

NOTES
TRIP TO THE WESTWARD AND SOUTHWARD,
IN THE
COLON! OF NEW,SOUTH WALES;
IN THE MONTHS OF MARCH AND APRIL, 1863;
Re-published from the Sydney “Empire.”
BY JOHN DUNMORE LANG, I),I),, A M.,
i&inteta: of tf)e Jscotg JSglmeg,
AND ONE OF THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CITY OF SYDNEY IN THE PARLIAMENT
OF NEW SOUTH WALES; HONORARY MEMBER OF THE AFRICAN INSTITUTE
OF FRANCE, OF THE AMERICAN ORIENTAL SOCIETY, AND OF THE
LITERARY INSTITUTE OF OLINDA IN THE BRAZILS.
Sphncp :
PRINTED BY HANSON AND BENNETT, “ EMPIRE” OFFICE, 1)4, PITT STREET.
1862.
(Price Half a Crown.)


ADVERTISEMENT.
Should any profits arise from the sale of this Pamphlet, they will be devoted towards
the object indicated in the following resolution, which was passed at a Public Meeting
of Presbyterians, held in the Scots Church, Sydney, on Monday, the 28th April, 1862,
viz ; the completion of the Tower and Spire of the Scots Church, agreeably to the
original plan of the building, as shown in the frontispiece.
Moved by Mr. George Brown, one of the Elders of the Scots Church, and
Chairman of the Committee of Management; seconded by Mr. Robert Horniman, and
carried unanimously :—“ That this Church and Congregation, having been happily
relieved by the recent decision of the Privy Council in their favour, from all apprehen-
sions in regard to their right to the valuable property of the Scots Chnrch, it is
expedient* and necessary that an immediate effort be made to finish the Tower and
Spire of the Church, agreeably to the original plan of the Building, as a fitting and
becoming monument of this important decision ; and that Subscriptions for this
purpose be solicited from the members of the Congregation, as well as from the
Presbyterians and the public generally.”
N.B.—Subscriptions towards the completion of the Tower and Spire of the
Scots Church, which it is expected will cost considerably upwards of £lOOO, will be
thankfully received, either by the Minister, or by any member of the Committee of
Management.


SCOTS CHURCH . SYDNEY.




cl u-~n
NOTES
TRIP TO THE SOUTHWARD AND WESTWARD.
No. I.—FROM SYDNEY TO THE LACHLAN.
March 17th, 1862.—Left by the 6.45 a.m. train for Bathurst. On the arrival
of the train at Rooty Hill, the present terminus of the Great Western
railway, 0 the day coach leaves for Bathurst and reaches Blackheath, on the
Blue Mountains, about nine o’clock the same evening ; the shortness of the
distance traversed being sufficiently accounted for by the badness of the road.
The climate of Blackheath is remarkably different from that of Sydney and
the coast region generally ; the greater elevation (from 2000 to 3000 feet)
being equivalent to a difference of at least ten or eleven degrees of latitude.
I have no doubt we shall, some day or other, have a sanitarium at
Blackheath, like the Neilgherries in India, for patients suffering under disease
of the liver, or other similar affections.
18.—Started from Blackheath at five a.m., and reached Bathurstf
about five in the evening. Considering the vast extent, the rapidly increas-
ing population, and the mineral resources of the Western districts, the state
of the mountain road to Bathurst is still discreditable and disgraceful to any
Government under the sun. The coach by which I travelled had, to use the
nautical phraseology, “ a list to portand as my position was on that side
of the vehicle, I could have made affidavit a dozen of times that I was
actually in bodily fear for my life ; the risk of an overturn and a smash being
imminent and apparently inevitable. In these circumstances I was again and
again led to speculate at my leisure, and by no means comfortably, upon the
probabilities of my own position in that event —landing on the hard rock
myself, or pitched over a precipice, with two able-bodied specimens ol fallen
humanity rolling over me ! I confess I used to think Mr. W. Gumming,
the member for the Western districts, a regular bore in the Assembly, with
his endless disquisitions on the Western-road; but 1 now see there was
method in his madness all the while, and 1 do not think he could say a word
too much on such a subject. But the fact is this colony is a great
deal too large to be well governed, and I am persuaded it never will be well
governed till it is very considerably curtailed in its dimensions, both north
and south ; as I am confident it will be sooner or later, whether we wish it or
no. We are accustomed to draw comparisons between ourselves and the
• The terminus is now at South a few miles further on,
f About 120 miles due W. from Sydney^


United States of America in various respects. Let us only make the
comparison with these States in regard to the single point of the extent of
territory they comprise individually, and what is the result ? Why, the
whole six states of New England comprise a territory of only 65,000 square
miles altogether, while the State of Missouri, one of the very largest of the
United States, has a territory as large as that of all these New England
States together. But this colony of New South Wales, with a superficial
extent equal to that of Great Britain and France together, is at least five
times the size of the American State of Missouri, a State containing
upwards of a hundred counties, and thirty times the average size of each of
the six States of New England. But my good friends, Messrs. Cowper,
■Robertson, and Co., are, it seems, men of such transcendent ability as to be
perfectly able to govern a colony as large as both Great Britain and France
together ; as large as five times the extent of the great American State of
Missouri; as large as thirty times the average extent of the six States of New
England, each of which has a government and a legislature of its own: and
this break-neck road to Bathurst is one of the rich and rare specimens of the
manner in which this mammoth colony is actually governed under their
auspices. I may, perhaps, discover some other specimens of a similar kind
before my return to Sydney.
The absurdity of attempting to govern a colony of such immense
dimensions as New South Wales, through a Government and Legislature
having their head-quarters in any particular locality, is evident from two
bungling pieces of legislation enacted during the recent session of Parliament.
As it was found impracticable, therefore, to establish a line of custom-houses
along the course of the River Murray, to protect the revenue of New South
Wales, by preventing the entrance of dutiable articles into that colony from
the province of Victoria, without having previously paid the duty, a law was
enacted virtually leaving the colony of Victoria to levy the duty on such
articles, and to give us what she pleases of the proceeds ! A somewhat
similar enactment had to be passed for Queensland ; for while the thirtieth
parallel of latitude, which would have excluded the Clarence and Richmond
Rivers, was a natural boundary across which (as the country in that locality
is of an impracticable character) there would have been no smuggling in
either direction, Sir William Denison’s line, or the 28th parallel, which in-
cluded these rivers, was no natural boundary at all; there being at least
three practicable routes for smuggling, in either direction, across that line.
But such cases of peculiarly wise legislation are to be expected in the case of
a Legislature enacting laws for localities so far distant and so entirely distinct
from each other as the Richmond and the Murray Rivers.
But, as I have already hinted, this state of things is not likely to be
permanent. As soon as the population of the noble Riverine district between
the Murray and the Murrumbidgee rivers—a tract of country equal in extent
to all Scotland —amounts to from twenty to thirty thousand souls (which it is
sure to do very soon now, with the present rush of population from the south-
ward to our own Far West on the Lachlan River), the agitation for separa-
tion and a distinct colony for that district will be fell, fierce, and irresistible.
The proper management of these two noble streams, and the judicious hus-
banding of the vast resources they afford to the inhabitants of that district,


can never be insured under a distant absentee Government either in Sydney
or Melbourne ; and would urgently require for their development the energies
and resources of an intelligent and enterprising population on the spot a
population having the entire management of their own affairs in their own
hands. And so will it he also, for a similar reason, with the inhabitants of
the Clarence and Richmond rivers in due time.
I have often been represented as having a perfect mania for separa
tion, and of being animated with a feeling of actual hostility to the welfare
and advancement of New South Wales. If I know anything of myself,
however, I can state with perfect sincerity that both of these charges are
utterly unfounded. My sole motive in this matter —in agitating in the first
instance, and agitating successfully, fCr the separation of Port Phillip, andi n
agitating afterwards for that of Queensland —has simply been my sincere and
ardent desire to see tbe entire population of this vast territory of Australia
well and wisely governed ; winch 1 am confident it can never be until tins
colony of New South Wales is divided into much more manageable portions,
and formed into separate and self-governing communities, with territories
much more limited than the present colony. I learned this lesson in America ,
and from all I saw there, in the comfort and happiness resulting from wbat
may be called the domestic government of the separate States, and the division
of the general population into manageable proportions, I am satisfied it is a
right one, which we shall be forced to learn, some day or other, with a bad
grace, as we refuse to learn it now with a good one.
The town of Hartley, beyond the famous Vittoria (not Aictoiia)
Pass —for it was named by the late Sir Thomas Mitchell from the scene of
one of the famous battles in Spain, during the great French war, and not in
honour of Her present Majesty, as is generally supposed ; Her Majesty
having not then come upon the topis —affords another illustration of the very
injudicious manner in which towns have been formed in many parts of this
colony. Like the “ lang toun o’ Kirkaldy,” Hartley lies like a wounded
snake along the highway—all length, and no breadth or thickness. There
is, as usual in such cases, a Little Hartley, before the great one has been
properly developed—like the snake’s head or tail, which some stockman has
struck off with his whip, and left lying at some distance from the body.
There are two important minerals in great abundance in this part of the
rou te —coal of a superior quality, and granite, in large boulders, Ihere can
be no want of metal, therefore, for the mountain road ; and the coal will,
doubtless, come into general use for the future railway to Bathurst, for
machinery on the spot, and for fuel for the treeless plains to the westward.
19th and 20th.—Remained at Bathurst; delivering a lecture in the
court-house, in the evening of the 19th, on the general prospects of the
colony under present circumstances, and the necessity for supplementing the
recent Lands’ Act and free selection, with some measure for the promotion of
immigration ; and another, in the same place, in the evening of the 20th, on
the forthcoming question of the Abolition of State-Aid for Religion. Thiough
some mistake the announcement of the former lecture had only been given
through the local press in the morning of the day on which it was delivered;
and as that day was the first and principal day of the Bathurst races, the


attendance, although fair, was but limited. It was much better, however,
on the occasion of the second lecture the following evening.
The most numerous and by far the wealthiest denomination in this
colony is the Episcopalian or Church of England ; and it would surely be a
gross libel upon the members of that numerous and wealthy body to allege
that it was either unable or unwilling to support all the ministers of religion
it required for the wants of the colony. It is seldom considered, however,
what the Episcopalian people would gain by such a change ; and the matter
is eminently worthy of their consideration. They would gain, therefore,
(although perhaps not immediately,) the same position in the matters of
discipline and church government as the Episcopalians of America, whose
Church is beyond all comparison a far more efficient institution than the
Church of England, either at home or abroad. They would gain, in the first
place, the right of electing their own ministers —a right and privilege ines-
timably more valuable than all they get at present in the shape of State-aid
from the Government. Under the present system, men, and not a few
either, utterly destitute of the indispensable apostolic qualification of “ aptness
to teach,” —men who would never by any chance be elected by the people
to the office of the ministry, if there were any-other persons to choose from —
come out and get appointed under the existing system, allured by the
prospect of getting a certain amount of support from the State, and being
thrust into the “ priest’s office, to eat a piece of bread.” And this, unfortu-
nately, is an evil not confined to the Church of England, It is equally
characteristic of the Presbyterian Church under the State-aid system ; men
coming out and getting appointed, it may be, to important stations under that
system, merely because they lack the talent or ability to obtain for themselves
any position in the Church at home— “ dry sticks,” as they are called in
Scotland ; “ dumb dogs that cannot bark,” as they are called in Scripture—
men who have no heart for their work and no fitness for it. Now all this
would be changed in both Churches by the abolition of the State-aid system
—men of popular talents would in due time rise up and present themselves
as candidates to the Christian people, under such a change of system, and
the drones would at length be driven from the hive.
K o doubt the Bishops would resist to the utmost the transference of this
power from their own hands into those of the people ; and there are, doubtless,
toadies enough in all these colonies to back them up in the maintenance and
perpetuation of that usurped power. The proposal would be stigmatised with all
manner of calumnious epithets, such as sacrilege and robbery on the one hand,
and democracy run mad on the other. But 1 would simply reply to all such
charges, that the system I recommend is the one in universal operation in the
Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States of America. And that
Church, I repeat it, is incomparably more efficient and more successful, as a
Christian institution, than the Church of England either at home or in the
colonies.
Again, if the system of State-aid were abolished, the clergy and
people of the Protestant Episcopal Church would have the right, as in
America, of electing their own bishops. This would doubtless be a great
transference of power into the right hands ; for the present system of making
the appointment of ministers of religion of any denomination a mere affair of


State policy is intolerably bad. The Episcopalians of the colony have, there-
fore, much to gain and nothing to fear from the abolition of State-aid for
religion.
The remarkable success of the Free Church movement in Scotland
proves to a demonstration that the Presbyterians of this colony have nothing to
fear from the abolition of State-aid for religion. The State Church of this
denomination has for twenty-five years past been a miserable failure —with-
out zeal, without energy, without influence, without success. Let a coroner s
inquest be summoned to “ view the body,” either north, west, or south, and
what other verdict could they give than “ Found Dead ?’ There is not a
breath of life in it, nor a pulse beating from June to January! There
are indications, indeed, in certain quarters, that might suggest the propriety
of a different verdict than the one I have suggested, I mean that of felo de
se ; and as Mr. Buchanan’s recent Act allows of Christian burial in such cases,
there might be no harm in giving such a verdict.
As to the Roman Catholics of New South Wales—as the members of that
communion can not only support their own priests, but pay tithes besides to
the Established Church, the Church of England, in poverty-stricken Ireland,
why should they be either unable or unwilling to support their priests here,
where they have no dominant Church to rule over and oppress them ? It is
not the people, however, but the priests who desire the continuance of the
existing system.
And as to the Wesleyan Methodists, the fourth of the Mate-paid
Churches of this colony, why should that denomination be on any other footing
here than it has ever been on in England ?
The alliance of Church and State at home has often been compared
with that of matrimony, or the alliance of husband and wife. And as the
Christian law is that the husband should only have one wife, the State has
accordingly got an Episcopalian wife in England, and a Presbyterian one in
Scotland. But we have surely a very different law here, I mean the
Turkish or Mahometan law, which allows the devout Mussulman to have
four wives if he chooses. For the State in New South Wales, like a good
Mussulman, has chosen to have all the four lawful wives allowed by the
Koran—an’ Episcopalian wife, a Presbyterian wife, a Roman Catholic wife,
and a Wesleyan Methodist wife ! Seeing, therefore, that there is something
unsuitable and discreditable in sueh a connection, I think it is high time to
sue out a divorce in the High Court of Parliament between all these parties
—to put an end at once to this Mahometan alliance.
It was rather more than ten years since I had been in Bathurst
before. The place has increased and improved very considerably in the in-
terval, but not so much as I had anticipated. It is sadly in want of a
municipal corporation, which, lam happy to find, there is a prospect of its
obtaining shortly. In this dry weather, it looks very much like a few houses
stuck down here and there in and around a great dust bin. Mr. Webb, an
enterprising storekeeper in Bathurst, has recently erected an extensive pile
of buildings for carrying on the different departments of his business in the
town —ironmongery and grocery on the one side, and drapery of all kinds
on the other—that is really a credit both to the place and the proprietor, and
that would not discredit either London or Manchester. The formation of


such an establishment, and the superior style of business which it introduces
in the commercial walks of life, forms an era in the onward progress of any
town or district.
21st and 22nd.—I had intended to cross over from Bathurst to Yass
by Burrangong or the Lambing Flat, where my son—Mr. G. D. Lang, the
representative of the Tumut District in the last Parliament—has recently
established a bi-weekly journal, with a very favourable prospect of success;
but finding that the road to Burrangong would carry me, at the end of my
first day's ride, within one day’s journey of the Lachlan Diggings (of which
I had been hearing so much both at Bathurst and on my way up), I deter-
mined to proceed thither—especially as I thought I should thus have it in
my power to perform Divine service among the miners there on the following
Sabbath. I accordingly took my passage to the Lachlan, by Carcoar and
Cowra, instead of to Burrangong,
Carcoar, which is thirty-two miles from Bathurst, is one of the most
singularly-situated towns I have seen in the colony. It looks —I mean the
assemblage of houses that compose it—like the grounds in the bottom of a
tea-cup, being situated in a deep hollow completely surrounded with hills.
Such a situation must, in summer, be like being in the focus of a burning
glass, without a breath of wind to stir a leaf! How singularly absurd in
such a climate as this! But, like Drayton in Queensland, which had a
somewhat similar malformation to complain of, Carcoar was evidently placed
where it is—not for the convenience and accommodation of the public—but to
suit the views and interests of an adjoining land-monopolist.
There is a considerable extent of good land available for cultivation
around Carcoar ; but till very recently, the inhabitants of the town and
vicinity were precluded from obtaining land for any purpose, or in any
quarter. It seems one of the Church and School estates is situated in the
immediate neighbourhood; and, till the first of January last, it was locked
up from the public. Ten sections, or thereby, of this land have been sold
since then, as unquestionably every acre of it ought to be, and the proceeds
thrown into the General Treasury. But such measures of reform, in
that particular department, are scarcely to be looked for under the present
regime.
The distance from Carcoar to Cowra on the Lachlan River is thirty-four
miles ; and the latter part of the route, as well as the whole distance from
Cowra to the town of Forbes, or the Lachlan diggings, is comparatively a
dead level; the country being generally a fair pastoral country, although suf-
fering from want of rain. The distance from Cowra to Forbes is sixty-eight
miles, and we reached our destination about 5 p.m. I was very unwell on
this part of the route ; and, in other circumstances, would most willingly have
stopped short and “ taken mine ease in mine inn.” But the strong desire I
had of spending the babbath and preaching among the miners, combined with
my knowledge of the fact that, if I gave up my seat for the day, in these
times of rushes to the Lachlan, I might not get another for a week again,
enabled me to bear up successfully under the depressing influence, and
to reach our desired terminus, the town of Forbes, or the far-famed Lachlan
Diggings.


No. 2.—THREE DAYS AT THE LACHLAN.
March 23rd (Sabbath). —I had scarcely got domiciled in the Forbes Hotel,
(on my arrival in the town of Forbes, on the Lachlan diggings, on Saturday
evening,) when I was waited upon by two respectable persons, requesting
that I would perform Divine service, in the temporary place of worship
erected for the Church of England minister of the district, the Rev. Mr.
Brownrigg, on the following (Sabbath) morning ; as Mr, B. would be absent
himself till the evening, officiating in a distant locality in the district. I
did so accordingly, and had a large congregation of miners and others, both
male and female, connected with the diggings, who all appeared respectable
and devout. Ihe temporary church and school (for it serves both purposes,
there being upwards of seventy pupils in the latter) is built of slabs, and has a
bark roof, with gables above the wall-plate of calico; a coating of coarse gravel,
or rather small stones, got up from the deep sinkings, being spread over the
bare ground for the floor. I did not ascertain what the place had cost; but
I was much pleased with the judicious and common-sense character of the
building: for there is nothing more unreasonable than for an infant community,
struggling into existence, to expend a large amount in the erection of a costly
edifice for the worship of God. The Americans are much wiser in their
generation in this particular than we are. I once preached for the Rev. Dr.
Beman, the pastor of the first Presbyterian Church (there being six altogether)
in the city of Troy, on the Hudson River, in the State of New York, in
America. The original congregation had been the first, in the order of time,
in the city, and bad erected a very plain but commodious-enough structure
of clap-boards, or weather boards, as we call them. When that building had
served its time, and the congregation had grown numerous and wealthy,
another church-edifice was erected on the model of a Grecian temple, at-a
cost of upwards of forty thousand dollars, or from eight to ten thousand
pounds of our money. An Independent minister, whom Dr. Beman had
previously met in London, during a visit he had made to Europe, happened
to pass through Troy, on his way to Canada ; and when Dr. B. took him to
see the building, which is really a beautiful structure, he observed, “ a very
fine chapel, Dr. Beman.” “ Church, if you please,” replied the American ;
“we can use that word here without asking any person’s liberty.’’ So can
we also in Australia ; and when State-aid for religion is discontinued, we
shall have made another step forward in the direction of equal rights and
equal privileges for all—for we have scarcely got that length yet.
Shortly before the hour for the commencement of the evening
service, the Rev. Mr. Brownrigg, who had returned to the town,
waited upon me at the Forbes Hotel, and requested me to con-
duct the service in the evening also, as I had done in the morn-
ing ; for he had had to preach twice himself and to ride upwards of
thirty miles that day. I did so accordingly, and had a still more nu-
merous congregation of apparently devout worshippers than I had had in the
morning. The subjects of my discourses were, in the morning, Isaiah iii. 10.
—Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him; and in the evening,
Luke xxiv. 36. —Peace be unto you. At the close of the morning service, I
had to baptize the child of a family who had recently arrived at the Lachlan


diggings, and for whom I had had to perform the same service for another of
their children at the Adelong diggings in June, 1859. They were from the
Shetland Islands, and had heard me lecturing in Lerwick, the capital of these
islands, in the year 1849, when I bad the honour of escorting Lady
Franklin, when in search of intelligence among the whalers in the north of
Scotland, respecting her unfortunate husband, Sir John, in the different ports
at which we touched and spent a few hours—Aberdeen, Wick, and Kirkwall
(in the Orkneys)—on our route from Leith to Lerwick. I bad met with and
become acquainted with her ladyship, when Sir John was Governor of Yan
Dieman’s Land, and we resumed our acquaintance on board the Leith steam-
boat. I was engaged at the time in recommending the emigration of fit and
proper persons, both families and individuals, to Australia ; and Lady
Franklin, who entered cordially into my views, and who remained for some
time in the Shetland Islands after I left them, was instrumental in effecting
the emigration of a large number of young Shetland women, through the
Commissioners of Emigration, to Australia. I little expected to find any of
these Shetlanders either at the Adelong or at the Lachlan.
I was happy to find that every person with whom I came in contact
at the Lachlan diggings speaks well of the Rev. Mr. Brownrigg. He is a
zealous and indefatigable minister, with none of those offensive pretensions
that characterise the whole Puseyite tribe, and that usually indicate only a
great lack of the apostolic qualification of aptness to teach. Mr. Brownrigg
has nothing of that kind. From the increasing number of respectable
families and individuals on the Lachlan diggings, and from the influence of
the regular dispensation of the ordinances of religion in the place, there is
already, I was happy to find, a visible improvement among the general
population on the Sabbath, and an increasing attention to the duties and
observances of religion.
24th and 25th.— I think I have already observed that from a short
distance to the westward of Carcoar, the country towards the Lachlan is,
generally speaking, a dead level; there being no mountains visible in any
direction, and no remarkable elevations or depressions of the surface. This
is remarkably the case in the region of the present diggings ; and how a
gold-field could be supposed to exist in so unpromising a locality is, to all
who have seen other gold-fields and the surface indications they present of
their subterranean wealth, perfectly incomprehensible. A small quantity of
gold had been found upon the surface by an individual at a particular spot,
by no means remarkable, which I saw ; and the impulse, altogether unac-
countable, to dig for more was so strong that the fortunate finder could not re-
sist it, and he dug accordingly and struck at length upon the hidden treasure,
which was lying beneath from twenty to thirty fathoms deep.
The gold at the Lachlan is uniformly found in what are called leads,
or streams, at an average depth of 140 feet beneath the present surface.*
These leads unquestionably indicate ancient water-courses of the prse-
Adamite earth ; along which the rushing torrents of the period brought down
from their native matrix in the elevated lands of that period, and lodged in
the sand or drift along their whole course, large quantities of gold, scarcely, if
* There are shafts now from 200 to 250 feet in depth.


at all, water-worn, and indicating the comparative vicinity of the matrix.
Where these eleva 1 ed lands were, or what has become of them, no man can
tell. A» little can we tell how these ancient water-courses were at length
buried under a superincumbent mass of alluvium to the depth of 140 feet and
upwards, or where this alluvium came from, extending as it does over thou-
sands of square miles of territory. The fact is evident and uuquestionable,
that these mysterious operations must have taken place in the olden time;
but the how and the when no man can tell.
That there can be no mistake as to the existence and reality of these
ancient watercourses, is evident from the fact, that if the bottom happens to
be struck at a smaller depth than 140 feet or thereby, the sinking has proved
a failure, and must be repeated elsewhere either to the right or left. I
observed shafts that had been sunk to a depth of lis and 128 feet
respectively, but without finding any auriferous matter at the bottom. These
shafts had evidently struck the bottom at some distance from the deeper bed
of the ancient watercourse; and other shafts must therefore be sunk to the
right or left to find that course. It is hard to grope for an object at a depth
of 140 feet in the solid earth; but this is what all the present diggers on the
Lachlan are obliged to do.
When the lead is struck, the auriferous sand and gravel along its
course is in general exceedingly rich. I was shown a shaft out of which
upwards of <£19,000 worth of gold had been dug for the fortunate proprietor ;
and in another, which was held in common by eight persons, they had
divided among the party, after a comparatively short period of labour, £4OOO
each. In a third case, in which the holders of one claim had encroached
upon and appropriated about three feet of the washing stuff of the adjoining
claim, it was decided by a jury of miners, on examining the stuff, that the
party encroaching should pay the rightful owners upwards of £3BO, as the
value of the stuff they had thus, unknowingly, doubtless, misappropriated.
The superincumbent mass of matter now overlying these ancient
water-courses is entirety alluvium, and is easily pierced through. A black-
smith whom I had known before, and to whom I observed that I supposed
he would have plenty of remunerative employment in sharpening the miners’
tools—as I knew had been the case at some of the other diggings—told me,
in reply, that there was comparatively little to do in that way ; as the ground
on the Lachlan diggings was so light that a miner could sink twenty feet
without turning the point of his tools. At a certain depth, however, a
stratum of sand or gravel of several feet in thickness, through which the
water percolates freely from all sides, is usually reached, in sinking for the
lead ; aud the miner is obliged to protect this part of the shaft with a case of
watertight stout boarding all round, to prevent the water and sand
escaping, and thereby filling up the shaft and undermining the superincumbent
mass of earth.
There are various leads at the Lachlan diggings of which the
existence has already been ascertained—the South lead, the Caledonian lead,
the Victoria lead, &c., and as the country presents precisely the same appear-
ance for a great distance in all directions, there is no saying how many more
there may be, or how far they may extend. A question of much interest and
importance to the miners is whether a particular lead which they are now


working crosses the river and will re-appear on the opposite side. I have no
doubt that it will; for the present conformation of the country, including the
whole course of the Lachlan river, can have no relation to the ancient water-
courses so far below the present surface. In short, there is reason to
believe that the Lachlan diggings, as they have already proved the richest
for their actual extent, will also prove the most extensive and permanent
diggings in Australia.
When a lead has been actually discovered and pronounced, any person
having a miner’s right is at liberty to peg off a certain extent of ground along
its probable course for himself and his mates, and so long as he holds
possession of that claim and fulfils the condition of what may be called
residence upon it, no other person can seize, or as it is called, jump his claim.
Eut as the course of the lead is uncertain, and the cost of sinking a shaft
great, the holders of these claims defer sinking till the lead has been traced to
some point within a certain distance of their holdings, that they may have some
prospect of success when they commence sinking. In the meantime they
must make good their claim by standing or sitting upon it for two hours every
lawful day, or from nine to eleven o’clock. This process is technically called
“shepherding,” and affords employment .and bread to hundreds, or rather
thousands, of persons on the Lachlan, who perform this service for the
wealthier claimants for hire at so much a week ; the wages for shepherding
being from one to two pounds per week. One pound ten, 1 believe, is the
sura generally given. I met a person at the Lachlan whom I had met with
before in a subordinate capacity at the Adelong diggings; and I found he
liked his present position and prospects remarkably well. He was a regular
pluralist, and was earning excellent wages—lst, for keeping certain govern-
ment offices clean and tidy, which could be done in the morning before
breakfast; 2nd, for shepherding some person’s claim, which was over by
eleven ; and 3rd, for acting as waiter in a hotel in the town. Shortly after
eleven o’clock a.m., the town of Forbes becomes quite alive with the multi-
tude of shepherds returning from the various claims they have been defending
from intrusion, and pacing along the principal street.
It must be evident from what I have stated that the Lachlan diggings
are available only for men of some capital; and shepherding is, therefore,
the principal, if not the only employment at present for those who have none.
Tliis is an unfortunate state of things for the place ; for the indolence which
it fosters, leads, in too many instances, to gambling and dissipation, the issue
of which in numberless cases is the ruin of the individual for time and for
eternity. It is to be hoped that as the diggings extend, and the place
generally becomes better known, there will be regular and profitable
employment found for the labouring population. It was reported, indeed,
before I left the Lachlan, that shallow sinkings with payable gold, or in the
mining vocabulary, a poor man’s diggings, had been found at Strickland’s
reef, about fifteen miles distant, in the direction of the town of Orange. If
this report should prove well founded, it will induce a healthier state of
society at these diggings generally, by affording regular and remunerative
employment to the labouring classes.
Ihe town of Forbes, with comparatively few exceptions, is as yet
merely a collection of all manner of apologies for decent habitations. There


are not a few,' however, of a better character in process of erection. The
Government building, a substantial wooden structure, for a court-house and
public-offices, is ridiculously small for the place and its prospects, although
pufficiently commodious for the present. The place has one great advantage,
which, I confess, I was scarcely prepared to find —the neighbourhood, for a
great distance round, abounding in excellent timber both for carpentry and
joinery purposes. The hard woods are similar to our own in the eastern
portion of the colony ; but there is a great abundance of a valuable species of
pine peculiar to the Lachlan and quite unknown to the eastward, as
well as in the colony of Victoria. This pine has a somewhat intermediate
character, in its contour and vegetation, between that of the spruce fir and the
Scotch fir of the old country ; being less umbrageous than the former, but
more regular and formal than the latter. The timber is scarcely strong
enough for carpentry purposes, and will not supersede the colonial gum in
this department of building; but it is well adapted for joinery, and takes an
excellent polish. It will, therefore, serve the same purpose at the Lachlan as
the cedar does with us.
Captain Brown, the Chief Commissioner at the Lachlan, assured me
that the population of the town and neighbourhood was already twelve
thousand ; and from the present rush from all quarters, he expected it would
soon amount to twenty thousand.* Ihere is a weekly coach from the Ovens
in Victoria to the Lachlan, the fare by which is five pounds, and it is now
regularly filled with passengers. A gentleman who had come to the Lachlan
from Victoria, at the time I was there, told us he had passed as many,
he was sure, as a thousand persons on the road ; and all along the road by
Burrangong, Burrowa, and Yass, to Goulburn, I met small parties of diggers
evidently bound to the Lachlan —some with a cart and packhorse, but most
of them on foot. One of these parties I happened to meet at a point of the
road about a hundred and ten miles from the Lachlan ; and on observing to
the leader, “ You have a long journey before you,” “ Not far, now, Sir,” he
replied, in a lively tone, which was quite cheering, amid the heat and dust of
the road, and which proclaimed that he had come from Victoria and had
walked all the way. .
A large portion of the population of the Lachlan consists of miners
from Victoria, and it is generally admitted on the diggings that these Victorian
miners are a superior class of men. They are better accustomed than most
of our miners with the operations of deep sinking, and the scientific processes
of regular mining ; for while gold mining has been a first-class interest in
"Victoria, it has all along been a very secondary one with us, carrying of! only
the floating part of our population.
It is interesting to observe how families and individuals from the same
point of departure like to associate together in their new-found-land. I
observed Bendigo stores and Bendigo restaurants; Adelong stores and
Adelonf restaurants. There was a Caledonian restaurant for the Scotchmen
on the lead, and a Restaurant de Paris for Monsieur and his mates. In the
principal street of the town I observed the discoverer of the Iviandra
diggings busily employed in erecting a store.
* It ia now (Ist July) upwards of 20,000.


There is something inexplicable in the extraordinary degree of heat
that prevails in summer in this part of the colony. One of the Government
officials told me that, for a considerable lime in February last, the thermometer
(Fahrenheit of course) stood at 125 degrees in the shade ; and if my memory
does not fail me, Sir Thomas Mitchell observed it sull higher in this tract of
country, to the eastward and southward of the Darling, When he crossed
that river to the northward, the temperature fell, instead of rising, as one
should have anticipated from the lower latitude. So great a degree of heat
is by no means conducive to health, and I am sorry to say the Lachlan dis-
trict generally is by no means a healthy one. There is a species of low fever
of a typhoid character, called continued or colonial fever, exceedingly prevalent
in the district, and in not a few instances it proves fatal. A few days ago
there were not fewer than fourteen deaths of adults in the town of Forbes in
two days—five the one day, and nine the other. There are few mining
parties of four, of which there is not one down with fever, and in some
there are more than one at the same time. I heard of one party with a good
claim, of which three had died of fever, leaving only a single survivor.
It has been observed that wherever the pine tree, which I have
described above, grows, the colonial fever prevails; but this is a mere
coincidence, like the building of Tenterden steeple and the formation of
the Goodwin Sands. The fact is the pine affects the low swampy levels, and
such localities are the natural habitat of fever in all countries. I believe the
bad quality of the water on the Lachlan diggings, combined with the excessive
heat of the climate and the malaria generated by the swampy character of
much of the land, is a much more influential cause of the fever than the
presence of the Lachlan pine.
The river is about a mile from the town. It is anything but a
picturesque object, being a sluggish stream, with scarcely a perceptible
current, winding along as if at the bottom of a deep ditch, and having an
unsightly yellowish tinge from the nature of the soil through which it flows.
It is raised by means of pumps, by parties who carry on this particular
business, and who erect at their own expense the requisite machinery tor the
purpose ; it is sold to the water-carriers at sixpence a cask. The latter charge
half a-crown for it to the inhabitants.
In the evening of Tuesday, the 25 th, I delivered a lecture on matters
of general interest to the Lachlan district, to a large assemblage of miners
and townspeople, in the temporary church, in which 1 had officiated on
Sabbath, and which was obligingly thrown open for the purpose ; and as the
introductory part of that lecture may not be uninteresting to the public
generally, I shall give an abstract of it in my next communication.
No 3.—THREE DAYS AT THE LACHLAN.— continued.
March 25th.—The town of Forbes is subject, more than any other locality
I have ever visited in the colony, to clouds and whirlwinds of dust. One can
sometimes scarcely see across the main street when the bullock drays or
other vehicles are passing along. And from this cause, combined with the
glare of sunlight and the excessive heat drying up the natural moisture of the
eyes, the inhabitants of this whole tract of country, to the westward of the


Blue Mountains, are much more subject than those residing to the eastward
of the mountains, or on the coast, to that very troublesome and annoying
affection of the eyes, called blight, or ophthalmia. From this cause, as well as
from the prevalence of continued fever in the district, there is an immediate
and urgent necessity for the erection of an hospital, and the appointment of an
hos ital staff in the town of Forbes, the present centre of the diggings. For
this object the Government must not look for subscriptions from the miners in
the first instance. This would be unreasonable in the highest degree. They
must incur the requisite expenditure at once from the public Treasury, and
look to Parliament to be borne out, as I am quite sure they will not require
to look in vain, in so pressing an emergency. The revenue which the
Government derives, in one way or other, from these goldfields, is, out of all
proportion, greater than the amount derived from other parts of the colony of
an equal population ; and it therefore well becomes the authorities to incur a
pretty liberal expenditure on their behalf, and to treat them with all due con-
sideration and kindness. Whether they have done so in time past, it is
scarcely necessary to inquire. Were such an inquiry actually ins’.ituted, the
zealous and indefatigable member for the Southern Gold-fields (Dr. Wilson)
would doubtless remind us that that odious class-tax, the gold duty, is still
unrepealed, although not merely weeks, but months and years have now
elapsed since the repeal was promised.
At the same time, it would neither be necessary nor judicious to in-
cur a large expenditure for such a purpose as the erection of an hospital for
the Lachlan diggings. A slab building, with a bark roof, and so planned as
to admit of indefinite extension, would be quite sufficient to meet the wants
of the district for years to come. T ,
I learned at the Lachlan that the Honorable the Minister for Lands
had been putting forth his antenna, or feelers, to ascertain the probable pro-
spects for free selection in that district. I fear they are anything but bright.
The Lachlan district generally is a pastoral country of superior character;
but the great uncertainty of the crops of any kind in that district, arising
from the excessive heat of the climate, and the withering and blasting
character of the hot winds of the far west, will preclude its extensive adapta-
tion to agriculture under any conceivable circumstances. That the town of
Forbes will become an important inland town there can be no doubt whatever;
but its supplies of the great staff of life, as well as of the other commodities
of civilisation, will have to be derived from the eastward ; and considering
how easily a tramway could be constructed across these great western levels,
there will be no insurmountable difficulty in supplying this desideratum.
In regard to the prospects of the town of b orbes, the vast tract of
level and highly eligible pastoral country that stretches along the left bank of
the Lachlan, extends also along the right bank of that river ; and is continued,
with precisely the same pastoral character, for about 350 miles to the Liver
Darling and that Ultima Thule of Australian civilisation, Fort Bourke, where
our old friend, Mr. Garrett, has recently been “ stuck up”—not by Gardiner,
but by himself like “ a pelican in the wilderness,” to exclaim with the poet.
O solitude, where are thy charms!
In such a central position as the town of Forbes thus occupies in this vast


pastoral and auriferous region, it must unquestionably become a place of very
considerable importance, although not an ounce of flour should ever be raised
on the banks of its sluggish stream. Like Tadmor in the wilderness, and
the city of Baalbec or Palmyra, its position as a great thoroughfare and
mart of commerce, will necessarily give it importance, notwithstanding its
great lack of agricultural capabilities.
I have already mentioned that in the evening before leaving
the Lachlan, I delivered a lecture on matters of interest to the Lachlan
district, in the temporary Episcopal Church in the town of Forbes,
which had been kindly granted for the purpose, and which was quite
filled with a numerous assemblage of miners. As it is well known that
infidel opinions, founded on mistaken views of the facts and deductions of
geology, are exceedingly prevalent at the diggings generally, I took ad-
vantage of the opportunity that was thus afforded me of showing that these
views were equally unwarranted and' unfounded ; setting forth the Christian
aspect of the case, and proving that the Word of God in revelation is by no
means inconsistent with an intelligent view of the works of God in [creation.
The following is the substance of the introductory portion of my lecture,
which, I may be permitted to state, was most cordially and even enthusias-
tically received: —
Fellow colonists and friends — I had no expectation, when I left
Sydney early last week, that I should visit the Lachlan diggings before my
return. But as I found that the route I intended to take from Bathurst to
Ya.ss by Burrangong, or the Lambing Flat, would carry me within a day’s
journey of these diggings, I determined to visit them; not, however, for the
mere gratification of an idle curiosity, but in the hope of being of .some ser-
vice hereafter to my fellow-colonists at these diggings, when the subject of
their condition and prospects comes before the colonial Parliament, of which
I have the honour to be a member, at the commencement of its next session in
the month of May.
Since the original discovery of gold iu Australia, this is the fourth
great rush that has taken place to the gold fields of this colony. The first
was to Canoona, near Rockhampton, in the year 1858 : the second was to
Kiandra, iu the Snowy Mountains, in the year 1860; the third was to
Burrangong, or the Lambing Flat, in the year 1861; and the present rush
to these diggings on the Lachlan is the fourth and latest. I shall not say
anything for the present on the third of these great rushes—l mean the one
to the Lambing Flat, or Burrangong—as it occurred during my own absence
from the colony, and as I am still but imperfectly acquainted with the some-
what strange occurrences that took place on the occasion. But from what I
know of the procedure of the local Government on the occasion of the first
and second of these rushes—those to Canoona and Kiandra, although they
both turned out egregious failures—there is every reason to believe that it will
cheerfully do whatever is practicable for the development of these Lachlan
diggings, and for the welfare and advancement of the mining population.
Both at Canoona and at Kiandra a large expenditure was incurred, in the very
first instance, in the establishment of the requisite staff of officials for the sup-
posed gold-fields, and for the erection of the necessary pnblic buildings. It
appeared to me, indeed, that the Government went to too great a length in


the way of public expenditure on the occasion of the Kiandra diggings. For
example—an item was placed on the Estimates for the establishment of
a line of telegraphic communication with Kiandra, which was to cost £14,0C0.
1 recollect I voted against that item, and thereby incurred the wrathful
denunciations of the local paper ! But it seemed to me that this was much too
large an amount of public money to expend on a mere experiment, as there
was no certainty at the time that the Kiandra diggings would either be ex-
tensive or permanent; and I strongly recommended that if the Government
had £14,000 to spare for such a purpose, that amount ought, by all means,
to be expended in improving the wretched public roads in that direction, as the
whole mining population would then reap the benefit of the expenditure,
whereas a line of telegraphic communication would only be of service to a
few storekeepers and speculators. My advice, however, was not taken on
the occasion ; but the result has shown that I was in the right and the
Government and their majority in the wrong. For although the proposed
expenditure was incurred, and the telegraphic line established to Kiandra,
the diggings in that locality soon proved a complete failure, the population
rapidly diminished to its present amount of three or four hundred souls, and
the costly telegraphic line has consequently been of no benefit whatever to the
public. 1 mention the circumstance, however, merely to showthe greatwillingness
and readiness of the Government —I mean the present Ministry—to do what-
ever may be deemed requisite by competent persons for the development of
these diggings, and for the general welfare of their inhabitants.
But as this locality is at least 250 miles from head-quarters, and as
the local Government cannot be supposed, at so great a distance, and in so
peculiarly constituted a community as this must necessarily he for a consider-
able time to come, to know what is really requisite for its welfare and pro-
gress, I would strongly recommend that a permanent committee should be
appointed at some general meeting of the inhabitants, to consist, in equal pro-
portions, of practical miners and of persons in business in the town, to ascer-
tain the wants of the neighbourhood and the improvements indispensably
necessary for the general welfare. Ido not mean that such a committee
should take the form of a Vigilance Committee, as in California and elsewhere ;
for I trust that under the recent reorganisation of the police force of the
colony, anything of this kind will be altogether unnecessary. Neither would
I propose that it should assume the character of a Grievance Committee, such
as we have had occasionally even in Sydney, under the very indifferent
Government of a former period : for this would virtually be passing a censure
on the Government before it was deserved. I would merely suggest that the
proposed committee should have some such object and designation as a
Committee of Wants and Improvements, to make suggestions to the Govern-
ment on the one hand, and to forward requisitions to it from time to time on
the other. If such a committee were appointed in this locality—to consist of
intelligent and well-disposed persons of the two classes of which the popula-
tion consists—I am confident that the communications it would address to the
local Governm nt would receive immediate and attentive consideration, and
that it would prove of the greatest benefit to the district generally. And if
I could personally be of any service to the district, in forwarding the views
and objects of such a committee at head quarters, from my having been


myself on the spot, aud from having thus obtained a general knowledge of
the circumstances of the locality, I should be most happy to do anything in
my power to promote so desirable an object.
In the want of any such committee, it appears to me that the first
requisite for this locality is an ample supply of good water, and the attention
of the Government ought, unquestionably, to be directed forthwith to this
most important point. The present supply is notoriously inadequate to the
general wants of the population. It is insufficient in quantity, inferior in
quality from the manner of its conveyance from the river, too costly for an
article of such prime necessity, and subject to great waste. I should be
sorry to say a single word to injure those deserving persons who are at
present taming their subsistence in providing for the water-supply of the town
and neighbourhood ; but the interests of private individuals must always be
left out of the question when the health, as well as the general comfort and.
welfare of the community can be promoted by any great public improvement.
I have no hesitation in expressing it as my decided opinion that the
insufficient supply and the inferior quality of this great element of life in the
Lachlan district, are not a little concerned in giving rise to the large amount
of disease now prevalent on these diggings. This disease, you are all aware,
is of a typhoid character, the very form of disease of which Her Majesty’s
Royal Consort died at Windsor the other day. And considering the sort of
accommodation which most of the miners have to put up with, and their want
of everything, when sick, in the shape of medical comforts and proper atten-
dance, there is an urgent necessity for the immediate establishment of an
hospital for the district, and the appointment of a sufficient medical staff. I
am quite sure the present Government would willingly anticipate a vote for
such a purpose ; but as the Parliament meets in about two months it will
scarcely be necessary to do so.
The next point of importance in the social system of this part of the
colony is the construction of roads and bridges for the district. There can be
no difficulty in the formation of roads and bridges for this district, from the
generally level character of the country, and the great abundance of eligible
timber for building purposes of all kinds. These are inestimable advantages,
in so far as the district is concerned ; and, if accompanied with energetic
action on the part of the Government, they will prove a great blessing to the
inhabitants. In particular, the great road to Sydney must be greatly amended
and improved, and a whole series of bridges must be constructed across the
dangerous creeks and rivers along the whole route from Bathurst to the
Lachlan. All that is necessary to be said, in regard to the mountain
portion of the Great Western Hoad, on which the inhabitants of these diggings
are at present so much dependent for their supplies, is that it is simply
execrable.
The only other requisite of importance to which I shall advert, is the
necessity for the provision of adequate means of education for the numerous
children that are rising up in this district. The question of general education
is one of the great questions that must necessarily come before the local
Parliament during its next session; and perhaps till that question is settled, it
would be injudicious to take any steps in the matter here. Purely, however,
there can be no necessity for Denominational schools here ; where children


are collected from all quarters, and where there are no vested interests to
interfere with the operation of a Generator National system.
Turning then to a different subject from any of those to which I
have been adverting, although one of direct and peculiar interest to the
inhabitants of this district, the gold that is obtained so abundantly in certain
well-known leads that are found traversing these plains in various directions,
has evidently been brought down by strong currents of water from its
original matrix in more elevated lands, at no great distance, in the primaeval
world. The question, therefore, arises, how long a period must have elapsed
since these ancient streams were running—since these once rapid currents
were flowing in the primaeval earth ? For it is evident and unquestionable
that, under the slow processes of nature, a prodigiously long period must
have elapsed since these streams were gradually filled up, and at length com-
pletely buried under accumulated masses of earth to the depth of upwards of
one hundred and forty and even two hundred feet, till all trace of their
existence had utterly vanished, and the superincumbent earth had been
rolled, as with a gardener’s roller, into a plain, over which other streams and
rivers are now meandering their way at a far higher level. These operations
of nature would seem to demand thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of
thousands, and it may be, millions of years.
But how does this tally, it may be asked, with the cosmogony and
chronology of Moses, or in other words, with the Mosaic account of the
creation ? I answer, “ perfectly.” We have been taught, indeed, that from
the first origin of all things to the last act of creation only six days elapsed,
and that this work of creation was accomplished by the Great Creator about
six thousand years ago. But these are evidently mere assumptions, founded
on a misinterpretation of Holy Scripture, and altogether unwarranted by the
Word of God. For the first verse of the first chapter of the book of
Genesis, “In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth,” is
simply a general introduction to the Word of God, and has no necessary con-
nection, in point of time, with the successive acts of creation afterwards
described. “In the beginning,” that is, at a period inconceivably remote in the
past eternity, “ God created the heavens and the earth.” There is here
merely the great fact announced, that God created the heavens and the earth
—without any note of time. And if we compare this scriptural expression with
one exactly similar in the commencement of the Gospel according to John,
we shall be constrained to acknowledge that the interpretation I have given of
the phrase “In the beginning” is the correct and the only correct one.
“ In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word
was God.” That is, at a period inconceivably remote in the past eternity,
was the Word or second person of the glorious Trinity. To explain this
passage, as we usually explain the first verse of the first chapter of Genesis
—supposing it to relate an event which took place only six thousand years
ago—would be a violation of all our ideas of propriety. In one word the
scriptural expression “ In the beginning” must evidently have the same
meaning in both of the passages in which it occurs. In the Gospel according
to John, it evidently signifies that at a period inconceivably remote in the
past eternity, the Word, or second person of the glorious Trinity, was with
God ; and in the first verse of the book of Genesis, it signifies that at a period


inconceivably remote in the past eternity, God created the heavens and the
earth. Whatever time, therefore, may have elapsed since the ancient streams
or water-courses, in which you are now finding gold at a depth of one hundred
and forty and even two hundred feet in the solid earth, were rolling their tor-
rents along on the surface of the primaeval earth, the books of Moses, the man
of God, are ready to grant it all. “ Geology,” says the late Mr. Poulett Scrope,
an eminent writer on the science, and a member of the Parliament of his day—
“ Geology makes large drafts on time.” But whatever drafts it requires to
make for those successive changes that must have taken place in ages past on
the surface of our globe—for those successive acts of creation of which the
evidences are now clear as daylight —the W ord of God, by the hand of Moses,
is ready to meet them all.
Assuming it, therefore, as an ascertained fact that the Mosaic accoun*'
of the creation is in perfect accordance with the deductions of modern geology
in regard to the antiquity of the globe, the accounts we receive from both of
these sources in regard to the original condition of the earth are perfectly
identical. Geologists hold that the earth was originally a vast mass of incan-
descent matter —a chaotic mass in which all the elements of things were com-
mingled in indescribable confusion, and ki which all the waters of the ocean
must have been in a state of steam or vapour. Now the description of
Moses is in perfect accordance with such an idea. “ The earth was without
form,” that is, without such distribution of land and water as we have at
present, without hills and dales, mountains and valleys—“and void,” that is,
destitute of all animal life, as it must have been in such circumstances —“ and
darkness was upon the face of the deep.” These words of Moses are just
the ideas of the most advanced geologists of our day translated into the
language of Scripture. It is, therefore, unquestionable that, both in regard
to the original condition of our globe and to its great antiquity, the Word of
God in the first chapter of Genesis is in perfect accordance with the views
and conclusions of modern geology.
And so is it also in regard to the progressive character of the work of
creation, which both the Mosaic record and the conclusions of geology declare
not to have been instantaneous, but a work of successive stages accomplish-
ed afier, it may be, very long intervals of time; the days of creation, in the
first chapter of Genesis, being regarded by certain very able commentators as
indefinitely long periods of time—successive forms of animated being having
evidently been called into existence by the Creator, and swept entirely away
when the purposes of their creation were served, to be succeeded by other
forms of being of a totally different description altogether.
Finally, geology regards man as the very last of the works of God in
creation ; human remains being found only in the most recent geological
formations. 1 need not remind you that in this particular also, the Word of
God speaks precisely the same language as his works ; for, in the words of the
sacred poet, after describing all the other acts of creation—
Then, chief o’er all his works below,
At last was Adam made :
His Maker’s image blessed his soul,
And glory crowned his head.


The lecture was concluded with some references to the question of
the abolition of State-aid for religion, in connection with the prospects for
religion and education in the far west.
No 4.-BUHRANGONG, OR THIS LAMBING FLAT.
March 26th, 1862.—-Started about sixa.m. for Burrangong, ortheLamb-
iutf Flat which is distant from the town of Forbes about eighty-five or ninety
miles. The level and open character of the country, of which the scenery is
occasionally both interesting and beautiful, continues for a great part of the
way, and it is confidently anticipated that the Lachlan gold fields will be
found to extend a long way, if not the whole distance, in the direction of
Burrangong. Reached our destination about seven in the evening.
27th. The Lambing Flat derives its name from the purpose which
it was made to serve under the squatting system, before the discovery of this
particular gold-field. In its. natural state, as is evident from the few umbra-
geous trees that are still left standing in the principal streets of the town, it
must have had a peculiarly interesting and beautiful appearance. But the
process of gold-mining, unfortunately, is unfavourable to the very last degree
to the preservation of the beauties of natural scenery ; for, like the locusts,
the miners speedily destroy every green thing in their neighbourhood, and
transform the fair face of nature into one of absolute desolation. There are
few places in the colony so utterly stripped of verdure of every kind as the
Lambing Flat and its vicinity. ,
The contour and general features of the ground in this neighbourhood
reminded me pretty much, although on a smaller scale, of that of Morpeth.
There is a deep creek, with or without water as it may happen, running
along the base of a sort of terrace on the left bank of the creek; and on the
opposite side of it there is a flat, the famous Lambing Flat, on which the
present town is situated. Now, if there had ever been anything like good
government exhibited in this remote locality—if there had been the slightest
degree either of judgment or of discretion evinced in the very important
governmental function of the laying out of a town in this part of the colony—
the town of Young, which is the name of the town on the Lambing Flat, should
certainly not have been placed on that flat at all, but on the terrace on the
opposite side of the creek, which is now occupied by the Government as the
Camp. This would have been a much more elevated, and consequently a
much healthier site for a town, while it would have served the purpose of
the mining population much better; for while there is no expectation
at present of finding gold in payable quantities on the Terrace,
it is the general belief that the whole of the I lat is auri-
ferous But there has hitherto been a singular want of common
sense exhibited in the acts and deeds of the Government generally
on the diggings, and a strange want of interest and concern, either m the
welfare of the miners, or in the advancement of the colony. There is no case
in which Government interference is more urgently required, or would be
more effectual in promoting the settlement of the country, than on the
diggings generally ; there is no case, however, in which almost everything of


the kind is either altogether awanting, or delayed till evils, which might
otherwise have been easily provided against, have been suffered to grow up
for all future generations without the means of remedy.
The objection to the laying out of the town of Young on the site of
the present Camp was, that there was no bridge across the creek, which, in
wet weather, is generally impassable. But I have been told on competent
authority, that an expenditure of not more than <£2oo would have been quite
sufficient for the construction of a substantial wooden bridge that would have
sufficed for the wants of the place for years to come. And considering the
very large amount of revenue derived from the gold-fields, not merely in that
iniquitous class-tax, the gold duty, but in the duties levied by the Govern-
ment on the Custom-house goods consumed in such large quantities by the
miners, this paltry amount might surely have been spared for such a pur-
pose.
Again, not only have the Government failed of its obvious duty in
not laying out a proper site for a town in this particular locality, it has
failed egregiously also in not affording either the miners or the people in
business in the place, the requisite facilities for obtaining building allotments
in the present town. There is nothing~so likely to fix a population in any
place such as this, as affording facilities for building purposes ; for as no man
in his senses will erect a substantial and permanent building of any kind on
ground that does not belong to him, so there is nothing more unlikely than that
people who have erected such buildings will dispose of them at an undervalue,
or abandon them on any slight cause, to move off to some other more
promi-ing locality. By neglecting their obvious duty, therefore, in this im-
portant particular, the Government have actually held forth a strong induce-
ment to the population to prepare for the next rush, or in other words, for a
general exodus to the Lachlan, or elsewhere. “ Three removes,” says
Benjamin f ranklin, “ are as bad as a fire and numerous miners who have
made the experiment, and realized the truth of the wise saying of “ Poor
Bichard,” Benjamin's hero, would never hare removed from the comfortable
homes they would have formed for their families on the different gold fields,
had the requisite facilities been afforded them at the first of obtaining suitable
allotments at a reasonable rate, and of erecting permanent buildings. There
is a local attachment which grows up naturally in such cases, which it is
alike the interest and the duty of the Government to foster and to encourage,
instead of throwing every obstade in its way, as has hitherto been too much
the absurd policy of the authorities of this colony. Even yet there are no
facilities afforded of obtaining building allotments in the town of Young ; and
the natural consequence is, that not a few of the miners and their families are
already packing up to be off to the Lachlan. The loss to the community at
large from these frequent removals, independently altogether of the ruin they
often entail upon well-disposed and industrious families, is quite incalculable.
In short, general neglect appears to have been characteristic of
every department under Government in this locality. The lock-up at the
camp is a slab-building, roofed with bark. It appeared to me to be not more
than twelve feet square, and yet there had been not fewer than thirty-one
persons locked up in it at one time. The accommodation of this kind was so
limited, that on one occasion men and women, I was told, had to be placed


in durance in the same apartment ! The temple of justice, or court-house,
which I went to see—with the previous information that fur the past twelve
months more business had been transacted in it than in any other court-house
out of Sydney in the colony—l found to be a small, miserable, calico tent,
such as an enterprising ginger-beer seller would have erected in the prospect
of a three days’ business at the Homebush races, or at some cricketting or
other exhibition of those Melbourne Barnums, Spiers and Pond, in the Go-
vernment Domain. And the post-office is so small, and withal so ricketty and
ruinous a structure, that I was told it was almost as easy to take a letter out
of it as to put one in, and that the soldiers bringing despatches from the camp
had frequently had to thrust them in with their bayonets. Nay, the boards
of the floor are so wide apart that when one or two of them were taken up
lately there were found the fragments of both letters and stamps that had
fallen through and been partly consumed by the vermin.*
Burrangong, or the Lambing Flat, is about 250 miles from Sydney ;
and will any person deny, after all 1 have stated, that the real cause of all
this neglect, this very bad government, is that the colony of New South
Wales, which is as large as all Great Britain aud France together, is a great
deal too large to be well governed, even by that best of all possible colonial
ministries, Messrs. Cowper, Robertson, and Co.? Whatpossible influence can
people at such a distance, and in such circumstances as those in which the
inhabitants of this neglected locality have hitherto been—what possible
influence can they have on a Government in Sydney, or a Legislature in
Macquarie-street ? As the rebellious Highlanders or Islanders used to say
to the Kings of Scotland, when threatening them with their royal vengeance,
“Itis a far pry to Loch Awe and therefore, instead of “ lending enchant-
ment to the view,” as the poet erroneously tells us, “ distance,” as in the
present case, too-often conceals the object from the view altogether.
How much more rational a system in such matters is that of the
United States (leaving out of the question the present disruption, which I
regard merely as the natural and necessary result of the absurd attempt to
amalgamate Freedom and Slavery, or a series of Free with a series of Slave
States, aud in which the only thing to be wondered at is that it did not take
place many years ago)—leaving out of the question, therefore, the present
American disruption, how much more rational a system, in matters of
government affecting the welfare of a whole community, is theirs than ours,
with all our pretensions to superiority ? When the inhabitants of any
American territory find that it is too extensive for good government, they
petition Congress to separate them into two or more distinct and independent
States. The inhabitants of Texas, which is as large as all France, and
• It has been alleged, in reply to these charges of neglect on the part of the
Government, in not erecting proper buildings lor the transaction of the public business
at Burrangong, that the Government had erected a public building of some kind in that
locality, but that it was burnt down by the rioters, during the famous Lambing Flat
riots. This, however, I am creditably informed by persons residing on the spot, was not
the fact ; the Government building referred to having been set fire to by a lunatic, who
had been in charge of the police till they left the place in a body as is stated below, but
was then .left at large. The people of Burrangong, indignantly, and I believe justly,
repudiate'the charge of their having ever wilfully destroyed any public property in the
place.


which would form not fewer than four States of the usual dimensions of an
American State—that is, from forty to fifty thousand square miles—petitioned
Congress for their separation and division into such States, which, in ordinary
circumstances, would have been conceded at once ; but as each of the four
States thus to be formed would have been entitled to two representatives
in the Senate, it was objected to on the part of the Free states, from their
unwillingness at the time to increase the slave power of the Union. On the
same principle Kentucky was separated at a much earlier period from Virginia,
and constituted a distinct and independent State ; and Tennessee was in
like manner separated from North Carolina and formed into a distinct State,
although both Virginia and North Carolina, before the separation, were
greatly smaller than New South Wales. In short, the Americans are a
common sense practical people in such matters, while we are little better than
fools, and suffer accordingly.
The same principle of consulting the convenience and welfare of the
general population extends even to the division of counties, when found too
large for their internal government, in the United States. In such cases the
population petitions the State Legislature for a division of the large county
into two smaller ones, which is granted at once, and the principle of self-
government is thus carried out in a corresponding practice. But the idea of
getting good government in any such way in this vast colony is altogether out
of the question. Men of humble abilities like the statesmen of America may
be able only to govern such comparatively small territories as the generality
of the American States ; but men of such transcendent ability as the present
Colonial Ministry are admitted to be, can govern a country five times as
large as the largest of these States, a country as large as all Great Britain and
France together, with perfect facility ; and the rich and rare specimens of
government, which I have been enumerating at Burrangong, are a pretty good
example of the manner in which they actually discharge this important duty.
In short, it is not government, but the absence of everything of the kind, that
is exhibited at Burrangong.
As there is some confusion in regard to the proper names in use in
this locality, I may state that the town of Young is situated on the Lambing
Flat, in the district of Burrangong. It is a pity to displace the ancient native
name, when so unexceptionable as this one, for any English name whatever ;
especially as this is the only memorial we shall soon have of the occupation
of this country for perhaps four thousand years by a race now rapidly under-
going the melancholy process of utter extinction.
The Burrangong or Lambing Fiat diggings are generally allowed to
be the best poor man’s diggings in all our Australian gold-fields. Every
person employed on these diggings is enabled, I was given to understand, to
earn considerably better wages than he could at the usual mechanical or other
industrial employments of our colonial towns. The diggings generally in
this locality, are what are termed shallow sinking—of no great depth, and
not requiring expensive machinery to work them. But there are some of
upwards of sixty feet in depth, which have regular shafts cased allround with
stout planking. At one of these shafts, the miners were getting tip water in
barrels, which they sell to the townspeople, who send for it in carts or wheel-
barrows, at sixpence each. It is quite clear, but it has a slightly mineral


taste, and I was told that the water of the place generally has the quality of
distending the stomach rather disagreeably till it has got used to it. From
the peculiar character of the Burrangong diggings, to which I have just ad-
verted, the storekeepers and other inhabitants of the place not directly
engaged in mining, are not apprehensive of any permanent exodus from these
diggings. Not a few of those who have actually gone to the Lach'an, they
expect to see back again, either on the approach of winter at the Lachlan,
with its wet weather and muddy fields, or when they find that tne prospect
there for miners without capital is much less favourable than at Burrangong.
In short, there is no-reason to apprehend that Burrangong will become a
deserted village, from the general exodus of the mining population, as has
actually been the case in certain of the other gold-fields. The auriferous
country in this locality is extensive, and it pays the mining population well.
Whether from the indifferent quality of the water or from some other
cause not yet ascertained, the same low, continued, typhoid fever that prevails
at the Lachlan, is also prevalent, although to a much smaller extent, here.
In such circumstances it was the duty of the Government to have taken the
requisite steps in the very first instance for the erection of a temporary
hospital; but they did not, leaving this duty entirely to the miners,
afier they had suffered long and severely from the want of such an
institution. An hospital, for which the public have contributed about ,£225
has, however, been erected in Burrangong ; but, as the Government_ in all
other cases of the same kind contribute an amount equal to the subscriptions
of the public, they are surely bound to do so in this case, although the contri-
butions of the public have been already expended. A contribution of <£225
or £250 from the public Treasury would, in addition to the sum already
contributed, place the Burrangong hospital on a proper footing both of
respectability and of efficiency.
The Burrangong Creek, which in times of rain or of flood rolls
down an impetuous torrent that sweeps away everything in its course, had,
during the long continuance of dry and sultry weather that preceded my visit,
ceased to run, and had become completely dry, except in one or two plac es
where a little water remained in holes. This was very calamitous to the
miners, to whose operations an abundant supply of water is indispensably
necessary. The appearance of the creek in its dry state, contrasted with the
account I had heard of a recent flood accompanied with loss of life in it,
reminded me strongly of a passage of Holy Scripture descriptive of a scene
precisely similar in the 6th chapter of the book of Job, which had been im-
pressed upon my memory at a comparatively early period. When student
under the late venerable Professor Jardine, in the logic or first philosophy
class of the University of Glasgow, in the session of 1812 and 1013, the
Professor prescribed to his students, as a class exercise, to arrange all the
verses of that chapter under the different subjects of which it treats, ihe passage
I refer to describes a caravan of eastern merchants coming in search of vater
to a mountain torrent or creek, which they had probably seen some time
before, when swollen with the melted snow and ice from the mountains, and
rolling a torrent of blackish water along the plain. But they search in vain,
as the torrent, like the Burrangong Creek so recently flooded, has become
completely dry. The passage is as follows, and it describes a scene to which


there is nothing analogous in the physical scenery of Scotland : —Job vl,
15—20.
“ My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the stream of brooks
they pass away ; which are blackish by reason of the ice, and wherein the snow is
hid ; what time they wax warm, they vanish ; when it is hot, they are consumed out of
their place. The paths of their ways are turned aside ; they go to nothing and perish.
The troops of Tema looked, the companies of Sheba waited for them. They were con-
founded because they had hoped ; they came thither, and were ashamed.”
I happened to be in England when the Burrangong or Lambing Flat
riot of last year took place, and I am still but imperfectly acquainted with the
circumstances and events of that conjuncture. But the conclusion to which I
was irresistibly led from all I have heard on the subject both on the spot and
elsewhere, from intelligent and unprejudiced persons of various classes, was,
that if the officer in command at the time had been a resolute man —I will
not say a brave man, for every soldier must in common courtesy be supposed
to be brave—if the officer in command had only been a resolute man, and had
stuck to his post and done his duty, there would in 1 all likelihood have been
no riot at all ; or if there had been, it would have been easily suppressed.
But after bullying and threatening the -miners, the gallant officer made a
regular Bull’s Run of it himself; posting off with all his troops, and never
stopping till he reached Yass, a distance of sixty-five miles. Like another
hero of Scottish song,
“ He staid tiot for brake and he stopped not for stone,
He swam the Yass river where ford there was none, &c.”
It is alleged, indeed, on behalf of the officer in charge at the time that his
ammunition was expended, that bis men had been two whole days and nights
in the saddle, and that, being a Freemason, he had received information
on which he could rely from a brother of the craft that it had been determined
by the diggers—about three thousand strong —to attack the camp on the
occasion of the burial of the man Lupton, who had been shot by the troopers
on the first collision. In these circumstances, it is alleged, the officer in
command was fully justifiable in retreating from the scene, as he would other-
wise have endangered his own life and the lives of his men to no purpose. It
is certain, however, on the other hand, that all was peace and quiet at the
diggings after the officer and the troopers had gone.
When the officer in command had thus left the field, it is the belief of all
well-informed persons in Burrangong that the place would have been sacked
forthwith had not one of the rioters, Mr. William Spicer, the most respectable
person of the lot, stood forward with a pistol in his hand and threatened to
shoot the first person who should put forth his hand to touch any article of
property that did not belong to him. Now one would naturally have
supposed that, in such circumstances, and especially after the other rioters
had been tried and acquitted, Spicer would not have been singled out for
prosecution and punishment by a liberal and paternal Government. The
tidings, however, “ that he had been tried at Goulburn, found guilty of parti-
cipating in the riot, and sentenced to two years’ imprisonment in Herrima
gaol,” which arrived at Burrangong whilst I was there, were received by
the respectable part of the population with astonishment and indignation.
It was an inglorious triumph on the part of the Government, and by


no means very creditably obtained. The trial took place at Goulbu r n, 'a
hundred and twenty five miles from the place in which the offence had been
committed. Why, then, was a special commission not appointed to try the
case on the spot, as would certainly have been done at home ? For how could
reliable evidence have been obtained at such a distance ? No doubt the
Government had the evidence of the men who ran away; but this, it see ms
to me, was rather a suspicious circumstance. Mr. Helroyd, M.P., the counsel
forthe defence —able pleader andupright Judge as he is—called no witnesses
as to character in the case —a case in which, it would seem that character,
exemplified as Spicer’s had been, was everything. The Chief Justice and
Attorney-General were, doubtless, very eloqnent on the occasion on the
enormity of popular ententes and commotions; but are these high function-
aries not aware that such emeutes and commotions never occur but when they
are preceded and caused by bad government ? and will they pretend to tell us,
after the specimens I have given, that there is good government even yet at
Burrangong? The fact is, the great colonial firm of Cowper, Robertson, and
Co., have a great deal too many irons in the fire to keep them all hot; and
the consequence is that, at the distance of two hundred and fifty miles from
head quarters, people are not governed, but neglected, and left to take their
chance. If a slice were taken off this overgrown colony, both north and
south, we should have some chance of being well governed in the portion
that remained. At present, we have very little, if any, at a certain distance
from head quarters.
Arriving at Burrangong in the evening of Wednesday, the 26th, I
had intended to remain two whole days there, and to proceed on Saturday to
Yass, where I had engaged to preach twice on the following Sabbath, and to
deliver a lecture on Saturday evening. But as I found the coach to Yass
started on Friday and not on Saturday, I was obliged to limit my stay at
Burrangong to one whole day. Unwilling, however, to pass even so short a
period in so important a locality, without endeavouring to be of some service
to my fellow-colonists there, I caused it to be announced that I should perform
Divine service in the evening in a temporary place of worship which had been
kindly granted for the occasion, and that after the service 1 should deliver a
lecture or address, as I had done at the Lachlan, on matters of interest to the
district. I did so accordingly, and had a numerous, respectable, and most
attentive audience both at the religious service and at the subsequent
address.
28th.—Having paid my fare the day previous, I took my place on the
box-seat of the coach, beside the driver, at the Great Eastern Hotel, where
I was staying, and from which the coach started. I had been given to un-
derstand that there were certain prisoners and troopers to proceed by the
coach to Yass ; so we drove over to the camp to receive them. On arriving
there I found, with some surprise and indignation, that there were not fewer
than eight prisoners and four troopers to be accommodated by the coach, and
that it could only accommodate twelve altogether, bo I was actually given to
understand by the principal trooper, who had a musket in his hand to enforce
his arguments, that there was no room for me, and that I must get down to
let him up. He might have said on the occasion (although he did not) almost
in the words of Mrs. John Gilpin—


Eight prisoners and four polic*
Will a fit lading be
For this here coach : so you must rids
On horseback after we.
It was a most unwarrantable and discreditable proceeding on the part
of the authorities, and it only shows how the colony is governed in these re-
mote regions even under the best possible Ministry. I had paid my fare and
taken my place in a public conveyance—not the mail; and T had to give up
my seat to accommodate prisoners and troopers ! No doubt I might have kept
my place and sat violently ; but I am not in the habit of using physical force
or resisting authority. So I resigned my place at once, when given to under-
stand that such was the wish of the authorities. In short, I could not but
see that order reigned at Burrangong even under the present Ministry, pre-
cisely as it does at Warsaw under tbe Bussian tyrant of Poland ; and so I
could do nothing but submit. I cannot but enter my protest, however, on
behalf of the public, against this Eusso-Polish Governmental practice of
seizing a public conveyance for the transport either of troops or prisoners,
except in some case of obvious emergency, such as an invasion or an insur-
rection. But there was no such emergency in the present case ; and as there
are express vans on these roads, surely the authorities might, with a little
foresight, have engaged one of these for the transport of their prisoners on
the occasion in question, without transforming a regular stage-coach into a
prison-van, and shutting out the public from their own conveyance.
As I had engaged to preach and lecture at Yass, and have made it a
rule all my life never to disappoint the people on such occasions, a horse and
dog-cart were immediately engaged to convey me thither; Mr. Gumming, the
printer of the Burrangong Courier, having kindly undertaken to drive me to
Xass, and to return with the vehicle. We started accordingly about an hour
after the coach.
No. S—FROM BURRANGONG TO YASS AND GOULBURN.
March 28 and S9. —There are two routes from Burrangong to Yass—the
one by Binalong, the other by Burrowa. The former of these is the one
traversed by the coach ; the other, which is somewhat longer, has the ad-
vantage of much superior accommodation for those who have to spend a night
by the way, in the hotel at Burrowa. Mr. Gumming and myself, with our
dog-cart, took the latter of these routes, as we found thirty miles a day a
sufficient journey for our hired horse. The country along the whole route to
Burrowa, which is thirty-one miles from Burrangong, is an open pastoral
country, presenting occasionally very picturesque scenes and views.
' 1 learned afterwards that Gardiner, who has recently been levying
black mail on the Lachlan, and other roads of tbe Far West, had heard of my
being at Burrangong, and intended to intercept me on the way, on hearing
that I had had to leave the coach and travel by some other conveyance. But
as we started within an hour after the coach had left with the troopers and
prisoners, and by a different route, we were mutually deprived of the pleasure
or benefit of an interview. I have been repeatedly congratulated since on
my providential escape ; but I confess I was rather sorry, when informed of


the circumstance, that I had missed him, as I understood he had some
communication or complaint to make to me, to which I should have been quite
willing to have listened attentively. From all I have heard of Gardiner,
I could never have supposed that he had any intention either to rob or
to maltreat me.
This very circumstance, however, discloses a state of things in the
far interior to which the authorities would do well to direct their attention.
All along these routes there are places of accommodation, shanties, sly grog-
shops, &c., of the most questionable character ; and it is in these places that
our modern bushrangers obtain occasional shelter and general information.
There is a maxim of Scotch law, “ The resetter (that is the receiver of stolen
goods) is as bad as the thief; for if there were no resetters, there would be
no thieves.” It is peculiarly unfortunate for society when there is any con-
siderable portion of the community, as has so frequently been the case in
certain parts of Ireland, banded together for the protection and escape of the
criminal, rather than for the protection and safety of society. But this may
always be expected in the frontier districts of a gold country ; considering the
character of no inconsiderable portion of the people that flock to such
localities.
Burrowa is one of the most prettily situated towns in the interior 1
There is a large extent of land available for agriculture, and naturally clear
of timber, in its immediate vicinity ; and a perennial stream, called the
Burrowa River, supplies the inhabitants with plenty of excellent water. The
Royal Hotel also, in which we rested for the night, is one of the very best
houses of the kind I have seen anywhere in the colony ; and I could not but
feel that we had got into the regions of civilisation once more when contrasting
the comfortable appearance and character of everything in the hotel at
Burrowa with the makeshifts of the more recent settlements of the Far
West.
Burrowa is one of the most thoroughly Roman Catholic districts in New
South Wales. As everybody in the Duke of Argyle’s country at home ia
called Campbell, so everybody in and around Burrowa is called Ryan, This,
at least, is the general rule, although there are particular exceptions, Bur-
rowa, in short, is the head-quarters and paradise of the Ryans, and might
almost be supposed to be a veritable slice of the county Tipperary. An
inhabitant of the town, a native of the Green Isle, but not a Ryan, told me
that at the last general election he had voted for Mr. Martin, who, however,
only obtained eight votes ; and for this independent exercise of his franchise,
his fellow-citizens threatened to burn him alive. I told him, by way of com-
fort, that I was very sorry myself that Mr. Martin was not a member of the
present Parliament; for, although I seldom voted with him, I thought it was
always safest for the country to have men of eminent ability in the Opposition.
It is unfortunate for any district of country to be of so one-sided a character
as that of Burrowa is, from the circumstance I have mentioned. A much
healthier tone of society is likely to prevail in those localities in which the
principal religious denominations are more equally balanced. Mr. Ryan, the
member for this electoral district, had very kindly sent me, through a friend,
an invitation to visit him at bis place on my tour; but, as he was not at home
when I passed through Burrowa, while the necessary rapidity of my move-


ments prevented me from miking visits of mere courtesy or pleasure, I was
unfortunately precluded from accepting his invitation, which I should other-
wise have been happy to do.
After passing the open downs to the eastward of Burrowa, the
country generally presents the same open pastoral character all the way to
Yass. There is a decided improvement, indeed, in approaching the town of
Yass ; and the country assumes all at once quite an English character - open
downs or plains of apparently superior land, and beautiful umbrageous trees
thinly and picturesquely scattered over them like the oaks or elms in a noble-
man’s park at home.
The distance from Burrowa to Yass is thirty-four miles, making the
whole distance from Burrangong sixty-five. Arriving as we did at Yass
between four and five in the afternoon of Saturday, I made sure of being
enabled to fulfil my previous engagement to deliver a lecture on some subject
of interest and importance to the district that evening, and to preach twice on
the following Sabbath to the Presbyterians in and around Yass, What, then,
was my mortification to find that, in consequence of my non-arrival by the
coach from Burrangong on Friday evening, it had been announced in the
Yass Courier of Saturday morning, that my proposed visit for both of these
purposes would be indefinitely postponed. The hire of the horse and dog-
cart at Burrangong, for four or five days, had been £5, and the expenses
of men and horses to and fro on the route were at least an equal amount; but
this expenditure had thus been incurred to no purpose through the un-
warrantable seizure of a public conveyance at the remote settlement of
Burrangong for Her Majesty’s troopers and prisoners ; for the Presbyterians
of the Yass district were for the most part at too great a distance from the
town to be informed of my arrival in time after the notice in the local paper
of Saturday morning.
I had been the more anxious to fulfil my engagement at Yass, from
the circumstances in which the Presbyterians of that district had been left,
through the negligence or inefficiency of those who had volunteered to care
for them for years past, A zealous, active, and self-denying minister of that
communion, the late Rev. William Ritchie, who had previously been
officiating for mein Sydney, during my long absence in England and America,
previous to the year 1850, had been settled in the Yass district in that
year ; and had not only formed a small but attached congregation at Yass,
but had made periodical ministerial visits to all the surrounding localities in
which there were Presbyterian families residing, as far as Queanbeyan on the
one hand, and Jugiong on the other. Unfortunately lor the district, however,
Mr. Ritchie died five or six years ago; and the Presbyterians of the districted
been induced to entrust the office of procuring for them another minister from
Scotland, for whose passage out they had raised and forwarded the necessary
funds, to the Synod of Australia. But that body having, as is well known,
devoted their efforts and energies for the last seven years to the somewhat
hopeless task of putting me down, the interests of the Presbyterians of the
Yass district were, in the meantime, entirely neglected; and the money they
had sent home for the payment of their future minister’s passage, had at
length to be transferred to other hands.
lu these circumstances, I was naturally anxious to fulfil the engage-


ment I had intimated from the Lachlan that I should preach twice at Yass on
Sabbath, the 30th, as I knew well that various Presbyterian families and
individuals, residing in various localities, twelve or fifteen miles from V’ass,
would receive notice indue time toenablethem to attend Divine service there,
agreeably to the hallowed institutions of their fatherland ; and 1 was conse-
quently the more disappointed, that an intimation had unwittingly been given
through the local paper, which would prevent their coming in.
Yass has greatly extended itself since I was last in that part of the
territory, in the year 1859; and not a few buildings, both public and private,
highly creditable for an inland town, have since been erected. The main
street, which forms part of the great road to Melbourne, which on my former
visit was a regular u Slough of Despoild ” in wet weather, has also been
greatly improved. The substantial wooden bridge which has been constructed
across the Yass River, is highly creditable to the Government; and so also is
the telegraph-office, a recent erection in the main-street.
1 was incidentally informed of a circumstance during my short stay in
Yass, which strongly confirms the views I have frequently put forth, although
with but slight countenance and support in certain influential quarters, as to
the extent of territory comprised within the limits of this vast colony, A mer-
cantile house of old standing in the district, which had been accustomed from an
early period to forward goods in drays from Sydney to Wagga Wagga, for the
inhabitants of the country beyond the Murrumbidgee, does not now send more
than one dray for ten they sent formerly. The fact is, the trade, in so far as the
consumption of the district lying between the Murray and Murrumbidgee
Rivers is concerned, has left the Sydney side almost altogether, and has fixed
itself in Victoria and South Australia—the natural sources of supply for that
tract of country. And yet, dependent as we are for almost the whole of the
revenue derived from the consumption of all dutiable commodities consumed
in that tract of country, upon what our honest and generous neighbours, the
Victorians, are pleased to give us, we still keep our cloven foot on that portion
of territory, and refuse to its inhabitants the boon of self-government which
we claim so loudly, and pretend to regard as so precious a possession, for our-
selves. For I maintain, without fear of contradiction, that the inhabitants of
that riverine district, a tract of country as large as all Scotland, and half the
size of the whole six New England States in America, can never be properly
or satisfactorily governed from Sydney, with a Legislature sitting in Mac-
quarie-street. Were this an American State, the people in that part of the
territory would get justice in this matter, from the Congress, in spite of us.
But as “ we are monarchs of all we survey” as far as the Murray River, and
our Imperial Government cares very little about such remote matters, the
people in that virtual dependency must continue to suffer the consequences
of our unrighteous domination till they get numerous enough to right themselves
as I have no doubt they will do, sooner or later. I trust I am quite as
anxious to advance the honour and glory of this colony as any other of its
inhabitants ; but the honour and glory of New South Wales are in no way
concerned in our maintaining an unrighteous domination over territories we
can never govern with satisfaction to their inhabitants. The views of Mr.
Goldwin Smith, of Oxford, on which I shall have a word or two to say when
1 have finished these Notes, are remarkably opportune, and show, in common


with various other indications of a similar kind in high quarters, how the
public mind is opening to conviction in the mother-country on this question
of empire or political domination. But I shall waive the subject for the
present. t
30th. Preached twice in the court-house, which was kindly granted
for the purpose, through Mr. Laidlaw, J.P., to a considerably larger congre-
gation than I anticipated under the circumstances 1 have mentioned ; for the
town population of Yass has very considerably increased since [ preach ed
there on ray way to the Tumut and the Adelong three years ago.
31st. I would gladly have stayed another day at \ ass, and delivered
a lecture in the evening, had there been any chance of ray getting to Goul-
burn on the following day; but as the Gold Escort monopolises the mail
every Tuesday, just as the troopers and prisoners did the Burrangong coach
on the previous Friday, I had to make the best of my way to Goulburn by
the mail on Monday.
April Ist and 2nd. After spending an idle day in Goulburn on
Tuesday—All Fools’ Day, agreeably to the old reckoning—and repeating
again and again with the poet, for my own comfort and edification, What’s
this dull town to me ?” I delivered a lecture of about two hours, agreeably to
previous advertisement, on the question of State-aid for Religion, to a
numerous and enthusiastic assemblage of the inhabitants of Goulburn, in
the noble Hall, so creditable to the place and the people, of the Mechanics’
Institute, in the evening of Wednesday. It is quite evident that the heart
of the people generally is all right on this great question.
3rd and 4th, Finding that the conveyance to Queanbeyan, ray next
station, where I had engaged to preach and lecture on the following Saturday
and Sabbath, did not leave Goulburn till Saturday, the sth, I hired a horse
for those two days to pay a visit to Mr. Arthur Rankin, of Lockyersleigh (a
brother of the late George Rankin, Esq., J.P., of Bathurst) with whom I had
travelled across the Blue Mountains to Bathurst, on his arrival in the colony
in the year 1826. Lockyersleigh is about fifteen miles from Goulburn, on
the old Sydney road, and is rather hard to find ; for I had almost made up
my mind, when about half way, to return to Goulburn, rather than run the
chance of encamping in the bush for the night, especially as it was
threatening to rain at the time.
Lockyersleigh was originally the property of the late Major Lockyer,
of the 51st Regiment, a very old colonist, who surveyed the Upper Brisbane
and Bremer rivers, in Queensland, in the year 1825 or 1826, and was
afterwards, for some time, commandant of the then penal settlement of King
George’s Sound. He had, unfortunately, expended all his substance in the
improvement of his grant of land; on which he had erected a handsome
cottage, with a whole suite of outbuildings of a very superior character, all
suited for the residence of a country gentleman of moderate fortune, when,
like many of the other military and other settlers of the olden time, he
overran his means, and fell, at the same time, into debt, and under the
tender mercies of that colonial patriot, Sir Stuart Alexander Donaldson. As
the debt was not targe, considering the value of hia property, the unfortunate
Major cherished for a time the hope that he would at length recover the
property for his family. But Sir Stuart was not the man to relax his grasp


in such circumstances ; and so the Major lost the property, winch fell to his
creditor. The latter, I was told, many years ago, had had a similar chance
at Tenterden, in New England, and had improved it accordingly.
Sic fortis Etruria crevit:
or as the sentiment may be done into English, “ Such is the style in which
not a few fortunes have been made in New South Wales.” The unfortunate
Major I may add, died about a year ago, as Usher of the Black Rod to our
Colonial House of Peers. It is sad to contemplate the shipwreck of a colonial
fortune in this way ; but this was, unhappily, not the only instance of the
kind I had to lament on my tour. ~ , . ,
On returning to Goulburn, from Mr. Rankins, in the r rid ay
afternoon, my horse, when between five and six miles from Goulburn, struck
work all at once, like the Newcastle colliers, and refused to proceed a single
step further. His owner told me afterwards that he supposed he had taken
the gripes. How, or what it was, 1 could not tell; but the animal stood stock
still, and refused to budge on any terms. I was therefore obliged to leave
him in charge of the obliging inhabitant of a cottage by the way side, and
walk the rest of the way, more than five miles, to Goulburn. In other
circumstances this would have been no hardship ; but it was now getting
quite dark, the rain was falling in torrents, and the road to Goulburn was
thickly overlaid with a coating of mud. I reached the Royal Hotel, however,
in good time ; and, although quite drenched, caught no barm from the
wetting.
No. 6. —PROM GOULBURN TO QUEANBEYAN.
April s. —Started for Queanbeyan by the mail-carriage at five a.m. It had
rained heavilv all night, and as 1 lay awake for hours in the hotel at Goul-
burn, listening to the pattering of therain on the shingles, I felt rather uneasy
at the prospect, (which was actually realised in the sequel,) of our being
suddenly arrested in our progress by the rising of some creek or river on the
way. But as the day broke, the weather moderated ; and, with the exception
of occasional showers, we pursued our course pretty comfortably.
For the first seven miles the road to Queanbeyan is the same as that
to Yass. It then diverges from the Yass road to the left, pursuing its course
through a thinly-wooded and pastoral country, with occasional tracts of land
of Greater or less extent, apparently well adapted for agriculture. In par-
ticular spots the scenery is decidedly beautiful ; the land stretching out into
extensive levels, with umbrageous trees thinly scattered over them, while
occasional pools, or lakes, diversify the scene, and the ground is covered with
a rich and luxuriant pasture. It is altogether a much more interesting coun-
try in its natural features than any along the whole route from Picton to Y ass.
Collector, a post town, where the mail halts for breakfast, is about
twenty-five miles from Goulburn. There is plenty of good land and abun-
dance of good water, the two principal requisites for an inland town—the
third being a good site—either as a thoroughfare or for a market in its imme-
diate vicinity. There are various small settlers, engaged in the cultivation of
the soil, in the surrounding district.


As the Honorable the Speaker resides within a short distance of
Collector, I forwarded my card to him, with my respeets, through the post-
master, as I could not leave the mail-carriage to discharge this duty other-
wise. And in a letter, which I afterwards received from Mr. Murray at
Queanbeyan, he did me the honour to invite me very courteously to spend a
few days at his place, of which the romantic, if not beautiful, native name is
Windenadeen —an invitation which my previous engagements, and the
necessary rapidity of my movements, unfortunately prevented me from
accepting.
It had often struck me as something unaccountable how so stupid an
English name as Collector could have been given to any inland town in New
South Wales; and I had tacitly concluded that, like Peabody, the absurd
American corruption of the French Huguenot name, Pibaudiere, it was
merely an English corruption of some significant and appropriate Aboriginal
name. On questioning the intelligent postmaster of Collector on the subject,
I was confirmed in this idea by his informing me that the late Rev. Robert
Cartwright, of Goulburn, a gentleman of superior education, as well as of
very old standing in the colony, whom I knew personally in the olden time,
always wrote the name Kaligda, before it had undergone the strange process
of naturalisation to which it was afterwards subjected. This, therefore,
we have reason to believe, was its original Aboriginal name. It is
unfortunate that we have no Aboriginal Eustathius to give us the meaning
of such a significant, but highly descriptive name ; for, unlike ourselves, the
Aborigines never give names without a reason.
This tract of country is popularly called the Lakes; by far the
longest depression in it, being known as Lake George. This lake must at
some time have been a noble object. It is about fifteen miles in length by
about four in breadth ; but it has evidently been subjected for many gene-
rations past to that process of desiccation which, according to Dr. Leichhardt,
has been in progress in the eastern portion of this country for a long time
past. It has been gradually filling up from generation to generation, with
the soil washed into it in times of flood, from all the higher lands around it.
For more than half way across from the base of the range of hills that skirt
it on the western shore, it is a mere swamp presenting an extensive bed of reeds,
over which the blue water, which, however, extends for miles along the
eastern shore, cannot be seen till one reaches the southern terminus of the
lake to the westward, and ascends the heights towards Gundaroo. From
that point it is really an interesting and beautiful object. What a noble
inland sea it must have been in the times of those ancient Oriental squatters,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob ! But like the Red Sea, at the famous crossing-
place of Moses and the children of Israel, the natural features of the country
are so changed from what they must have been then, from the filling up of the
lake, that those who had seen it then, if such a thing were possible,
could scarcely have recognised it now.
The day had in the meantime become so fine, and the sun was shining
out so brightly upon our path, that I had begun to fancy that all the
difficulties of our route were past, and was calculating the probable time of
our arrival at Queanbeyan, when we were suddenly stopped short, about five
miles from Gundaroo, on the right bank of Brooke’s Creek (one of those


mountain torrents, or water courses, that cross the road,) which was then,
like Campbell’s “ Iser, rolling rapidly,” with a broad deep current, which it
was utterly hopeless for any vehicle to attempt to ford. It was then about
two o’clock, and I was advertised to deliver a lecture at Queanbeyan that
evening, and to preach twice on the following day. “It was an awkward
predicament,” as one of the royal dukes of George the Third’s happy family
observed to a friend, when his coach and horses, which he had just left for
a moment in the street to step into a shop on his way, were seized and
carried off by some tradesman for debt—it was really an awkward predica-
ment, and it was in no way improved by the circumstance, that while there
was a tolerably comfortable house of accommodation on the opposite bank of
the stream, there was no house of any 'kind on our side for miles in any
direction, and it had just begun to rain again. , ,
There was only one other passenger, a lady with an infant, in the
mail besides myself; and we were sitting disconsolate enough when the
coachman proposed to drive up along the creek, for about half a mile, to
where he told us there were some gold-miners at work. He did so
accordingly, and we soon found ourselves in the midst of a smaL collection
of miners’tents, on the bank of the creek. Into one of these we were
courteously invited by the proprietor, William Ryan, who swept it out tor
our reception, arranged the two stretchers for seats for us, and made us a
comfortable pot of tea, which, with damper, potatoes, and wild honey from
the surrounding forest, formed a very acceptable repast. .
Surveying the torrent, as I did occasionally and rather disconsolate y
under the rain, Ryan's mate pointed out to me a tuft of grass that was just
visible in mid-stream, and told me that that was the highest point of an
island in the creek, which I would soon see in all its dimensions. 1 could
not help recurring at the time to the well-known story in Horace, of a rustic
arriving on the bank of a rapid river, and sitting down till it should run dry,
as he thought so rapid a stream would do very soon ; and I certainly
sympathised with the poet when, in ridicule of the poor rustic, he adds
Labitur, et labetur in omne volubilis sevum
“It rolls along, and will continue to roll for every succeeding age.”
With these feelings, rather sceptical I confess as to the speedy subsidence of
the torrent, I retired once more under the shelter of the miner s tent, and
managed to while away an hour or two with an American compilation of
rather a superior character which he put into my hands, and which appeared
to form the only volume in the miner’s library. At length, about five o clock,
I looked out at the creek again and found, to my agreeable surprise, that it
had gone down very much during the interval, the island being now fully
developed. There was still, however, a rapid and apparently deep current
between the island and our side of the creek, and I confess I contemplated the
scene with the feeling of utter helplessness which was natural tea townsman
in so unusual a scene. But our good friends, the miners, were just the men
for such an emergeney. By-and-bye one of them came down from the wood
with a stout sapling, like a telegraph pole, on his shoulder and threw it across
the rapid current to the island. He had a second in readiness at the time, i
the wood, which he brought down immediately after and threw across the


stream as he had done the other. Our host of the canvas tent, William Ryan,
then crossed over this temporary bridge to the island ; but as such a feat
could not be expected from such helpless creatures as the lady with her infant
and myself, Ryan called out to his mate to bring two forked pieces, two paces
long. Quick as thought the stout bushman shouldered his axe, and presently
brought down the two forked pieces, exactly according to order. This was
no sooner done than Ryan dug a hole on the island at the end of the tem-
porary bridge, into which he sunk one of the forked pieces, w’hile his mate
did the same with the other on our side of the creek. This being done, the
sturdy miner prepared and brought down a third sapling, like a telegraph
pole, and threw it across the stream, resting the opposite ends of it on the two
forked pieces, and thereby forming a rail for the temporary bridge. I then
crossed over with perfect ease, and the lady followed ; one of the miners
taking her hand, while the coachman carried her infant. On the opposite
side of the island the stream was much shallower, and there was a reef of
rocks that served as stepping stones to the other side, where we soon reached
the house of accommodation, in which we were domiciled for the night.
I was greatly struck at the superior tact and intelligence which these
miners had thus exhibited, as well as at the genuine courtesy and politeness
they had shown towards the lady passenger and myself. The absence of
everything like an Hibernian accent, I confess, somewhat staggered me,
although the name, Ryan, reminded me strongly of Burrowa. But as the
miners on the creek happened to have a jollification at the house of accom-
modation that evening, to celebrate the birthday of one of their number, in
the course of which I overheard them singing American songs, and especially
one with the refrain of Kentucky 0 ! it was quite evident where they had
come from, and that if our polite host of the canvas tent could actually
trace his descent from the Green Isle, either his immediate forefathers or him-
self had been enlightened and civilised in America.
There was a large family going to Sydney from Maneira, also domi-
ciled in the house of accommodation on the creek. They had a spring cart
with two horses, and had expected to reach Collector that night ; but they
were stopped by the rising of the creek, like ourselves. Surely, then, it is
the bounden duty of the Government to bridge over this dangerous creek ;
crossing, as it does, one of the great highways of the colony—the road to
Queanbeyan, Cooma, and Kiandra. This, I believe, could be done with per-
fect facility, with an expenditure of not more than ,£200; for it would be
much easier to throw a substantial bridge over Brooke’s creek than over the
Burrangong Creek, which I was told could be effected for that amount. No
doubt such a rising of the creeks as I experienced is but of rare occurrence;
but this is no reason why a substantial bridge should not be constructed over
a dangerous creek on one of the great roads of the colony.
I was not aware, till the occurrence I have mentioned, that there
were any miners at work intbis part of the colony at all. There are not many,
it is true ; but there are a few, and these, I was happy to be informed, were
doing pretty well, that is, earning good wages. The geological structure of
the country is pretty much like that of the Turon ; the prevailing rock being
argillaceous schistus, with a dip or inclination precisely similar to that of
the rocks in that part of the territory. Gold, it seems, has been found all


alone- Brooke’s Creek, as well as on another a few miles distant. There are
few places indeed, in the colony now in which it is not found ; and when
free selection shall have fulfilled its mission, in settling hundreds of small
farmers on their own land all over the territory, the search for gold may be
engaged in regularly by the small settler, with profit to himself, and with
advantage to the community, at those seasons of the year in which his labour
wi'l not be required on his land. It is a remarkable fact that many of the
small farmers of Switzerland are engaged, at those seasons in which their
field labours are intermitted, in the apparently uncongenial occupation of
watchmaking. Gold-mining is surely a much more kindred occupation to
that of the working-farmer than watchmaking ; and I see no reason why
the two occupations should not be conjoined in the way I have mentioned, in
those parts of the country in which gold is found, even in small quantities,
within a moderate distance of eligible land for cultivation. A very small
quantity obtamed in this way, to fill up the farmer’s otherwise idle time,
would pay him well; and as I was told on my present tour by an intelligent
miner who had found it to his advantage to act upon his own rule “It is
much better for a practical miner to continue to work even on the worst pay-
ing gold-field, than to run off, as many of them do, to every rush that takes
place in the colony.” . . . .. ~ .
6th (Sabbath,) The creek had fallen considerably during the night,
and the coachman succeeded in getting the mail carriage across about eight
o’clock. In short, Horace’s rustic might not have been so irrational a person
after all, if he had come to Brooke’s Creek when at the highest, and had sat
down at the crossing place till it fell.
Started again about nine o’clock, and reached Gundaroo, where the
lady with the infant left us, a little before ten. To reach Queanbeyan in
time for the morning service was now out of the question, as we had still
thirty-two miles before us, (rather too much for a Sabbath day sjouiney, only
that I was going to church); the whole distance from Goulburn, by the route
the mail travels, being eighty-two miles. There is a direct line, 1 under-
stood by which the distance from Gundaroo to Queanbeyan is not more than
twenty miles; but it is rather hilly, and practicable as yet only for horsemen.
Gundaroo is a nice-looking place for an inland town, although one
must draw not a little upon futurity, to recognise it as a town at all There
is a large extent of eligible land for cultivation, and many small settlers
within a reasonable distance around it; and it possesses a perennial stream of
excellent water. It is sure to become a place of considerable importance.
The next stopping place is Gininderra, about seventeen miles from
Gundaroo ; the intervening country, especially for the last few miles, being
exceedingly beautiful. Gininderra itself is one of the most picturesque and
beautiful spots 1 have seen in the colony—plenty of eligible land around it
either naturally clear of timber or very lightly wooded, and a fine perennial
stream of water crossing the plain. On one of my earlier voyages to Europe,
I happened one morning to breakfast, along with another Scotch clergyman,
with the late celebrated Dr. Chalmers, while that great man was Professor of
Divinity in the University of Edinburgh. After breakfast we accompanied Dr.
Chalmers to the University, to hear his lecture in the Divinity Hall; and in
passing along Prince’s-street, with the fine mountain scenery of Arthur s Seat


fully in view, Dr. C., apparently attracted with the scenery before him,
suddenly stopped short on the pavement, and, passing the point of his staff
along the outline of the mountain, exclaimed quite aloud, to the surprise of
the people who happened to be passing at the time, “ What a glorious
outline!” Such an exclamation would, I conceive, have been much
more appropriate on the plain of Gininderra, in viewing the glorious outline
of hill and mountain with which it is surrounded, at various distances and in
all directions. It is quite a paradisaical scene.
The remaining portion of the route to Queanbeyan traverses a
beautiful country, consisting chiefly of a series of treeless plains, and forming
part of the splendid domain of George Campbell, Esq., of Duntroon, about
eight or ten miles from Queanbeyan. Mr. Campbell has erected a neat
church (an Episcopalian Church, of course) for the district, which is called
Canberra, and in which, as I had been long aware, there is a considerable
Scotch population ; who, unlike the lord of the manor, still retain their
hereditary attachment to the simpler, but hallowed institutions of their
fatherland.
The road to Queanbeyan terminates at the river, right opposite to the
town. The Queanbeyan river is a perennial stream, easily fordable on all
ordinary occasions, and sometimes nearly dry. But it was anything but
dry when I arrived on its banks. On the contrary, it was rolling like the
Clyde at Glasgow in a “ spate” or flood ; and the idea of crossing it either
on horseback or with the mail carriage, was out of the question. The
Molouglo Creek, I understood, joins the Queanbeyan River at some distance
above the usual crossing place, and the postman proposed to drive round for
a few- miles to the usual crossing place of that creek; the crossing of which,
he conceived, would be a much less formidable affair than attempting the
river. In due time, therefore, we reached the Molonglo Creek, which we
found, to our great mortification, was a broad and rapid stream which
there seemed no prospect of our being able to cross. There was no house of
any kind for miles around, and the nearest place with a roof to it was Mr.
Campbell’s woolshed, distant about three miles, to which, accordingly, our
horses’ heads w T ere rather sorrowfully turned, in the hope of our obtaining
some sort of shelter for the night. We had get within a mile of the wool-
shed when we w r ere overtaken by four or five horsemen, who, on coming up
with the mail, proved to be Scotchmen from Canberra and Gininderra, who
had been in at Queanbeyan, expecting to hear me preach there that morning,
agreeably to previous netice. and who, finding the mail had not arrived, were
returning home. They had crossed the Molonglo Creek, they told us, with-
out difficulty ; and assured us it was quite practicable to get across, if not
with the mail carriage, at least on horseback. One of the horsemen, Mr.
Cameron, of Gininderra, offered to accompany us back to the creek, and did
soaccordingly; but on reaching the bank a second time, we found that the creek
had risen considerably since the horsemen had crossed it, and was still rising.
This was another awkward predicament. It was out of the question to
attempt to cross with the mail carriage, and I felt for some time quite at a
loss whether I should attempt to cross on horseback. The word having in
the meantime been passed alongto Queanbeyan, some friends came down to the
creek ; and one of them volunteering to return to the town and bring back a


tall horse for me; with a coil of rope to stretch across the stream, (which,
however, was not required], he did so accordingly, aud I crossed over in
safety. ,
Surely there ought to be a bridge across so important a stream, anti
so near(a rising town, as the Molonglo Creek. It would doubtless cost con-
siderably more than one for Brooke’s Creek ; but it is surely a matter of
urgent necessity, as the’danger in crossing such streams iu times of flood is
extreme.
It was nearly six o’clock p.m., when I reached Queanbeyan, and at
seven’l'bad a numerous audience in the court-house, where I celebrated
to the forms of the Presbyterian Church.
No . 7. —QUEANBEYAN ; AND FROM THENCE TO BRAIDWOOD.
>pril 7th and Bth. — Queanbeyan is one of the best situated towns in the
interior of New South Wales. It occupies a plateau of elevated and nearly
level ground, with ranges of hills behind, on both sides of the Queanbeyan
fti ver — a perennial stream, which supplies the inhabitants with abundance of
excellent water. At the period of my visit, as I have already had occasion
to observe, the Queanbeyan river was a deep and wide stream—like the
Clyde at Glasgow, when swollen with the winter’s rain although in summer
it is sometimes almost dry. There is a noble wooden bridge recently erected
across the river, which is creditable alike to the place, to the architect and
to the Government; and which cost, I was told, from <£l6oo to £I7OO. i
was sorry to observe, however, that, through some gross blunder in the
engineer department of the public service, the approach to this bridge by
Maneiro-street, the principal street of the town, is likely to be washed away
in the next heavy flood, and to be replaced with an impassable gully.
Maneiro-street presents a gentle declivity towards the river ; and a run of
water from the hills behind the town, instead of being directed, as I under-
stood it might easily have been, quite past the town is carried down to the
river by the two open surface-drains of this street. But as the river is greatly
below the general level of the street, a sink or tunnel had to be constructed,
at a cost of not less [I was told) than £SOO, at the terminus of each of these
drains, to carry down the water into the river. But the run of water
having proved a great deal too strong and impetuous for the sinks or tunnels,
they have proved utterly useless; and the whole expenditure incurred m
their construction has consequently been lost. For a eep gu y as a rea y
been formed on each side of the road, close to the end of the bridge, which,
if left to the ordinary operations of nature in this colony, will very soon
extend across the road and render the bridge itself unapproachable. The
gentleman who superintends the construction ot roads and bridges m this
part of the colony is a Mr. Weber, formerly, I believe an ofheer in the
Prussian army ; but he seems, unfortunately, not to have had much experience
of the prodigious force and destructive power of the mountain torrents of
Australia
The town of Queanbeyan has a much genteeler and more respec-
table appearance, considering the style of its public buildings, than mos


other inland towns in a similar stage of advancement throughout the colony.
The court-house, the hospital, and the Oddfellows’ Hall, are all buildings of
an appropriate, and at the same time of a superior character for an inland
town. The Episcopal Church is quite an ornament to the place. It is
built of stone, in the cruciform or mediaeval style, from the designs of the
Rev. Mr. Soares, * the minister of the church, who, I understood, had originally
been a professional architect. It does great credit to his taste and architec-
tural ability, as well as to his perseverance in getting it completed in the
face of not a little discouragement; although I was sorry to find that it is
still encumbered with a very considerable amount of debt, its entire cost
having been from £ISOO to ,£I6OO. There are very few places, indeed, in
New South Wales, in which so much has been done, in the way of Ecclesias-
tical building, at so comparatively small a cost; and it is scarcely creditable
to the Episcopalians of the colony to allow Mr, Soares to be put to any
trouble with the debt on his church, for which, I believe, he is personally
responsible. The Roman Catholic Church in Queanbeyan is also a credit-
able building, and the Wesleyan Chapel, although very small, is very
tastefully fitted up within.
In regard, however, to any outlet, in the form of available Crown
land, beyond the solitary section originally reserved for the town of
Queanbeyan, there is nothing of the kind. The laird of Duntroon, with his
magnificent estate and its beautiful grassy plains, naturally clear of timber,
and extending almost to the verge of the horizon, has been permitted, under
the wretched Government with which this colony was cursed in times past, to
come up to the very doors of the place, and to monopolise the whole of the
land that ought to have been reserved from the first for the extension of the
town and the convenience of the inhabitants. No doubt they have got a
common, two miles distant jrom the town, beyond two sections deep of Mr.
Campbell’s land ; but of what service can this be to the townspeople, each of
whom might otherwise have had a cow or two to graze in their immediate
neighbourhood ?
Nay, this grasping, monopolising spirit, like that of the Lord’of Shoal-
haven, is not satisfied with the enormous grants and five shillings an acre
purchases of the olden time. For within the last few years, when a con-
siderable extent of Crown land was put up for sale in Queanbeyan, in lots
that would have given a number of persons of the humbler classes in the
neighbourhood a chance of obtaining small farms for themselves, in a highly
eligible locality, the principal purchaser was Mr. Campbell, who, it seems,
could not allow people of that class “to come between the wind and his
nobility.” Owing, indeed, to the public spirit of a respectable inhabitant of
the place, who could not allow such a barefaced monopoly to be effected with
impunity, Mr. Campbell was run up to between two and three thousand
pounds above what he should otherwise have paid for the land he purchased.
* I had thought this gentleman’s name was an English word of one syllable, and
of uncertain origin, like many other English names; but I ascertained, incidentally,
that he was of Portuguese descent, and that his name was therefore trisyllabic. It is
evidently the same name, with a slight difference in the spelling, as that of the famous
Spanish Jesuit Doctor, Suarez. I was glad to recognise the name under a Protestant
form.


Instead, therefore, of the well-known lively old Scotch air, “ The
Campbells are coming,” the unfortunate people of Queanbeyan can only
strike up, <l The Campbells are come : a Lament,” to be sung to some such
lugubrious tune as that of “ Lochaber no more ! ’
How people professing the Christian religion in any of its forms can
reconcile such a grasping, monopolising spirit with the law of ' hrist, as re-
vealed in the New Testament, or with the Word of God as declared by his
prophets in the Old, I cannot conceive. Unfortunately, however, this
mammon-worshipping colony affords us more than one instance (whether the
laird of Duntroon is an exception or not, I shall leave the reader to
determine), of men who systematically act upon the principle of monopolising
the lands of the colony, in so far as bad laws and worse Government will
allow them, and thereby shutting out the industrious classes from every
chance of bettering their fortune by obtaining an eligible homestead for
themselves and their families; but who think they can ‘ make it all square
with the Court above by giving a paltry hundred a year perhaps to a sort of
domestic chaplain, or by subscribing handsomely, it may be, for the endow-
ment of a bishopric. Like the old Pharisees, these gentlemen say “korban, it
is a gift,” that is, to the Christian treasury; and they get the Sydney Morning
Herald, perhaps, to laud their generosity to the skies, while they are all the
while busily employing their wealth on the one hand, or their political
influence on the other, to buy-up the public lands in particular localities, and
thereby prevent hundreds, perhaps, of the industrious classes from obtaining a
home and a settlement in their adopted country. Let such gentlemen rest
assured, however, that the Court above will accept of no such set-off against
the unchristian, monopolising, grasping spirit they evince. On the contrary,
their ostentatious liberality, their gifts and sacrifices on the Christian altar,
will prove as utterly hateful in the sight of God, as those of the Italian pros-
titute, who, under the teaching of the renowned Doctor Suarez, that ‘the end
sanctifies the means,” regularly dedicates her earnings one day in every week
to the service of her patron-saint, the Madonna ! The divine indignation
against practices of this kind, even under the Mosaic economy, was so
extreme as to bring down the heaviest judgments upon the ancient land
monopolists of Israel. “ Woe unto them that join house to house, that join field
to field till there he no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the
earth. In mine ears, said the Lord of Hosts, of a truth many houses shall he
desolate, even great and fair without inhabitants. Isai. v. 8, 9.
There was a wealthy inhabitant of the city of Rheims, in France, in
what we call the dark ages, whose character I have long admired, and would
earnestly recommend to the study of those of our colonial nabobs who make
profession of the Christian religion in any of its forms, and who clamour all
the while for State-aid to relieve them of their proper duties in the support of
its ministers. The person’s name I allude to was Aloysius, and his epitaph,
if I can recollect right, was as follows—one of the most beautiful and affect-
ing 1 have ever seen or read :
Here lies all that was mortal of
Aloysius, of Rheims.
He had sent his goods to Heaven before him, in his charities to
the poor.
• And he has now gone to take possession.


There are lamentably few such consignments made in this colony.
There are two literary questions connected with this locality which I
should like to have settled ere the means of doing so satisfactorily are for ever
gone, in the lamentable, but rapidly approaching extinction of the aboriginal
race. What, then, is the proper pronunciation of the name of this town, for
there are all manner of liberties taken with it ; some making it a word of
three syllables, and others of four, while the accents are placed differently by
different authorities ? For my own part, reasoning from analogy, I would
regard the word as a compound word of two syllables each ; the latter word
rhyming with the former, and the accent being on the first syllable of each—
thus forming what grammarians would call two trochees. 0 then for such
unquestionable and reliable authorities as our sable friends, Yellamundy,
Terribalong, and Tomboorrowa; for who else can decide when white doctors,
disagree ?
Then, as to the word Maneiro, the name of the principal street of
Queanbeyan —it is as frequently called Monaroo ; and this, lam informed,
the Honorable the Speaker has ruled to be the proper spelling and pronun-
ciation. But willingly as I defer to the Speaker’s ruling in all matters
within the House, I confess I should be disposed to attach still greater
authority to the ruling of the three aboriginal sages I have mentioned, in a
question of this kind. About thirty years ago, the word used to be pro-
nounced, by persons acquainted with the locality, as I have written it,
Maneira or Maneiro, the accent being on the second syllable, which was pro-
nounced like ain fate. These may appear trivial questions, but they will be
very interesting to the literary and philosophical societies of some future day.
One of the objects of my visit to Queanbeyan—as indeed it had been
my object all along from the Lachlan to the coast — was to ascertain what
provision there was for the dispensation of the ordinances of religion among
the scattered Presbyterian families and individuals in these remote localities,
and what prospect there was for the settlement of Presbyterian ministers of
the right stamp, who would throw themselves entirely upon the Christian
sympathies and the voluntary support of the members of their communion in
these localities ; and I am happy to say that the reception I met with in con-
nection with this object was most encouraging.
As several families and individuals, residing at some distance from
Queanbeyan, had been disappointed through my non-arrival in the morning
of Sabbath, the 6th of April, I announced, at the close of Divine service in
the Court-house that evening, that I should preach again in the same place
in the afternoon of Tuesday, the Bth, and deliver a lecture in the Oddfellows’
Hall, which had been kindly granted for the purpose, at eight in the evening,
on the question of the Abolition of State-aid for Religion. The religious
service was held accordingly at 4 p.m., on Tuesday, and was well attended
for a week-day afternoon service, although the congregation was not so
numerous as on the Sabbath evening. At the close of the service I
endeavoured, and I am happy to say by no means unsuccessfully, to stir up
the Presbyterians of the town and neighbourhood to make an immediate effort
for the settlement of a minister in their district. The Synod of Australia,
I ascertained, had had an allotment of ground for the erection of a church in
Queanbeyan for years before; but, as had happened also at Yass, they had


never turned it to account in any way, and had made no effort of any kind
to procure a minister for the place ; their energies being, to all appearance,
wholly absorbed in what they seem to have regarded as the much more
important office of endeavouring to put me down—with what success the
public are now sufficiently aware. The people, however, in the district of
Queanbeyan, had themselves subscribed about =£soo towards the
erection of a Presbyterian church; but they naturally enough refused to
expend a single farthing of that amount on the allotment in question, lest the
Synod, in whom they could have no confidence, should claim the property, as
they had just done in another case of a similar kind in a neighbouring district.
In these circumstances a public-spirited and generous merchant in the place,
althouoh himself an Episcopalian—J. J. Wright, Esq., J.P.—had very hand-
somely offered to pay for any other allotment they might choose to select,
in the event of their requiring to purchase one, and to present it to them as
The attendance at the lecture, in the Oddfellows’ Hall, in the evening
(at which Mr. Wright presided), on the proposed Abolition of State-aid for
religion) was much more numerous; the hall being quite full, and the audience
enthusiastic in favour of the principles announced. At the close of the lec-
ture, without my having had any previous knowledge or idea of such an in-
tention, it was resolved unanimously, on the motion of a respectable inha-
bitant, that a collection should be made forthwith to assist in defraying the
expenses of my tour, which, it was kindly acknowledged, had been under-
taken for the benefit of the colony. I was quite unprepared, I confess, for
anything of the kind; but as it was well meant, it could not be but well
taken. The collection amounted to the very handsome sum of fifteen
pounds. It was an indirect, but at the same time a valuable practical testi-
mony to the principle I had been endeavouring to establish, that State-
aid was not necessary for the support of religion in this colony.
April 9th and 10th.—Mr. Wright, and his friend Dr. Morton, of
Queanbevan. had very kindly provided me with a horse and gig, and a man to
drive me to Braidwood, by a shorter route than the one taken by the mail,
and a respectable Scotch settler and squatter from Kilmarnock, a Mr.
M‘Fadzen, at whose house, about half way, we were to stop for the night,
accompanied us on horseback. The first part of the road, which is rather
mountainous, presents an inferior soil, but tolerably well grassed throughout.
On descending, however, to the lower level of the country skirting the lakes,
there is a great improvement both in the soil and pasture. This is really a
beautiful tract of country; extending, as it does, for many miles in a series of
grassy plains, with a mountain range to the right and the blue water of
Lake George and other smaller lakes or ponds to the left.
The incipiest town of Bungendore is situated in this tract of country,
about eighteen miles from Queanbeyan. I believe the situaiion is a central
one for the district, which might easily be rendered a very productive one ;
but the town itself certainly exhibits but few marks of rapid progression. It
rather reminded me of the legend of Sleepy Hollow, in the Sketch Book of
the late Washington Irving.
Mr. M'Fadzen’s house is about seven miles on the Braidwood road from
Bungendore, and the intervening country is at once rich and exceedingly


picturesque and beautiful; being well watered, with umbrageous trees scat-
tered over it, and standing widely apart, as if they had been planted by a
landscape gardener! Mr. MTadzen’s station is merely a leasehold property,
of two thousand acres, which he holds at a very moderate rental from the
representatives of the late Captain Robinson, of the Royal Veteran corps, at
/me time so famous in this colony in connection with the Sudds and Thompson
affair, during the administration of the late Lieutenant-General Sir Ralph
Darling. The property thus held on lease by Mr M‘Fadzen is employed chiefly
for grazing purposes, but he has also a small portion of it under cultivation ;
and, as an instance of the extraordinary fertility of the soil in this region, Mr.
M'Fadzen pointed out to me a paddock in which he had reaped not less than
fifty-six bushels of wheat from three-quarters of an acre of land, that is equal
to about seventy-four bushels to the acre ! I recollect perfectly having been
told, many years ago, by the late Dr. Wilson, of Braidwood, of upwards of
seventy bushels of wheat to the acre having been reaped somewhere in the
Braidwood district, near the heads of the Shoalhaven River. '1 his was a
confirmation of the fact, of which, I confess, I was somewhat doubtful before ;
for Mr. M’Fadzen assured me that there could be no fallacy in the matter,
as both the land and the produce had been carefully measured by himself.
I was happy to embrace the opportunity, which my stay for the night,
under the hospitable roof of Mr. M‘Fadzen, afforded me, of celebrating
Divine service in the evening of our arrival, which I was gratified to find was
most acceptable to my host and his respectable family, one of whom, his
youngest daughter, was lying at the time dangerously ill. I did not expect
that there would be more present on the occasion than Mr. M‘Fadzenand his
family ; but we had no sooner arrived (towards evening) than Mr. M’F.
sent off one or two messengers in all directions, to inform his Scotch and
other Presbyterian neighbours within a circuit of several miles, that Divine
service would be solemnised in his house that evening by a Presbyterian
minister. A very interesting congregation of eighteen or nineteen persons
was assembled on the occasion; one of whom, a respectable matron from
Glasgow, told me it was the first time she had ever had an opportunity of
hearing a Presbyterian minister since her arrival in the colony, about four
years ago. I had had no idea of finding such a little knot of Presbyterian
families (all from Scotland and the North of Ireland) in such a locality, for
there was no other house visible from Mr. M'Fadzen's ; but there are many
such knots of families in the colony, if they were only to be looked after by
men who had common sense, not to say common Christianity, enough to
discover that they had higher duties to perform to society than the very
questionable one of endeavouring, in all the impotence of the purest malice,
to put me down. Preaching in such places, to such congregations, is the
real apostolic succession, as it is unquestionably the real apostolic practice ;
and if we had only a little more of it in certain quarters, our profiting and
our advancement as a community would very soon be evident to all men.
The country towards Braidwood, from Mr. M‘Fadzen’s station, is a
well grassed pastoral country; variegated in its a-pect and presenting
many beautiful scenes to the eye of the traveller. The vegetation and scenery
generally have much more of an English character than any 1 have seen else-
where in the colony. This is doubtless to be accounted for from the much


greater elevation of the district; the town of Braidwood being not less than
3557 feet above the level of the sea, that is, about 1500 feet above the level
of the town of Bathurst. This elevation is equivalent, in point of climate, to
about fourteen degrees of latitude, that is, to the climate of a country, if such
there were, four degrees south of Van Pieman s Land ; and the absence of
the miserable carmen of our old Sydney friends, the mosquitoes, proclaims the
climate to be very different indeed from that of Sydney or the country along
the coast. I have no doubt, indeed, that the medical faculty of the colony
will by-and -bye take advantage of this very important fact, by recommending
the formation of a Sanitarium at Braidwood for patients requiring, as in affec-
tions of the liver, removal to a colder climate. I have been told of various
instances of persons arriving in Braidwood from the coast in very delicate
health, who, after a short residence in the bracing climate of this elevated
region had returned to Sydney with renovated health, and had seemingly
taken out a new lease of life. I arrived in Braidwood in good time in the
afternoon of the 10th of April.
No B.—BRAIDWOOD, ARALUEN, AND MAJOR’S CREEK.
April 11th and 12th.—When the good people of Queanbeyan volunteered so
handsomely to assist in defraying the expenses of my tour, I suppose they re-
garded me as a sort of volunteer and unpaid commissioner, travelling about
the country like the renowned knight of La Mancha, if not to attack enchanted
castles, and to liberate imprisoned Duleineas del Toboso. at least to ferret out
and report upon abuses and grievances both in Church and State, with a view
to their exposure and redress, either in Parliament or through the Press. If
so, they will probably find that there is something to be done in this way in
other districts as well as in their own.
Braidwood is finely situated for an inland town, on a plateau or com-
paratively level ground, at the base of the Jillimatong mountain ; which,
rising as it does, behind the town, reminded me not a little of Mount
Wellington, at Hobart Town, Van Dieman’s Land, or the Table Mountain
at the Cape of Good Hope. No doubt Mount Jillimatong does not rise to so
great an elevation from the plain of Braidwood, as either of these mountains
does from the general level of the towns situated at their base ; but it must
be borne in mind that while Hobart Town and Cape Town are very little
above the level of the sea, the plain of Braidwood, from which the Australian
mountain springs, is itself, as I ba ve already had occasion to observe, not less
than 3557 feet above the level of the sea.
There is a vast extent of land of the first quality, either for grazing
or for cultivation, around Braidwood ; and the country appeared to me to be
generally well watered. The upper part of the Shoalhaven River crosses
the road from Queanbeyan to Braidwood, and stands urgently in need of a
bridge. Indeed, from the breadth of its shingle-covered channel, it must be
a truly formidable affair to cross it in times of flood.
The great drawback to Braidwood, and the great obstruction in the
way of the settlement of an agricultural population in its vicinity, has hitherto
been the extensive Church and bebool Estate in this part of the territory..
That estate comprises,, in this particular locality, not less than 44,750 acres


of land ; and a large portion of that land is of the first quality, and in every
way adapted for the settlement of a numerous agricultural population. The
question, hitherto, in reference to this estate, is whether it is to be considered
as Crown land, to be dealt with accordingly by the Legislature, or a mere
trust property, to be employed or appropriated only fora particular purpose,
and in a particular way. For my own part, lam strongly of opinion, with
the majority of the present Assembly, that these lands are Crown lands, and
to be dealt with accordingly ; although I am well aware that Mr Cowper and
the Duke of Newcastle, alter idem in such a question, are strongly of a dif-
ferent opinion, and hold the original trusteeship still valid, and of force in law.
But the real question in the case is not whose the lands in question are, and
what is to be done with the proceeds of their sale or appropriation, but
whether they are to be sold at all for the benefit of the public. Leaving the
other question, therefore, to be settled afterwards, lam decidedly of opinion
that it is urgently and indispensably necessary, for the welfare and advance-
ment of the colony, that these lands should be sold —that they should be sold
speedily, if not forthwith, and in small farms, to suit the means and the wants
of an agricultural population, Were this done, these lands would very
speedily be settled and improved, agricultural produce of all kinds could
be raised and forwarded from them in great abundance, not only to Braid-
wood, but to Sydney. For it must be borne in mind that Braidwood is now,
by the Clyde River road, -within thirty-five miles of the sea, and the road
down hill almost the whole way ; for in this very short distance a descent of
upwards of three thousand five hundred feet has to be accomplished—that is,
on an average, a descent of one hundred feet every mile. There is nothing,
therefore, in which the people of Sydney are more deeply interested than in
the sale and settlement of these valuable lands. How the proceeds are to
be appropriated is, I repeat it, quite a secondary question in comparison with
that of their actual sale and settlement.
But even although the views of the Assembly should prevail, and
the lands in question be regarded as Crown lands, I must protest against the
proposal of Mr. Forster to deal with them aso rdinary Crown lands, and to
throw them open for free selection. These lands have, from various causes,
acquired a far higher value than that of any ordinary Crown lands.
They would readily be purchased for much more than the present minimum
price ; and why should this additional mm be lost to the public ? These
questions will doubtless come before Parliament shortly after its meeting on
the 27th of May, and I only trust that they will be settled speedily and
satisfactorily for all concerned.
There are few public buildings of any note in Braidwood—the Court-
House, the Gaol, the '1 elegraph Office, and the Hospital are the only ones
worth mentioning ; but there are various private buildings of a creditable
appearance rising up, in, and around the town ; and there cannot be a doubt
that, considering the advantages of its situation, Braidwcod will, eventually,
and at no distant period, become one of the most important central
points in the colony.
On my arrival in Braidwood I found letters of invitation addressed
to me by certain miners and others residing at Araluen and Major’s Creek,
inviting me to visit these localities during my stay in this part of the territory,


and to deliver a lecture in each of them on some subject of interest and
importance to the colony. Finding, therefore, that I should have two days to
spare at Braidwood, 1 rode, on Friday the 11th, along with a friend who was
well acquainted with the route, to the valley of the Araluen. The country
from Braidwood to the summit of the mountain ranges that skirt the valley
is well grassed, well watered and exceedingly picturesque. The descent from
the summit level at Braidwood to the Araluen valley, about twenty miles in
distance, cannot be less, 1 should think, than three thousand feet; ani that
descent is effected for the latter part of the way by an excellent road, the
construction of which evinces very considerable engineering ability, and is
highly creditable to the Government, as one of the public works of the
colony.
The valley of the Araluen is one of the most remarkable localities I
have seen in the colony ; and in its original state it must have been one of the
most delightful spots imaginable. It consists of along valley, or rather level
plain, with a perennial stream running through it, between two lofty and
almost precipitous mountain ranges ; and when one is fairly down in it, it is
difficult to perceive, on looking all around it, either an exit or an entrance.
It reminded me strongly of the description of the Happy Valley in Dr. John-
son’s “ Rasselas, the Prince of Abyssinia,” which I recollect reading with
great interest, when a boy at school, more than fifty years ago. But the
gold-miners, as I have had occasion to observe already, make sad havoc with
the beauties of nature. As is said of the locusts, it is a paradise before them
and desolation behind. Holes, like newly-opened graves, where people have
been prospecting, in all directions ; races, to divert the run of water into some
other than its natural channel, to clean the washing stuff; mounds of earth
thrown up from the deeper sinkings, and steam engines for pumping up water
coughing and blowing from morning to night—these are the exchange one
observes even in the happiest valley, after it has been subjected for a time to
the operations of the gold miner. But, why should it be otherwise ? These
ancient Banks of deposit, which were established by the Creator himself in
the bowels of the harmless earth tens of thousands, it may be millions, of
years ago, were unquestionably intended from the first to be Banks of Issue
some day or other; and this is the only way of getting at the ancient Bank
Safe, and unlocking its hidden treasures.
From an unexpected difficulty in getting a second horse for our trip
at Braidwood, we had not started till past twelve o’clock, and it was conse-
quently towards evening when we reached our landing-place at Araluen. In
these circumstances, as there had been no previous announcement of my visit,
I had given up all idea of having anything like a decent audience to hear a
lecture on State-aid, which was given out, rather despairingly, for eight
o’clock that evening. But it was a beautiful moonlight night; and the
miners have ways and means of telegraphing intelligence to one another on
the diggings with great rapidity. So I had, most unexpectedly, an audience
of about a hundred and twenty adults in the hall of the Band of Hope for my
lecture ; and, from anything I could learn, we were mutually pleased with
each other. Of course, these itinerant lectures and addresses, varied as they
are very much to suit the peculiar circumstances of each locality, are not to
be understood as mere tirades against the system of State-aid. On the con-


trary I have always endeavoured to render them subservient towards stirring
up the pure minds of the public, by way of remembrance alike of their own
proper interests, as well as of their duty to contribute for the support of
religion in a more excellent way.
The Government have reserved a section of land in the Aralueu
valley for a township, on which public-houses, stores, and other places of
business are in process of erection ; for, although there has been a considerable
exodus from the district to the far-famed Lachlan diggings, there is still a
respectable amount of population remaining, and most of it, there is reason
to believe, will be permanent. The gold is widely diffused in the district;
and, although much has already been got out of it, it is believed that there
is still much remaining. Without any means of judging accurately, from
my* entire ignorance of the physical character of the intervening country,
through which the Araluen creek flows into the Moruya river, about thirty
miles distant, I estimate the height of the valley to be about 500 feet above
the level of the sea.
Started for Major’s Creek on Saturday, the 12th ; the ascent of the
mountain in that direction being oruthe opposite side of the Araluen Creek,
from that on which we had descended into the valley. The for a
long way is almost precipitous, and we had to drag our horses behind us
and to stop to draw breath, as we reached the successive elevations where
there was good standing ground, again and again ; the magnificent views
presented at each resting-place being an ample compensation, however, for
the toil of the ascent.
Major’s Creek and the township of Elrington, both of which derive
their names from Major Elrington, (for some time a Government functionary,
well known in these regions,) must be at least two thousand feet above the
level of the valley of the Araluen. Major’s Creek empties itself into the
Araluen, which runs at a prodigious depth below, by a magnificent fall or
rather series of falls over almost precipitous rocks, about a mile from the
township, As it was the only natural curiosity in the place, I walked out to
see it. There was only a comparatively small run of water in the creek at
the time ; but in times of flood the scene must be magnificent.
The population at Major’s Creek, which at one time was very large
is now greatly diminished; many of the miners having gone either to the Gulf,
as it is called, or to the Lachlan. There is still, however, a considerable
population, including not a few Chinamen, along the creek. I had a pretty
fair audience for my lecture in the evening, at the National school.
April 13th, (Sabbath). —Started at eight a.m. for Braidwood, about
eleven or twelve miles distant, along with a Mr. Ellice, a respectable North
of Ireland Presbyterian gold-miner and settler on Major’s Creek. Mr. Ellice,
who arrived in the colony in the year 1854, has, I am happy to say, been a
successful gold inner; chiefly, I believe, from his having stuck to the place on
which he sat down at first. For a considerable time he had been unsuccess-
ful, and he was at one time £9O below zero ; but he persevered, and the tide
turned in his favour at last, so as to enable him, in one fortnight, to discharge
all his liabilities. He had bought a piece of ground adjoining the township,
which he was farming as at home, while he had a herd of cattle depasturing
on the adjoining run. His two sons were working with him on his claim,


and he was himself conjoining the two apparently, but, not in this country,
uncongenial occupations of gold mining and farming.
Much of the land between Major’s Creek and Braidwood is equally
adapted for agriculture and grazing. It is, at all events, a fine pastoral
country. The road to Braidwood crosses, about half-way, Jembaicumbene
Creek, an auriferous locality of some importance, but at present exclusively
occupied by Chinamen.
Arrived at Braidwood in good time for the morning service.
Preached in the Court-house both forenoon and afternoon, to large congre-
gations, for the place.
The Presbyterians of Braidwood and its vicinity had been very in-
differently treated for years past by the Synod of Australia. An allotment
of two acres had been granted in the town for the erection of a Presby-
terian church ; and Presbyterians, without distinction, had accordingly
subscribed liberally for the erection of a church on that allotment, under the
idea that they would have it in their power to elect as their minister the
man of their choice. But no sooner was the church erected, than the Synod
claimed the building, and asserted their exclusive right to deal with it, without
doing anything all the while to provide the people with a pastor. In the
meantime, a Presbyterian minister had been settled elsewhere in the Braid-
wood district, under the auspices of the said Synod, who, for seven years
past, has been a scandal, not only to the Presbyterian church, but to the
Christian name ; and no effort of any kind has been made up to the present
hour to have his case investigated, and himself brought to trial !
It is no discredit or disgrace to any body or denomination of professed
Christians, for a minister of religion belonging to that body or denomination
to fall into habits of intemperance ; for this has unfortunately happened again
and again with all the leading denominations of this colony. But it is
discreditable, and absolutely disgraceful in the highest degree, for any pro-
fessed Christian denomination, like the Synod of Australia, to allow any one
of its members—and unfortunately the one I allude to is not the only one—
to continue to pollute the moral atmosphere of a whole district for weeks, for
months, nay, for years, in succession, without question and without inquiry.
The Episcopalians of the colony did themselves great honour, as they did the
interests of morality great and good service on a recent occasion, in bringing
to justice an offender of this kind ; but that unhappy man (taking it for
granted that the evidence on which he was convicted was all truthful and
reliable) was never guilty of a tenth part of the enormities publicly, and for
years past, chargeable against the person I refer to. The fama clamosa, as
it is technically styled in Scotland, runs and reads thus“ Beastly drunk
at sundry times and places. Drunk in a public house, and had his face
blackened while in this condition by one of the party present to make sport
for the rest. Drunk at the celebration of marriage repeatedly. Found lying
drunk on the road, having fallen off his horse. Made a solemn vow to
Almighty God, at the instance of a kind and zealous friend, that he would
not again touch any intoxicating liquor; but forgot the vow within six weeks,
and “ returned again like the dog to his vomit, or the sow that was washed to
her wallowing in the mire.’’
No doubt the gentlemen of the Synod of Australia may plead, and


perhaps successfully, that they have been so much engaged for seven years
past in endeavouring to put me down by due course of law, that they had no
time to spare for dealing with notorious drunkards, either inj the Braidwood
district or nearer the coast. But now that that case of mine has been settled
and well settled, as the whole colony seems to think—what is there to
prevent their proceeding now ? Must a matter of this kind be put off till
they have also got the costs of my appeal paid ?
There is no part of the colony in which the peculiar charac er and
actings of this ecclesiastical body—l mean the Synod of Australia, —have
been more fuly developed, than in the Braidwood district. I have just noticed
the very culpable indifference with which that body has treated the grossest
intemperance on the part of a clerical brother, although persisted in
notoriously for years. Strangely enough, the Episcopal Minister of Braid-
wood, the Rev. James Allan, is a remarkable instance of the leniency and
forbearance of the same body towards offenders of a different kind. Mr.
Allan was originally the Parish School-Master of Erskine, Renfrewshire,
Scotland. On my applying, on one of my voyages home, for additional
Presbyterian Ministers lor this colony, Mr. Allan, who was equally destitute
of patronage and popularity in Scotland, was sent out in that capacity by the
General Assembly’s Colonial Committee, in the year 1837. But having
taken offence at a measure affecting himself, which had been passed by the
Synod in 1841, he immediately renounced his ordination vows and his con-
nection with the Presbyterian Church altogether, and declared publicly before
an Episcopalian congregation in St. James’s Church, Sydney, that he was
moved by the Holy Ghost, to accept re-ordination from a Puseyite Bishop, (the
late Bishop Broughton)—thereby virtually declaring that the glorious struggle
for civil and religious liberty, in which his forefathers had been engaged for a
century and a half, and which had reddened the moors of Scotland with the blood
-of martyrs, was a thing of nought and utterly worthless. But the Synod of
Australia, in the warmth of its sympathy for ecclesiastical as well as for moral
delinquency, took no proceedings whatever in the case of Mr. Allan, and never
even said that he had done wrong. But when I deemed it necessary to
renounce all further connection with their body, although without the
slightest desire to renounce my connection with the Church of Scotland, all
their .malice and venom were poured out upon me. An address which I
delivered to my congregation on the 6th of February, 1842, when an-
nouncing my withdrawal from the Synod, happened to contain the following
passage: —
“ But the office-bearers in any church in which this truly apostolic and divinely
instituted system of Church government (the Presbyterian) prevails, must be brethren
in reality, and not merely by profession —in order to render that system either tolerable
on the one hand or practicable on the other. They must be animated by one spirit—
they must be pursuing one object—and that spirit must be the spirit of Christ, and
that object the glory of God, and the salvation of men. In short the Presbyterian,
system of Church government is fitted only for a Church of Christ, and not for a mere
synagogue of Satan—a mere society of worldlings or hirelings. When administered by
men of the latter description, men who show by their actions that they are destitute
of the spirit of Christ, tbe Presbyterian system of Church Government degenerates,
into an instrument of the grossest tyranny, alike intolerable and contemptible.
“Now it appears to me that the Presbyterian Church in this colony has
fallen in great measure into this unhappy condition.


Now, this really harmless paragraph, of the truth of which I can surely re-
quire no further evidence after the details I have given above, was regarded by
these Simon Pures as so enormous an offence, that in the hope of degrading me
in the estimation of the public, and of thereby getting possession of certain
valuable ecclesiastical property in my possession, they actually pretended to
depose me from the office of the ministry in the Church of Scotland, which
it is now universally acknowledged they could have no power to do under
any conceivable circumstances. The attempt to degrade me in public esti-
mation was forthwith indignantly met with the virtual protest of the Scotch-
men of Port Phillip, who were then part and parcel of this colony ; and
who immediately elected me as one of their Representatives in the Colonial
Legislature, a position which I should otherwise never have occupied and which,
with one brief exception, I have continued to hold these nineteen years past.
And the result of the persevering efforts of these Scots and Irish worthies
these seven years past, to dispossess me of the valuable ecclesiastical property
to which I have alluded, has just been declared in the decision of the Lords
of the Privy Council entirely in my favour; subjecting these parties to all
the costs of the action for their pains. So much then for the moral sympathies
and antipathies of the Synod of Australia.
April 14th. —Braidwood derives its name from the late Thomas
Braidwood Wilson, Esq., M.D., R. N., one of the original settlers in that
district—the site of the town of Braidwood having originally been part of
his grant from the Crown. Dr. Wilson, who for many years honoured me
with his warm friendship, was one of the most learned men in his profession
either at home or abroad. He always wrote his journals for the Admiralty,
as it was permitted to do under the rules of the service, in Latin; but there
was only one other medical officer who did so in his time in the British Navy.
Dr. Wilson had, during his lifetime, selected the spot where he wished to be
buried, and where he was afterwards interred. It is a small hillock, about a
mile from the town. I went to see his grave, as a tribute of respect to the
memory of a valued friend. He had been unfortunate in his speculations
towards the close of his life, and the vanity of human wishes only received
an additional illustration in his untimely fate.*
Pursuant to previous notice, I delivered a lecture, in the Court-house,
of nearly two hours, on the abolition of State-aid for religion, and I can only
say it was exceedingly well received.
NO. IX.—NELLIGEN, THE CLYDE RIVER, AND THE MORUYA.
My visit to Queanbeyan had proved eminently successful, in stirring up
the scattered Presbyterian inhabitants of that district to make a vigorous effort
to provide themselves with the regular dispensation of the ordinances of
religion, and thereby to show what might easily be accomplished for this
object in numerous other localities of a similar character as to population and
pecuniary ability throughout the colony. There was a minister in Sydney at
the time, who, I conceived, might be induced to undertake the pastoral charge
* Dr. Wilson died suddenly from the accidental bursting of a blood-ressel during
a violent fit of vomiting brought on by an over-dose of Tartar Emetic.


of the Presbyterians of Queanbeyan*; but as these good people were unwilling
to forego the cherished right they had inherited from their forefathers, of
choosing their own pastor, and could not think of inviting a minister without
previous trial, which their distance from the capital rendered impracticable, I
suggested, as a suitable expedient for their particular case, the practice (not
unfrequent in the United States of America) of inviting the minister for a
limited period; leaving the pastoral relation to grow up and be established in
the usual way, in the event of their being mutually satisfied with each other,
or the engagement to terminate, if otherwise, at the close of that period. An
invitation, or call, as it is technically styled among Presbyterians, was accord-
ingly forwarded to the minister I refer to by the Presbyterians of Queanbeyan,
shortly after my return to Sydney ; in which they expressed “their earnest
desire that a minister of the Gospel, holding the Westminster Confession of
Faith and the other Standards of the Presbyterian Church, should be settled
among them, to go in and out before them as their leader and guide in things
pertaining to godliness, to distribute to them in due season the bread of life,
to aid them with suitable counsel in times of need, and to sympathise with
and to comfort them in their sorrows binding themselves to contribute for
his maintenance, during the twelve months certain which the engagement was
supposed to last, a salary of not less than <£lso, besides paying his expenses
up, and his house rent during his stay. But the minister who had thus been
so strongly invited to Queanbeyan, having had his attention directed in the
meantime to the Lachlan district, determined rather to proceed to the
Lachlan, as being, from its present population, a much more extensive and
necessitous field. Although I was therefore sincerely sorry at the disappoint-
ment of the hopes of the people of Queanbeyan,f lam not surprised that the
minister they had invited should have preferred the Lachlan district as a
more important field of ministerial labour.
But if so comparatively small and scattered a community as the
Presbyterians of Queanbeyan could, nevertheless, make such exertions for
the settlement of a minister of their own communion in their midst, what
is there to hinder people of other communions, especially in districts in which
they are much more numerous and much wealthier, from doing the same ?
Let the Christian people, in such circumstances, have the right men to minister
among them—that is, men of their own choice, in whom they can place con-
fidence, and whom they can respect and reverence —and there can be no fear
of their supporting them.
Tuesday, April 15th. —Started for Nelligen, on the Clyde River, at
6 a.m. The country generally, as far as the summit of the coast-range of
mountains, maintains pretty much the same character as on the Quean-
beyan side’ of Braidwood; being a good pastoral country, and well watered,
with tracts of considerable extent available for cultivation. About ten miles
from Braidwood there is an incipient town called by its original name,
Munga, but not yet sufficiently developed to require any further notice ; for
the Clyde River road, although a great convenience to the Southern districts
generally, has not yet been a practicable thoroughfare long enough to
•Theßev. Robert Kerr, M.A., of the University ofSt. Andrew’s, Scotland.
j'They have since elected as their minister, the Rev. W. F. Reid.


admit of the settlement of any considerable amount of population along its
course.
There is a remarkable change visible in the general vegetation in
descending the coast range. All at once, the usual forest scenery of
Australia disappears, and a rich profusion of semi-tropical vegetation, like that
which is observable in the jungles of Illawarra, succeeds. This is, doubtless
occasioned by the interjection of a vein of trap, between the sandstone of
the coast and the granite formation of the Braidwood country ; for wher-
ever a trap country exists, the vegetation assumes this semi-tropical charac-
ter. There are, doubtless, many rich spots for cultivation in this tract of
country, which, I am told, extends a long way north and south.
The road down the mountain is remarkably good ; but from Braid-
wood to the summit of the mountain range, it is very much the reverse in
various places ; and from the stopping place at Carter’s, where we halted for
breakfast, to Nelligen, about twelve miles, it is execrably bad. I was
really thankful, when, about four miles from Carter’s, the tire of one of the
wheels of our ricketty mail-carriage came off, and the coachman announced
to us that we must get down and walk the rest of the way; for I had repeat-
edly anticipated reaching terra firma on this part of the route by a much
more sudden and unceremonious process. The state of this part of the road is
certainly very discreditable to the authorities, and the coachman congra-
tulated himself on having a member of the Assembly as a passenger, to see it
with his own eyes, for the information of those who might have it in their
power to apply the proper remedy.
The steamer Hunter was to leave Nelligen for Sydney at 4 p.m,, and
we had performed about six miles of our distance at as rapid a pedestrian
rate as we could sustain, in the fear of otherwise being too late for our passage
to Sydney, when we were met by a vehicle from Nelligen, which had been
sent on to meet us as soon as the accident had been reported there by a person
who had ridden forward with the two fore-horses to report progress.
The Clyde River is a noble inlet, but the land on both sides of it,
although thickly wooded all along, is hopelessly sterile. Nelligen, the present
terminus of the Braidwood road, is a miserable place, there being no available
land near it for the purposes of man. The only erections in the place are the
Illawarra Steam Company’s store, two or three public houses, a post office,
&c. These are erected on the face of the hill, which descends, with a steep
declivity, almost to the water’s edge ; and they are all dependent entirely
on the traffic to and fro between Braidwood and Sydney. Nelligen is about
twelve miles from the heads, and the river is navigable eight miles higher up
to a place called Carawan, where the Government have reserved a
section for a township; there being a considerable extent of available land,
with plenty of excellent water, in that neighbourhood. It had been strongly
recommended, indeed, that Carawan, and not Nelligen, should be the
terminus of the Braidwood road, as the distance from Carter’s is much thesame,
while the route is more easily traversed, and the intervening country affords
better feed lor cattle. But sixteen miles of additional navigation to and fro
was too important a consideration for the Steam Navigation Company to
overlook, and they therefore fixed upon Nelligen, although a confessedly infe-
rior locality. Otherwise, it was rather an unfortunate selection for the river.


On ray arrival at Nelligen, I found a letter awaiting me, from certain
Presbyterians on the Moruya River, inviting me to visit that district before
ray returu to Sydney ; and, as I ascertained that the steamer Black Swan,
which is now trading between the two rivers, and was then about to start
for the Moruya, would return to Nelligen in time to enable me to take
advantage of the next trip of the Sydney steamer, I resolved to accept the
invitation.
Started by the Black Swan steamer in the evening, and got within
the heads of ihe Moruya River about midnight; the distance between the
two rivers by land being between twenty and thirty miles.
16th. The Moruya River, although forming a beautiful inlet, is
much inferior to the Clyde, for the purposes of navigation ; but there is a
considerable extent of eligible land on both of its banks, and the scenery,
generally, with its fine background of mountains of various elevation, is
picturesque and beautiful in a very high degree. Ihe town of Moruya, which is
beautifully situated on the right bank of the river, and which, I am happy to
say, is exhibiting unmistakable marks of progress, is about four miles from
the heads ; but the navigation is so much obstructed with rocks and sand
banks, that the steamer is obligecbto anchor about a mile from the town. It
is believed, indeed, that these obstructions may be removed ; but there will
require to be a much larger population than there is at present in Moruya to
warrant the necessary expenditure for such a purpose.
As I could only have one clear day at Moruya, (the steamer being
announced to sail for Nelligen in the evening of the following day), I
arranged to have Divine service for the Presbyterians in and around Moruya,
at 4 p.m., and to deliver a lecture on the proposed Abolition of State-aid to
religion in the evening. The religious service was better attended than I
expected, considering the shortness of the notice and the impracticability of
giving intimation in time to persons residing at some distance from the town ;
and at the close of the service I had to dispense the ordinance of baptism to
the children of three different Presbyterian families in Moruya.
The attendance at the lecture, consisting of persons of all denomina-
tions, was much more numerous ; and the circumstance of having a lecture
at all in the place on any subject, appeared to excite much interest in the
quiet little town. Both meetings were held in the Court-house, which
was kindly placed at my disposal by William Caswell, Esq., J.P. and P.M.
The town of Moruya is about thirty miles from the valley of the
Araluen on the north, and rather farther from the Gulf diggings on the
south. These diggings, which are so designated from the physical character
of the locality, already contain a mining population of about two thousand
souls; and as a proof of the generally stable and permanent character of that
population, I have been applied to since my return to Sydney, by a respect-
able resident Scotch storekeeper, to endeavour to procure a minister for the
Presbyterians of the district; who, I was given to understand, were both
able and willing to contribute a hundred and fifty pounds a year for the
support of a minister of their communion, to be settled at the Gulf. Like
Burrowa in the interior, the district of Moruya, has, till lately, been a
thoroughly Roman Catholic district; but the Protestants of the different
denominations are now, through the number of gold miners at the Gulf


diggings, the majority of the population, which amounts altogether to four
thousand souls.
Considerably to the south of the Moruya River, there is another
river, the Wogonga, which empties itself into one of the best and safest
harbours on the coast. It is but of limited extent, and the entrance is rather
narrow ; otherwise it is a very superior harbour, and as it is only eighteen
miles from the Gulf diggings, there is no doubt that it will very soon form
the regular means of access to that part of the country, both for passengers
and goods. Already a steamer has begun to ply from Sydney direct to
Wogonga, with goods aud passengers to and from the Gulf, A town, which
it has been proposed to call after the late Prince Consort, Albert, or Alberton,
has been projected for this locality. The situation, lam told, is admirably
adapted for the purpose; being a point of land about four miles from the
heads, bounded on the north by the river Wogonga, and on the south by a
capacious inlet, called Ponkalla Bay. Sea-going steamers, which will not be
much inconvenienced by the narrowness of the entrance, can come up to this
point; and the distance, as I have already stated, to the Gulf is only
eighteen miles. Adjoining the proposed town, which will very soon become
a place of importance, there is, I am happy to add, a considerable extent of
eligible land.
Adjoining the Wogonga River, to the northward, the splendid estate
of Bodalla, consisting of twelve or thirteen thousand acres of beautiful land,
selected under the pre-emptive right system, by Hawdon, Esq., J.P., one
of the patriarchs of this district, is now the property of a Sydney firm. It
was surely a most unwarrantable proceeding, on the part of the Government
of the period, to allow any person whatever to make such a selection, when
it was so completely in the power of the Executive, under the Orders in
Council, to have reserved the whole of it, with the exception, perhaps, of a
single section, for the general welfare and advancement of the colony in the
settlement of a number of respectable families aud individuals in small farms
over its whole extent. I cannot say I was sorry to learn that the extreme
cupidity of the gentleman I have named, in making so enormous a selection
under his pre-emptive right had failed of its object. Land, even at the
lowest price, is always too dear to those who can make no use of it. Mr.
Hawdon, it seems, saw this himself when the accumulating amount of princi-
pal and interest obliged him at length to sell his estate, which is now the
property of another ! To use the slang of the geologist, the Saurian, the
immense monstrosity that had managed to creep into the possession of twelve
or thirteen thousand acres of the finest land in the colony, has disappeared
from creation, and been succeeded or swallowed up by the Pachyderm or
Mammoth, of which we have another living specimen in the lord of
Shoalhaven. Whether man, the nobler animal, is likely to be any better off
under the latter of these prae-Adamite formations than under the former, is not
very evident; but now that we have actually got responsible Government, and
no mistake, it is greatly to be desired that no such monstrous prse-Adamite
jobs will ever again be permitted in this territory.
17th. —There are two places of worship—an Episcopal Church (nearly
completed), and a Roman Catholic—in Moruya. They are both creditable
buildings for the place. There are also two Denominational schools for


these communions respectively. Mr. Caswell, the police magistrate, who
seems now to be a general favourite in the district, kindly accompanied me
to the Church of England school, in which I ascertained that there were fifty-
five pupils of both sexes, and of course, in various stages of progress. Mr.
Uaher, the teacher, who is from Dublin, had, I understood, been a Roman
Catholic, but is now a thorough Protestant. He examined his pupils on a
passage of scripture, which formed their reading lesson for the day ; and I
have seldom heard an examination of the kind conducted with such ability
on the part of the teacher, or one calculated to impart so much useful instruc-
tion to the pupils on the one hand, or to interest them, and call forth their
natural talents so strongly on the other. I was greatly pleased with Mr. Usher’s
school. He well deserves preferment in the important path of usefulness he
is now pursuing.
The public are aware, from some slight newspaper reports, of the exis-
tence of a silver mine in the district of Moruya. I accompanied Mr. Caswell to
the spot on horseback. It consists of an argentiferous and auriferous reef, near a
small rivulet about four miles from the town. There are two parties, it seems,
claiming a right to the spot in which the reef is situated; but there is no
doubt as to the great value of the undeveloped mineral wealth which it con-
tains—the produce of the mineral, when subjected to the requisite treatment,
being at the rate of eighty-eight ounces of silver and two of gold to the ton.
A shaft has been sunk on the reef to a considerable depth, and a quantity of
the mineral, which had been brought up from it, was lying on the surface ,
but there was no person at work at the time, the arrangements for carrying
on mining operations on the spot not having been sufficiently matured. I
brought away a small specimen from the locality, informing the person in
charge, whom 1 afterwards met with, that I had done so ; as I had seen a
notice stuck up on a tree at the place, prohibiting all and sundry from carry-
ing away any portion of the stuff. Mica is evidently and largely one of its
constituents, but its specific gravity is much greater than that of granite, of
which mica is also one of the constituents, and it strongly indicates the presence
of some metallic substance in large quantity. In short, I am strongly of
opinion that the Moruya district will prove oue of the richest mineral
districts in New South Wales, and will afford permanent and remunerating
employment to a large population.
Mr. Hawdon’s place, of which, if I am not mistaken, the native name
is Kooria, is situated on the opposite bank of the river, two miles or so above
the town. It is one of the most beautiful spots I have seen in the colony, and
has much more of an English character than is generally observable in such,
places in Australia. . , ,
As the little steamer, Black Swan, was to lie at anchor at the heads
till nine o ’clock p.m., when the tide would serve for crossing the bar, I availed
myself of Mr. Caswell’s hospitality till the evening, and then rode down
with him to the pilot station at the heads. There is a great work in pro-
gress, for the improvement of the navigation of the river, in this locality.
Instead of being directed towards the outlet, and thereby keeping the deep
water channel clear, the current of the river is diverted from its proper
course, and sweeps along an indentation of the land or bay, to the southward,
leaving sand and gravel to accumulate in the deep water channel. io


remedy this evil an embankment is in progress, to extend about 833 feet
from the one extremity of this diminutive inland bay to the other, to prevent
the current from entering the bay at all. About one-third of the work has
been already completed, and I am happy to say, the anticipated result is, in
so far, realised already. The portion of the work completed, resembles
the capital letter T ; the upright limb representing the road from the quarry
to the embankment, and the cross-piece representing the portion of the
embankment completed. The present roadway represented by the upright
limb is, of course, no part of the contract; but it was constructed, as a
matter of necessity, both for the convenience of the quarry, and to afford the
shortest practicable route for the conveyance of the stones or rocks to form
the embankment. A tramway has been formed for the stone-trucks along
the roadway, and to the right and left, as far as it has been formed, along
the embankment. The reader will have some idea of the magnitude of this
work when I add, that in forming the roadway the contractor had actually
had to fill up a depth of twenty-four feet. When the embankment on the
right or south bank of the river is completed, a similar one will have to be
formed on the north or left bank; and there is every reason to believe that
when these works are finished and the current confined to the proper channel,
the depth of water on the bar will always be sufficient for moderately-sized
vessels.
Embarked on board the Black Swan at the heads of the Moruya
River, at 9 p.m., and reached Nelligen on the Clyde River during the night.
18th. The Rlawarra Company’s steamer, Hunter, having arrived at
five o’clock this morning, and being announced to sail again at four p.m,, I
took my passage by her, as I had arranged doing on her previous trip ; and
after touching and coaling at Wollongong, arrived in Sydney on Saturday,
the 19th, having preached eleven times and lectured ten times during my
month’s tour.




* V


