

NOTES
ON THE
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE AND THE OLIVE,
AND ON THE
METHODS OF MAKING WINE AND OIL,
ETC., ETC.,
IN THE SOUTHERN PARTS OF SPAIN;
TAKEN DURING A TOUR THROUGH ANDALUSIA,
IN SEPTEMBER AND OCTOBER, 1847,
BY
LIEUT. COLONEL SIR T. L. MITCHELL.
“For the seed shall be prosperous; the vine shall give her fruit, and the ground shall give
her encrease, and the heavens shall give their dew; and I will cause the remnant of this people
to possess all these things". — Zech. viii. 12.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY D. L. WELCH, AT THE ATLAS OFFICE, OPPOSITE THE OLD MILITARY BARRACKS, GEORGE STREET.
MDCCCXLIX.


PREFACE.
By the kindness of Sir Thomas Mitchell, the Manuscript of the following
work has been placed at the disposal of the Committee of the Botanic and Horti-
cultural Society for publication, and now forms the first number of the Society’s
Transactions.
The valuable and interesting observations of the talented author upon the
various branches of Spanish Husbandry and Horticulture, must, at no distant
period, become of the greatest importance to the permanent wealth and prosperity
of the Colony.
Such a work may moreover be reasonably expected to stimulate other
Members to contribute Papers on such scientific and practical subjects, as may
conduce to the interest of the Society, and be legitimately and usefully connected
with its general objects.


NOTES MADE DURING A TOUR IN ANDALUSIA.
ON VINES.
The vines of Spain consist of several well known varieties, some of which are supposed to be identical
with those named by Pliny—for anciently, as now, varieties were numerous, as we gather from Virgil,
who declared he could not count them:
Sed neque qnam multas species, nec nomina quae sint,
Est nuinerus: neque enira numero comprendere refert.
Lib. 11., Georg., 11. 103.
Here we can only endeavour to enumerate those vines most known in Spain at present, and esteemed
for their raisins, wines, and fruit:—
1. Pcro-Ximen —The grapes of this vine are white—very sweet —of a round oval form—not very
large—of the colour of wax, clear and transparent —having a soft skin. The ordinary size of the clusters
is about a pound of sixteen ounces, little more or less, and rather compressed. Of these grapes,
when gathered at the proper season (every green or decayed grape being carefully excluded from the
press) is made the wine formerly so famous in Spain, called Pero-Ximen, or according to others, Pedro
Ximenes.
2. Jaen bianco (or white) ; this vine is very common and well known in all parts of Spain—indeed so
identical is it with the country, that Pliny, according to his Commentator Huerta, called its fruit by no
other name than the Spanish Grape. The peasantry make very good raisins of this grape, with lye—
which are called Pasas de Legia.
3. Jaen doradillo (or gilt); the grape has a colour as if gilt.
4. Jaen prieto (or black); the grapes are of this colour, being almost black.
5. Temprdnas (early); of this there are white and black grapes, &c. They are called ehrly , because
they are the first to ripen. Pliny called them Forenses , because becoming ripe so early, they were better
known and sold better in the market place near the Forum. Others called them Albanas , the name by
which they are mentioned in Horace. Ser. 11, 4 72.
6. Almunecar , or Largo.
B


7. Moscate/on ; or Dutch Moscatel. Pliny called every kind of Moscatel— Apianus, a name given
to this grape from that of the bees.
8. Moscatel morisco, or Jim (Moorish moscatel or fine muscatel), small, but of more flavour and
perfume. •
9. Montera a grape of round form, thin skin, green colour, sharp taste, and in large bunches.
10. I iginego somewhat resembling the Montera, having a round grape, green colour, an ordinary
sized cluster, an acrid taste, and thick skin.
11. Uvas de Loja grapes of Loja—a town on the road between Granada and Malaga.
12. Uvas de Sta. 1 aula (Grapes of Sta. Paula); this is an excellent table grape, from its fine flavour,
thin skin, and sweetness; it is large, of a green or rather waxy colour, and in loose bunches.
13. Teta de Negra , (head of negro.)
14. Teta de baca, (head of cow.)
15. I erdegas (green gage) the name is given from the colour, &c.—the fruit is small.
16. Corinto —very small—pleasant flavour.
In the selection of ground for a vineyard, the slope should be towards the meridian, or between that
and eastward; and where the ground cannot be conveniently trenched, the vines are planted at greater
distances. For instance, the distance of the vines at Xeres (where the earth is trenched three feet deep)
is five feet—whereas at Malaga and Almunecar, where it is not always customary to trench, the distance
between the vines is eight feet. Rough ground is first levelled with the “ Azadon de Monte” an
implement resembling a broad pickaxe, thus:—
half an inch thick (at a), sixteen inches from faJ
to (c), and having a handle about three feet long.
Sometimes one end of this is pointed like a pick-
axe, when very stony ground is to be broken up.
1 he tool however most in use for the vineyards of Andalusia is the “ Azadon de Gancho,” formed thus:—
It is about eighteen inches from (a) to (b), and has a handle rather curved, and about three feet long.
The ground having been ploughed, and the stones gathered off or removed (to be built in terraces
along steep acclivities,) the arrangement of the lines in which the vines are to be planted is made according
to the natural slope, which these lines ought to be made to cross diagonally. It seldom happens thus that
the lines are rectangular, care being taken that they are not so, and this for two reasons: the one being
that the intervals between the vines may be as narrow as possible in the direction of the slope; the other,
to admit as much sun as possible to the earth between the vines. Both objects are accomplished, by


determining first two governing lines which shall cross each other, so that both may be across the slope;
thus they form St. Andrew’s cross, and other lines are set off parallel to these with great facility, by means
of a line of sixteen feet and a cane of eight feet The spots for the vines are rapidly marked by a third
man who runs with a hoe to each point so determined. The result is an arrangement of the vines in this
manner, according to which it is obvious that in the direction of the slope the intervals must be very
narrow, leaving no room for any water to run clear of the vines and form ruts, while the noonday shadows
of the vines must be separate and not cast upon
each other. The sun, when in the
shines upon the lozenge shaped space between
each four vines in the direction of the largest
diagonal, and directly against the slope—conse-
quently making the least possible shadow; his
rays for the same reason falling most directly on
the earth. By the nearer approximation of the
two side vines they are more accessible to the
radiation of heat from the intermediate sloping
surface.
The holes for the vine cuttings are dug about twenty inches deep with the “Azadon de Gancho,”
and in the bottom of each, a hole as much deeper is made with the “ Barra,” an implement of iron three
feet long and of this shape :
On sloping ground the hole is
made to go rather under the
hill —or, so that the cutting may
be inserted at right angles to the sur-
face. The cutting, at least a yard and
a half long, is then inserted, and soft
rich earth placed around it, first with
the hand, and then rammed down with an “ Atacador ,” which is a sort of dibble of wood, and shaped thus :
The newly planted cutting having been so surrounded with earth, so ram-
med down, up to the surface of the bottom of the hole, the hole or space is
filled up with the “ Azadon de Gancho .” The length of each cutting above
the general surface is afterwards regulated by an experienced hand, (the arreglador,) who usually leaves
two or three eyes above ground for the future growth, according to the system of pruning to be hereafter
explained.
When each hole has been filled up, small hollows are made on the upper and lower sides of each vine
to catch and retain any water; but these hollows are not made so deep as the plough or hoe afterwards go
in the earth around. These hollows are made in January and February, and closed before the vintage,
that is to say in April and May, when they apply the last dressing of the ground (ultimo labrar), called
“ Binar,” by levelling all the ground with the “ Azadon de Gancho,” which thus removes all weeds
from it.
The year after planting new vines, and for two or three following years, it is necessary to “abrir ” or
open the ground with the Azadon de Gancho as low as possible around the young vine, and to remove with
a knife (or the pruning sickle), all the upper roots, in order that the vine may strike root as low as possible in
the ground; without which precaution, Don Jose Marquez informed me, that a vineyard would be of no
value in ten years, whereas his had endured for upwards of a century.
There are two prunings during the year. In November, they begin to clean away the dry wood and
b 2


fruitless shoots from the vine-stock, leaving the fruit-bearing branches until January. This operation of
November may be better understood, after the method of pruning the fruit bearing branches in January has
been described. These branches are
always pruned, so as to leave the space
between the eye intended for the next
year’s shoot (a) and the next above (b),
in order to take out the bud and yet
leave the intermediate portion of the
twig to dry and harden, above the next
expected shoot (a), which would
otherwise grow falsely or fail—the
incision should therefore be made
obliquely across the twig at (b), in
order to kill it and dry the twig above
(a). In planting, they on the same
principle take the cutting off just
under the eye, that it may readily become a root. This pruning is called to “ pulgar” or inch the vines,
from the usual length (about an inch of dead wood) left above the eye.
In November, the fruit-bearing shoot having grown out, from (a), and the dead wood between (a and b)
having become quite dry, this is cut off close to the new shoot from (a,) and the various green fruitless
shoots are cleaned off at the same time, leaving only the fruit bearing branches to be cut in the manner
already described.
In these pruning operations, an implement is used, called the “ Hoz de podar ” or pruning sickle,
which is shaped thus:—the lower end, very sharp, is used as a chisel, to
take off" very cleanly both the old wood and young shoots, or underground
suckers, even where a hand and knife cannot be readily introduced. The
upper part is of course applicable, without altering the position of the Hoz,
to take off any shoot or wood above the hand of the primer.
Vacancies are filled up by layers from adjacent vines. The layer is brought out at the spot where a
vine was wanting, and supported by a cane; this layer yields as much fruit as the parent vine. It is cut off
close to the parent stock in three years. This is considered a better method of filling up vacant spaces
amongst old vines, than that of planting a new and separate cutting whose roots would not be readily
admitted amongst those of older vines.
At Xeres the vines are pruned to stools about eighteen inches high, and about five feet apart. The
shoots supported by stakes of cane, placed according as each shoot grows, whether vertically or horizontally.
Some of the stools at the Quinta we visited, were forty years old. The shoots did not run to more than
four or five feet in length, and are cut to one bud at pruning. The ground, in planting, is trenched three
feet deep and manured. In August, the earth is dug, and rendered loose (floxa) by manuring with grape-
skins. A trench is cut round each vine about two feet wide and one foot deep, to receive the rain in
Autumn, the loose earth being left in four heaps around. In Spring each hole is filled up, and during the
Summer the whole of the ground is weeded: and the vineyard of Mr. Gordon, that we visited, was
remarkably well kept—not a weed was to be seen.
On the 28th September, 1847, at 7 a. m., we left Xeres in a calesa, with a letter from Mr. Gordon to
the Capataz of one of his Quintas, about a league from Xeres, where we saw the whole process of gathering
in the grapes and presssing them to make wine.
The house looked well—flat-roofed, and white-washed, on a rising ground. A space (fifty feet wide)
on the eastern and southern sides of the building is kept clear for drying the grapes upon, being paved in
front and levelled on the eastern side for this purpose. Circular mats called “ Reores,” are laid down in
rows, and on these the grapes are spread and exposed to the sun during three days, that all moisture


may be thoroughly dried off. These mats are about three feet in diameter, having two handles
At the end of three days, when the presses may not be quite ready for the reception of the grapes, similar
mats are laid over them to prevent the sun from scorching them too much. Twelve men
were employed to gather in the grapes; one of these preceded the others, and guided
them to such parts of the vineyard as contained grapes in the fittest state for cutting.
These men carried the fruit from the field to the Reores, (or mats) in a square wooden
bucket, called a “ Tineita,” which was ten inches deep, seven inches broad at
bottom, and sixteen inches at the top; having a band of “stera” or matting, so
attached to it, that the bucket, or “ tinetta” could be sustained by it while the gatherer
was at work. When filled, the “ tinetta” is carried on the head. These square
buckets seemed rather clumsy, but the Capataz told me more of their utility. In wet
weather they received any moisture from the fruit, which in such a case, is taken out
by the hand, to be placed on the drying mats — (< reores.” When on the contrary, in
very dry seasons, the grapes are very ripe, the juice is apt to fall from them into
the c< tinetta;” the fruit is also then taken out by hand, leaving the juice in the
“ tinetta,” to be poured from it into the lagar or butt.
The building was about sixty feet square; the walls two feet thick, the central part being occupied by


the wine presses—four in number. These presses were double, so that the man who was treading out and
screwing down the press on grapes in one, could easily step across into that adjacent, either to assist at the
screw in the other, or in treading out the grapes there, while those in his own lagar might remain under pressure.
At the time of our visit to the Quinta, the men were at work in these presses. On approaching the
building, we passed under an arch and entered an external space, paved with large pebble stones. On the
left as we entered was a draw well, and there were two bench seats against the inner wall. The door
was five feet wide leading to the inner compartment, which was also paved neatly with rounded black and
white pebble stones, in compartments, resembling old tesselated pavement, and slightly sloping outwards for
drainage.
On entering this, the principal part of the building, the four wine presses, with a door in the middle
appeared under five arches of equal span thus:
The openings between the arches over the wine presses are nine feet four inches: breadth of pillar between
the arches—nineteen inches. The door (o) under the centre arch, leads to a cellar twelve feet broad,
extending the whole length of the building, and containing two rows of barrels. Each vat, “lagar,” or
press, is ten feet square, about eighteen inches deep, with sides a little sloping. Each rests upon four
beams (morillos,J each seven inches by five inches, and placed thus. The floor slopes slightly towards
the front that the must may run out (at a). In the middle of each lagar a wooden screw stands up (b ;)
it is about four inches in diameter, and is passed up through the wooden floor from the ground on which it
rests. The shaft of this screw is surrounded by wooden frame-work; thus—
The use of this screw in each lagar is to press the grapes after they have undergone the first treading
out.
The first process is to tread them under foot in the following manner:—A quantity of the grapes that
have lain three days outside on the “ Reores ” or mats, is carried in to the lagar, and thrown into a corner
of it. The man who is there to tread the grapes (with his legs naked, but wearing shoes,) spreads them
out with a wooden shovel “ palu ,” so as to cover the floor or bottom of the lagar, with a layer of grapes,
one bunch deep. He then commences treading on them, by proceeding regularly from side to side, in
lines parallel to the back of the lagar, where he first begins to tread. When all the grapes so spread
out have been sufficiently trodden on and broken, he shovels them into a heap (e,) opposite to
the first heap of unbroken grapes (at d,) from which he again takes a quantity and spreads it out
over the floor of the lagar to be trodden out as before. By this first process, the juice of the grape


flows copiously from the lagar through a small square spout into a tub about three feet wide at the top (f.)
A small frame (g,) supports a rough sort of sieve or funnel made of twisted straw, the bottom of
which consists of the same straw or rushes, (like open matting,) through which the juice being lifted out of
the nearest tub (f,) passes into the second (g,) cleared of grape skins, stones, and coarser matter. The
little vessel (i,) or a larger one (like k,) being used for lifting the must from the nearest tub into the
sieve.
This straw sieve is eighteen inches in diameter at the mouth,
nine inches at the bottom, which, on the outside (l,) is crossed by
two withes of the same material.
From the outer tub (g,) the must is carried to the bota or butt-a strong barrel containing wine
gallons. In these botas, the must is carried during the hottest weather to Xeres, one or two leagues distance,
to be thrown into the large vats there. The fermentation is not much thought of; a cane being introduced
through the bunghole so as to project about a foot. This first juice from the grape is considered of the best
quality, and is not mixed with that afterwards extracted by the pressure of the screw.


After the treading, as already described, has been completed, the remaining of the trodden grapes are
shovelled up into a pyramidal heap round the lower part of the screw, —the whole being shovelled about
and chopped into form, with the wooden “ palu ”or shovel, (m) The pile of pressed remains of grapes is
then bound round tightly with the “ Impletilla," which is a band of plaited esparta {slipa tenacissima ,)
about three inches broad.
Thick boards called mardnos are laid over this pile around the screw, and upon these the Cochina or
female screw is placed—this having two handles for two men. Under this pressure, whatever juice that
may have remained is expressed, and the drainage from grapes thus left under pressure continues
some time, during which, the men either proceed with the treading out in the adjacent lagar—or remove
must to the botas, &c.
There are shelves placed over the division between each double lagar on which the mardnos are
deposited; and on the pillars next the two outer arches, are two wooden cranes with teeth for the
suspension of lights, as during the vintage season the work at the wine press is continued until midnight.
There are also similar supports for lights on the inside of the two pillars:—they are called billados.
The remainder of the grapes and stalks—after the pressing—are laid out on the soil and dug into
new ground on first breaking it up, in order to render it loose “floxo.” The tools used at that quinta in
breaking up the ground for this purpose are, first,—a “ Zuello,” Fig. ], for breaking it, and secondly—a
“ ZadaJ’ Fig 2, for finishing the work and levelling.
In about two months the wine is racked off into other “ botas ,” on which occasion about a gallon of
brandy is added to each, (or 1 to 100.)
The bodega, or great wine warehouse of Mr. Gordon, at Xeres, has a very lofty roof;-—it is paved
with portions of old staves, (an inch thick,) set on edge. The floor composed of these was very unequal,
but the place seemed cool and convenient for the movement of heavy butts without sustaining damage
over it.
At Almunecar, in latitude 36° 30' N. I subsequently visited a vineyard belonging to the Senores
Marquez, which was at an elevation of at least one thousand feet above the sea, —being on the mountains
about a league westward from the shore of the Mediterranean, and near a spot from whence Gibraltar and
even the African coast could be distinguished at sunrise. Near this vineyard, consisting chiefly of
Moscatel Vines, not only the carob tree, the cherimoya, and the orange, grew luxuriantly, but in the
same place grew also the apple, pear, plum, and cherry, the figtree, and bushes bearing hazelnuts.
At the time I visited that Quinta, (25th Oct.,) they were pressing the last of the vintage, comprising
two sorts of grapes, called “Doradilla,” or golden, and “Roma,”, a large red grape giving red juice;—
these together produced the wine called from its colour “Ojo de Gallo” or Cocks~eye, and known as Vino
seco or Vidueno.


The building somewhat resembled a barn, and was about twelve feet wide, but of considerable length.
The “ lagar ” was larger and made of more solid materials than those I saw in Mr. Gordon’s Quinta, near
Xeres. The screw presses (two,) were separate from the lagar, in which grapes were trodden on only.
They next placed these in the presses—the crushed fruit in one, and the separated husks and stalks in the
other—the whole having been placed in capachos.
The lagar taking up one end of the building, was an apartment measuring about fourteen feet by
twelve. The floor —(a. c. b. d.) was raised about two feet, and paved with brick or stone. The sides were
lined up two or three feet with well set dutch tiles (azulejas). The floor sloped towards one corner (c,)
where the must was intended to flow out into a covered vat or “ tenaja ” (d,) level with the floor of the
building. The grapes from the field were thrown in at two windows f f fJ, and the treader inside first
spread them out in a thin layer over the whole floor of the lagar. His next operation was to strew “ yeso ”
(plaster of Paris), from a bag, over the whole. The proportion, I was told, should be two arrobas
of yeso to 100 arrobas of grapes. This pounded gypsum is said to warm the juice, and to absorb
any acidity.
The next process is to tread the whole (with shoes,) giving it one treading (una pisa.) The treader
next forms the whole into ridges (Surco, G. g,) that the must may the more readily drain off. He next
spreads the whole again over the floor, and gives it a second treading. Again he opens the trodden mass
into ridges, and next he takes out the bare stalks of the grapes (escobajo,) and lays them in a heap at one
corner (c,) whence they can be conveniently removed to the second press (h.)
The mass now cleared of the stalks, is again gathered together and re-trodden, after which, the must,
being as thoroughly extracted as mere treading can accomplish, is shovelled into a heap in the corner (b,)
and placed under a heavy thick board ( tahlon ,) with a weight upon it, and in this state it is left until
bed-time. Before the wine-pressers retire to sleep, they place the whole in “ capachos,” and these
capachos under the press (i,) and leave them well screwed down, there to drain during the night. The
same thing is done with the grape-stalks (escobajo,) in the opposite corner (c,) which are placed in the
second press (h.) The must from these stalks is not made into wine, but after it has stood about a month,
is distilled into brandy. The stalks are said to possess a degree of acidity which my kind informants did
not consider good to be left in the must intended to be made wine; and in fact, on tasting the two kinds
of must, I found a very great difference between them.
These presses were simple, and not very unlike those used in some countries in making cyder. The
“capachos’’ are made of open matting or rush (stipa tenacissima,)* so that when under pressure, the
juice flows readily from the husks, or whatever else containing any may be in the “ capacho,” and which
when caked and clogged under pressure may be easily crumbled and reset for more pressure or carried away.
• They might be made here of cabbage-tree, &c.
c


The screws of the two presses were worked by one man only, who alternately inserted his pole lever
at the holes on each side of the screw.
The method of carrying in the grapes from the field was in
some respects different from the practice of Xeres. An oval-
shaped tub called the “ aportadera” (or carrier,) is borne by
the vigneron on one side, supported by an “ albardilla,” which
is a sort of cushion attached by a belt (a,) passing over either
shoulder. A small basket of light matting (espuerta,) b,) is used
in gathering the grapes when first cut from the vines; in this
they are carried to the aportadera, in which the fruit is even pres-
sed down that it may carry the more, and it is therefore made
quite tight like a tub, that it may contain whatever juice may be
thus pressed out of the grapes.


It is usual to plant the prickly pear about the enclosures, or near the vineyards, that the vintagers may
spare the grapes, preferring always the “ higo de chumbo,’' or fruit of the prickly pear. This is in so
much esteem with the ladies of Malaga, that parties are made only for the purpose of eating it, the fruit
being considered particularly wholesome. There are two sorts of fruit produced by this clumsy leaved
plant in the vicinity of Malaga; that which is red is not the sort so much eaten as the other.
At Malaga they rack off the wine from the lees, in six weeks or two months after it has been placed
in the “bota” butt. About six months thereafter the wine is clarified with white of eggs, (six eggs being
taken for each butt.) The white of eggs is first well beaten up, then thrown into the butt, where the wine
is then stirred about with a wooden stick shaped like a poker. The wine is then racked off and immedi-
ately exported.
French Gelatine made expressly for this purpose, is said to be much better than eggs, and is now
used by the merchant from whom I obtained this information in clarifying his wines.
On the 17th October, 1847, (Sunday,) people were arriving at my friend’s warehouses, bringing loads
of new wine and new oil from the country on donkeys; the wine and oil was contained in goat skins*
holding eight or nine arrobas. The wine thus brought was immediately poured into the butts, containing
each, thirty arrobas.f In order to regulate the fermentation, one arroba of brandy of 36° strength was
added, and one arroba of boiled Malaga or Muscat wine—leaving thus twenty-eight arrobas of must to
one of brandy and one of boiled wine. The syrup used for this purpose resembled treacle, and consisted
of a wine boiled down to a fifth of its quantity. I understood that the proper quantity to be thrown into
the fermenting must, depended on the degree of fermentation and quality of the must.
They have a famous wine here called Lagrima, and in other parts “ Virgen” or “de Gota.” This is
obtained from the small portion of must which gently runs from the heap of grapes in one corner of the
lagar; these being under no other pressure than their own weight above one another, give out the juice,
drop by drop like tears from the eyes, and therefore called “de Lagrima ” (tears.) It is also made by
picking the grapes from the stalks, and afterwards pressing them, without crushing them in the wine-press.
The Greeks knew this wine, and called it Protopon, or wine drawn from grapes before they are pressed.
See Pliny, lib. 14, c. 9, and Columella, lib. 2, c. 27.
SULPHUR WINE.
When the grapes are neither green nor very ripe, they are cut and carried to the “lagar ” and made
into must without throwing in any composition. This is immediately brought to the cellars of the
merchants, without allowing the sun to heat the skins and cause it to boil or ferment, which usually
happens within twenty-four hours, and therefore the best way is to carry it by night.
They throw into an empty butt four arrobas of this must, and by the mouth or bung-hole, they
* In this district they use skins as much under the influence of custom as for economy, since a pair of skins with their frame,
including five or six yards of coarse cloth sacking, costs sixty reals—whereas two barrels cost eighty reals. Besides the wine from the skins
can be emptied with more facility and promptitude into the stores, as it goes directly into the butts. The skin is most convenient; the
barrel the most secure.
f The arroba here meant contains 4? gallons; the bota or butt 127 i English wine gallons; the Spanish pipe, 114 f.
c 2


introduce three or four matches of burning sulphur, stopping it so as not to exhale with a very strong
stopper fitting well, and driven in with a hammer. The matches remain suspended from the stopper, that
they may burn well within without reaching the must. When they are burnt, and all the butt full of
smoke, they place it on beams so that it can be conveniently rocked about by strong men, who with the
continual movement during two hours, beat that must until it remains liquid and clear with the colour of
the sulphur, or even deeper. They afterwards pass this beaten and clarified portion into the butt, in which
it is to remain, and repeat the operation until a sufficient quantity is made. With these first labours, the
wine does not come out very perfect, and therefore after a few days, they repeat these sulphurings in order
to refine it, until there remains a wine very vigorous, secure from spoiling, ready for use at any time for
all purposes for which good wine is required. It is doubted whether wine is made thus any where else
than at Malaga.
It seems possible that this may be the wine mentioned by Cato, as quoted by Pliny lib. 14, cap. 20
when he ordered wines to be prepared, making mention of that of sulphur;—or whether the smoke of this
may be what in Pliny's time was connected with the wine he termed smoked , of which Marcial also speaks
in the Epigram 36 of book 10, and in the 13th Epigram 122, but always as of a wine not much esteemed.
In Malaga—they distinguish their wines—as being either sweet, or dry—four sorts of sweet being
well known for that quality, viz., the Abocado, the Tierno, the Moscatel, and the Lagrima; and they have
also “ vino seco ”or dry wine of diverse qualities; after which they class the “ compuestas ” (compound or
mixed) such as that of cherries, &c.
The white wine is made there of a variety of different kinds of grapes known as Jaen , Doradillo, Don
BuenOy Bfc.
The wine of colour is made of the grape Pedro Ximines—(or Pero Ximeri) and called “ Abocado ”
(sweet) the colour being imparted to it from a composition of the same name or with other smaller grapes
“ Tintilldy” or from boiled must (recent) —whereof they throw in from three to four arrobas for every one
hundred. The cut grape they place in the sun during three or four days, which they call giving it “ mantillo,”
and carry it afterwards to the press (lagar) on animals—where it is trodden in the manner already
described. The bare stalks are at length thrown into large earthenware Jars (Tinajas) with a quantity of
warm water and in which, after they have been left there for three or four days, the water is found
converted into vinegar, although this is not considered good for use until the next ensuing month of May.
Of this article it is said that thirty-five thousand arrobas are collected and brought annually into Malaga, the
greater part of which is consumed in the country, the remainder being exported, chiefly to South America
and Gibraltar. The price in general is six reals the arroba.
The grape-stones are given to the pigs, and the skins or husks are food for most other animals.
When three years old (trasanejo) the wine of colour (de color) is called “generoso.”
The wine “Tierno” is made of the same grape (Pero Ximen) but after it is “pasada”—that is
raisined, or half-dried, and not until winter. It is often made in places which the merchants have in their
own houses. The most exquisite wines of this class are obtained in the proportion of one arroba for every
two of raisins—one-half consisting of water, without which, this wine could not be obtained. To inferior
raisins, the quantity of water is in encreased proportion. From each three arrobas of the skin or pellicle,
one arroba of superior vinegar is afterwards obtained. The great quantity of stone-pip, or kernel of the
grape is besides separated from the husks—and given as food to domestic fowls. The inferior sort is used
at Malaga the best is exported, to be used by the foreigner in making liqueurs, &c.


The wine “ Moscatel” is made of the grape of the same name, and in the manner already described at
page 9.
The wine “ Lagrima ” is made of the grape “ Pero Ximen ” in a perfect state of ripeness, without
much pressing, (lagrima h lagrima) as they express it, or tea?’ by tear.
The wine “de Guindas ” (of cherries) is made by introducing for a certain number of days into the
vessel containing sweet wine, a handful of fresh leaves of the cherry tree.
In general it is found that from every three arrobas of grapes, one arroba of wine is obtained, and in
very warm seasons when the fruit is very forward, they throw into the tread (pisa) a little water to every
foot depth of grapes, to diminish the strength—which water evaporates when the must ferments in the
“vacijas,” (vessels).
Towards the end of August, the vintage commences in all the productive parts of the province of
Malaga—the principal being El Colmenar and Casabermeja, which produce only white wines—Comares,
Almachar, and the hills of Malaga, (four leagues in circumference) where chiefly the Abocado and other
sweet wines are made. The vintage continues to the end of October, and from the middle of September,
the proprietors commence the carriage of the must in goat-skins (preserved afterwards to carry the oil,) to
the city. The country people deliver it without certificate or measurement to the good faith of the
merchant, and without knowing what price will be paid for it until the Ist of November—on which day,
according to very ancient custom, the price is paid.
Attached to most lagars or wine presses, are large earthen jars “ tinajas,” in which the must is
deposited until it can be carried to the city, and in the two towns first mentioned above, these serve for
the purpose of storing it, to await a rise in price, which some proprietors can thus afford to do, and avoid a
sacrifice of property.
The wine placed in the warehouses of Malaga, in “botas” (butts) containing thirty arrobas (equal
to 127£ English wine gallons,) at the end of eight months having been racked off or decanted (trasegudo)
five times; clarified with nine eggs;—and there having been given to each bota of white wine, one and
a half arrobas of aguardiente (brandy) of thirty-five degrees strength; and to that of colour (de color,) one
arroba—to which they add deeper colour by means of the syrup made in the country (reboiled in Malaga),
in quantity amounting to half an arroba to each “bota” (or butt of thirty arrobas)—they consider the wine
ready for exportation, and call it “arropado,” the sole meaning of which word is, “mixed with boiled
wine. ”
This is regularly certified in the months of March and April, and afterwards in September and
October, communicating with London, Liverpool, Bristol, Gibraltar, St. Petersburg, Stettin, Elsineur,
Hamburg, Antwerp, Amsterdam, Copenhagen, Gottenburg, Rotterdam, Bremen, Stockholm, Brest,
Helsinburg, Triest, Genoa, Leghorn, Havre, Rouen, Marseilles, Nantes, Tangier, Oran, and the two
Americas. To all these places and countries, the wine is carried in butts of thirty arrobas (127£ gallons,)
half and quarter casks, and also in glass bottles packed in cases.
There are magazines in Malaga in which they reckon from three to seven thousand butts of wine of
all ages. In the year 1844 they appear to have entered 652,938 arrobas of wine; but the extreme
abundance of that.season, and the frauds practised to avoid the duties would warrant a much higher
estimate —a Spanish authority says upwards of 900,000 arrobas, equivalent to 30,000 pipes. 4
* Apuutes geographicas, &c., hasta fin del ano 1846, por Don Francisco de Moya.


The more judicious of the merchants say, that the wine ought not to be embarked the first season;
but much as the exportation has been diminished, it falls in price, so that there is little encouragement
to keep the wine in stores, that it may be ameliorated by age—consequently they export the wines which
have put them to least expense, the cost of production not being assisted by the price obtained in many
foreign markets. There is comparatively but little demand for mixed, or three-year old wines (anejas, and
trasanejas,) and the consequence is, that an arroba of wine three or four years old, is worth twenty
reals; while the arroba of fifty years is only worth sixty reals—a price not covering half the expense,
estimating the interest of capital.
Formerly, when commerce was less shackled, in 1792, for instance, they exported 412,214 arrobas
of wine, equal to 13,740 butts; there were indeed years in which they exported 30,000 butts; whereas
at the present day, they scarcely export to the amount of three thousand butts. Of the 2,261,786
gallons of Spanish wine consumed in England in 1842, little was from Malaga. In the former year, 1841,
the importation from Xeres exceeded that from Oporto, by 30,000 gallons—(the imperial gallon is equal
to nine Spanish quartillos of wine exactly). The reduction of duties made by England in 1825, so
animated the trade of Xeres, that from 14,000 butts, the most they had before exported in any
one year, the export amounted to 92,271 butts in 1831, and exceeded 35,000 in 1840—that
liberal policy having thus been the cause of a prodigious encrease of the culture of the vine. The want of
good commercial treaties with the European powers, has sunk in lamentable prostration, one of the
productions of the Spanish soil, most worthy of protection and stimulus. The United States made a
reduction in duties to the amount, in some cases, of one-half the per centage, and the consequence has
been, that they find a ready market for their raw cotton in Catalonia, (the manufacturing district,) where
almost all they manufacture is from New Orleans, (coarse bush which they call “ blanquillas,”) and of
which there is an enormous consumption in the many mercantile houses which require it to pack the oil,
wine, fruits &c., and in packing the barrels of tobacco for Gibraltar.* American staves are coming into
demand for the butts-but staves of fine oak come also from Hamburg; others of the same wood from the
Roman States, and other parts of Italy; others of chesnut from France and the North of Spain. The
hoops for these barrels, which for the most part (osier or willow) are grown in the woods and “canadas ” of
Malaga, and others they also use of chesnut, come from various provinces of the kingdom.
Ihe soil and climate of Andalusia are favourable to the growth of both cotton and sugar, both of
which, the writer of these notes saw in cultivation there; but while the growth of cotton has been almost
abandoned, the cultivation and manufacture of sugar has been resumed—and he saw at Almunecar, a very
complete establishment, where the finest loaf-sugar was made by the same steam-machinery employed to
bruise the cane. r }
The remittances of wine to Great Britain are of the superior classes, and if the country were opened by
good roads it is impossible to say how much the trade and intercourse between the two nations might be
encreased.f Until now the wine trade in Spain is supplied by Malaga, Xeres, Alicant, and part of
Catalonia; but in the interior provinces they produce wines so exquisite, that they might compete with the
most delicate of those of other countries, if the roads and other circumstances would facilitate their
* In 1845 they exported to America 62,516 arrobas, which at 18 reals amount to 1,125,288 reals,
f In the beginning of the 17th century, they counted in Malaga about six thousand wine presses; at present there are not above half that
number, at least m the circuit of Malaga they have not hands sufficient for the harvest, and thus multitudes of “ madrillas ” come from the
Alpujarras. The wages to a man at this labour is ordinarily five reals, giving him besides, four meals.


exportation, by allowing them to be made known. Without going out of Andalusia, there is the rich and
highly esteemed wine of Montilla, made almost without brandy, costs at first hand twelve reals, (falling to five
reals) per arroba, adding four reals tonnage, five reals of duty; the almost impossibility of trading in this
wine, whatever its quality, must be obvious from the slowness of carriage, in consequence of distance and
bad roads; and hence it is, that the anejo costs in the cellars twenty reals per arroba.
The wine of Val de Penas is so excellent, that one of the strongest arguments for constructing the
proposed railway between Madrid and Valencia, was, that it would afford the means of exporting this
wine, which is produced in a hilly part of the intermediate country. But because of the very imperfect
state of the internal communication in Spain, as connected with the sea coast, the finest products of its
vintages are still unknown to commerce.
In the year 1844 this liquid was so abundant, that in El Colmenar and other neighbouring towns, the
arroba of the “ seco ’ was sold at two and two and-a-half reals—the price in ordinary seasons being
from four to four-and-a-half reals in the cellar. In La Rabita (Alpujurra) it was at one and-a-half
reals the arroba; and in the wine presses of Malaga, the “ vacijas, ” were not sufficient to contain the
products.
The ordinary ratio of production is, that each one thousand roots (or an “ obrada,” which is as much as
two oxen plough in a day,) gives from fifty to sixty arrobas of wine, but it has been known to yield as
much as four hundred arrobas.
The value of all wines exported from Spain in 1843, was 28,797,119 realsMalaga is next
to Xeres in the importance of its embarkations, and Catalonia next, which certifies to many of these
from Malaga.
It may not be uninteresting to the Australian Colonist to know in what manner the cultivation of the
soil of the vineyard is performed. The plough used for this purpose, and the employment of oxen to till
the land amongst vines, may seem very primitive; but it should be borne in mind that it is still from such
a mode of cultivation that all good sherry is derived; and that the soils most favourable for the production
of wine are not exactly what is best for the production of grain.
A thousand vines are said to occupy an “obrada” of land, which means as much as two oxen can
plough in a day—(at five feet apart, 20,000,250 square feet, or somewhat less than half an English
acre.)
The bullocks are yoked entirely by the head and horns by means of a yoke (übio) shaped thus.
To this the horns are bound by cords attached to it (at a a). These cords terminate at each side in a loop


which receives the knotted end of the “garetta,” a rope passing over the yoke and round the bullock’s head
across his brow, which is protected by little pads (usually ornamented) called “ Frontiles’’— (b b) as in the
accompanying sketch —
A thick leathern collar or hoop called a Barzon is fastened to the yoke (at c). The loop of this is frequently
dipped in neat’s-foot oil to render it pliant—its use is to receive the Juguero, or pole of the plough.—The
construction of this is simple.
The “ Orejera” (h) is a small plug of wood, moveable, and used long or short according to the nature of
the soil and work required.
Amongst vines this plough is used with advantage. One man with the handle in his left hand, and
the cord guiding the bullocks in his right, passes easily over and through the ground amongst the vines—
thereby thoroughly clearing it, and turning up about half-an-acre a day.
When the yoke is attached to the pole of a dray, it is fastened in the manner shewn in the second
figure above.


OF RAISINS.
At Malaga, the most productive province in all Spain, of this valuable article of commerce, they distinguish
five different kinds, namely—Moscatel, Larga, Legia, Escombro, and De Brena.
Before describing more particularly, the qualities of these different sorts of raisins, it is necessary to
describe the usual method of drying the grapes to produce raisins—a process exceedingly simple, but yet
not much known out of the province of Malaga. For this purpose mounds of earth are raised (usually
against a wall,) so as to present a sloping surface towards the meridian sun, at an angle of about 30°, or
one-third of a right angle. The bare red soil—warmed by solar heat, kept dry, and protected from rain or
dew—is considered to possess properties for drying the grapes into raisins, preferable to any other sort of
surface, or any artificial heat. Such mounds are called “ Paseras,” and are to be seen in great numbers on
all the best cultivated estates in the country around Malaga. One in the possession of a gentleman in
Malaga, a principal merchant, and one to whom I am indebted for much kindness and useful information,
was of the following dimensions: the earth consisted of poor ground raised against a wall, and presented
an inclined surface (sloping towards the south, at an angle of 30°.) The width or distance between the
upper and lower part of the slope, was about
twenty-six feet, —(some other Paseras were of
much greater length,) this was divided into
two compartments, by two planks fixed on
edge and supported by stakes and cleats (a) at
the lower edge of the Pasera.* Down the
middle of each of the two compartments so
formed, a central sleeper (bb) was laid to sup-
port the middle of the covering boards “toldos.”
These covering boards were planks eleven
inches broad, having three cleats nailed across
each—one in the middle and one at each extremity, by which they were kept in their places when laid
across (cc) so as to overlap each other like some boarded roofs ( dd).
These covering boards could thus be lifted on every evening and taken off every morning, and laid on
again, whenever rain was about to fall.
Commencing at the lowest part of the slope of the Pasera, the grapes were laid down in separate
bunches on the naked earthy surface, where in a few days (five or six at Malaga ten or twelve on the
hills behind Almunecar), they became brown and were once turned, so that in from two to three weeks
grapes were converted into raisins. Care was taken to touch the fruit as little as possible in turning it,
which turning was only necessary once.
* In other Paseras I have seen bricks set in mortar and on edge to divide the compartments and support the “ to»dos or covering
boards. When the Paseras are long, cross drains of hollow tiles are laid to carry o the rain water. x
D


As raisins are made with more or less care according to the quality of the grapes, the different sorts
already mentioned must now be described.
MOSCATEL.
The moscatel raisin—“a fruit so exquisite,” says a Spanish writer, “that it has no rival of its species
on the globe,” is packed in “cartones” or cases, half-cases, quarter-cases (quarterones), and even eighths
(octavines), containing only single bunches.
The cartones are small wooden boxes, narrow in shape, and papered with lithographic drawings,
containing each six and a quarter pounds. These are filled with raisins of the most superior quality.
Twelve such cases, “cartones,” were packed in a “ cajon ” or box, for exportation.
The next quality, the “lechos” or layers, was packed in wooden boxes, each containing twenty-five
pounds of raisins placed in three “lechos” or layers, on paper prepared for the purpose; the paper was
laid between every four layers of the largest size, carefully packed; that in the upper layers consisted of
the very largest raisins.
The next in quality consisted of cases of bunches of the same weight as the lechos, the branches
having been cleared of any small and bad raisins.
Lastly, there were the boxes of “catiles,” or bunches separately wrapped in a sheet of white paper in
the form of a cone, and thus packed together.
I hese arrangements for thus carefully arranging the assorted fruit in smaller packages, have only been
made within the last eighteen years, and have probably been suggested by the demands of different
foreign markets.
Formerly, the “cajas de racimo” cases of bunches, were alone made, containing “fruto corriente,”
current fruit, adapted to the market of North America, and cost from twenty-four to thirty reals. It is
said that at that time the Spanish cultivators fell into the same error that the Australian wool-growers have
recently run into with their wool. They began to clear “baldios,” waste lands, rooting out old wine-
producing vines, in order to produce muscatel, thereby producing too much for that branch of grape-
cultivation, and injuring the market for fruit, and diminishing the trade in wines.
It is said that three arrobas of grapes, raised in irrigated or humid ground, yield but one arroba of
raisins: thus it would appear that the produce in wine or raisins is nearly the same, and that what is lost
by mere evaporation in making raisins, is about equal in quantity to all that is taken from the grape before
it is made into wine.
The principal towns around which the richest muscatel raisins are produced are: Almayate, Almochar,
Algarrobo, Arche, Canellas, Calhiz, Benaque, Benamocarra, Benamargoza, Iznote, Macharaviaya, Sayalonga,
Nerja, Velez Torrea. Besides these, a muscatel of inferior quality is produced in the vicinity of Borje,
Cutar, Comares, and Riogordo.
The country consuming most of this raisin is North America, next is England, then France, and
following in proportional succession, Germany, South America, and many other parts consuming smaller
quantities.
In England, they imported in 1841, upwards of 656,000 arrobas of raisins from all Spain; and in the


United States, in 1845, from Malaga only, and according to the Customs’ return, which rather gives less
than more, it amounted to 641,464 arrobas, the value of which was 12,829,980 reals, or £133,649.
In 1792, they exported from Malaga in totum 640,000 arrobas of moscatel raisins.
Each box of raisins pays six mrs. of duty at the port entrance, but only four mrs. when the merchant
guarantees it for exportation.
LARGA.
The raisin Larga—called also “suelta” (or loose), “de estuca” (or of stucco), “de sol ” (or sun-dried)
is made of the grape known by the name of Santa Paula (which belongs to the larger grape), and dried
according to the same method as the moscatel, but not in such expensive drying places as are the
“ paseras.’ Ihe grapes are cut in due season and spread out on the swept ground around the vines,
without having any covering of “ toldos” against rain or dew, such as are used on the Passeras. The raisins
are brought from the country to Malaga in loads of wicker-baskets or bass-frails, containing some twelve
arrobas each. The fruit is then packed in barrels containing a quintal each. It was thought that raisins
so put in barrels were preserved better by being closely pressed, and they were trodden down into the
barrels by a man who jumped on a round bit of thick matting or bass placed above the raisins. The greater
part of the raisins of this qualiity is sent to Hamburg, Copenhagen, and various parts of Germany much
of it to the United States and to England. The port entry of this fruit is calculated at 200,000 arrobas.
The best raisins “ De Sol,” come from the ravines and vallies of Cartama.
This sort, and the Moscatel Raisin, in rainy seasons, bears a high price when it can be kept dry— the
value being in inverse proportion to the injury sustained by the rest of the crop.
LEJIA.
The raisin is so called from lye , which is the English meaning of the word, and is made, not by exposure
to the sun, but by dipping in lye made from the ashes of the rose-laurel, bind-weed, grabanzos, or
pea-straw —which is considered best, and what they make use of for this purpose in Alicant, Denia, Javea,
Altea, and other parts of the Levant, mixing here and there a sprinkling of common olive oil to soften the
grape-skins. This is the most inferior class of raisins, and for which reason and the low price, much is
exported.
The principal towns producing this raisin are Tolosa, Guaro, Monda, Alhaurin, and Comares, which
last yielded the best; but now the grape there is made into wine, and if this were good for much, it would
become difficult to obtain Lejia raisins, except at a high price.
The price of an arroba of twenty-five pounds (Castillian) was, in 1846, from eight to eleven reals, in
the market place.
This fruit is in demand in some parts of Scotland and other remote places in the North—for wines,
and also for culinary purposes.
d 2


They estimate the annual exportation at forty thousand arrobas, and this in barrels of a quintal, and
still more in baskets of palm leaves, containing about four arrobas and less.
The palm leaf packages are made chiefly by the women of Almogia, a town three leagues from
Malaga; and the handy work of these industrious females enables the merchants to pack up, at the cost of
one real only, as much as is contained in a barrel which costs nine reals.
ESCOMBRO.
This kind of raisin consists of what remains of the moscatel in the “paseras” after the large
clusters have been selected for package in boxes, and after careful examination, and cutting off with
scissors, the small or broken grapes, according to the neatness of the vine-dresser.
It is packed in barrels of a quintal—(these barrels are two and a-quarter feet deep, and twenty inches
in diameter) —and sent to various parts. The fruit is known in England by the name of Sultana raisins,
and used in puddings and pastry. In packing this fruit in the barrel, a man treads it down by jumping on
a round bit of thick matting or bass placed above the raisins. It was considered that the closer they
were packed the better.
The quantity exported from Malaga is calculated at fifty thousand arrobas; and the price is usually
at twelve or fourteen reals, although this depends on the proportion it bears to the quantity of other raisins
produced. Sometimes this sort of raisin, from the steady demand for it in the land of puddings, bears a
higher price than the same quantity of the first selected clusters of muscatel—case and all. The demand
alone determines the price, independently of other circumstances.
PERO-XIMEN OR CHRISTINAS.
The first of these names is given from the grape so called; the second is that of Dona Maria
•Christina, a former queen of Spain, in whose reign many things were distinguished by a name then very
popular.
This raisin is, however, of very inferior quality, and little in demand. It is packed in baskets of
palm leaves.
DE BRENA.
This raisin is made of the muscatel grape cultivated in brambly places “brena,” or in rocky arid
lands producing a weak spiritless grape, which is made into raisins carelessly, and not with that attention
and nicety bestowed on the raisins made from the better sort of moscatel. It comes into Malaga like the


larga and all the other loose sorts—in baskets or capachos of bass-weed or rush, and is exported in palm
leaf baskets.
The raisins exported from Spain in 1843, were valued at 10,379,33? reals=£loß,llß Is. and of
this the greatest portion was from Malaga. It is said that there are upwards of thirty-four different kinds
of grapes grown on the hills around Malaga made into wine and raisins.
It may be remarked here that figs are dried on the paseras in the same manner as grapes—the only
difference being that the figs are not laid on the bare earth as the grapes are, but on dry twigs, felt, hay,
or straw.
OF FIGS.
This fruit, originally from Mesopotamia, consists of four sorts at Malaga, namely, Blancos, Negros, Ver-
dejos, and Parretejos.
The Blancos (white,) have the finest appearance. They are brought into Malaga like all the rest, in
baskets or capachos of bass (esparto,) each load weighing eight or ten rs., and they are repacked in barrels
with the hand; also in little baskets (seretes,) of palm leaf, containing one arroba, half an arroba, and
twenty-eight pounds; in cases also, containing an arroba, and in half cases, and in circular boxes (tamborettes)
of twenty-eight pounds, and of an arroba. These cases and tamborettes are filled by women who place
the figs one by one in circular rows, commencing at the outside, and laying the stalk end of the fig
downwards. The women are paid four reals daily; the price of the arroba, in 1846, was eleven reals.
Paper is laid in the bottom of the tamborette (or drum,) and when about half filled in the manner
above described, a wooden rammer is placed in the drum, and with this the figs are rammed down by a
man. The rammer is shaped thus :


There is a maggot very apt to grow amongst the figs so preserved, and pressure is considered the best
preservative. Other figs are packed in flat baskets made of bass or matting stuff about twenty inches
broad and four inches deep, shaped somewhat like a watch; these are called “ capachos,” and a column of
them is placed under a wooden screw table-press, and kept under pressure until winter.
The “Negro” (black) fig is not gathered in sufficient quantity to supply the consumption in its early
state, and also the demand for it when dried, amongst the poorer classes, (this as well as the other three
sorts being profitably sold unpreserved by many who have no convenient means of drying them.) In
winter the poor use the dried fig as food, being warm, savory, nutritive, and, above all, cheap, for two out
of three of their daily meals. Neither is the quality of the black fig considered so good as to encourage
much the exportation. It is sold at five reals the arroba.
The “Verdejo” fig although not so showy as the “bianco,” yet from its fleshiness, sweetness,
firmness of skin, and, above all, from its aroma, greatly resembling in this, the justly celebrated Smyrna
fig, is indisputably the best kind produced in the soil of Malaga.
It is all packed at first hand in barrels. The best come from Almogia and its environs, and from the
Pechos de Cartama, the price having been, last year, (1847,) nine reals the arroba.
The “Parretejo ” fig is of the same species as the “bianco”; but not coarser, dry, and dull in colour.
It is packed by itself in barrels and baskets; much of this kind of fig being sent to Spanish America,
and to Galicia, and other provinces of Spain. It is worth five or six reals the arroba.
It is said that three arrobas of the green fruit yield one arroba only of dried figs. It is calculated
that of the two kinds required in commerce, the “ Blancos ” and “ Verdejos,” 80,000 arrobas come into the
market, the demand for the first being in double the quantity of the last. The port returns for 1844, give
86,189 arrobas of figs of all classes, but in this as with other articles, (observes the writer of the notes
whence I transcribe the particulars), at least one third should be added for defalcation, which is proved by
the quantity brought to market in the green state, and the figs packed in baskets brought in during the
winter for home consumption.
Much of the figs are exported to England, which although not equal to those from Smyrna, are
earlier in the market. Those of the best quality are exported also, to various parts of France; and those
ot the second quality are sent to the Ports of the Baltic, France, Africa, Gibraltar, &c.
There is a kind of fig produced from the refuse of the Passeras, or of those remaining under the trees
or the remains in the warehouses—which figs are called “ malucos ” (weak,) which formerly were given to
cattle working in the orchards where they were gathered, or in the city were sold to the poor; but in the
year 1847, barley having risen with the wheat to the exorbitant price of forty-three reals the fanega, (or
per bushel,) which five years before sold for fourteen reals, and the straw (with which it was mixed, when
given to animals) being also very dear, stable-keepers, carriers, and farmers, had recourse to these figs,
which in consequence rose one or two reals per arroba; but at all events they were much wanted, and
horses and donkeys eat them as readily as barley, consuming one-fourth of an arroba (6£- lbs.) daily
per head. The minor animals have thriven also during the dearth of grain on the carob—the best of which
was about the same price as the figs, six reals the arroba.
0
Note.—ln the Passeras the Figs are not laid on earth, but on dry twigs, felt, hay, or straw.


ALMONDS.
Of the Almond, indigenous in Syria and Barbary, they distinguish, at Malaga, two kinds—the renowned
and excellent Jordan, called here “Larga,” or “ Fanfarona,” considered the best in the world; and “La
fina.” This last has the advantage of giving more weight in pounds of kernel, per fanega, than the other;
being also sweeter, of more equal shape, and having a finer skin. In an extent of twenty-five leagues of
the Levant, almost all that is produced is of this class, which before the consumption was adjusted to the
demand, was for the most part exported; but now the home consumption absorbs all with the exception of
some small embarkations; others of greater amount, consisting of the “ Larga,’’ which is chiefly grown on
the side of the Levant at Adra, and La Rabita, which are supplied from Albunol and Juron. The almond
is packed in sacks and bags of serge, “yerga,” &c.
From each fanega and cuartilla of almonds they obtain twenty-five pounds of kernels, and one fanega
of shell, which weighs sixty-seven pounds, and is in much demand for the purpose of heating the ovens
of bakers, confectioners, and others, being worth in the market two and a-half reals the fanega,
(6|d. sterling), and using during winter, to four and a-half reals, (11 sterling).
The kernels remaining after the picking of the largest for cases of an arroba, and of half an arroba
each, which go to London, other parts of the United Kingdom, and France; are placed in barrels lined
with white paper, containing from two to twelve arrobas, which are sent to the countries of the North’
and to the United States, and the refuse remaining is sold for sweet-meats, and to the confectioner’s shops at
about forty reals the arroba, and when they consist of whole kernels at from seventy to eighty reals
(14s. 6d. to 16s. Bd.) All the operations necessary for the exportation of almonds, except that of filling the
packages, are performed by females, who gain from three to four reals daily, according to the branch of
work they are employed in.
The almond is also exported in baskets of matting or bass containing one fanega, principally the
soft and fleshy sort (Mollar,) which is brought chiefly from Ibiza, costing ninety reals the fanega, and they
are so preserved for use at table; although for this purpose none are so good as the “ Larga ” when it has
been “blanqueada ” {i. e. whitened), which the almonds are called, when the epidermis has been taken off
with warm or cold water.
Although as a general rule, it may be estimated as already stated, that the frauds of Custom-house
officers, diminish the fair proportion of duty one third —there are some articles, and this is one of them, in
which the “ occultation ” is enormous.
For instance, it appears that in 1844, 2,998 fanegas of almonds were introduced into Malaga, and
upwards of 12,000 fanegas were exported, besides what was consumed in the city, &c.
According to the same returns seven hundred and ninety arrobas of kernel from Albunol (Province of
‘Granada, which produces five hundred fanegas,) and from all the Alpujarras, although it cannot be put up in
cases, not being well enough seasoned.
The arroba of this kind of kernel is worth one hundred reals, and always bears the same proportional
price to that of the country around Malaga.


The best almond (Jordan) comes from Alora, La Pizarra, and Los Pechos de Cartama, which, it may
be observed, contain abundance of the nutritive juice of towns.
The highest market price of the almond at Malaga in 1846, has been 107 reals the fanega, including
half a real of commission, and half a real for measurement. The price has sometimes fallen to sixty reals.
ALMENDRON.
Of this variety of the almond, which is known by its form, and by its taste; there are also two kinds,
large and small, which are sub-divided into sharp-pointed (picudo,) and round (redondo). There is also
the Almendron mollar —(soft or tender). The second class, like the almendra Jina, contains the most
kernel. This fruit is not very abundant, the whole crop amounting to about two thousand fanegas, and is
entirely disposed of by exportation. It comes in various packages from the Balearic Islands, as well in
kernel as in shell.
The price of a fanega of almendron redondo (of Majorca) is from forty to forty-five reals, and that of
a quintal of kernels of the same %. 12.
The kernel of this species, brought from Albunol, is worth per quintal some fifteen reals less. The
almendron of Malaga is worth from forty-five to fifty reals the fanega, keeping always in proportion to the
current prices of the almond.
The plains most productive of this fruit in the province of Malaga, are those mentioned in the
preceding article—and the immediate vicinity of the city.
The women who separate the kernels from the husk or shell, earn one real more per fanega, than they
do for the almond, that is to say, four reals, by reason of its greater hardness, less bulk, and the slipperiness
of the shell which gives more trouble.
It is exported to the North, France, and Germany, in barrels lined with white paper, and containing
four, eight, and twelve arrobas.
At Almunecar, the season for planting Almonds is December.
LEMONS.
This fruit (coming originally from Media) is cultivated in large groves and orchards, outside the suburbs
of Malaga, and their products are chiefly required for exportation; but that of most superior quality, is
brought from the extensive “limonares” (lemon groves) of Benamargosa, Velez, Benamocaria, Jorrox,
and Cutar, towns of this province, and to the eastward of the Capital. The lemons from the first named
of these places, are of better quality than those of the district of Malaga, which also are subject to the


inconvenience of a system, followed according to which, from the near vicinity, they are packed too green,
so that when they arrive at their destined ports they are loose in the packing cases, from having shrunk so
much—a circumstance which does not occur with the lemons brought from a distance, since when they
arrive to be packed, they have been gathered four or five days, and are in a perfect condition. The lemons
are collected with long cars drawn by two bullocks (carretas,) and packed on animals in baskets, capachos,
and sacks.
I hey have three kinds of cases, which have their corresponding halves and quarters, called English,
Dutch, and of Messina; the latter not being heaped up, avoid the necessity for that violent pressure by
which the fruit is injured; although the lemon, when of good quality, and well conditioned, is a fruit of
much consistence and durability. It seems to be indeed desirable, that it should be put up under pressure,
when destined for distant markets. Ihe cases are covered by arched tops, which men jump upon and bind
them down with hoops, well nailed over. Women first put up the lemons separately in paper, rejecting
all that are yellow, and selecting only such as are green. I saw great quantities of ripe looking lemons
remaining on the quays at Malaga, which the merchants told me were of no value whatever; the force
with which the arched tops of the cases were trodden down, seemed sufficient to crush the lemons, but I
was told it did not, but was necessary.
In the English cases, are placed all the largest lemons, as in most other articles; and in the Dutch
cases the most inferior fruit.
In this branch, as in all, the grower is at the mercy of the buyer, and this is one of those liable to
much abuse; for, as the payment is per case, after the fruit has been picked to the satisfaction of the
“ escojedores (or pickers), whom the purchaser employs to separate the fruit, he neither takes care that it
is not damaged by accident or delay, or diminished by theft, and afterwards he rejects at will, what many
take advantage of, to leave less still of what is available; and the more reasonable leave the refuse to the
of the growers, who sell it to persons who deal only in this. Usually it is sold per thousand, and
also per case; in any way they pay half the price of the fruit, which they choose to call received.
Besides, the case ought to contain, dealing justly, the largest, twelve arrobas of fruit, and two arroba
in wood, paper and nails; and there are many which weigh from eighteen to twenty-one arrobas, which only
appear in the invoices.
The English case contains about 1200 lemons, and has cost (in 1846), about 140 reals.
The Dutch case with some 1700 lemons, 100 reals.
7 II
Ihe half case of Messina (as they do not make whole cases of this sort) with 750 lemons, worth 100
reals.
Ihe total shipment is estimated at an amount of %. 16,000, and it was to England, France, Holland,
Denmark, Russia, and the United States.
To Russia only go half cases of Dutch, and of Messina. To the United States, they take only quarter
cases of Messina; and those cases which are to be carried from the ports to the interior of Germany, are
required to be matted and tied with ropes, a thing not done for any other part of the world.
The return of port entries in 1844, gave 98,595 arrobas of lemons,* which paid each five maravedis of
duty, being for embarkation.
* Equal to 6,573 cases, measuring them at fifteen arrobas each.
E


ORANGES.
The Orange is supposed by some to come from Tyre, and by others from the Celestial Empire, and for
which reason the sweet is vulgarly called China Orange; there are also bitter oranges.
In the same year, 1844, were introduced according to the port entries of Malaga, 23,370 arrobas of
oranges, it being borne in mind that more than the half of this number consisted of what was gathered ripe
for the use of the town.*
The oranges for exportation are gathered (both the sweet and bitter) in the same state as the lemons,
just before they appear ripe, and that they may arrive before they grow ripe at the place of packing.
The cases are made for the various parts to which the lemons are sent, containing each about 1000
oranges, and are worth some 110 reals; and for Scotland they fill cases with some 1800 oranges of the
smallest sort, and which are worth only eighty reals. It is considered a very delicate fruit which cannot
go compressed, nor resist pressure like the lemon, without rotting from the blows of hammers, or cuts, &c.,
to which they are exposed at the closing of the boxes. %
The difference in price between the half and quarter cases, as compared with the whole cases, as well
in this fruit as with the lemons, is almost insignificant; for it only increases four reals in every two of the
first, and ten reals in every four of the second. Such is the abundance of oranges, that from the month of
November, they begin to sell to the public the ripe fruit, and continue until the end of August —the
supply coming chiefly from Alhanruiel Grande, Coin, and la Pizarra, towns to the Westward, also Sayalonga;
situated to the Eastward, whence come the oranges most esteemed; other various towns producing much,
and in all, the fine gardens of this beautiful tree present an enchanting aspect, especially during the time
when it is in flower, and also when the fruit is ripe. The “limonero,” (lemon-tree,) and the “Naranjo,”
(orange-tree,) are two of the most beautiful and fragrant ornaments of these fertile and balmy fields.
T here are seasons in which a dozen of oranges —such as poor people consume —is sold for two cuartos (a
half-penny).
LEMON AND ORANGE SKINS (DRIED.)
Of these there is a regular exportation to the ports of the Baltic. They are from the overplus of the
lemons, which, from the great abundance, may be no longer in demand, or from bad quality remaining on
the trees; and from the bitter (or Seville) orange, which for similar reasons is allowed to ripen. Both
fruits are in a state to be peeled in February, and the skins, quite dry and hard, are brought to market;
and for each arroba of the first mentioned, the price obtained is from seven to eleven reals; for an arroba
of that of the second, from ten to fourteen reals.
* The oranges pay duty when entered for exportation of five mrs. per arroba, and when for consumption twenty-two mrs.


It is gathered in mats of bass, and packed in bales of plaited straw of bass, containing twelve arrobas
of the two kinds—about 16,000 arrobas are exported; but the greater quantity consists of the skins of
oranges rather than that of lemons; of this they make the liqueur known as in Holland.
It is clear that almost all the lemon and orange grounds produce this article, but where it is collected
expressly for exportation, is in the towns of Alora and La Pizarra, where they use the inside of the lemon
in making lime-juice, salt, and essence of lemon, sold at the very manufactory for five reals the arroba,
the juice; twenty-four reals per pound for the salt, and thirty reals per pound for the essence. The
essence of orange is worth thirty-six reals the pound in Alora, and the centre of the bitter orange, in paste,
is found to fatten very much all dairy cattle. In Malaga also, they extract juice which is worth six reals
the arroba. Salt of lemon sold at thirty-two reals a pound, and essence of lemon at thirty reals per pound.
GRAPES.
Of this fruit—three kinds are exported—the beautiful Loja-grape which they send to the English market,
and that known as grey “gusano,” and “lagalina,” which is consumed in the two Americas. Great as is
the difference in quality, so is the price; for in the present year the first has been worth thirty-four reals
the arroba,* while the second has not exceeded in price fourteen reals, except during some days in which
this and the “ Calona,” which is inferior to all, were required to dispatch the Catalonian vessels, and were
bought as high as twenty-five reals.
That called “de Loja ” is later in ripening by fourteen days than the others, and besides being
afterwards of better flavour; it retains its freshness and permanent appearance sufficiently, provided it is
gathered in season, and well packed; the “grey gusano” is of little duration, and soon becomes hollow.
The high price of the grape this year arose from part of the harvest being lost, and the great demand
for it; so that in the middle of August there were already Catalonian vessels taking cargoes to the United
States.
The entry of all kinds of grapes in 1844, including the home consumption, appears to be 196,737
arrobas—this is 262,316 arrobas, with the understood increase; so that it may fairly be estimated that
100,000 arrobas is within the quantity exported in capachos, (lined inside with leaves of maize.)
Anciently they placed the fruit in casks or pitchers of earthenware or pottery, glazed outside; afterwards
in small stone troughs not glazed; and still later they introduced the use of equal sized barrels, although
of different forms from those employed to pack the raisin “ Larga,” &c.
At present they fill casks containing from fifty to fifty-five pounds—barrels of the same capacity—
and one arroba, and small stone troughs (piletas,) holding as much, also to contain a half and a quarter of
an arroba.
* The grape of Loja is amongst the least esteemed at Malaga for the table, and undoubtedly, as the best adapted for exportation, they
have paid as we see twelve reals the pound for it, when the general price at Malaga, for the very best sorts, is only four reals, and when
this rises to six reals it is considered exorbitant.,
E 2


DRIED CHERRIES.
The dried cherries come from the kingdom of Jaen in quantities of two or three thousand arrobas
annually, which are put in cases of from twenty-five pounds, and sent to England, France, America,
Gibraltar, Oran, and some of the countries to the Northward.
They make up the celebrated black in Zaragones of two kinds, amongst the multitude of species of
which this fruit, originally from Syria, consists, and it is made into raisins, or rather dried into that state
almost in the same manner in which the Lejia raisins are made. The price of an arroba is from fifteen to
twenty reals.
OF THE OLIVE.
The olive-tree (originally from Greece,) is planted in stakes or slips (estaca,) in holes a yard (vara) square,
and at a distance each way of twelve or fourteen varas (yards)—watering them during the three first
years, although this is not indispensable, but only that they may bear fruit at seven or eight years, —which
without watering they would not until ten or twelve years.
Between twenty-five and forty-five years is the period of their greatest amount of production and
verdure, and this will continue for ages under careful cultivation. The ground is worked with plough
and hoe from February to April. Every three years they cut a third part of the branches (ramaje,) that
the product may be good, and thus in every nine years the tree is renewed. Its usual height in the field
is five (varas) yards, and the diameter ten. A good olive tree affords from nine to ten celemines (1£ bushels)
of olives. This plant Olea Europea occupies the first place after corn and wine in the agriculture of
Europe. The olive is produced only in certain latitudes, and in these it seems to thrive best in the
vicinity of the sea.*
The tree is beaten with a cudgel, which labor, mal-treating the tree, is performed by men who earn
thus six or eight reals net {a seco ); and women who gather the fruit from the ground, two and a-half to
three reals a day, also (a seco), net; and mill it afterwards. The millers in general not giving “ avio ”
(provisions or money in advance.) The fruit is stacked or piled up many days, and is placed frequently
between the stones in a state of putrefaction, which causes much sediment in the oil, a bad colour, &c.
* At Baylen, on the contrary, which is 20 leagues inland, the olive thrives so luxuriantly, that trees only three years planted, bore much
fruit; whereas at Malaga, close to the sea, the olive seems to require seven or eight years to produce fruit, and this only when watered.


By December the new oil is received in Malaga, and almost at the same time that which the district produces
in no very great quantity. We know of only one small steam-mill (in Montilla), all others extract the oil
according to the ancient methods of stone or bowl, which are not the best for making oil of good quality,
or for obtaining from the fruit all its juice; but they look forward to another system being introduced
when there will be many rich proprietors of olive grounds, who possessing what is necessary, now adhere to
that which has been transmitted to them by their ancestors. One of the largest mills known is in Lucena,
which has twenty-four beams (t. e. presses); and at this the farmers of the vast estates of the Duke of
Medina Celi, to whom the mill belongs, are obliged to come with their olives.
I his important article, of which, when the crop fails in Italy, or when whale-oil is scarce, exportation
takes place from Malaga to the amount of eight or nine “toneles ” of from fifty-four to sixty arrobas each,
and half and quarter-toneles—pipes of thirty arrobas, and smaller casks besides numerous earthen jars
containing four, five, and six pounds, lined with common plaited bass,* to Catalonia, South America, &c.,
&c., and some bottles of clarified oil, made by some simple methods, which render it very fine, forms one
of the most important branches of the interior trade of Andalusia, from various ports of which province,
such as Lucena, Cabra, Montilla, Osuna, Cordova, Antequera El Valle, Granada, Alpujarra-baja, &c., it
is carried to Malaga on mules (caballerias), by carriers who live by this traffic, receiving at the rate of
about five reals or more of profit, on each arroba carried to the port.
In the months of October to January, and even to March, according to the harvest, is the season when
they commence to “ varedr ” or beat down with a pole or cudgel the fruit of this most useful of trees,
which affords in its fruit—food, light, and fire; and with its trunk and branches, a good material for various
useful purposes.
The olive most generally bruized for oil is that called “ picuda” although the other kind known as
“ manzanilla ” gives better oil, but not abundantly ; so that of the town of Periana, five and a-half leagues
from the capital, which makes oil of this olive, is of the best quality known. Each fanega of olivesf of
the “picuda” gives on an average measurement one arroba of oil, and of the “manzanilla,” one and a
quarter arroba. The miller receives for each fanega “milled,” three pounds of oil. The oil mills pay an
annual tax of forty-eight reals for each beam or common press. The oil would be better if made of the
pulp or fleshy part only, but they also press the husk of the olive. Those olives produced in the district
of Malaga, give a greater quantity of oil than those grown in the country, but the greater abundance of
olives there compensates for all.
The skins that remain in cakes in the cloths or “capachos” placed under the press, are used as fuel to
warm the water used in the mills for extracting the oil.
In the season of its being brought in, they enter from 1000 to 1500 mules daily, loaded with goat-
skins, which each contain from five to nine arrobas of oil.
The augmentation introduced to this traffic by the great exports to Catalonia, and in Catalonian
vessels to different countries, and having discontinued some of the ancient “bodegas” which consisted
usually of a subterranean store, with two or more rows of large earthen jars, made only in Lucena
(Kingdom of Cordoba), —some containing as much as 300 arrobas, has introduced the adoption of
wooden butts “botacos” made of wood of Hamburg), which hold from 150 to 400 arrobas, and which enable
* A species of rush—the stipa tenacissima of the botanists,
f The mean fanega is equal to 2,220 cubic pulgadas (inches nearly.)


the merchant to preserve the oil, the hiring or renting of these enables him to offer the contents of a
bodega for sale, placing in the “patios ” or magazines of his own house, the butts, by which means some
have had in their own house as much as 30,000 arrobas of this article. The butts have also the advantage,
that in them the oil deposits its sediment so as to admit of removing the oil from it without moving it
about so much as in the earthen jars (tinajas), and are also better in winter than the earthen ware, cold in
itself, and still more so when shut up in damp ground. The jars at from two and a-half to five reals to the
arroba of contents, placed in the bodega, properly joined, and giving them a year’s trial. A butt “ botaco ”
or “ colbato” as it is sometimes called), containing 350 arrobas, is worth 1200 reals.
In the productive towns of the interior they have great deposits, formed of earthen jars (tinajas), in
which they place the whole produce of a season, and sometimes keep it there for years; when a rise in
price is promised, or that the current price yields them no profit—although these calculations are not
always certain, and cannot well be so, when few know to a cypher, according to the total cost of production
—the cost of oil by the arroba. At this time there are great stocks (existencias) unsold in the interior, and
a great number of arrobas always remain shut up in Malaga from one year to another. The oil of one or
two years, brings a better price than the new, from having a better taste, and being freer from se-
diment.
The dregs left in the jars of the farmers (cosecheros), the thick grounds which subside in the
“ bodegas ” (or butts) of the merchants, and which comes from the mill by repassing (repaso) as the
residue of the first passing; and that of the second with warm water, is taken by the makers of hard
common soap, called “ de piedra ” (of stone) for the making thereof, and of which it forms a com-
ponent part. The first and third qualities of dregs or grounds is sold for ten or fifteen reals less
than the clear oil, and the second quality called “ aceiton,” for four or five reals below the current price
of the oil.
The equalization of duty in England on Spanish oil with the Sicilian oil, has diminished the
exportation to England. In 1841, it amounted to 127,660 arrobas in all Spain; and in 1842, the extraction
in general amounted to a value of 32,285,059 reals. It must be observed that the greater part is still oil
of Andalusia, and that the principal part of its embarkation is Malaga.
In the year 1847, the United States exported 10,395 arrobas, which, at 35 rea15=381,325 reals.
Besides the great extraction which has been already shewn, and in which Marseilles alone figures in
1835, for 43,469 arrobas, 10 pounds; its amount 1,304,082 reals v" ; the consumption of the country
Comes to much; besides serving generally for light, publicly and privately, there is scarcely a dish in which
olive oil enters not as a condiment; and those who attend to and manage it, almost live on bread
and oil.
According to the books of entry kept at the Custom House, the entries in the year 1844 appear to be
68,688 arrobas of oil, although it may well be set down 100,000 arrobas for the great fraud which chiefly
takes place with the connivance of the Custom-house officers.
The oil, clarified by a simple process known here, and which leaves nothing injurious to health, is as
fine and brilliant as the filtered oils of Italy and France.
In the works connected with this article, an immense number of hands are employed, as w T ell in the
field labour as in that of the Bodegas, the transport by land and by vessels, giving life to speculation and
banking business.


The temperature of Andalusia in some days of winter coagulates the oil, which takes a consistency
similar to that of butter in summer.
10 Oct., Bailen—Rode over the position guided by Pascual Linares. He was an intelligent guide,
and gave me some important information about the culture of Olives, of which he described eight different
kinds, viz:—
1. Gordales—very large for eating, being first preserved in salt and water, having been cut in
one or two places.
2. CorrealesO
3. Perillo, all large and good for the same purpose.
4. Sevillano, J
5. De Tomate—This is as long as the finger, and marked like a Tomate.
6. De Cuerniguello—two inches long, horn-shaped, and pointed.
7. Manzanilla.
8. Azeituna ordinaria (common olive) fit for oil only.
The olive is planted (at Bailen,) by cutting upright shoots four inches in circumference, and a yard in
length, placed in a hole, one yard deep, and half a yard wide. Two plants are placed so as to slope from
each side of the hole and meet together at the division of the shoots, from which young shoots grow
the following season, the whole being well covered over with earth.
This planting takes place in January, February, and March. Three or four shoots come up, that in
three years yield fruit, and in seven or eight years are worth six dollars; in twenty years they may be
worth as much as sixteen dollars. The trees are sold, but not the land. A “ cabador ” hoes round each
tree, and gains eighteen or twenty reals a day. The laborers come from Murcia, and places still further
off, to work at these olive grounds, and live in tents with their families.
At this season, people were busy clearing, (or redding up,) the ground from all weeds with a hook,
(or sickle and stick), and a rake, in order that the olives when beaten off the trees might be more readily
seen and gathered by the women so employed.
Various herbs grew abundantly in the fields—a Juniper, (Parragneron), and a sweet herb (Inojo),
with which our guide said a flavour was given to olives and to figs; also a caper (Caparon,) which we were
informed was much used and preserved with vinegar, both in flower and capsule. “ Serranos,” (mountain
labourers,) from Cuenca and Aragon, arrive about the Ist November, to mill (molar,) the olives, and thus make
oil—they depart in May. There are about sixty mills in Bailen; the double ones are worked by eight
horses.
19th October, Malaga—Mr. D shewed me his oil warehouses; his premises were extensive,
yet scarcely spacious enough for his business; the carpentry department by itself takes room; then there
were the oil stores; the lofty warehouses for raisins, and those for the wine butts.
The oil is stored in a warehouse on the ground floor in “ Tinajas ” of earthenware, the largest vessels I
ever saw made of that material, one contained as much as 292 arrobas (the arroba holds four gallons and


one quart.) They are about six feet in diameter at the utmost, and about nine feet deep, and shaped thus
Hie surface (a a) is approached by two earthen steps from the door. There is a double row of
“ linajas” eight in each, said to be within an inch of each other, under the ground.
Other merchants had filled up around the “ Tinajas,” with stone to, (a a) and all the “ Tinajas ” so
surrounded with stone, had broken nearly parallel to the surface, (a a) whereas those of Mr. D.
surrounded only with earth or sand, had not one broken. The form of the bottom is the most favourable
tor the deposit of the turbios (or dregs.) They were busy transferring the clear oil of a former season to
barrels for shipment, and the new oil was being brought in and discharged into barrels, previous to its going
into the “ tinajas.’’ They were trying the tightness, first, of each cask, by filling it with water.
23rd October—Saturday—Almunecar. Visited the Oil Mill of Senores M , accompanied by Don
Jose Maria M , and Don Joaquim, (who manages the sugar establishment.) The olives were first
bruised under a stone roller worked by w'ater thus —


This is to “ mass” or mash the olives. The next object is to press the olives thus “ massed” or mashed,
for which purpose the bruised fruit is put into “ Capachos” (of open felt or strong rush matting stuff) and
placed under a press, (either of wooden screws, or large heavy leaver of logs). The “ Capachos,” to the
amount of about a dozen, each capped Muth a small cover, (a) are placed to-gether under the press, and
when squeezed, are not above one and a-half inches thick, thus (b). After the first pressing, the Capachos
are taken out, and the contents of each are shaken about and the squeezed masses divided by hand,
after which to “ recortar” the whole, water as warm as it can he made is poured on each, and finally thrown
about them when in the press, the more completely to extract the oil,
The water is separated from the oil on falling together into “ pelones,” which are connected at the
lower part of each by a tube, whereby the water being lowest, passes from the first into the second pelon,
and runs off at its upper surface, from the pressure of the oil and water in the first.
A “ Cojedor” or tin skimmer shaped thus
and pour it into a “ Tinaja”.
is used to skim off the oil from time to time,
Fhe water passes from the second pelon into a vat outside, whence any remaining oil coming to the
surface is taken off, and returned to the “ capachos,’' this vat having an outlet for the water at the lowest
part.
The dry remaining matter taken from the “ capachos,” called “ orujo,” is useful either as fuel, or is
sold at the same price as food for fowls, (given them mixed with wheat,) or for feeding pigs.
The same mill was employed to grind the white Indian corn into flour. I took two cobs of this with
me for Australia, as the Senores M said it made much better flour than the yellow sort.
COTTON.
23rd October, Almunecar—Saw for the first time the cotton plant growing. It depends wholly on
irrigation here, and I therefore noted the method by which this is accomplished. It may be remarked,
F


that the soil is loose and calcareous, —that the maximum summer heat is 24° of Rheaumer, 86° of
Farenheit; in winter 14° of do., 64° of Farenheit; the lowest temperature in winter, at 5° or 6° of
Rheaumer, 43° or 45° of Farenheit.
A small plot or “ liana '* (level,) is set out in an oblong form to be enclosed, except at one edge, by a
little ridge called the “ macho.”
This compartment is called a “ Zorilla,” a , b, c, d , — a, b , or c, d , the “ Macho,” — d, </, d, d, d, the
“ Ataja,”—c, e, the “ Carrilejo,” or hollow between.
The “ Ataja” is one foot higher than the bed of the “ Carrilejo,” and the distance between these
ridges “ Atajos,” is five palms, or one yard.
In planting the Cotton seeds a hole is made two inches deep with the “ Maneuje,”
in the Southern or Eastern side if possible, (never on the North) of the “ Ataja,”
about half way up, and twelve or fourteen seeds of the Cotton plant are dropped into
each hole. These holes are twenty inches apart.
The planting takes place in March or April—the cotton is gathered in September; and I saw a simple
sort of wooden jenny, with two wooden cylinders turning in opposite directions, with which the seeds were
afterwards separated from the cotton.
The seeds so planted, give a crop in the second or third year. The cotton plant is pruned in the same
manner as the vine, leaving about an inch and a-half above the eye for next shoot, as explained relative to
the vine pruning in January.
The cultivation of cotton on the Eastern coast of Spain, has declined of late years from the fall in
price, owing to the great importations from the United States. In Motril, four or five years ago, 100,000
arrobas were annually produced (worth from thirty to forty reals per arroba,) now they scarcely produce at
the same place 4000 arrobas, the price having fallen to sixteen reals, which (I was informed,) would not
cover the cost of production.


In 1842, of 68,000,000 reals, the value of the cotton imported into Barcelona; fifty-six were from the
United States, eight and a-half from the Island of Cuba, and three and a-half from Motril.
The cultivation of the sugar cane is, for the above reasons, superseding that of the cotton plant on the
Eastern coast of Spain, stimulated as the people are, by the advantages held out by new machinery,
imported by the Peninsular Sugar Company (Sociedad Azucarera Peninsular.)
SUGAR CANE.
It is said that the vega (or vale) of Motril alone, produced formerly as much as 20,000 arrobas of
sugar. They now cultivate there, and at Almunecar,* three kinds of cane— algarrohena , de la tierra , and
the American. It is said that with proper cultivation and irrigation Motril alone might produce 4,000,000
of arrobas; but as not above a dozen laborers are employed, they have only afforded to the Peninsular
Sugar Company 350,000 arrobas annually.
In a memoir on the cultivation of the sugar cane, by Don Antonio de Pinedo y Barragon, Secretary
t° the Principal Royal Economical Society of the Province of Granada, it is stated: “ From all that I
have read in the ancient manuscripts of this city, or consulted the oldest and most intelligent persons in it.
as to the origin of the cultivation of the sugar cane on this coast, I have not been able to investigate it.
I have only ascertained from the history of Spain by Masdev, that in Yuica they cultivated sugar when
the Romans held that island, whence it is very probable that in the same epoch it was brought to this
country.
I his seems attested by the remains of sugar factories, whose subterranean appendages, such as large
jars (tinajones) or deposits of syrups, water-pipes, furnaces, and other remains, have been found, and are still
met with in the environs of this city (Granada) wherever they have made, or make excavations.
It is worthy of notice, in connection with this remark, that the sort of sugar cane called “de la
tierra ” or native, is very different from, and inferior to, the sort brought from America , which is now'
superseding the native plant—easily distinguishable from the American, being of much darker green —the
canes less in size and not so juicy. If, as has been supposed, the sugar cane was first taken from Spain to
the West Indies; and that this improved sort called “American,” is descended from it, it would appear
that the permanent improvement in quality and aspect, has been produced by change of soil and climate,
and cultivation only.
At Almunecar, sugar canes are cut every year in March or April. They have two sorts —the original
(of a dark green,) and the American , introduced by the father of Senhor M , which is by far the
* A city on the sea coast, eleven leagues from Granada (the capital,) and about as far from Malaga. It has a good anchorage ;
the inhabitants amount to 5,096 : there has been erected a very complete Sugar Manufactory—they export thence 4000 qqs. of lead, aud
upwards of 1000 arrobas of alcohol. The Arabic name signifies the place of renegadoes.


best. It is irrigated every nineteen or twenty days, being planted in “ Zorillas ” for irrigation, like cotton
and maize.
Choice of Ground.
If much sugar is to be produced, without much regard to quality, fertile lands are chosen, as containing
much short manure or vegetable earth, that the silex or sand may be very minute, and that the calcareous
matter may exceed the argilaceous—which lands the farmers (labradores) term “francos " i.e. free ; if, on
the contrary, sugar of good quality, although not in such great abundance be desired, the lands should not
contain so much vegetable matter as the former, that the silex should be grosser, and that the argilaceous
matter should greatly exceed the calcareous. Such lands are known to the cultivators by the denomination
‘‘recios ”or “fuertes” i.e ., coarse or strong.
The lands which, at a short depth from the surface, contain hard rock, or a sub-stratum of clay, or
which contain too much sand, are the worst for this kind of cultivation.
Preparation of Soil.
As the sugar cane is propagated by plants which require two years to bring it to maturity, or three
that it may be thoroughly full of juice: the land is cultivated differently according to the object of the
cultivator.
In the first case it is so simple, that the giving it a few turns with the plough (which goes little deeper
than an English pair of harrows), in the months of April and May, is sufficient; in the second, the process
is more tedious and expensive (since it is to produce on a given space in one year as much sugar, as with
the cuttings in the two of their growth), consisting in giving to land intended for “ tercio ” (third) after
taking off a different crop, two ploughings in different directions, that it may lie open and fallow to the
atmospheric influence. Every fifteen or twenty days this operation has to be repeated, until it has six or
eight ploughings before planting—augmenting the number of these in proportion as the land may be more
clayey, as being more compact, it requires more opening out —undoubtedly this is preferable to giving two
ploughings only; and in the months of January or February, they give it a trenching with the azado de
medio (hoe), to the depth of a foot, leaving the earth in large hollows that it may thus absorb more of the
atmospheric influence, and that they may extract with more facility the roots of prejudicial herbs.
On Irrigation.
The vestiges of Roman and Moorish aqueducts, form the most enduring and remarkable traces of the
colonization of two nations, who, at different remote ages, held possession of Spain. It is said that the
population of Spain during the Roman empire, amounted to 60,000,000; that under the Moors, it was
about 40,000,000; and at the end of last war, it certainly did not much exceed 9,000,000.
The scale of the different structures raised for the irrigation of the land, appears in fair proportion to
the ratio of population at these different periods. The Roman aqueducts were magnificent; those of the
Moors very considerable; while at the present day, little remains besides the practice of that irrigation,
which is found essential to raise most of the vegetable productions.


The Moors seem to have distributed the water more extensively, and with more ingenuity than the
Romans. Coming from the arid regions of Barbary, they valued water as an article of the greatest
luxury; and when by their conquests they could command labour, they filled their palaces with fountains,
and applied the art of irrigation more extensively, than perhaps any other people, except the Chinese.
The design of such works on territories to which they, who raised them were strangers, exhibits a
degree of foresight and arrangement, of which modern British colonization, in similar climates, furnishes
no instance.
In Australia, there is an ample field for the timely introduction of such works, rich soils, an irregular
although abundant supply of water, and a territory not likely to be recovered, like Spain, by its original
inhabitants.
Leaden pipes, (occasionally used by the Moors,) and cast iron pipes, and galvanized pipes, can now be
had in abundance, but still they have not been of any use in the irrigation of the land.
Works, still of magnitude, but of much easier construction, would be required in Australia when
fully peopled. 'I hese would be dams for the retention of water—machinery and pipes for distributing the
supply so retained. It is impossible to assign a limit to the capabilities of the Australian soil for the
production of whatever has been mentioned in these pages, or those more ordinary and necessary, such as
rice, maize, guinea-grass, &c., &c., &c., under good systematic arrangements for the retention of rain
water, and its economical distribution.
Common method of Raising Water for the purpose of Irrigation in Spain.
FINIS.
WELCH, PRINTER, ATLAS OFFICE, SYDNEY.


ADDENDUM.
On setting out for Spain, the author was requested by a gentleman anxious about the improvement of Australian Wools, to ask several
questions which he wrote out. These, having been referred to Her Majesty’s Consul at Malaga, and by that gentleman duly put in the
land of merinos, were answered seriatim —and the answers are annexed to this work, only as information gathered during the same
journey to which it has reference :
1. —The ewes are first given to the ram at the age of two years; but in the larger flocks the age of three years is
preferred, in order to ensure greater strength in the breed.
2. —The ewes do not cease to breed until on account of their teeth failing they are sold to the butcher, which gene-
rally occurs at the age of from eight to ten years.
3. The average weight of the fleece of an ewe of good caste is about s£lbs., and that of the ram 8£ to 91bs.
4. —Merino ewes of the best breed can easily be procured for 32 to 34 Reals of Vellon, or 6/6 to 7/ each, together
with the rams required for breeding. The law, I believe, allows one ram for every ten ewes.
5. —The age of the animal cannot have much influence on the quality of the wool; however, in order to guard
against a deterioration of the latter, great care should be had in maintaining a good stock of rams. To effect
this, it is customary to select a certain number of lambs from amongst those whose wool is finest, which
selection takes place when they are one year old, at the end of the second year another classification is
made amongst these, and a third the following year, always rejecting those whose wool has become coarser
in quality. Until the age of three years the rams are not used for breeding.
6-—The best class of Sheep Dog is that called the “ Mastin. ” They can be procured without difficulty in
Estremadura where they abound, and are of excellent caste.
