

Notes of Travel
JAMES CORMACK


NOTES OF TRAVEL


Entrance to the Shinto Temple of Yomei-mon at Nikko, Japan.


NOTES OF TRAVEL
BY
JAMES CORMACK
SHIPOWNER, LEITH
EX-CHAIRMAN OP THB CHAMBERS OF
COMMERCE OF EDINBURGH AND LEITH
With Photographs by the Author
LEITH
PRINTED AT THE “OBSERVER” OFFICE
75 Toi,booth Wynd
1912




PREFACE
I was persuaded to write these “ Notes of Travel,”
after repeated requests, by the Editor of the “ Leith
Observer,” in which paper they appeared from time
to time, as I was able to supply them. Some of
them were written at sea, and others at odd times
after my return home, from notes made in the course
of my journeys. They really cover two journeys
round the world, the first, undertaken with my wife
in 1906-07, when we travelled through Canada by
the Great Lakes, and sailed from Vancouver to Japan,
China, the Philippines, Australia, and New Zealand.
The second arose from my agreeing to the request of
the Chambers of Commerce of Edinburgh and Leith,
to represent them at the Congress of Chambers of
Commerce of the Empire, held at Sydney, New South
Wales, in September 1909. On that occasion also I
took the Western route, but instead of going by
Japan and China, which would have taken much
longer, I sailed from Vancouver in the R.M.S. Marama
for Australia, visiting on the way Honolulu, the
principal towns of the Sandwich Islands, and Suva,
the chief town of the Fijian Group. On joining
the Marama I was fortunate in finding among my
fellow voyagers a number of Canadian and other


friends bound for the Congress, whose pleasant com-
panionship across the Pacific and afterwards was to
me a source of much enjoyment and of happy
retrospect. In Australia we were the guests of the
Chambers of Commerce, of whose kindness and
courtesy it would be impossible to speak too highly.
But I must let the notes speak for themselves. I
will only add that I feel it a very great advantage to
have seen so much of Greater Britain beyond the
seas. If in any 7 degree I have been able to extend
among our people at home the knowledge and
appreciation of these vast dominions, I shall be more
than repaid for any trouble the preparation of these
notes has cost me.
EDINBURGH
December 1912.


CONTENTS
PREFACE v
CHAPTER I
CANADA
In the Heart of the Canadian Rockies—The Journey West-
ward—Quebec and Montreal—Railway Development —
Evidences of Prosperity Crops Dairy Farming—
Exshaw Cement Works—Banff—The Rockies—The
National Park Laggan The Track Westward
Salmon-Catching by Red Indians—Vancouver—Salmon
Canneries at Lake Island—Placidity of Japanese Babies
—The Grand Trunk Railroad I
CHAPTER II
VANCOUVER TO BRISBANE
Vancouver Island—Victoria—The Hawaian Islands—Hono-
lulu—Shark Fishing—Sugar Growing—The Islanders—
Queen Liliuokalani—Fanning Island—“ Crossing the
Line” —Fiji and its Inhabitants—Suva—A Carnegie
Library—The Great Barrier Reef 14
CHAPTER 111
AUSTRALIA
Captain Cook’s Voyages—Early Settlements—Coastline and
Area—Queensland —Brisbane—Chambers of Commerce
Meeting—Sugar Growing—Kanaka Labour —Mount
Morgan—Gympie—Rockhampton—The Darling Downs
—Railways 24


CHAPTER IV
NEW SOUTH WALES
Founding of the Colony—Sydney and its Harbour—lts
Wealth in Sheep —Sheep Shearing—lce Company—
Engineering Works Mort’s Docks Hawkesbury
Agricultural College Prosperity under Protective
Tariffs—Coal Mining 33
CHAPTER V
THE INTERIOR
Exploration—Storage of Water-Irrigation—Water Supply
of Western Australia—Mildura—Melbourne—Victorian
Railway Workshops —General Assembly—Simplicity
and Cheapness of Transfer of Land and Buildings—
Tasmania Lauceston Hobart Fruit Growing
Apple Blossom—Franklin Monument—Botanic Gardens
Fish Hatcheries —Adelaide—Sheep Shearing—Vine-
yards and Fruit 41
CHAPTER VI
INDIA
Colombo—The Indian as Trader—Kandy—The Temple of
the Tooth—Open Air Preaching—Botanical Gardens—
The Cingalese—Calcutta—A Comparatively Modern
City—The Scottish Churches College —Darjeeling—
Railway Travelling Our “Bearer” Benares Its
Pilgrims—The Burning Ghat—The Golden Temple—
The Monkey Temple—St George’s Church—Girls’
School —The Bazaars—Lucknow—The Residency and
its Defence Cawnpore Delhi Remains of Older
Cities—The Mughal Emperors—Mutations of Power—
Kutab Minar—The Flagstaff Tower Architectural
Beauties—Memorials of the Mutiny—A Jain Temple—
The Observatory—Agra—The Taj Mahal—The Bazaars
—Primitive Methods of Industry—Jaipur—Old City of
Amer—Brass Work—Bombay—Part of a Royal Dowry—


Malabar Hill—The Wilson College—The Towers of
Silence —Educational Defects—Gaekwar of Baroda on
Education 5 1
CHAPTER VIII
JAPAN
Fujiyama—Yokohama—Japanese Politeness—Jinrickishas
—Traders—The Spade doing the Work of the Plough—
The Diabatsu—Buddhism and Shintoism —The Temples
at Nikko—Japanese Indifference to Religion—Lake
Chuzenji Hot Springs—Physical Training Pawn -
broking and Safe Deposits—Jap Household Arrange-
ment—Self-Restraint and Contented Appearance of the
People—Love of Flowers—lndustries—Cloisonne and
Lacquer Work—Shipbuilding Development—Jap Pas-
senger Services —Warships—A Japanese Theatre—The
National Music—Characteristics of the People—Com-
mercial Morality—Japan and Korea The British
Japanese Alliance—lnfluence of Japan in the Far
East 83
CHAPTER IX
NEW ZEALAND
Introductory—Auckland—Mount Eden —Shops and Prices
The Three Islands—Early Discoverers and Settlers —
The Maoris—A Maori Village and Fort—Te Wairoa—
The Pink and White Terraces—Hamurana—Farming
—Sheep the Principal Wealth—The Wanganui River—
Wellington and the Houses of Parliament—Area and
Population of the Colony Rabbits Gold Mining
—Acclimatisation of Game Birds, Animals, and Fish—
Railway Travelling—The Trend in Legislation—Arbitra-
tion Courts in Labour Disputes—Aggressiveness of
Trade Unions —Dunedin—New Zealand Trees—The
Southern Alps—Lakes of the Middle Island—Trout
Fishing Milford Sound The Sutherland Fall
Climate of New Zealand in




ILLUSTRATIONS
Facing Page
ENTRANCE TO THE SHINTO TEMPLE OF YOMEI-MON
Frontis•
AT NIKKO, JAPAN piece
HONG KONG: CHINESE JUNK IN ROADS. . . 16
HONG KONG FROM THE ROADS, WITH THE PEAK IN
THE BACKGROUND 22
MELBOURNE : THE HOUSES OF THE COMMONWEALTH
PARLIAMENT 44
TEMPLE OF THE TOOTH AT KANDY (BUDDHIST) . 52
BENARES : THE RIVER GANGES WHERE THE PILGRIMS
BATHE . 5S
THE RUINED RESIDENCY, LUCKNOW ... 62
THE CASHMERE GATE, DELHI, FROM THE OUTSIDE . 64
THE DIWAN-I-KHAS, OR COURT OF PRIVATE AUDIENCE
IN THE PALACE, DELHI 66
GENERAL JOHN NICHOLSON’S MONUMENT, DELHI . 68
THE TAJ-MAHAL, AGRA . . ' . . . 72
LEAVING THE OLD CITY OF AMER WITH THE FORT
IN BACKGROUND (RAJPCTANA) ... 76
OUTSIDE THE CITY OF NAGOYA, STARTING FOR A
RICKISHA RIDE (japan) 84
KIOTO, JAPAN ; ENTRANCE TO THE TEMPLE CHION-
1N (BUDDHIST) 92
A GROUP ROUND THE TRAVELLERS IN FRONT OF
TEMPLE AT KIOTO, JAPAN .... 96
WYNDHAM, NEW ZEALAND ; JOHN BEGG’S FARM IN
OTAGO 126
PISHING CAMP AT MOUTH OF THE WAIAU, NEW
ZEALAND, IN GROVE OF CABBAGE TREES . 134




Banff Springs Hotel,
ALTA
9th August 1909.
It is only a fortnight to-day since I left Edin-
burgh, and yet here 1 am in the heart of the Canadian
Rockies, and in the midst of scenery at once so
grand and beautiful that any description must fail
to convey an adequate impression of it. “Sunny
Alberta ” is not a mere name, as here we are literally
basking in sunshine, with the bluest of skies over-
head. To get here, one has to traverse nearly 3000
miles of ocean and river, and then from Montreal
to Banff there is a land journey of 2335 miles.
The sea voyage, as I experienced it in the fine
triple screw turbine steamer Virginian, of the Allan
Line, was enjoyable and invigorating. Everything
on board was most comfortable; and the attend-
ance and table all that could be desired. The
route was by the Straits of Belle-isle, and as we
entered the Straits in the early morning, the weather
being fine and clear, it was a beautiful sight to see
the icebergs, to the number of about a hundred,
A
NOTES OF TRAVEL
I
CANADA


large and small, which had drifted into the narrow
waters between Labrador and Newfoundland on
their voyage from the Arctic to the south. A stop
of an hour or so occurred at Rimuski to land
mails, and the voyage was again resumed, not
again stopping till we reached Quebec, a city of
splendid memories as well as grand situation. From
the walls of the Citadel which crowns the heights,
I could trace with the help of a Canadian artillery-
man the operations by which General Wolfe, with
a small but fine fighting force, both military and
naval, defeated the French under Montcalm, and
settled once for all the long-contested question
whether Canada was to belong to France or Britain.
The Province of Quebec is mainly peopled by
French Canadians, and the appearance of the country
testifies to their thrift and industry in the cultiva-
tion of the soil. The present able and popular
Premier, Sir Wilfrid Laurier, whom I saw in Montreal
a few days ago looking remarkably well, was formerly
a lawyer in Quebec, and is by birth a French
Canadian. Trade in Quebec, so far as shipping is
concerned, does not seem to be so important as it
once was. Though it has a splendid system of
railways, and occupies the position it does on what
is probably the finest waterway in the world, Montreal
has far surpassed it as a seaport. I have been told
that this is due in no small measure to labour
troubles at the docks and quays. Fortunately for
all concerned, these difficulties were met in a very
different manner at Montreal, and an Employers’
Federation formed about seven years ago, by means


of which peace has been since assured. Most of
the large steamers now go up to Montreal to dis-
charge and load. Large sums of money have been
spent on dredging and rounding of corners in the
river. Vast elevators have been erected for grain,
and the Dominion Government has wisely done
much to make the lighting and marking of the
St Lawrence good, and to reduce the cost of water
transit by canals from the Great Lakes to the sea-
ports. Thus the grain grown in the Far West is
brought to the place of shipment at a surprisingly
low cost.
There can be no doubt, too, that the railways,
such as the Canadian Pacific and Grand Trunk,
have been well managed. It is marvellous what
the C.P.R. in particular has done and is doing in
the way of opening up the country. Besides its
main line from the Atlantic to the Pacific, on which
it runs each way two passenger trains daily, the
Imperial Limited and the Pacific Express, it has
made and is making numerous lines whereby the
outlying districts are brought into connection with
the seaports. It owns 10,239 miles of railway
track, which it is continually extending, and operates
13,112 miles. Then it has an ocean service of splen-
did steamers both on the Atlantic and Pacific, the
latter running to Japan and China, as far as Hong-
Kong; also steamers on the Great Lakes, and fine
hotels at Quebec, Montreal, Winnipeg, Banff,
Glacier, Vancouver, Victoria, etc. The Pacific
express, by which I travelled from Montreal, arrived
up to time here after its long journey of 2336 miles,


occupying about three days and four nights. It
consisted of ten cars, including dining car. Each
car has an attendant, a coloured man, to look after
the comfort of the passengers, and nothing could
he better than the attention received. The dining
car is served entirely by white men. Two things
strike a stranger in the appearance of the train—
one is the great length of the cars (from 70 to 80
feet), and the other is the great height and power
of the locomotives. It is a surprise to see the
enormous loads these engines draw. In one freight
train which passed us near Winnipeg, I counted fifty-
eight cars. The engines are huilt by the C.P.R. at
their works in Montreal, and are made for work,
though they have not the fine finish and upkeep
of our home locomotives. Scotch-huilt engines
were said to last longer, and required less repairs,
hut they cost more with the import duty, and are
now seldom ordered.
Everywhere in this country one sees evidences
of prosperity and advancement. The cities grow
in population with a rapidity which astonishes one
from the old country. Montreal now claims about
half-a-million inhabitants; Toronto not much short
of it. Winnipeg, which about twenty-seven years
ago was only a trading station of the Hudson Bay
Company, is now a city of 118,250 inhabitants.
Vancouver, the terminus of the C.P.R. on the
Pacific, now embraces a population of 80,000 —
about three times what it had seven years ago.
And now a few words as to the crops. The
general report is that the prospects never were


better. Cutting was begun in some places, and
everywhere along the route one sees the reapers
and binders laid out ready for use. The thresh-
ing is done on the field by steam machines, and
with a speed that is hardly conceivable, the grain
which to-day is in the field is, so to speak, to-morrow,
if not in the oven, on its way to the elevator or
on the rails. Small elevators for temporary storage
are numerous along the lines, and at such points
as Fort William and Port Arthur, on the north-
west shores of Lake Superior, the railway companies
have built enormous elevators, constructed of steel
and Portland cement, to house the grain till wanted.
Steamers lie alongside and receive the grain from
shoots, without any handling. While grain growing,
on account of the ease with which it is managed
in this fertile land, is rapidly increasing, I regret
to find that butter and cheese, the produce of dairy
farming, do not keep pace with it. Indeed, these
valuable industries appear for the present to be
decreasing. The main reason, so far as I can learn,
is that dairy farming requires more regular and
constant work, and people here want quick returns
and less work. It is to be hoped that Canadian
butter and cheese, so justly famed in our markets,
will receive more attention in future. Of course,
Canada, with her increasing population, requires
more of these articles for home use; but, allowing
for that, Canadians should see to it that they don’t
lose a trade which they can so well maintain.
Exshaw lies about thirty miles east of Banff,
on the C.P.R. main line in the valley of the Bow,


between the river and the mountains. The situation,
though beautiful, has been chosen for reasons more
utilitarian, namely, the supply of rock calcium car-
bonate of the best quality for the making of Portland
cement. Rock, shale, and coal, the three necessary
constituents, are here, and in the immediate neigh-
bourhood, in abundant supply, with a plentiful
water supply. To-day Exshaw, though it only
began its existence about four years ago, contains,
besides the large and splendidly-equipped cement
works, two churches, a hotel, a school-house, a store,
and about a hundred houses, with a population of
somewhere about 300 to 400. It owes its existence
to the Western Canada Cement and Coal Company,
Ltd., who determined that their works should have
no superior anywhere. Portland cement seems so
common an article, that it comes as a surprise to
find that its manufacture, if a high quality is re-
quired, involves the application of science in a high
degree. Here, the standard must not vary a tenth
of 1 per cent. The perfection of the machinery
reminded me a good deal of the roller mill process
of flour making. Chemists are at work constantly
testing the products. The heat required to be
maintained in the great rotatory kilns is 3000 degs.
Fahr.; anything above or below that affecting the
results unfavourably. At present the output is
about 1800 barrels per day, and soon it may be
up to 2000. In a country where labour is dear,
the uses to which Portland cement are put are
very numerous. Sir Sandford Fleming, one of
Canada’s grand old men, is president of the company.


He has made his mark on Canada as a great railway
engineer, and in the course of his career made the
first survey for carrying the C.P.R through the
Rockies. Like many other of Canada’s leading
men, Sir Sandford is a Scotsman.
Before leaving Banff, it is necessary to make
a few remarks on this, one of the most delightful
health resorts in Canada, a country which abounds
in such. I have already referred to the grandeur
of the scenery. In whatever direction one looks,
the views are splendid. The lower mountains are
clothed with rich dark green, behind and above
which rise in endless succession and variety heights
which form the jagged profiles of what are well
called the Rockies. These mountains are tremendous
uplifts of stratified rocks, broken out of the crust
of the earth, and slowly reared aloft. The strata
show at every possible angle, the abrupt, perpen-
dicular faces being mostly towards the east. When
lighted up by the early morning sun, as I saw them
when approaching them from the prairie, the effect
was entrancing. Just beside the hotel is the Sulphur
Mountain, 8030 feet high. About 1000 feet above
the hotel a hot sulphur spring issues from the side
of the mountain, and on the other side, lower down,
there are other similar springs. Near to these
baths have been provided, which are much used
by visitors. There is a remarkable formation at
the lower spring. Entering by a tunnel, you come
to a great dome-shaped cavern, with a large pool
of water, now almost quiescent, but from which
evidently at one time must have issued a column


of hot water, finding a vent from the top of the
dome, which opens to the sky. In the immediate
vicinity are the Bow River and the Spray. The
former forms a beautiful fall close to the hotel, the
waters being of a pale green colour, as is usual in
glacial rivers. There are some delightful drives
in the neighbourhood, and the great Canadian
National Park is close to, in which a herd of
buffaloes, moose deer, mountain sheep, and other
wild animals are preserved. This is said to be the
largest national reservation in the world, being
5732 square miles in extent. The immense herds
of buffaloes which used to roam the plains have
disappeared, and one can only imagine what they
must have been from the remaining specimens
here preserved.
About thirty-five miles west of Banff, and that
distance further into the mountains, is a station
called Laggan. Here I left the train to visit one
of several beautiful lakes in the neighbourhood,
namely, Lake Louise. The C.P.R. have built a
chalet or hotel near the lakeside, the view from
which is very striking. High and precipitous
mountains hem in the lake on its two sides. Across
the head, at almost right angles, stretches a high
range of mountains covered with ice and snow,
and 11,355 feet high, and sloping down to the
head of the lake is the Victoria Glacier, the water
from which feeds the lake and gives it that beautiful
green colour for which it is noted. The play of
light and shade, and the changing colours on the
surface of the water, form an endless source of en


joyment. The glacier may be reached by a path
cut along the one side of the lake, or a row boat
can be erot to the head of the lake, and the rest of
O }
the way continued on foot. The altitude of Lake
Louise is 5670 feet. Mirror Lake, 6655 feet up the
mountain, Lake Agnes, the Lake of the Clouds,
and others can be visited from this centre.
Resuming my journey to Vancouver, the railway
track leads through some of the most magnificent
mountain scenery, range upon range being traversed,
in places through miles of snow sheds and over
deep canons, until it emerges at a much lower level
at Revelstroke, the northern gateway to the mining
district of the Kootenay. From Revelstroke the
line follows the course of the Thomson and Fraser
Rivers, through—for the most part forest-clad
mountains. As we passed, I could see at many
places the Indians busy catching salmon. They
had little stages of wood hung over the face of
a big rock, on which they stood, and, with a bag
net on the end of a pole, they scooped up the fish
from the river. Close by were their tents and
frameworks of wood whereon the fish, 'after being
cleansed, were exposed to the sun and dried for
later use. The old instinct predisposes the red
man to fishing and hunting much more than to
steady work. Hence few of them are to be found
engaging in any industrial work.
About twenty-four hours after leaving Laggan
we steamed into the station of Vancouver, the
western terminus of the C.P.R., finely situated on
the south shore of the Burrard Inlet, and with one


of the finest of harbours. The rise of Vancouver
City since the railway reached it has been very
rapid, and there can be no doubt it has a great
future before it as a commercial and industrial
centre. Handsome buildings, conspicuous among
which is the new Post Office, and the Canadian
Bank of Commerce, are in evidence; new avenues
of streets are being opened up on what recently
was forest land, as one sees from the blackened
stumps of trees still sticking up in many places
presently suburban, but not likely long to remain
so.. These and many other things testify to the
rapidly expanding importance of this city, which
aspires to be the Liverpool of the Pacific.
The extent and value of the salmon fisheries
to British Columbia may be inferred from the fact
that last year over twenty-six millions of salmon
were tinned, besides that disposed of fresh, smoked,
and salted, the total value being about 4| million
dollars, or about £875,000. Yet last year was not
a good year. Hearing that the fish were “running
well,” and the opportunity offering of seeing the
large canneries in full swing, I went with some
friends by electric rail from Vancouver to Lulu
Island, and saw the whole process, from the fish
being taken from the nets to the storage of the
piles of bright tins waiting only for the labels to
be ready for export. We visited two canneries.
In the first, 25,000 fish were that day being dis-
posed of, and in the second, 40,000. The workers
employed are Chinese, Japs, and natives of India.
Where such large numbers of fish have to be dealt


with, the work goes on at high pressure. Many
of the workers are women, whose duty it is to
fill the tins with fish. Several of the Jap women
had babies tied on their backs while they worked,
the little black heads and brown faces looking over
their mothers’ shoulders and apparently quite content
with their lot. I had often, when in Japan, re-
marked the happy indifference of the Jap children
to such conditions. They seem to be blessed with
a placidity of disposition to which European children
are generally strangers. I do not think I ever
heard a Jap child cry. It seems part of their nature
and education to control their feelings even from
infancy.
There are about forty canneries on the coast,
from which fact some idea may be had of the
large total number of fish dealt with. The most
of the fish are caught in traps, which are large
enclosures or entanglements made of wire netting;
but the boats, numbering 2000 or more, on the
Fraser River, also bring in large numbers caught
with the ordinary nets. From 200 to 400 fish per
boat is a fair morning’s catch. The fish are dark
red in the flesh, and run very evenly in size and
weight, about seven to eight pounds each being the
average. This renders the use of machinery easier
than it would otherwise be. This, indeed, is what
strikes one in the whole business, next to the
number of fish, namely, the extent to which
machinery is made to do the work and save hand
labour, But for this, it would be impossible te
deal with the enormous number of fish. From


the time the fish leave the boats till they reach
the store in tins, hand labour does but a small
part of the work. One machine cuts off the heads
and tails, guts, cleans, washes, and cuts into pieces
to fit the tins. Women then fill the tins, after
which other machines remove, close, solder, wash,
and weigh them; after which they are tested in
hot water for leaks, then transported to the steam
cooker, where they remain for about half-an-hour.
Another testing in hot water, pricking, and soldering,
followed by another washing, and they then pass
to the labelling room and store, ready for export
to all parts of the world. The whole process occupies
about an hour. The capital invested in the industry
is large, and employment at good wages is afforded
to a large number of people. In the larger of the
two canneries visited, about four hundred were
employed.
Next in importance to the salmon fisheries of
British Columbia are those of halibut and herring,
about million pounds of the former being got
last year, and 19J million pounds of the latter. The
quality of the herring, whether fresh, salted, or
kippered, is, I consider, inferior to our Scotch
lierring.
Canada is so vast a country, and its resources
so enormous, that it is not possible in the compass
of a letter to do more than touch the fringe of
the subject; but before closing I might refer to
the great undertaking being carried on by the
•Grand Trunk Railway in the new line called the
Grand Trunk Pacific, which, when finished, will


provide a second through route from the Atlantic
to the Pacific. A considerable part of the line is
already constructed, but the more difficult part
through the mountains on the west is still to be
built, and though two years is the time spoken of,
I doubt whether twice that time will see it done.
The future terminus of the line on the Pacific
is Prince Rupert, 550 miles north of Vancouver,
where already a town is growing up, and building
sites are being largely dealt in. The Canadian
Government has greatly helped forward this under-
taking, and facilitated the raising of the necessary
capital by guaranteeing payment of interest, and
in other ways. There is no doubt this railway will,
when completed, open up important districts of
country in the north-west which are at present
remote from railway communications.


II
VANCOUVER TO BRISBANE
R.M.S. “Marama,”
2Srd August 1909,
At Sea, South Pacific.
From Vancouver the Canadian Pacific Railway
Company run a line of steamers carrying mails to
Japan and China. These steamers, all “ Empresses,”
are finely appointed, and the Chinese servants on
board are excellent. Dressed in white and blue,
with black silk caps while waiting at table, they
attend well to the comfort of passengers, and slip
about in a quiet and unobtrusive manner to which
we Europeans are too little accustomed. Having
decided, however, on the present occasion, to go
by the direct route to Australia, I took the Union
Company of New Zealand’s steamer “ Marama,”
leaving Vancouver on 13th August, for Sydney,
the voyage being over 7000 miles in length.
Among the passengers, numbering in the
saloon about 150—there were about thirty dele-
gates to the Congress of Chambers of Commerce
of the Empire, of which quite half the number
were Canadians and the rest from the United
Kingdom. The Union Company run in connec-
tion with the Canadian Pacific Railway, and are
an important link in the “all red route” round


the world. A look at the map will show that
Vancouver City is on the mainland, and, lying
along the coast for a distance of over 300 miles,
is the island of the same name. The island is
rich in coal, copper, wood, etc., and at the south
end of it is the city of Victoria, the capital of the
State of British Columbia. The sail down the
strait between the island and the mainland for
about eighty miles is very interesting, and reminded
one occasionally of some parts of the lower reaches
of the Firth of Clyde. The range of mountains
named Olympic appear to shut in the southern
passage, while to the south-east one sees the huge
snow-white bulk of Mount Baker, in the State of
Washington, U.S.
Victoria prides itself on being very English-
like. Certainly it is an attractive city, with fine
villas scattered over the beautiful suburbs, and can
boast of as fine a pile of Parliament Buildings as
are to be found anywhere in Canada. The C.P.R.,
with their usual enterprise, have built a splendid
hotel there. The naval station of Esquimalt, lately
taken over by the Canadian Government, is access-
ible by electric car from Victoria. The dry dock
and repairing shops are well protected by a neck
of land, and being so near the Pacific Ocean is
a decided advantage for naval purposes.
HAWAIA.
“No alien land in all the world has any deep,
strong charm for me but that one; no other land
could as longingly and beseechingly haunt me


sleeping and waking through half a lifetime as
that one has done.”
Allowing for the poetical fervour of these words of
Mark Twain, it is undeniable that no one can visit
these beautiful Hawaian islands, set like gems in the
midst of the Pacific, without sharing in some degree
at least the fascination expressed by the poet. The
rich, tropical foliage, the brilliance, variety, and
abundance of the flowers, the graceful palms, bam-
boos, and other trees which shade the roads and
gardens, the beautiful villas, and the warm, balmy
air, tempered by the sea breezes, combine to make
this an earthly paradise. In front is the sea,
breaking on the coral reefs, and landward the
mountains form a fine background to a picture
which the memory dwells upon long after it has
been left behind. There are fifteen or sixteen
islands in all, the largest being Hawaii, on which
is situated Honolulu, the chief town. The town
is in a bay, protected by a coral reef at a distance
of about a mile and a half from the shore. The
insects which produce these reefs have fortunately
seen fit to leave gaps in their breakwaters, which
serve to allow ships to pass in or out. While the
Marama lay in the offing, waiting for the doctor
to arrive for the examination of passengers and
crew, some of the sailors engaged in shark fishing.
A number of sharks could be seen swimming just
under the surface, and I watched with interest
the result. A hook the size of those seen in a
butcher’s shop, baited with a piece of meat and
attached with a piece of chain to a stout rope,


Hong Kong: Chinese Junk in Roads.


was the tackle used. Very soon the bait was
seized. The shark fought savagely, hut, being
well hooked, and a dozen strong arms hauling
on the rope, he came slowly up, and on being
landed on deck he was seen to be about six feet
long. Though numerous outside, sharks are said
never to come inside the reef. Hence sea-bathing
is a favourite amusement, and in the harbour,
where the water is very clear and deep, quite a
number of natives dived and swam for our enter-
tainment. By the way, sharks seem to be of a
discriminating turn of mind, as they are said to
avoid a black or brown skin in favour of the white.
As seen from the offing, the skyline of the islands
is very picturesque. The mountains rise to a great
height—in one instance at least to 13,000 feet—
and not far from Honolulu is the crater of an
extinct volcano of enormous dimensions. The
whole islands are volcanic in origin. The sides
of some of the islands are deeply scarred, and it
is easy to trace the lines formed by the lava and
ashes of eruptions in past ages.
Before reaching Honolulu we passed the island
called Molokai, on which is the leper settlement
associated with Father Damien, the Roman Catholic
priest who devoted his life to the care of these poor
afflicted people, and who at last fell a victim to
the disease. Such heroism deserves to be kept in
remembrance.
Honolulu is not deficient in amusements. There
is also a fine polo ground, and a large number of
automobiles. The roads are good. The Aquarium


contains the most wonderful collection of curious
fishes I have ever seen. The shapes, colours, and
variety were a revelation of the wonders of the
deep in that part of the world.
Sugar growing is the largest industry in the
islands. Over 500,000 tons of sugar were shipped
last year to the United States. Pine-apples, bananas,
and almost all other tropical fruits are grown in
abundance. The canning and export of pine-apples
is carried on largely. The natives are physically
a fine race. They are brown or copper-coloured,
and reminded me of the Maories of New Zealand,
whom they greatly resemble. It seems probable
that they were originally the same. They have
greatly decreased in number during the last century,
being now only a tenth of what they were in
1800. They presently number from 25,000 to
30,000. Japanese and Chinese are found here
in large numbers. It was in 1898 that these
islands came under the sovereignty of the United
States of America, and in 1900 Hawaii became a
self-governing territory of the United States. I
remember well seeing the last native sovereign,
Queen Liliuokalani, in Westminster Abbey, at the
service held on the occasion of our late Queen’s
Jubilee in 1887. I was struck by her queenly
bearing, even among so many Royal personages.
I could not but entertain a feeling of regret and
sympathy with her, in being deprived of her crown.
It is said that Great Britain might have had these
islands at one time if she had liked.
Leaving Honolulu, which is 2427 miles from


Vancouver, our next stopping-place was Fanning
Island, 1050 miles from Hawaii, in long. 160|
W. x4° north of the Equator. This is a coral
island, about ten miles long by four or five broad,
in the form of a horse shoe, with a lagoon in the
middle. It rises no great height above the sea,
and is covered with palms and other trees. The
chief produce and article of export of the island
is copra — i.e., dried cocoa-nut. Fanning Island
was discovered and taken possession of by a Captain
English, about the year 1700. It remained in the
possession of his family for many years, until,
through financial difficulties, it was sold to its present
possessor, who was formerly a French missionary,
but who abandoned the Church for the business
of a planter and trader. He'had to become a British
subject before he could get the island. Its principal
importance arises from the fact that it is the mid-
Pacific station of the Pacific cable, established six
years ago, and upheld at the joint expense of Great
Britain, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. It
is therefore an important link in the “all red”
cable line, which is the longest cable in the world,
being 4000 miles in length. A barrier of coral
reef encircles the island, on which the long white
roll of the breakers is seen. The inhabitants consist
of forty or fifty natives and the staff of the cable,
besides a doctor and the owner. The natives are
of the Polynesian type, and seem to be a simple
and happy sort of people. Though so isolated, the
dwellers on Fanning are well posted up in news from
both east and west; and we received here a good


batch of telegraphic reports of passing events. The
mail steamers call at Fanning once every two months.
The day after leaving Fanning Island, 25th
August, we crossed the Equator at 10 a.m., long.
161 \ W. But for the fine breeze of the north-
easterly trade wind, the heat would have been
much more oppressive than it was. The old-
fashioned ceremonies attending crossing the line
are seldom enacted now, but among the amusements
of the day was a pillow fight over a big bath of
salt water formed by a sail and filled by the hose.
The combatants were seated face to face astride a
spar, and belaboured each other with pillows till
one or both tumbled over into the water. On a
voyage of twenty-four days, any little amusement
is welcome; and yet, with numerous deck games—
for which a committee and secretary are duly ap-
pointed at the beginning of the voyage, and prizes
ultimately awarded with all due ceremony, the
time passes wonderfully quickly.
Distant from Fanning Island 1914 miles, we
come to the Fijian group of islands, not a little
resembling the Hawaian group, but somewhat smaller
in extent. High mountain ranges with peaks of
wonderful forms rising to heights of 4000 feet,
meet the eye as the islands are approached. Here
also coral reefs form an outer barrier round the
islands, inside of which we could see the native
fishers at work. Fifty years ago the inhabitants
were cannibals. To-day they are as quiet and well-
behaved people as can be seen anywhere. They
are of the Papuan race, dark brown in colour, of


remarkably good physique, and with a fine, bold,
independent bearing. The remarkable style of
wearing the hair is quite a feature in their appear-
ance. It stands straight out six or eight inches,
like a great mop, and, though the effect to our
eyes is rather comical, it seems not altogether un-
becoming to their style of beauty. The men wear
a light cotton jacket and a short undergarment
very like a kilt, the latter varying in colour accord-
ing to the taste of the wearer. The native police
look very smart in their blue tunics and white kilts,
with vandyked edges. The women wear printed
cotton dresses not unlike what we know at home
as wrappers, though many of the younger girls, I
noticed, wore white dresses after the fashion of
Europeans. The population of the islands is about
125,000, of which 91,000 are Fijians. They speak
English, and are polite and courteous to visitors.
They have their own ideas about employment, and,
as the working in the sugar plantations does not
suit their fancy, a large number, said to be 25,000
to 40,000, of natives of India are engaged in this
work. They come in under a five years’ engage-
ment, and it is said that many of them remain to
work on their own account when their term is
expired. Until 1882 the chief town was Levuka,
but since then Suva holds that position. Suva is
situated in a bay, and presents a very pretty picture
from the sea, the slopes of the hills being dotted
with houses, usually white, with green or red roofs,
among the beautiful foliage of palms, oranges, and
bananas. In one of the streets near the sea front


I noticed a building unlike any of the others, of
stone, with heavy pillars in front, and on the front
in big letters were the words “ Carnegie Library.”
As it was closed, the time being evening, I had
not the opportunity of making an inspection of
the interior, or of learning how far it was taken
advantage of. Many beautiful birds are seen here,
among them being humming birds of the most
brilliant and delicate plumage. Exquisite corals
and shells are exposed for sale by natives on the
quay, and plenty of fruit of the kinds usual in
these localities. The chief industries are the sugar
growing, for which the country is very well adapted,
and the making of copra for export.
From Suva our course was shaped for Brisbane,
1550 miles distant, and on the evening of the fourth
day we came in sight of the Australian coast. In
these latitudes the day seems to come more quickly
to a close than it does at home; but the sunsets
are often very beautiful, and such there was when
we made the Australian coast. The entrance to
Brisbane from the sea is circuitous, and a long detour
has to be made before the river mouth is reached.
What is called the Great Barrier Reef extends from
Thursday Island in Torres Straits down the Australian
coast to Brisbane. With a good pilot on board,
steamers coming south can take the inside passage
quite safely, as I found on a former occasion when
on a voyage from Hong Kong to Sydney. Four
hours after getting the pilot on board we were
moored alongside the wharf at Pinkenba, in the
Brisbane River, about five or six miles below the


Hong Kong from the Roads, with the Peak in the background.


city. Queensland, and Brisbane, its capital, will
form the subject of a further letter. Meantime, I
may add that a voyage across the Pacific in such
a ship as the Marama, and with a captain and officers
such as she has, is a most agreeable experience.
Every attention was paid to the comfort and enjoy-
ment of passengers, and from first to last the voyage
was a happy and memorable one.


III
AUSTRALIA
In one of the public parks of Sydney there stands
a fine statue in memory of one who well deserves
to be held in remembrance by the British people
both in the old country and in the new. It is
that of Captain James Cook, who in the year 1770
landed in Australia and took possession of the whole
eastern coast “ In right of His Majesty King George
the Third.” Captain Cook had been commissioned
to proceed to Otahiete to observe the transit of
Venus and from there to proceed to ascertain whether
the unexplored part of the Southern Hemisphere
was only an immense mass of water or contained
another continent. The ship he commanded was
H.M.S. Endeavour, a barque of 370 tons. What
great deeds these brave old navigators did in the
little ships of their day! In 1769 Captain Cook
discovered New Zealand, and then, sailing westward
about 1200 miles, he sighted Australia. Having
discovered Botany Bay, a little to the south of the
inlet called Port Jackson, but now the harbour of
Sydney, he sailed along the coast northward, and,
passing through Torres Straits, directed his course
to England.
The existence of a great south land was known


to Europeans before Captain Cook’s voyage, but it
was a “ terra incognita.” Marco Polo (1254-1324)
refers to a land called Java Major, which, there is
little doubt, was Australia, but even as late as 1688
it was a matter of doubt whether it joined Asia,
Africa, or America. Captain Cook having in 1770
taken possession of the eastern side, it was not till
1825 that a settlement was formed at St George’s
Sound in the south-west, and in 1829 Captain
Freeman tie hoisted the British flag at the mouth
of the Swan River in Western Australia, or New
Holland as it was then called, which was not in-
cluded in the territory of New South Wales. Thus
in 1829 the whole continent of Australia became
a dependency of the British Crown. In 1786 the
Colony of New South Wales had been founded,
and in 1788 Governor Philip founded the city
of Sydney. A splendid monument to his memory
occupies a fine position in the Botanic Gardens,
from which a beautiful view of the famous harbour
is obtained.
The next State formed was Tasmania, in 1825,
and Western Australia in 1829. Then South Aus-
tralia in 1834, Victoria in 1851, Queensland in 1859,
and the Northern Territory in 1863. In January
1901 these seven States became federated under the
name of the Commonwealth of Australia, the late
Marquis of Linlithgow, then Lord Hopetoun, being
the first Governor-General.
Australia has a coastline of 11,310 miles, to which
that of Tasmania (904 miles) has to be added. It
has an area of 2,974,581 square miles, or about


twenty - five times that of the United Kingdom,
being as large as the United States of America,
exclusive of Alaska. The population in 1907 was
4,197,037, so that over this vast area there were
then only about as many people as there are in
Scotland. It hardly needs to be said, therefore,
that more people is Australia’s most pressing need,
both for the development and defence of the country.
I have thought it well to preface my Australian
Notes with the above, as I believe there is, generally
speaking, too little known in this country of that
great land lying under the Southern Cross, which,
next to Canada, is the largest territory in the Greater
Britain beyond the seas.
The Brisbane Chamber of Commerce had pre-
pared not only a welcome for the delegates, but a
series of journeys into Central Queensland. Here
is the first day’s programme:—
10 a.m.—Reception by Mayor and Council at Town
Hall.
11.30 a.m.—Reception and lunch by Chamber of
Commerce.
3 p.m.—J übilee Municipal reception and celebration
at Exhibition Hall and Gardens.
8 p.m. —State banquet at Parliament House.
11.30 p.m.—Leave by special train for the north.
Our visit happened to coincide with the Jubilee
of the Constitution of Queensland as a separate State,
it having been till then known as the Moreton Bay
District of N.S.W. We were thus enabled to take


part in the celebration of that event. Brisbane,,
which is now a city of 80,000 inhabitants, is plea-
santly situated on both sides of the river. It is
well built, and has a spacious, substantial, and
prosperous air about it. The Botanic Gardens are
beautiful, and though it was then but early spring,
they were brilliant with flowers, the palms and
other tropical trees lending a pleasant variety te
the scene. Brisbane is the seat of the State Govern-
ment, with its Parliament, Governor, Deputy-
Governor, etc. The present State Premier, Mr
Kidston, is a Scotsman, who in his early days
came from Falkirk, and he was pleased to welcome
a “brither Scot” from Edinburgh and Leith. Queens-
land is one of the largest States in the Common-
wealth, and, possessing great natural resources, is
coming rapidly to the front, offering a good field
for new settlements and industrial enterprises. It
has a variety of climate, plentiful rainfall, extensive-
forests, fine pastoral and agricultural lands, and
rich mineral deposits. What is required more than
anything else is labour to develop these resources.
Here is a territory of 670,500 square miles, with
a population of only 560,000, and merely fraction-
ally developed. The growing of sugar cane, for
which the middle and northern districts are well
adapted, is an industry of great importance. But
it is one requiring labour. For years that labour
was obtained by importing Kanakas from the South
Sea Islands under engagements for a fixed number
of years. Both climate and work suited them, and
they were well content with the conditions; but


to-day there is not a Kanaka left in Australia.
Under an Act passed by the Federal Parliament
at the instance of the Labour Party, they were all
deported to their islands, and from that time—
about three years ago the sugar planters have
had to depend on such white labour as they could
get. By way of compensation, Parliament gave a
bounty on the cane raised for a certain number
of years. This has enabled the planters to carry
on and to pay the higher wages necessary to obtain
white labour, but the supply is insufficient for any
expansion of the industry, and, besides, the work
is such as white men are not nearly so suitable
for as the brown.
In 1907 the sugar cane grown in Queensland
was 1,665,000 tons, yielding 188,307 tons of sugar,
and the bounty paid thereon was £120,019. The
total bounty paid in the Commonwealth in 1907-1908
was £584,630. All the sugar produced at present
is used in Australia. Bundaberg, a thriving town
about 300 miles north of Brisbane, which we visited,
is the centre of the sugar industry in that district.
We drove through many miles of sugar canefields,
and saw the cutting, carting, crushing, and refining
of the sugar.
Mining is another important industry of Queens-
land. In one part or other of Australia, all or
nearly all metals are got, but those principally worked
hitherto are gold, silver, copper, lead, or tin. There
are large deposits of iron ore in New South Wales
and the other States, but these have scarcely been
touched yet.


Mount Morgan Mines and Smelters, about 360
miles north of Brisbane, is one of the largest and
most highly organised undertakings of the kind
to be found anywhere. We had a most hospitable
reception from Captain Richards, the managing
director of the company. About 3000 men are
employed, and the weight of ore got and treated
is 20,000 tons per month. The ore, which is got
both by open cut and deep mining, contains 3 per
cent, of pure copper and a good percentage of gold.
As the metals come from the smelters, these are
in combination, and being run into moulds, it takes
the form of rough plates, which are sent to Port
Kembla by rail, where there is plenty of coal, and
where, by chemical processes, the gold and copper
are separated. The pure copper is then made into
ingots. The quality is said to be of the finest.
The value of copper produced at Mount Morgan
in 1907 was £386,000, and in all the Commonwealth
£3,573,393, nearly one-third of which came from
Queensland.
Gold mining has been carried on in Queensland
for fifty years, with variable success. In 1908 the
value of gold obtained was about two million pounds,
while that for the whole of Australia was rather
over thirteen millions. We visited Gympie, on the
invitation of the Chamber of Commerce. The
town seemed to owe its existence chiefly to the
gold mining. The neighbourhood is covered with
mines, but most of them appeared to be abandoned.
We visited one large mill, where the quartz is
crushed and the gold extracted. This industry at


the present time does not appear to be very pros-
perous either here or at other places, except in
Western Australia, though probably payable enough
when operations are carried on on a large scale
and with up-to-date machinery. Gold is widely
distributed throughout Australia, and fresh finds
may occur at any time, with some of the rich
results of former years.
A visit was paid to Rockhampton, a nicely-situated
thriving city, where the local Chamber had made
preparations to entertain our party by drives in
the neighbourhood, a garden party in the beautiful
Botanic Gardens, and a banquet in the evening,
held in the hall of the Institute of Arts. Here I
was introduced to a number of Scottish people, and
the kindness and cordiality of their welcome showed
that in the far-distant land which they have made
their home they still have a warm side for the old
land. Rockhampton is situated on the Fitzroy
River, about thirty miles from the sea, but steamers
of 3000 to 4000 tons come up to the wharves.
It has one of the handsomest Custom House
Buildings I have seen. There is an important
trade, the value of the exports last year in wool,
copper, and other produce being about three-and-
a-half millions sterling. The population is about
25,000.
We had invitations to visit Ipswich and
Toowoomba, both places of growing importance
in an industrial sense, the former being the seat
of large railway workshops, making engines and
rolling stock for the State lines, and the latter


having large mailings and bacon factories. I did
not avail myself of these invitations, being anxious
to reach Sydney a day or two before the beginning
of the Congress. The railway journey from Brisbane
to Sydney for a considerable part of the way passes
through woodland country of an attractive kind,
till we come to the Darling Downs, a high plateau
of fine agricultural and grazing land. Here the
change of temperature was very marked from the
other parts of Queensland we had visited, being
decidedly colder. The Government are here doing
a good deal to induce closer settlements, by the
cutting up of large estates and the encouragement
of small farms. Judging from the numerous farms
passed, the results seem to be satisfactory. This,
as he told me, is a pet scheme of the Deputy-
Governor, Sir Arthur Morgan, who is himself a
landowner on the Downs, and has a fine residence
there.
The new Governor of Queensland, Sir William
Macgregor, had on account of illness been unable
to take up his duties. The Deputy-Governor is
naturally proud of the achievements of the State
in the matter of railways. He told me that there
are about 4000 miles in operation, and that the
Queensland State Railways last year paid 3| per
cent., besides interest on loans. Relatively to popu-
lation, these results are very good. The gauge of
the Queensland railways is 3ft. 6in., whereas in
New South Wales it is 4ft. BJin. Consequently,
passengers and goods must change carriages at
the boundary. Victoria has a sft. Sin. gauge,


and South and Western Australia 3ft. 6in. Some
day, no doubt, these unfortunate breaks in
the communications will be remedied by the
adoption of a uniform gauge. In all Australia
there are at present rather over 16,000 miles of
railway.


IV
NEW SOUTH WALES
The New South Wales over which Commander
Phillips was, in 1786, appointed “ Captain -General
and Governor-in-Chief,” was practically the eastern
half of Australia. Botany Bay, where Captain Cook
had landed, was the place where the colony was
first established, but that, after a time, proving
unsuitable, Phillips set off with three boats to find
a better site. A little to the north he found what
he was in search of. To use his own words—“We
got into Port Jackson early in the afternoon, and
had the satisfaction of finding the finest harbour
in the world, in which a thousand sail of the line
may ride in the most perfect security.” The colony
was soon transported thither, and the foundation
of Sydney laid in the year 1788.
Posterity has endorsed Governor Phillips’ opinion
of the harbour. Sydney people are justly proud
of it. I have seen a good number of fine harbours,
but none to compare with that of Sydney. From
the Heads, this splendid harbour stretches for
twelve to fifteen miles inland, fringed with number-
less coves and bays crowned with heights clad in
dark green foliage. The city occupies the slopes
opposite the main or central harbour. From the
central harbour stretch numerous branches, like
33
SYDNEY HARBOUR


the arms of an octopus. Some of these reminded
me of the Kyles of Bute, but with richer foliage
and more numerous villas, with gardens and lawns
stretching down to the water. Numbers of small
passenger steamers run in all directions, and afford
excellent opportunities for seeing the harbour
properly.
Sydney to-day is a large and fine city of about
600,000 inhabitants, with a large and growing
maritime trade, the seat of a well-equipped Univer-
sity, and with its advantageous situation and the
enterprise of its people, has a splendid future before
it. It is hardly possible to pass from the city
without a reference to the fine public parks, and
especially the Botanic Gardens, which, for situation
and the variety and beauty of the trees, plants,
and flowers are unsurpassed.
By the foundation of Queensland to the north
and Victoria to the south into separate States,
New South Wales was much reduced in size, but
it still has an area of 310,388 square miles, or fully
two and a-half times the area of the United King-
dom. At the present time, sheep constitute the
chief source of the wealth of Australia, and New
South Wales is the State most largely interested
in that industry. The total number of sheep in
the Commonwealth in 1907 was rather over 87|
millions, the largest of any country in the world,
and of these 44£ millions were in New South
Wales. The sheep are mostly of the merino breed.
The wool produced in all Australia in 1907 was
665 million pounds, and the total value of the


wool exported was close on £29,000,000, of which
£13,000,000 worth went to the United Kingdom.
In frozen mutton also the United Kingdom is Aus-
tralia’s largest customer. Out of a total value
exported in 1907 of £1,377,502, the United Kingdom
took £1,141,718.
As may be supposed, the sheep-shearing is a
great event in Australia, and employs a large
number of men who, beginning in the north, work
their way south, earning large wages. Clippers
driven by steam power are used, and so expert are
the men that to shear, on an average, 120 sheep
a day per man is quite common. About 3| minutes
is sufficient to remove the fleece from the sheep’s
body. The wages paid are 25s per 100, but the
work is hard if a good average is to be got. After
the fleece is off, it is passed to the sorting table,
and from there to the packing press, from which
the wool comes out in neat square canvas-covered
bales of about 4001 b weight, ready for transport
to the shipping port. The process called “ dumping ”
consists in further pressing the bales by hydraulic
power and binding them with iron bands.
A visit paid to the works of the New South
Wales Fresh Food and Ice Company, on the in-
vitation of the directors, proved very interesting.
Here we saw the process of freezing the mutton,
lamb, rabbits, and other fresh food for export. I
may remark here that not long ago rabbits were
looked upon as a pest, for the destruction of which
Government paid large sums. Now, through re-
frigeration, they have acquired quite an important


value both as an article of food and for their skins.
There is just one of the several departments of
food supply carried on at these works that I would
refer to further, and that is the milk supply. A
staff of experts is employed testing the milk as
it comes in from the dairy farmers, to see that it
is up to the standard. After that, it is sterilised
by heat, and after cooling is ready for delivery
throughout the city. The system appeared very
good as a safeguard against adulteration and against
infection.
An interesting afternoon was spent at the Clyde
Engineering Works, which are situated about fifteen
miles from Sydney. The directors of the company
had arranged for a large party of visitors, and about a
hundred or more took advantage of the opportunity.
The shops and offices were gay with bunting, but what
struck me particularly was the evident appreciation
of the visit shown by the w r orkmen. All through
the extensive shops were to be seen boards on
which were written the men’s welcome, and on a
large stretch of white bunting outside were the
words in large letters—“We are Australians, but
we are proud to be Britishers.” The men appeared
a fine class of workmen, and I was informed by
the chairman of the company that the best of
relations prevailed between them and the company.
The principal work here carried on is the building
of locomotives and carriages for the State Railways.
We saw the 57th locomotive just finished and under
steam, and the company had orders in hand for
upwards of fifty more.


Other visits to Mort’s Docks, to the Colonial
Sugar Company’s Refineries, to inland stations, and
to the Blue Mountains, were arranged and taken
advantage of by part of our number, but I shall
only refer to one, which I found of much interest,
namely, the visit to Hawkesbury Government Agri-
cultural College and Experimental Farm. In ap-
proaching Sydney from the north, the railway passes
through mountainous country, from which fine
views of the Hawkesbury River are obtained. In
places, it spreads itself out into lakes, affording
beautiful examples of woodland scenery. A special
train conveyed about 120 ladies and gentlemen
to the College at Richmond, about thirty miles
from Sydney, which has been established by the
State for the training of young men in all the
branches of agriculture and farm work. There can
be no doubt of the wisdom of this enterprise. A well-
trained class of farmers experimentally taught
in the best ways of working the various kinds
of soil, and of farm stock of all kinds, is, in a
country like Australia, with millions of acres of
land waiting to be tilled, of the greatest value.
Not only is the theoretic and scientific side
well provided for in the lecture and class rooms,
but a thorough practical training is given to the
“boys,” as they are called, though many of them
are beyond the stage of boyhood in the ordinary
sense of the term. They number 230, which is
as many as can be taken at one time, and a finer
and healthier set of young men it would be hard
to find. The whole work of the farm is done by


the boys, who get up at 4.30 a.m. summer and
winter. There are sixty horses to be attended to,
cows, sheep, pigs,, and poultry of all kinds in well
arranged and cleanly kept houses, a park of fine
ostriches, many of them standing six feet or more
high, and in beautiful plumage. There is butter
and cheese making, instruction in carpentry, the
making and mending of saddlery and horse clothing,
smith and farrier work, in addition to all the usual
field work. Then there are orchards, the cultivation
of a great variety of fruits, bee culture, the manage-
ment of incubators, ensilage, fruit preserving, and
instruction in insect life and how to prevent the
destruction of fruit and vegetables by these enemies.
We had dinner in the large dining hall with
the Principal and staff and the boys. After dinner,
Principal Potts made a short speech of welcome
to the visitors, and at its close the boys gave a
round of applause of the most vociferous sort, in-
cluding what sounded like a Maori chant. I was
asked to reply for the visitors, and I could not
fail to notice with pleasure that my references to
the old country were promptly accentuated by the
hearty applause of the boys. Altogether the visit
was a most instructive and enjoyable one. The
course of instruction is three years, and the cost
to the boys is only £6O for the whole period, the
State meeting all the rest of the expenses. I know
nothing better for young men who have a fancy
for farming than to go through a course such as
that at Hawkesbury College.
The relations between the staff and the boys


are of the pleasantest kind, and there are meantime
more applicants for admission than can be accom-
modated. I may add that there are at least three
similar colleges in Canada—one in Ontario, one in
Manitoba (which I visited a few years ago), and
one recently established in the Province of Quebec,
about forty miles from Montreal. The last-named
was established by a Scotsman, Sir W. Macdonald,
at the cost, with endowments, of over a million
sterling. It has long appeared to me that our young
Scottish farmers and indeed the country generally
would gain immensely if they had the advantages
set forth above. I may mention that young women
are also trained for dairy and farm work at the
Macdonald College in Canada.
Previous to the Federation of the States in 1901,
New South Wales was a Free Trade State, but
from that time the Commonwealth Customs Acts
have applied to all States alike. New South Wales
appears to have benefited under these Protective
tariffs, as well as the other States, and I heard of
new industrial concerns being started in New South
Wales which would not have been the case had it
remained a Free Trade State. The wages of engine
fitters and boiler makers in the ship repairing yards
at Sydney are 12s to 14s per day.
A large and important industry which ought
not to be omitted from any reference to the industries
of New South Wales, is that of coal mining. New-
castle, situated on the coast about forty miles north
of Sydney, has extensive docks, and is the prin-
cipal shipping port for coal. In 1907 about 8f


million tons were raised in New South Wales,
valued at close on £3,000,000. There are various
qualities, some being very suitable for gas making
and household purposes, and others for use in
steam-ships. In the other States, coal is also
pretty widely distributed, though not yet worked
to the same extent as in New South Wales.


V
THE INTERIOR
Although the first British Colony was established
in New South Wales in 1786, it was not till 1860
that the first expedition was undertaken to cross
the continent from south to north. Exploration had
been going on for years before that, but up till then
the interior of Australia was practically unknown.
The general impression was that it was a dry,
arid land, fitly described as desert, and not likely
to be of much use. As the result of various journeys
of exploration, it was established that while there
were parts to which the term desert might properly
apply, there were far larger tracts of excellent land
which could be profitably settled. When in Queens-
land I was frequently told by those who knew the
country —“What a pity your time won’t allow you
to visit the fine pastoral lands to the west. You
might travel west for 700 miles without reaching
the limit of them.” Australia has her “ North-West”
Territory as well as Canada, with this difference,
that Australia’s northern boundary is the Indian
Ocean, and Canada’s the Arctic—or, as I have heard
Canadians say, the North Pole. There is another
important difference. Canada is well watered,
whereas Australia in the past has suffered occasion-
41
THE PASTORAL LANDS


ally from droughts, which have inflicted great loss
upon the country, and especially upon the pastoral
and agricultural sections of the people. Yet, after
prolonged drought when the rains came, the
recovery of the country is wonderfully rapid. For
four or five years past fine seasons, with good rainfall,
have been experienced, and consequently abundant
prosperity has been the result. The important
question, namely, how to conserve and store up
the rains, which come plentifully at certain seasons,
has been occupying the serious attention of the
Government of the Commonwealth. Irrigation
works have been established with excellent results,
and artesian wells have been opened up in large
numbers. The artesian basin is believed to extend
to about 570,000 square miles.
The most remarkable water scheme yet carried
out is the Goldfields Water Supply of Western
Australia. The scheme is unique. A weir has
been built across the Helena river at a point
where the width of the river is 760 feet. The
surplus water flows over the weir and down the
face to the river, 100 feet below. The capacity
of the reservoir is 4600 million gallons, and the
daily output capacity 5 million gallons. The
Goldfields towns are 351 miles inland, and at
an altitude of 1200 feet above the reservoir. Ac-
cordingly, it is necessary to pump a daily quantity
of 5 million gallons over that distance and to raise
it that height. This is done by eight pumping
stations, the principal main being 2 ft. 6 in. in
diameter. The cost of the scheme was over


£3,000,000 sterling. And yet it is a mistake to
suppose that Australia is deficient in rivers. The
largest is the Murray River, the total length of
which is 1600 miles, and the Murrumbigee, over
1000 miles in length. There are numerous other
rivers, large and small, among them the Hawkes-
bury, 335 miles long, and some with such familiar
names as the Clyde, Tweed, Forth, Esk, etc. Mildura,
in the north-west corner of Victoria, 350 miles from
Melbourne, is a good illustration of what can be
done by irrigation. In 1887 the place was a deserted
cattle run, abandoned to rabbits. Now, the ridges
formerly clothed with scrub, have been by the
application of water transformed into smiling orchards
and vineyards, producing fruit of the highest quality.
I never saw nor tasted oranges of the size and
quality grown at Mildura, and the grapes, peaches,
figs, limes, lemons, straAvberries, and tomatoes
take a high place in the market. There are
47,000 people in the place, and 250,000 acres
within the irrigated area. About 12,000 acres
are planted. The water is raised from the Murray
River.
Melbourne, the capital of Victoria, is a fine
city of about 500,000 inhabitants. It is younger
than Sydney, being only about seventy years old;
hut for handsome buildings it would be hard to
find an equal. It has been laid out upon broad
and spacious lines. Collins Street runs for about
two miles from Spencer Street Station to the fine
square where the Commonwealth Parliament Build-
ings and Government Offices are situated. Outside


the city are splendid avenues, with lines of trees,
the effect being particularly fine. The battle of
the sites for the seat of the Federal Government
still goes on. Sydney, though consenting to Mel-
bourne as a temporary arrangement, has never ceased
to agitate for the establishment of a new and in-
dependent site, and one is in contemplation mid-
way between the two cities. A very fine railway
station and offices were just being finished at
Flinders Street. Lower down are the docks, which
are reached by the River Yarra Yarra, a few
miles from Hobson’s Bay, opening out into Basses
Straits.
The arrangements for the delegates at Melbourne
included visits to the Victorian Railway Workshops,
where they were shown the locomotive, engineering,
and carriage building industry, excursions to Bendigo
and Ballarat, and motor car trips to places of
interest in the country. Our visit to the Victoria
Railway Workshops at Newport, a few miles out
from Melbourne, calls for further notice. The
number of men employed is about 2500, and the
shops are large, with plenty of space for expansion.
Work begins at 7.30 a.m., and ends at 5 p.m.,
with an interval for dinner from 12 to 12.50, the
week’s total being 49 hours. There was a large
dining hall in the grounds, where quite 500 of the
men dined daily. The Railway Commissioners
provide the hall, which is comfortably seated, with
twelve at each table, and a well-equipped kitchen
connected with it. The men manage the rest. The
following was the menu for the day:—


Melbourne: The Houses of the Commonwealth Parliament.


A WORKSHOP MENU
NEWPORT WORKSHOPS
Wednesday, 29th September 1909
Sours
Celery Brown
Entrees
Steak and Kidney Pie
Maized Lamb and Green Peas
Joints
Roast Beef and Yorkshire Pudding
Boast Lamb and Mint Sauce
Sweets
Plum Pudding Rice Custard
The price is 6d each. There is a separate room
where other refreshments —tea, coffee, and other
drinks, can be got, hut no intoxicants. I found
several Scotsmen among the heads of departments.
The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church
in Australia was holding its session in Melbourne
while I was there. Presbyterians in Australia, as
in Canada, are one Church, as they ought to be,
and as it is to be hoped they will be ere long in
Scotland. I visited the Assembly, and, except
for a little more freedom of manner, I could have
fancied myself listening to a debate in the Assembly
Hall at the head of the Mound. The Moderator
was the Rev. John Ferguson, the able and popular
minister of St Stephen’s Church, Sydney, who,
in official dress similar to our home Moderators,
ruled the House with a mixture of genial good
45


humour and firmness, which, while not wanting
in dignity, was slightly novel to me, when compared
with the greater solemnity of our home procedure.
Being introduced to the House by the Moderator
as representative of Edinburgh and Leith Chambers
at the Congress, I received from the fathers and
brethren an exceedingly kind welcome. Many—
perhaps most of them—were our own countrymen,
who are ever ready to extend a warm greeting to
one from the Old Country. The work which they
are carrying on in that great southern continent
is such as ought to enlist our heartiest sympathy
and interest. The Assembly meets, I believe, in
the different State capitals alternately. Besides the
University, Melbourne has in Ormond College a
fine educational institution, which I visited, along
with the Presbyterian Ladies’ College, founded in
1875, now under the Principalship of the Rev.
S. G. M'Laren, and which occupies a high position
among girls’ schools for scholarship. These—
namely, Ormond College, Ormond Theological
College, the Presbyterian Ladies’ College, and the
Scotch College for Boys have all been founded
by the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, showing
that the same genius and passion for education
which have characterised the home Churches, have
also inspired our Australian brethren.
Turning to another subject, and one which has
long been a matter of complaint in this country,
namely, the cost of transfer of land and buildings,
I found that in Australia a purchaser can get for
a few shillings what costs here nearly as many


pounds. There is a simple and efficient system
of registration. The fee for registration of the
transfer is 10s. The form costs 6d, and if searches
are wanted there is an extra charge of 2s. Thus,
for 10s 6d or 12s 6d, a buyer can secure his title
to property. For every £SO of price over the first
£SO, there is a stamp duty of 5s per cent.
It was on the afternoon of 4th October that
about thirty-five of the delegates embarked on
the Loangana, a fine turbine steamer, at Melbourne,
for Tasmania. A large party of our Melbourne friends
gathered on board and on shore to give us a good
send-off as we quitted the hospitable capital of
Victoria. After passing out of Hobson’s Bay,
Basses Straits are crossed, and about forty miles
of river sailing brings us to Launceston, the principal
citjr in the north of Tasmania, and about 285 miles
from Melbourne. As we steam up the river, the
country is seen to be prettily diversified pastoral
and agricultural land, with a fine background of
mountains, and in many parts well wooded. For-
merly it was called Van Diemen’s Land, and was
the dumping ground for our criminals, who, with
a barbarity now scarcely conceivable, were kept
in convict settlements, and were subject to cruel
bondage. The remains of some of these places
can be seen yet—for instance, at Port Arthur, not
far from Hobart—but even the memory of these
is fast fading away. Strange it is, that one of the
fairest spots on earth should have been sullied
in this way. Tasmania is called after the old Dutch
navigator Janszoon Tasman, who sailed these seas


in 1642 and 1644. With the decline of Dutch
maritime power, their interest in Australian dis-
coveries vanished. In geographical features Tasmania
reminded us a good deal of Scotland. The con-
trast of climate, however, is very marked. It has
neither the summer heat of Australia, nor the
cold of a Scottish winter. The mountain, river,
and coast scenery are very beautiful, and there
is ample scope for the tourist, the yachtsman, and
the angler. Launceston is a nice town, with a
considerable trade, and is the centre of a large
agricultural area. The show, which we had
the opportunity of visiting, was really very
good, the turnout of horses, cattle, sheep, etc.,
being such as would do credit to a much older
country.
Six or seven hours pleasant travelling by rail
brings us to Hobart, the State capital, which is
beautifully situated in a fine, sheltered bay. The
river Derwent winds its way for a long distance
before it flows into the bay at Hobart. Mount
Wellington forms a fine background to the city,
and is a favourite resort for pleasure parties driving
or motoring out. In fact, in all directions round
Hobart the country is very attractive, while the
pretty country hotels and tea houses provide very
agreeably for the wants of visitors. Though
Tasmania grows the finest wool in the world,
the quantity is small. Accordingly, it is more
upon agriculture, fruit growing, and potato raising
that the trade depends. Tasmania supplies Aus-
tralia to a large extent with potatoes, and the


exports of fruit, especially apples, run into large
figures. When I was there the orchards were in
blossom, and a beautiful sight it was to see the
hillsides covered with pink and white. There are
copper mines on the west coast at Mount Lyell,
which, I understand, are profitably worked, but
I was unable to visit them, though some of our
friends did. In the public gardens at Hobart, I
found a fine statue in memory of Sir John Franklin,
who was Governor at one time, and who was after-
wards lost with the Erebus and Terror, in the
Polar regions when in search of the north - west
passage.
The Botanic Gardens at Hobart are particularly
fine. About twenty-five miles out from the city
we visited the Fish Hatcheries, where large
numbers of trout of various kinds are bred, which
go to keep the rivers stocked.
The most of my travelling companions here
left for New Zealand. As I had been there so
recently, I preferred to return to Australia, and
after visiting South and Western Australia to
return home by way of India. Accordingly at
Melbourne I joined several other delegates and
proceeded to Adelaide by rail. Here the Chamber
of Commerce had arranged an agreeable pro-
gramme for us. In addition to the city functions,
we visited a large sheep station about one hundred
miles inland. There we saw sheep shearing in
full swing, and on a large scale. The country
was very pretty, with fruit, trees, and flowers in
abundance. There are some large vineyards in


the neighbourhood of Adelaide, and in fact all
kinds of fruit appear to grow abundantly there,
which in the season is to be bought at low
prices compared with what we are in the habit
of paying at home.


VI
INDIA
Leaving Freemantle, Western Australia, in the
P. and O. steamer India, we reached Colombo after
nine days’ steaming. The India is one of the
older ships of the company, but very comfortable,
and kept up her speed of fifteen knots an hour
steadily throughout the voyage. In the Indian
Ocean, and crossing the line, the weather was fine,
and as the home-coming passengers were at that
season few, there was ample room and attendance.
The India had been a full ship going out from
home.
Colombo is situated on the west side of the
Island of Ceylon, and has quite superseded Point
de Galle as the place of call for steamers to and
from the East. Great harbour works have been
carried out to make it a safe port. Even in calm
weather the great roll or swell from the Indian
Ocean breaks with terrific force on the shore in
long lines of foam, and where it strikes the break-
waters sends a wall of white broken water high
into the air. Steamers lie off in the harbour, and
the landing is made in small steamers. Great
numbers of boats—mostly native, of extraordinary
build—flit about the harbour, which is very exten-
51
COLOMBO


sive. Being the chief port of Ceylon, Colombo
has a large trade. The streets are wide, and shops
good. The Indian is a born trader, and it is sur-
prising the confidence they show in the honesty
of British visitors, whom, although but birds of
passage, they trust to remit them, on reaching
home, the price of articles bought, and for which
the visitor, as often happens, has with him or her
not enough ready money to pay. The streets
are thronged with bullock carts driven by brown-
skinned natives, whose only article of dress is the
loin cloth. Many of the carts have an awning of
palm leaves. Rickshaws are in vogue here, but
the Cingalese are no match for the Japanese in the
manning of these. There is a splendid drive along
the Galle Face, and at the end of it is the famous
Hotel of that name.
To sit on the lawn of the hotel and hear the
surf breaking upon the beach is delightful and
restful, especially in the evening, when the brilliant
sun has given place to the soft light of the moon.
Colombo is a pretty warm place, and we soon left
it for the interior, hoping to find it cooler. A
railway journey of hours brought us to Kandy,
the old capital of Ceylon. The country through
which we passed was very picturesque, with high
mountains and deep valleys, plenty of fine timber,
and tea gardens. The name of Lipton, in large
letters, I observed on the roof of a building, marking
out the tea garden as one belonging to the great
provider. Kandy is a place of considerable interest,
though no longer the abode of native royalty.


Temple of the Tooth at Kandy (Buddhist).


Beautifully wooded hills surround the city, and
the large lake, round which there is an excellent
road, shaded by stately trees, is not only pictu-
resque, but imparts an air of coolness to the place.
The night of our arrival, there being full moon,
was a great night at the Temple of the Tooth.
The noise of the tom-toms and the - shrill ndtes
of the pipes (a substitute, though a poor one, for
our bagpipes), could he heard a long way off. The
temple was thronged with people, but they kept
moving about, in and out of the various apart-
ments, up and down stairs, and talking without
anything suggestive of worship. The deformed,
the lame, and the blind lay on the steps and floors
of the basement soliciting alms, and the whole
atmosphere was redolent of the heavy scent of the
temple flower, which in shape is like the white
arum lily, but much smaller.
The heat, increased by the numerous lights,
was great. In one circular room upstairs, the
library, a yellow-robed priest was engaged instruct-
ing a number of women and girls, who were
kneeling on the floor in front of him. He stopped
when we entered, and courteously showed us the
sacred books, consisting of long strips of palm
leaves, about two and a half inches broad, neatly
inscribed with the sacred writing, and strung
together upon cords. Mounting higher by a narrow
stair, we came to a small apartment, where, behind
a heavily barred grill was the richly ornamented
gold casket containing the Tooth of Buddha. The
casket would be about twenty inches high, by


about twelve inches broad, and was richly studded
with precious stones. On a table in front were
offerings of two kinds—the temple flower and the
lotus. The place was crowded, chiefly with women,
and a priest, naked to the waist, and who wore
a curious hat shaped like a large soup plate, was
in attendance, and looked after the money offerings
which visitors, as well as the faithful, were required
to bring.
In a large open space close to the temple were
gathered large numbers of people, listening to the
preaching of the Buddhist priests. This was said
to be kept up all night. Open air preaching in
the warm, balmy air of a night at Kandy, can
hardly fail to have its attractions. In small
temples within this enclosure were several statues
of Buddha, but none of them of any merit or
interest from an artistic point of view.
The Botanical Gardens are about five miles
from the city, and are beautifully kept. As might
be expected, the display of tropical plants and
trees is very fine. I noticed some magnificent
rubber trees, for the growth of which the climate
of Ceylon is very favourable. In one of the walks
there was a curious sight. Looking up to the top
branches of high trees, we observed great numbers
of what looked like cocoa nuts hanging. They
were really huge bats, which, on being disturbed,
rose into the air, hovered for a time, and then
resumed their pendant position on the trees. Tea
growing has largely displaced coffee in Ceylon, and
now forms, I believe, the principal article of export.


I should not omit to mention that we passed
through great tracts of country on the lower
levels flooded, and native houses and hay ricks
were seen standing in the water. This was due
to the heavy rains which had fallen. This part
of the country is very suitable for growing rice.
Our stay at Kandy was limited to a couple of
days, as we had to be back in Colombo in time
for the P. and 0. steamer Malta to Calcutta. The
Cingalese appeared to be a mild, quiet sort of
people, neither, as a rule, so strong nor so tall
as the natives of some of the northern provinces
of India. The men wear a curious kind of hair-
comb made of tortoise-shell, which encircles the
head except the forehead, and keeps the hair,
which is worn long, well to the back of the head.
I have referred to the large use made of oxen
for draught purposes. They are not more remark-
able for their strength than their docility. For
heavy loads and long distances they seem to answer
better than horses in these hot climates. Of course,
they are slower; but, then, time is of less account
to an Oriental than it is to us.
The sail up the Bay of Bengal from Colombo
was made in fine but warm weather. The passage
occupied about five days. At the mouth of the
Hooghiy, one of the many mouths of the Ganges,
we had to wait for the tide several hours. There
is nothing of much interest in the passage up the
river, the delta land being low and flat, with little
to be seen in the way of human habitations, until,
as Calcutta is approached, jute and cotton mills,


with factories of other kinds, are seen on both
sides of the river. The city is little seen until
we are near it, being hidden behind a bend of the
river, and as it stands on ground not much above
the water level. It was five o’clock in the evening
when we came to anchor, and it was then too late
to enter the dock before the morning. Most of
the passengers remained on board, but my Canadian
friends and I decided to go ashore, as the heat on
board was rather trying. Accordingly, we got into
a sampan, and were rowed to a ghat or landing
place about 1J miles distant, after which we had
to drive about five miles to our hotel. It was
then dark, and our way took us through long
stretches of native shops and dwellings, where
the oil lamps threw a dim and fitful light among
the brown, half-naked bodies of a teeming popu-
lation.
Our hotel turned out to be on the Chowringee,
a fine road facing the Maidan, a great public park,
near which are Government House and most of
the Government offices. Calcutta is a compara-
tively modern city, and covers a large area. There
are some good streets and squares, such as Dalhousie
Square, and the public buildings and banks are
very good. The native bazaars are many ol them
good, and there is a great amount of traffic in the
streets. Among other places, I visited the Scottish
Churches College, originally founded by Dr Duff
about sixty years ago, and within recent years
it has passed under the united management of
the Established and United Free Churches of Scot


land, an augury, let us hope, of what may ere long
be done at home, as well as abroad. The College
is situated in Cornwallis Square, a long way from
what is now the centre of the city. The surrounding
streets are rather shabby, and appear as if they
had seen better days. It happened to be holiday
time when I called, so I did not see the classes
at work. A fine marble bust of the grand old
man, Dr Duff, one whom Scotsmen may well re-
member and honour, occupies a prominent place
in the hall of the College.
Before proceeding on our journey across India,
we were desirous to visit Darjeerling, one of the
most beautiful places in the Himalayas, but the
time of year—November—rendered it certain that
we would encounter a great change of climate in
going from the moist heat of Calcutta to much
colder regions, at an altitude of over 7000 feet.
We therefore decided to go on to Benares and the
other places selected on our route across the
country from Calcutta to Bombay.
Railway travelling in India is on the whole
comfortable, and the fares are very moderate. Of
course, travellers cannot get rid of the dust and
heat. Night travelling is preferable, as being much
cooler than the day, but the dust follows one
everywhere. The cars are arranged for sleeping,
but passengers require to provide their own bedding,
towels, etc. Some of the newer cars are provided
with baths, and on the day trains luncheon cars
are attached. As a rule, the station refreshment
rooms are to be preferred for meals, I consider.


Europeans are greatly the better of the assistance
of a native “ bearer,” whose duty it is to look after
the luggage, to make up beds, and render no end
of other services which in a hot country are very
acceptable. We engaged our man at Calcutta,
after consultation with Thomas Cook and Son. He
was a Punjabi, by name Gabool Khan, and turned
out a very good sort of fellow. He saved us a
great deal of trouble, and if he made a little out
of us in addition to his modest wages, in the way
of commissions, it is no more, and perhaps con-
siderably less, than many of his confreres are in
the habit of doing.
A night’s journey from Calcutta brought us to
Benares, the religious capital of India, and a city
whose age goes back beyond historic times. Every
year a million pilgrims find their way to the holy
city to bathe in the sacred river, and to do the
round of the sacred territory. The city contains
about 290,000 inhabitants, of whom 30,000 are said
to be Brahmins. The buildings generally did not
strike me as very old nor very beautiful, and it is
not recognised here that cleanliness is next to
godliness so far as the city itself is concerned.
The sight which is probably the most interesting
at Benares is that which is seen in the early
morning at the river Ganges, where the pilgrims
gather to go through the washings prescribed by
their religion. The city is situated on high ground
on the right bank of the Ganges, and to reach the
water it is necessary to descend by broad flights of
steps, called ghats. There are several of these


Benares: The River Ganges where the Pilgrims bathe.


ghats at intervals for a distance of about two
miles. Along the brink of the river are numerous
small temples, recesses, and stages of all sorts,
crowded with the religious devotees, all of them so
absorbed in their duties as to pay little or no
attention to the strangers looking on. In going
through the washings and lavings, every movement
appeared to be accompanied by a prayer or the
repetition of some portion of the sacred writings.
Temples and mosques crown the height over-
looking the river, and at one place portions of the
bank had slipped down, carrying the temple with
it, but so gradually that the building held together,
and stood partly in the water. In order to see the
sights properly, we had engaged for us a curious
native boat, the rowers being in what we would call
the ’tween decks, and on a raised deck were placed
chairs, from which we could conveniently regard
the curious scene before us. The Ganges would
there be about half-a-mile or more wide. It was
then the dry season. It must be much more in
the rainy season. We saw the funeral pyres being
built, but no actual cremations in progress there.
The “ Burning Ghat,” where the cremation of the
bodies is carried out, we passed. It is close to the
river brink, and the ashes are strewn upon the
sacred waters.
The Golden Temple—so called, I suppose, be-
cause the high pointed roofs are plated with gold—
next claims attention. It stands in its own court,
but with buildings so close to it that it is not seen
to advantage. In the court some of the sacred


bulls were moving about. One, with a garland
about its neck, invited attention, but resented any
attempt at familiarity, as if he knew his own
importance. In the temple court were many people
gathered, but not much appearance of devotion.
A big, ugly, and roughly hewn bull in stone, coated
with red paint, stood in the court, and round about
were numerous small shrines, in some of which
the idols reminded me of the peculiar form of doll
dear to some juveniles, called “golliwogs.” After
passing in and out a good many passages, and up
and down stairs, we were introduced to the main
temple, in the innermost shrine of which I saw
one of the Brahmin bulls comfortably lying, the
object of divine honours apparently. The sight
was enough ; I had no desire for a nearer acquaint-
ance with him. The only other temple I need
refer to is that usually called the Monkey Temple,
from the fact that it is literally over-run with
these curious creatures of all sorts and sizes. They
look for visitors to provide them with nuts, and
make themselves very much at home. No part of
the building is free from their presence, from floor
to roof, and they varied their devotions with a
scamper up the sculptured pillars and up to the
top of the spire. The attendants, who were prob-
ably priests, seemed only interested in the gratuities
which might fall to them. It is really a Durga, or
devil temple. It is a great part of the Hindu
worship to propitiate the evil spirits, who would
otherwise, it is thought, exercise a baneful influence
upon them. For the same reason the fakirs, or


so-called holy men, who perambulate the country
naked and unkempt, receive a great deal of
material help, if not of reverence, from the
people.
In pleasing contrast with this was a visit paid to
the St George’s Church Girls’ School. Though the
hour was early—about 8 a.m.—we found the girls
assembling, and very neat they looked in their
white dresses. There were about a hundred of
them. As they came into the large room for
morning prayers, they took their seats in rows on
the floor, the bigger girls at the back, and the
little ones in front. We heard them sing a hymn
very sweetly, and then left for a tour through the
class rooms and other parts of the buildings, which
were all on one floor. Two English ladies with
native assistants carry on the school, and expressed
themselves as very happy in their work, and in the
enjoyment of good health. There is a good large
church near, St George’s, and at some distance a
boys’ school, where about 500 youths are being
taught and trained. These, of course, are outside
the city, and occupy large enclosures nicely shaded
by trees. The native bazaars, which are in the
city, are narrow and rather shabby-looking as
compared with what one sees elsewhere in India,
but then, as I have already said, Benares is a very
old city, and evidently not progressive. In many
of the shops in the bazaar the making of the brass
and silverware for which Benares is famous, is seen
going on. It is remarkable with what primitive
tools and appliances these Indian workmen turn


out really very pretty work. In one of the silk
shops I saw eight men seated round a frame with
needles busy upon a large piece of embroidery.
Only in a country where labour is cheap is such
a thing possible.
Lucknow! —What memories does the name
arouse, of heroic deeds which, though half-a-century
old, are still fresh in the recollection of many
now living, and which must ever shine illustriously
in the annals of British rule in India. Ap-
proaching Lucknow from the east, the line
passes through nicely wooded and pasture land.
A number of cavalry horses, attended by natives,
are seen as we pass here, showing that we were
not far from the military cantonments. As usual,
the European residences are apart from the native
town, with fine, wide avenues and extensive parks
and gardens formerly surrounding native palaces,
etc. Though a town of considerable size and im-
portance, and having many attractive features, the
chief interest to me lay in the place it filled in
the Mutiny. The defence of the Residency by a
small British force must always be regarded as one
of the finest chapters in the history of that event-
ful period. As one lingers about the ruins of the
Residency, now roofless and shot-torn for the most
part, but with the old flag still flying from the
tower, it is difficult to restrain tears. Here for
anxious and weary months the little garrison
watched and fought the rebel army by which
they were surrounded. I wandered through the
underground apartments where the women and


The ruined Residency, Lucknow.


children lived, and had food passed in to them
after 9 p.m., when the rebel guns ceased firing for
the day. Noticing that the floor was bare earth,
I asked our guide the reason, and he replied that
it was not originally so, but that the mutineers, on
gaining access to the place, dug up the floors, in
the hope of finding buried treasure. Close to a low
window which let in a little light, I noticed the
gap made by a round shot, which had torn its
way through the wall and passed through an inner
partition wall. One of the apartments was pointed
out as Jessie’s Room. The story is that a High-
land maidservant sleeping there heard, or dreamt
that she heard, in the distance the well - known
sound of the pibroch of the Highland soldiers ad-
vancing and fighting their way to the relief of the
beleaguered defenders of the Residency. Whether
dream or reality, she cheered the hearts of those
around her, and it was not long before the relief
came. It is said that nothing could withstand the
British soldiers in the attack, roused to fury as
they were by the atrocious deeds of the mutineers
where they had succeeded in getting the upper
hand. To Sir Henry Lawrence it is due that the
Lucknow garrison and residents did not meet the
same fate as those at some other places. Though
a very difficult place to hold, he put the Residency
into the best state of defence possible, and stored
it with food and ammunition, thus providing in
time for what he saw might happen. I saw the
room, now roofless, in which that heroic and in-
trepid soldier received his death wound, among his


last instructions to his officers being that they
must never surrender. His grave is in the cemetery
which surrounds the ruins of the English Church
near the Residency, and on the tomb there is the
epitaph dictated by himself: —“ Here lies Henry
Lawrence, who tried to do his duty. And may the
Lord have mercy on his soul.”
We had the advantage of wandering over the
Residency under the guidance of an old soldier, a
Bengal Artilleryman, William Ireland, aged 78, who
had been one of the defenders throughout the
siege. It was on the 25th September that a reliev-
ing force under General Havelock succeeded in
fighting its way into the Residency, but not being
strong enough to raise the siege, was obliged to
stand on the defensive till finally relieved on 17 th
November 1857 by Sir Colin Campbell’s force,
when the survivors of the siege were conducted to
a place of safety. The rebels then broke into the
Residency, which they looted and ruined, as also
the English Church standing a short way off. Sir
Colin Campbell, after effecting the relief, returned
to Lucknow and routed the rebels.
Among the more remarkable buildings at
Lucknow are the mausoleum of the last King of
Oude, the Daulet Khan Palace, the great Imambara,
and mosque beside it. None of the buildings are
very old, though striking in their architectural
effects, and from their position. In one of the
parks there is a beautiful memorial of the late
Queen Victoria, in white marble, under guard of a
native soldier.


The Cashmere Gate, Dethi, from the outside.


From Lucknow to Cawnpore the railway journey
occupies about two and a-quarter hours. Cawnpore
is probably the most important city in Upper
India from an industrial and commercial point
of view, with a population of 197,000. Its prin-
cipal manufactures are leather goods and cotton
fabrics. As we arrived there somewhat late in
the day, and were anxious to get on to Delhi,
we spent only a short time at Cawnpore. The
city is memorable in the history of the Mutiny
as the place where, beguiled by the false promises
of the infamous Nana Sahib, the garrison and
British residents, after stout resistance under General
Wheeler, surrendered and were put to the sword,
the bodies of the women and children being thrown
into a well. Over this well a beautiful monument
in white marble has been erected in which the
Angel of the Resurrection is represented as watching
over it. A British sentry always stands guard over
the spot, no native being allowed to enter the
enclosure.
There are probably few cities in India of more
interest historically and otherwise than Delhi. The
city stands upon the great plains which run far
into India from the Afghan and Himalayan mountain
barriers on the west and north. The River Jumna
runs past the city at a short distance from the
walls. The plains around for a distance of 45
miles are covered with the remains of older cities.
Parts of the walls and gateways of these are standing,
Mid numerous mosques and tombs are dotted over
the country. These plains, where one now sees
E


the natives engaged following the plough, or drawing
water from the wells in peace and security, were
for centuries the scenes of desolating wars. Through
the mountain passes of the north-west invading
hosts of Persians, Afghans, and other warlike races
swept down upon the plains, some of them to
remain, and others to return whence they came,
laden with the spoils of conquest. Hindus, Sikhs,
and Marathas contested the possession of the
country with the Mahomedan invaders; but these
last held sway for several centuries. From Delhi
as their capital, these Mughal Emperors ruled India
for a time. Their power, however, gradually ebbed
away, and though their rule over a restricted part
of the country continued in name till 1857, it
vanished when their last King emerged for a
moment as a rebel at the time of the Mutiny. It
is significant of these mutations that at Kutab,
eleven miles out from Delhi, part of the great
mosque consists of a quadrangle where the stone
pillars are covered with beautiful Hindu carvings,
the explanation being that the Mahomedans pulled
down the Hindu temples and used the pillars in
building their mosques. In the centre of that
quadrangle stands a famous iron pillar of ancient
date, and in close proximity the still more remark-
able tower of Kutab Minar. This tower is built
of a fine red stone, and rises in gradually reduced
circumference to a height of over 200 feet. Quo-
tations from the Koran are sculptured on the outer
surface, and run like a great encircling ribbon all
the way up.


The Diwan-i-khas, or Court of Private Audience in the Palace, Delhi.


It was early morning when we alighted at the
railway station of Delhi, and a drive of about two
miles brought us to our hotel some distance
outside the city. Morning in India is the time for
exercise, when the air is fresh and the sun low.
A walk before breakfast towards the country
brought me within sight of a tower of red stone
on a ridge of low hills. Ascending it I had from
the top an extensive view of the country around.
This was the Flagstaff Tower, where on the morning
of 11th May 1857, on the outbreak of the Mutiny,
were gathered the European women and children,
anxiously looking across the plain for the troops
from Meerut. When the revolt occurred there was
no British garrison in Delhi. At Meerut there
was a detatchment of British, also a large number
of native troops who broke out in rebellion and
marched off to occupy Delhi. The mutineers soon
made themselves masters of the city, as well as
the Fort and Palace, the King having opened his
gates to them.
The present city dates from 1638, when the
Fort was commenced by the Emperor Shah Jahan,
the same who built the Taj Mahal at Agra. The
Fort, in which is the Palace, is very extensive,
with high and massive walls of red stone. It
forms the citadel, the city itself being also sur-
rounded by walls. The palace is without doubt
the most beautiful bit of building in Delhi. The
Divan-i-Khas or Court of Private Audience is
particularly fine. That, as well as the other apart-
ments, is of white marble, richly sculptured, and


the tracery filled in with gilding. The baths, too,
are splendid apartments, all of marble, and in the
centre of one I observed a beautiful shell-like basin
richly inlaid, and with jets for scented water
playing. The Pearl Mosque adjoining, also of
white marble, is considered a gem of its kind.
The Palace stands on a level with the top of the
walls of the Fort, and commands an uninterrupted
view of the country. The city itself is well built,
and contains more gardens and open spaces with
wider streets than most Indian cities. The great
central avenue called the Chandi-Chauk is lined
on both sides with shops, banks, and offices, and
along the centre are lines of stalls for the sale of
all sorts of things. It is wide enough to allow of
tramway lines and roadways for vehicles of all
kinds besides.
There are many interesting memorials of the
Mutiny in and around Delhi. Within the city
is the site and gateway of the Arsenal, which
was blown up by Lieutenant Willoughby and
his eight comrades rather than allow it to be
taken by the rebels. There are the Cashmere
and Mori Gates, through which two of the as-
saulting columns entered on the day the city
was retaken. Through the former of these General
Nicholson led his men, and fell in the hour of
victory, a brave soldier whose grave is in the
English Cemetery not far off, and whose memory
is perpetuated in a beautiful statue which stands
in the middle of what is named the Nicholson
Garden. He was only thirty-five at the time of


General John Nicholson’s Monument, Delhi.


his death. Then there is the Ridge, famous in
the story of the siege, on which the British guns
were placed. The Mutiny Monument, a tower of
red stone, stands upon the site of the right-hand
battery. Two very intelligent native soldiers, one
of whom spoke excellent English, gave us a most
interesting description of the main events of the
siege and final assault.
A visit to a Jain Temple in the city was
interesting in its way. The way to it lay through
several long, narrow passages or closes, where
the air was none of the freshest. On arriving
at the vestibule, we had our shoes removed, and
slippers substituted for them. The Temple was
evidently a very old one, and was not possessed
of much architectural beauty, but had some fine
carvings in wood. In form it was a square court,
open to the sky, but provided with awnings, and
at one side was a raised part roofed in, where the
statues of Buddha and the saints were accommo-
dated, as well as the other ornaments and
accessories of the Temple.
The Jains are a sect of the Buddhists, though
they claim that their religion is even older than
Buddhism. They are mostly, it appears, merchants
or bankers. It is said that “their charity is bound-
less, and they form the chief supporters of the
beast hospitals which the old Buddhistic tenderness
for animals has left in many of the cities of India.
They refuse to kill either man or beast.”
The principal mosque, the Jam& Masjid, is of
vast dimensions, and of imposing appearance. Pro


bably the most striking monument outside the
city is the Mausoleum of Humayun, the second
Mughal Emperor. The domes and cupolas are
seen from a long distance. The grounds and water-
courses about it are very well kept. The Govern-
ment of India does good work in preserving and
caring for the upkeep of these beautiful monuments.
Another object of interest outside the city,
of a different kind, is the ancient Observatory,
consisting of a group of buildings of very remark-
able forms. Astronomy was a science in which
the ancient Brahmans were far advanced even
before the Greeks arrived in India 327 b.c. ; and
it is recorded that more than 3000 years ago the
Vedic poets had worked out a fairly correct calcu-
lation of the solar year, and were acquainted with
the phases of the moon, the motions of the planets,
and the signs of the zodiac. There is another of
these Observatories at Benares, and, I believe, in
some other places in India,
Agra, which is distant 145 miles from Delhi,
has many points of interest both in and around
the city. Situated on the right bank of the
River Jumna, it is like most Indian cities, walled
round, with an inner fort or citadel. Akbar the
Great, who was the real founder of the Mughal
Empire, made Agra his capital, and built the fort
about the year 1566. It is a splendid piece of
work. The walls, which are of red stone, rise in
places to a height of 70 feet or more, with a moat
between them and a lower outer wall. Turtles
were peacefully disporting themselves in the water


of the moat. The Palace, Great Mosque, and
Arsenal are in the Fort. As at Delhi, white marble
enters largely into the construction of the Palace,
and from it a fine view is got of the open country,
and of the famous Taj, about a mile and a-half
distant. Inside the city which has a population
of 188,000, are the native bazaars and houses.
Outside are the European residences, hotels,
churches, colleges, schools, and the soldiers’ can-
tonments. The Victoria Park is extensive and
well kept. A fine statue in marble of the late
Queen-Empress Victoria stands in the Park.
Our first drive was to the famous Taj Mahal.
It stands about a mile and a-half or two miles
from the city, and ought to be visited at different
times of the day, and night if the moon is full,
in order to see it in the different lights. The
entrance to the grounds is by a great gateway of
fine red stone of elaborate design and workmanship,
and surmounted by eleven cupolas. The Taj itself
stands upon a high platform of marble, at a dis-
tance of about 400 yards from the entrance. The
intervening space is occupied by gardens kept in
perfect order, and lines of cypress and yews, while
in the centre line is a marble watercourse about
20 feet wide, with jets for fountains at intervals.
In the water there is a perfect reflection of the
Taj, which fills the end of the vista, a beautiful
vision in marble, of perfect form and workmanship.
The central dome rises to a height of 187 feet,
above which the metal pinnacle rises to a further
height of 30 feet. There are four corner cupolas,


and at some distance from the main building, at
each corner of the platform, is a round tower of
marble, about the same height as the principal
dome. The whole building, outside and inside,
is elaborately carved with flowers and other
devices, the leaves and petals of the flowers
being inlaid with coloured stones. Quotations
from the Koran form part of the outside carving.
The inner shrine, in which are the richly sculptured
marble tombs, is surrounded with screens of marble
tracery. The light from the outside is admitted
by similar marble screens high up at the top of
the walls, just below the dome, and suspended over
the tombs is a large and beautiful lamp, the gift
of Lord Curzon.
Words fail to convey the impression that this
wonderful creation in marble makes upon the mind.
No more beautiful resting-place and monument
could have been devised for her whose name
signifies the pride or joy of the Palace, the favourite
Queen of the Emperor. Begun in a.d. 1630, the
Taj took twenty-two years to build, and the cost is
said to have been thirty-two million rupees. From
the side of the platform farthest from the entrance,
one looks down upon the Jumna, which runs about
fifty yards from the walls. We visited the Taj
each day at different hours, and found some new
beauty to admire each time. These old Mughal
Emperors were fond of splendid monuments. At
Sikandra, about five miles out from Agra, in
another direction, is the Mausoleum of Akbar. It
is a great pile of building, a mixture of Hindu and


The Taj-Mahal, Agra.


Mahommedan architecture, peculiar and imposing.
In the centre of the flat top, open to the sky>
under a plain marble slab, lie the remains of Akbar
the Great.
To return to the city. The native bazaars are
very interesting. Some are narrow and crowded,
but others are wide and open, with good shops,
where beautiful silk embroidery, silver, jewellery,
and a great variety of articles can be got. In the
shops there are no counters on which the goods
are displayed: the floor serves that purpose. It
is richly carpeted, and the shopkeeper and his
assistants sit on the floor in front of their cus-
tomers, who are seated upon low chairs. Having
selected such things as you are inclined to buy,
the next stage is the fixing of the prices. As a
rule, they ask a good deal more than they are
willing to take, even where the goods are marked
with the selling price. The Indian is a keen
business man, but you require to understand his
ways, and you need have no compunction in offer-
ing 25 or 30 per cent, less than asked. Only in
one shop in Delhi did I find the opposite practice
prevail, namely, no abatement from the price asked.
In the evening we drove through the bazaars.
They were thronged with people, and progress was
slow* It was some religious festival, and every
shop, house, balcony, and building was illuminated.
The plan generally adopted was to place a great
number of small lamps in such a way as to outline
ho building, and every niche, window, and door,
he bright-coloured dresses, caps, and turbans, and


the sound of so many voices were very interesting.
Within the city the houses are of stone or brick,
brightly coloured. Outside the city the native
dwellings are mostly of clay, and roofed with palm
leaves, without windows. The door admits all the
light they require. The fewer openings, the less
heat finds admission. The watering of the streets
and roads is done by men carrying on their backs
goat skins filled with water, the flow being regulated
by the fingers. Wells exist in great numbers. The
usual way of raising the water is by a couple of
oxen walking down an incline, pulling a rope which,
passing over a wheel, raises a large leather bucket
filled with water. On reaching the required level,
it is emptied into a trough, and distributed in any
direction desired. Thus the fields and gardens are
watered. There are irrigation works on an extensive
scale in many parts of India, under charge of
Government officials. Many of the operations in
agriculture done by machinery in other countries
are in India done by hand labour. The plough is
still the same simple contrivance of wood shod with
iron as was in use thousands of years ago. Drawn
by two oxen, it merely scratches the surface. The
grain is cut by hand, beaten out by hand, winnowed
by hand, and ground by hand, usually by women,
as in the days of the patriarchs, the upper and
nether mill-stones being part of the furnishing of
every house. The spinning of wool is also done
by hand, with very primitive-looking little wheels,
and many more industries which might be named,
and which in European countries have long passed


out of the region of hand labour. It is well that
it is so, as otherwise it is difficult to see how
occupation could be found for such a teeming
population.
Another night’s journey from Agra brought us
to Jaipur, the capital of Raj putana, and one of the
best laid out and built native cities we saw in
India. The Maharajah is evidently a ruler of an
enlightened and progressive spirit. He has at great
expense constructed, and maintains in fine order,
public gardens, in which is the Albert Museum, a
beautiful eastern palace-like building, containing a
most interesting collection of articles, illustrative of
the history, ethnology, arts, and industries of the
country. There is also in the gardens a fine
collection of birds and animals. Inside the walls
of the city, the bazaars are large, wide, and well
constructed. The buildings in the main streets are
painted the same colour, namely, pink. The Palace
is in the city, and visitors are allowed to see it on
previous written application. It is very extensive,
as well as the gardens. In a large tank or lake
were several crocodiles and huge turtles. One of
the former was lying half-way up the steps leading
to the water, with an enormous mouth wide open
and ready to descend on anything that might com©
its way. They were not pleasant objects to con-
template. A visit to the old city of Amer is one
of the most interesting sights. To get to it we
had to drive a distance of five miles, and then
mount a great elephant, which carried us up the
steep ascent to the courtyard of the old Palace, a


further distance of two miles. The city is situated
in the mountains, and must have been extensive,
but is now almost deserted, except by the keepers
of the Palace and the Dak bungalow. It is said
the situation was found to be unhealthy, and con-
sequently the Court and inhabitants removed to
the site of the present capital. On the hill above
the old Palace is a fort, and the walls, which must
embrace many miles of territory, run up hill and
down dale in a wonderful manner.
Among the products of native industry at
Jaipur, one of the most attractive is the brass
work, beautifully chased and enamelled. The
articles consist of trays, flagons, candlesticks, lamps,
boxes, and a great variety of other things. The
monkeys appear to have a good time in Jaipur.
I noticed some of large size swinging themselves
along in grand style on the house tops, and jump-
ing with the greatest ease across the openings
where side streets intervened. Pigeons, too, there
were in large numbers, and as no Hindu would
think of killing them, they must multiply greatly.
When at lunch at the Dak bungalow at Amer, one
of the dishes was some kind of bird, which looked
and tasted like partridge. I asked the man in
charge how he dared to kill the birds, to which he
replied, with a smile, “Here we are outside the
city.” In the gardens of the Albert Museum there
is a fine statue of Lord Mayo, the Governor-General,
who about 1867 was killed by a fanatical prisoner
at the penal settlement of Port Blair, in the
Andaman Islands, when stepping into the boat


Leaving the old City of Amer with the Fort in background (Rajputana).
Our bearer in white turban and coat.


which was to take him from the landing place to
the ship, after having paid his visit to the settle-
ment.
Our next stopping place, Bombay, is a
comparatively modern city, and is much more
Europeanlike than the cities already described,
though it has a large native population. In 1661,
the island of Bombay was ceded by Portugal to
the British Crown, as part of the dowry of Catherine
of Braganza, Queen of Charles II.; but it was not
delivered up by the Portugese till 1665. In 1668
Charles sold his rights over Bombay to the East
India Company for an annual payment of £lO. It
was then a mere fishing village, and notoriously
unhealthy; but being on an island gave the place
a great security against the raids of the Maratha
horsemen. What was then the island is now joined
to the mainland, and is covered with handsome
streets, squares, and gardens. The public buildings
are very fine, particularly the offices of the Railway
Administration and station. From the windows of
the Taj Mahal Hotel a fine view across the harbour
is obtained. This hotel is the finest we saw in
India. A drive of about two miles from the centre
of the city along a finely shaded avenue leads to
Malabar Hill, a long ridge of hills, on the slopes of
which are many fine residences facing the sea, or
what is called the back bay. The Wilson College,
as it is now called, stands in that position. The
College was established by the late Dr John Wilson,
on lines similar to the College established by Dr
Duff in Calcutta. I visited the College, and was


shown over all the rooms by the Principal, Dr
M'Kichan, whose thirty-five years in India do not
seem to have impaired his health and vigour. The
College I found in excellent order, and up to date.
The Doctor evidently does not intend to let it fall
behind. It belongs to the United Free Church of
Scotland. The number of students, I think, is
about 500. Bombay is the chief centre of the
Parsees in India. They form an important and
influential part of the community. We paid a visit
to their cemetery, or Towers of Silence, as they are
called. These towers are in a beautiful garden on
Malabar Hill. All that visitors are permitted to
see are the gardens and the outsides of the towers
at a distance. The bodies of the dead are exposed
in these towers to the vultures and the strong sun,
and in a comparatively short time are reduced to
dust, which is in time washed away by the rains
of the monsoon.
Much attention has been of late called to the
unrest and disaffection of the natives in India, and
the causes thereof. While of course it is unwise
for anyone who has only spent a few weeks in a
country to presume to speak or write with any
degree of certainty on so wide a subject, yet one
could not but meet and converse on the subject
with some of our own countrymen, who have spent
most of their lives there, and so learn something
from them, in addition to the impressions received
from observation. So far as I could judge, I should
say that the great mass of the natives are con-
tented and happy, having no tendency towards


disorder nor desire for political changes of any sort,
but desirous only to be let alone and to follow their
own way of living and working in peace and quiet-
ness. As for representative government on Western
or any other models, they neither understand nor
care anything about it. They are quite content to
leave Government affairs in the hands of others.
The great mass of the people are illiterate, but
there is a growing—though still a comparatively
small—number who have acquired such education
as is given in the schools and colleges established
throughout the country by the Government and the
home churches. The main defect of that education
is that it is almost entirely literary in character.
The students get their heads filled with English
literature and other branches of a Western educa-
tion. They have, moreover, a remarkable faculty of
acquiring, by a retentive memory, a verbal acquaint-
ance with the subjects taught, so that they can
pass examinations without, in most cases, under-
standing or being influenced by the ethical and
moral teaching which constitute the essential part
of education. Then, no sooner does the young
Indian student get his degree at some college, than
he considers himself entitled to a Government
appointment. Consequently, there are for every
vacancy something like fifty or more applicants.
Only one of the number gets the appointment; hut
what of the others ? They go to make up a class of
discontented men, all the more dangerous because
of the education they have received. The great
majority 0 f them set up as lawyers or so-called


“Pleaders/’ and, like a certain class of lawyers of
whom we have too many representatives at home,
they make a living by instigating litigation, with
its attendant evils. This is the class, I believe, to
whom we principally owe the political unrest in
India.
The foolish and mischievous talk of a certain
class of politicians at home has helped to fan the
flame. To these may be added a few disappointed
ex-Indian officials who have unfortunately been
successful in getting into Parliament, and thus
acquired an importance which they would otherwise
be without. What appears to be necessary is a
thorough change in the kind of education given.
Instead of being purely literary, it should partake
much more of a technical and industrial character,
so that young men may be brought up to see and
feel that there is nothing derogatory in industrial
pursuits, for which there is such vast scope in the
country. Then it ought to be much more difficult
to obtain a University degree, and instead of a
College education, as in too many cases at present,
costing the students nothing, there ought to be a
reasonable charge made for the advantages afforded.
I was informed that the pass examinations of some
if not all the Universities had been lowered, thereby
making it easier for the students to get degrees
than it was and is at home. If this is so, it seems
to call for a change. I cannot do better than
close this part of my letter with an extract from
a speech made by the Gaekwar of Baroda during
the tour of the Viceroy, Lord Minto, in November


last. I think it would be difficult to find any-
thing better either in the solid sense and wisdom
displayed or in the felicity of expression of this
remarkable speech:—
“Education, after all, is the most efficacious
means of natural progress. As one who has for
many years been in intimate touch with the
people, I may venture to remark that the educa-
tion imparted in this country is not exactly of the
right kind. Its effect is superficial. It does not
sufficiently penetrate society. True education con-
sists not merely in the acquisition of knowledge,
but in the development of the reasoning powers,
and in the formation of character. It should train
up men to a full sense of the responsibility of
their duties as men and as citizens. It should not
be confined to one class, but should reach the
masses. The attainment of these objects, in my
opinion, can best be helped forward by the adoption
of a sound system of primary and secondary educa-
tion for girls as well as boys, which will influence
the people at the most impressionable period of
their lives. It seems to me that a wider spread
of education is all the more necessary now that it
is proposed to enlist the co - operation of large
classes in the management of their own affairs,
and to widen the basis of representation. I know
full well the difficulties with which education is
beset, difficulties which many are liable to ignore
in their haste to achieve in a day those results
which are attainable only by the patient and self-
less (unselfish) work of generations. I would have
F


my people learn that progress, to be real, must
have its roots in themselves, that they must look
to the orderly conduct of their lives, that it is
probity, fair-mindedness, public spirit, and loyalty
to the State which every good citizen should aim
at; and that he who can subordinate his private
interests to the common weal is he who is fitted
for a voice in the affairs of State. The truly
educated will regard the personal liberty they enjoy
as the most precious blessing of civilisation, and
their duties to the State as essential to their
corporate existence. Those, on the other hand, who
confound liberty with licence, and seek to under-
mine authority, must be repressed with a firm
hand, and not allowed to endanger public tran-
quility or general progress.”


VII
JAPAN
The Canadian Pacific Railway Company, which has
done so much for the inland communications of
the Dominion, with an enterprise which does them
credit, besides running numerous steamers on the
West Coast, runs a regular service of mail and
passenger steamers between Vancouver, Japan, and
China as far as Hong Kong. The Empress of
India (one of the three Empresses), by which we
made the voyage, we found exceedingly comfort-
able, and in thirteen days after leaving Vancouver
we were at Yokohama, one of the principal seaports
of Japan.
On going on deck in the morning, I found we
wore running parallel with the land, which pre-
sented a beautiful outline of sharp peaked mountain
ranges against a clear blue sky. This was our first
glimpse of Japan, the Land of the Rising Sun.
Right ahead, distant about a hundred miles from
where we then were, rose Japan’s sacred mountain,
a lofty snow-capped pyramid, the Fuji or Fuziyama,
which one sees depicted on so many works of
Japanese art. It is said to be 12,500 feet high,
and is the highest mountain in Japan.
Yokohama is reached by a long sea entrance
between high land on both sides, well protected by
83
FUZIYAMA


forts, as the harbour itself is by two long break-
waters. As seen from the harbour, the town is
very picturesque. On the slopes of the hills facing
the water are seen houses and villas amidst gardens,
while along the shore between it and the hills are
the business and more densely populated parts of
the town. On the Bund along the shore are the
principal hotels, the English Club, and offices.
Before leaving the Empress of India, we had a
specimen of the formal and polite etiquette which
is a remarkable characteristic of Japanese manners.
While we were waiting on deck to get ashore after
medical inspection, a boat pulled alongside, and
three or four Japanese gentlemen ascended to the
deck. They were beautifully dressed, with kimonas
of purple silk embroidered. The object of their
visit was soon apparent. They had come to
welcome some friends or officials on board. Instead
of walking up and shaking hands, however, they
stopped at a few yards distance, and made several
low and stately bows; then, moving a little forward,
the bows were repeated, till the fx-iends were at
length reached and warmly welcomed. It is said
that the number of bows is regulated by the station
in life of the person approached. But politeness is
not confined to the upper classes in Japan. It
pervades all classes, and is one of the charms of
Japanese life and society. The children are from
their earliest years taught politeness and deference
to others, particularly their elders. It may be said,
indeed, to be part of their religion, into which
ancestral worship largely enters.


Outside the City of Nagoya, starting for a rickisha ride (Japan)


On landing at the Custom House Wharf, we
found a line of rickishas waiting to convey passen-
gers to their hotels, a mode of locomotion we were
from that time to become very familiar with.
With a little persuasion, my wife was induced to
get into one, and away we spun along the Bund
at a smart pace, and were soon deposited safely
on the steps of the Oriental Palace Hotel. After
that, I am bound to say that we took kindly to
the rickishas, and found the coolies as a rule
polite, pleasant fellows, and anxious to please.
They can go through a great deal of fatigue,
covering long distances at a smart trot. Their
usual headgear was a mushroom-shaped yellow hat
made of cotton cloth stretched over a cane frame
so that the air had free circulation round and over
the head. On their feet, when they wore anything
were sandals made of straw, and by way of clothing
they wore a light cotton shirt and short trousers.
We had not been long in our room when a
gentle tap at the door was heard, and on being
opened a Chinaman politely inquired if we required
any clothing made or done up. Both these they
do well and cheaply. I noticed in Yokohama the
tailors were generally Chinamen, whereas in Canada
they fulfil a very useful office by acting as laundry-
men. Soon another tap, and this time it was a
Jap who desired the privilege of making or mend-
ing boots and shoes for us. He carried his samples
of leather and his measuring articles in the deep
sleeves of his kimona. I gave him an order for a
pair of brown boots, and my wife ordered a pair of


black kid boots, both of which gave perfect satis-
faction, were beautifully made, and cost about 30
per cent, less than at home. This was all the
more remarkable, as the Japs don’t wear boots and
shoes. Their footwear is a thick white cotton sock
having a separate division for the big toe, and for
street use they slip on a wooden patten or sandal,
which is kept on by a strap or thong across the
foot. The Oriental Palace we found a very com-
fortable hotel. The attendants were all Japs, and
were very attentive.
As we intended spending several weeks in
Japan, we, together with two fellow - travellers,
engaged a Japanese guide to travel with us and
arrange our journeys. Such are not absolutely
necessary, but are a great help, particularly in the
country districts. The language, of course, is the
principal difficulty, but it is remarkable how the
knowledge of English is spreading in distant Japan.
It is taught in all the schools. The names of the
stations on the railways are given both in Japanese
and English characters, and the notices to travellers
are also given in parallel columns in the two
languages. This reference to railway notices reminds
me of a notice board I saw at one of the stations.
It was in English, and gave the names of places of
interest which could be visited from that station,
also the distances in miles, and concluded by
politely asking travellers to inquire of the station-
master for any further information desired. Our
guide’s name was Ito. He was a very intelligent
fellow, and spoke English well. I must say he


looked commonplace in his English suit of grey
tweeds, but was a gentleman of quite a different type
when dressed in his native costume, which gave
him an appearance of height and dignity awanting
in the European dress. This applies to all Japanese,
both men and women. The women, I was glad to
see, were more conservative in the matter of dress
than the men. Beyond doubt their national dress
suits them best.
In and around Yokohama there is a good deal
to interest strangers, but being a seaport, there is
more of the European element observable than in
the inland cities. From a tea house on the Bluff
we had a fine view of the harbour. In the court-
yard of the house stood the shrine with ancestral
tablets so common in Japan. A long rickisha ride
brings us to Mississippi Bay. A beautiful tea
house on the shore provided a most agreeable
resting place and refreshments, and from the open
windows we looked out on the bay, which, with
its fishing boats and distant mountains, presented
that peculiarly soft, restful, and dreamy aspect
which one sees in Japanese pictures. In the house
were some fine specimens of Japanese idols of
huge and hideous aspect, as well as a variety of
palanquins, carved woodwork, etc.
On the way we passed many rice fields, and to
see the patient and assiduous labour of the people
in cultivation of the fields, was very remarkable.
They are great as vegetable gardeners and florists,
bringing to bear upon these their powers of minute
industry and application. Human labour in the


cultivation of the fields largely occupies the place
of agricultural implements with us. The spade
does much of the work of the plough, and so on.
This is not such a drawback as it appears, because
with the redundant population it provides work
which would otherwise be wanting, and I doubt
whether with any other kind of cultivation the
same results could be got. There is nothing
wasted there. No corner of ground is allowed to
lie idle. From Yokohama another interesting day
was spent in a visit to Eneshimo and Kamakura.
The first is a favourite Jap sea-bathing place, and
at the latter is seen the great bronze statue of
Buddha called the Diabutsu. The statue is about
50 feet high, and is the finest we saw in Japan.
The idol stands—or, rather, sits—in the midst of
a beautiful grove of trees, the approach being by
a fine avenue. It dates from the year 1252, and
at one time was housed in a temple, but in 1495
the temple was swept away by a great inundation,
since which it has had only the sky for a cover-
ing. This I thought was no disadvantage, as the
quiet majesty and repose of the figure, and the
far-reaching gaze of the eyes, as if looking into
the future with calm benignity, harmonise well
with the surroundings. Inside the statue there is
a large room, which seemed as if it were used as
a temple. The eyes of the idol are each a little
over 3 feet in length, and the circumference of
the thumbs 3 feet. There were several priests in
attendance.
We visited another temple at Kamakura, where


there was a large gilded figure of the Goddess of
Mercy in a standing posture, and apparently about
30 feet high. Buddhism and Shintoism are the
two great divisions of Japanese religion. To the
outward appearance there was little to distinguish
the temples of the one from the other, except that
in the Buddhist temples we saw usually several
statues of Buddha, while in the Shinto temples
there were no images. The approaches to Shinto
temples were always marked by the peculiar arches
called “ torries ” — i.e., two uprights with a cross
beam above curved slightly downwards, and generally
painted red. The temples were ahnost always on
the slope of a hill, and surrounded with trees,
reminding us of the high places and groves of Old
Testament times. Shintoism is the religion of the
Court and officials, and at Tokio we visited the
temple where the great national service was held
at the close of the Russo-Japanese War. If there
are no images inside the Shinto temples, they have
some compensation in the enormous and hideous
figures which occupy houses on each side of the
gates, representing the Gods of War, though I
noticed in some cases one of the figures had rather
a jovial look on his red face, and had his hand
turned out at his side as if slyly soliciting a tip.
The most beautiful temples we saw in Japan
were at Nikko, a town about eighty or ninety
miles north of Yokohama. This has long been a
sacred spot. The group of temples occupy a fine
position on the southern slope of a beautifully
wooded hill. A long line of cryptomaria trees of


great height mark the approach to the temples,
some of which are of rare beauty. In one of these
we saw' a Shinto service going on. The priests, in
richly coloured silk dresses and the peculiar hat
well knowm in pictures of the Mikado, knelt at
each side of the shrine, and murmured their ser-
vice, the people being seated in lines on the floor
and looking on, but taking no visible part in the
service. Before entering, our boots were removed,
and a sort of slipper put on. Of music or singing
there was none. At a short distance from the
principal temple was another of smaller size, in
front of which a priestess clad in white sat. There
was also a very beautiful temple, the outside of
which was covered with the fine lacquer for which
Japan is famous, and finely inlaid with different
coloured woods. In adjoining galleries there are
many interesting things, relics of the Shoguns or
former provincial Governors, and offerings from the
Damios and others.
Without in the least presuming to dogmatise
on so difficult a question, the religion of the Japs
did not appear to me to have very much interest
for them, and the neglected state of many of the
temples—for I saw few so well kept as those at
Nikko—seemed to confirm this impression. Out-
side Kioto, for instance, I noticed the fine, shady
grounds round the temples were the favourite resort
of the people, who of an afternoon would assemble
there and enjoy themselves, bringing their tea and
eatables with them, or supplying themselves from
the stalls about the grounds. The people were


bright and happy, and the children playing about
suggested that probably the temple gardens could
hardly have been put to a better use.
The temple at Nikko in which we saw the
service was called Yomei-mon, and the gateway
Higurashi-mon—the latter meaning “ the gate pass-
ing a day,” because, it is said, people never tire of
looking at it and its marvellous workmanship even
for a whole day. Between the town of Nikko and
the temple hill runs the river, spanning which are
two bridges. One is for ordinary traffic, and the
other called the Mihashi —of red lacquer —is
reserved for the use of members of the Imperial
Family, as it formerly was for the Shoguns. This
famous bridge is frequently represented on trays,
pictures, and carved woodwork for which Nikko is
famous.
From Nikko we had a very interesting journey
into the mountains and Lake Chuzenji. As the
lake lies 4400 feet above sea level, some steep
climbing has to be done on the way up. Our
party was accommodated in seven rickishas, with
three coolies to each, in addition to our guide,
Ito, on a pony. For the first couple of miles or
so the road lay alongside the river, which flows
down from the mountains in a rocky bed, with
many bits of fine scenery. Further on the river
rushed through a deep gorge among rocks, and the
path, now on one side and then on the other,
was carried across on rather frail-looking wooden
bridges. By and by we left the river, and a steep
mountain climb by a zig-zag path for a long


distance followed. More beautiful mountain scenery
it would be difficult to find anywhere. The weather,
too, was perfect. We were told that such days
were few in a season. By the way there are
several Jap tea houses, where we stopped to rest
and enjoy the scenery. Our coolies stuck to their
work manfully, and a stiff job they had. At some
very steep places I got out of my rickisha and
climbed up by what the coolies called “ shorta
cutta,” leaving them as I expected to go round by
the path. On looking back I was surprised to see
them climbing after me carrying the rickisha on
their shoulders. In the evening we reached the
Lakeside Hotel, which, though small, was quite
comfortable, all connected with it being Japs. The
daughter of the proprietor, a very bright and
intelligent little woman, spoke English well, and on
my inquiring where she learned it she replied, at
school. The lake lies like a mirror framed in
mountains. It is 7i miles long by about 3 miles
broad. But what gave a glorious beauty to the
scene was the maple foliage which covered the
lower sides of the mountains. Every shade and
hue of crimson, scarlet, orange, and yellow, lit up
by brilliant sunshine, combined to give richness and
splendour to the setting. I had seen the autumn
glories of Canadian woods, but I had to admit that
I had before seen nothing like this. In the even-
ing we sat on the balcony overlooking the lake till
the light of day gave place to starlight of wonder-
ful brilliancy, the calm beauty of which was
reflected in the still mirror before us. Next day


Kioto, Japan: Entrance to the Temple Chion-in (Buddhist).


was mostly occupied by a visit to another lake
and the hot sulphur springs of Yumoto, about
seven miles further into the mountains. The path
followed took us to a still higher level, but the
rise was more gradual, and not so trying for the
coolies. The scenery was beautifully diversified.
The lake and springs lie in a hollow among
the mountains. The water is highly impregnated
with sulphur. A silver coin dipped in it was
turned black in a few seconds. As it issues from
the springs, the water is quite hot, and the wooden
waterways which conduct it to the baths are
coated with sulphur. The baths are very effective
in removing rheumatism and other ailments.
Springs hot and cold are numerous in Japan, the
hot springs varying in temperature from 98 degs.
to 230 degs. Fahr. Coming down from the lake
we passed some small houses, and, being evening,
I observed outside one of them a man taking his
bath with evident enjoyment. It consisted of a
barrel of water. He had the advantage and addi-
tional enjoyment of seeing all that passed, his head
and shoulders being visible above the rim of the
barrel. When in the mountains I observed several
companies of boys, under the direction of a master,
out for exercise in climbing, and to acquire a
knowledge of the country. They were undergoing
training similar to our Boy Scouts. Physical
development has a prominent place in Japanese
school life. I observed in a large gymnastic hall
at a school in Yokohama a great array of
appliances for muscular exercises. Probably the


desire to increase the stature of the race may
have something to do with it.
The universality of the business of pawnbroker
was borne in upon me when I came across, even
in small inland towns in Japan, signs directing the
way to the business places of these moneylenders.
In Japan, as elsewhere, they no doubt fulfil a use-
ful purpose, and very far back in the history of
the world the requirements of the borrower, with
his pledge, were supplied by the pawnbroker, by
whatever name he was known.
The system of safe deposit, too, has been prac"
tised in Japan from time immemorial. I was at
first puzzled to make out what purpose was served
by the strongly built, shuttered, and barred build-
ings in the streets of the cities. They were easily
distinguished from all other buildings. Their use
will be easily understood when it is remembered
that Jap houses, being built of wood, are liable to
fire, and being lightly built with screens, they don’t
offer much resistance to robbers. Accordingly a
safe place to put away valuables—either household
or personal—is a necessity. The furnishings of the
houses are very few, and when an entertainment is
given the owner has only to go to the store and
select what decorative or other articles he wants,
which are afterwards returned.
Japanese do not have either tables or chairs in
their houses, and no bedsteads are required. The
floors of the houses are covered with fine grass
matting over rice straw, which makes a comfort-
able padding. A pillow upon which they kneel or


squat is all the seat used, and three square pillows
put on the floor, with some sort of covering, form
the bed. A little box with a mirror fixed on the
top, and a drawer for brush and comb, etc., com-
prises the toilet table; and a small table about
eight inches high serves for meals. The rooms are
divided by wooden frame screens, which run in
grooves, the panels of which are filled in with
paper. For winter, or when shut up, a set of close
wooden screens is kept. Always before entering a
Jap house people take off their sandals or pattens,
and leave them outside. In the front of the
houses of poor people, facing the street, there is
generally a little raised platform, railed, on which
the young children play and get the air, while
their mothers are busy inside. The custom is to
bring up the children from their earliest years to
habitual self-restraint—not of a dull kind unnatural
to youth, but of a happy and contented sort,
neither showing too much sorrow nor joy, but in
all cases polite and deferential. During all the
time we were in Japan, I do not remember to
have observed a child cry. Tied on the back of
the mother or elder sister, who worked or played
notwithstanding, the little dark face was peering
over the shoulder or asleep. Thus burdened, I
have seen Japanese women in boats hauling up a
sail, and girls and boys playing ball with the little
head waggling behind, as if it ran risk of dis-
location—but quite happy in all cases. In spite of
the dense population, even the poor had a com-
fortable, well-fed appearance, without any of that


squalor and misery we too often see at home. A
very little money goes a long way in supplying
them with food, and their wants are easily satis-
fied. Rice is the chief food of the mass of the
people. Vegetables are abundant and cheap; so is
fruit such as apples, persimmon, and oranges.
Butcher meat seemed seldom used. Yet it is
remarkable how much work they can do upon
such simple diet, and how healthy they are. The
open-air life must help in the same direction.
The population is steadily increasing. In 1903 it
stood at 46f millions—not including Formosa. It
must now be about 491 millions, which is about
6 millions more than that of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Ireland. No wonder, there-
fore, the Japs are spreading so rapidly in other
lands, such as Korea, Manchuria, and the Western
States of America, both North and South.
Few nations show such a genuine appreciation
of flowers as the Japanese. Their flower festivals
occur several times a year, and to these almost the
whole population turns out. Plum blossom is in
flower from January till March, cherry blossom in
April, azalea and wistaria in June, the lotus in
August, and the chrysanthemum in November.
The chrysanthemum shows in some cases take a
curious form. Instead of the flowers being ranged
in pots, as with us, they are made up into forms
and figures of great variety, but most commonly
some historical or mythological tableaux. In those
we saw the figures were about eight feet high. The
flowers used were the small kind, and were most


A group round the travellers in front of Temple at Kioto, Japan, showing the
way Japanese women carry their children.


skilfully arranged so that the colours suited the
faces, hands, and dresses, on which last the patterns
were worked out with wonderful minuteness and
beauty.
These, in addition to agriculture and tea growing,
may he briefly summarised as wood and ivory
carving, pottery, lacquer work, inlaying; silk pro-
ducing, weaving, and embroidering; cotton manu-
factures ; cut velvet, with printed decorations, metal
work, and cloisonne. The last-named they have
brought to great perfection. Briefly the process is
as follows. Let us suppose the article is a vase. It
is made of red copper. The design is painted upon
it in black lines with a fine brush by hand. This
part is generally done by women. It then passes
into the hands of a workman, who solders on very
fine gold and silver wire so as to line out the
design. The next stage is to fill in with appro-
priate enamels the design such as flowers, birds, or
whatever it may be. Then follows the firing or
stoving, whereby the colours are hardened. After
this the polishing is taken in hand, and a laborious
process it is before the rough surface is reduced
to the smoothness of glass, and the beautifully deli-
cate design and colours are evolved. In nothing
perhaps is the patient toil and marvellous art of
the Jap workman exhibited so much as in the
lacquer work. Originally the Japs acquired the
art from the Chinese, but they have improved
upon it till they have far surpassed their teachers.
The material used is the sap of the lacquer tree,
which goes through a variety of processes before


it is ready for use. We saw some very beautiful
and costly specimens of lacquer in Kyoto, some of
them cabinets the inside fittings and decorations
of which wore in gold lacquer, and were of the
most delicate and exquisite workmanship. It is
worthy of remark that four hundred years ago,
when art and science were hardly thought of in
England, the Japanese were evolving this beautiful
art. Whether this art and other arts requiring
long, minute, and patient labour will continue to
be practised in these modern days is questionable.
Inferior and cheap substitutes—quantity rather than
quality—are observable in many of the articles
exposed for sale. Silk production increases year by
year, the value of these goods exported being about
nine to ten million pounds sterling, besides the
large quantity used in the country.
Turning now to an imported industry which has
made -wonderful progress, and which shows the extra-
ordinary adaptability of the Japanese, I have now to
notice their shipbuilding. The principal yards are at
Kobe and Nagasaki. At Kobe there are two extensive
and well-equipped yards, one employing over 8000
men and the other, which was but recently opened,
employing about 2500. There was a fine largo
graving dock, and a floating dry dock capable of
lifting a 7000-ton steamer. An additional floating
dock, to take in a steamer of 12,000 tons, was
about to be added. There were, among others,
several gun and dispatch boats building for the
Chinese Government, and the shops and yards
were well furnished with modem plant. At


Nagasaki, where I spent nearly a fortnight, I paid
frequent visits to the great Mitsubishi Yards, where,
under the guidance of the Surveyor of Lloyd’s
Register of British and Foreign Shipping, and by
the courteous invitation of the heads of the concern,
I became acquainted with every part of the
works. The number of workpeople employed was
then about 8500. A steamer of 8000 tons was
being completed, machinery as well as hull having
been constructed in the shops and yard under
Lloyd’s Survey and to Lloyd’s highest class.
There were four or five other large steamers on
the stocks in various stages of progress, and they
were laying down two others of 13,500 tons each
to be fitted with turbine machinery. These two
last named have since been completed, besides
many others which have followed. The chief ship
constructor was a Clyde man, and so was the chief
of the engineering department. They had gone
out on, I believe, a five years’ engagement, and
at the end of the time the Japs were able to
do without them, and dispensed with their
services. There are several graving docks of sizes
to suit the largest steamers coming to the port,
one being 722 feet long. An interesting feature
I found in this yard was the training of young
men in the science of shipbuilding and engineer-
ing. A school in which about 500 of these lads
o
were being instructed had been established in
connection with the works by this company,
which shows the thorough and practical way
they organise things. At the time I was there


almost all the steel for building was imported,
but as the Japs aim at providing their own
materials as well as workmanship, they have
established some large steel works. Ore being
available in any quantity, there is no difficulty
in this. The price of steamers in consequence of
the cost of imported material and duty was
considerably higher than with us in Britain, and
this notwithstanding the low wages paid the
workmen, which ran from about lOd. to Is. 3d.
per day. On the other hand, the Government pay
large subsidies to the shipping companies, and the
cost of working the steamers is very much less
than with us. Accordingly, they are in a posi-
tion to compete with our steamers on very favour-
able terms, and are pushing their lines out in all
directions such as to London, to Australia, to
America, and to India, besides China, Korea, Siam,
etc. According to the latest figures at my dis-
posal, the total mercantile marine steam tonnage
of Japan was 1,149,222 tons, a wonderful result,
seeing that it is only the growth of from thirty
to forty years, and mainly of the last ten years.
Having travelled by one of the Nippon Yusen
Kaisha steamers, the “Nikko Maru,” from Hong
Kong to Sydney, N.S.W., a voyage of about three
weeks, we found ourselves very comfortable. There
was an excellent table in European style, and
the attendance was very good. The officers, engi-
neers, crew, and stewards were Japs, the doctor
included. The only exception was the captain,
who was a Devonshire man, and I have since


heard that he has given place to a Jap captain.
The “ Nikko Maru ” was a steamer of rather over
6000 tons, built under Lloyd’s Survey by the
Mitsubishi Company at Nagasaki. The panels
in the drawing-room were filled with beautiful
paintings by Japanese artists. This is the first
steamer in which I found a laundry where
passengers’ linen could be washed on board, a
matter which conduces much to comfort in these
tropical regions. I understand some of the new
Orient Company’s steamers between London and
Australia have now been provided with laundries.
At the close of the war with Russia (1905)
Japan had 10 battleships and 28 cruisers, which
with gunboats, etc., totalled 341,671 tons. In
1907 there were under construction in their own
yards two battleships, four first-class cruisers, and
four third-class cruisers, a total of 97,500 tons. The
two battleships are of 20,000 tons displacement
each, materials and arms being all Japanese, thus
realising a long-cherished ambition in the line of
self-defence.
It was a wet afternoon in Tokyo when wo left
our hotel in richishas to make our first acquaint-
ance with Jap theatricals. On arriving about 2.30
p.m., we found the performance had already been
going on for some hours, for the people like to
make a day of it when they go. The building
was about the same size as an ordinary British
theatre, but very plain both externally and inter-
nally. It was principally constructed of wood, with
screens which during the intervals were drawn


aside and gave access to the surrounding court,
in which there were stalls and booths for the sale
of a variety of food and other things. A gallery
ran round three sides, from which, when the
screens were pulled back, a way was opened to
an outside gallery. Thus exit was easy, as by
simply drawing the screens aside the whole theatre
could be emptied very quickly on an emergency.
The stage occupied one end or side, and there was
an ingenious contrivance by which the circle of
the stage revolved so that the scenery was changed
by the simple process of turning round the stage.
The whole floor of the theatre was divided into
little square boxes like a draughts board, the
divisions being about eighteen inches from the
floor. They were large enough to hold four people,
one in each corner, upon cushions (no chairs), with
a little charcoal brazier in the middle for the pur-
pose of making tea and lighting pipes, which are
smoked by both sexes. It must be said, however,
that the little pipes used, which hold only as
much tobacco as will roll into the size of a pea,
do not render the atmosphere unpleasant from
smoke. We tried the squatting upon cushions,
but soon found the cramped position of the legs
intolerable, and would have had to leave, but on
our guide explaining our trouble to the Chief of
Police, he very kindly gave us the use of his
private box in the gallery, into which a couple of
chairs were put for us, so that we were able to
sit out the rest of the time in comfort. The
actors came upon the stage on a platform or gang


way which ran from the front of the theatre to the
stage on a level rvith the heads of the spectators.
The piece which was being played when we
entered was some historical play, which gave room
for fine effects in dresses, scenery, etc. It was a
war piece, of course, and the fighting was of the
most sanguinary sort. The get-up of the warriors
in the old Japanese armour and arms was very
picturesque. After the tussle only one of the
leaders was left alive on the stage, and he was
badly wounded. In a high-pitched, unnatural voice
he soliloquised, evidently bewailing the loss of
friends who lay in heaps around him, until he
dropped from exhaustion into a sitting posture
upon the ground, but still continued to hold forth.
Then another wounded warrior comes upon the
scene, who seats himself beside the first. They
talk together for some time, and having apparently
agreed to die together, the first plunges his sword
into his companion, and then, turning his weapon
upon himself, commits the “ happy dispatch.”
These scenes appeared to be highly appreciated
by the audience. What pleased us more w r ere
those scenes where the Daimios, Shoguns, or
Princes, splendidly dressed, sat in council and
showed how the affairs of State w T ere conducted
in olden times. This was followed by a piece of
a more modem and domestic kind, some parts of
which were such as to arouse the emotions of the
female part of the spectators, but being -wanting
in the spectacular features of the previous play,
was not so interesting to us.


The curtain was lowered and raised on a signal
given by a man with two pieces of hard wood,
which he clapped together and made a good deal
of noise. The orchestra was accommodated in two
boxes, one on each side of the stage, and about
ten feet above it. The musicians were two in each
box, or four altogether. One in each box had a
samisen or three-stringed square-headed banjo, and
the other a sort of drum. Every now and then
they broke out into a dismal kind of wail, and
twanged their strings, with an utter absence of
harmony; but Ave Avere quite unable to understand
AA'hat it all meant, Avhere the idea of music came
in, and Avhat possible connection it could haA T e
with the play going on beloAv. When Ave left the
play Avas still going on, and Avas likely to do so for
some hours longer. The Japs seem to go there
to spend the day in a sort of family capacity,
taking their food Avith them or buying Avhat they
want from the stalls in the A-estibule; and if any
of them happen to feel sleepy or don’t find the
piece interesting, they think nothing of curling up
in their corner and taking a nap.
I have referred to music incidentally AA'hile
describing the theatre. It Avas ahvays a surprise
to us to find that the Japs Avere so far back in
this delightful art, at least according to our ideas.
The native music is, generally speaking, far from
agreeable, and even among the Japs themselves
does not seem to be much appreciated. The sing-
ing consists of a sort of squalling or catenvauling
in a high key, accompanied by some stringed in


strument, such as the samisen or koto, the latter
a kind of lyre. The Geisha or singing girls are
the general entertainers at all festive gatherings,
which are very numerous in Japan. But it is
much more their bright, clever, and amusing ways
for which they are noted rather than for their
singing. Schools of music have now been esta-
blished in Tokyo, in which European as well as
national music is cultivated, and there is every
reason to expect that the younger generation will
develop a higher order of musical talent. The
military bands are on European models. At the
recent Japanese Exhibition in London, the Band
of His Imperial Majesty played splendidly Euro-
pean music of all kinds.
With few exceptions the Japanese people are
a small race, dark-skinned, black-haired, slant-eyed,
with large mouth, and the front upper teeth large
and prominent. They are bright and intelligent,
with much politeness, which seems partly natural
and partly acquired, as good manners form an im-
portant part of the education of the children.
They have a great liking for things English, and
even in dress many of them have copied their
British allies, which is a pity, as they look far
better in their native dress, which suits them
well and allows much more freedom to the body.
They are quite alive to the importance of physical
exercises, and I noticed in the schools appliances
in great variety for developing the muscles, and
possibly the stature. One does not see many
horses in Japan. For drawing heavy loads, oxen


are used, and for lighter work men and women,
which answers well in the towns, where the streets
.are generally narrow. The rickisha coolies are a
strong and athletic set of men, capable of running
great distances and enduring much fatigue. It
rather upsets our ideas about the need of butcher
moat to see that so much hard work and en-
durance are maintained on a diet consisting
principally of rice and a little fish. The value of
physical training is recognised also in the schools
and colleges by a system of holiday excursions on
foot. We often met bands of young men on the
march, climbing mountains, thus combining train-
ing and gaining a knowledge of the country very
effectually.
The mass of the people are quiet, sober, patient,
and industrious. They are cheerful in manner,
quick in taking up new ideas and copying any-
thing they see, with much artistic and refined
taste. The hurry and pressure of Western nations
have not yet displaced the minute and patient
application of skill and labour which are neces-
sary to produce much of their fine artistic work,
but as I have already remarked, there is a danger
in this direction in the future.
With all his courtesy and agreeablcness, the
Jap knows how to keep his own counsel, and is
not in the habit of opening all his mind to you.
As an old Scotsman, who had married a Jap wife
and lived for over thirty years in the country,
expressed it to me, there is always something at
the back of the Japanese mind which he won’t


let you know. He has a shrewd eye to his own
interest. He will adopt as much of your know-
ledge and experience as he thinks desirable, and
as long as he finds it his interest to do so. He
is not tied to custom and conventional ideas, like
the Chinaman, but has a quick appreciation of what
is necessary to place him on a par with the European
in things educational, industrial, military, and naval.
In naval organisation he takes the British as his
model, and in military matters the German.
Except in a small way, I had no experience
of how the Japs conduct commercial affairs, but
from the testimony of those well able to speak,
it appears that the Japanese in business have
generally speaking rather loose ideas of a con-
tract. In our own and most other nations a
contract, once agreed and signed, is regarded as
conclusive. Not so, however, in the view of the
Jap, 'who seems to regard it rather as a sort of
preliminary arrangement the conditions of which
may be altered or set aside as he may find it
desirable. Of course this often leads to trouble
and litigation, in w ? hich the foreigner very often
comes off only second best. In this respect the
Jap is a contrast to the Chinese merchant, whose
word is said to be as good as his bond, and in
fact a great deal of business between British houses
in the East and Chinamen used to be, and I
suppose still is, conducted by w T ord of mouth only.
The Jap code of commercial morality, in short, is
not yet of a high order, but probably they will
yet come to see that honesty is the best policy,


and act accordingly. Certain it is that no great
and enduring commercial prosperity can be built
upon any other foundation.
It was natural that after the events of a suc-
cessful war with a great European and Asiatic
Power like Russia, there should be a considerable
amount of pride and self-satisfaction visible among
the people, though it is only right to say that
this has not shown itself in the sayings and
doings of the leaders, either naval or military.
Indeed, the modest and self-depreciatory attitude
of the Generals and Admirals who distinguished
themselves most in the late war was such as to
evoke only approval and praise. If, however, the
complaint known as swelled head does not become
epidemic, no great harm need be feared. The
opinion I heard expressed frequently in the East
in regard to the Japanese doings in Korea was
not very favourable. What was begun then has
practically since been carried out, and Korea may
now be said to be part of the Japanese Empire.
Perhaps this was the inevitable consequence of the
state of the Government in that country, which
had become feeble and unprogressive.
On the question of the British-Japanese alliance,
it may be that Englishmen resident out there are
not in all respects the best judges, but I heard
doubts expressed as to whether we had not been
too generous and confiding, with the possibility
that some day we might find ourselves to have
been so. However that may be, there can be no
doubt that Japan aims at being a first-class Power,


and equal with any either in Europe or America.
Furthermore, they are making a big bid for the
maritime trade of the East, and from what I have
already stated it will be seen that they are doing
so with a large amount of success. It behoves
our people at home to mind what they are about,
as the Japanese workman can be trained quickly
to do anything that we can do at home, and as
he is frugal, sober, diligent, and works for a
fraction of the wages paid in our country, besides
caring little about holidays, it will be seen that
they have many advantages to offer for industrial
success in competition with Europe and America.
I shall conclude my Japanese notes with an
extract from a speech of Count Okuma on the
influence of Japan in the Far East, delivered in
September 1905:
“Japan is a newly-risen nation, active and
vigorous in all her actions. She avails herself of
all the scientific knowledge of the civilised coun-
tries in her government, she is quite free from
the despotism and feudal system of the Middle
Ages. She has given political and religious freedom
to her people. In short, all her institutions are
absolutely opposite to those of the Czar’s Empire,
the only representative of the semi-civilisation of
the Middle Age. There is every reason to believe
that Russia, depending for her national existence
entirely on her topographical position and her
ineffective military resources and precarious inter-
national relations, is no match for Japan, who is armed
with the up-to-date knowledge of modern civili


sation and the indomitable vigour of a rising nation.
It is certain that in the Far East Japan has proved
herself at least equal, and perhaps even superior,
to any civilised nation in militaiy strength. But to
be strong in war is not enough for a nation to
become a predominant Power of the world; she
has to be recognised by all other Powers as worthy
to take rank with them on equal terms.
“ In the first place, how should we treat our inferior
neighbours ? With justice and benevolence. These
are the two great principles we have adhered to from
the time immemorial in our foreign intercourse, and
have been proved by events to be the only way
leading to permanent success. . . . The great
maxim that honesty is the best policy, is beneficially
applicable to all departments of human affairs.
Besides this, there would he a great danger of
being justly punished sooner or later if we have
recourse to mere military force unaccompanied by
morality, every time we have to deal with any
weaker nation, and invade her territory without
provocation, a statement of which history furnishes
ample evidence. Paradoxical as it may seem, no
nation on earth has ever been destroyed by others,
but by herself.”
Count Okuma was leader of the progressive Party
in the Japanese Parliament, and he and the late
Marquis Ito were reckoned two of the ablest states-
men of their time. With men of that stamp to guide
her destinies, a great future may be predicted for
Japan. In what relation that future may stand to
the British Empire, time alone can prove.


VIII
NEW ZEALAND
New Zealand, though the most distant of our
oversea dominions, is nevertheless a land in which
a Scotsman feels himself very much at home. It
might indeed with propriety be called New Scot-
land, not only because, like the Old Country, it is
a land of mountains, lakes, and rivers, but because
so large a proportion of its people are Scotch by
birth or descent. Separated from the Mother
Country by about 14,000 miles of ocean, a veritable
outpost of Empire, these islands in the far off South
Pacific appeal to us as the home of many of our
friends and kinsmen who, through deeply attached
to their new country, still think and speak of the
old land as “home.” A voyage to New Zealand in
the old days of sailing ships, when three or four
mouths were spent upon the ocean, must have been
a trying experience, and it must have required a
good deal of resolution and hardihood on the part
of the early settlers to face not only the long voyage,
but the hardships and toil incident to the life of
pioneers in a new country. How different are the
conditions of travel and of life now. Splendid ocean
steamers, replete with every comfort, convey the
traveller over the same seas in six weeks, and on
111
AN OUTPOST OF EMPIRE


landing he finds himself, though in a new country,
amid surroundings hardly less comfortable than at
home. Familiar names of people and places, of towns,
streets and houses, of mountains, lakes, and rivers,
meet him everywhere, and he finds the counterpart
of home institutions wherever he goes.
It was on the afternoon of 30th December, the
period corresponding to our midsummer at home,
four days after leaving Sydney, N.S.W., that we
came to anchor in the spacious harbour of Auck-
land, formerly the capital of New Zealand, until
Wellington took its place as the seat of Govern-
ment. Auckland, like nearly all the seaports of the
Dominion, is on the east side, about the middle of
the North Island. To reach it from Australia we
had to come round the North Cape, or as it was
at one time called by the early Dutch navigators,
Cape Maria van Diemen. Off the cape lie the
islands called the Three Kings, on which not a few
ships have come to grief. The coast-line is marked by
ranges of mountains and numerous islets, many of
the latter being of singular forms. After passing
the headlands, the harbour of Auckland opens out
into a spacious land-locked roadstead. Owing to
the height of the intervening land, little is seen of
the city until arrival in the roads. The city lies
on the slopes of the hills, which form a fine back-
ground. Seen from the harbour, it presents a very
pleasing picture, and on landing one is not dis-
appointed, as he finds himself in a well-built, busy,
and flourishing city, with an excellent service of
electric cars running in all directions through well


made streets and roads from the centre, called
Queen Street, to the suburbs.
The public gardens are very pretty, and no one
misses visiting Mount Eden, which stands in
relation to Auckland somewhat in the same
position as Arthur Seat to Edinburgh, without
Salisbury Crags. It also wants the height and bold-
ness of outline, but commands a splendid view, and
is interesting as possessing the most perfectly
formed crater of an extinct volcano I have ever
seen. The crater is round and cup shaped, the top
diameter being apparently about 400 feet, and depth
about 150 feet. Auckland has a considerable
trade, and is the calling place of steamers from
the west coast of America en route to Australia,
besides having a large coasting trade. The
climate we found warm and pleasant, if somewhat
relaxing at that season. The shops as a rule are
good and well stocked. Many of the articles dis-
played, especially clothing, appeared to be of British
manufacture, while in some of the windows were
seen the fine soft woollen rugs, plaids, and under-
wear for which the mills of New Zealand are
famous. Prices generally seemed to be not very
different from those at home, except in the case of
clothing made to order, where the higher cost of
labour tells.
New Year’s Day was ushered in with the sound
of steam whistles, bells, and other noisy demon-
strations similar to what we are accustomed to at
home, and I daresay, if curiosity had tempted us
to stray from our hotel on the heights to the


level of Queen Street, we would without much
difficulty have fancied we were back in the streets
of our own good city of Edinburgh when the mid-
night hour peals forth from the steeple of the
Tron Kirk, and the bells “ring out the old, and
ring in the new.”
The Dominion of New Zealand consists of three
main islands, with several groups of smaller islands
lying at distances of 200 to 1600 miles from
Auckland. The North and Middle Islands are
divided by Cook’s Strait, sixteen miles wide at its
narrowest part, and constitute the most important
part of the country, having a coastline of about
4300 miles. Stewart’s Island, on the extreme
south, has a coastline of only about 130 miles.
The Dutch navigator, Abel Jansen Tasman, was the
first, so far as is known, to discover New Zealand.
In December 1642 he sighted the west coast of
the Middle Island, which he truly described as “a
high mountainous country.” He believed the land
to be part of a great polar continent. He had
some trouble with the natives, and does not appear
to have landed. Keeping a northerly course, he
steered along the coast of the North Island, and,
after sighting the Three Kings Islands, he departed.
Captain Cook, in search of a southern continent,
was the next discoverer to visit New Zealand,
which name had been given to it by Tasman. It
was in October 1769 Captain Cook sighted land
and cast anchor in Poverty Bay. After coasting
round the three islands, he took his departure for
Australia in March 1770. Captain Cook visited


New Zealand again in 1773, in 1774, and in 1777.
After this there was occasional intercourse between
New Zealand and the English settlements in New
South Wales; and in 1814 the first missionaries
arrived. The first attempts at colonisation were
failures, owing to the savage character of the
inhabitants, but gradually settlements grew up
round the coast, and in 1833 a British Resident
was appointed. In 1840, with the consent of the
natives, the sovereignty of Queen Victoria was pro-
claimed, and in 1841 New Zealand was established
as a separate colony.
The next important event was the arrival at
Port Chalmers, on the south-east coast of the
Middle Island, in March 1848, of two emigrant
ships sent out by the Otago Association for the
purpose of founding a settlement by people belong-
ing to the Free Church of Scotland. Dunedin,
about six miles from Port Chalmers, became the
chief town of Otago. That was followed in 1849
by the Canterbury Association, composed of persons
connected with the Church of England, establish-
ing a settlement about 200 miles north of Port
Chalmers, which became the Province of Canter-
bury with Christchurch as its chief town and
Lyttleton its port.
The native inhabitants of New Zealand, the
Maoris, now number somewhere about 45,000, and
inhabit the northern part of the North Island.
Large tracts of land were reserved for their use.
They are a fine race physically, far before the
native Australians, and previous to the advent of


the British seem to have spent a great part of
their time in fighting. The Middle Island when
first colonised was found to contain very few
inhabitants, owing to the constant wars in which
they had engaged. Their war canoes, of which I
saw one at Auckland, were large, well-built, and
capable of carrying from fifty to sixty or more men.
In colour and physique the Maoris appeared to me
to resemble strongly the Sandwich and Fijian
Islanders. They are of a warm brown colour, not
black like the Australians. There are now many
of them well educated, and they are represented in
Parliament by men of their own race. They are,
so far as I know, the only instance of a native
race holding its own and not disappearing before
the advance of western civilisation. They speak a
pure dialect of the Polynesian language. It was
long before they would take to any industry, and
even yet I believe only a small proportion of them
care to engage in work beyond what is absolutely
necessary. Many of them prefer to take their ease
and enjoy the pipe of peace in a natural warm
bath under the shade of an umbrella. Some are
engaged by the Government in tree planting and
such-like outdoor employment.
At Whakarewarewa, where we spent a week in
the centre of the North Island, there was a Maori
village. The little wooden houses, or “whare,” as
they are called, were grouped at all sort of angles
round and among the hot sulphur springs, so that
they had hot water in plenty always at their
doors, and were saved even the expense of a fire.


as they were able to cook their food by putting it
into a net and letting it down into one of the
pots or boiling cauldrons of the springs. This
whole neighbourhood steams and smokes of sulphur.
The geysers spout to a height of 60 or 80 feet,
and besides the clear water there are ponds of
grey mud in a state of ebullition and constantly
throwing up bubbles of steam like boiling porridge.
Our guide here was Maggie Papakura, a pure
Maori, well educated, and who spoke and wrote
English perfectly. Her “whare” was neatly fur-
nished, and contained a little library and writing
table, where Maggie carried on her literary pur-
suits. Her Maori legends were very interesting,
such as “ The Parting of Heaven and Earth,”
“Rona, the Woman in the Moon,” etc. About a
mile and a half off is Rotorua, on the shore of
the lake of the same name. There a fine sana-
torium has been built, and is maintained by the
Government, to which many people in search of
health resort, the hot springs being very good for
many complaints. At Whakarewarewa there is a
fine example of a Maori Pa, or fort. The con-
struction shows much skill. The outer defence is
a strong stockade of wood, with an arched gate-
way on one side curiously carved with figures of
Maori warriors tattooed. The main posts of the
stockade are ornamented with large wooden figures
of men at regular intervals, as if on the lookout.
Inside the palisade is a trench, and then a wall
of earth and turf. These Pas, defended by bold
and hardy fighters used to give our soldiers some


pretty hard work in the early days of coloni-
sation.
The “haka” or war dance, which in the olden
days used to be danced by the Maoris as a
defiance to enemies, is still given at Whaka once
or twice a-week for the entertainment of visitors.
Both men and women take part in it. They get
very excited and make awful grimaces.
About nine miles from Rotorua is Te Wairoa.
It was there in 1886 that the eruption of Mount
Tarawera destroyed not merely the village, but a
good number of lives. The ruins are still to be
seen, and the horrors of that night are still vividly
remembered. A tall, benevolent-looking old Maori
woman called Sophia, who now lives at Whaka and
acts as a guide to strangers, was instrumental in
saving thirty-nine lives during the eruption. Her
tall figure and tattooed face were familiar to us
during our stay at Whaka. Most people have
heard of the famous pink and white terraces. They
were destroyed at the same time. Those who saw
these terraces prior to the eruption say it was hard
to describe their beauties and colouring. Froude
called the White Terrace “a crystal staircase,
glittering and stainless, as if it were ice.” He
found the Pink Terraces still more beautiful, and
describes them as “Something which I had never
seen, and shall never see again on this side of
eternity.” The terraces were on the borders of
Lake Rotomahana. A launch now takes visitors
across and over their sites.
On the N.E. shore of Lake Rotorua there is an


interesting and beautiful spot called Hamurana. It
is reacted by steam launch after an hour’s steam-
ing from Rotorua. At a distance of half a mile or
so from the lake towards the foot of the mountain
we came to a river, and getting into a small boat
pushed our waj r through the tropical vegetation
for a short distance, when we came to a large
rocky basin overhung with great ferns, and here,
welling up through a great vent in the rock, was
a river of the purest water. So clear was it that
we could see deep down into the chasm, and
another surprising thing about it was, that any-
thing thrown in would not sink but was immediately
thrown to the surface by the force of the spring.
Thus pennies were returned by the water and
deposited at the edge of the basin. The water is
perfectly cold. About ten miles from Rotorua is
Tikitere, a weird-looking place in a valley among
the hills. Sulphurous steam from the boiling mud-
holes fills the air, and care has to be taken in
walking beside the pools to closely follow the
guide lest you put your foot into a hot pool or
break through the crust of the earth which is thin
in places. The “ Devil’s Punch Bowl,” “ Gates of
Hell,” “ Inferno,” etc., are the suggestive names one
comes across here.
From what I have stated, it will be understood
that the North Island is highly volcanic. Mount
Egmont, an extinct volcano, rises to a height of
8200 feet, and there are numerous others of lesser
altitude. Ruapehu is over 9000 feet, and like
Egmont is covered on its upper part with perpetual


snow. Though mountainous there are extensive
tracts of splendid pastoral lands in the North
Island. Dairy farming has rapidly extended there,
particularly in the Taranaki district, where there
are 87 butter and 11 cheese factories. About 75
per cent, of the cattle, of which there are nearly
two million in the colony, are in the North Island;
and of sheep it contains also rather the greater
number. The export of butter is an increasing
business. In 1905 butter to the value of about
£1,500,000 was exported, and of cheese nearly
£250,000 sterling.
Sheep, however, constitute the principal wealth
of New Zealand. In 1901 the total number in the
North and Middle Islands was about 20£ millions.
In 1905 it was slightly lower, being 19,130,000.
The weight of wool exported and locally consumed
amounts to 150 J million pounds. The frozen
mutton and lamb exported in 1905 was over 3|
millions. The province of Canterbury is famous for
its sheep and lambs. The size of flocks in New
Zealand varies very much. The number of those
of ten thousand to twenty thousand and upwards
is fewer than it was, which is probably due to the
policy of dividing up large farms; but in 1905 there
were still about three hundred flocks over ten
thousand each. The kind of sheep which suits
New Zealand farmers best is that which combines
the best fleece with the most suitable carcase for
freezing purposes, and early maturity.
To reach the Wanganui River from Rotorua, a
long detour is necessary. The journey by rail


occupies the whole day. The intervening country
is very mountainous, and for the most part heavily
timbered. At Taumaranui, a very new - looking
town, the river is reached, and in the morning we
embarked in a small screw steamer on our passage
down the river. Soon after starting, the strength
of the current increases, huge rocks impede the
passage, and the marvel is how the steamer can
get through without disaster. At one place a
strange manoeuvre had to be resorted to. The bows
of the boat were stuck on a bank, and the steamer
turned round into the rapids and allowed to drop
down stern foremost, the engines meantime going
full speed ahead so as to partly counteract the
force of the current. After an hour or two of this
difficult navigation, we got into smoother and
deeper water, and were then transferred to a larger
boat, in which we continued till Pipiriki was
reached, and a stop made for the night. The rich
semi-tropical vegetation and huge tree ferns on the
river banks presented scenes of great interest and
beauty. There were few signs of human life on
the river or its banks. An occasional dug-out
canoe shot out from the bank or lay under its
shadow, with a few brownskinned Maoris in it.
About mid-way between the place where we started
and Pipiriki, T. Cook & Son have a floating hotel
and restaurant on the river, with a number of
rooms for travellers who prefer to spend the night
there. At Pipiriki the country is much less moun-
tainous, and is dotted over with farms, and from
there to the town of Wanganui, near the mouth


of the river, the country looks fairly well cultivated.
Steamers of light draught can come to the town,
but though a good deal of money has been spent
in trying to make a deep water channel, the
results have not so far been very successful.
From Wanganui, which is a well built and
prosperous-looking town, to Wellington, the journey
is made by rail. We arrived there in the evening,
and found very good quarters at the Grand Hotel,
but being later than the usual dinner hour, we
had to be content with cold viands. It appeared
that the kitchens had by law to be closed and work
suspended at a certain hour in the evening.
Wellington, as already stated, took the place of
Auckland as the seat of government. Its position
is much more central and accessible from the other
islands. The harbour is one of the best in New
Zealand, extending up from the sea about ten
miles, and being well protected by high land all
round. The wharf, dock, and warehousing accom-
modation are excellent. In fact, I have not seen
anywhere a better equipped port. The electric
lighting and cranes for loading and discharging
ships are particularly good; and the provision for
the comfort of the dockers and others whom
business leads in that direction is such as I have
seen nowhere else. It is all Government property,
and has grown up under the enlightened and able
direction and superintendence of Mr William Fer-
guson, who, after a long service, has now retired
from the active management. As the land behind
the city rises abruptly to a considerable height.


extension has mainly to follow the shore line,
though the hill slopes are built upon to a large
extent. A plateau upon the hillside above the city,
in a commanding position, was being cleared for a
monument in memory of Richard Seddon, the late
Premier. The Houses of Parliament occupy a good
site, and as usual we paid a visit to them. They
were built mostly of wood, and soon after our visit
were burned down. The Parliament consists, as in
all our over-seas Dominions, of two Chambers—the
House of Representatives, composed of 80 members
(76 Europeans and 4 Maoris), the members being
paid £3OO per annum and travelling expenses; and
the Legislative Council, consisting of about 40
members, who are paid at the rate of £2OO and
expenses. The elections to the House of Repre-
sentatives are triennial; appointments to the Council
are tenable for seven years only. The latter is
purely a revising body. I understand the pay has
been since increased to £4OO for both Houses.
The area of New Zealand is about one-seventh
less than that of Great Britain and Ireland. The
population, including Maoris, is only a little over
a million. Of course the country is capable of
supporting a very much larger population. The
slow rate of increase is due to several causes, such
as distance from the Old Country, and consequent
expense and time of getting out compared, say,
with Canada; but I believe the views of the Labour
Party have largely prevented inducements being
offered to immigrants such as have proved so
successful in Canada. The idea is that if more


people come, wages will go down. They fail to see
that they are very far from the stage when there
will he a redundancy of labour, that the greater
the development of the country, the greater will be
its wealth, prosperity, and security. The scheme by
which large estates have been compulsorily acquired
by Government and cut up into small farms has
turned out so far to have been a successful measure.
I saw in the plains of Otago, between Gore and
Invercargill, numerous new homesteads settled in
this way, and the land being good both for graz-
ing and crops, they will no doubt do well.
Among the animals introduced into New Zealand
from the Old Country none were more prolific nor
so destructive than the rabbit. They caused tre-
mendous losses to sheep farmers by destruction of
the pastures, and so serious did the state of matters
become that the Government had to take steps to
find a remedy. Rabbit catchers were brought out
from home; birds and beasts of prey, such as
hawks, weasels, stoats, and owls were introduced,
and great expense incurred for netting. Still it
was years before much impression was made, and
it would probably have been still longer had not
the extraordinary rate of increase incident to a new
country suffered some diminution. New uses, too,
have been found for what were and still are
regarded as pests. Refrigeration has rendered it
possible to supply our home markets with rabbits,
while the skins have acquired a market value which
they had not before. I used to notice signboards
near the railway stations in the country to the


effect that “Rabbit Skins” were bought. In 1905
the value of these skins exported was £67,000, the
number of skins being about nine millions. Sausage
skins—a by-product of the mutton freezing estab-
lishments —which at one time had no value, are
worth to the colony now for export £50,000 per
annum.
The industry of gold mining is carried on in
many places in the beds of rivers and streams.
The boom which occurred a few years ago spent
itself with the usual result. It is a precarious
industry, but has a wonderful attraction for some
men. It is not at all unusual to come upon men
who live a lonely life among the mountains searching
for the precious metal, and who have become so
accustomed to the life that they would not leave
it for any other. The value of gold exported in
1905 was £2,035,146.
The Acclimatisation Society of Otago has been
very active and successful in the introduction of
game birds, animals, and fishes into New Zealand.
The red deer of our Highlands has thriven well,
and I saw some splendid heads. These are found
among the mountains on the south-west of Otago.
The fish hatcheries which have been established
have done excellent work. The rivers are kept
well stocked with trout such as the brown, the
Lochleven, and the rainbow. No trout under nine
inches long can be kept, but must be returned to
the water, and every fisher must have a licence,
which cost 25s a year. The licence money goes to
assist in keeping up the hatcheries. Salmon, too,


have been tried, but none have been caught. No
one seems to know what becomes of them when
let out into the streams. The trout have been an
extraordinary success. No better fishing can be got
anywhere. At a river which joins the sea on the
south-west coast, where I spent about a week in
camp, trout up to 14 lb. each were got, of the
finest quality; and in Dunedin Harbour, really an
inlet of about twenty miles long, they have been
got up to 2Gf lb. These were sea trout, but in
the inland rivers fish of three, four, and five pounds
were quite common.
The railways belong to and are worked by the
Government. The mileage open for traffic in 1907
was 2456 miles, and the net profit on working,
according to the official statements, was £812,118
for the same year. More might have been done to
open up important tracts of country b}" a more
comprehensive scheme of railways. From the
passengers’ point of view there is still a good deal
to be desired. 1 was told there had been a great
improvement, but it seemed to me that there was
plenty room for more. The narrow gauge unfor-
tunately restricts the width of the carriages, and
they are often disagreeably crowded. The trains
are few in the day on the main routes, and the
frequent long stoppages probably account for the
average speed being only about fifteen miles an
hour. No advantages are given to those taking
return tickets, the price being simply double the
single fare. There are two classes, but all the
carriages of both classes open into one another.


Wyndham, New Zealand: John Begg’s Farm in Otago.


On some routes there are luncheon cars, hut it is
first come first served, and the scramble or waiting
for places is far from agreeable. You may suppose
you have secured your seat by coming early and
putting your bag on the seat to show it is taken;
but ten to one when you come back a little later
you find your property deposited on the floor and
the seat occupied by someone else, who regards
you as an intruder if you claim what you supposed
was yours. The advantages of competition among
the railway companies which we enjoy at home
are conspicuous by their absence in New Zealand.
The trend of legislation for years past has been
distinctly Socialistic. Old age pensions, State fire
insurance, regulation of hours of labour—not only
in mines, factories, and workshops, but in shops
and offices arbitration courts for dealing with
disputes between workmen and employers, are
among the measures passed in recent years, not to
mention others, such as the exclusion of Chinese,
Japanese, and other than what is called white
labour. The Government was understood to be
contemplating legislation limiting the lease of
Government land to the short period of nine years,
and refusing to dispose of land on freehold. The
effect would be to limit, if not prevent, improve-
ments, and to remove the incentive which owner-
ship gives to industry and frugality.
The opinion I heard generally expressed as to
the results of arbitration courts in disputes was to
the effect that they had not reduced but augmented
the number of disputes. The fact that the Courts


are frequently condemned as inefficient by both
parties may perhaps be taken as an evidence that
they seek to do their work fairly. That they are
harassing to employers is undeniable, and the more
so as any decision is held to apply to wages and
conditions of employment in the same trade
throughout the province, thus needlessly disturbing
the relations of employers and employed far beyond
the original cause and area of dispute.
Though they were intended to interpose a check
upon hasty stoppages of work, they do not succeed
in that respect. An instance of this occurred while
I was in the country. The slaughtermen employed
at the Refrigerating Works stopped work because
dissatisfied with the decision of the Court in a
claim for extra wages. They were making about
23s per day, and wanted 255. Large numbers of
sheep and lambs were standing in the yards of the
works, and the owners were thus left with their
stocks fast depreciating until an arrangement could
be come to.
Trade unions appear to be aggressive, and the
“ walking delegate ” has his counterpart in the
Colony. The following case illustrates the action
of these functionaries. A man in a little country
town, having a turn for carpentry, set to work to
put up a new house for himself. Two “swaggers”
—that is, men on the tramp —came along one day
and asked for a job. He agreed to employ them
to assist him, and gave them 7s fid a day each,
with which they were satisfied. When the house
was well advanced, the “delegate” appeared, and


intimated that the two labourers must be paid
wages at the trade union rate for joiners, or cease
to be employed, which, being confirmed on an
appeal to the Court, the two men were discharged.
It is not to be wondered at, therefore, that
people are little disposed to risk money in in-
dustrial concerns. The last few years have been
years of plenty. Good seasons and good prices
have brought wealth and prosperity, notwith-
standing the untoward effects of shortsighted and
restrictive legislation. But good times don’t last
for ever, and it may be that when the tide of
prosperity abates and troubles come, then the evil
effects may come to be felt with increased force,
and thus a way be opened for remedial measures,
which may give a new impetus to immigration, to
the investment of capital, to the employment of
labour, and the diffusion of wealth.
Dunedin, in point of situation and the quality
of the buildings, is probably second to no city in
New Zealand. It possesses a Princes Street, a
George Street, and other familiar names borrowed
from old Edina. There are other points of resem-
blance, such as the Water of Leith, the elevated
position of the City Chambers, Knox Church, and
a fine monument to Robert Burns. There is also
a suburb called Rosslyn, besides much more, to
remind one of home. The hills in the neighbour-
hood are covered principally with Eucalyptus trees.
One afternoon, when returning from Blueskin Bay,
a bush fire broke out on the hills around Dunedin,
and at night the sky was lighted up with the


reflection. As the leaves and wood of these trees
contain a good deal of oil, they burn with great
brilliancy.
I may here remark that the eucalyptus tree
abounds everywhere in New Zealand. In some
places—at Rotorua, for instance—the roadsides are
planted with it, where it forms an agreeable shade
from the sun. It has a very curious seed-nut of
a pale bluish colour, which, as well as the leaf,
smells strongly of eucalyptus oil, with which we are
familiar. It is commonly called the blue gum, but
there is a great variety of the species. It is a
good, hard, and durable wood, suitable for many
purposes. Another tree which one often sees by
the roadsides and elsewhere is the wattle tree, a
kind of acacia, with a beautiful and delicately-
formed leaf. I have not seen it in any other
country. But the tree of probably the greatest
value which is indigenous to New Zealand, is the
kauri pine, which, besides the timber, yields a
valuable gum, worth on an average about £sl to
£52 a ton. About 11,000 tons of this gum are
exported annually.
Another important vegetable product of the
country, and especially of the Middle Island, is
Phormium Fibri, commonly called New Zealand
flax. It grows wild in many places, and when
skutched or cleaned and dressed, it resembles
Manilla hemp so much that it is difficult to tell
one from the other. Ropes and cordage made of
it do not stand water so well as Manilla. It grows
in marshy ground, having a broad, sword-like leaf,


and often reaching a height of eight or ten feet.
The Maoris use it for making not only cord, hut
coarse cloth, and the fine white sorts for making
fancy bags, etc. About 30,000 tons are exported
annually, and the value of the export is about
£720,000.
The grandest scenery is without doubt in the
west and south of the Middle Island. It is inter-
sected almost its entire length by mountains known
as the Southern Alps. Some of them reach to a
height of 10,000 and 12,000 feet, Mount Cook
rising to 12,349 feet. Many of the”peaks and most
of the glaciers are as yet unnamed, and few of
them have been scaled. The Tasman glacier is
eighteen miles long by rather more than two miles
broad. In this part also are the largest lakes.
Lake Wakatipu is about 60 miles in length, but
only about 4 miles in breadth. It is hemmed
in by lofty mountains.
We sailed up from Kingston at the southern
end to Queenstown, which is beautifully situated
about half way up. The little steamer in which we
sailed was named “ Benlomond.” Close to Queens-
town is the mountain called Benlomond, 5747 feet
high, so it is considerably higher than its proto-
type of the same name in Scotland. The lake is
of great depth, being 1252 feet deep. Lake Te
Anau is 42 miles, and Lake Wanaka 35 miles, in
length. Manipouri is regarded by many as the
most picturesque lake in New Zealand. It is also
the deepest, being 1452 feet deep. I should not
omit to mention the Remarkable Mountains, a


beautiful range beside Lake Wakatipu, of which a
fine view is got from Queenstown. The snow on
the summits, as well as the fine bold skyline,
render them a remarkable picture as their name
implies.
The five or six days which I spent in trout
fishing at the mouth of the river Waiau were very
enjoyable. The river is a great body of fresh water
which flows from the lakes above referred to and
joins the sea in the south-west of the Island. To
reach it we went by rail to Invercargill, and then
west about forty miles further to a place called
Arepuke, after which a drive of ten miles brought
us to our destination. Here wo were in the bush,
where the only dwellings were a few huts or tents
made of wood and canvas. Every thing was of the
most primitive sort. Our chef was an old ship’s
cook called Billy, whose cooking range and utensils
were of the least expensive kind. Two upright
sticks cut from a neighbouring tree with a cleft
in the tops in which a crossbar was placed was
the arrangement for holding the pots over the fire
of sticks burning on the ground below. Billy’s hot
water boiler was a large square case oil tin sus-
pended by wire, and a pitcher served among other
purposes, as boiler for the trout and vegetables,
the latter consisting of onions and potatoes. And
yet I never tasted finer trout in my life. This is
a sample of the adaptability of the dwellers in the
bush to circumstances. The best time for fishing
was when the tide was rising. Our camp among
the cabbage trees was about a couple of miles from


the sea. Morning and evening were the times
when the fishing was most successful. One morning
we had arranged to go out before daylight. It
would be about 2 a.m. when our Maori boatman,
Jack, a splendid specimen of a native, called us,
and took us across to the fishing banks. As we
there plied the rod, the rising sun lighted up with
rosy tints the mountain ranges, and presented one
of the most lovely pictures imaginable.
Leaving Port Chalmers in one of the Huddard
Parker steamers, and calling at the Bluff, the
southernmost port on the Middle Island, we
steamed away to the west coast to visit the
famous Milford Sound. The mountains on the
west coast rise abruptly from the sea to a great
height, and form an apparently impenetrable
barrier to the interior. No opening was to be
seen until suddenly we came upon a great rift in
the mountains, as if some terrible convulsion had
cleft a passage and torn the mountains asunder.
Steaming into the passage so formed, we followed
the windings for several miles up what in Norway
would be called a fiord, until it opened out into
a broad sheet of water. Down the precipitous
sides of the mountains in many places water
flowed, and in others waterfalls of great height
plunged straight down into the waters of the
Sound. One of these latter, the Sutherland Fall,
is 1900 feet high, said to be the highest fall in
the world. Some of the mountains rise almost
precipitously from the water’s edge to 5000 and
6000 feet above the sea. I saw only one house in


this lonely region. It was at the head of the
Sound, and was occupied by the “caretaker” of
this vast territory, otherwise inhabited only by the
red deer, whose progenitors came from the High-
land hills of old Scotland. Leaving Milford Sound
by the way we came, we bade adieu to New
Zealand, and shaped our course for Hobart Town,
in Tasmania. As I have endeavoured to show,
there is much that is attractive in New Zealand.
Undoubtedly it is a country of great possibilities.
In climate it is temperate. Its winters are milder
and its summers warmer than our own. It has
very little snow in winter, and it never lies long
on the low ground and pasture lands. I noticed
that on the hills even in summer there was a
great difference in temperature of the day and
night. But this is common in most of these
countries, as also in the tropics. Taking it all
together, life is pleasant under the Southern Cross,
and were it not so far away, I often wish to go
back to renew old acquaintance with people and
places, and see how the trout are doing.
A word in conclusion for the information of
those who, on account of health, may have to seek
a more genial climate than our own. The climate
of New Zealand is, as already stated, not extreme
either as regards heat or cold, and generally
speaking is well suited to people from this country.
As compared with Australia, however, the Islands
are small, and being surrounded with ocean, the
air is more moist and the rainfall greater. Accord-
ingly, for those who may be threatened with lung


Fishing Camp at mouth of the Waiau, New Zealand, in grove of cabbage trees.


or chest complaints, and for whom a dry and
warm climate is preferable, there is no doubt that
Australia offers one of the finest climates in the
world, and will be found more suitable in such
cases than New Zealand. I mention this more
particularly as I am aware that mistakes have
sometimes been made in this respect, most probably
from want of knowledge of the difference of
climate.
