





WITH THE WRITER'S COMPLIMENTS.
NOTES BY THE WAY:
BEING THE DIARY OF A VOYAGE
AUSTRALIA TO LONDON
IN THE PENINSULAR AND ORIENTAL STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY’S
R.M.S. “BRITANNIA.”
WM. K. S ALTON,
BRISBANE, QUEENSLAND.
LASGOW: AIRD & COGHILL, 263 ARGYLE STREET.
1889.




EXPLANATORY NOTE.
■M33 53T rr /O HjJ.
When the notes in the following Diary were being taken
down, it was with no thought that they would ever appear
in printed form. Had that been intended, many things
now appearing in them would not be there ; and many
items not in them might have been introduced. Why the
Diary has been printed is that since we landed in the old
country we have made so many friends, who have taken
such a deep and kindly interest in us, that we thought we
could not do better than print the notes and give them
as a souvenir of our visit. This little book has been
prepared without any pretence to literary correctness, and
is intended to interest friends here and in our own land,
and possibly it may be of service to some who may yet take
the trip themselves. All the information given, with the
exception of data, is our own experience during an unusually
pleasant voyage, and that we may have a similarly agreeable
return trip we are quite sure is the earnest hope of our many
friends. At the end of the Diary the passengers’ log is
printed, and we have no doubt it will prove useful to readers
interested in nautical matters.
6 Fir Park Terrace, Dennistoun,
Glasgow, July , iBBg.




NOTES BY THE WAY.
Introductory.
On 22nd March, 1889, at half : past 12 o’clock, we left
Brisbane by the A.U.S.N. Co. steamer Cintra , Captain
Lee. For two years and more we had been looking
forward to our home trip, and sometimes it seemed as if
the date of departure would never come round. - But long
looked for has come at last. Before going on board we drove
round and saw our children. Alick, our eldest child, whom
we had placed under the care of our friend, Mr. J. S. Kerr,
of the Normal School, was much affected and felt our leaving
keenly. Our other children —Dolly, Roy, and Trixie—aged
respectively eight, five, and three years, were but little
concerned, and appeared to be quite at home with Miss
Wilson, under whose care and with whom they were to
reside during our absence.
When we got to the steamer neither my wife nor I were
as much affected as we expected. Possibly this was because
so many of our old friends were there to bid us bon voyage.
Besides our immediate relations, Mr. and Mrs. J. L.
M‘Kellar, Mr. and Mrs. Matthew Laird, and Miss Lang,
there were Mr. and Mrs. Brennan, Mr. J. H. Robertson
(Toowoomba) and his daughter, Mrs. Wm. Geddes, Mr.
J. J. Kingsbury, Mr. David Reid, Mr. Joseph Black, Mrs.
R. Taylor, Mrs. H. Stark, Mrs. Larimer, Miss Caldwell,
Miss Muller, and, I think, a few others.


On the way down the river (Brisbane River it is called)
we had a pleasant time, and when the lunch hour came
were quite ready for it. We ate heartily and enjoyed it.
When nearing Moreton Island the sea became somewhat
rough, and shortly after passing “ Cowan Cowan ” light, my
wife succumbed to sea-sickness, and amused herself by
feeding the fishes. After rounding Cape Moreton I also
succumbed, and until our arrival in Sydney was scarcely
able to hold up my head. My wife, on the other hand,
was soon well, and was on deck nearly all the next day, thus
agreeably disappointing us, for this being her first voyage
we had little hope of her proving anything of a.sailor.
It may be interesting to give here a few particulars of
Brisbane, where I have lived continuously for over fourteen
years; where my wife has lived nearly all her life; where
our four children were born, and where so many of our
friends are.
Brisbane.
The city of Brisbane is the capital of the colony of
Queensland, and is situated on the Brisbane River. It
has a population of about 70,000 inhabitants, and its
geographical situation is 27° 28' 3" S. lat., and 153 0 1'
54*93" E. long. During the months of November, Decem-
ber, January, and February, it is very hot, but not unbearable.
In September, October, March, and April, the mornings and
evenings are delightfully cool, while during the day it is
pleasantly warm and very healthy. May, June, July, and
August are our winter months —very mild and charming—
and it is said our climate then is equal, if not superior, to
any in the world. We have neither snow nor ice, but we
have hail and occasional heavy rains, and our westerly
winds, which prevail in the winter months, are exceedingly
cold. Brisbane is the seat of government and the centre
of all the commerce of the colony. In it is situated Govern-


ment House, the Law Courts, and, of course, the Houses of
Parliament. There are also the Botanical Gardens, three
public parks, and other places for the recreation of the
people. The city is beautifully situated on hilly ground, is
well laid out, and there are many imposing buildings.
Horse tram-cars run through the principal thoroughfares,
while very comfortable ’buses ply to the suburbs. Wherever
one goes in the city the signs of progress and intelligence
are visible. One morning and two evening daily newspapers,
and at least half-a-dozen weeklies are published, and they
are no discredit to journalism. The river is navigable up
to the city, and large steamers like the British India Com-
pany’s splendid mail steamer Jumna , which is over 5,000
tons, steam up the river and are berthed at the wharves.
There is daily communication by railway and steamer with
Sydney, the journey occupying about 30 hours by rail and
40 hours by sea.
Sydney.
At 5 o’clock a.m. on Sunday, 24th March, we arrived at
the A.U.S.N. Co. Wharf, Sydney, and at 7 o’clock we drove
off in a cab to the Oxford Hotel at the top of King Street.
At 10 o’clock we had breakfast, and afterwards found our
way to the Glebe Presbyterian Church, where we heard the
Rev. Andrew Gardiner, the pastor, preach a most excellent
sermon from St. John x. 27, “My sheep hear My voice,
and I know them, and they follow Me.” The Glebe con-
gregation is large, and seems to be composed of well-to-do
people ; but they are old-fashioned, stiff, and stubborn. For
instance, at praise when the end of the psalm or hymn has
been reached, many in the congregation flop down on their
seats before the amen is sung. The collection is taken up
as the congregation retire, and the organ voluntary is not
commenced until quite half the congregation have gone
home. After dinner an old friend, Mr. Christie, called ; we


were very glad to see him, and without any ceremony he
took us away to his place at Hunter’s Hill.
Hunter’s Hill is a lovely place, so beautifully situated on
the Paramatta River, and the trip to it is most charming.
It is by taking a little trip like this that one gets an idea of
the beauties of Sydney Harbour, Lane Cove and Paramatta
rivers. But it is only an idea, for one may take twelve
different trips to twelve different places, and then not have
seen all the beautiful sights. No wonder the Sydney people
are proud of their harbour. We are told that the harbour
at Rio is the only one in the world that approaches it.
Next day we took a stroll through the city, and we were
much impressed with its extent, its narrow, crowded streets,
its splendid buildings, the continuous throng of people rush-
ing to and fro, every one seemingly in a great hurry, as if
their very existence depended on the one thing they were
now doing. My wife wonders how they manage to find
time to eat and to sleep.
The steam trams running through so many busy streets
also impress us as being huge, unsightly, dirty, and seem-
ingly dangerous. We are amazed at the tremendous crowds
that travel by them, for nowhere have we seen such large
numbers of people travelling by tram; and we wonder, after
all is said, if any other tram system would now suit the
requirements of the Sydney people.
To-day we see and visit the P. & O. steamer Britannia
for the first time. Being the largest steamer that we have
ever had the opportunity of seeing, we were much interested
in it. It looked so large and so powerful that one would
think no sea could move it. When we got on board we
were simply wonderstruck—long promenades on deck,
and long rows of passages below, looking more like minia-
ture streets than part of a ship. We soon found the cabin
that we had selected,, and were much pleased with it. It
was roomy, well ventilated, and had of course two berths,


their numbers being 107 and 108. There seemed to be
everything on board to make passengers feel happy and
comfortable.
In the afternoon we were much pleased to get a visit from
our old friend Mr. M. H. Lauchlan and his daughter, and
in the evening we went to the Gaiety Theatre, where we
saw acted a society comedy called the “ Glass of Fashion.”
It was well acted and we enjoyed ourselves, but we felt as
if we would not care to see it again.
The next day (26th March) we went to Ashfield, a
beautiful suburb on the main line, about seven miles from
Sydney, and there called on Mr. and Mrs. Walter Watson.
Poor Watson ! he was far, far through, and we could see that
his end was not far off. He was, however, in fairly good
spirits, and seemed to have the hope that he would again
be at business.
Wednesday, 27th, we went by tram to Coogee Bay, and
visited the Aquarium. It is well worth a visit, though we
were told that there is a better at Bondi. Coogee Bay
occupies a charming position outside Sydney Heads, and
right on the Pacific coast. All round the bay there is white
sand and rocks, and the sea rolls in in great breakers,
washing far up on the sand in some places, and breaking
over huge rocks in others. Altogether the sight is grand,
and almost beyond description. On the way to and from
Coogee we saw some very beautiful residences, and if
appearances are anything to go by, there must be in Sydney
a large number of citizens in easy circumstances. The
following day (Thursday) we took train to Petersham, where
we called on Mrs. Lauchlan, and then in company with Miss
Lauchlan we called on Mrs. Donald Cormack at Ashfield
and had afternoon tea. Mrs. Cormack is a most motherly
woman, and she made us feel at home right away. We
returned to Petersham and spent the evening most enjoyably
with the Lauchlans. Saturday, 3.oth March, was our last


day in Sydney, and we made a few hurried calls, then at
noon we drove to the Britannia , which, with one or two
short intervals, was to be our home for the next seven
weeks. Everything there was commotion and excitement.
The first to visit us was Mr. Leopold Barnett, then came
Mr., Mrs., and Miss Lauchlan, and then Mr. Christie.
Many hundreds were on board seeing friends away, and
others having a look at the noble vessel. A few minutes
before 1 o’clock the bell rang and all the visitors had to go
ashore. Prompt to the minute, at 1 o’clock, the Britannia
left, the ship’s band playing first “ Auld Lang Syne,” and
then “ Home, Sweet Home.” We felt somewhat sorry to
leave Sydney, for during our short stay we made many
friends, and we got to like the place so well.
The Britannia.
The Britannia (our home now) is a new steamer of 6,258
tons, with engines 7,000 horse-power, and was built by
Caird & Co., Greenock, at the latter end of 1887. She is
commanded by Captain Hector, late of the Royal Navy,
and is a sister steamer to the Victoria , Arcadia, and Oceana ,
all four about the same size, and built for the P. & O.
Company to commemorate the Queen’s Jubilee. Every-
thing on board is got up seemingly regardless of expense,
and all calculated to add to the comfort of passengers. The
dining saloon, which is well forward, is very large, and the
fittings are of solid oak unpolished. The ceiling is covered
with lincrusta, done in white and gold, and besideg.
numerous side tables there are two large tables running
down the centre. The music or drawing room is over the
dining saloon, but is not nearly so large. It is beautifully
upholstered and has a grand piano in it. The companion
is a kind of sitting room at the top of the grand staircase
and also has a piano in it. It was throughout the voyage a
favourite retiring place, especially with the ladies, who very


often took their sewing and fancy work to it. Downstairs
on the main deck were writing tables and one or two
lounges. Behind the engines on the poop deck there is a
most commodious smoking room, and this room was very
popular during the voyage. The whole ship was lighted
with the electric light, and in case of any mishap taking
place to it, the ordinary ship lights were supplied as well.
The ventilation was as near perfect as could be, and the
attendance excellent. The beds were very wide indeed,
and all had spring mattresses. In fact, from beginning
to end, the convenience and comfort of passengers was
carefully studied.
Sunday, 31st March, was our first at sea. We slept well
during the previous night, ,and although there was a swell
on the water, we were in no way inconvenienced. After
breakfast all hands were marshalled on deck, then the
commander, accompanied by the chief engineer, chief officer,
and ship’s surgeon, passed in front of them to see that all
were neat and clean. This done, we had divine service at
10.45 * n the dining saloon, conducted by the commander,
and I am pleased to state that it was exceedingly well
attended. During the day everything was quiet and
orderly, and we were particularly struck with the discipline
on board. This, no doubt, accounts largely for the
immunity from accident the P. & O. Company has had
during its long career.
Melbourne.
On Monday morning, ist April, about 6 o’clock, we
reached Williamstown, the landing-place of the Company
for Melbourne, and as we were anxious to get to Melbourne
as early as possible, we took what things we thought needful
for our four days’ stay there, and started off by the 9.20
train. Melbourne was reached about 10 o’clock, and we
at once set off to the Federal Coffee Palace. Everything


at the Federal is on a big scale—thoroughly American, it
appeared to us. The noise and bustle were very great, and
in marked contrast with the quiet of the Oxford Hotel,
Sydney. It is a great undertaking, thoroughly well managed,
and since its institution a year or two ago has become very
popular, and I understand pays good dividends. Having
settled down, we went out and had a look round marvellous
Melbourne. We were struck with the great width of the
streets, the immense height of many of the buildings, and
the cleanly appearance of the city generally. The cable
trams interested us greatly. It is wonderful to see the cars
running smoothly along without horse or steam-power.
Each car is attached to a kind of engine called a dummy,
and on this unseen are all the appliances for gripping the
cable, which is underground. Passengers are carried on the
dummy as well as on the car proper, and in the summer
evenings it is first favourite with many ladies. It is also
much availed of by men during the day. On the dummy
which hauls the car after it is the driver, called the
gripman, and he manipulates the attaching and detaching
with the cable. The first cost of laying the cables and in
providing the plant and machinery is, ,1 am informed,
enormous, but the maintenance and working expenses after
the services have been started is less than either steam or
horse power, and the Melbourne lines are worked at a fair
profit. The horse system in Brisbane has not yet paid a
dividend, although they have been running for over three
years. The Sydney steam trams are the property of the
New South Wales Government, and are worked at a
tremendous loss annually. Melbourne is a busy, go-ahead
place, and the city men have the appearance of being fairly
fortunate in business. We are told that Melbourne is just
now suffering a reaction from the late unfortunate land
boom, but being strangers we do not see it. However, the
daily papers almost every morning tell of leading men going


insolvent through this rash speculation. In every one of
these insolvencies the assets are larger than the liabilities,
but that is on paper.
On the day after our arrival in Melbourne Mr. R.
Cochrane, of Messrs. Brooks, Robinson, & Co., called on
us, and took us for a drive. He drove us through many of
the suburbs, and finally landed us at his own residence in
Hawthorne. Here we met Mrs. Cochrane and family.
The evening was most agreeably spent, and we slept there
that night. During our drive Mr. Cochrane took us to
Mrs. M‘Kellar’s, at East Prahran, where we had afternoon
tea. Mrs. M'Kellar is my wife’s aunt, and she is also my
partner’s mother. On the next day (Wednesday, 3rd April)
we called on Mrs. Robertson, at Clarendon Street, South
Melbourne. Mrs. R. is a sister of Mrs. M'Kellar’s, and is
thus another of my wife’s aunts. Mrs. R. was busy making
preparations 'for her table at a tea meeting to be held that
evening to welcome a new minister to their church. She
impressed me as being a large-hearted, good Christian
woman, one that would go out of her way to do one a good
turn. In the evening we had dinner with Mrs. Dunbar (late
of Brisbane), at Kew, and after dinner we accompanied her
and her son to the weekly prayer meeting at their church.
The horse trams at Kew attracted our attention, for they
were identical in every way with our Brisbane ones.
4th April.—Had lunch to-day at Mrs. M‘Kellar’s, East
Prahran, where we saw all the members of her family, except
those resident at Brisbane. We had a good time there,
and were sorry when we had to leave. Mrs. M'Kellar is a
most excellent woman, and has great reason to be proud of
her family, some of whom are very talented. In the
evening we went to the Theatre Royal and saw the Bland
Holt Company in “The World.” “The World ”is a highly
sensational drama, impossible in plot and improbable in
theory, but it was well acted, and capitally put on the stage.


But why people can go time after time to see such plays I
cannot understand. Among those who witnessed the piece
were Sir William Robinson, the acting governor of Victoria,
and the Earl and Countess of Onslow. Lord and Lady
Onslow were on their way to New Zealand, over which
colony Lord Onslow had lately been appointed governor.
sth April was our last day in Melbourne, and on our way
to the Spencer Street Railway Station we called on Mr.
Cochrane, of Messrs. Brooks, Robinson & Co. Mr.
Cochrane had been so kind to us, that on leaving we felt
we were saying good-bye to a friend. At the railway station
we were met by Mrs. M'Kellar and her eldest daughter, and
also by Mrs. Robertson and her younger daughter. They
accompanied us to the steamer and thus saw the last of us.
If we thought the crowd at Sydney great, and the scene
impressive, what shall we say of the crowd at Williamstown?
The words “rabble” and “mob” best describe; for while at
Sydney the better class of people prevailed in the crowd, all
classes seemed to predominate here, and the crowd was
certainly twice as great. Our friend Mrs. Robertson had
her pocket picked of all the change she had. At half-past
i o’clock we left, and in a few minutes the crowd was out of
sight, and we proceeded to the next stage of our journey.
The Melbourne people are very proud of their city, and
justly so. It is a great city, and, with its 400,000 inhabitants,
comes seventh or eighth in the list of the chief cities in the
British Empire. Considering its age (about 50 years) it is a
marvel, and a triumph to the enterprise of the Anglo-Saxon
race as colonizers. The one great defect that we saw was
its drainage. Being on flat low-lying country, the drainage
is on the surface, and the sanitary arrangements—especially
in hotels and places where large numbers are boarded—
are very defective. The dry earth closet system may be all
very well in villages and small communities, but in a city of
such extent and population as Melbourne, it is an abomina-


tion, for it cannot be properly carried out. We were glad
to learn that the authorities, alive to this matter, have under
consideration a comprehensive scheme of drainage, which
they hope, when completed, will make Melbourne one of
the healthiest and perhaps the most beautiful of the cities
in the whole group of the Australasian colonies.
Adelaide.
On Sunday, 7th April, about 7 o’clock in the morning,
we arrived in Largs Bay. The passage from Williamstown
occupied about 40 hours, and was very pleasant. The sea
was somewhat rough and the steamer rolled considerably.
Several ladies and one or two gentlemen were sea-sick, but
neither my wife nor I indulged in that amusement. When
we anchored in Largs Bay the sea was so boisterous that
only a very few passengers (among them one lady) were
able to land. With these few exceptions we all remained
on board, and being Sunday, games or amusements were
not indulged in, and things were thus very dull. Divine
service was conducted in the saloon at 11 o’clock by the
commander, and was largely attended. The number of
saloon passengers that came on board at Melbourne was so
great that all could not be accommodated at the dining
tables at one sitting, so that two dinner hours had to be
arranged, and the time allowed for breakfast and tiffen
extended. It fell to our lot to dine at the second dinner
table. The meal hours on board were now as follows :
Breakfast, 8.30 to 10 a.m. ; tiffen, 12.30 to 2 p.m. ; dinner,
first, at 6 p.m.; second, at 7.30 p.m: Beef tea was served
at 11 a.m. to those who wished it, and afternoon tea
in the saloon at 4 o’clock.
Bth April.—This morning the weather had moderated and
the sea had fallen considerably. We were informed that we
could without any inconvenience go over to Largs Bay pier.


This was real good news, and at 9 o’clock about 200 or 250
passengers boarded the steam tenders, and were soon landed
on terra firma. A few minutes more and we were rattling
along the rails to South Australia’s fair capital. We were
astonished to notice that at several places on the way the
train ran along the streets. This seemed to us a bad arrange-
ment, but possibly it could not be avoided.
At ten o’clock we landed at Adelaide. The railway
station is not very attractive looking, but it was full
of life. Mondays are always busy days there, being the out-
going mail days. In a few minutes we were in King William
Street. It is the principal street in the city, and must be
about three chains wide. It has on both sides of it many
handsome buildings, especially the General Post Office. By
and by we found our way to the Botanic Hotel, opposite
the Botanical Gardens. Mr. Kelly, the proprietor of this
hotel, knows how to tempt the appetite by a well-furnished
table and well-cooked victuals. We were very hungry, and
enjoyed his appetising meal. Before lunch we had a long
ride on one of the tram lines to a place the name of which
I forget, but I remember that the first stopping place past
it was called Paradise. We have thus the satisfaction of
knowing that once in our lives we were very near to Paradise.
Having had to stay on board the steamer all day yesterday,
our time in Adelaide was much shortened. We had to be
back at the railway station at 2.30 p.m., so that our stay
was only of four and a half hours’ duration. However, we
determined to make the most of it, notwithstanding the
slight rain that fell occasionally. Rundle Street is seemingly
the next street in importance to King William Street. If
King William Street impressed us by its great width, Rundle
Street impressed us by its narrowness. It cannot be more
than a chain wide, and it has quite a Sydney appearance;
but it is a very busy street, and is lined on either side with
first-class shops and large retail warehouses.


We were most favourably impressed with Adelaide. It
is prettily situated, and the Mount Lofty ranges lying a few
miles behind give it quite a panoramic appearance. It is a
cathedral city, is the seat of government, and the centre of
all the national life in South Australia. In and around it,
within a radius of a few miles, there is a population of over
120,000. Still we fancy that Adelaide has its drawbacks.
The soil is 1 very sandy, and in dry weather the dust is con-
siderable. There are also high winds very often, so that the
dust flying about must be a great annoyance to the people.
The careful housewife may also find that at such times her
lines have not fallen in pleasant places. When we got back
to the Britannia it was with very pleasing recollections of
Adelaide, and we quite made up our minds that if the
opportunity offered on our return, we would not fail to
renew our acquaintance with it. Here Sir William Jervois,
the late Governor of New Zealand and a former Governor
of South Australia, came on board on his way to London.
It is said that he is leaving the service of the British govern-
ment, and intends to return to New Zealand to settle there;
but this may only be ship gossip. We noticed that on board
the steamer no more attention was paid to him than to the
other passengers, and that he had his meals at table just
like ourselves. Sir William was accompanied by one of his
daughters, and both made themselves very agreeable to all
on board.
Seeing that I have mentioned the name of one eminent
man on board, I take the opportunity to mention that of
another, no less eminent, though in another way. Mr.
Martin Hoskings, town missionary, Ballarat, Victoria, has for
years laboured in season and out of season, ministering to
the spiritual and bodily wants of the poor, the suffering and
the unfortunate in his town, in a way that has won for him-
self the esteem of his fellow-men. His townsmen, seeing
that he was breaking down, though never complaining,


collected, unknown to him, such a sum of money that they
were able to send him off on a long holiday, at the same
time taking upon themselves the support of his wife and
family until his return. Could there possibly be a higher
compliment paid to a good man ?
King George’s Sound.
x 2th April.—This morning, about 8 o’clock, we anchored
off Albany, King George’s Sound, our port of call for
Western Australia, and after breakfast we boarded the steam
tender and paid a visit to the town. Albany has a popula-
tion of only about 1,200 persons, and is important only
because that it is the calling place of the mail steamers. It
is the last Australian port touched at from Australia and the
first from Britain. It is a clean, well-built town, but very
few of the streets are as yet formed. The buildings are
principally of stone (of which there is an abundant supply
in the district), and we only noticed one wooden building—
the railway station—and it struck us particularly, not
because it was of wood so much as that it was varnished on
the outside, instead of painted, as is usually the case. The
Town Hall, built in 1887, is s'eejningly the principal
building, and is built of a blue slatey stone. The Union
Bank of Australia and the National Bank of Australia are
also fine buildings. The Anglican Church is a dear old
building, so quaint looking, more like what we would
expect to see in an old English town than in Australia.
There is a railway built on the land grant principle, I under-
stand, called the Great Southern Railway, and it runs as far
north as the city of Perth, the capital of the colony. Albany
is yet expected to become an important place, as it is
contemplated to establish a British military and naval
station there, for which, from its situation, it is well adapted.
After about two hours’ strolling round, we were satisfied with
what we had seen, so we returned to the steamer in time for


“ tiffen,” which we thoroughly enjoyed. Incidentally I may
mention that in warm weather “tiffen” on board the
Britannia is our most enjoyable meal.
Since we left Largs Bay on Monday we have had fairly
good weather, but yesterday (Thursday) the sea rose and
set our good ship rolling, which she kept on doing
increasingly until we anchored inside the harbour this
morning. Last night was a most unpleasant one, and it
was no easy task for the passengers to walk. During the
night the rolling was really dreadful, and sometimes it
was with difficulty that we kept in our berths, and every now
and then we could hear the crash of dishes, etc. This
morning it was unanimously agreed to award the good ship
Britannia the title of “Champion Roller.” Our good
commander says that the rolling is not the fault of the ship,
but of the sea. About half-past two o’clock in the after-
noon we steamed off to Colombo, our next port of call.
Colombo is 3,390 miles steaming from King George’s
Sound, and we are timed to arrive there on the 23rd mst.
As the indications are that we shall have stormy weather
we are hoping that we may arrive a few days in advance of
contract time. At Albany the Hon. Chief Justice Onslow
came on board from Perth. The Chief was known to nearly
all on board by repute through the quarrel between
Governor Broome and himself. It is said that the Governor
suspended him, and that he was now on his way to London
to personally interview the Colonial Office authorities.
The Chief (who may be about 48 years of age) was accom'-
panied by his wife—a most accomplished lady, two little
daughters, and a lady friend.
In the Indian Ocean.
14th April.—Palm Sunday. A beautifully fine day, and
all on board appeared in the best of health and spirits.
Sea-sickness was now a thing of the past, and as a conse-


quence the breakfast tables were more crowded than they
have been since we left Largs Bay. We had Divine service
in the saloon as usual, conducted by the commander,
assisted by the Rev. J. Woolnough. Anglican clergyman
from Tasmania. The service was largely attended. Mr.
Woolnough preached a short but really thoughtful sermon
from the words, “So we, being many, are one body in
Christ, and every one members one of another” (Rom.
xii. ch. sth ver.). One passage in this sermon struck me
as being worthy of notice. It was, “ Though the likenesses
in families are many, the unlikenesses are greater.” To-day
my wife and I thought and talked more about our children
than on any previous day, and we both had to admit feeling
a little home-sick on that account. Cape Lewin was passed
on Friday evening, and last night we passed the P. & O
steamer Paramatta , bound for the ports we had just left.
18th April.—Since the foregoing was written we have
pursued the even tenor of our ways, running on an average
343 miles each day. Games of all sorts are freely engaged
in, the favourites being whist, chess, draughts, and quoits.
A series of grand tournament games has been got up, and
the contests go on from day to day. Prizes are to be given.
The money for these prizes was subscribed by the passengers,
the maximum subscription being ten shillings. Very many
of the passengers have entered for the games, which are
causing much excitement. Yesterday at noon we had run
11,639 °f the 3,390 miles to Colombo, so that we were then
almost half way. This evening we had a concert in the
music room, and but for the intense heat it would have been
most enjoyable. At dinner to-day we had a dish of sweets
called Macedonian fruits, and when I tasted it a kind of
inspiration came over me, and I said to those at table, “ I
am just real glad that I have tasted this dish. I have often
been puzzled to know what it was that gave the * man of
Macedonia’ that we read of in scripture the nightmare.


Now, I do believe that he had eaten of this forbidden fruit,
hence his nightmare.”
During the last few days rumours have been afloat that
there are some dishonest persons on board, and it was stated
that one young man, a saloon passenger, is suspected.
Certain it is that several valuable articles have been missed,
and one gentleman had 14 sovereigns taken out of his box.
This of course is unpleasant, and we have had to put every-
thing of any value under lock and key.
19th April.—We have now got fairly into the hot latitudes,
and at noon our position was lat. 7-5 S., long. 89-38 E., so
that if we have it warm we need not be surprised. The
wind being with us made the heat all the more burdensome.
Yesterday I omitted to note down that we had a cricket
match on board between first and second class passengers.
In the first-class team were one or two English players of
note, and as the seconds were not so fortunate, we need not
wonder that they made a poor stand against them. There
was also a ladies’ cricket match, but it was soon evident
that cricket is not a ladies’ game.
This by the way is Good Friday, and we had service in
the saloon, conducted by the Rev. Mr. Woolnough, his text
being John xix. 30, “It is finished.” At dinner to-day I
noticed that the stewards wore a piece of yellow ribbon on
their jackets, and I asked one of them what it meant. He
stated that it was “ Primrose Day.” I asked if they were
obliged to wear it ? He said, “ No, but some of us believe
in it.”
21st April.—Easter Sunday. At half-past 3 o’clock in the
morning the line was crossed, so that we are now in the
Northern Hemisphere. In the evening we saw our first
Old World sunset. It was very beautiful—different, but
not more beautiful than our southern ones. As we get
farther north and east we hope to see those beautiful sunsets
that we have read and heard so much about. Yesterday


was the hottest day we have yet experienced. It was not
only hot, it was close and muggy besides. As we were
unable to do any active work, we sat and watched each
other slowly melting away. It was cremation in another
form. This morning at 8 o’clock Holy Communion was
celebrated in the music room. It was well attended. At
half-past 10 o’clock we had Divine service as usual. Prayers
were read by the commander, and the lessons by Rev. Mr.
Woolnough, who also preached a sermon from the words,
“ The Lord is risen indeed.” A collection was taken up
at the close of the sermon in aid of the “ Distressed Sea-
men’s Society” I think. It amounted to £l6 3s. 3d. In
the second saloon 17s. was collected ;at the communion
service 14s. 6dq and those on deck who did not attend
any of the services collected £6 35., so that in all
17s. 9d. was collected. It is the custom on board the
P. and O. steamers to make one collection on each voyage,
and it is, I think, usually in aid of some charity in connection
with seamen.
April 21st was a red-letter day with us. Before breakfast
we sighted the German mail steamer bound for Australia.
At noon we were off Point-de-Galle, where the mail steamers
used to call before the breakwater at Colombo was built,
and at half-past 12 we passed quite close to a large French
war steamer, bound probably to New Caledonia. All on
board were much excited the whole day with the prospect
before us of landing at Colombo before dark. After a nine
days’ sail in hot weather, during which we had not seen land
until this morning, we can be excused for having a strong
desire to land. Besides, it was Easter Monday, and we
wanted to see what was going on on shore.
Colombo and Kandy.
At half-past 5 in the afternoon we cast anchor inside
the breakwater. No sooner had we anchored than we were


surrounded by a host of little boats crowded with coloured
people. Some were natives, they are called Cingalees, and
are nearly all Buddhists in religion. Others, originally from
Singapore and Calcutta, are mostly Mahomedans. Besides
these there were many foreigners acting as boatmen, &c.
All these, clamouring at the top of their voices, made a
perfect Babel of tongues. It was most amusing to look at
the boys diving for money. They really seemed to be
amphibious, and I do not recollect one instance of a piece
of money being thrown into the sea that was not found by
these boys. Then the men selling jewellery, fans, &c., and
the tailors wishing to measure our male passengers for suits
of white clothes at 9s. a suit, was a very exciting occupation
to us. These men are certainly to be commended for the
way they push business, but, except to the tailors, who
seemed to have fixed prices, it would never do to give the
price asked at first for an article. The price asked is no
guide as to the value of the article, neither does it follow
that that is the price they expect to get. As a rule an
article for which at first five pounds has been asked, may in
the end be bought for twenty shillings. After dinner, in
company with Brisbane friends—the Misses Bale and their
brother—we went on shore. We had scarcely put our
foot on land than we were surrounded by quite a host
of gurra-men, guides, fruit and flower-sellers, and beggars.
Of the latter there is no end —boys, and even men, who
had no fathers and no mothers, others minus an arm or leg,
men and women blind, halt and deformed. Altogether it
was a strange sight, and to get rid of these torments we
hired a gurra and a guide, and drove round the town and
outskirts. Of course, being dark, we could not see so much
as during day-time, but it was very enjoyable, for it was
delightfully cool. Among the places visited were the Galle-
Face Hotel, Court-house, Barracks, Police Station, and
Railway Station. Perhaps the most interesting places to us


were the native market and the natives’ quarters. In these
places we saw the natives at business and at home. In the
market the fruit was good and cheap, and in the quarters the
crowd of people was so great, and the stench so strong that
it seemed tempting Providence on our part to be there.
So we got back to the steamer about ten o’clock, well pleased
with our trip on shore.
The next day we got up very early, and, along with Mrs.
Bale, her two daughters, and son, went on shore, determined
to take a trip to Kandy, a place we had been told to be
sure and visit if time permitted. On the way to the railway
station, although it was not 7 o’clock, the streets were
crowded—men, women, and children all busy at work of
some sort. Begging seems here to be quite legitimate
employment, and I fancy that there are more at that
business than at any other. The natives have a great
contempt for clothing; the full dress of the men consisting
of a small piece of calico tied around their loins, and the
women wear a very little more. When we got to the
railway station we learned that it was a public holiday, and
that return fares could be had at the cost of a single fare.
The first-class fare to Kandy and back was thus only six
rupees (about 9s. English money) for a distance of
148 miles. Kandy is about 74 miles from Colombo, and
bears the same relation to Colombo that Toowoomba does
to Brisbane, Katoomba to Sydney, and Malvern to Mel-
bourne. It is situated about 1,600 feet above sea level,
and is of course much cooler than Colombo. The trip up
to Kandy is very enjoyable, and the scenery simply grand.
It is really beyond description. We saw on the way what
I never saw before—rice-fields. Rice grows so differ-
ently from other cereals that I have seen. The ground is
all divided off at the different levels by low mud dykes, and
the fields are covered, in fact, flooded over with water.
Through this water the rice grass grows. There are


thousands of acres to be seen on the way, and so much
fresh water cools the air very considerably. To understand
irrigation one has only to pay a visit to Kandy—they will
learn more about it than by a year’s reading or lecturing.
Rice growing is not the only vegetation to be seen on the
way. Innumerable palm trees, bearing cocoa nut, bread
fruit, and jack fruit, are to be seen, and also tea, coffee, and
cocoa in abundance; and we had the good fortune to see
the coolies on one of the plantations at work tea-picking.
This is a beautiful and picturesque sight. Men and women
are employed at it, and the many gay colours worn by them
add much to the novelty of the scene. On the way we
breakfasted in the train, and were much delighted to get
our first cup of really good tea since we left Melbourne. A
little before noon we reached Kandy under a perfect deluge
of rain, and we were glad to reach our quarters at the Queen’s
Hotel. Here we rested awhile, and in the meantime had
to put up with the intolerable nuisance of the merchants
and dealers trying to sell us their goods. They are the
most importuning business men I have met in all my life.
Kandy had formerly a king of its own, and we were
shewn the last king’s palace, said to have been built 500
years ago. It is now used as a court-house. After lunch
we procured two gurras and a guide, and started off sight-
seeing. Passing through the more crowded parts of the
town and one or two villages, we at length reached the
Peradeniya Gardens, which are really well worth seeing. On
our return we called at the native market, which is lighted
With electric light, the post office, Buddhist temple, and
several other places of interest. We also had a walk
round the beautiful lake in the centre of the town. In
the evening we visited the Salvation Army hall, where
a service was being held. The leader was a young
English lady, of good education and pleasing manners.
She was dressed after the manner of the better-class


Mahomedans, and had on the characteristic red jacket
of the army. She addressed the audience (which was
not large) in English, and was interpreted by a Mahom-
edan convert. The next day we returned to Colombo by
train, which left Kandy at 7 o’clock in the morning. The
ride down was even more enjoyable than the ride up, and
we will not soon forget the grand sights. Colombo was
reached about mid-day; and after making a few purchases,
we got back to the steamer highly pleased with our excur-
sion. In Colombo and Kandy, besides the gurras, there
are vehicles for one passenger drawn by men. The charge
for these is is. per hour, and it is surprising how swiftly the
men run along the roads with them. In appearance they
are not unlike large two-wheeled perambulators, but are
drawn in front instead of being pushed from behind, and
a man draws one of them with great ease.
Colombo has a population, including the shipping and
soldiers, of over 110,000, and being a coaling station for
the Australian, Indian, and China steamers, it is a place, of
considerable importance. At the time we were there no
less than eight mail and other large steamers were there, not
to speak of other smaller vessels, and these gave the harbour
a busy appearance.
In the Indian Ocean again.
April 25 th.—Heavy rain having set in yesterday after-
noon, we were unable to leave the harbour until 7 o’clock
this morning. During the day we had a strong head wind,
and this of course cooled the atmosphere—a most welcome
change to us, for the heat before we reached Ceylon was
almost unbearable, and several of our passengers were sick
on that account.
April 28th.—Sunday, and the day was calm and beautiful,
so like the day of rest. Since I left off writing on the 25th,
everything has gone on with a placid monotony almost


painful. The sea has been and is more like a lake than the
ocean. The colour was of the richest blue imaginable, so
beautiful to look at. In the evenings it was most interesting
to look over the ship’s side and see the phosphorescence in
the water ; this was a source of great enjoyment to all on
board, and especially to the young ladies and their gallant
cavaliers. At half-past ten this morning we had Divine
worship in the saloon as usual. The lessons were read by
the chief officer and the prayers by the Rev. Mr. Woolnough.
Mr. Woolnough also preached a sermon from the words,
“ There talked with Him two men, which were Moses and
Elias” (Luke ix. 30). Mr. Woolnough is a man deeply
interested in our state after death, and has some rather
novel theories regarding it. Every day now we pass one or
more steamers, and outside of ourselves these are the only
things to interest us during the day.
May i st.—Two days ago the wind died away, and we
have had it very warm—much warmer than we have experi-
enced since we started our voyage. Of course we have
grumblers in a long voyage: they would be missed, for they
add much to the enjoyment of others, and as grumbling is
rather their misfortune than their fault they are to be pitied,
and we tolerate them on that account. In the afternoon all
began to be cheerful, for we were nearing Aden; not because
Aden is a very interesting place, so much as that it is a
stopping place, and there is fresh excitement for all.
,Life on board Steamer.
This may now be a good time to note down some par-
ticulars of our life on board steamer, —for we have our daily
duties, our pastimes and our amusements, as well as our
times for eating, drinking, and sleeping. After the first few
days we soon settle down into our own ways, and we have
our little sets, just as on land. Some passengers get up in
the mornings , early, and have a walk to give them an appe-


tite for breakfast; others are unable, or do not get up until
it is quite time for breakfast. After breakfast a short walk
is usually taken, then letter and diary writing to those so
inclined. The ladies as a rule are more industrious than
the men, for there is scarcely one on board that has not
work of some sort with her. The work most engaged in by
the men is letter writing and diary keeping. Reading takes
up a large part of the time, and is the commonest occupa-
tion. During the day the men saunter round to the smoking
room, and there engage in cards, chess, and draughts, besides
enjoying their smoke. The ladies gather together in little
knots and have friendly chats and gossips, probably a little
scandal is now and then indulged in; but men enjoy a bit
of scandal quite as much as women —at least on board
steamer. The ladies who have provided themselves with
their own teapots and tea services invite others to join them
in a friendly afternoon cup of tea, and in this way afternoon
calls are paid. The afternoon tea, although probably a bit
of a farce, is a very agreeable pastime, and does harm to no
one. At these afternoon teas the young ladies shew their
preference for the officers of the ship and the nice young
men by inviting them to join them. Of course in a large
company such as we have on board the Britannia , there is
sure to be one or two objectionable persons, but I must say
that we were singularly free of this class. Of course we
had the dude, the masher, and the fop—male and female —
but we really could not do without them during so long a
voyage. They fill up so much of our daily programme of
amusement, and after all they are very harmless. If I were
asked to censure any class on board it would not be them,
but the young married ladies who are travelling without
their husbands. These creatures seem to forget that they
have been already appropriated, and are no longer young
ladies. The barefaced way in which they flirted with the
men was most objectionable, and was decidedly galling to


the young ladies \ and we had many decidedly attractive
and handsome young ladies on board. It is surely not in
good taste or womanly to see married women got up with
all the attraction art can give them, and appropriate the
gentlemen at the evening promenades and dances to the
exclusion of modest young ladies, —and yet this was done
every day. Strange as it may seem, we had almost no
excessive drinking on board. There was the friendly glass,
and the glass of wine or beer at tiffen and dinner, and that
surely is not objectionable. Of course, we had one or two
who required their “ nips ” frequently, but only in the case
of one person in the saloon did I see drinking to excess,
and I think this state of things creditable alike to the
passengers and the Company. In regard to the drinking
on board I may relate two anecdotes.
I wanted to get some spirits one day at- the bar, and
when I got to it, it had not been opened, although it was a
few minutes past the hour when it was supposed to be
opened. . One of our “jolly” passengers was there, waiting,-
you know what for, and I said to him, “ They are not very
punctual here.” “No,” said he, “they are not nearly so
punctual as we are.” Another passenger coming up then,
he remarked, “ Here’s another punctual man” The other
anecdote requires a few introductory words. The Scottish
Australians are very sociable, we may even say clannish.
It was a common thing to see them gathered together in
the afternoons and evenings over the flowing bowl. A
Highland gentleman on board (not an Australian) had
frequently been their guest, and they had in return
frequently been his guests. One day when all were together
enjoying their friendly glass and chat, he said to them, in
slightly Highland accent, “ Gentlemen, can you tell me what
the great Australian national pastime is?” Some said
“Cricket” and some “Football,” but neither of these
answers was correct. So they all gave it up. “Well,


gentlemen,” said the Highlander, “it is having a drink all
round.” This answer in the circumstances seemed so good
that it, as the saying is, literally “brought the house
down.” Concerts, dances, and balls were of frequent
occurrence, and helped much to the enjoyment of all. On
one occasion we had a fancy dress ball, and, to the credit of
all who took part, be it said that the make-up and turn-out
was really marvellous. Too much praise cannot be
given to the officers of the steamer for the hearty way in
which they all helped to break the monotony of the voyage
by joining in and suggesting means for our enjoyment
and amusement. During a voyage it takes little to interest
the passengers, and the sight of a passing steamer or a
shoal of porpoises, which we frequently had, caused great
excitement. After leaving Colombo every day steamers
passed us, and in the Red Sea a steamer was scarcely ever
out of sight. And in this way and with these amusements
the time was passed both enjoyably and harmlessly.
Aden and the Red Sea.
We arrived at Aden about 7 o’clock on the evening of Ist
May, but as it was very dark after dinner, and the boats
were small, very few of the passengers ventured on shore.
Those that did land said it was not worth the trouble. But we
had plenty of amusement on board the steamer, for many of
the natives paid us a visit, and as they had articles to sell
we had a very brisk time of it until the bed hour. Next
morning we were awakened early by the noise and jabber
of the natives. Our steamer was surrounded by them.
Some were boy divers, some sellers of fancy baskets and
boxes, and others ostrich feather merchants. Some of the
feathers were beautiful, and of very good quality. We
bought several, and think we got good value for our money.
But the same thing prevails there that had to be contended


against at Colombo, viz., asking a price far in excess of what
they will ultimately take. We bought a set of four feathers
for ios., for which the price asked in the first instance was
60s. And for the benefit of those who may yet visit Aden,
I would say that if you intend buying feathers examine all
the four before buying, for they are very cunning, and
frequently have a beautiful feather on the top while those
under are very inferior. Also see that you get the same set
that was offered you when your price has been accepted, for
they are very clever, and can change them without being
noticed if not closely watched. At 10 o’clock in the fore-
noon we left in company with the 8.1. Co.’s steamer India ,
also bound for London. Aden is the port of call, at the
entrance to the Red Sea when journeying from the east,
and all its surroundings have a dry and parched appearance,
and no vegetation of any kind is visible. Rain, they say,
falls about every two or three years, and the town is supplied
with water from tanks, called Solomon’s tanks, which hold
some millions of gallons. The town is distant from the
landing place about five miles, and has a population of
about 21,000, chiefly Soumalies. The Soumalies are very
dark skinned, and the majority have the same lofty contempt
for clothing that we referred to when writing about the
Cingalees.
3rd May.—We have now got fairly into the Straits of
Babel-Mandeb, and the heat is very intense. So great is
the heat that we look forward to the few days that we are to
be in the Red Sea with the utmost dread. What makes
the heat so great is that we have a fair wind, and fair winds
in tropical localities favour heat. Were it not for the
interest which so many steamers passing us now make, I
do not know what we would do. However, this state of
things did not long continue, for at night the wind changed,
and gradually a strong head wind set in, so that by next
morning it was nice and cool, and all day it continued to


get colder and colder until the evening, when it was so cold
that many of us had to put on additional or heavier clothing.
During the night blankets had to be put on the beds, and
next day (Sunday, sth May) ulsters and rugs were freely
used on deck. Blankets, ulsters, and rugs in the Red Sea
seem out of place, and look as if the much-talked-of heat
of the Red Sea was a myth. We had service in the saloon
this morning at half-past 10 o’clock. Prayers were read by
the Commander, and a most thoughtful, but certainly not
evangelical, sermon was preached by the Rev. Mr. Wool-
nough from the words, “ That mortality might be swallowed
up of victory” (2 Cor. v. 4). About 10 o’clock this evening
we had a narrow escape from a collision which might have
been followed with serious results. A troopship without a
mast light was noticed coming right on to us. Our lookout
saw her, and our helm was immediately starboarded. Just
at this moment the troopship saw the difficulty and ported
her helm. This, of course, made confusion worse con-
founded, and the moment was one of intense excitement.
Happily our Captain was abje to get our helm ported, and
the collision was averted, but it was, as one of the quarter-
masters observed, a very close shave.
The Suez Canal.
6th May.—We entered the Suez Canal about 6 o’clock this
morning, and at midnight reached Port-Said, which is at
the Mediterranean end of the Canal. The passage through
is conducted by pilots, one coming on board at Suez and
remaining until Ismailia is reached, where he leaves, and
another takes his place and continues till arrival at Port-Said.
Each pilot brings a steersman with him. The reason for
this is probably, that the pilots are either French or Italian,
and would not be understood by the regular steersmen on the
steamers. The average speed of the steamers in the canal is


not more than five knots per hour. The length, according
to Sheriff’s Illustrated Chart is 88 geographical miles (nearly
ioo English miles); 66 miles are actual canal, and 22 miles
run through the three lakes, Timsah, Great and Small Bitter
Lakes. The total cost of the work was The
canal is owned by a company, and, thanks to the genius of the
late Earl of Beaconsfield, the British Government are large
shareholders. The width at the surface throughout the
greater part is 325 feet and at its bottom 72 feet, with a
depth of 26 feet. The surface width is reduced to 195 feet
in three places, where the course is through high and rocky
ground. The total mileage of the narrow cuttings is about
18 miles. It is wonderful to see such a large steamer as
the “ Britannia ” floating through what I can best describe
as a ribbon of water. On either side all the way as far as
the eye can reach it is a barren wilderness of sand. I never
saw such barrenness anywhere. The only vegetation to be
seen is at the different signal stations, and it is of the most
meagre description. Before the electric light was introduced
the steamers had to tie up at night. There are certain
places where steamers pass each other in going through the
Canal, and we passed several steamers bound for India,
China and Australia. Dredgers are constantly at work, so
that the channel may be kept at its proper depth, for the
silting up of the sand is considerable. Our sail through the
Canal was very pleasant, but sometimes it is anything but
that, for there are wind storms, and then, on account of the
sand flying about, it is disagreeable in the extreme. Port-
Said was reached at midnight, and at three o’clock next
morning we left and proceeded on our way across the
Mediterranean to Brindisi, which is 934 miles steaming from
Port-Said. We did not go ashore at Port-Said, for the -very
good reason that we were in bed asleep, and when we got
up in the morning, land was actually out of sight. It may
interest some of our friends to learn, so soundly were


we asleep, that when we went on deck in the morning, we
were not aware that we had been to Port-Said, and had done
three hours’ coaling.
Brindisi.
We reached Brindisi, our first European port of call, about
half-past five o’clock on the afternoon of Thursday, 9th May,
the voyage having taken nearly 63 hours. It was very cold
all the way, and such a thing as a glimpse of the sun we
never had. Overhead there was constantly a leaden sky,
and the sea was of a dull blue. We had often heard of the
“ bright blue ” of the Mediterranean, but we never saw it,
and in comparison with the waters in the Southern Oceans,
it came a bad second. On the Bth we passed the island of
Crete; it was covered with snow. This was both a surprise
and pleasure to us, for many on board had never seen snow
before, and as for myself I had not seen any for 15 years.
But oh, the day was cold and bleak! In the afternoon we
were off the coast of Greece. The next day it was still very
cold, so unlike what we had pictured to ourselves to be
experienced in the sunny Mediterranean, and it was with great
delight that we saw ourselves being moored alongside the
wharf at Brindisi. After dinner we landed and had a stroll
through the town. The streets are flagged, and are not by
any means clean. The architecture of the place is of no
order. It is painfully plain and unsightly. The inhabitants
are, of course, Italian, and their manner in speaking very
striking. They speak with the hand as well as the mouth,
and this of course attracts attention at once. Any other
than Italians might think us rude, for we cannot keep from
watching them; but they cannot, for they have the most staring
and wicked eyes I ever saw in any people and they use them
well. You cannot put a Brindisi man out of countenance.
In Brindisi we found the usual complement of beggars, but
they are able-bodied men and women. In the other places


that we visited the beggars were mostly blind, deaf, dumb,
in want of a limb, or they had no father or no mother.
Here it is otherwise, it is their business, their profession.
Fruit of certain kinds is to be had plentifully and cheap.
These are oranges, lemons, dates, cherries, grapes, and
nuts. When the steamer got safely moored at the wharf it
was amusing to see the large number of consequential-
looking customs officials coming on board and taking as it
were possession of our steamer. Their business is to hunt
after dutiable goods, which are principally tobacco and
cigars. During the evening most beautiful music was
played and sung by small companies of Italian minstrels at
the wharf, and it was really excellent. The time was good
and the harmony exquisite, and we really enjoyed ourselves.
Shortly after 9 o’clock we left, much pleased with our visit.
At this port nearly one fourth of our number left, to proceed
overland, but I daresay quite as many new people came on
board, so that our numbers were not really diminished.
Malta.
Malta was reached on the morning of nth May. It was
about 6 o’clock when we anchored in the quarantine har-
bour, Yaletta, and after partaking of an early breakfast we
landed. Having engaged a guide, we unreservedly placed
ourselves in his hands, which is the far better way when you
have a reliable man. And this our guide proved himself to
be. He first took us to St. John’s Cathedral, but as service
was going on, we left to come back later on in the mornino-
We then went to the governor’s palace in Strada Reale.
Here the armoury chamber and the council room are
the principal places; they are both well worth seeing.
The walls of the council room are hung with tapestries,
worked by the ladies of Malta in the last and preceding
centuries. This work is beautiful, and may well be
considered one of the lost arts. There are also in the


council room, and in the lobby leading to it from the
armoury chamber, several splendid old paintings in a really
good state of preservation. Leading up to the armoury is
Napoleon’s carriage—the carriage coated with gold that we
read of in the history books. It is now painted over, and
that the gold is there can be discovered by scraping with a
penknife. No visitor to Malta should fail to visit the
palace. After leaving it we revisited St. John’s. The
service being over, we were able to have a better look
through this wonderful building. Externally, St. John’s is
a most unattractive edifice, but internally it is different. A
large volume could easily be filled with a description of it
and its history. The carvings, the fittings, and the paintings
are really wonderful, pure gold and silver being often used.
In a vault under the church are the tombs of the Knights
of Malta, men celebrated in history for their patriotism,
bravery, and liberality. We next drove out to see the
Capuchin monks. The great sight here is the dead bodies
of the monks mummified, if I may §o speak. When a monk
dies he is first buried, I understand, then the body is
exhumed and placed in a niche in the building. Some are
falling into decay, but others are in a wonderfully good state
of preservation. This is a strange, weird sight, and not
every one has nerve enough to go down through the vaults.
The chapel here is also well worth seeing, all the work
about it having been done by the monks themselves. As
the monks are very poor, and keep up the place by their
own labours, visitors are expected to leave a gratuity foi
them. On our way back we saw several other places of
interest, but we did not visit any but the market, and it to
us was chiefly remarkable for its dirtiness and abominable
smells. The rest of the morning was spent driving through
the streets and shopping; and in Valetta the visitor can get
possessed of many curios, if so inclined. The streets aie
very narrow, it being nearly possible to shake hands from


the opposite windows. Among other things that the streets
of Valetta are remarkable for is the number of beggars. It
is impossible for a stranger to get along without being
followed by them. Their number is legion, and the surest
and quickest way of getting through is to have a plentiful
supply of coppers.
Before noon we returned to the steamer quite delighted
with Malta. Of course, as is usual at these places, we found
the decks of the steamer crowded with dealers, Maltese
lace being the chief article for sale. Tobacco, cigars, and
cigarettes are also largely sold. Malta being a free port,
these articles can be had free of duty, and as it is consider-
able, very good tobacco can be had for is. and is. 3d. per
lb., capital cigars at 10s. per hundred, and Egyptian cigar-
ettes at is. per hundred; but the visitor must take care not
to buy too freely, or he will be mulcted in London of the
heavy duty. Shortly after noon we steamed away to our
next port —Gibraltar— 1,054 miles steaming from Malta.
Very soon we were in sight of H.M.S. Sultan, which only a
few weeks ago was stranded on rocks near the Malta coast.
Without passing any opinion, I will here state that the
remark made by one and all was, “ What the dickens was
such a large vessel doing there ? ”
At Malta we received a large addition to our passenger
list, principally army men and their wives and daughters.
With some of them it was very noticeable that they thought
themselves of a better stock than the Australians. This refers
particularly to the ladies. One lady was heard to say that
if she had known there were to be so many Australians on
board, she certainly would have chosen another steamer.
Another remarked that she would like to be shown an
Australian so that she could hear how they spoke. Well,
Australians may not belong to the patrician class, nor may
they live such butterfly lives, but they have the satisfaction
of knowing that they are raising up a people that will yet


hold their own in the world of letters, arts, and sciences.
They have also the satisfaction of knowing that in their
land such class distinctions as patrician and plebeian are
unknown.
Gibraltar.
At 8 o’clock on the morning of Tuesday, 14th May, we
anchored in the bay of Gibraltar, or, 1 as the travelled ones
call it, the Gib. Since we left Malta the weather has been
bitterly cold, and the day previous it was wet, foggy, and
generally disagreeable. We rarely saw the sun during the
whole of the trip through the Mediterranean, and as for a
blue sky, we only saw a little of it when at Malta. This
morning, however, we were in real luck, for it cleared up,
and we had it bright and fine, more like what we are accus-
tomed to in Australia. Soon after arrival at the Gib, we
were surrounded by a fleet of small boats, and the disem-
barking at once commenced. We did not land, preferring
to leave this port until our return, when we may have more
time, for it is useless to land at Gibraltar unless you have at
least four hours to spare. Besides, we were informed that
visitors would not be allowed to visit the fortifications on
the rock, as the armaments were being altered, and other
improvements being made. Those who did land were
unanimous in their opinion that the town was the cleanest
they had visited since leaving Australia, and the market a
perfect model of cleanliness and good appointment. For
the information of those of our friends who may be inter-
ested in Gibraltar, I will give the following facts regarding
it, taken from Sheriff’s Chart: —
The rock rises up from the bay, and is three miles in
length; its width about three-quarters of a mile, and it is
nearly seven miles in circumference. It was taken by the
English, under Sir George Rooke, in 1704, and though
many attempts have been made to recover it, it has ever


since remained in their possession. It is a bold ridge in
the form of a peninsula running due north and south. The
mountain at the northern side rises to a height of about
1,400 feet in a perpendicular cliff. The chief eminences
are:—The Rock Gun or Wolf’s Crag, 1,250 feet, at the
north; The Upper Signal Station, 1,294 feet, in the centre;
Sugar Loaf Hill, or O’Hara’s Tower, 1,361 feet, at the
south. The greatest height is situated between the Signal
Station and O’Hara’s Tower; the highest point in the
neighbourhood, on the African side, is Ape’s Hill, 2,808
feet. The town is on the western side, and is divided into
two distinct parts, known as the North and South Town.
The slopes at the back of the town are thickly studded with
houses, built tier above tier to a height of 250 feet above
the sea. The bay is nearly eight miles long, and about five
miles broad. The whole place has a striking and picturesque
appearance, and is really worth the attention of traveller
and tourist.
At half-past eleven we left for Plymouth, which we hope
to reach on Friday morning. Already the excitement
caused by nearing the port of destination has commenced,
and packing up has become a busy occupation. We our-
selves are not free from the excitement.
The Bay of Biscay.
When we got up on the morning of 16th May we learned
that we had entered the much-dreaded Bay of Biscay, and
again we were doomed to disappointment, for the sea was
perfectly calm. Like the heat of the Red Sea, and the
blue sky of the Mediterranean, we are beginning to think
that the dreadful storms of the Bay of Biscay are highly
mythological. But, whether or not, notwithstanding our
apparent disappointment, we were not a little glad that we
had had so much good fortune during the voyage. The
only thing to remind us in the bay that we were not sailing


in Australian waters was that the whole day it was cold, wet,
and awfully disagreeable, and we felt just about as miserable
as it was possible. Early the next morning we entered the
English Channel, and before breakfast were off the English
Coast. Our excitement was greht, and was only equalled
by our admiration of the green hills and fields of Old
England. About noon, amid much joy, and a drizzling,
wetting rain, we anchored off Plymouth, where the steam
tender brought us innumerable letters, telegrams, and
newspapers. Joy ! joy ! joy ! a cordial welcome to the old
land, the land of our fathers, awaited all, and we have the
satisfaction of knowing that although years and distance have
separated friend from friend we have not been forgotten.
London Docks were reached the next day about 2 o’clock,
and it was with big lumps in our throats and thankfulness
in our hearts that we met our friends, and said good-bye to
the good ship Britannia , to her able Commander and her
gallant officers and men. Saturday, the 18th May, 1889,
will for ever be a memorable day in our lives.
