

f / ■ V-- -0 ** PtfTH- 'PPm
1 1
• CD ~~ ' ——— (D >
I NOTES
ON
-| AUSTRALASIA, SOUTH AFRICA, AND
| MAURITIUS.
BT
JA.]VfJHS ZBTJLGTIjST.
(Reprinted from the “ China Mail.”)
Price; 30 Cents.
HONGKONG;
PRINTED AT THE “CHINA MAIL” OFFICE. |
i s s a .
t - -f-


'


NOTES
AUSTRALASIA, SOUTH AFRICA, AND
MAURITIUS.
JAMES BXJJLGIjN.
(Reprinted from the “ China Mail.”)
Price: 30 Cents,
HONGKONG:
PRINTED AT THE “CHINA MAIL” OFFICE.
18 8 3.


.
.
.
'
-
.
*
'


NOTES ON AUSTRALASIA, SOUTH AFRICA, AND
MAURITIUS.
Melbourne, Jan. 3rd, 1883.
It is not my intention to give, in the
series of letters I am about to write to yon,
dry details respecting the resources and
trade of the colonies mentioned above, or
elaborate descriptions of their appearance,
as such information may be obtained from
good works of reference, but I will only
note those matters which you are not like-
ly to find in any publication, and those
matters that will be most interesting to
readers in the Far East.
The stranger in Australia must be both
pleased and surprised at the excellent man-
ner in which most of the chief towns are
built and laid out. I think Melbourne or
Adelaide would vie in this respect with any
other city in the world. Sydney is old, and
not as well built or laid out as Melbourne,
but the town and harbour surveyed to-
gether afford the most magnificent view I
ever beheld. There is an old saying ad-
monishing frail humanity to “ see Naples
and die.” I have seen Naples, with Vesu-
vius in eruption, but I would much rather die
after seeing Sydney. One great drawback
to the Australian cities, however, is the
clouds of dust that fly about the streets
whenever there is a high wind, blinding one
and rendering cleanliness impossible, espe-
daily when the thermometer shows a hun-
dred degrees of heat in the shade, which is
a common occurrence during the summer
and months here. This evil will continue bo
>, or long as there are only macadamised roads to
nee, bear the heavy traffic in the main thorough-
:rora fares of these cities.
Another matter that prejudices life in
this part of the world is the difficulty in
obtaining servants. This is really a serious
difficulty. Servants require exorbitant
wages here, are most independent in their
behaviour, and frequently cannot be ob-
tained at all. While I am writing these
lines a servant has come to the house in
which I am lodging and demanded her box
and her wages in the most impertinent
manner. She was allowed out for a few
hours on New Year’s Eve, and nothing
more was seen or heard of her until to-day
—the third of the month. The servant we
had before her was a member of the Salva-
tion Array. She may have been a noble
soldier of the Cross, but she was a poor miser-
able object in appearance. One day she got
half a day’s holiday to attend a picnic to
celebrate the birthday of the Commander-
in-chief of the Salvation forces in Australia.
Nothing was seen or heard of her for three
days, and then she sent a letter to her mis-


tress stating that she was introduced to a marriages here. Often young men in Mel-
“ young gentleman ” —a distinguished mem-
ber of the Salvation Army—at the picnic,
and she was so overcome by this circum-
stance, and the fervour of the proceedings
generally, that she fainted, and had since
been too unwell to return to her work.
The letter was probably intended to be a
“ feeler,” but no notice was taken of it. A
day or two later on, the noble but rather
dilapidated-looking soldier appeared at the
front door with a hymn-book in her hand,
and a very penitent look upon her face.
Her mistress had, however, by this time
come to the conclusion that she must be
better adapted for fighting in the grand
struggle against sin than for the humble
duties of a domestic servant, and the door
was closed against her.
Probably the chief reason of the scarcity
of servants in Australia, and their inde-
pendence, is the prosperity of the people.
Any man who is a decent workman, or has
had a fair amount of training in any pro-
fession, can do well in Australia. The
result is that the female members of the
families of the labouring classes are kept at
home instead of being sent out to earn the
cost of their own living as servants. To the
prosperity of the people may also be traced
another circumstance which must tend to
check, more or less, the progress of the
colonies, namely that the daughters of
trades-people and others who in England
are generally trained to be good, useful
wives, here lay themselves out to be ladies,
and very idle ones too. Dolce far niente is,
apparently the motto of their lives. Young
men with moderate incomes naturally hesi-
tate to marry girls who can do nothing but
play the piano, and make a few fancy
tilings for the ornamentation of rooms,
especially in a country like this, where even
a housemaid has to be paid about fifteen
shillings a week as wages. Melbourne
swarms with single girls, yet it is a matter
of common remark that there are very few
i mem- bourne must sigh, when girls are display-
picnic, ing their fancy accomplishments—
“ Your dressing, dancing, gadding, where’s the
good in ?
Sweet lady, tell me—can you make a pud-
ding ?”
House rent is extravagantly high in
Melbourne. Tenements that would let for
£5O in London are not obtainable here
under double that amount. House rent,
servants and clothes are all highly priced in
Australia, but the other items of living are
cheap—meat especially so. On the whole I
think one can live almost as cheaply in
Melbourne as in London, if his requirements
in the matter of servants are modest. One
thing I like about the Colonies is that they
are thoroughly English, not only in the
descent of the people, but in their sympa-
thies. In these respects they offer a strik-
ing contrast to the South African Colonies.
There is more loyalty in a single street of
an Australian city than there is in a whole
town in South Africa. The general appear-
ance of things, both in and out of the towns,
is almost quite English. Persons fresh
from the “Old Country” walking the
streets in Melbourne could easily imagine
themselves, from the surroundings, to be in
some well-built and busy town in England ;
outside the City they would find present,
all the features of English scenery excep-
ting that the trees would be the blue-gum
and wattle in place of the elm and oak, and
instead of the sweet notes of the thrush and
lark they would probably have their ears
saluted with the chuckles of the magpie and
the laughing jackass.
While on the subject of the difficulties in
the way of a comfortable life in Australia I
may refer to the abominable names borne
by the majority of the towns and places
here. The names bestowed on many of the
places in New Zealand are, I know, even
more terrible than those adopted in this
country, but the latter are quite difficult
enough for me. It is surprising that a


highly civilized community coutiuues to 'in opera t
Buffer under such appellations. I never
could recollect how many o’s there wer<n j n
Woolloomooloo, an important suburb ot
Sydney, nor can I believe that a place will
prosper so long as it is burdened with such
a name as Yudanarautana, a township in
South Australia. The names here remind
me of the two euphonious lines of Carey—
a Compai
New Zea!
" they g
his cleve.
known in Hoi
teachers of music, instrumental and voWff
Plumpton is the composer of two songs in-
troduced into the opera-bouffe of Buccacio.
“ Aldebo-ontipbo-cophornio ? He has also composed many other songs,
Where left you Chrououhotontbologos?" an( j one ver y excellent mass.
The Australians are a great sporting
people. On Cup Day the Melbourne Race
Course is a surprisingly grand spectacle.
The crowd present sometimes numbers
nearly a hundred thousand, and the
Grand Stand is filled with ladies, many
of whom are dressed in the most superb
costumes, obtained without regard to
cost. Yesterday I saw a crowd of about
20,000 people, assembled on the Cricket cheerful
Ground to witness the defeat of the Hon.
Ivo Bligh’s team of English cricketers by
the redoubtable Australian Eleven, just
returned from England, covered with the
laurels of victory. There were thousands
in the crowd who would have rejoiced to see
the English team win the match, and the
applause that followed any smart feat of
batting or bowling by the English Cricketers
was almost if not quite as loud and hearty
as that which was awarded for similar feats
bj ipembers of the Australian eleven.
There are four good theatres in Mel-
bourne. Some of the peformances at them
would vie with those at many of the lead-
ing London theatres. Most of the English
star artistes visit Australia. Vernon, who
has taken opera companies once or twice to
Hongkong, was recently playing leading
characters in Melbourne and Sydney. He
took the part of “ Bunthorne ” in Patience
at the Theatre Royal here, and gave a most
clever and successful rendering of the char-
acter. Miss Elcia May, who visited Hong-
kong with Vernon, does not seem to be con-
sidered good enough for leading characters
In writing of people weii known in Hoii-
kong, I may note that Ball, formerly of the
China Dispensary, has married the lady of
his choice, and settled down as a chemist in
Melbourne. He is working very hard to
get together a good business, and so far
appears to have been very successful. His
courtship and marriage were rather roman-
tic, but his wife is one of the sweetest, most
and contented ladies in disposition
I have met. Salway, who formerly carried
on business in Hongkong, has established
himself here as an auctioneer or estate
agent, or something of the kind.
In concluding this letter I must say ft
word in praise of the Australian press. The
leading newspapers in these Colonies are
almost equal in excellence to some of the
London daily journals. I wish I could say
as much for the Australian parliaments. If
reports are to be believed they are not
always superior to the allurements of a little
Jobbery. The newspapers are also con-
stantly charging members with wasting
time in talking twaddle. This is a general
complaint against members of parliament,
I know, but perhaps it is well founded with
regard to the members in this Colony, as
they receive a salary of £3OO a year and
naturally are anxious to let the public see
that they are doing something beyond mere
voting for their money. The Parliamen-
tary critic of one of the Melbourne papers
heads his weekly notes on the proceedings
in Parliament with the well-known lines
about the busy bee improving the shining


tiding the 1 of the shops in Uie chief Parisian rues, but
Kfe should ! I have nevo«' walked up what I may call a
l-.oh little i shopping street which has been more plea-
iot speak ?”
LETTER, NO. 2.
Ballarat, Jan. 15.
In an assembly of legislators there are
always some individuals who imagine them-
selves to be witty, and others who really are
' <.:.ng to ray eye than the broad business
j thoroughfare running through the town in
which I date this letter. Bourke Street
i and Collins Street—the two great shopping
i thoroughfares in Melbourne are rather
| spoilt, so far as appearances are concerned,
by dips in the middle ; and the narrowness
of George Street and Pitt Street—the two
great shopping thoroughfares in Sydney —
detract much from their handsomeness.
—the former being usually in the majority. There are plenty of mosquitoes in Austra-
Both classes of these individuals seem to be
present in the Legislature at Melbourne.
One of the best efforts at repartee that have
come within my knowledge is said to have
been made in the Victorian House of
Assembly. The circumstances were related
to me the other day in a railway carriage,
coming up to Ballarat. It appears that a
lia, and for strength of jaw, audacity, and
dogged resolution, I would back them
against any mosquitoes in China. This is
saying a great deal for the Australian mos-
quitoes, but I make the statement deli-
berately after many a savage and wearying
battle, in the dead of night, with mosqui-
toes on the banka of the Canton river, and
member of the House, who is not noted for in house-boats on the canals intersecting
his educational attainments, was in doubt the country round Shanghai. The Austra-
about the orthography of a word in a manu- lian and Chinese mosquitoes must, however,
script report he was criticising. Holding hide their diminished heads before the New
up the report, with a finger on the doubtful
letter, he said, in tones more emphatic than
correct: “Mr Speaker, is this a hem or a
hen ” ? The Speaker, with a quick percep-
tion of the humorous, immediately replied
in equally stentorian tones: “Put it down
as a hen, and let it lay on the table.” The
member murmured something about the pun
being afoul one, and subsided.
The reference to Ballarat reminds me
that I have not written anything, so far,
with respect to this fine town. 1 am only
doing justice to the people of Ballarat when
I state that their main street is as pleasing
and almost as well built a business thorough-
fare as any one I have ever had the pleasure
of traversing. It is true that the buildings
in Church Street, Ballarat—the thorough-
fare to which I refer—have not the grandeur
of those which line some of the principal
streets in London, nor the glitter and finish
Jersey ones, if the following beautiful lines,
which I culled from an American paper,
afford anything like a correct idea of
them:
“ A fair-haired child to its mother spoke
As its eyes with wonder grew ’
•WhatVu.aCdear ma,’ the p&fl* said ,
i Inal’s hiding the sun from view ' ’
The mother gazed, as the darken d light
Made the scene look ghastly and dear,
Then turned to her fair-haired child and said,
‘That’s a Jersey mosquito, dear!’ ”
My intention was to confine this letter to
notes on Tasmania, and I will now proceed
to give your a few jottings on that beautiful
and interesting island. 1 went over to
Launceston from Melbourne in one of the
small ocean steamers which ply almost daily
between those two ports. After reaching
the Tasmanian coast we had a run of about
forty miles up the river Tamar to I,nun-


ceston. The scenery on each bank of the ] sired “smoke!” 1 cannot vouch for the
river was most imposing and beautiful.
Launceston, a town of about 10,000 inha-
bitants, is pleasantly situated among hills,
and seems to be a more thriving place than
Hobart, the capital, but it is not nearly as
pleasant a place for residence. The journey
from Launceston to Hobart is now made by
a railway, 133 miles in length, and running
almost through the centre of the island.
Formerly travellers from Launceston to
Hobart went by the main road—a road made
by convict labour and said to have been the
finest in the world. Owing to the construc-
tion of the railway the road is not now kept
in perfect repair. Tasmania appears to be
a country constituted almost entirely of
mountains, hills and valleys, covered with
dense forests, and the whole journey from
Launceston to Hobart by the railway pre-
sents one with ever-changing beauties like a
kaleidoscope, for, just as in that instru-
ment, one pattern of beauty is formed only
to be changed at the next turn, so the
tourist travelling on the Tasmanian main-
line railway catches glimpse after glimpse
of varying scenery, on each of which he
would gladly linger for a more complete
view. Occasionally there comes a track of
level country, but during most of the jour-
ney the train is rushing wildly about among
mountains.
The sinuosities of the Tasmanian railway
have given rise to a very pretty anecdote,
which I will relate. One day the guard in
charge of a train discovered that he was
greatly in need of a “ smoke,” and that he
hadn’t a match in his possession. He com-
municated the position of affairs to the
engine-driver as the train was going round
a curve. The driver, with ingenuity and
considerateness worthy of loftier purposes,
waited until the train was winding its way
round another tremendous curve, and then
held out a shovel-full of burning coals to
the guard, thus enabling him to obtain a
light, and gratify his feelings with the de-
truth of this story; nor am I particularly
anxious that your readers should believe it.
Tasmanian scenery is more like Japanese
scenery than any other 1 have seen. The
scenery in Tasmania is, however, rather
more imposing, if less beautiful, than most
of that I saw in Japan, although I have
done some amount of travelling in the coun-
try which, Mr McLeod contends, was the
final refuge of the Ten Lost Tribes of Israel.
By the way, I took so much interest at
one time in the researches to discover the
whereabouts of those Lost Tribes, that you
ipt will perhaps pardon my digressing to that
be subject for a moment. Probably your read-
of ers are utterly indifferent as to what be-
came of those wandering Jews. lam now ;
but I was not three or four years ago. This
is how I came to be interested in them.
When I went up to Yokohama to edit a pa-
stru- per there, I found that Mr McLeod’s book,
only written for the purpose of proving that the
i the Japanese samurai are the veritable descen-
dants of the Ten Lost Tribes, was the only
volume on the bookshelves of the editorial
sanctum. It was the only visible pabulum
on which I—an extremely modest young
man, and a stranger in the land—was ex-
pected to produce articles that would startle
the Japanese world, and instruct the Mika-
do and his ministers how to govern their
country. I read that solitary work with
care, and was profoundly impressed with
Mr McLeod’s arguments and proofs. Hence-
forward, whenever I thought I had dis-
covered a samurai, outrageously disguised
perhaps in European clothes, I felt inclined
to take off my hat and salute him as a true
descendant of the Ten Lost Tribes. I found-
ed one or two articles for the paper, on Mr
McLeod’s book, and I might have utilised
the work further in the same way had not a
contretemps occurred, resulting in its loss.
One day the author—Mr McLeod—turned
up in my sanctum. His eyes were quickly
directed to the lone volume; its appearance


was no doubt familiar to him ; any way he paper to show that the descendants of the
pounced upon it, and, to my disgust, claimed
it as a book he had lent to the previous
editor! I struggled manfully for the pos-
session of that volume, —I mean in argu-
ment. I pointed out that it was the sole
support of my editorial dignity; the
foundation perhaps for some more articles,
and the only solace of my leisure moments.
Mr McLeod was, however, inexorable, and,
if I remember rightly, he ekffied the work
away in triumph. Possibly copies of the
book had run short. I don’t know if the
loss of the volume had any influence on my
subsequent proceedings, but it is certain
that shortly after Mr McLeod’s visit I found
it expedient to make my exit from the office,
never to return.
I was quite content that the Japanese
samurai should be identified as the descen_
dants of the Ten Lost Tribes. It was at any
rate satisfactory to know we had at last dis-
covered them. When I got back to Eng-
land, however, I found the people there
exulting over another discovery that the
English nation were the real descendants of
the missing Jews. Even a periodical had
been started there to demonstrate the stabi-
lity of the discovery, and swell the cry of
exultation. The Japanese samurai fell at
once in my estimation, and I exulted with
my countrymen over the idea that our an-
cestors were the Babylonish captives. It is
singular there should have been any stigh
exultation, seeing that the anxiety of most
European nations appears to be not to
honour the Jews, but to get rid of them.
My exultation was, however, but short-
lived, for, when I made a holiday trip to the
United States, I found that the English
claims were discountenanced there, and that
the North American Indians were the popu-
lar candidates on the other side of the Atlan-
tic for the honour of being the modern repre-
sentatives of the Ten Lost Tribes. Subse-
quently I ascertained that many savants
had been, and were, using much ink and
lost Jews were in India, while other learned
men were working equally hard to convince
the world that they were wandering about
in Kurdistan. I lost ultimately all interest
in the matter; or at any rate I concluded it
would be premature to worry myself further
about the fate of the Lost Tribes until at
least moat of the existing nations had been
satisfactorily proved to be their descendants.
Before leaving scriptural matters I may
remark that the colonists in one part of
Tasmania favour much the use of biblical
names. On my journey to Hobart from
Launceston I went to Jericho de facto, there
being a station of that name. I was told
that a stream 1 saw flowing through it was
called the Jordan. The next station was
Jerusalem, and the one after it Lower Jeru-
salem. “ Where’er I went, ’twas haunted,
holy ground”—in name. The Tasmanian
Jerusalem did not appear to me to be a city
any one would care to weep over, excepting
perhaps an individual unfortunate enough
to be compelled to live there. A few strag-
gling, badly-built houses constituted the
place. Probably the name for the hamlet
was suggested by the low hills around it.
I noticed that the station porter called the
place “ Jer rooz lum !” Later on we
passed Lake Tiberias, and it was really a
most interesting sight. It had the appear-
ance of an immense track of perfectly level
eountry; m P e FSII witk the points of reeds,
and bounded, except on the side where we
were rushing past in the train, with ab-
ruptly rising mountains. Not a drop of
water was to be seen. I had no idea it was
a lake at all when I first caught sight of it,
but its singular appearance arrested my at-
tention, and in reply to enquiries, I was
told that down below the tops of the reeds
I saw, stretching away for miles, the water
was in places as much as fourteen feet deep.
I was inclined to think I could walk on
that lake without any specially strong faith,
but had 1 attempted the experiment, I


should moat likely soon have found myself i way. Indeed, my feelings in regard to
in troubla.
Hobart is a most pleasantly situated
town, tying as it does among mountains,
with the broad Derwent forming a splendid
harbour in front of it. It is the great
holiday resort for people in the great towns
of the Australian continent; in fact, Tas-
mania is the Australian Isle of Wight, and
Hobart the Australian Hyde or Cowes. The
Huon road, running out of Hobart, is one of
the best drives, I should think, in the world
for magnificent scenery, united with a good,
smooth road. A beautiful spot called the
“ Bower,” noted for its gigantic ferns, is
situated about six miles from Hobart, and j
is reached by this road. The first time I
started for the “ Bower ” 1 did not get j
there, for I was so enchanted with the drive I
that I prolonged it for seventeen miles until ■
a returning coach was met, when I changed j
vehicles and came back to Hobart. 1 have
seen grander and more beautiful scenery I
than that on the Huon road, but it has
been limited in extent, and not easily
approachable; whereas the traveller in Ho-
bart can get on top of one of the Huon
coaches and enjoy a whole day’s drive
along a smooth, hard, road, having on each
side, during the entire journey, scenery of
the most majestic and lovely description.
The stranger in Tasmania should be
careful not to speak of the country as Van
Diemen’s Land, nor of Hobart as Hobart
Town. There is a smack of the convict
about the old name which the colonists do
not like. Residents in Hobart are much
addicted to telling their pedigrees to tra-
vellers upon a short acquaintance with them.
Perhaps the reason is that many persons in
good position there were, or they are the
children of parents who were, at one time,
mauvais sujets— individuals who “ left their
country for their country’s good.” I should
add, in fairness to the Hobart people, that
I met many highly respectable persons
there, whose pedigree was unsullied in any
pedigrees are much the same as those of
Josh Billings, when he wrote :—“ I wouldn’t
give 10 cents a yard for all the pedigree in
the world; if a man haz got a level head on
great! his shoulders, and an honest harte in hiz
towns body, he haz got all the pedigree i am in
search ov.”
Both in Tasmania and Australia the com-
monest bird seems to be the magpie. Many
persons keep these birds in cages and teach
them to talk and whistle. I noticed some
results which may furnish mental food for
your readers fond of working out logical
conclusions. Nearly every magpie in Ho-
bart spends his unoccupied moments during
the day in whistling the tune of “Pot o’
Beer.” In Sydney, on the other hand, the
magpies have a religious turn of mind ; they
sing chiefly hymns there, and one caged in
the neighbourhood of my bedroom window
used to warble very sweetly every morning
“ Safe in the arras of Jesus ” The only
caged magpie I saw in Melbourne, engaged
in exhibiting his accomplishments, was vigo-
rously chirping “ Up in a balloon, boys !”
The scenery of Tasmania, and the salu ■
brity of its climate, are not more talked
about in Australia than the beauty of its
demoiselles. I went over to the island with
the liveliest anticipations in the last respect.
In truth I had heard so much about the
comeliness of the Tasmanian maidens, and
their large numbers, that I almost expected
mvict a brilliant deputation of them would be
its do awaiting the arrival of the steamer to assist
much the young bachelors on board in their land-
i tra- ing operations. A grievous disappointment
them, was in store for me. Undoubtedly the
ns in climate of the country produces clear com-
-3 the i plexions, and I believe some exceedingly
time, | pretty girls have had their homes in Hobart,
their j but during my month’s stay on the island I
saw very few young ladies more than passa-
ble in looks. I enquired for a few beautiful
maidens, but I was told that the good-
looking girls had been married and taken


away to Australia and India. A day or two j low
after my arrival in Hobart 1 went to a sift
flower-show, expecting to find a galaxy of j feel
beauty there. I should be sorry to say any- j the
thing discourteous of the Hobart ladies, but lof
it is my journalistic duty to declare that 1 par
never saw at any gathering of the fair sex t 0 s
in England—where I have attended, iu a i glii
professional capacity, hundreds of assem- cus
hlies of the fair and brave—say, to be as ■ mot
polite as possible, a much less attractive ga- I repi
thering of ladies than was present at the I fen
Hobart flower-show. Although I did not see
many young ladies of superior personal at-
tractions at that flower-show, yet I did see a
pretty old and wrinkled face there, which I
was at one time most familiar to residents | I
in Hongkong. 1 allude to Mr Mitchell, Afr
your old Post-master General. He is living the
retired iu Hobart, and is quite a “ big-wig” so il
of the place. There he was with collar and eX p
spectacles, and the usual amount of dignity p re j
stiffening his backbone, Just as I saw him 0 r I
once portrayed in the Hongkong Punch. J
He left Hongkong before I arrived there, thai
and not having the pleasure of his acquaint- c ili,
ancc, I was satisfied to stand at a respectful tola
distance from the little great man, and gaze “J s
at him in silent admiration. em i
My return journey from Hobart to Laun-
ceston was made at night, and I became
most unusually interested in the movements
of the moon during that trip. The incon-
stant thing would peep in at one of the
windows of the carriage for a moment; then
bob about, and finally sail round to the
other side of the carriage, and there take a
look at us. It continued these singular
proceedings until I began to think that
either it or I must be in the state of a cer-
tain gentleman whose erratic proceedings,
after dining out, were related to me. This
gentleman was wandering down a foot-path
in one of the main streets when he came
into collision with a lamp-post. He stopped
and apologised profusely. But as lamp-
post succeeded lamp-post and collision fol-
lowed collision, he at last lost heart, and
sitting down in the middle of the path, he
feebly murmured that he would “wait until
the procession had passed”! The antics
of the moon became so outrageous at one
part of the Journey that I felt constrained
to shout to a fellow traveller, while strug-
gling to maintain an upright position on the
m- : cushions : “ What’s the matter with the
as ! moon ”? “Oh!” he savagely yelled iu
reply, “ the moon’s all right; it’s the in-
fernal railway going round ” !
LETTER, NO. 3.
Hobart, Tasmania, Nov. 23rd, 18S2.
I was rather disappointed with the South
African colonies. In scenery, enterprise of
the population, climate, or fertility of the
soil, South Africa did not come up to my
expectations. I scarcely know that I would
prefer the climate of either the Cape Colony
or Natal to that of Hongkong.
It may not be out of place to observe here
that I have found Hongkong most super-
ciliously treated by the world. The sura
total of the popular ideas respecting the
“ Island of fragrant streams ” seems to be
embraced in the unvarying enquiry, when
Hongkong is referred to, that “ It is very
hot there, isn’t it ?” Very rarely does the
popular interest or knowledge regarding
your island exceed what is implied in that
enquiry. Ton get no credit for your tour
or five months of lovely winter weather,
your massive granite buildings, your smooth
and well-kept roads, your magnificent har-
bour filled with the shipping of all nations,
and, above all, your large commercial in-
terests.
Capetown I found to be an irregularly
laid out place, with narrow streets, rather
badly kept and full of snares for the un-
wary stranger. I shall not forget my first
few hours there. We—l and two others—
landed after dark, and struggled along the
road, covered with two or three inches ol


mud, from tho wharf to the town. The : Elizabeth from the fact that the landing and
mud I thought might be excusable on a
roadway where there was a great deal of
heavy traffic, but I poured out anything but
a blessing on the Capetown corporation
when, turning a corner to get into one of
the main streets, I went into a hole filled
with muddy water at least six inches deep.
But this was not the worst mishap we ex-
perienced that night. The footpaths at
Capetown are composed of what are there
called “ stoeps,” and if I wanted to make a
pun 1 should say they are the most
“ stoopid ” and murderous pathways I ever
saw provided for pedestrians in a town of
civilized inhabitants. You will sympathise
with this remark when 1 explain that the
trMoirs in some of tire main streets in Cape-
town run level enough for twenty or thirty
yards; then comes a deep step down to an-
other level stretch of pavement, and so on
to the bottom of the street. Our casualties
that night, before we became aware of the
peculiarities in the construction of the Gape-
town streets, were a sprained ankle and
some serious bruises. The hotel charges at
Capetown are also extravagantly high, and
the cost of living in the .South African Co-
lonies generally is far higher than it is in
Australia.
Port Elizabeth is much better built than
Capetown, and there seems to be more i
energy and enterprise at the former place I
than at the latter. I hope I have seen suffi-
cient of the world to soften national pre-
judices, inherent in every man, and 1
venture therefore to say that I ascribe the
rapid progress visible at Port Elizabeth
largely to the fact that the bulk of the in-
habitants there are English, while at Cape-
town, where matters seem pretty stagnant,
the Dutch and Africander elements pre-
dominate in the population. Port Elizabeth
is certainly fast taking the lead from Cape-
town, and already surpasses it in the excel-
lence of its public buildings. This position
of affairs is all the more creditable to Port
shipping of goods in Algoa Bay are attended
with far greater natural disadvantages than
they are in Table Bay.
As you are aware the Dutch element is
very strong in the Cape Colony. It is not
so strong, I think, as it is generally sup-
posed to be by people in South Africa, be-
cause they always appear to forget the
heavy stream of emigration constantly
going out there from the United King-
dom. The two chief towns in Natal—
Pietermaritzburg (or Maritzburg, as it is
called for the sake of briefness) and Durban
—have but few Dutch or Africander resi-
dents, but there are numbers of Boer farmers
spread over the upper districts of the
Colony bordering on the Transvaal. The
term “Africander” is applied to persons
boru in the Colony of European parentage.
One of my greatest objections to the South
African Colonies is the divided state of feel-
ing among the colonists —based mainly on
an intense dislike existing between the
English and Dutch.
I am doubtful if there is more loyal feel-
ing among the South African colonists as a
whole than there is among the Irish as a
whole. Not only the Dutch but the Afri-
canders evince a feeling of disloyalty. The
Australians 1 have found as loyal as the
English people themselves, but the Dutch
in South Africa and the bulk of the Afri-
canders are bitterly hostile to the British
Crown. I got out to South Africa just
after the dual disaster at Amajuba Hill,
when of course political feeling was run-
ning very high between the Dutch and Eng-
lish in the colonies, hut there never has been,
and I am afraid there never will be, much
mutual regard existing between the two.
Durban, the next port of importance in
South Africa, and the only port of the
Colony of Natal, seems to be quite a tropical
place. Most of the buildings there at pre-
sent are very slight and unpretentious
structures, corrugated iron being largely


used in them, but better buildings are
now being constructed. One has to travel
about 70 miles “ up-country ” by rail-
way to reach Maritzhurg, the capital of
Natal. For about thirty miles inland this
railway passes through some very pretty,
well-wooded and apparently fertile country,
but during the remainder of the journey
scarcely a tree is to be seen, the country
consisting of hills, mountains and ravines,
utterly bare of all vegetation excepting
grass. R mad the villages a few trees are of
course planted. Maritzhurg is a well laid
out town, the streets being broad, and all
crossing each other at right angles. Most
of the houses there, however, are wretched
structures, being seldom more than one
storey high.
One striking feature of Maritzhurg is the
“sluits.” These arc streams of water run-
ning down the sides of ail the streets. In
one or two of the main thoroughfares these
sluits are covered, but in most of the streets
they are left entirely open. During day-
light they form a rather agreeable feature
of the town, but they must be a terror to
midnight revellers, fond of deep potations.
Many a good citizen of unimpeachable
character, and of anything but eccentric
habits, has been discovered, in the small
hours of the morning, taking a cold bath,
with his clothes on, in these sluits.
There are several churches for Kaffirs in
Maritzhurg. One of these edifices was
situated in the best part of the town for
business, directly opposite an office in which
it was ray duty to manufacture articles for
a morning paper. Now the European con-
ductors of the native churches appear to
have an inordinate appreciation of the power
of music to sooth the savage breast, and
elevate the Kaffir soul to more lofty subjects
than cattle-lifting and slaughter. So far as
my observation of Kaffir churches went, the
congregations seemed to be occupied in sing-
ing from the time they entered the doors
until they came out again. I should not,
however, have felt aggrieved at the amount
of singing that went on in the church oppo-
site the office in which I was engaged, if the
Kaffir vocalists had the faintest ideas of
harmony, and could resist the temptation of
breaking off into occasional war-whoops.
The hymn singing of those Kaffirs may have
softened their souls, but it assuredly did
not bring me solace, and I am afraid it was
responsible for many virulent passages in
my articles which I never intended to pen
byture the coloured Christians opposite
launched into their efforts at harmony.
There are no less than three bishops in
Maritzhurg, the celebrated Bishop Colenso
being one of them. He reads his sermons,
and has but a poor delivery.
Sheep farming is the chief occupation of
the colonists in Natal, but on the coast con-
siderable quantities of sugar are grown.
Shortly before I arrived in the Colony efforts
had been made to introduce ostrich farming
from the Cape Colony into Natal; a com-
pany with a large capital was formed for
the purpose, and ostrich farming speedily
became almost a mania among the Natal
people. I became affected to some extent
with this mania myself, and at one time
thought I would desert the wearying work
of journalism for the apparently lucrative
occupation of producing feathers. Visions
of the wealth to be obtained by ostrich farm-
ing floated through my mind; I attended
the sales of the birds, got all the informa-
tion I could respecting their habits, and
studied the mysteries of patent incubators.
A speculator brought large numbers of the
birds over from the Cape Colony, and sold
them for good prices in Maritzhurg. Re-
ports became prevalent, however, in a few
months that tho birds did not do well in
Natal, and one day a friend informed me
with a long face that he had just received
£ 1.7.6 as the sole and final return for £lOO
which he had invested in a speculation with
others in ostriches. Several of their birds
had died, and the others could not be in


duced to produce progeny by any means.
It is needless to add that I concluded not to
leave the journalistic ranks at present.
Birds which had been originally sold in
Maritzburg for £l2O a pair, were ultimately
sold there for something less than £3O.
I have already' referred to the absence of
loyal feeling among the bulk of the South
African colonists. This lack of good feeling
towards the English Government was pain-
fully evident to me when the British troops-
marched down from the front through'
Maritzburg at the close of the Transvaal
war. Wearied with a long march, covered
with mud up to the waists, some limping
along, and the ranks thinned by the bullets
of the Boers, hardly a cheer was raised to
eneourage the poor fellows as they marched
through the streets of the town. Somehow
many of the English in South Africa appear
to lose their attachment to the mother
country after a long residence in the Cape
Colony or Natal. Even in the legislative
assemblies of the two colonies this want of
good feeling towards the English Govern-
ment is constantly evinced. England no
To one accustomed to the ready obedience
of Chinese servants there is a want of civility
and respect among dependents and others
in the South African Colonies that is occa-
sionally almost irritating. I will give you
an instance by way of illustration. Opposite
the house in which I was lodging there was
a tailor hearing the patronymic of Benziilla.
His nationality I am unable to state, but
he had the appearance of a cross between
an Italian and a Hottentot. The bachelors
in the town were about to give a fancy
dress ball, and it was ray desire to appear
at it in the airy garb of a nigger minstrel.
I thought the “get-up,” so far as the
the doubt committed
errors in her South Afri-
can policy, but she gave the Boers peace
and independence when she was un-
questionably in a position to crush them,
and she did this when there were some
severe reverses of the British arms to be
clothes were concerned, might be entrusted
to Mr Benzulla, and I sailed across the road
to his shop bearing on my arm some articles
of attire which I thought would serve as
patterns. A Chinese tailor would have
jumped at the job I had in
contemplation, revenged.
Until after the final disaster at
Amajuba Hill, the British Government'
never had more than Ij-SOO' troops at the
front to operate against several thousands of
splendid Boer marksmen; hut when the
English troops fled in a panic from that hill
strong reinforcements had almost reached
the English camp, and in another fortnight
General Roberts would have been there
with fourteen or fifteen thousand men under
his command, a proportion of this force
being especially adapted for operations
against the Boers. General Colley was,
however, anxious to wipe out his previous
defeats before the arrival of the new com-
mander with his troops, and the disaster at
Amajuba Hill, and the death of Colley,
himself, were the result. In concluding
that war in the way they did the English
Government assuredly exhibited more mag-
nanimity than policy—magnanimity which
and I had not the slightest idea Mr Benzulla
would treat it with lofty contempt. 'ATien
I entered the shop he clearly imagined I
had come to get some clothes repaired, for
he gave me one withering look, and pro-
ceeded to take the orders of some petty
Kaffir chief who was in want of a resplen-
dent uniform. After a time I got an op-
portunity for modestly stating my wishes.
The only reply vouchsafed was the curt
one that "He didn’t make theatrical cos-
tumes.” I explained that I didn’t want
the costume for theatrical purposes, but for
a fancy dress ball. No matter; “He didn’t
make that sort of thing,” and I had to
retire from the shop discomfited. 1 tried
one or two other tailors with similar non-
snccess, and ultimately I had to impress the
services of my landlady for the making of
the costume.


was never appreciated by the Dutch and | be'
Africanders in South Africa, while it Iwi
irritated, and in a great many instances | ha
despoiled, English residents there. Eng- ide
land also crushed the power of the ' ov
Zulu King, whose array was a standing ■ 1111
menace not only to Natal but to the Trans- : UD
Vaal. Millions of English money were 1
spent over that work alone. Taking all in
matters into consideration, I could never iof
regard much of the ill-feeling I saw mani- i un
tested in the South African colonies against' hu
the English Government but as unreasonable : th
and arising from purely selfish motives. I lei
It was a pleasanter sight to me to witness ! bel
the distribution of the Zulu war medals to iut
the men of the 58th llegiment—the regi- ; del
ment that was cut up so terribly at Laing’s i ass
Nek—and the Natal volunteer forces in the
Market Square at Maritzburg. That was j So'
both an interesting, and to some degree a | gh
historic spectacle. Above the heads of the j coi
men of the 58th llegiment there were borne wh
their colours—tattered and soiled. When !to
the distribution of the medals to the regi- : ho
ment had been nearly completed the colours j sin
were borne forward to the table at which i tin
General Sir Evelyn Wood was standing, and j bo
then colour-Sergeant Bridgstock was thank-
ed for carrying the colours out of action
under noteworthy circumstances at Laing’s |
Nek—the last occasion on which the colours |
of a British regiment had been, or would be,
carried out of action, for shortly after the nit
aftair at Laing’s Nek the hat went forth go
that regimental colours were not to be taken ta!
into action in future. The survivors of the to
massacre at Isandhiwana, belonging to the of
Natal volunteer forces, also received their tin
medals on the same occasion. With these un
men there proudly stepped up for their wt
medals two well-known native chiefs, one he
of them wearing a yellow uniform. General bo
Wood did these two fine, brave fellows wi
the honour of pinning on the medals him-
self. The two chiefs were as grave in the pa
face as undertakers while this ceremony was iu
being performed, and thanked the General
with most dignified bows. But when they
had retired somewhat from observation their
delight overcame their dignity, smiles stole
over their faces and gradually broadened
into grins, which widened more and more
until they spread from ear—but enough !
I met several friends from the Far East
in South Africa. Dulckeu, formerly editor
of your morning contemporary, has taken
unto himself a wife, and settled in Maritz-
Imrg. He has abandoned journalism for
the law, and instead of manufacturing
leading articles he may be now seen engaged
before one of the judges in unravelling the
intricacies of a Kaffir marriage dower, or
defending some mud-headed Zulu who has
assegaied a neighbour.
1 do not intend to write more respecting
South Africa, but in my next letter Will
give you my experiences of Mauritius. In
conclusion, I may say 1 should pity any one
who emigrated to South Africa in preference
to Australia, ft puzzles me to determine
how in years to come the vast and increa-
sing hordes of natives will mb along with
the European settlers, room being found for
both.
LETTER, NO, 4.
Launceston, Tasmania, Dec. oth 1882.
My visit to th , beautiful island of Mau-
ritius was rather an accidental one. I had
gone from Durban to Capetown intending to
take, at the latter port, the Orient steamer
to Adelaide. While waiting for the arrival
of tliis steamer 1 fell in with the captain of
tlie iron barque E. J. Spence , a vessel not
unknown in China waters. The Captain
was about to sail for the Mauritius, where
lie would take in a cargo of sugar for Mel-
bourne. 1 was able to arrange a passage
with him for the double voyage for a little
less than £:5O, and one night in the early
part of May last we heaved up our anchor
Table Bay and soon afterwards- were


scudding round the Cape of Good Hope with ! but the harbour, with the fautaatieally
a stiff breeze. Those who have made a shaped mountains in the background, affords
voyage round the Cape in boisterous wea- a most pleasing and impressive coup d' ceil.
ther know something of what sailing the The southern part of the island is ex-
troubled ocean means. Fortunately the treraely beautiful, being diversified with
wind was a favourable one. I think we ran
about 300 miles the first day, and we
covered two-thirds of the distance to the
Mauritius in eight or nine days, but owing
to a succession of calms which then ensued,
it took us longer than that to do the re-
mainder of the voyage.
Mauritius I found to be one of the most most
beautiful, but, at the same time, one of the s ;t u£
most unhealthy parts of the world I had i mlu
ever visited. Port Louis, where most of gjga
the Europeans in the island reside, is es- were
pecially unhealthy. The population of the persi
island is about 300,000, of whom over tain
200,000 are Indian coolies, aud it was sent
stated that the deaths there during the his i
month previous to my visit —the most uu- ! iu tl
healthy period of the year—had amounted ; from
to an appalling number which I do not care ; read
to mention for fear it may not be correct, i tion
Most of the Europeans there look as if they nese
largely subsisted on quinine. An aguish Port
fever, known as the Mauritius fever, is the Altli
general form of sickness in the island. The sessi
Chief Officer of the E. J. Spence —a hardy men
looking American and a teetotaller— was yet
talking to me late one evening on the deck | still
of the vessel, apparently in as good health i the i
as any man could wish to be. Next morn- undi
ing he was raging with fever. The attack bron
lasted, however, only a brief period, and in seve
two or three days he was able to resume his boui
duties. Nearly all the wealthier European pate
residents live out of the town on the moun- j wen
tains, where they enjoy a cooler and i sugr
healthier atmosphere. The prevalence of T
fever in Port Louis is chiefly due to the orde
bad sanitary arrangements of the place, luxi
and the position of the town, shut in, agn
as it is, on all sides but one with high moun- ty n
tains, which keep away the sweetening curi
breezes. Port Louis is a badly built town, gree
mountain and ravine, clothed with luxuriant
vegetation. At one time the whole islan d
appears to have been covered with forests,
but now there are so few trees in some parts
of it that the Government has considered
the advisability of undertaking operations
in tree-planting for sanitary reasons. The
most noteworthy mountain is “ Peter Hotte,”
situated in the rear of Port Louis. It is an
immense cone, sustaining on its apex a
gigantic piece of rock, which looks as if it
were poised with the nicest precision. To
persons looking at the summit of the moun-
tain from the harbour it is supposed to pre-
sent the appearance of a Dutch lawyer in
his robes. Another mountain point rising
' in the rear of the town is called the Ponce
from its resemblance to a thumb. As your
readers are aware, sugar is the chief produe-
i tion of the island. I saw numbers of Chi-
nese there, many of them keeping shops in
Port Louis. The natives are called creoles.
Although the island has been in I'u ilish pos-
session for over seventy years ami its com-
merce is very largely in British hands,
yet the bulk of the native population
still speak nothing but French, or rather
the creole patois, for good French is scarcely
understood by most of the natives. We
brought a creole family, numbering six or
seven adults, from the Mauritius to Mel-
bourne, and not one of them, excepting the
pater, could speak a word of English. They
were proceeding to .Queensland to engage in
sugar planting there.
The roads in the island are in splendid
order, and being bordered on each side with
luxuriant tropical vegetation, afford most
agreeable drives. Lines of railway run pret-
ty nearly all round the island. One great
curiosity shown to me in Mauritius was a
green rose. I must confess I should not


have known it was a rose had I not been
told it was one, as the leaves were smaller
and lay flatter than those of roses generally,
but we were assured it was a veritable rose,
and we brought away two specimens for
presentation to some society in Melbourne.
notice of their rig, observing that one ap-
peared to have five masts. Then, hasten-
ing down to the town, he gave information
of what he had seen. The authorities treat-
ed his story as incredible, and were inclined
to imprison him for attempting to scare the
people. Soon afterwards, however, they had
reason to regret the way in which they had
I must reserve for my next letter the
wonderful story of Paul and Virginia, and
to the graves of these received
his tale, for the English fleet sailed
an account of my visit
remarkable children.
up, landed a force, and got possession of
Port Louis almost by surprise. The man’s
story was found correct in all particulars
save one—the five masted vessel was shown
to have been a frigate towing a disabled
brig.
LETTER, NO, 5.
Melbourne, Dec. 20th, 1882.
While staying in the Mauritius I heard
of a very efficacious method adopted there
for quieting a noisy audience. A statue of
a local celebrity had been unveiled, and it
was proposed that a poem should be sung in
his honor at the theatre on the evening of
the day of the ceremony. The tenor, on
whom this effort devolved, wanted a fee for
the work, and the same not being forth-
coming, a deadlock arose at the last mo-
ment. No p®m was sung. The audience
became turbulent, and finally tore up the
seats and threw portions of them on the
stage. The Mayor of Port Louis was pre-
sent, and an idea occurred to him. He
hurried round to the back of the theatre,
Everyone who has visited Mauritius must
have read, or have been told, the story of
Paul and Virginie. It is, I believe, better
known by visitors to the island, or foreign
residents there, than the history of Mauri-
tius itself. I had cot been three days en
voyage to the island before the story was in-
troduced to me. The Captain carried it
about on his vessel in two volumes, and the
books were promptly placed in my hands,
with the advice that I should make myself
acquainted with their contents before onr
arrival in the Mauritius. The books were
in French, and as I do not read that
language with as much facility as my own,
7 OO UO lUJ V 7 TV 11 j
got the tire-engine put on the stage, and I took the story in small daily doses, which
ordered it to be played on the riotous as- lasted until the mountain ridges of Mauri-
sembly! His orders were obeyed, with,
happily, very excellent results. The rioters
could not stand the stream qf gglcj tyqtgr
and the “ house ” dissolved with wonderful
rapidity.
There is another event in the history of
the island which is worth relating. Just
previous to the capture of Mauritius by the
English, an individual, who must have been
endowed with a marvellous power of vision,
happened to be on one of the mountains in
the island. He saw from his vantage point
the hostile English fleet sail out of a small
harbour about eighty miles distant. He
counted the number of the vessels, and took
tius were almost in sight.
This is the briefest outline of the story.
Piiul hud Virginie were two children, reared
near each other on the island of Mauritius.
They loved each other with a fourteenth-
century frenzy for a long number of years.
Virginie then went to Europe to get posses-
sion of some property, leaving Paul behind.
On returning, the vessel in which she was a
passenger was wrecked off the coast of the
island during a terrific hurricane. Paul en-
deavoured, unsuccessfully, to save her, and
he received such injuries in the attempt
that he himself died a few days afterwards.
The body of Virginie was washed ashore, and


she and Paul were laid in graves side by side.
The story is represented in the book as
being related to a traveller by an old man
who had resided near the two lovers, but as
there are about two lines of incident in the
work to about fifty of the old man’s mora-
lising, I am afraid any ordinary traveller
would find the narrative rather a tedious
one. The absorbing, unquenchable, never-
to-be-equalled love of the young couple, as
worked out by the French author, is truly
appalling in its intensity. Ouida never
wrote anything like it. Paul and Virginie,
or the French author, must have had occa-
sional attacks of Mauritius fever and the
consequent deliria. The hurricane that
destroyed the vessel is also a wonderful
production.
The creole inhabitants of Mauritius were
apparently as full of the story as the foreign
residents and visitors, for the first creole
lady I encountered there, on taking a moon-
light stroll through the town on the night
of my arrival, said, pointing to me and then
to herself: “You Paul; me Virginie.” I
certainly did not feel equal to the high-
souled and adorable Paul, nor did she,
notwithstanding the blandishments of the
moonlight, look like the beautiful Virginie.
She had also foully murdered the Queen's
English, and, meditating, I pursued my
walk.
The great event of my stay in Mauritius
was a visit to the graves of Paul and
Virginie. We had a lovely drive of about
seven miles to the Pamplemousse gar-
dens, where, we were told, the graves
were to be seen. The gardens, which
are extensive and very beautiful, were
well worth the visit, but I cannot say
as much for the graves we had gone to see.
They were, in fact, the most unsatisfactory
graves I had ever gone out of my way to
visit. After struggling through a field of
sugar canes on the out-skirts of the gar-
dens, under the piloting of the worthy Cap-
tain of the vessel, who knew “ all about the
place,” we came to two piles of stones, one
of which, we were told, was the grave of
Paul and the other that of Virginia.
Which was the grave of Paul and which
the grave of Virginia was a matter for our
own choice. We took the opinion of the
majority on the question, and then, as a young
American lady who was with us insisted on
carrying away a memento of the occasion,
I loaded myself with a stone weighing about
half-a-dozen pounds as the most trifling
souvenir of the grave of Virginia I could
obtain.
Continuing our stroll in the gardens we
presently came to a seat shaped very much
after the style of a Chinese grave. One of
the Creole garden-keepers informed us,
somewhat to my surprise, that the seat was
constructed to enable visitors to contemplate
the graves of Paul and Virgine at their
ease. 1 thought I would like to take an-
other look from this seat at the graves of
these two tender-hearted young people, and
perhaps drop a tear in memoriam, especially
as the heat was oppressive, and the souvenir
of Virginie’s grave, and other mementoes
with which I had been laden, were rather
weighty. I mounted the seat, but found
about two acres of luxuriant tropical vege-
tation intervening between me and the spot
where we had found the two graves. An
explanation was necessary, and getting to-
gether some French I endeavoured to elicit
a little information from the keeper. It
then transpired that the veritable graves of
Paul and Virginie were represented by a
couple of monuments just in front of us.
Later in the day a Creole official at the rail-
way station told us that we had not seen the
graves of Paul and Virginie at all, and that
he could take us to them in about five
minutes. We decided, however, on not
visiting any more graves that day. We
were fearful that the number of the true
graves would go on increasing interminably,
and it was resolved unanimously, after due
confabulation, that we didn’t care a red


cent where Paul and Virginie were buried, of this voyage, however, I will conclude my
so long as we felt assured that two such
admirable beings had met with decent in-
terment.
notes on Australia. That the Australian
colonies have a prosperous future before
them, and are the nursery of what, some day,
will be a great and powerful nation, no one
can doubt who has visited the Antipodes.
Everything there points to that conclusion,
j from the vastness and fertility of the ter-
ritory, colonised by an energetic and pro-
gressive people, to—-well, to the greatness of
the public debts, coupled with the com-
paratively low rates of interest paid on
them. The Australians are heavily in-
debted in a national sense. Queensland
owes over £55 per head of its population ;
New Zealand £53; South Australia £34;
1 Victoria £25; New South Wales £l9;
and Western Australia £ll. While
the total population of the colonies is
I have now finished with the Mauritius,
and, beautiful as theisland undoubtedly is,
I have no great desire to visit it again.
We sailed from Port Louis on the 6th June,
and reached Melbourne on the eighth of the
following month. During three days we
were knocking about between Mauritius
and the island of Bourbon, owing to the
prevalence of contrary winds, but soon after
we had got clear of the islands a succession
of gales carried us at a rapid rate in the
direction of the Australian continent. So
heavy were these gales that on two occasions
the vessel had to lie to, and one night the
motion of the vessel was so violent that I
was thrown completely nut of an
upper | scarcely three
millions, their public debts
berth on to the floor of the cabin. For-
tunately I fell Hat on my back, and sus-
tained no injury beyond a severe shaking,
but the violence with which I was ejected
from my berth may be imagined when I
state that an ulster which was lying across
my feet was sent flying through the cabin
door on to the saloon table. The weather
was dreadfully’ cold, when the wind came
off the ice round the South Pole, and the
time passed pretty’ drearily. It was a
pleasant evening for all on hoard when we
passed Cape Otway, and early next morning
were being towed up the ffladdf and
anything but sweet-smelling river Yarra to
Melbourne.
amount to nearly ninety millions sterling,
or over £32 per head. Great Britain has
the heaviest public debt of any European
country, but it does not amount to more
than £26 per head. I take it that these
debts are evidence that the utmost confi-
dence is felt in the future prosperity’ of the
colonies by those who should be best able to
form an opinion on the matter—namely, the
creditors and debtors.
It has generally been my unfortunate lot
to pass, in the various countries I have visit-
ed, the hottest and most uncomfortable sea-
aiitl sBfls
sOfls known in them for a number of years
previously. The summer 1 passed in Shang-
hai was the hottest that had been known
there for ten years; in South Africa the
people were complaining of the unpreced-
entedly great heat, and during my stay in
Melbourne I had excellent opportunities of
judging of the sensations of being reduced
to a spot of grease. 1 have the authority
of perhaps the most influential journal in
Australia —the Argus —for stating that the
weather in Melbourne on one of the day's
1 was there was the hottest known for
“ manv years,” This is what the Argus
LETTER, NO. 6.
Hongkong, March 31.
Now that a considerable trade has been
developed between China and Australia,
and nearly every steamer trading between
the two countries carries passengers, a few
notes on the voyage from Melbourne to
Hongkong may interest some of your
readers, Before dealing with the incidents


wrote about the weather in Melbourne on
the loth January last“ The weather
during the last few days has been exces-
sively hot, and culminated yesterday in one
of the most oppressive days which have
been experienced in Melbourne for many
years. At the Observatory at half-past
3 p.m. the maximum was reached, when
165 deg. was the record in the sun, and
lOodeg. in the shade. In 1862 the greatest
shade register known, 111 deg., was re-
corded in January. Yesterday was so very
exceptional an experience that almost every-
one was prepared to declare that never be-
fore had such heat been known. The .same
weather which prevailed in Melbourne was |
general all over the colony, in South
Australia and in portions of New South !
Wales. At Echuea the register in the !
shade was llldeg.” During the three years j
I was in Hongkong I do not think I ever
saw the thermometer go beyond 96J in the
shade, but 105 degrees in the shade would j
certainly be far more unbearable in Hong- !
kong than it is in Melbourne.
The Australian colonists have had to
contend, during the past summer, not only
with hot weather, but with red-hot religion
in the shade of the Salvation Army. Ge-
neral Booth’s movement has spread to the
Antipodes, He has quite a number of
Colonels, Captains and Lieutenants, to say
nothing of non-commissioned officers and
rank and file, campaigning amongst the
unwashed in Melbourne and other Austra-
lian towns. I went to one of their meetings
out of curiosity. I didn’t go to scoff and I
didn’t remain to pray. The great attrac-
tion of the meeting, to my mind, was a
female lieutenant called “Happy Diana.”
Her face is certainly not like a benediction;
in fact there was the suspicion of a scowl upon
it. Her nose, it is true, had a happy turn —
anyway it pointed to higher things. “ Happy
Diana” made the meeting “hum” with a
hymn of about thirteen verses in length, and
then she talked; great heavens, how she
talked ! She related the following pretty
incident of the way in which the “Army”
performs its noble work;—
j “When we were in Port Adelaide, there
was a poor dear man, and I think he had
j been drinking. But, oh 1 the Lord wrought
jon him in the meeting for all that. He
I clasped the captain round the neck, and
j both of them goes right down on the floor,
lat the penitent form. Then he hauls off,
but away he comes right for captain again,
| catches him round the neck,, and down they
goes to the floor. I did so feel for the dear
man. Next morning he was round to cap-
tain’s house. The captain was abed. 1
opened the door, and I was a bit frightened,
for I thought the poor man had the—l don’t
know what you call them. I went for cap-
tain, and when we came back the dear man
was kneeling behind the door, and crjung
for God to help him, I did so feel for him,
I believe the Lord was working with him.
I hope he found Salvation.”
If this is but an apt illustration of the
way in which the Salvation Army carries
on its operations, I would recommend in-
tending candidates for commissions in its
service to devote some amount of attention
to pugilistic accomplishments, and to con-
sider well their fighting weight.
, of . The peace of mind of Australians is now
say being disturbed by another mission of a
I somewhat different character. Mr Red-
mond, M.P., has arrived in the country to
advocate the cause of the Irish agitators.
He is specially seeking dollars. 1 don’t
think he will find Australia the Dorado he
anticipates. The Australians are a loyal
and clear-headed people on the whole, and
I should not be surprised if Mr Redmond
meets with more kicks than ha’pence. The
possibility of such a result as this seems to
have occurred to Mr Redmond himself
since his arrival in Australia. There is a
wonderful moderation in the tone of his
speeches. True, he still “talks as flip-
pantly of roaring lions as maids do of puppy


dogs,” but, hearing him speak in Australia,
one might take him to be an advocate for
the promotion of peace and good will in
Ireland instead of absolute defiance of law
and sedition. His mild utterances in
Adelaide and his repudiation there of any
responsibility on the part of the Land
League for the dastardly assassinations and
other outrageous violations of law and the
rights of property in Ireland within the
last year or two, did not read well beside
the telegrams that arrived ffOffl England a
few day's after the delivery' of his speech.
These telegrams coupled the Land League
directly with the most audacious, the most
brutal and the most stupid of all the hor-
rible crimes that have blotted the character
of the Irish people during the present
agitations—the murder of Lord Cavendish
and Mr Burke in Phoenix Park, Dublin.
Nor would Mr Redmond’s speech in
Adelaide compare any better with a me-
morable one he delivered in Cork some
time ago. In the course of this speech he
said;—“l say, as a Nationalist, that no
man yearns more than I do to see Ireland a
free nation, untrammelled by any shadow
of British law, but I say to you that no
league will do that—it can only be accom-
plished by the swords and united arms of
the Irish people. I have some belief in
constitutional agitation, but greater still
is my belief in the sword, for history
teaches us that no country ever gained her
liberty without Mhg the IWSfil. (Cheers.)
I say that we are living in an oppressed
country, and under a tyrannical and rotten
form of Government, which must fall. I
say revolution will come, but, in the mean- i
time, use peaceful agitation. Revolution
must come, and I say it is the duty of every i
man, not only in Cork but in all Ireland,
to prepare for that revolution, and when
the day comes may it be said that rebel i
Cork was never backward in thp I
march for liberty and peace. (Cheers.) ” !
This is the sort of man who is endeavour- t
ing to sap the loyalty of the Australian
people; and more particularly to draw their
dollars. He is undoubtedly a good hater
of the Saxon; he may be a partriot in the
eyes of some people, but I don’t think my-
self there will be much occasion for Free-
dom to shriek if Mr Redmond falls.
i The voyage from Melbourne to Hongkong
j is an extremely pleasant one at this period
of the year. It should be added, however,
that the voyageur is not enabled to see as
many places on his way up as he probably may
anticipate visiting. I left Melbourne on the
20th February in the steamship Euxtne, and
I arrived in Hongkong yesterday afternoon.
On leaving Melbourne we went to Newcastle
and there loaded partly with coals. New-
castle is the great Australian coaling port.
It presents few features worth describing
beyond the great hydraulic cranes with
which vessels are rapidly laden with coal.
We left Newcastle for Sydney, where we
lay about twenty-four hours; then we
sailed for Brisbane. Brisbane was one of
the towns in Australia I had not visited, as
I fully expected to be afforded an opportu-
nity of getting a peep at it on my way up
to Hongkong, but in this expectation I was
disappointed; in fact I did not go ashore
from the time we left Sydney until we got
to Port Darwin, although we landed and
took on board passengers not only at Bris-
bane, but at Townsville, Rockhampton,
Cooktowu and Thursday Island. The rea-
son of this was that, most of the places men-
tioned being some distance from the
achorage grounds, the landing and shipping
business was transacted by means of steam
tenders.
Thursday Island is one of a group of
islands at the entrance to Torres Straits.
It is the centre of the pearl-shell fisheries.
I did not go on shore there. The town-
ship consists of the Resident’s house, two
hotels, one or two stores and about half
a dozen dwelling houses, and I did not
think I should amuse myself very much,


or add very largely to my stock of know-
ledge, by landing, lam pretty certain
however, that I saw nearly all the inha-
bitants of the place. They began to come
on board before we dropped the anchor,
and I think we had the whole population
of Thursday Island on board by the time
we had got alongside the receiving hulk.
They must have closed business on shore
to come off to us. Most of them perched
themselves along the railing at the stern
and sat there and talked and smoked until
midnight. It was a gala day for them.
I like to see people enjoying themselves,
but as the evening wore on, and bed-time
came, I could not help a wish that our
visitors would transfer themselves to some
other part of the vessel. They do not all
do their spiriting gently here I should say ;
cogniac is a noun which some of them, I
fear, never decline. I don’t think the town-
ship itself could have turned out all the
people that boarded the Buxine, and doubt-
less many of them came from some of the
numerous fishing stations in the Bay.
The remainder of the voyage was not
very productive of incident. One of the
prettiest coast lines I have ever seen was
that of the Basilan Island, which is the
most easterly island of the Sooloo group.
We had lovely weather and smooth water
from Moretou Bay until we had cleared the
Eastern Archipelago, and stood away from
Manila for Hongkong. We were nearly
the whole of the time in sight of islands or
of the mainland. Still “the everlasting
yawn would confess the pains and penalties
of idleness,” and we chewed the cud of
sweet and bitter fancy most eonsumedly.
We did one day get up a little excitement
on board over the games of “ Grab-100 ”
and the “ Cincinnati man’s Game.” Per-
haps your readers would like to know how
“Grab-loo” is played. The knowledge
may be useful to them; at all events it
would have been to me. The players stand
round a table on which a piece of cork for
each man is placed, the instructions being
that the last man to lift his piece of cork on
a given signal is to pay for “drinks.”
Each player grabs furiously at his piece of
cork on the signal being given, but he is
careful not to lift it. Only the unwary
player lifts his piece of cork, and he is
forthwith declared the last man who has
done so, and it is then his special privilege
to pay for refreshments. The “ Cincinnati
J man’s Game ” is an equally intellectual
pastime. You get every one present, ex-
cepting yourself, to put his thumb down on
the table, and then you announce that the
first man who lifts his thumb will pay for
the assuaging of the general thirst. Half
the fun lies in observing the happy look of
intelligence that gradually spreads over the
faces of the players as you make your an-
nouncement.
PRINTED AT THE “ CHINA MAIL” OFFICE, HONGKONG.


.
