

A
SOUVENIR
OF THE
VOYAGE
. . To the
Lana of the southern Cross.
R.M.S. “ORSOVA.”
A ■
A #
I 0F THE I
\ voyage /
y


Printed and Published on the
High Sea by kind permission
of Commander C. G. Matheson,
d 5.0., R.N R.
Rotes on tbe Vopaae
FROM
. England to Australia .
ON ROARD
R.M.S. “ORSOVA" v
Le f t London (Tilbury) Sat.,
31st August, 1920
Due Australia (Brisbane), Fri.,
17th September


THE REFLECTIONS OF A SEA CYNIC.
An ocean life is undoubtedly the life for me so long as
it may be enjoyed under the present conditions. Of
course the complete absence of any kind of work has
influenced me in coming to this conclusion ; it has
enabled me to concentrate on what I am not doing,
just as the Hindoo philosophers get out of having to
philosophise by pretending that their mental efforts are
centred on the monosyllable om.
My pleasant reflections are sometimes disturbed by
dual necessity of taking food and retaining it for a long
enough time to ensure my nutrition. The attractions
of the table and the relatively fine weather have, how-
ever, helped to lighten these tasks, and I have been
able to carry out a conservative policy.
I am interested in sociological subjects and And it
advantageous to be able to lie in my bunk of an after-
noon and listen to the intensely human confidences
exchanged between people on the deck outside ; a most
comfortable way of acquiring knowledge. I am
not dishonourable ; only apathetic. Sleep alone pre-
vented me on the last occasion from coming to a
satisfactory solution of the problem of how not to listen
to these confidences.
In one’s daily rounds of the promenade decks one
may observe love, anger, and other passions with the
least possible exertion. Only to-day an effective little
brawl about a table brought out some aspects of
emotional display that were quite new to me.
I am getting together some excellent notes on love-
making, classified under various headings, e.g., married,
single, astral (Southern Cross), physical, psychic, sea-
side, adult, and infantile. It will not be necessary for
me to record these experiences. They are repeated
daily so that by revision I may commit them to memory
with a view to reproducing them some day.


So far no one has offered to read aloud to me, but
the voyage is by no means over, and I may yet be relieved
of the tedium of reading for myself. With this and
other requirements in my mind, I am taking pains to
return at least the daily salutations of people who lock
good natured.
Conservations of any kind fatigue me, but I have
little difficulty in simulating an interested and intelligent
facial expression. This carries one a long way with
ladies who like to talk, and I do not of course trouble
myself to tell the single ones that I am married.
So far amusements of the more active kind have
not been provided for me on a very generous scale, but
there is every prospect of an increase in the number
and scope of those entertainments which my status as
a passenger will enable me to attend with not the
slightest trouble or expense to me personally.
The stewards are capital fellows, and I find that
they are only too willing to leave me alone if I leave
them alone, an arrangement of great mutual advantage.
My wants are few and for the most part are mechani-
cally met —the course of routine.
I understand that there is some obligation towards
the stewards to be discharged at the end of the voyage,
but that is some time off, and I am not accustomed to
distress myself with unpleasant anticipations.
There is only one really distressing circumstance
in the life of this ship. A reasonable quantity of
diluted spirit or wine (taken medicinally) might stimu-
late my flagging energy to treat of the circumstance in
question ; but if I could procure this prescription my
altruism would fail me in the academic discussion of a
matter which had ceased to concern me.
MORE MUSICAL MUSINGS.
The Maiden’s Prayer: an Evening Him : " Music hath
charms to sooth the savage beast,” unless the beast
happens to dwell in the next cabin.— Fragments,


INVESTMENTS AND OTHERWISE.
Several method? were provided ’hoard ship to enable
passengers to shed their nimble shillings, perhaps the
most popular being “ Ye Olde Toto ” which was run on
strictly business lines by a syndicate styled “ The I key
Orsova NO Liability,” but “naughtically ” known as “The
Sharks.” The chief of the Sharks was a Tasmaniac
who had evidently gleaned a lot of information from
the famous institution known as “ Tatts,” which the
Tasmanian Government has for many years regarded
with no unkindly eye—to business.
Of course “ the machine ” required a good supply
of “ oil,” especially in the Mer Mer Rouge, but there
were many Good Samaritans who took charge of the
“ oiling.” The staff was most obliging and succeeded
in pleasing everybody—who drew dividends.
“ Ikev,” the artful dodger, made a very efficient
“ bottoner ” and the broken money enabled him to do
himself proud on the whole run. The “ ringer-on ”
was one Sullivan—chosen on account of his size and
his relationship to ” John L.,” and needless to say his
name alone prevented any serious disorder.
The Machine was not without a “ Flohr ” —it did
not pay everybody—but as Benjamin always said to the
punters, “ What Mo(o)re do you want ! Why don’t
you Read Robertson on Totes before investing ? ”
Many followed Colonel T. who was said to get
infernal information from a distant relation of the pantry
boy, but Puss always went “ on her own ” and usually
picked up a crumb or two to console her in her mid-
night rambles.
There were several large “Pools” and the pencillers
were kept working at high pressure, the spelling of the
names of several customers being oftimes a very difficult
problem to the gent who “ writ ” them down, the most


notable jaw breakers being C)’Hooligan (who would in-
sist on her name being spelt with a capital O), and
Casibanca, whilst some were uncharitable enough to
insist upon their double-barrelled cognomens being
accurately displayed. Fancy Bruce-Snorting, C.-P.,
Finn-igan, King-David. Why do parents inflict the
syphon on their offspring ? The Staff much preferred
Shillings—they purchased drinks. However, all’s well
that ends well, and the fact that none of the machine’s
component parts were thrown overboard speaks
volumes.
Owing to the luke-warm weather only one Calcutta
Sweep was held between London and Colombo and it
proved a very interesting diversion, especially to the
torrid syndic >te who would insist upon buying up the
winning numbers. But why grumble ? Did the
syndicate not crack a few bottles —among themselves ?
One pitied the poor auctioneer —the aforesaid Tas-
maniac—who worked as hard as a labour member, his
labours being punctuated by a gill or two.
We reproduce a copy of the Toto ticket:
YE OLDE TOXO !
IKEY ORSOVA NO LIABILITY,
(De-Register ed)
A.J.C,, V.R.C., C.T.C., T.J.C., and all other
Old Seas. 0.1. C,
TATTS and RATTS
(With apologies to the Inky Megantic Company)
We Guarantee to Kid a Rat orf Cheese.
No Amount Paid


SOME OF US.
There was a young fellow called Newbigin
The entries he said are too big in
These deck games ; let us start
And get through a small part.
Oh ladies and gentlemen do begin!
A very gay crowd runs the tote
Quite the liveliest boys on the boat,
A bob you invest
And your money’s gone west,
For the boys have a drought in the throat.
There is a young lady, Miss Drayson,
Whom all of us love just to gaze on,
If she so wins the heart
When she’s not in a part,
What must she be when the play’s on ?
Colombo got Mrs. Bruce Norton
Just when she really had caught on
At the tote how to win
Or not lose her tin,
Was to put a total of nought on.
There is a gay fellow called Locke
The youngsters find out with a shock
That he’s not maladroit
When he handles a quoit,
It’s the other chap looks like the crock.
There is a young lady Miss Brunton
Who keeps so joyful a front on,
If you just see her smiling
In her manner beguiling,
Good-bye to all grousin’ and gruntin’.


There was a young Major called Watson
Though of clothes he always had lots on,
By sitting still in a chair
He had always the air
Or really enjoying the hot sun.
Master Dean is tip top at tennis,
Scarce one among all the men is
As expert a passenger
In wielding the Slazenger,
As this hopeful young Tilden of ten is.
We all love Mrs. Mac Kay,
But if anyone wants to know why,
We can only just say
That she’s got such a way,
And a je ne sais quoi in her eye.
There was a young padre called Barclay
That often made sportsmen frown darkly,
For a white hope of fame
Was lost to the game,
When he took up the job of being clerkly.
There was a young lady, Miss Shilling,
When the rest in the Red Sea were grilling
She looked perfectly cool
In a dress of pink tuile
With just a suspicion of frilling.
There was a gay sea-dog, McGuffie,
When the heat made the rest of us huffy
He just wiped his face
With a hanky of lace,
Saying “ Isn’t it just a bit stuffy ? ”
There was a young lady, Miss Foster,
No matter what trouble it cost her,
She would chase us and beg
Do throw quoits at a peg ;
Oh, what should we do if we lost her ?


A shrewd old wisehead was Thompson,
There were dances and other old romps on ;
But he sat down for a smoke,
His idea of a joke
Was a hand you could call “three no trumps” on.
There was a young fellow called Gill,
A popular fellow until
He sold the Calcutta,
The thoughts I can’t utter
Of the losers that footed the bill.
SUNSHINE GIRLS.
We’ve finished our job and we’re Homeward bound
To the Land we call our own.
We know what we’ve left and we know what we’ve
found,
(We’ve reaped just as we’ve sown).
But we don’t give a damn we are hale and sound,
So we do not sigh alone,
But we’re doing our best to enjoy the trip
With the Sunshine Girls on the Sunshine Ship.
Their smile’s like the sky on a cloudless night,
Their eyes make the sun look pale ;
They’ve youth in their blood and their hearts are light
And nothing on earth is stale.
And they don’t give a damn who wins the fight,
Or whether it blow T s a gale.
They’re out like ourselves to enjoy the trip
Are the Sunshine Girls on the Sunshine Ship.
To-morrow’s unborn and yesterday’s dead
But still we have to day;
Let the telegraph ring “ full steam ahead ”
And turn your face to the spray,
For there’s more in life than beer and bread,
On a ship where youth holds sway.
So thank your stars you are making the trip
With the Sunshine Girls on the Sunshine Ship.


BUT WHY IS IT WE SHOULD NEED A
SOUVENIR OF THE CHILDREN?
In coming years most vital among our memories of the
“ Orsova ” will stand the fat smiles of Joan holding her
court (and I suppose Cleopatra even smiled the first
fatal smile from her baby bath of onyx and marble !)
Dinkum’s elf in grace, and the sleek golden plaits of
the earnest Patsv. Of what use are 300 words at our
disposal when a volume devoted to each little pas-
senger would not convey the individual fascination
and the promise and the hope in life of each of them.
Laughing Norah and her astute Stanley; Noel and
little Fido; Peter of the brown face and whitest teeth ;
Muriel; Patricia ; and Tommy the Wag ; our thoughtful
little allies, Ronnie and his fat brother; and youngest
and tenderest of them all, the Heavenly Twins ! ! May
they at least never fall from their giddy heights to a
rude contact with earth !
How I wish I were a little boy to grow up with
such darling ladies, or a little girl to smile upon the
coming men!
That is the awful part of being a grown-up—one
can but look on and hope, but can never take the most
active parts of all!
We are so dreadfully at their mercy—these little
passengers. In their hands lies so much of our happi-
ness, our beliefs—our hopes of Empire.
This boat-load, at least, will not destroy us, but
will sail triumphant through rougher seas and fiercer
monsoons.
But we cannot leave the babies without some
reference to our visitors from the third-class—all first-
class sportsmen. A wonderful impression we received
of coming boxers and athletic women.


TO THE CHILDREN !
The dreaded monsoon now is past and life resumes it’s
normal tone,
The children play around the decks, no more you hear a
plaintive moan.
Baby Joan with her pretty ways hold daily court, and
holds it well,
She gurgles sweetly with delight at all who at her shrine
do dwell.
Sturdy John had a real good try the hanging bun to
swallow down,
Alas ! he had to taste defeat; to Noel went the victor's
crown.
Now Stanley is a different type for all his tender age and
years,
Just now sweet Patsy with her smiles doth rule his heart
—so it appears.
And after dinner when on deck the music calls, and
people dance,
Dainty Violet full of grace draws many an admiring
glance.
And Peter is as good as gold, he never murmurs nor
complains,
He does exactly as he’s told—l think his chief delight is
trains.
But one there is whom you all know, and truthfully I do
adore her,
With her sparkling eyes and pretty hair, you all are right,
her name is Nora.
And far away from Sunny ‘France where beauty holds
eternal sway,
Les enfants Doucet are with us, always good and always
gay.


But many children here there are I’ve never had the luck
to meet
I wish them joy where’er they go—-may all things in
their lives be sweet!
For in this life of grief and pain where sorrows come and
seldom go,
A little child can bring a smile to the face of all of us —
I know.
And when you think upon this trip in after years, if
shadows fall,
Kemember goodness is the key to happiness—“ God bless
you all! ”
FANCY DRESS BALL.
A very successful Fancy Dress Ball was held on Fri-
day, 27th August. After dinner a procession was
formed which passed twice before the Commander and
a band of five critical judges, who had a very difficult
task as there were so many excellent costumes.
Prizes were awarded as under :
1. For Costumes made on Board:
Mrs, Graham as “ Topsy.”
Mr. Shepherd as “ Prehistoric Man.”
2. —For Costumes not made on Board :
Mrs. Johnson and Miss Higson as “ Egyptian
Ladies.”
Mr. Petrie as “ Chu Chin Chow.”
3. —For most Humorous Costume :
Miss Leon as a “ Scarecrow.”
Miss Dravson as a “ Paper Bov.”
Mr. Berri'll as “ Old Bill.”
4. —For Children :
Miss Patsy Lempriere as a “Cowboy.”
Master John Dean as a “ Chinaman.”
Everybody agreed that it was a most successful
evening in every respect. Dancing was kept up
lintil midnight when the proceedings closed with the
singing of the National Anthem.




WHAT I DID IN THE GREAT WAR !
By R.M.S. Orsova.
But then I am practically a new ship
now. That is what accounts for so much of my looks.
Rebuilt a considerable extent since I was wounded. I
wanted to wear a wound stripe on the after smoke-
stack, but it was not allowed.
“ I was in Australia when the war broke out. I
brought home troops, and when I got home I was
collared by the Admiralty too ; a foregone conclusion.
“ I left the Australian route then and my first job
was to take troops to the Mediterranean. I did not
land at Gallipoli, but was there (at Mudros) and I
suppose I could wear an A on each side of my forward
smoke-stake if they would let me. But they won’t, any
more than the wound stripe. I was in the Mediter-
ranean for a while, between Mudros and Alexandria,
and then, late in 1915 I went off to Australia Again with
details and invalided troops.
" Back again to Egypt, from there (“ Emden ” and
Kdningsberg ’’ dead and gone by that time), and re-
turned to Egypt with Australian reinforcements, ' Just
any sort of job that wanted doing, you Understand, and
troops had to go to every sort of strange coast. From
Egypt I went to England again, dodging- submarines
pretty well, and then in escort out again full pf troops
sent from a winter in France out to the Persian Gulf.
They must have had hell. A lot of them were in
Bombay Hospital within fourteen days, poor devils.
. . . Towards the end of 1916 I turned up
in Australia again, and then turned round for England
vi i the Cape. Coal getting dear in the Red. Sea, I
suppose ; also there were quite enough submarines to
d x!ge in the North Atlantic without taking on the


Mediterranean as well. I got to London safely, after a
three week’s wait at Cape Town en route; just missed
an escort there and had to wait for the next—and from
London I was bound for Plymouth to pick up troops
for Salonika, when my hit of bad luck occurred.
“ March 14th, 1S» 16, it was. A nice afternoon, a
little after four o’clock. I was about three miles off
Eddystone Lighthouse when a Hun appeared, loosed
off, and got me. He fired onlv one torpedo, but it got
clean into my port eng'ni; killed eight hands in the
engine-room. It was a terrific shock. A boat hanging
in the davits from the boat deck just above the point of
impact was thrown clean over the after funnel, and
both davits were dislodged. The hole in my side
measured 39 feet by 27 feet.
“ I thought I was done for. In about two seconds
the water was over the cylinder tops in the engine-
room. Several destroyers raced round and fired at the
Hun’s periscope, but he got away that time. I had a
pretty anxious time for a couple of hours, trying to
keep afloat; then tugs arrived and got me ashore on
sand. They patched up the hole and pumped out the
water inside me, and then they took me into hospital at
Plymouth. I was there for seven or eight months.
From Plymouth I was sent to Birkenhead for permanent
repairs, and had a new engine put in. Nice job that
was too!
“That finished me for the war, and I saw no more
of it afloat. Fights? No, can’t say I every really had
any, tho’ I was ready for them with a couple of six-
inch guns shipped at Gibraltar quite early.
“ Very quiet back on the old game again—with
Women and children, and just the simple course. Yes,
I like it much better too.
“Still I wish they would let me ship that wound
stripe and my A’s . . .”


MISSING WORD COMPETITION.
My dear Bruce—l was within an Ace of missing the
“ Orsova ” at Tilbury and was quite Shortt of bieath
when I got on board. We then Hurd the propellor
revolving and all they had to do was to Turner and we
were on the way to our Holmes in Australia. We all
felt sure that the man who had to Steerwood take us
safely to our destinations. Good-bye to the Starlings
and Rookes of old England. Passing down the Thames
we saw the Wheaton the fields and the hay in the
Barnes.
The weather is now becoming Moran more un-
settled and when this boat returns to England the
Somerville be gone, whilst on the other hand the sun
will Fairbairn us before we reach Eden. Each day
passes pleasantly, some Tweedale their thumbs some
Reid, but others are Moore inclined to go to the bar
and Bassett.
Some of the passengers are driven Madden in the
night by small insects and no doubt their bites make
one very Savage.
We had a concert on Tuesday night; I think Phillips
Andrew’s items were the most appreciated. One lady
sang like an Angell and we Calder back several
times.
At Colombo nearly everyone did some shopping ;
one lady went to a Milners to Fitton a hat, but after
buying it she found that she could not Weaire it. This
letter is supposed to be a Bidell for the passengers, so
when you Wade through it send me a few Lyons in
reply.—Yours sincerely,
Herbert.
Results.
l'rk e—Mr. W. C. Savage and Mrs. S. McCunnie.
2nd Prize —Misses Tavlor and Clark.
Moran Loftus.


A SPORTS COMMITTEE MEETING ON THE
" ORSOVA.”
10.15 a.m. Enter Mr. Blather, Secretary. Finds
lounge empty.
Mr. Blather : Three seconds past the time for
starting and not a member present yet i This is the
28th time I have been secretary, and I have never
struck such a slack committee before. I shall give them
a bit of my mind this morning. (Enter Mr. Dobegin)
Mr. Dobegin : Sure you have some to spare, Mr.
Blather.
Mr. Blather : This is not the time for cheap jokes ;
I’ve been here for three minutes and not a single
member (Enter Mr. Just Mister and Miss Grade,
hand in hand, singing)
Mr. Blather : This is no time for hilarity. Do you
young people know that I’ve been here (Enter Mr.
Knocke)
Mr. Knocke: Good morning. I move that the
meeting begin.
Mr. Blather: You can't, the chairman is not here.
Mr. Knocke: I move fhat the chairman is here.
(Enter Mr. String)
Mr. String : I second that; all in favour ? Carried.
(Enter chairman)
Mr. Knocke : There you are ! Have I ever been
wrong yet? (Enter Miss Florin, Mr. Growler, Major
Graser, Miss Boster, Mr. Bobson, Mrs. LeEmperor,
Miss Bigson, and Mr. Stodge)
Mr. Blather : I would like to draw your attention
to the time, I’ve been here (Cries of ‘ get on
with the business.’)
Chairman : The only matter for consideration this
morning is the height of the tennis net.
Mr. Knocke : I propose that the net be 31.4 ins. high.
Mr. Growler : I propose that it be 32.3.
Mr. Bobson : I move that the height of the net
vary in direct ratio with the length of arm of the server.


Major Graser: I propose that a sub-committee be
appointed.
Mr. Dobegin : With power to co-opt.
Major Graser : Shut up Dobegin.
Chairman : Order please; we can’t have any bad
language here. (Cries of ‘ withdraw.’)
Major Graser: I apologise. I propose that a sub-
committee be appointed
Mr. Dobegin : With power to (Uproar ; cries
of ‘ order’)
Major Graser: to approach the Captain and
make inquiries as to what in his opinion is the correct
height for the net.
Mr. String : I second that.
[The sub-committe is appointed and waits on the
Commander. The remainder of the committee refresh
themselves for the space of 20 minutes. The sub-
committee returns.]
Major Graser : The Captain informs us that the
correct height for the tennis net is the sum of the
heights of three long squashes, two tonies and a
‘ Western.’
Mr. Stodge: I propose an amendment that the
word ‘ gin ’ be inserted between the words ‘ two ’ and
‘ tonies.’
Mr. Growler: I second that on condition that the
test drinks become the property of the sub-committee
in charge of the tennis.
Chairman : All in favour?
[The three members of the sub-committee vote
for the amendment and the remainder vote against.]
Chairman : The amendment is lost.
Mr. Bobson : But the drinks are saved.
Mr. Knocke: I would like to move
[At this moment a noise of spoons and plates is
heard reminiscent of ice-creams.]
Miss Gracie : I move that the meeting adjourns.
[The motion is carried unanimously and a wild
rush is made for the ices.]


ON THE MURCHISON, WEST AUSTRALIA.
(Written on the voyage expressly for the benefit of several passen-
gers who contemplate making their homes in the Golden West.)
Yes, and right glad to see you, Mr. Shenton. I hope
the run up to Three Peaks in this Buik six will not be
uninteresting to you. I have my rifle and a gun so if
you are anything of a shot maybe we shall get a wild
turkey or two, or perhaps a “ Roo.”
What’s that ? Oh ! these gates ; this is the
boundary fence of Wnndinna Station ; on the other
side we are on Woolgooroong Station. Rather ! some
splendid wool from these places, and the size of the
sheep is good ; but wait until you see “ 8.8. Combing’s”
sheep station ; by jove, wool at 25d. per lb. and cutting
a big weight per head.
Speaking of “ 8.8. Combing,” he’s great sport. A
few days ago there was a big gathering of station-
owners and managers at Tuin, and of course there had
to be some dancing, that new sort of six steps forward
and backwards, wearing shoe leather for nowt. I for-
get the name. What’s that ? Yes, that’s it —“ Jass.”
Well old “ B.B.” had a jackeroo who had been down
to Perth and learnt this dance, so had to buy a swallow
tailed suit to dance it right, and he turned out in this
’ere fancy suit at Tuin dance and was dancing finely
when “ B.B.” himself came into the room. He looks
round and sees his youngest jackeroo in all his rig-out.
” Nay, the devil, what has yond lad got on now, and
see, he is swinging old Jack’s pet daughter about like a
young ram ; tell him I want him, he will be running riot
if not checked.” So they fetched this jackeroo up
befoie old ” B.B.” and the old man said : “ Some swell,
son; where the hell did you find that suit?” The
jackeroo said : ” I paid seventeen pounds in Perth for


it during my leave, sir.” ” What,” shouted old ” B.B.”
“ just think how many sheep that would buy ; look here
lad, thou’s up here to learn something about managing
sheep stations, not spending months’ wages on a use-
less suit like that. Take my big horse, saddle up ; it is
not yet 10 p.m., and off you go to the railway; it’s only
70 miles away, and see how that fancy costume feels
like on horse-back. There’s a parcel waiting there
for me.”
The Jackeroo set off as instructed, leaving the nice
girls, the supper, and the dances behind him. He was
a good rider but the suit he was wearing was most un-
comfortable. At daybreak he saw Peter Horton with
his camel team, just yoking up. Now Peter is a good
sort, but stood looking at this bloke on horseback.
“ Pull up there” he yelled out, and picking up his gun
approached the rider. I can’t have been drinking
thought Peter, and I’m fully awake, but what the hell
is this on a hoss..
“ What’s up, lad, coming out in thee shirt with
t’ front of thee waistcoat cut out and pinned on to thee
coat, thou’s lumy.”
Bv this time the jackeroo found his tongue and
explained matters, but Peter replied :
” That tale will do for some folk but not for me,
thou follows me and my team back to see old ‘ 8.8.’ ”
and the jackerboo had to do so.
After this the car duly arrived at Billabobang
Station. We lunch here, Mr. Shenton ; have just done
112 miles since we left the railway early this morning.
A hearty reception awaited them at Billabobang
and after lunch the usual toast was duly honoured—
“ Here’s to our King and Empire, may the flag always'
fly at the top.”
At 5 p.m. the same day Three Peaks Station was
reached, the homestead being the best on the Murchi-
son, having electric light, billiard table, a number of
shower baths, and every comfort a city home has.
Cheerio Jim.


JOTTINGS FROM OUR MUSICAL SOCIETY.
Considerable improvement has been made in our
Musical Society since it was first formed, The im-
provement is perhaps more in the quantity than the
quality of our members, and distinct vigour is shown in
the nightly competition for the monopoly of the piano
and the attention of the poor unfortunate letter writers
in the Music Room. Nothing venture nothing win
appears to be the motto of many of our voluntary
accompanists and personally I admire their pluck in
attempting to accompany some of our vocalists, but
they manage to confine their attention mostly to the
right hand and let the left go where it will, and so save
a deal of mental strain both for themselves and their
hearers. However, the effect produced is ioyou;: and
abandoned if not absolutely faultless.
Our first concert was a great success and we all
managed to squeeze in the encores we had arranged for
ourselves, and the audience were charmingly indulgent.
The Russian ballet was an astonishing spectacle and
the artistes have since been inundated with offers of
pupils for the gentle art. The choir, composed of the
picked voices of the society, would have no difficulty in
holding a Handel Festival on its own and, indeed, we
hear they are to sing at a big Chinese Festival at
Colombo next year.
We cordially thank all those who have so kindly
given us their support and trust that they will still
continue to favour us with a slight appreciation now
and again, in spite of the weather and other draw-
backs.
I trust that my readers have got a thoroughly
concise and clear idea of the tremendous work we are
carrying on in our Musical Society.


ON SEA SICKNESS.
I’ll always remember the 31st of July,
(’Twas the day that I sailed for home)
The weather was fine and the merry sunshine
Shone down on the eddying' foam.
Of the first sailing day I’ve little to say,
But the second I’ll never forget
With a moan and a wail you hang over the rail
And regret with fiercest regret.
But as the day passes you begin to feel gay
(Sea sickness is not everlasting.)
So when the time comes to sup, then you try to
make up
For the time you were forced into fasting.
Alas, poor soul, your eyes were much bigger
Than your stomach (at least so you thought),
But you eat up in vain for it comes up again,
’Tis experience that is dearly bought.
Then you feel so much thinner when you go
down to dinner,
And you smile as you glance at the dishes;
But the smile fades away in the course of a day,
And your dinner you give to the fishes.
Between you and me a long trip at sea
Is not all “milk pond” sailing ;
As I find to my cost, when my meals I’ve lost
Whilst leaning over the railing.
C.F.P.W


THE SUNSHINE SHIP.
Since the day she left old John Erown’s slip
On the banks of the far-off Clyde,
She has always been the favourite ship
Twixt the Nore and the Sydney side ;
She has always carried the pick of the boys,
And she has always made her trip,
On the Eastern run she s the big, big noise,
And she’s known as the Sunshine Ship !
Chorus —
Here’s to the ship and here’s to the crew,
To the seas that raged and the winds that blew
To the fo’c’stle head and the whirling screw
That pushed her through or over.
Here's to the galley and here's to the deck,
To the jumper blue and the sweat ragged neck
To the brass bound coat without a speck,
To the Sunshine Ship “ Orsova.”
From the minute she slips her after spring
To the minute her headline's fast,
From the first “ stand-by ” the telegraphs ring
To the last slow leadline’s cast,
She will hold to her course or else she’ll bust
And she’ll make it a happy trip.
If the Old Man’s strict, at least he’s just,
And he’s proud of his Sunshine Ship !
Chorus.
And if trouble should come as come it must
To the men who follow the seas,
There may be some grouser will raise a dust
(Was ever a dog without fleas ?)
But bye and large we are seamen true,
And on this and every trip
Whatever’s the trouble we’ll see it through,
And we’ll keep her the Sunshine Ship !
Chorus.


SHIP’S GOSSIP.
You see that woman there in blue !
I’ll tell you what I know is true!!
But mark ! I tell it but to you.
When I came from my bath to-day
As' I passed down the passage way
I saw ! well I don’t like to say ! !
It’s strange she favours blue !
You see that man with her ? You do!
Remark he’s also dressed in blue!
His berth is number Umpty two.
I met her I repeat this day,
She passed ! Now listen what I say,
She glanced in a peculiar way !!
It’s strange they both wear blue.
She fell right into Umpty two!
A most audacious thing to do.
His cabin! as I swear to you!
Her berth they say is Umpty-four’
So easy to mistake a door! !
I think she’s stumbled there before.
No wonder they wear blue !
Now take to heart this maxim true!
Don’t stumble into Umpty-two!
For Grundy has her eyes on you !
’Tis through no accident you fall!
Your name has gone for good and all!
You simply tripped up in the hall!
But then her thoughts are blue! !


Hutogvapbs
PRINTED AT SEA BY F. WERTH, SHIP’S PRINTER.




