

PREFACE.
The “Notes on the Tasmanian Fauna’’have been printed for
private circulation only, and principally with a view to draw the
attention of our fellow colonists to the productions of their island,
which are not so well known as might be expected from the length
of its colonization.
It is to be hoped that any omissions on my part will be speedi-
ly corrected by resident naturalists ; the fishes inhabiting the
fresh water streams deserve particular attention, as only four
species have been described, though probably many more exist.
According to some residents a species of Flying Phalanger is
found in certain parts of the island, said to be introduced from
Victoria ; if this statement is correct, the animal should be inclu-
ded in the list.
The common Bandicoot, Perameles ohesula, and the forty-spotted
Pardalote have been accidentally omitted, and the sheet sent to
press without a final correction being made ; I therefore ask the
reader’s indulgence, and draw attention to the following
ADDENDA ET ERRATA.
At page 7, after Pardalotus ajjinis , to be added Pardalotus
quadragintus Forty-spotted Pardalote
page 4, line 14 after Perameles gunnii add Perameles ohesula
„ 6, „ 42 for diemensis read diemenensis.
, 7, „ 9 „ organica „ organicum.
, 7, „ 12 „ Graicalus „ Graucalus.
„ 7, „ 27 „ diemensis „ diemenensis.
„ 7, „ 37 „ Grained „ Ground.
„ 8, „ 6 „ inaurus „ inauris.
„ 8, „ 7 „ Authochcera ... „ Anthochcera.
~ 8, „ 18 „ Cocatua „ Cacatua.
„ 8, „ 39 „ diemensis „ diemenensis.
„ 9, „ 3 after Emu, add extinct; no specimens having
been observed for thirty years.
„ 9, „ 13 for hicinata read bicincta.
~ 10, „ 11 „ cattaractes „ catarrhactes.
„ 10, „ 11 „ Spua „ Skua.
„ 10, „ 12 „ strenuses „ strenuus.
„ 10, „ 14 „ Sterua „ Sterna.
~ 10, u 15 „ Stemula „ Sternida.
~ 11. ~ 18 „is „ in.
„ 11, 21 „ diemensis „ diemenensis.
„ 11, „ 26 and 27 „ Hiunlia „ Hinulia.
~13, „ 6 „26 „ 27.
„ 13, „ 38 „ Lepidoptera ... „ Diurnal Le-
pidoptera.
With the earnest request to make corrections with pen and ink
at the places indicated.




NOTES
ON THE
FAUNA OF TASMANIA.
The following remarks suggested themselves to the writer after
examination of a magnificent series of specimens of Natural
History, collected in Tasmania by Mr. George Masters, as-
sistant curator of the Australian Museum, Sydney, who visited
Tasmania about a year ago, on behalf of the Trustees of that
institution.
It will be observed that, excepting some of the Whales, speci-
mens of all the Mammals known to exist in the island were brought
together, not only their skins but also a fine series of skeletons, and
young from the pouch, besides a large number of skulls, proving
the existence of another species of Thylacine-
The following is a list of the Mammals collected:—
PLACENTALIA,
Producing their young in a perfect state and having no pouch or
skin-fold for their protection: —
1. Canis dingo
2. ArctocepJialus hiatus....
3. Stenorhynchus leptonyx .
4. Vespertilio tasmaniensis.
5. Scotophilus microdon
6. Nyctophilus unicolor
7. Hydromys dry soy aster...
.The Dingo, (now extinct).
The Cowled Seal.
Sea Leopard.
Tasmanian Bat.
Small-toothed Bat.
Long-eared Bat.
Golden-bellied Beaver Rat,
8. Mns tasmaniensis —(Kr.,) a new species of land-rat dis-
covered by Mr. George Masters, on the banks of the
Ouse River. Except this rat, all the animals mentioned
are also found in Victoria and New South Wales.


IMPLACENTALIA.
Producing their young in a very imperfect state and having a
pouch or skin-fold for their protection.
Section I.— Marsupialia.
Wombat Pamilt.
Phascolomys wombat The Tasmanian Wombat.
Kangaroo Family.
Holmaturus bennettii Bennett’s Kangaroo.
Holmaturus billardieri Tasmanian Wallaby.
Macropus major Great or Common Kangaroo.
JBettongia cuniculus Tasmanian Bettong.
Hypsiprymnus apicalis Tasmanian Eat-Kangaroo.
Bandicoot Family.
Perameles gunnii Gunn’s Perameles.
Phalanger Family.
Pholangistafuliginosa Black or Sooty Opossum.
Phalangista vulpina Common Opossum.
Pholangista viverrina Eing-tail Opossum.
JDromicia gliriformis Thick-tailed Dromicia.
Dasyure Family.
Antechinus swainsonii Swainson’s Antechinus.
Dasyurus viverrinus Common Dasyure or Native-Cat.
Dasyurus maculatus Spotted-tailed Dasyure or Tiger-Cat.
Sarcophilus ursinus Tasmanian Devil,) (fossil in N. S.
Thylacinuscynocephalus Tasmanian Tiger, j Wales.)
Section ll— Monotremata.
Ornithorhynchus anatinus... Duck-billed Platypus
Fchidna setosa Hairy Echidna.
A second species of Thylacine recently obtained by Mr. Mas-
ters, and which I have described in the Proceedings of the
Zoological Society of London as Thylacinus breviceps , must be
added to this list.
This is a smaller animal with a shorter head, and much larger
teeth than the T. cynocephalus , and was well known to many of
the old residents of Van Dieman’s Land who distinguished the
two kinds, so Mr. Masters assures me, by the popular names of
Grey-hound and Bull-dog Tigers.


Peculiar to the island are the following mammals :
The Tasmanian Wombat
Bennett’s Kangaroo.
The Tasmanian Eat Kangaroo.
Grunn’s Bandicoot.
The Sooty Phalanger.
Thick-tailed Dromicia.
The Tasmanian “Devil.”
The two “ Tigers”; and
The Hairy Echidna or Porcupine Anteater.
With the exception of the “Devil” and “Tigers” all have
closely allied representatives on the mainland.
A colder climate always modifies species more or less, and we
find the Mammals of Tasmania generally more robust, of larger
size, and provided with thicker and darker fur, than those inhab-
iting New Holland. In the structure, however, of the skull and
teeth, but little difference, (except in size,) is observable in Tas-
manian specimens when compared with continental ones. Com-
paring the fauna of Tasmania with that of the Australian mainland,
we arrive at the following result.
The Dingo is extinct,—the Seals and Whales are the same as
on our own coast. The insect fauna of the island not being very
rich, there are but few insect-feeding bats, three species” only-
are known to our twenty or more Oheivopteva. Eor similar reasons
(the absence of indigenous fruits) no Elying-foxes occur, though
if these marauders once found out the richness of Tasmanian
plantations, they would soon wing their way across the Straits.
The peculiar Australian Eodent, the Water-rat, or Beaver-rat,
is represented by a single species to five on the mainland. Some
four or five and twenty other rats and mice are known to
inhabit Australia, and only one kind Tasmania. The marsupial
order is richer, but here again many species common to our
south coast are missing. There are but three RalmaturL
whne some forty species inhabit the continent.
Our tenor twelve “Kangaroo-Eats” and “ Bettongs,” have
tw o representatives in Tasmania, both of which, curious to say
resemble in a most remarkable degree two West Australian
species, so much so, that the one can only be distinguished from
the other by a close comparison of their skeletons.
One would naturally conclude that a mountainous island like
lasmama, would be the very paradise of “ Eock-Wallabies ” but
none are found there. The absence of the “Koala,” or Native
Bear, and of all the species of “Plying Phalangers,” common
in Victoria, is also unaccountable, the more so as the allied
“ Phalangers,” better known as “ Brush and Eing-tail Opossums ”
which subsist on similar food and live in the same forests, thrive
well, and attain a great size in that Island.
/« -Kl'i'


OEHEE-
-EAPTOEES.
Family
Falconed je.
Aquila audax
Eagle Hawk.
Ichthyaetus leucog aster
...White-bellied Sea Eagle.
Pandion leucocephalus
White-headed Osprey.
Falco melanogenys
Blacked-cheeked Falcon.
Falco lunulatus
White-fronted Falcon.
Hieracidea herigora
Brown Hawk.
Astur novce Tiollandice
New Holland Groshawk.
Astur approximans
Australian Groshawk.
r i
Accipiter torquatus
.... Collared Sparrowhawk.
Circus assimilis
Allied Harrier.
Family Steiged^:.
Strix castanops
Chesnut-faced Owl.
Athene maculata
....Spotted Owl.
OEHEE—
INCESSOEES.
The small marsupial insectivora allied to the genera Podabrus
and Anfechinus, are represented in the latter by a single species,
though probably a second kind exists, as I received a new form
from one of the islands of Bass’ Straits not long ago, which is
perhaps also found in Tasmania.
The predominance of the large carnivora over all other animals,
is most likely the cause of so limited a number of species; it is
highly probable that many more kinds of Kangaroos once existed,
and that they have been exterminated by the ferocious “ Tigers ”
and “ Devils ” still plentiful in some of the wild districts ; if so,
their remains will tell whenever the bone-caverns are explored.
The monotremous section of the Implacentalia is represented
as in Australia, by the well known Platypus, and by an Echidna
or Ant-eater which appears to differ from our own in nothing but
the shorter spines and more hairy fur.
The birds observed amount to one hundred and sixty-two
species, as follows :
Family Caprimulgidal
JEgotJieles novce-JiollandicB Little Morepork.
Foclargus cuvieri Morepork.
Family HmuNDixiDiE.
Acanthylis caudacuta Spine-tailed Swallow.
Hirundo frontalis Welcome Swallow.
Collocalia arhorea Tree Swallow.
Family Alcedinid^:
Alcyone diememis Tasmanian Kingfisher.


Family Artamidje.
Artamus sordidus Wood Swallow.
Family Ampeledj:.
Pardalotus punctatus Diamond-bird.
Fardalotus afjinis Allied Diamond-bird.
Family Laniad.®
Strepera fuliginosa Sooty Crow-Sbrike.
&trepera arguta Hill Crow-Shrike.
Gymnorhina organica Tasmanian Crow-Shrike.
Cracticus cinereus Cinereous Crow-Shrike.
Family Campephagen^e.
Graicalusparvirostris Tasmanian Graicalus.
Pachycephala glaucura Grey-tailed Thickhead.
Pachycephala olivacea Native Thrush.
Colluricincla selbii Whistling Dick.
Family MusciCAPiDi®.
Phipidura alhiscapa White-shafted Fantail.
Family Saxicolid.®.
Erythrodryas rhodinogaster Pink-breasted Wood Eobin
Petroica multicolor Scarlet-breasted Eobin.
Petroica phcenicea Flame-breasted Eobin.
Petroica fusca Dusky Eobin.
Family Malurid.®. ?
Malurus longicaudus Blue Wren.
Stipiturus malachurus Emeu Wren.
Sericornis humilis Sombre Sericornis.
Acanthiza diemensis Tasmanian Acanthiza.
Acanthiza magna Great Acanthiza.
Acanthiza chrysorrhcea Yellow-rumped Acanthiza.
Calamanthus fuliginosus Striated Calamanthus.
Calamanthus fuliginosus.
Family Motacilled.®.
Anthus australis Australian Pipit.
&phenceacus gramineus Tawny Grass-bird.
Family Fren-gelled.®.
Estrelda hella Fire-tail.
Family Mereled.®
Cinclosoma punctata Spotted-Grained Thrush.
Oreocincla lunulata Mountain Thrush.
Family Coryedje
Corvus australis White-eyed Crow.


Family Meliphagidje.
ALeliphaga novce hollandicz New Holland Honey-eater.
Aleliphagaaustralasiana Tasmanian Honey-eater.
Glyciphila fulvifrons Fulvous-fronted Honey-eater.
Ptilotis flavigula Yellow-throated Honey-eater,
Anthochcerainaurus Wattle Bird.
Authochocra mellivora Brush Wattle-bird.
Acanthorhynchus tenuirostris Cobbler’s Awl.
„ #7 ., 7 , ~7. , . ( Strong-billed Honey-eater
Mehthreptus vahdirostns | o°Cherry-picker. 0 °Cherry-picker.
Alehthreptus melanocephalus Black-beaded Honey-eater.
Alyzantha garrula Miner.
Zosterops ccerulescens Grey-backed Zosterops.
Family Cuculidal
Cuculus inornatus Plain Cuckoo.
Cuculus cineracdus Grey Cuckoo.
Chrysococcyx lucidus Bronze Cuckoo.
Family Psittaciile.
Cocatua galerita
Calyptorhynchus xanthonotus
Callocephalon goleatum
Platycercus. flaviventris
Flatycercus eximius
Fupheina chrysostoma
Fuphema aurantia
Pezoporus formosus
Lathamus discolor
Trichoglossus swainsonii
Trichoglossus concinnus
Trichoglossus pusillus
Common Cockatoo.
Black Cockatoo.
Gang Gang Cockatoo.
Green Parrot.
Eose Hill Parrakeet or Eosella
Blue-banded Grass-Parrakeet.
Orange-bellied Grass-Parrakeet
Swamp Parrakeet.
Swift Parrakeet.
Blue Mountain Parrakeet.
Musk Parrakeet.
Small Parrakeet.
OEDEE EASOEES.
Family Columbim.
Phaps chalcoptera Common Bronze-wing.
Phaps elegans Brush Bronze-wing.
Family Tuenlcid^.
Turnix varius Painted Quail.
Family Peedicida:.
Coturix pectoralis Pectoral Quail, Stubble Quail
Synoicus australis Brown Quail.
Synoicus diemensis Tasmanian Partridge.
8
The Fauna of Tasmania.


ORDER— GRALLATORES.
Family Steuthionidy:.
Hromaius novae hollandice Emu.
Eamily Chaeadeldy;.
Hcematopus longirostris White-breasted Oyster-catcher
Hcematopus fuliginosus Black Oyster-catcher.
Sarciophorus pectoralis Black-breasted Plover.
Sguatarola helvetica Grey Plover, or Sand Piper.
Charadrius orientalis Golden Plover.
Hiaticula monacha Hooded Dottrel.
Hiaticula ruficapilla Red-capped Dottrel.
Hiaticula inornata Allied Dottrel.
Hiaticula bicinata Double-banded Dottrel.
Eamily Recueyirosteidy:.
Becurvirostra rubricollis Red-necked Avocet.
Limosa uropygialis Barred-rumped God wit.
Eamily Teen-gid^e.
Schceniclus australis Marsh Tringa.
Schceniclus subtorquatus Curlew Sandpiper.
Schceniclus albescens Little Sandpiper.
Strepsilas interpres Turnstone.
Eamily Scolopacid^.
Gallinago australis New Holland Snipe.
Eamily Tahtaledy:.
Humemus australis Australian Curlew.
Eamily Aedeedyj.
Ardea novae-hollandice Blue Crane.
JBotaurus australis Australian Bittern.
Eamily Ralled^e.
Porphqrio melanotus Red-bill.
Tribonyx mortierii Native Hen.
Bollus lewinii Lewin’s Rail.
Borzana fluminea Spotted Water CraKe.
Porzana palustris Little Water Crake.
Porzanaimmaculata Little Swamn Hen.
Little Swamp Hen.
ORDER —NAT A TORE S.
Eamily Abated iE.
Cygnus atratus Black Swan.
Cereopsis novae-hollandice Cape Barren Goose.


Family Laeidje.
Larus jpacificus
Pacific Gull.
J£ema jamesonii
Jameson’s Gull.
Lestris cattaractes
Spua Gull.
Sylochelidon strenuses
Caspian Tern.
Tholasseus poliocercus
Bass’ Straits Tern.
Sterna gracilis
Graceful Tern.
Stemula nereis
Little Tern.
Family Peocellaeidje.
Casarca tadornoides
Anas superciliosa
Anas punctata
Spatula rhynchotis
Malacorhynchus membranaceus
Nyroca australis
Fiziura lobata
Mountain Duck.
Black Duck.
Teal.
Shoveller.
.Pink-eyed Duck.
.White-winged Duck.
.Musk Duck.
Fiomedea exulans. ..
Fiomedea cauta ....
Fiomedea culminata.
Fiomedea chlororhynchos.
Fiomedea melanophrys
Fiomedea fuliginosa
Frocellaria gigantea
Frocellaria conspicillata
Frocellaria hasitata
Frocellaria macroptera .
Frocellaria atlantica ...
Frocellaria solanderii ...
Frocellaria leucocephala
Frocellaria mollis
Frocellaria leucoptera ...
Frocellaria cookii
Frocellaria ccerulea
Frocellaria glacialdides
Puffinus brevicaudatus.
Faption capensis
Prion turtur
Prion ariel
Frion banJcsii
Prion vittatus
Thalassidroma nereis
Thalassidroma wilsonii ....
Thalassidroma melanogaster.
Thalassidroma leucogaster .
Fuffinuria urinatrix
.Wandering Alhatros.
.Shy Albatros.
.Culminated Albatros.
.Yellow-nosed Albatros.
.Black-eyebrowed Albatros.
.Sooty Albatros.
.Giant Petrel.
Spectacled Petrel
Great Grey Petrel.
Great Winged Petrel.
Atlantic Petrel.
Solander’s Petrel.
.White-headed Petrel.
.Soft-plumaged Petrel.
.White-winged Petrel.
.Cook’s Petrel.
Blue Petrel.
Silvery-grey Petrel.
.Short-tailed Petrel.
Cape Pigeon.
Whale Bird.
Fairy Whale Bird.
Bank’s Whale Bird.
Broad-billed Whale Bird.
Grey-backed Storm Petrel.
Wilson’s Storm Petrel.
Black-bellied Storm Petrel.
White-bellied Storm Petrel
Diving Petrel.
10
The Fauna of Tasmania.


Family
P ODICIPLD J3.
Fodiceps australis
Diver.
Podiceps poliocepJialus
Grey-headed Diver.
Fodiceps gularis
Black-throated Diver.
Family Spheniscid.®.
Fudyptes chrysocome
Crested Penguin.
Spheniscus minor
Little Penguin.
Spheniscus undina
Fairy Penguin,
Family Pelicatiid^:.
Felecanus conspicillatus
Fhalacrocorax novce-hollandice.
Fhalacrocorax leucogaster
Fhalacrocorax melanoleucus .
Sula australis
Australian Pelican.
Australian Cormorant.
White-breasted Cormorant.
.Little Cormorant.
Australian Gannet.
Of the above list, forty-three are roaming sea birds, only twenty-
six kinds are peculiar to the island, and six of these are very
doubtful species, so that we cannot put down more than twenty
birds, so limited is their habitat.
The most interesting of them are the large Gill-bird, Antho-
cJicera inauris; the Tasmanian Parrakeet, Platycercus flaviventris;
the large Quail, Synoicus diemensis; and the great Water-hen,
Tribonyx mortierii.
The reptiles, as might be expected from a cold climate, are
few in number. Ido not think that Tasmania furnishes more
than two or three species to the Australian fauna. The well
known Hiunlia whiteii, the peculiar Omolepida casuarince , a Gram-
matophora, two small species of Hiunlice, and a Cyclodus, (Cyclodus
nigroluteus) allied to our “ Sleeping Lizard,” are all the saurians
known to exist there.
No tortoise inhabits the Tasmanian streams. Snakes abound,
but the number of species is limited to two highly venomous
kinds, and a small one, venomous but not dangerous. Not a
single innocuous snake has as yet been discovered.
All the snakes belong to the peculiar Australian genus Hoplo-
cepholus, and are local varieties of continental forms. They
go under different names in Tasmania however, such as “ Black
Snake,” “ Carpet Snake,” and “ Diamond Snake.”
The first two are varieties of our “ Brown-banded Snake,” Hoplo-
cephalus curtus , and named “ Black Snake ” if of a dark color ;
and “ Carpet Snake,” if light, with the cross-bands visible. The
Museum is indebted to Mr. Masters for a fine series of both, and
having taken thirty-five young (some black, and some with visible
cross-bands) from the same mother, the identity of both is
sufficiently proved.


The term “ Carpet Snake ” is not well chosen, and leads to
frequent mistakes here and in Tasmania, as our own “ Carpet
Snake,” {Morelia variegata,) belongs to the Python tribe and is
r not venomous.
The second dangerous snake is Hoplocephalus superlus, the
“Tiger Snake” of Victoria, known to Tasmanians as the
“ Diamond Snake,” another popular name which leads to confusion
if we bear in mind that the “ Diamond Snake ” {Morelia spilotes)
of the south-eastern coast of New South "Wales is a member
of the Python family and harmless.
The third venomous snake is the Hoplocephalus coronoides, or
“ Black-bellied Snake,” of small size and wide range. This
snake, even when handled, seldom, if ever offers to bite, and the
wound caused by it is not as bad as the sting of a bee.
Two other small snakes {Brachysoma himaculatum , and B.
calonotos ), discovered by Mons. Yerreaux in 1844, are mentioned
by Messrs Dumeril and Bibron, as inhabitants of Tasmania;
since then no more specimens have come to hand from the
same locality, and we may fairly conclude that the habitat given by
M. Yerreaux is erroneous.
The Tasmanian frogs are also few in number. The Hylce , or
“ Tree Progs,” represent three species, viz., the common “ Grolden
Tree Prog,” Hyla aurea\ “Ewing’s Tree Prog,” Hyla ewingii;
and a kind, which I consider to be identical with Hyla verreauxii ,
all of which are common on the mainland of Australia. Of
Swamp-Progs, we find the widely distributed Limnodynastes
tasmaniensis, a Pseudophryne discovered by Mr. Masters and
probably new, Pterophrynus tasmaniensis , and JP. Icevis, the two latter
much infected by the larvae of a small fly of the Genus Batrachyomya ,
(Macleay,) which insects are also found on allied species in
Australia.
These are all the species of frogs known from Tasmania, up to
the present time.
The fishes, such as inhabit fresh water only, are also limited. No
Fleotris, known here as the “ Gudgeon,” is as yet recorded,
though the genus exists in Australia, New Zealand, and South
America ; of the Galaxidce, the so called “ Black-fish,” appears to
be most common in the Tasmanian streams ; this is Eichardson’s
Galaxias truttaceus ; we also have specimens of the Galaxias
attenuatus, from the Ouse Eiver, collected by Mr. Masters ; the
“ Common Eel,” Anguilla australis, and the well known “ Fresh-
water Herring,” Prototroctes marcena. I wish I could have added
the Salmon, but at present no authenticated specimens exist in
any of our colonial museums. Competent judges state that the
Salmon has been duly acclimatized and has been frequently
observed in the Derwent, it is therefore much to be regretted,


that no specimen has yet been caught, if only to prove beyond
doubt the success of one of the greatest experiments of modern
times.
In summing up the whole Yertehrata of the island, leaving out
the extinct Dingo, Seals, "Whales, and Marine fish, we find there are
26 Mammals
162 Birds
6 Lizards
3 Snakes
7 Frogs, and
4 Fresh-water Fishes.
Together 208 Yertehrata
about thirty-seven of which may be considered as peculiar to
Tasmania.
The Invertebrata were collected to the number of more than
one thousand species, that is to say, of the class Insecta, nine
hundred and fifty species, and ninety-eight of the class Mollusca;
twenty-one of the latter are Land-shells,iand nearly all peculiar to
Tasmania. The insects appear, with few exceptions, to be identi-
cal with Australian species.
The following is a list of the Invertebrata: —
CLASS INSECTA.
ORDER COLEOPTERA.
640 species, and 7662 specimens.
Order —Lepidoptbea.
Papilio macleayanus
Pyrameis itea.
Pyrameis cardui.
Junonia vellida.
Lasiommata merope.
Lasiommata philerope.
Lasiommata singa.
Lasiommata lathoniella.
Lasiommata hobartia.
Satyrus (one very rare species.)
Lycsena (four species.)
Pamphila (two species.)
Together sixteen species of Lepidoptera.
Order —Htmenoptera.
90 species and 478 specimens.


Order—Diptera.
86 species and 689 specimens.
Order—Neuroptera, Orthoptera, &c.
14 species.
Order—Hemiptera.
70 species and 394 specimens.
Order—Homopteea.
34 species and 137 specimens.
CLASS MOLLIJSCA.
98 species and 960 specimens, whereof the following are Land
shells, and, except Helix mortii , all are peculiar to Tasmania.
Helix minima (Cox)
Helix suhangulata ( Pfr .)
Helix bombycina (Pfr.)
Helix diemenensis (Cox)
Helix mortii (Cox)
Helix tasmanise (Cox)
Helix hobarti ( Cox)
Helix legrandi, (Cox)
Helix similis ( Cox)
Helix lampra (Pfr.)
Helix lamproides (Cox)
Helix wellingtonensis (Cox)
Helix launcestonensis (Peeve)
Helix hisulcata (Pfr.)
Helix sinclairi (Pfr.)
Helix hamiltoni (Cox)
Bulimus dufresnii (Leach)
Bulimus tasmanicus (Pfr.)
Yitrina milligani (Pfr.)
Yitrina verreauxi (Pfr.)
Succinea australis (Per.)
It was the author’s intention to have given a few engravings
with this paper, the publication would, however, have been de-
layed too long, but, as far as possible, Photographs of the most
interesting specimens will be added to it.


HOPLOCEPHALUS OEETUS.
known as f SNAKE in New South Wale»,
I TIGrER SNAKE in Victoria.
” BLACK SNAKE in Tasmania.
• > CARPET SNAKE in Tasmania.


__
fS <>S Sr&/es /Ozaw’/noss


1. ThYLACINUS CrN-OCEPHALUS.
2. Thylacinus beeyiceps.


