

Notes and Guide
for
Labor Speakers
SYDNEY:
The Worker Trade Union Print.
St. Andrew’s Place




SUBJECT.
Pag
Defence jj
Defence—Relation Between Australia and Great Britain
Regarding War 6
Loyalty and the Empire 7
Deportation g
Cruisers IX
Woollen Mills—Geelong 16
Wool Profits—Payments to Bawra 18
Composite Government—History of Formation and Statements
by Leaders of Both Parties, etc 20
The Pact—Statements and Criticisms 26
Criticisms of Bruce-Page Government 30
Finance and Labor—Commonwealth Bank and Note Issue .... 35
Unemployment and Immigration 39
Kidman-Mayo Contract for Wooden Vessels 42
Capital and Labor 44
Constitution—Alteration of 46
Wireless ; 47
Oil 52
Ex-enemy Vessels 57
Country Party 59




Defence.
NATIONALIST GOVERNMENTS WASTE £32,000,000 ON
DEFENCE.
NOTHING TO SHOW FOR THIS HUGE EXPENDITURE.
During the last few years the Bruee-Page Government and its
supporters have taunted the Labor Party as being Pacifists and not
having any Defence Policy.
This is a deliberate misrepresentation of facts. Labor believes
in Peace—hates war in any shape or form, but nevertheless has a
policy to defend Australia should she be called upon to do so.
MR. CHARLTON, Federal Parliamentary Labor Leader, on 27th
July, 1923, said:
“The Labor policy is to promote World Peace, and, con-
sistently with Australia’s goodwill to her kindred oversea, de-
clares its readiness to take full responsibility for Australia’s
defence. ...”
Before explaining the Defence Policy of the Labor Party, let us
first of all look at what the Bruce-Page and other Nationalist
Governments have done so far as the Defence of Australia is con-
cerned.
Since the Armistice was signed in 1918, and up to June, 1925,
the Nationalist Governments have spent approximately £32,000,000
on defence.
EXPENDITURE—DEFENCE DEPARTMENT.
From signing Armistice to June, 1919, about .... £3,000,000
From June, 1919, to 1924-25, approximately 29,000,000
Total •• £32,000,000
It would be only reasonable to expect a good return for such
a huge expenditure, but the following quotations will show that the
Nationalists and the Bruce-Page Government have absolutely
nothing to show for the money they have squandered.
GENERAL MONASH at different times stated:
“The air FORCE was a sham.”
“There was not enough munitions in the country to last 24
hours.”
“Conditions in regard to the defence of Australia were
most unsatisfactory; things were going to pieces.” (Sydney
“D.T.,” 13/11/23.)


“In my opinion the position of Australia in 1924 is not
as favorable as it was in 1914.” (Melbourne “Sun,” ;50/4/24.)
“The present compulsory system of training Australian
youths is farcical.” (Melbourne “Sun,” ;30/4/24.)
THE LATE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE (Mr. Bowden):
“When 1 came to realise the appalling conditions of the
defence of Australia.” (Sydney “D.M.,” 20/10/28.)
“Mr. Bowden emphasised the fact that Australia was not
prepared to meet an emergency. The greatest problems were
those of the supply of arms and munitions. The supply on
hand was very inadequate.” (“Argus,” 28/10/28.)
SENATOR DRAKE-BROCKMAN (General), speaking in the
Senate, 28/8/24,_said:
“I can say that at the moment Australia could not equip
one division.”
“We are not able to provide to-day munitions of war.”
“At the present time we are not getting full value for
the money we are spending.”
• “If we were suddenly called upon to defend ourselves we
would not have enough munitions, .war equipment and the
things necessary to maintain an army for 24 hours.”
These statements, coming from prominent Military authorities,
prove conclusively that the present Bruce-Page Government, and
previous Nationalist Governments, have done NOTHING regarding
the Defence of Australia except to spend money.
The present system of Defence is a “pretence” and must go,
and in its place substituted a defence system that will, year by
year, place us in a better position to defend ourselves than the
previous year.
The “Age,” in a leading article (5/1/24) referring to Mr.
Bruce and bis Government, said:
“The increasing inconsistency of his actions is not calcu-
lated to serve as an inspiration to the robust spirit of the
Australian Nation, while his speeches on Defence and in justifi-
cation of his actions are unlikely to impress even the feeblest
intelligence. ’ ’
This scathing criticism and condemnation is made by a leading
paper that is absolutely opposed to the Labor Party.
And now let, use see what is the Defence Policy of the Labor
Party.
LABOR’S DEFENCE POLICY.
1. Adequate home defence against possible foreign aggression.
2. Convertible factories for small arms, munitions, aeroplanes.
Preparedness for the defence of our country means more and
more organisation of the industries essential for defence.
This means the establishment and organisation of our industries.
Industries which in time of peace can manufacture the things neces


sary for the development of our country, but which in time of war
can be so converted as to turn out everything that is essential and
necessary for war.
LORD JELLICOE, speaking on this matter, stated:
“A sound policy must aim at promoting Australia’s capa-
city to make or produce everything essential to its own pro-
tection.”
“The importance of industrial power to an island continent
was stressed bv Lord Jellicoe in his Australian Report.”
(“Age,” 20/11/24.)
THE CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES
“suggested that Australian industries should be organised to
make them convertible for war purposes.” (“Age,” 20/11/24.)
3. Air forces, depots, etc.
That is, the establishment of an aerial fleet. We must have a
fleet capable of the most rapid concentration, that can go across
Australia as well as around it, and which can be of use and service
to the public in time of peace as in time of war.
This will require the establishment of aerial depots all over
Australia with aerial supplies.
4. Submarines and Mines with adequate above-water crafts.
“Prominent Naval authorities, such as Sir P. Scott, Admiral
Kerr, Rear-Admiral Hall, Commander Rawson, Admiral Pullar,
Admiral Sims, Admiral Yon Scheer and others, are all of the opinion
that the main thing essential for the defence of a country, especially
situated like Australia with her huge coast line, are aerial forces,
submarines, mines and torpedo boats, etc.” (Hansard, 9/9/25, page
2295, and 6/8/24, page 2861.)
5. Land forces, fortifications, etc.
6. Utilisation of Bureau of Science and Industry for the purpose
of standardisation of railway and motor rolling stock and material.
7. Roads and railways.
8. That the Commonwealth Constitution be amended to include
a. condition that no Australian can be conscripted for military
service oversea.
: 9. No compulsory training, etc., etc.
AND TO SUMMARISE IT we find:
That the Labor Party has a Defence Policy that will bear
the criticism of any military authority in the world.
It stands for those things which prominent military authorities
sav are essential for the defence of a countrv.
It stands for ECONOMIC PREPAREDNESS
WHEREAS
on the other hand the present and past Nationalist Governments
have squandered millions on Defence.
They have nothing to show for it and nothing to hope for.


Defence.
POSITION OF AUSTRALIA AND GREAT BRITAIN IN REGARD
TO WAR.
The question has often been asked whether the Labor Party
believes that Australia should become involved in every war that
may take place between Great Britain and other countries.
The Labor Party maintains that as Australia enjoys responsible
Government she must have the fullest right to decide whether or
not she shall become involved in any wars.
One clause of the policy of the Labor Party regarding Defence
states that there shall be
“No raising of forces for service outside the Commonwealth
or participation or promise of participation in any future over-
sea Avar except by decision of the people.’’
Prom this it will be seen that the Australian Labor Party does
not stand for the doctrine that because Great Britain goes to war
Australia must do likeAvise.
This A'ieAv is also held by prominent statesmen in other Empire
Dominions.
SIR A. BAILEY (avlio has long been a staunch supporter of
General Smuts and a leading South African Party man) stated:
“Nobody outside the South African Parliament must ever
decide for South Africa Avhether she shall go to Avar or not.
This is a responsibilitA 7 Avhich must be ahvavs ours alone.”
(“Herald,” 30/12/24.)’
MR. CHARLTON, speaking on the treaty Avith Turkey, said:
“We do not as a Party accept the view that every time
Great Britain is at Avar Australia must also be involved.”
(“Hansard,” 3/4/24.)
It Avill be seen therefore that, Avhatever may be the justice or
otherAvise of future Avars, the Australian Labor Party’s attitude is
that Australia must retain that independent right to say AA r hether
she Avill be a participant or not.


Loyalty and the Empire
and
“Cutting the Painter.”
Some people are under the impression that the Labor Party
does not wish to he part of the Empire, and the opponents of Labor
bolster np this FALSE impression by trying to make out there is
no loyalty in the Labor Party.
Sueli is not the case. The principles of the Labor Party are very
often condemned before they are really understood, especially by
those of inherited principles and ideas, and chiefly because they
have not studied the platform of the Labor Party, but associate
them with the disciples of Anarchy, etc.
LOYALTY—AUSTRALIA FIRST.
As regards LOYALTY, the Labor Party is loyal, and as far as
Australia is concerned, is far more loyal and patriotic than many
cf those who are always flaunting their so-called “patriotism and
loyalty to the Empire” in the face of the public.
The Labor Party puts AUSTRALIA FIRST, and will always
work and fight for its country, which is Australia, but what it does
object to is to have to work, without fair and adequate reward, for
the benefit of the Profiteer, the big Trusts, Combines, etc.
AUSTRALIA PART OF THE EMPIRE.
There is no doubt regarding this question, the Labor Party has
never at any time even suggested that Australia should not be part
of the Empire, but what it has advocated and still advocates is that
Australia be left to determine her own affairs.
CUTTING THE PAINTER.
Never at any time has the Labor Party advocated anything in
the nature of cutting adrift from the Empire, but on the contrary
desires that the friendship which exists between the countries of the
British nations shall continue, and trusts that the ties of kinship
and friendship will never be loosened, let alone severed.


Deportation.
BILL TO CRUSH TRADES UNIONISM.
In July, 1!)25, the Bruce-Page Government introduced a Bill to
give the Government power to deport a person who is not Australian
born.
To boil down this Bill it means that a person can be deported
for what may practically be termed a “political offence.”
CLASS LEGISLATION.
If ever a Bill was brought before Parliament that could be
called a “Class Legislation” Bill, this was one, as it is directed
against one section of the community, and one section only, and
that is the working man.
BOARD TO TRY PERSONS TO BE DEPORTED.
Under this Bill a Board is appointed, and any person whom
the Government wish to deport will be brought before this Board,
•and will have to show cause why he should not be deported.
In other words he will have to prove himself innocent of the
charges made against him under this Act.
And what chance will he have when HIS JUDGES WILL BE
THE PERSONS APPOINTED BY HIS ACCUSERS?
The British law states a man shall be innocent until he is proved
guilty.
THE MAGNA CHARTA SAYS:
“No freeman shall be arrested or detained in prison or
deprived of his freehold, or banished, or molested in any way,
and we will not set forth against him, nor send against him,
unless by lawful judgment of his peers, and by the law of the
land.”
But this Bill reverses the procedure, and does not give a man
that right to which he is entitled, and for which our forefathers
fought centuries ago.
Can anybody say by the widest stretch of imagination that it is
“British justice” or “Lawful justice” to drag a person before a
Board, which will be appointed by his accusers, and then make him
prove himself innocent?
Here is a Government always canting about its loyalty, its fair-
mindedness and its impartiality to all classes, passing legislation of


this nature, aiming solely at the working man, and depriving him
of his rights.
TRADES UNIONISM.
Years ago when there were no Unions, the conditions of the
working man and women were shocking.
In the very early days of history we find where little children
of 4,5, 6 and 7 years of age and upwards were put to work.
Women and children worked 14, 15 and 1G hours a day for from
5/- a week to 5/- a month—MEßE SLAVES.
Many people still remember the awful conditions under which
people worked not so many years ago, and the poor wages they
received.
PRESENT CONDITIONS.
But things have changed for the better, the working man has
better wages and better conditions
but
still he is not getting that which he is justly entitled to, and that is,
a full return for the work he does, because in most cases we find
Capital is getting more than its share, and also on account of the
fact that most employers think of one thing, and one thing only,
and that is the amount of profit he can make for HIMSELF.
Labor, recognising that Union is strength, had to band itself
together in order to protect itself from these men.
Unions were formed and officers elected to conduct the affairs
of their respective organisations..
These officers (if they be not Australian born, or any other
person who is not Australian born), no matter how conscientious
he may be in his beliefs, no matter whether be thinks he is honestly
doing the right thing, and no matter whether he is doing or advo-
cating something which he himself may not be in accord with, but
which his Union desires, if he dares to advise the men in any matter
in connection with any Industrial Dispute, the Government can
deport him.
The Bruce-Page Government is bringing thousands of men from
the old country here, and they are all working men.
We have here men from the old country of 20, 00, 40 and 50
years’ standing, whose whole heart and soul is in Australia, whose
children are Australian born, and under this Bill the Government
has power to deport them.
The employing class have evidently recognised that the strength
of Labor is growing daily and they wish to crush it.
They want the “good old days” that were good days for the
employer but “hell” for the worker.


REAL PURPOSE OF THE BILL.
The ical purpose of this Bill is apparently to break up and
■destroy Trades Unionism.
To stop in some way the power of Labor, and this is the first
step.
FREEDOM OF SPEECH.
Whether a man's views in any matter be right or wrong is
beside the point; every man should be entitled to give his views
on any matter.
Why should we have" our liberties curtailed in this manner ?
Quite recently an artist sued the Melbourne “Herald” for
saying certain things about his paintings.
The Chief Justice, in summing up, stated:
‘ ‘ln matters of public interest, not only the press but every
citizen has a right to say what he thinks, no matter how in-
jurious it may be to the other man who is affected by it. He
has a perfect right to do this, and in many cases, if he is a man
of courage, he ought to deal with it as a duty in addition to a
right.”
The “Herald,” in a leading article which was headed “FREE-
DOM OF SPEECH,” said:
“The outcome of this case means that so long as a man
or newspaper expresses what lie honestly believes to be the
truth, lie need not fear the consequencs.
“Neither Courts nor juries shall take away either from the
press or from citizens THAT GREAT FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT
OF OUR LIBERTY, THE RIGHT OF FREE SPEECH AND
FREE CRITICISM IN MATTERS OP PUBLIC INTEREST.”
But this BILL prevents all this. It is a dastardly attack on
Trades Unionism, Freedom of Speech and our liberties.


Cruisers.
NATIONALIST GOVERNMENT SEND ORDERS FOR
CONSTRUCTION OVERSEAS.
During the months of March and April, 1924, the Prime Min-
ister, Mr. Bruce, announced that it was the intention of the Govern-
ment to build
(a) 2 new cruisers;
(b) 2 new cruisers, submarines, etc.
Shortly after this announcement the Prime Minister, speaking
on the Defence Equipment Bill on 27th June, 1924, stated it was
the intention of the Government to have one built in Great Britain-
LABOR OPPOSED CONSTRUCTION OF CRUISERS.
From the commencement the Federal Labor Party opposed the*
building of these cruisers in view of the fact that at that time efforts-
were being made by the President of the United States, and the*
Prime Minister of Great Britain, to convene another conference to
deal with the question of further disarmaments,
, and
also contending that for the defence of Australia, as prominent Naval
and Military authorities had pointed out (see Article on Defence),
air fleets, submarines, mines, torpedo boats, etc., were of the most
vital importance in connection with the defence of a country, especi-
ally one with such a huge coast line as Australia.
LABOR AND NAVAL CONSTRUCTION.
Some people are endeavoring to put the Labor Party in a false
position by saying that they were opposed to all form of naval
construction for the Defence of Australia.
THAT IS NOT SO, as the following plank of the Defence policy
of the Labor Party will show.
Labor’s Defence policy (one item) —submarines and mines,,
with adequate above-water crafts.*
BUILDING OF CRUISERS.
As soon as it was known that the Government were determined
to build these cruisers, the Labor Party then strongly took up the
attitude that both should be constructed in Australia, and if not
both, at least one should be built here, and did everything possible*
to bring this about, but without success.


BUILDING FIRST CRUISER.
Mr. Bruce, speaking in the House on 30th July, 1924 (page
2004), stated:
“. . . the Government, having taken all the circumstances
into consideration, have determined that one of them shall be
built in England.”
How could the Government possibly take “all the circum-
stances into consideration” before the plans were available, tenders
called, prices compared, etc. ?
Sir John Monash, who was afterwards appointed to investigate
the cost of constructing the second cruiser in Australia, admitted it
was impossible to formulate any reliable estimate on the information
placed at his disposal, and he went into the matter thoroughly and
had all the evidence before him it was possible to procure, with
the exception of tenders, as no tenders had been invited.
The Prime Minister also stated (“Hansard,” 30/7/24, page
2604) :
“When in Great Britain I was pressed by the British
Government to consent to the building of a cruiser there. Un-
employment was so acute in that country then that the Govern-
ment was anxious to do all that was possible to relieve it.”
While the Prime Minister went on to say that he would not
commit himself in any way, in view of the facts just stated, and
'from statements that have appeared in the English papers, there
appears to be no shadow of doubt but that it was a foregone con-
clusion when the Prime Minister left England that one, if not both,
of the cruisers was going to be built there.
Was the Prime Minister more concerned about the unemployed
in Great Britain than in Australia?
Here again we find how great an Imperialist is Mr. Bruce.
CONSTRUCTION OP SECOND CRUISER.
On the question of the building of the second cruiser, Mr. Bruce
made certain definite, emphatic promises, which were not carried
out.
Mr. Bruce on the 30th July, 1924 (“Hansard,” page 2604)
stated:
“The question of where the second cruiser shall be built
will be submitted for the determination of this House when the
general policy is put before it.”
This is a clear, definite promise and can only mean one thing,
and that is that Parliament should decide where the second cruiser
was to be built.
Mr. Bruce again said (“Hansard,” 22/8/24, page 3i)16) :
“When the Defence estimates were before the House, I gave
an explicit undertaking that ... no action would be taken to


let the contract for the second cruiser until the House was
afforded a further opportunity to consider the matter.
“I most certainly give the honorable member for Dailey
(Mr. Mahony) my assurance that the fullest opportunity will
be given to the House to discuss the question of where the
second cruiser shall be built.
“. . . I gave an undertaking that the Government would
not take any action in regard to the second cruiser until the
House had had a further opportunity of discussing the matter. ’ ’
(“Hansard,” 5/9/24, page 4052.)
Despite these definite promises of the Prime Minister, THE
GOVERNMENT LET THE CONTRACT FOR THE CONSTRUC-
TION OP THE SECOND CRUISER IN GREAT BRITAIN WITH-
OUT CONSULTING PARLIAMENT.
MR. BOWDEN, when Minister for Defence, stated (“Han-
sard,” 23/7/24, page 2381) :
“I am fully conscious of the necessity for maintaining in
Australia a first-class engineering yard capable of effecting
major repairs to ships in time of war.
“One of the strongest arguments for the building of the
second cruiser in Australia is that it will maintain at Cockatoo
Island an efficient shipbuilding and repairing yard.
“The workmanship of the ‘Adelaide’ compares most favor-
ably with that in any other ship of the same class in the
British Navy.”
Mr. Bowden shorth T afterwards “resigned.” Was it voluntary
or not ?
GENERAL MONASH ASKED TO INVESTIGATE.
In August, 1924, the Government appointed General Monash
to investigate what it would cost to build the second cruiser in
Australia.
After going carefully and exhaustively into the matter, he
stated it was impossible to reach unanimity as to the building of
the second cruiser here.
In his report he says:
“I am therefore definitely of the opinion that we have no
reliable figure of the price iu Great Britain of a modern 10,000
ton cruiser with which to compare any estimated Australian
cost.
“We cannot be certain, even approximately, that both
amounts would refer to one and the same type of vessel.”
Here we have the opinion of the Conference which consisted of
General Monash, the Commonwealth Shipping Board, and the Naval
Board,
and yet
the Government, prior to this inquiry which gave some inkling as to


costs, “took all the circumstances into consideration,” and decided
to have the first vessel built in England.
TENDERS CALLED.
After General Monash’s report was made available, the Govern-
ment called for tenders as under:
(a) 1 cruiser built in Great Britain.
(b) 2 cruisers built in Great Britain.
(c) 1 cruiser built in Great Britain and 1 in Australia.
(d) 1 cruiser built in Australia.
From the above it will be seen that the Australian tenderer had
only one cruiser to tender for, whereas if he had had two probably
he could have submitted a lower price in view of less overhead
charges, etc.
TIME.
The question of “time of construction” was also raised against
the vessels being built here.
It does not appear as if “time was the essence of the contract
of the building of these vessels” when we find it took the Govern-
ment over 12 months before any tenders were let.
COST OF CRUISERS.
The Prime Minister first stated the cost of building a cruiser
in Great Britain would be £1,900,000.
The price they are paying for the cruisers has exceeded that
estimate by £450,000.
It is alleged that the saving between the oversea price and
rhe local price will'result in a saving of £BIB,OOO.
For this, £BIB,OOO the Government is going to let the vessels be
built abroad.
The Minister for Defence (Sir N. Ilowse) stated:
“The Department gave preference to articles manufactured
in Australia from 2 per cent, to 108 per cent.” (“Age,’”
18/6/25.)
Let 108 per cent, protection be given to the construction of a
cruiser here and then sec how the prices woidd compare.
If the vessels were built here it would mean that the money,,
or a great deal of it, would be circulated.
The money so circulated would bring in revenue to the country
as in Taxation, Post Office, Railways, etc., etc.
REASONS WHY CRUISERS SHOULD BE BUILT HERE.
(1) Australia should build her oAvn war vessels, and also every-
thing necessary for war should war be forced upon us.


(2) It would establish a shipbuilding and repair yard capable
of dealing with big vessels.
(3) It would absorb a lot of unemployed, and as every man
out.of employment is an economic loss to the country, this would be
a great factor, etc., etc.
ENGLAND SENDING ORDERS FOR SHIPS OVERSEA.
Great Britain got the contract for the two vessels. The British
Government stressed upon Mr. Bruce to give them the contract,
and yet
“we find England to-day has let contracts to European firms
to build £1,000,000 worth of vessels, owing to the fact that they
can be built cheaper in Europe than here.” (“Age,” 19/6/25.)
CRITICISMS OF ACTION OF GOVERNMENT.
“Buying ships abroad is not an Australian Defence Policy.
Therefore Mr. Bruce’s pleading is empty and vain. His economies
are false. His defence theories are IMPERIAL rather than Aus-
tralian.” (“Age, 8/4/25.)
“From a Government that is squandering unproductive mil-
lions and tacitly inviting each avaricious trading interest to come
as mendicant for public largesse, the excuse is strange and detestably
hollow.” (Referring to the saving of £818,000.) (“Age,” 25/3/25.)
“The boasted saving is a sham and a delusion. Before there
can be real Australian defence this country must be able to make
the things bv which it is to be defended. THE BASIS OF DE-
FENCE IS INDUSTRY.” (“Age, 25/3/25.)
“No Australian of Australian heart and mind will endorse the
action of the Government in turning its back upon its own country.
No authority on defence, unless ho is a false one basely courting
political favor, will deny that the capacity to produce the essentials
of defence is the real basis of defence.” (“Age,” 25/3/25.)
Australia will be loyal to Great Britain to the end. Her
national hopes lie always within the Empire. Nevertheless she has
national spirit enough to resent the act of her own Ministers in
degrading her to the status of a helpless tribute-paying depend-
ency.


Woollen Mills (Geelong).
In 1910 the Fisher Government made provision on the Estimates
for the establishment of the Commonwealth Woollen Mills.
An expert (Mr. Smail) was obtained from Scotland, who after
touring Australia selected a site at Geelong, Victoria.
The Geelong Harbor Trust, with the consent of the Victorian
State Government, gave the Commonwealth the site for the mills,
13 acres, which was in effect a gift from the people of Victoria.
Mr. Smail procured the best machinery the world could pro-
vide, and commenced operations in 1915.
The industry showed a profit from the commencement.
SENATOR PEARCE (Nationalist Minister— then Labor Minis-
ter for Defence) stated that the principal reason for the establish-
ment of these mills was on account of the great difficulty in ob-
taining supplies and the inferior cpiality of the cloth that was ob-
tainable.
THE SECRETARY FOR DEFENCE in 1918 stated:
“It can be authoritatively stated that these factories have
materially improved the quality of military clothing and equip-
ment generally.”
MR. SMAIL, MANAGER OF THE MILLS, in 1918 said:
“Cloth was supplied to the Department at prices lower
than the existing contract rate.”
SENATOR GUTHRIE (Nationalist), in September, 1922, stated:
“The mills have tended to prevent—and I think this is
a very important fact—the Government Departments and re-
turned soldiers from being exploited.
“Whilst charging comparatively low prices for splendid
material the Government mills have been able to show a sub-
stantial profit vear after vcar.”
PROFITS.
During the six years 19l(i-17 to 1921-22 the gross profits
amounted to £347,533
Allowing for high depreciation ...•• 85,882
Makes the actual profits £261,651
And again allowing 5 per cent, on capital invested to be
paid to the Treasury 71,583
NET PROFITS to the Commonwealth £190.068


During the last two years, 1920-21 and 1921-22, the NET
PROFITS amounted to £103,311.
In addition to these profits the mills had the effect of keeping'
down prices which saved the country somewhere about £3,000,000.
Despite these splendid profits, the money it saved the com-
munity, and the splendid reports as to the work being turned out,
the members of the Nationalist Government all voted to sell the
mills.
Let us look at what these mills cost the Government:
Machinery ” £128.000
Buildings 80,000
Land 13,000*
Total £221.000
•Its value at the time it was given to the Government.
Those were pre-war prices. In 1922 the value of buildings,
land and machinery had increased enormously.
At the instigation of the Bruee-Page Government, an expert
from Messrs. Wilridge and Sinclair, engineering firm in Melbourne,
valued the plant, machinery, fittings, building and land at £267,159.
But the mills were a “going concern,” showing handsome pro-
fits, and something must be added for the “goodwill.”
Tenders were invited. Tenderers were to pay ONE-THIRD
CASH and the BALANCE IN FIVE YEARS.
Returned soldiers controlling a mill at Geelong asked time to
form a company. The} - had no ready cash, but offered the Govern-
ment property worth £57,000 as security.
The Government refused the soldiers’ offer, and sold the mills
for £155,000. They took one-tenth deposit; allowed the buying com-
pany ten (10) years to pay it off, at about 5 per cent.
Some time ago the Chairman of the Company that purchased
the mills made a statement to the press in London to the effect
that the mills were worth £lOO,OOO more than they gave for them.


Wool Profits.
GOVERNMENT GIVES AWAY £275,393.
SHAREHOLDERS OF BAWRA AND BRITISH GOVERNMENT
GET HALF EACH.
In 1916 the British Government offered to purchase the Aus-
tralian wool clip, and the then Prime Minister (AV. M, Hughes)
agreed to sell at the flat rate of 15kl. per lb., and a half share
of the profits from the sale of any surplus wool, on the condition
that all wool required for local manufacturing purposes was not
to be included.
The British Government.replied, stating;
“We agree to the condition that the wool for local manu-
facturing purposes should not be included in the sale to the
British Government.”
SENATOR E. D. MILLEN (late leader of the Government in
the Senate), on March 17, 1920, stated:
“Local requirements have throughout been held to include
manufacture of wool tops for export as well as manufacture of
woollens for local manufacture.”
Sir JOHN HIGGINS (Chairman, Central Wool Committee) him-
self admitted that the Imperial Government had only purchased
wool “over and above Australian requirements, including the out-
put of wooltops for export.”—(“Herald,” 6/6/24.)
MR. PRATTEN (Minister for Trade and Customs), when
speaking in the Senate (14/4/20), stated:
“All the evidence, therefore, is that it was clearly intended
that Australian manufacturers should get all the wool they
needed in their business at the flat rate both for local consump-
tion and export, and that the Commonwealth Government
alone should profit by the world’s parity on Australian manu-
factures sold for export, and the Central Wool Committee itself,
including the growers’ representatives on it, established that
principle.
“I wish emphatically to assert that the sale of wool to
local manufacturers is a right, not a privilege, and has nothing
to do with the British Government’s purchase.”
Prime Minister Hughes and Cabinet Ministers at different times
emphasised the fact that all wool for Australian industries included


the manufacture of wooltops for export as well as for local con-
sumption.
It will be seen, therefore, that any wool required by local
manufacturers was excluded from the agreement with the British
Government, yet the British Government was paid £137,000 by the
Bruce-Page Government in respect of wool that was sold in Australia
for local manufacturing purposes.
Up to the time the Bruce-Page Government came into office
nothing had been paid.
Mr. W. M. HUGHES, dealing with the payment, stated:
“The British Government has no right and never had- a
right to a farthing of this money.
“If this money is paid by virtue of a promise said to have
been made by me, it will be paid under misapprehension of
facts. No such promise was ever made or implied by me.
“I say most emphatically that it was never recognised by
my Government, nor by me, nor by my Department, during
my term as Prime Minister, that the British Government had
a claim to one halfpenny in respect of this wool.
“Had I remained in office 1 would not have paid the
amount to which the Government had agreed.”
Mr. Hughes further stated that when he left the Conference
that was called together to discuss the sale of wool to the British
Government cvervbodv there was agreeable to accept 15d. per lb.„
AND NO SHARE OF THE PROFITS.
The British Government sold the surplus wool that it did not
require, and on the lowest computation cleared £30,000,000 profit.
And yet this Government gives them another £137,000 to which
the British Government themselves agreed that it had no claim.
One of the excuses put forward so far as the payment of the-
£l37,ooo to Bawra was concerned was that the growers themselves,
were entitled to this money.
It is strange to relate, however, that prior to the payment of
this money to Bawra, thousands of small wool-growers who owned
shares in Bawra were bought out.
In the share list issued by J. Palmer in April, 1020, it stated:
“Bawra’s shares always change hands by the hundred
thousands each week.”
From this it will be observed that this cry about tbe growers;
getting the money is all “camouflage.”
It was mostly the speculators and big pastoralists who bought
up the small shareholders in Bawra who divided this money givem
to them by ther friends —the Bruce-Page Government.


Composite Government.
FORMATION OP BRUCE-PAGE GOVERNMENT
NEGOTIATIONS.
DID DR. PAGE SEEK OFFICE?
Polities to-day as far as the Federal Government is concerned
is in such a state of chaos that people are wondering, and have
been wondering for some considerable time, what is to be the out-
come of it all.
Both in the Federal and State arenas the auti-Labor forces have
been fighting amongst themselves to such an extent that not only
are many of the members of these parties dissatisfied, but they are
unable to do anything in the way of passing legislation that can
in any way be classified as of a constructive nature, or which is
for the benefit and welfare of the people of Australia, tending to-
wards the progress of Australia as a whole.
To see how the present state of affairs has been brought about,
it will be most interesting to review the events that have transpired
during the last few years.
TWO POLITICAL PARTIES.
Prior to the war Ihere existed only two parties, Labor and
anti-Labor (who were called Liberals). Everyone knows how in
1916, when Mr. Hughes came back from England, he split the Labor
Party on the conscription issue, and how he joined with the Liberal
Party and formed the National Government.
BIRTH OP COUNTRY PARTY.
After this amalgamation there came into existence another
party, called the Country Party. During the war, and up to the
1922 Federal elections, the Nationalist Party were still in power
under the leadership of Mr. Hughes, while the Country Party
occupied the corner seat.
COUNTRY PARTY CONDEMNED HUGHES ADMINISTRATION
BUT KEPT HUGHES GOVERNMENT IN POWER.
Prior to the 1922 Federal elections many opportunities were
.given to the Country Party, who moved 16 censure motions against
the Hughes Government to “out” the National Government, but
on every occasion the Hughes Government, owing' to some of the
Country Party members voting with the Government or refraining
from voting at all, managed to secure a majority.
Prior to the election, on several occasions the “olive branch”
•was held out by the Hughes National Party to the Country Party,
but without success.


1922 FEDERAL ELECTIONS.
The 1922 general election was perhaps the bitterest fight with
three parties in the field that has ever been known. The Country
I’arty refused to give their second preference votes to the National-
ists, and bitter recriminations passed between the then Prime
Minister and the leader of the Country Party.
MR. BRUCE PROMISES TO STAND BY W. M. HUGHES.
During the election fight Mr. Bruce, then Treasurer in the
Hughes Government, stated:
“If he be thrown out (meaning Mr. Hughes), as some
cheery optimist suggests, I may say incidentally that I will go
out too, and I think we will put up a stiff fight against those
who attempt to run the Government of this country. ’ ’
How “stiff the fight” is can be gauged by the fact that, despite
the above utterances of Mr. Bruce, he now occupies the position of
the man he said he would stand by. It might be said that Mr.
Bruce went “out” when Mr. Hughes resigned, but he was not long
in coming back and taking the position of the man he had sworn
to stand by.
COUNTRY PARTY REFUSES TO ALLY ITSELF WITH
DEFEATED NATIONAL GOVERNMENT.
After the 1922 elections, at which the Hughes Government
received such a rebuff, negotiations were entered into between the
National Govrnment and the Country Party in order to bring about
the formation of a Composite Government.
At the preliminary discussion of the Conference the following
appeared in one of the leading Melbourne dailies (“Age,”
18/1/23) :
“Opposing interpretations of the result of the elections
provided a' battleground at the Conference.
“The Country Party representatives argued that the ver-
dict of the country was in effect a vote of censure upon the
Hughes administration, and that they would be stultifying
themselves and proving themselves recreant to the whole atti-
tude they had taken up during the election campaign by now
allying themselves with a Government which had received such
a heavy and significant setback.
“The exceptionally severe casualties in the Ministerial
team and among those closely associated with Mr. Hughes
had also to be reckoned, and after such a result it would be
unthinkable for a growing party to submit itself to incorpora-
tion or fusian under the Nationalist leader.”
Tt would be only logical to assume from this statement that
the Country Party would under no circumstances join with the
Nationals to form a Composite Government.


But they did, and by so doing, to use their own words and
arguments, have stultified themselves and proved themselves re-
creant to the attitude they took up during the election campaign.
Why this climb-down by Dr. Page?
There appears to be only one answer—the great desire for
office. And it appears therefore as if they sunk their principles in
order to get into the Government.
CONDITIONS LAID DOWN BY COUNTRY PARTY FOR
FORMATION OF COMPOSITE GOVERNMENT.
However, negotiations continued and the Country Party stated
that if an alliance was to be brought about it should firmly adhere
tc the two main conditions laid down (“Age,” 22/1/23);
(1) If an alliance, the leader of the Country Part}’ to be the
leader of the Government.
(2) If Mr. Page not to be Prime Minister, no binding alliance
but a working arrangement under which the Country
Party will undertake to support the Nationalist Govern-
ment in carrying out an approved legislative programme,,
but will retain the right to independent action on other-
matters.
And the instructions were that either one of these two proposals-
had to be accepted or negotiations would be declared ended.
Dr. Page at the outset of the negotiations stated he would not
support or co-operate with any Government containing Mr. Hughes.
It should he borne in mind, however, that during the previous three-
years he had opportunity after opportunity to defeat the Hughes
Government (as stated before), but the Hughes Government was
never defeated.
Eventually negotiations broke down much to Dr. Page’s annoy-
ance. as he upbraided the National Party for want of candor and
stated they would not recognise the verdict at the polls.
NATIONALISTS STATE COUNTRY PARTY DEMANDS ARE
“ARROGANT.”
Mr. Bowden, late Minister for Defence in the Composite Govern-
ment, stated that the Country Party had made arrogant and out-
rageous demands, and that thev had been impossible.” (Sydney
“D.T.,” 5/2/23).
It is strange these “outrageous demands” were overcome.
Either the Country Party gave in or else the Nationalist Party.
Which was it?
HUGHES RESIGNED—BRUCE PRIME MINISTER.
Then came the bomb-shell. Mr. Hughes resigned, and the man
who promised to stand by him, and fight with him, stepped into,
his position.


A leading article in the “Age” of 6/2/23 stated:
“Mr. Bruce has no more right to lead a Government of
Australia than has the rejected Prime Minister, whom he backed
in acts that were hotly condemned and with whom he vowed as
a man of honor that he would go down.”
BRUCE GIVES IN TO PAGE.
As soon as Mr. Bruce was delegated to form a Ministry he im-
mediately got in touch with Dr. Page, who, in turn, immediately
rushed from Sydney to Melbourne, got out at a suburban station
and went by a back way to Mr. Bruce’s flat, and made arrange-
ments for the formation of a Composite Government.
The “Age” in a leading article (7/8/24), speaking on the
formation of the Composite Government, said:
“Mr. Bruce made concessions to a small minority (Country
Party) that are without Federal precedent, granting even one-
half of the portfolios with equality of Cabinet power.”
Ever since the Composite Government has been formed, Dr.
Page has gone to great pains to inform the people that he did not
seek office.
If that is so—
Why did he continue negotiations for the formation of a
Composite Government after stating the Country Party would
not stultify itself by allying itself with a defeated Govern-
ment?
Why did he rush back to Melbourne to fix things up with
Mr. Bruce in the manner in which he did?
At the Farmers’ Conference held in March, 1922, one of the
delegates stated (“Argus,” 21/3/23):
“lie voiced the feeling of the rank and file, and what
stuck in their ‘gizzards’ was the fact that their leader sneaked
into Melbourne by a back way and then slipped unseen into a
South Yarra flat and fixed up something with the leader of
the Nationals.”
And that summed it up, as it appears evident that Dr. Page
wanted to get into office under any conditions possible, and once
there he has hung on like “grim death.”
OLD GOVERNMENT AND NEW—CONTRADICTORY
STATEMENTS.
After the negotiations had been arranged. Dr. Page, addressing
his party—
maintained that the new Government bore very little resem-
blance to the old and discredited administration.
What a statement to make, and how ridiculous! Does Dr. Page
want us to believe that as soon as the Composite Government was
formed the National Party was going to throw over all its ideas,
proposals and the policy it had been working on since its inception ?


Such a supposition, which is the only logical one that can be deduced
from Dr. Page’s statement, is absurd, and would only be made by
such a man as Dr. Page himself.
To show how absurd it is, Dr. Page himself said (Sydney “D.T.,”
19/2/23):
“Placed side by side, the policy and proposals of the
National and Country Party are surprisingly alike.”
And Dr. Page gave that as one of the reasons for the formation
of the Composite Government.
There you have two statements made by Dr. Page within a
week of one another, each contradicting the other.
Further, the statement is indirectly contradicted by Senator
Pearce, who stated at Geelong (29/8/23) :
“The policy of the present Ministry was but a continuance
of the last Ministry’s policy. The National and Country Parties
had come together and should accomplish much good for the
benefit of Australia.”
Prom this it will be seen that the statements of Dr. Page (C.P.)
and Senator Pearce (National Party) contradict one another.
Dr. Page tries to make out the Composite Government is a
new Government, whereas Senator Pearce states the Composite
Government is but a continuance of the old one.
COUNTRY PARTY AND COMPOSITE GOVERNMENT.
And then we come to some of the “strings” supposed to be
attached to the formation of this Government by the Country
Party.
“if a fair deal for the interests they represented and the
policy they advocated could not be secured, they would be
able to pull out just like an army corps with their lines of
communication and all their forces intact.” —“Age,” 19/2/23.
The question could well be asked here. “If, as Dr. Page said, the
policy and proposals of the National and Country Party are sur-
prisingly alike, why should they have any doubts as to the
Nationalists giving the farming interests a fair deal?”
“A separate entity at all hazards” was one of the main things
the Country Party stood for.
He would be a bold person who would say that Dr. Page lias
preserved the separate entity of the Country Party. What has he
done that he promised to do. Peruse his policy speech and look
through the points he stipulated at the formation of the Composite
Government and see how much he has done. For the sake of office
it appears as if he has allowed the Country Party to be swallowed
up by the National Government.
Shortly after the formation of the Composite Government, Dr.
Page said:


“I think the Nationalists will play fair, and as long as
they do we will reciprocate, and good Government should
result.”
This is a statement that shows clearly the mind of Dr. Page.
Firstly, he only thinks the Nationalists will ‘‘play fair.”
He threw his lot in with a party which, evidently in his mind,
he was not certain whether or not they were an honorable
party.
Secondly, he would only reciprocate; i.e., he would only
play fair as long as the Nationalists did likewise, and evidently
he would not play fair if he thought the Nationalists would not
do the same.
Thirdly, he thinks good Government should result. 'He
was evidently not certain that good Government would result,
and in this regard he can he complimented on his foresight, as
good Government, as everybody knows, has not resulted by
the widest stretch of imagination.
And, to sum up, this brilliant statement shows clearly that
the Country Party did not trust the National Party, and that each
would be watching the other like ‘‘cat and dog.’” No wonder it has
not been a success.
COUNTRY PARTY CLAIMS CREDIT FOR GOOD GOVERNMENT
AND CONDEMNS PREVIOUS NATIONAL ADMINISTRATION.
Another utterance of Dr. Page was (“ArguS,” 8/2/24), in
replying to a statement of Mr. Hughes:
“Considering the state in which WE found things when
WE came into possession of the Treasury Benches, if we are
drifting, we are drifting with the tide and coming closer and
closer every day to our desired haven.”
Quite a compliment to the National Party. Evidently, accord-
ing to Dr. Page, Mr. Bruce, Senator Pearce, Mr. M. Greene and
other National Ministers led by Mr. Hughes, and members of
the National Party did not know how to run the country, and let
things drift; hut when Dr. Page came along everything went along
smoothly.
It sounds all right, but unfortunately for Dr. Page the people
know better.
Everybody knows that the present Government has been a
failure. There has been dissatisfaction amongst the members of
both sections of the Composite Government, hut both leaders sank
everything in order to keep office. ,
Time went on until about June, 1924, when Mr. Bruce began
to look at the future elections, and negotiations then took place
which brought about what is known as “The Pact.”


The Pact.
MR. BRUCE GIVES DEFINITE ULTIMATUM TO
COUNTRY PARTY.
"When in Adelaide, May 24, 1924, Mr. Bniee made an emphatic
statement that the National and Country Parties should go to the
country as a United Party on a common policy, and that if this
could not he brought about lie . would form a Cabinet from the
National Party.
AGREEMENT BETWEEN MR. BRUCE AND DR. PAGE.
This statement commenced negotiations between Mr. Bruce and
Dr. Page, and an agreement was arrived at, which stated:
(1) No contests at elections between Nationalist and Coun-
try Party candidates, except for seats now held by
Labor.
(2) When triangular contests are held, preferences to be ex-
changed between Nationalists and Country Party can-
didates.
(.5) In election for the Senate, two Nationalists and one
Country Party candidate to comprise the Ministerial
group.
(4) A common election policy to be formulated.
PACT AMENDED BY FARMERS’ ORGANISATION.
MR. BRUCE ADAMANT IN HIS DEMANDS.
Strong opposition was made by the Country Party branches
against the Pact, and the Farmers’ Organisation amended the agree-
ment made by the two leaders, but Mr. Bruce, speaking at the
National Executive (“Age,” 22/7/24), declared plainly that the
Pact as it stood was the only effective thing, and left the distinct
impression that if he were to continue as leader he could not accept
anything else.
After further negotiations, as the “Age” of July 24, 1914,
stated, “A PATCHED-UP PACT” was arrived at between the-mana-
geis of the National and Country Parties.
The point then at issue was: Would Mr. Bruce accept the
amended Pact after his statements in Adelaide and at the National
Executive?


AMENDED PACT.
MR BRUCE ACCEPTS CONDITIONALLY.
The “Afro,” referring to the amended Pact (24/7/24), stated:
“No arrangement was made for a common policy.
“Some seats were to be immune and some would be con-
tested as ‘friendly fights.’ ”
Thus showing clearly that the whole agreement was a farce,
as Mr. Bruce had stated there must be a common policy, and Dr.
Page had stated the Country Party must preserve its separate
identity; nevertheless, Mr. Bruce accepted the agreement, subject to
the following conditions, which were never carried out.
CONDITION—ALL STATE ORGANISATIONS TO APPROVE.
Mr. Bruce, in accepting the amended Pact, stated that “as the
Federal Executive had no power to bind the State Executives it
would be necessary before the arrangements can be finally accepted
that the endorsement of the State organisations should be obtained,
and I am asking for meetings to be held immediately for this pur-
pose. Subject to this being done, I am prepared to accept the
agreement.” —(“Age,” 6/8/24.)
MR. STEWART RESIGNS AND CONDEMNS PACT.
As soon as it was known that the Pact had been accepted, Mr.
Stewart immediately resigned from the Government, and strongly
condemned the Pact, stating it was a “mockery and a sham.”
MR. STEWART, in making a statement, said:
“I hold it (the Pact) to be a vicious attempt to usurp the
rights and privileges of the electors.
“It is an attempt at a political conspiracy.
“It would violate every political principle upon which the
Victorian Farmers’ Union as an organisation was built, and
render our claims to an independent party to be a mockery and
a sham.”
MR. PROWSE RESIGNS.
Following on Mr. Stewart's resignation, Mr. Prowse (G.P.)
also resigned his Government office as he considered the Pact wrong
in principle and unnecessary.
MR. STEWART EXPELLED FROM GOVERNMENT.
DR. PAGE BREAKS HIS PLEDGE.
Later on Mr, Slewart stated (“Sun,” 3/10/24) :
“I was expelled from the Federal Ministry because I re-
fused to agree to tbe Bruce-Page Pact.
“Dr. Page deliberately broke the promise which he gave
me when he appealed to me to join the Ministry. That promise


was that there would he no curtailment of the Country Party
rights to contest all States at the next elections.”
Mr. Stewart himself stated that the acceptance of the Pact
would “violate every political principle” upon which the Victorian
Farmers’ Union . . . was built. — (“Herald,” 8/8/24.)
Here again is further proof of HOW DR. PAGE CLINGS TO
OFFICE. His own colleagues in Cabinet state that he deliberately
broke his promise.
There appears to he only one deduction, and that is he went
back on his principles, and on the principles of his party, for what
reason? Only one — in order that he, Dr. Page, might remain in
office.
Mr. BRUCE asked that meetings be held immediately to give
a decision re the acceptance or otherwise of the Pact, but all the
State organisations have not yet passed resolutions agreeing to it,
.and yet the Composite Government continued.
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN FARMERS REJECT PACT.
At a meeting of the Primary Producers in Western Australia
the Pact was rejected, and no Special Conference had been called
to further discuss the matter, so evidently Western Australia
farmers look upon the Pact as having been rejected.
VICTORIA.
Most of the Country Party Branches in Victoria opposed the
Pact, and made repeated efforts (by about 93 per cent, of the
Branches) to have a Special Conference called together to decide
the matter.
During March, 1925 (eight months after Mr. Bruce's statement
that the State organisations meet immediately to accept or decline
the Pact), the Victorian Farmers’ Union, after a most bitter meet-
ing, sanctioned the existing Pact, but stated it was not to be renewed.
One of the outstanding features of the Conference was the
accusations made by Mr. Stewart against Mr. Bruce and Dr. Page,
when he stated:
(1) That Dr. Page had deliberately broken his pledge that
there would be no election arrangement.
(2) That despite the statement of Mr Bruce that he was
astonished at Mr. Stewart’s resigning, it was Mr. Bruce
himself who requested him (Mr. Stewart) to tender his
resignation.
OPINIONS OF NATIONALISTS RE THE PACT.
Mr. Wise (ex-M.H.R.), Nationalist member, stated:
“The Prime Minister’s policy in the matter was one of
humbug and hesitation.” —(“Sun,” 24/9/24.)


Mr. Maxwell, M.H.R. (Nationalist):
“The Pact was undemocratic in conception, and so far as
Victoria was concerned, impossible of fulfilment.”-—“Sun,”
29/4/24.)
Mr. Killen, M.H.R. (C.P.):
“They may be able to force such a Pact on some electorates,
hut they can’t force it in mine. I am going to take no notice
of it.”-—(“Sun,” 13/8/25.)
Mr. Stewart, M.H.R. (C.P.):
“1 believe we should adhere to the principles upon which
the Victorian Farmers’ Union was formed, and be prepared
to co-operate with the Labor Party, or any other partv ”
(“Sun,” 3/10/24.)
COUNTRY PARTY’S FAITH IN THE LABOR PARTY.
Evidently Mr. Stewart and other members of the Country
Party have faith in the Labor Party, as they are evidently prepared
to work in conjunction with them.
After the State elections in Victoria in 1924, MR. WALTERS,
M.L.A. (Country Party member), stated:
“The Country Party was determined not to allow the
National Government to remain in power with an autocratic
Premier at the head.
“The other parties were tired of THEIR DO-NOTHING
POLICY, AND DECIDED TO PUT IN A PARTY THAT
WOULD DO SOMETHING, THEREFORE THE COUNTRY
PARTY VOTED FOR LABOR.
“The National Party and Country Party would not amal-
gamate. The National Party had only one thing at heart and
that was city interests.”
COUNTRY PARTY PAPER PRAISES THE LABOR PARTY.
The “Countryman,” speaking about the Dried Fruits Bill be-
fore the Victorian Slate Parliament (“Sun,” 19/12/24), of which
Mr. Allan (C.P.) is Premier, stated:
“The whole thing savors of weakness and compromise,
so that office might be retained.
“IF LABOR HAD HAD CHARGE OP THIS MEASURE
IT WOULD AT LEAST HAVE STUCK TO ITS GUNS.
“THE LABOR PARTY WERE TRIERS, AND SAW EYE
TO EYE WITH THE PRODUCERS AND THOSE WORKING
ON THE LAND, CONSIDERING THAT EVERY MAN AND
WOMAN WAS WORTHY OP THEIR HIRE AND EN-
TITLED TO FAIR WAGES AND BETTER CONDITIONS.—
(“Age,” 2/8/24.)
All going to show that the Country Party members, papers and
rank and file have more faith in the Labor Party and what the
Labor Part}’ would do for the country than the Nationalists.


Criticism of Composite
Government.
DENOUNCED BY ITS OWN SUPPORTERS.
PRIME MINISTER HIMSELF ADMITS HE HAS NO POLICY.
Speaking at Geelong in 1924, Mi - . Bruce lamented the lack of
a National policy strong enough to unite the anti-Labor forces.
HE GAVE LABOR A CHANCE AT THE NEXT FEDERAL
ELECTIONS BECAUSE, AS HE QUITE GLIBLY CONFESSED,
HE HAD NO POLICY TO FIGHT IT WITH.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, HE SAID. WAS HELD TO-
GETHER BY THE VERY LIGHTEST BONDS, BECAUSE IT DID
NOT HAVE A GREAT OBJECTIVE.— (“HeraId.” 4/8/24.)
What an admission for the leader of a party and PRIME
MINISTER of a country to make! “They had no policy,” and yet
they remained in office. No wonder the country has not been
progressing. No wonder its own supporters are condemning the
Composite Government and its leaders.
His statement that “the Government are held together by the
very lightest bonds” clearly proves that these two bodies have not
been working together harmoniously.
HAS THE COMPOSITE GOVERNMENT BEEN WORKING IN
HARMONY?
PEARCE LETS “CAT OUT OF BAG.’’—BRUCE CONTRADICTS
HIM.
The people have often asked themselves this question, so per-
haps the following statements will enlighten them:
Senator Pearce (“Age,” 29/8/23) :
“He did not think he was divulging Cabinet secrets in
stating that two such bodies had not manifested themselves in
Cabinet. There certainly had been divisions.”
Mr. Bruce, however, made a totally different statement, as he
declared that:
“There had never been a division of opinion between the
two parties in the Cabinet room. He believed they would go on
working in complete harmony. ' —(“Argus,” 21/3/24.)


Whom are we to believe? The leader of the House of Repre-
sentatives or the leader of the Government in the Senate?
And so it went on. If we could analyse what has transpired
in the Composite Government since its inception we would probably
find nothing but suspicion between the two parties that make up
the alliance which has retarded progress and kept the country
back, as the legislation they have passed will show.
SITTINGS OF PARLIAMENT.
LONG ADJOURNMENTS.
BRUCE CLOSED PARLIAMENT WHILE HE WAS AWAY.
DID HE MISTRUST PAGE?
Early in February, 19211, Mr. Bruce formed his Government,
and from then until now Parliament has sat 171 days.
Parliament opened on February 28, 1923. and sat for six days.
They then adjourned until Juno 13, 1923, and resumed on that day
and sat for ten weeks, from June 13 to August 24, 1923.
BRUCE RUSHED THROUGH BILLS, CLOSED PARLIAMENT
AND WENT TO ENGLAND.
During the short session in 1923, Mr. Bruce rushed bills through
Parliament as he wanted to leave Australia at a certain date in
order to attend the Imperial Conference, and as he evidently did
not trust or think Dr. Page capable of conducting Parliament in
his absence he decided to close Parliament until his return.
The “Age,” commenting on this, said (7/8/24):
“Last year the session lasted ten weeks owing to the
approach of the Imperial Conference, and bills were rushed
through at all-night sittings. Parliamentary business appears
to be of secondary importance to Parliamentary jaunts.
“Bill after bill was then hurled through at late hours
without adequate opportunity for Parliamentary criticism or
for public discussion.”
In another article the “Age” stated (5/1/25) :
“He (Mr. Bruce) set out for England the radiant centre
of an official constellation greater than ever before left Aus-
tralia’s shore. His pomp and state might have provoked the
envy of any old-time Eastern potentate.
“Parliament was bludgeoned in order to get through
strictly necessary bills.”


Criticism of Government on
Efficiency and Economy
Policy.
From the time the Composite Government took office, the
leaders of the Composite Government, especially Dr. Page, who
strongly condemned the waste and financial policy of previous
Governments, endeavored to explain to the public how they were
going to effect economies, and how they would overcome and deal
with financial problems.
Let us look at what one of the leading papers of Melbourne
stated regarding this matter (“Age,” 5/1/25) :
“It is high time he set his house in order. Nationally, the
confusion is increasing. So is the cost. There is neither effici-
ency nor economy.
“Politically, we are drifting; financially, we are squan-
dering.
“High expense may sometimes mean stage statesmanship,
hut not with the present Government. It merely fritters away
money. ’ ’
“If Mr. Bruce be fortunate he will he able to finish the
business and close up Parliament before there have been any
further raids ou the Treasury.”—(“Age,” 10/9/24.)
“. . . from a Government that is’’squandering unproduc-
tive millions and tacitly inviting each avaricious trading interest
to come as a mendicant for public largesse, the excuse is
strange and it is detestably hollow.”—(This was in an article
dealing with the construction of Cruisers oversea, “Age,”
25/3/25.)
COMPOSITE GOVERNMENT AND ELECTIONS.
The Composite Government has been in office for three years,
and now has to face the electors.
Prom events that have transpired and statements made, the
leaders have evidently viewed these elections with fear and tre-
pidation.


Again the “Age,” in a leading article, stated (A/l/25) :
“At an early date Mr. Bruce is expected to launch his
barque once more on the political sea. The weather promises
to be dirty, the steering unsteady. It is difficult to make out
the port for which he is SUPPOSED to be heading, always
assuming that he is not secretly bent on self-destruction, al-
though that at times seems a perfectly warrantable assumption.”
INCAPACITY OF COMPOSITE GOVERNMENT.
It will be remembered how the Prime Minister, speaking at Gee-
long in 11124, stated he had no policy. Such a statement must make
even the most ardent Nationalist supporter wonder whether the
present Government has been, and is, capable of administering the
affairs of this country.
The Composite Government is like two horses attached to a
plough, where one is pulling in one direction and the other in
another. The Composite Government has the Nationalist seeking
to go in one direction and the Countrv Party in another, and the
result is “CHAOS.”
It is incredible to believe for a moment that they can capably
administer the affairs of the Commonwealth.
The “Age,” dealing with this subject, said (5/1/25):
“The Commonwealth has not even the satisfaction of know-
ing that during the period that Mr. Bruce has been Prime
Minister it has been marking time. It has been much less satis-
factorily occupied. IT HAS BEEN MARCHING ALL THE
TIME WITHOUT INTELLIGENT DIRECTION, WITHOUT
DEFINITE OBJECT.
“WHEREVER THE MINISTRY’S RECORD IS TURNED
UP THE TAXPAYER WILL FIND PROOF OF INEXCUS-
ABLE LETHARGY OR OF NATURAL INCAPACITY.”
RICH MAN’S GOVERNMENT.
This Bruce-Page Government poses to be a Democratic Govern-
ment. its leader and supporters have stated that it is a friend to the
working man, but by, its acts and by its legislation we know only
too well it is purely a “rich man’s Government.”
“Rightly or wrongly, the public is gaining the impression that
the Coalition is a rich man’s Government, and has little or no
use for the 70 or 80 per cent, of the people who live bv their
labor.”—(“Age,” 26/6/24.)
COUNTRY PARTY.
The “Age,” referring to the Country Party, stated (10/9/24):
“If the Government can only get through without its


Country supporters making further attempts to increase the
cost of officalism. ...
“THE FEDERAL COUNTRY PARTY WILL DRAG
DOWN ANY GOVERNMENT WITH WHICH IT IS ASSO-
CIATED. It seems determined to outdo all rivals and records,
but there are policies which cannot be forced upon the people
and there are politicians whose friendship brings political
death.”
SUMMARY.
These are the criticisms of men and papers who are opposed
to Labor. They are criticisms from the press and men who have
seen and realise what a failure this Composite Government is doing
and has done for Australia.
It has been a failure from start to finish, which is only what
can be expected in a Ministry where there is—
NO HARMONY,
NO TRUST,
NO WORKING TOGETHER.
But, on the other hand—
INCAPACITY,
INEFFICIENCY, and
NO COMMON POLICY (as admitted by the Prime
Minister).


Finance and Labor.
COMMONWEALTH BANK-NOTE ISSUE.
When all other arguments fail, the opponents of Labor, know-
ing that the problem of the finances of a country is most intri-
cate and important, invariably fall back on the old "cry:
“What docs Labor know about finance?”
And go to great lengths to endeavor to explain that those who
represent Labor and Labor’s interest know nothing about finance.
LABOR’S RECORD.
Past history has proved this to bo untrue, and we only have
to look af Labor’s record to see how Labor representatives have
handled this all-important question.
HON. A. FISHER—COMMONWEALTH BANK.
When Mr. Fisher was Prime Minister he inaugurated the Com-
monwealth Bank. The opponents of Labor of that day laughed
to scorn the idea of a Labor man, and a miner at that, knowing any-
thing about finance, and they ridiculed and opposed his bill for
the establishment of a Commonwealth Bank.
However, despite their hostilitv and without anv big gold
reserve, BUT ON THE CREDIT OF'THE PEOPLE, he*established
the Commonwealth Bank, which has proved such a blessing to the
whole of Australia.
LABOR MADE PEOPLE’S BANK.
NATIONALS MADE IT A BANKERS’ BANK.
The Labor Party brought this Bank into existence, recognising
the great necessity for such an institution, so that it would be a
people’s Bank, and spread all over Australia, and compete with
the private banks.
Everybody who has had business with private banks knows
how hard it is to obtain money from a private bank, especially on
country property; how autocratic these private banks are in their
dealings; and we only have to look at their balance sheets to see
the enormous profits they are and have been making.


LABOR wanted to help the people of Australia, and therefore
created this bank, but since the Bruce-Page Government has been
in power they have crippled the bank so far as it being: beneficial
to the people, restricted its operations, AND MADE IT A BANK
FOR THE BANKERS. In other words, made it a security for the
private banks, which means that the people of Australia are really-
standing as security for the operations of the private banks, while
they reap in the profits.
COMMONWEALTH BANK AND THE WAR.
During the war the Commonwealth Bank was the only bank
that kept its doors open and did business in the usual manner, all
other banks closing. Even the Bank of England closed its doors
for a short time.
Had the Commonwealth Bank closed its doors also, business
would have been disrupted and many business men would have
been ruined, and thousands of men would have been out of work;
but the fact that the Commonwealth Bank, brought into existence
by a Labor Government, did business in the usual way during
that time of stress, enabled the businesses of the country to be
kept on a fairly even keel.
PROFITS, ETC., OF THE BANK.
Up to the time the Composite Government made the bank a
bankers’ bank, the profits of the bank amounted to approximately
£5,000,000.
And who gets the benefit of that £5,000,000? The people of
Australia. And it was because this bank was interfering with the
private banks, taking some of its trade, that the big interests got
to work and make those they put into Parliamen—the Nationalist
Party—cripple the operations of the Commonwealth Bank so far
as it was detrimental to their own private banking interests.
NOTE ISSUE.
And then we have the Note Issue, also brought into existence
by Andrew Fisher, the Labor Prime Minister,
Here again the opponents of Labor opposed the Note Issue
and called them “Fisher’s Flimsies,’’ saying that it would not be
long before they would not be worth 15/- in the £.
But Labor saw further ahead than its opponents, saw the
necessity for such a course, and in face of bitter opposition passed
the Note Issue Bill.
BASIS FOR ISSUE OF NOTES,
When Mr. Fisher brought the Note Issue Bill into existence
he got the advice of the best financial experts in the world on the


matter, and was informed that a 12i per cent, gold basis was suf-
fxcent security, but in order to be on the right side, Mr. Fisher
made it 25 per cent. That is to say, the Government can issue four
£1 notes for every sovereign in its possession.
NOTE ISSUE AND WAR.
During the early period of the war the Note Issue lent
£i.6,000,000 to the Government, free of interest. It advanced money
to the wheat pool—to the farmers—at reasonable rates of interest,
and, in addition, up to dune 30, 1925, has earned approximately
£13,000,000.
NATIONALISTS OBJECT TO INCREASING NOTE ISSUE.
Speaking on the National Debt Sinking Fund on July 20, 1923
(page 1623), Senator Gardiner pointed out that the Government
was in the position to issue about £46,000,000 of notes, and still
be within the margin of 25 per cent., and suggested it issue some
more notes to liquidate certain debts.
Nationalist supporters strongly condemned the suggestion, and
the following are some of the interjections that were made to Sena-
tor Gardiner during his peeeli:
SENATOR GLASGOW (Nationalist) :
“The Hon. Senator wishes Australian currency to follow
the course of the mark.”—(“Hansard,” 26/7/23, page 1623.)
SENATOR CRAWFORD (Hon. Minister):
“That scheme would add to the note circulation.” —(Page
1623.)
SENATOR DRAKE-BROCKMAN (Nationalist) :
“It would be most unwise.”—(Page 1624.)
SENATOR GLASGOW:
“Germany has greater resources than has Australia, but
her credit is low because of the over-issue of the mark.”
SENATOR ELLIOTT (Nationalist) :
“There would always be the danger of the cost of living
mounting still higher than it is.”—(Page 1626.)
SENATOR ELLIOTT:
“ . . . and I hope that Senator Gardiner will be convinced
that his argument is unsound.”- —Page 1629.)
NATIONALISTS NOW INCREASE NOTE ISSUE.
From these statements it will be seen that the Government’s
supporters were opposed to any increase being made to the note


issue, but let us look at recent developments and avc find that this
Government, despite .the utterances of many of its supporters, have
made available £15,000,000 in notes to the private banks.
FINANCING WOOL CLIP.
Quite recently the private banks refused to finance the wool
clip unless they got assistance from the Government, with the
result that the Commonwealth Government made available
£15,000,000 of notes, charging the banks 4 per cent interest for
the notes so borrowed.
, In reality the private hanks did not borrow this money, but
advanced credit on the knowledge that they can secure the notes
if there is any gerat demand, consequently the private banks prac-
tically do not pay any interest.
The private hanks worked on this £15,000,000 as if it were
a gold basis, and therefore issued credits to approximately four
times that amount.
This means that the private banks can issue credits to the
extent of approximately £60,000,000 for which they charge a high
rate of interest, and their asset is the credit of the people and
the knowledge that they can get these notes if they desire.
It will be seen, therefore, that the people of Australia, to an
extent, are standing as security for the private banks for the issue
of credits up to £60.000,000 for which the banks receive all the
benefit and profits.
The Labor- Party wanted the country to stand as security for
the Commonwealth Hank, or the People’s Bank, hut the Nationalist
Government has now made the Commonwealth Bank the security
whereby private hanks can carry out operations for their own
benefit.


Unemployment and
Immigration.
Unemployment and immigration are so closely allied to one
another that it is practically impossible to discuss one without
referring to the other.
These subjects, especially the former, are always of import-
ance, but in view of the large number of unemployed in Australia
to-day, and the great influx of immigrants, particularly foreign,
into Australa, they are at present of paramount interest.
UNEMPLOYMENT.
The greatest and most important problem that faces all the
countries of the world to-day is that of unemployment, and the
nation that can. solve the problem of this economic waste will be
looked upon as one of the greatest nations in the world.
Pre-war figures showed that 10 per cent, of the people were
always out of employment, meaning that one out of every ten was
always unemployed.
In 1921 there were 159,000 unemployed in the Commonwealth.
To-day if a census was taken we would probably find this figure
largely increased.
In a great rich countrv like Australa work should be found for
all, as every man who is out of employment means a loss to the
country.
The capitalistic class think that by always having an army
of unemployed they can get cheaper labor, and to bring this about
they say there is no money for developmental work that would
absorb these men.
Prior to the war who would have thought we could have
raised £400,000.000? Anybody even suggesting the matter would
have been laughed at.
The money, however, was raised, and if we could raise
£400,000,000 for war, surely, with the unlimited possibilites as there
are in Australia, with our rich fertile lands, we can raise money
for the development of this country which will not only absorb all
the unemployed, but will develop the country and in years to come
pay us back a hundredfold.
There is capital amply sufficient to employ all these men, but
P is not made available, and consequently we have idle capital
and workless men.


PRIVATE ENTERPRISE AND LABOR.
EMPLOYMENT SHOULD AND MUST BE FOUND FOR ALL.
All wealth comes from labor, and as long as private enterprise
is the employer of labor, then the onus is on private enterprise
to see that every man is in employment.
If private enterprise refuses to do this, and accept this respon-
sibility, then it must allow “public enterprise” to do it.
During the 1921 session, Mr. F. McDonald, M.H.R., moved the
adjournment of the House to discuss—
“ The acute distress due to unemployment and the obliga-
tion of the Commonwealth Government to assist in the relief
of same”—
and urged that money be made available for relief work to give
these men employment.
The Nationalist Government, however, refused to take the mat-
ter up, and nothing has been done.
IMMIGRATION.
LABOR’S ATTITUDE TOWARDS IMMIGRATION.
On the question of immigration, the Labor Party stands firmly
together.
THE LABOR PARTY DOES NOT OPPOSE THE PRINCIPLE
OF BRINGING IMMIGRANTS TO AUSTRALIA, BUT DECLARES
THAT BEFORE ANYONE COMES TO AUSTRALIA AMPLE EM-
PLOYMENT SHOULD BE SECURED FOR OUR OWN PEOPLE.
When Labor comes into power we shall not mind if tens of
thousands of Britishers come to Australia, provided good jobs can
be found for all.
As everyone knows, we have thousands of unemployed in our
midst.
Government supporters say they are bringing out immigrants
to settle on the land, but we know the majority of them remain
in the city, and those who do go to the country very soon find
their way back to the large towns.
As far as settling on the land is concerned, we have thousands
of young Australians only too willing to go on the land (decent
land) if they are given the chance.
But—
The National Government will not help our own people to start
cn the land, but is making arrangements to place immigrants on the
land and is assisting them financially.
Mr. W. M. HUGHES (late Prime Minister) once said:
“To cry for more men and decline to employ those already
here is folly and worse.”
And this is just what the Nationalist Government is doing—
refusing to make available money for developmental purposes in
order to absorb the unemployed, and at the same time crying out
for more population.


MR. BRUCE himself said (“Hansard,'’ 17/9/24, page 4407):
“It is no use to increase our population unless every indi-
vidual who enters the country becomes a productive unit.”
The only logical deduction that can be arrived at from that
statement is that every man to become a “productive unit” must be
in employment of some kind.
Despite this statement, the Prime Minister and his Government
are bringing in thousands of immigrants, and they know that there
is absolutely no chance of work being found for all as things are
at present, that thousands are out of work, and, therefore, every
man is NOT a productive unit.
Within the last year or two Australia has been inundated with
foreign immigrants. These immigrants are mostly poor and illiter-
ate, and the majority cannot speak English.
The “Age” (17/12/24), in an article dealing with foreign im-
migrants, said:
“The ports of America having been closed against them,
the races of Southern Europe are looking towards the Com-
monwealth.
“During the last few months 3000 of these" foreigners,
mostly poor and illiterate, have landed in the different States.
The majority of them cannot speak a word of English.
“Last week a vessel arrived in Fremantle under the
Egyptian flag. It was loaded with an assortment of Greeks,
Maltese, Syrians, Jugo-Slavs and others, all intending to make
Australia their home.”
Mr. Charlton, speaking in Parliament (“Hansard,” 25/6/24,
page 1539), complained about the action of the Government in
allowing Maltese to enter Australia to compete with our unemployed,
but the Government took no notice of his warning, and lately we
have had hundreds coming here, as the following figures will show:
Actual Number of Persons who Entered Australia.
1923-24. 1924-25.
British 83,159 .. 82,670
Other 13,782 .. 23,473
Showing an increase of arrivals in Australia of persons not
British of 10,000 in one year.
Net Migration—i.e., Excess of Arrivals over Departures.
1923-24. 1924-25.
British 34,546 .. 32,765
Other 5,581 .. 12,504
Here again is shown clearly the large increase of foreigners
into Australia.
In one year the net increase of persons other than British who
migrated to Australia amounted to 6923, or an increase of 124 per
cent.


Kidman-Mayo Contract.
VESSELS BUILT FOR COMMONWEALTH THAT WOULD
NOT FLOAT.
£166,000 LOST.
In 1918 the Nationalist Government let a contract to Messrs.
Kidman and Mayo to construct six wooden ships.
In 1919 they had made some progress with the construction of
two of them.
When the war ceased the Government released contractors (in-
cluding Kidman and Mayo) of their contracts, and compensated
them.
For the four vessels not started Kidman and Mayo received
£13,000 each, making a total of £52,000.
Kidman and Mayo asked to be allowed to finish the two vessels
the}' had started to construct (Braeside and Burnside), instead of
receiving compensation for cancellation of same.
During course of construction, Messrs. Burns, Philp decided to
buy the Braeside, which when launched was found to be unsea-
worthy, and Lloyds refused to furnish a certificate for same.
Burns. Philp therefore refused to take delivery of same.
Kidman and Mayo then asked to be relieved of their contract.
They agreed to allow the Public Works Committee to decide
whether or not they should be relieved of their contract, and, if so,
upon what terms, intimating they would abide by the decision of the
Committee.
The Public Works Committee got experts to examine the vessel
and give evidence.
The report of the experts was of such a nature, pointing out
that “dummy bolts” had been used (i.e., bolts a couple of inches
long instead of two-foot bolts), that the work had been “slummed” -
over, and that the vessel was absolutely unseaworthy; that the Com


mittee recommended tliat the firm be not relieved of their contract,
as the vessels had not been built to plans and specifications.
The vessels were veritable “death-traps” for anybody who put
to sea in them.
The Nationalist Government had paid Kidman and Mayo by
way of progress payments £114,000.
Later on the Government appointed Sir Mark Sheldon to arbi-
trate in the matter, and he stated the contractors should repay the
Government £75,000.
They should be made to repay the lot.
SUMMARY,
It will be seen, therefore, that the Nationalist Government:
1. Paid Kidman and Mayo £114,000 in progress payments.
2. Paid Kidman and Mayo £52,000 compensation in respect of
cancellation of contract for four vessels not commenced.
3. Allowed Kidman and Mayo to finish constructing the two
vessels that would not float.
4. Despite the report of the Public Works Committee and Six-
Mark Sheldon, the Government have (as far as can be ascertained)
received nothing from Kidman and Mayo.
ANOTHER GIFT OP £166,000.


Capital and Labor.
DOES LABOR GET ITS SHARE OF PRODUCTION?
The question of unemployment and the settlement of indus-
trial disputes is linked up with the problem of giving Labor a full
return for all its work and paying Capital a fair price for its share
in production.
All wealth comes from labor, but as yet the question of Capital
and Labor has never been settled, and it never will be settled
UNTIL IT HAS BEEN FAIRLY SETTLED.
For all that Labor does in connection with production, it must
receive its fair share. At the present time the scales do not balance
fairly. Capital is getting more than its share and Labor is getting
less.
This is the cause of all the trouble that exists, and has existed
for centuries; it is the cause of all the industrial disputes, and until
Labor does get its fair share of production this great question
will never be settled.
LABOR ALWAYS CALLED ON TO MAKE SACRIFICES.
The working man, no matter in what position he is employed,
is always called upon to make the sacrifice, and if times are a bit
bad at once a move is made to reduce the wages of the worker,
or he is put off. Nothing is ever said about reducing the profits of
the employer, of the big Companies, of the big Trusts and Combines;
they see that they always get their profits, their share, and more
than their share, and always at the expense of the working man.
Mr. Baldwin, Prime Minister of Great Britain, when speaking
to the employing class on this question some time ago, pointed out
that the wharf laborers, coal miners and working men were called
upon and were making sacrifices, but he said:
“When I look at your balance sheets I can see no sacri-
fices.”
And so it goes on. Equality in this question has not been arrived
at, the working man is not getting his fair share of production.
The brunt of the burden has always fallen on his shoulders in bad
times, and so UNTIL THIS QUESTION OF CAPITAL AND LABOR


IS FAIRLY AND HONESTLY SETTLED, EACH RECEIVING ITS
PAIR SHARE IN PROPORTION TO THE ASSISTANCE IT REN-
DERS, we cannot hope for Industrial Peace.
HENRY FORD AND HIS IDEAS.
Perhaps the greatest and most successful employer of labor in
the world to-day is Henry Ford.
Years ago Henry Ford paid his men only a meagre wage.
One day, walking through the shops with his son, he saw an
Italian scowl and grab at a drill. This made Ford think, and he
tried to put himself in the place of the Italian. Probably the
Italian’s children were without hoots, and had scarcely enough
clothes to keep them warm, and he thought that if he was in
that position and saw his boss walk through the factory with his
son well-dressed, etc., he might also feel like smashing something.
Next day he sent for his accountant and asked him to see by
how much the men’s wages could be increased. They were then
getting 2 dollars 4(1 cents. The accountant reported 25 cents, but
Ford said it was not enough. The matter was revised and the
accountant said 50 cents, but this was insufficient to Ford, so
finally the wages were doubled, which made the salary 4 dollars 80
cents, and to-day it is over 6 dollars a day.
Did Ford ruin his business? NO. He gave his men a fair share
for the work they were doing; he believed in uplifting the workers,
to give them some interest in the business and in life generally, with
the result they were more contented and happy, and they had a job
with a sufficient wage and decent conditions to make them take
an interest in their work.
Compare Ford’s system with the system of most employers yon
know and you will find that very few have anything like the big
ideas of Henry Ford.
He has shown the world that it is possible to pay good wages,
etc., and at the same time produce an article at a reasonable price.


Constitution.
During the 1922 elections, the then Prime Minister in his speech
enunciating the policy of the Nationalist Party stated:
“Time has shown that in certain respects it (referring to
the Constitution) is unsuited to the ever-expanding needs of
this young but rapidly progressive country. ...
• ‘‘The need for amendment of the Constitution has long been
recognised. ...
“The Government being of the opinion that some amend-
mens of the Constitution are necessary, and that those recom-
mended by a Convention are much more likely to be approved
by the people than any put before them by the Parliament,
will, during the first session of the new Parliament, legislate
for the election of a Constitutional Convention.”
THAT PROMISE HAS NEVER BEEN FULFILLED.
A Bill providing for a Convention was brought before Parlia-
ment prior to the 1922 elections, but was rejected, and since the
1922 elections, despite the assurance given in the policy speech,
nothing has been done.
DR. PAGE, in his policy speech, said:
“The Party offers a definite plan of Constitutional reform.
“Its plan of Constitutional reform will obtain economy and
efficiency in administration. . . .
“To bring this about we advocate the early holding of a
Federal Convention to consider the revising of the Consti-
tution. ...”
Dr. Page’s offer of a definite plan has never materialised, just
like a lot of other plans and promises he made, and nothing has
been done.
Dr. PAGE, in October, 1922, said:
“Promises have been made of Constitutional amendments,
hut those promises have not been honored by the Government.
“The Treasurer’s statement of last year referred to this
matter, and pointed out that Constitutional amendment was the
only way to attain real relief from taxation and undue expen-
diture ; yet there is no mention of this reform in the Budget of
this year, nor is there any attempt by the Government to submit
Constitutional amendments to a referendum at the forthcoming
elections, although there was a definite undertaking to that
effect. ...”
Dr. Page then condemned the Nationalist Government for not
moving in this matter; he then made promises in his Policy speech
on the subject; he has been in office -I years and DONE NOTHING.


Wireless.
COMMONWEALTH LINKS ITSELF WITH FOREIGN COMBINE.
SCANDALOUS EXPOSURES.
Several years ago the Commonwealth Government had presented
to it a wireless patent system which was operated under the direc-
tion of Father Shaw.
The Telcfunken Co. brought an action against the Common-
wealth for infringement of its patent rights.
The Marconi Co. then became linked up in the matter, and also
took action against the Government.
The Liberal Government at that time brought one of the greatest
experts (Mr. Geo. Swinbourne) from Great Britain, who inspected
the Commonwealth Wireless system and stated that there was no
infringement of patent rights, and that the Commonwealth sysem
was 33 per cent, better than Marconi.
On sth September, 1914, the Cook Government was defeated at
the polls, but before leaving office (between sth and 17th Septem-
ber), despite the report of Mr. Swinbourne they paid the Marconi Co.
£5OOO and paid their own expenses.
That is one of the earlier transactions of Marconi with the
Commonwealth Government.
1921 AGREEMENT.
In 1921 Mr. Hughes endeavored to rush through Parliament an
Agreement with the Amalgamated AVireless Company.
Parliament refused to pass the Bill and referred it to a Par-
liamentary Committee which altered the agreement.
Mr. Wise, a member of the Hughes Cabinet, who was bitterly
hostile to the agreement, found himself within a very short time
out of the Ministry.
The Parliamentary Committee slightly amended the Bill, and
the Hughes Government then signed same.
Under this agreement, signed in March, 1922, between the
Wireless Amalgamated Co. and the Commonwealth Government


THE CAPITAL was to be £1,000,000 of £1 shares.
The Commonwealth was to have 500,001 shares.
DIRECTORS: There were to be 7 directors;
3 to he appointed by the Commonwealth;
3 to be appointed by the Company;
1 to be elected by the other six directors or
by Arbitration.
It might be stated that WHILE THE AMALGAMATED WIRE-
LESS COMPANY APPEARS TO BE AN AUSTRALIAN CON-
CERN, IT IS IN REALITY A SMALL LINK OP MARCONI.
COMMONWEALTH DIRECTORS.
MANNER IN WHICH THEY CARRIED OUT THEIR DUTIES.
It will be noted that 3 of the Directors are appointed by the
Commonwealth.
To show the class of men the Nationalist Government selected
it is interesting to see what some of the supporters of the Govern-
ment said about these Directors, and the public can then draw
their own conclusions.
SENATOR DRAKE-BROCKMAN (Nationalist);
“That means that representatives of the Government mi
the Board of Directors have not been carrying out their job.”
SENATOR J. D. MILLEN (Nationalist and member of the Com-
mittee that inquired into the Bill) :
“That is very obvious.”
SENATOR DRAKE-BROCKMAN:
“The present representatives (referring to the Directors)
will not do what the Government has asked them to do.”
SENATOR J. D. MILLEN;
“I agree with the honorable Senator.”
SENATOR J. D. MILLEN:
“Senator Drake-Brockman is quite correct in saying that
the Government representatives on the Directorate have not
been properly functioning. THE POSITION IS BECOMING A
SCANDAL.”
IT SHOULD BE BORNE IN MIND THAT SUCCESSIVE
BRITISH GOVERNMENTS HAVE ABSOLUTELY REFUSED TO
BE ASSOCIATED WITH THE MARCONI CO. IN ANY WAY.
That in itself should have been sufficient for the Nationalist
Government to go slow.
MARCONI AND GREAT BRITAIN.
For some time Marconi strongly endeavored to secure control
of Wireless in Great Britain, but every British Government that
came into power REFUSED to allow a largely Foreign Company
to control the National Wireless service of Great Britain.


Let us look at the REPORT OP THE IMPERIAL WIRELESS
TELEGRAPHY COMMITTEE OF 1924.
Recommendations:
1. That the State through the Post Office should own all
wireless stations in Great Britain for communication with
the overseas Dominions, Colonies, Protectorates and Ter-
ritories.
4. That in any license granted to a private company, the State
must reserve to itself the right to take possession or
exercise control over the working of the licensed stations
whenever in the opinion of the Government an emergency
requires it.
6. That each of the high-power stations should be of world
range and equipped with the latest apparatus so that the
highest degree of efficiency can be attained.
Notwithstanding these facts the Nationalist and Bruce-Page
Governments have entered into an agreement with this practically
FOREIGN Company, an agreement which stipulates no termination.
Among other things provided in this agreement was that Mar-
coni was—
(l) To arrange for the operation of suitable corresponding
stations in the United Kingdom.
(2) To take over within one month after signing this agree-
ment the existing Commonwealth Radio stations at a
valuation to be decided by a Court to be appointed, and
the amount arrived at to be credited to the Common-
wealth in part payment of the 500,001 shares to be
allotted to the Government.
TERMS OF 1921 AGREEMENT NEVER CARRIED OUT.
Nearly 8 years went by, and nothing was done by the Company,
The British Government absolutely refused to grant the con-
cessions to Marconi as set out in the Agreement.
The Company did not take over the Commonwealth Radio
Stations, although it continued to use them.
TO SUM IT UP:
1. The Company took over all our Wireless system.
2. It took all the money it was entitled to receive, including
annual subsidies amounting to approximately £140,000.
The Company under the agreement repaid to the Com-
monwealth £52,000, leaving the Government £BB,OOO out
of pocket.
3. AND IN RETURN HAS GIVEN NOTHING NOR HAS IT
CARRIED OUT ANY PART OF ITS AGREEMENT.


1924 AGREEMENT.
MARCONI RELIEVED OF THE CONDITIONS IT DID NOT
FULFIL.
In September, 1924, the Brnee-Page Government brought before
Parliament another Agreement between the Amalgamated Wireless
Company and the Commonwealth Government.
This Bill, when it was passed, relieved the Company of its
obligations under the 1921 Agreement which it was unable to
carry out.
BEAM SYSTEM.
The main feature in the new agreement was the establishment
of wireless communication by means of the “Beam System,”
This Beam System was not new by any means, as in 1917 it was
refused a Patent, and it had been known many years before that.
SENATOR J. D. MILLEN (Nationalist), speaking on the 1924
Agreement, said:
“To-day we are asked to ratify an agreement to erect a
station under a svstem which in 1917 was considered OBSO-
LETE.”
This Beam System can be only operated during the night, and
it will be seen therefore that so far as communication between Aus-
tralia and Great Britain is concerned there'will only be a few
hours when transmission can be undertaken.
It would be well to know some of the opinions of experts
regarding this Beam System to show what the Bruce-Page Govern-
ment has let the people of Australia in for.
British Naval and Military experts believe the beam wireless
system would be useless in wartime as the “beam” could be
destroyed by of a counter beam.
To this fact is now attributed the strong opposition of the
British Post Office to the Empire Beam Station scheme and its
insistence that high power stations are essential. (Melbourne
“Herald,” 14/10/24.)
In an article in the “Age,” 22/10/24, the following appears:.
“BEAM WIRELESS—A HAZARDOUS EXPERIMENT.
“BRITAIN WARY WHILE AUSTRALIA PLUNGES.
“Already Federal Ministers are beginning to realise that they
have pledged the country to a hazardous experiment in entering into
•an agreement with Amalgamated Wireless Ltd. for the erection of
a ‘beam’ station in Australia.”


“The Government, carried away with enthusiasm, pledged the
country to a project in which grave risks are unquestionably in-
volved.
“Owing to the hazardous and experimental nature of beam
wireless for long range work, it is practically certain that it will
be abandoned for reciprocal British and Australian stations.” (Syd-
ney “Daily Telegraph,” 1/12/24.)
Mr. Elwell (Australian Wireless Expert) stated;
“At least we know what the long-wave stations will do.
We are only guessing about the beam. The Marconi beam tests
are not strongly wonderful.” (“Herald,” 18/12/24.)
Capt. Taylor (President, Associated Developing Wireless in
Australia, New Zealand and Fiji) said it would be inadvisable for
the Commonwealth to accept the tender for the erection of a beam
station in Australia while the British Government was experimenting
with the same scheme.
Which all goes to show how this Government has bound the
Commonwealth to a scheme which is entirely experimental, and
which if it is not a success Australia will lose anything from £lbo,ooo
upwards.
Dr. PAGE, before he became Treasurer, in his Policy speech
in October, 1923, stated:
“The Country Party desires an immediate and thorough
investigation of
‘the Wireless Agreement’
and other doubtful transactions by independent tribunals.”
He has occupied a Ministerial position for over 3 years now, and
nothing has been done.
Evidently the fact that he has become a Minister has acted as a
“soothing syrup” to such an extent that he no more cares about
“this and other doubtful transactions.”
If he has, then he has evidently kept quiet in order to retain
his position in the Ministerial ranks.


Oil.
Everyone will admit that one of the most important products
of the Avorld to-day is “Oil.”
It is used to such a great extent by most countries of the world
that its importance is paramount, and the country that has its own
oil supply is indeed fortunate.
AUSTRALIA’S CONSUMPTION.
To show how important the oil question is to the Commonwealth,
the importation of petrol, benzine, etc., into Australia was for
1922- 46,000,000 gals., valued at £3,500,000
1923- 66,000,000 gals., valued at £4,200,000.
1924- 90,000,000 gals., valued at £5,375,000.
The Navy Department is a large consumer of oil, their con-
sumption in 1924 being 13,000 tons.
PRICE OF PETROL.
To-day petrol is about 2/3 per gallon, hut according to the
“Age” of sth September, 1924, petrol is being sold in England
retail at 1/51 per gallon. The petrol price in Australia on that
date was 2/3.
Why is it that we have to pay nearly 1/- a gallon more for
petrol here than in England?
Perhaps the answer is in the fact that most of the oil is con-
trolled by a few large companies, amongst whom is the Anglo-.
Persian Oil Co.
To show how these Companies operate to control the world's
supply, in August, 1923, the Standard Oil Company—perhaps the
largest oil company in the world—reduced the retail price of petrol
to Bd. per gallon in America in order to wipe out some independent
firms, and so do away with competition.
Such is the power of Combines and Trusts, and it will he seen
therefore —
(1) How imperative it is for Australia to (if possible) find
her own oil fields, and have her own oil supply, and
(2) Until oil is discovered within the Commonwealth, to see
that we get adequate supplies at reasonable prices.


AGREEMENT WITH ANGLO-PERSIAN OIL COMPANY.
In 1920 the Nationalist Government entered into an agreement
with the Anglo-Persian Oil Company to supply the Commonwealth
with oil.
Under this agreement the Anglo-Persian Oil Co. was to form
and register a “Refining Company” subject to the following con-
ditions ;
CAPITAL: £500,000 of £1 shares.
SHARES: Commonwealth to have 250,001, Anglo-Persian Oil
Company to have 249,999.
DIRECTORS: Commonwealth to have 5; A.P. Oil Co. to have 4.
OIL COMPANY HAS MAJORITY OF DIRECTORS.
It will be seen that although the Commonwealth has the majority
of shares, the Anglo-Persian Oil Company has the majority of
Directors, and can consequently direct things as they please.
The significance of this will be seen in the terms set out in the
agreement, and with another agreement which Avill be mentioned
later on, where the Anglo Persian Oil Co. has complete control of
operations in connection with the search for oil for the Common-
wealth Government.
Under the Agreement;
Supply and Cost.
1. The Anglo-Persian Oil Co. supplies the Commonwealth with
200,000 tons of oil per annum until oil is found in Aus-
tralia.
2. The term of the agreement is for 15 years, after which the
Commonwealth can buy the Anglo-Persian Oil Co. out on
giving two years’ notice.
3. The Anglo-Persian Oil Co. will supply oil to Australia at
reasonable rates.
The agreement goes on to say that the price of oil shall be fixed
by agreement between the Commonwealth Government and the
Anglo-Persian Oil Company .based on the contents of the oil, and
shall be fixed every two years.
The method at which the “reasonable rates” are to be arrived
at is so vague that it appears as if the Oil Company is going to
practically charge what it likes.
OIL COMPANY HAS MONOPOLY.
There is no doubt that the Oil Company practically has a
monopoly, especialy as another clause in the Agreement provides
that the Government will introduce a Bill to impose a duty on oil
if necessary to prevent unfair competition with the Anglo-Persian
Oil Company.


FREIGHT.
The Oil Company is also to make arrangements for freight at
current rates.
As the Oil Company has its own ships, here again the Company
will make a nice profit, as who is to decide what are “current
rates”?
AUSTRALIA AT MERCY OF COMBINE.
From beginning to end of the Agreement the people of Australia
are placed at the mercy of this huge Combine whose profits are
enormous, as the following will show:
PROFITS OF ANGLO-PERSIAN OIL COMPANY.
1914 (losses) £26,711
1915 (profits) 90,431
1920 (profits) •• 2,611,000
1922 (profits) 3,422,000
Thus showing that from 1915 to 1921-22 its profits increased approxi-
mately 3700 per cent.
Having shown the unbusinesslike agreement the Nationalist
Government entered into for the supply of Oil, we now come to the
more important question of FINDING OIL WITHIN THE COM-
MONWEALTH.
DISCOVERY OF OIL IN PAPUA.
In 1911 oil was first discovered in Papua, and in 1913 in German
New Guinea.
Geologists were sent from Germany in 1913 to report upon the
oil prospects in German New Guinea, which they did, and their
report was of such a nature that the German Government imme-
diately made extensive plans and ordered expensive plants to go
ahead with the work.
War, however, prevented any work being done.
In 1912 the Commonwealth Government decided not to allow
private enterprise to operate in connection with oil, and in 1913
the Commonwealth Government secured the services of Dr. Wade
to investigate oil matters, and in 1915 appointed him Director of
the Oil Fields.
OIL DISCOVERED,
In 1916 a search was made in West German New Guinea, which
resulted in the finding of many seepages, and many tins of rich oil
were collected.
Geologists have stated that seepages have been discovered, and
that oil is bubbling into the water, and yet no oil to speak of is
reported to have been found.
WHY?


Ever since operations were first commenced in connection with
the search for oil, extraordinary breakages occurred to the plants.
"When machinery was ordered from other countries, it was found
that on arrival important pieces, WHICH COULD NOT BE EE-
PLACED OR MANUFACTURED IN AUSTRALIA, WERE MISS-
ING. Drills were continuously breaking after being s\ink a certain
depth, and could not be recoA’ered. Men have resigned, and the
material was often of a poor class.
ANGLO-PERSIAN OIL COMPANY TO SEARCH FOR OIL FOR
THE COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT.
In 1920 the Nationalist Government entered into an agreement
with the British Government to search for oil in Papua.
Under this agreement each Government was to contribute
£50,000 AND THE ANGLO-PERSIAN OIL COMPANY, WHO HAD
AN AGREEMENT TO SUPPLY AUSTRALIA WITH 200,000 TONS
OF OIL FOR FIFTEEN YEARS OR UNTIL OIL WAS FOUND
IN AUSTRALIA, WAS SELECTED TO TAKE THE FULL CON-
TROL OP ALL EXPEDITIONS, SELECT SITES FOR TEST
DRILLING, SUPERINTEND BORINGS, ETC.
FURTHER, the Anglo-Persian Oil Co.—
1. Had full control of all appointments and dismissals;
2. Fixed all salaries, etc.,
and
8. The Government agreed to defray all expenses up to
£lOO,OOO.
If the Company finds oil, it means that it would spoil their
contract to supply Australia with 200,000 tons annually for 15 years.
The British Government soon dropped out of the deal, and the
Commonwealth Government bought them out for £25,000.
Perhaps the following extract from a paper in the Northern
Territory will give an idea of what some people think about the
“bona fides” of the search for oil.
In a local paper at Port Darwin the following appeared:
“There are ugly rumors through the Northern Territory
re Dr. AVade and oil operations. It is asserted that Dr. AVade
is in receipt of the same amount from the Amcuum Oil Company
not to find oil as he is from the Government to find oil.
“AVhy is it that as soon as oil is struck Dr. AVade packs up
and makes for fresh fields?
“AVhy was it one American of his party left because it was
a crook business?
“If this paragraph is untrue, we will be glad to have and
publish Dr. AVade’s denial.”


MONEY SPENT IN SEARCH FOR OIL.
Prior to the agreement of 1920, £131,000 was spent in connection
with the search for oil.
Since the Anglo-Persian Co. have been conducting operations
from about May, 1920, the amount spent in the search for oil has
been as follows:
1920- £15,000
1921- 115,000
1922- 29,912
1923- 27,489
1924- 17,422
Total £204,823
In addition to this the Commonwealth bought out the British
Government’s interest in the matter for £25,000, which makes a
total expenditure spent since the Oil Company commenced opera-
tions of £229,800.
ALL TOLD, £230,000 HAS BEEN SPENT IN THE SEARCH
FOR OIL, BUT NOTHING FOUND.
The Anglo-Persian Oil Company has been conducting opera-
tions in connection with the search for oil for over 5 years.
£230,000 has been spent in connection therewith, and although,
as stated before, favorable reports have been received- re oil being
discovered, they have found nothing of value.
IF THE ANGLO-PERSIAN OIL COMPANY FINDS OIL IT
WILL BE TO THE DETRIMENT OF THEIR OWN COMPANY.
WHAT DO YOU THINK ABOUT IT?


Ex-Enemy Vessels.
GOVERNMENT GIVES AWAY £309,412.
During the war 16 enemy vessels were captured by the Aus-
tralian Forces and taken possession of by the Commonwealth.
Seven of these vessels were captured at sea and classified as
“Prizes,” and nine were detained in Australian ports and classified
as “Detained” vessels.
FIRST PAYMENT OF £107,000.
On the 2nd August, 1923, while Parliament was sitting, the
Government paid £107,000, but nothing was mentioned in the House
at the time.
While the Prime Minister was in England, on the 22nd Novem-
ber, 1923, a cablegram was sent by the Acting Prime Minister to
the Secretary of State for the Colonies in England, portion of which
read as follows:
“My Ministers are strongly of opinion that, as the vessels
were seized in Australia, and expenditure incurred by Australia
in connection with their seizure and detention, all these vessels
should be allotted to Australia, proceeds of sale of any of
which are sold being debited to Australia by Reparations Com-
mission instead of to Imperial Treasury.”
SECOND PAYMENT OF £197,000.
Despite this cablegram Mr. Bruce, while in England, against
the advice of his own Cabinet, agreed to pay the second payment of
£197,000, which was made on 14th March, 1924, just twelve days
before Parliament assembled.
Mr. Bruce, in trying to justify his action for these payments,
stated that after the Summer judgment (a judgment of the Judicial
Court of the Privy Council) no other course was left open but to
make payment for the vessels to the British Government.
This Summer judgment, however, was given on the 4th October,
1923, yet the cablegram from the Acting Prime Minister against the
payment was sent on the 22nd November, 1923, seven weeks after
this judgment had been given.
So it will be seen that Mr. Bruce’s Ministers in Australia,
despite this Summer judgment, were against paying the money.


There was no need for urgency in making any payments, as
this matter had been subject to correspondence since the signing
of the Treaty, yet the Prime Minister
(1) makes the first payment while Parliament is sitting with-
out notifying or consulting Parliament;
(2) makes the second payment 12 days before Parliament
met and against the advice of his own Cabinet.
Mr. W. M. HUGHES, in replying to the explanation of the
Prime Minister regarding these payments, said:
“The explanation of the Prime Minister (Mr. Bruce) was
a modified form of hypnosis, something which bottled would
make a good soothing syrup. I FAILED UTTERLY TO
LEARN WHY HE PAID THIS MONEY.” (“Hansard,” page
4070.)
“I DECLINED TO DO MORE THAN AGREE TO DEBIT
THEM AGAINST OUR SHARE OF THE REPARATIONS.”
“The money should not have been paid.”
“It was a case of catching a mug,” said Mr. Hughes to-day
in attacking Mr. Bruce’s payment of £300,000. (“Sun,”
10/9/24.)
“We waited years for Germany to pay what she owes.
Then a bright young man in a hurry comes along and pays
away this asset.” (“Sun,” 10/0/24.)
This was a matter between Australia and Germany, the British
Government acting as Trustee.
Our share of .reparation to be received from Germany is
£66,000,000, of which we have received about £135,000, and the only
asset we had was these few ships which the Bruce-Page Government
has now paid for, before we have received anything in the way
of reparation. (“Hansard,” 15/8/24, page 3232.)


Country Party.
ARE ALL COUNTRY PARTY MEMBERS REALLY COUNTRY
PARTY MEMBERS OR NATIONALISTS IN DISGUISE?
The Country Party, which has not been,in existence very long,,
is supposed to represent the XNm tit ry man's interests, and in certain
electorates has elected its oavh members.
The point at issue, however, is: Do all the members who have-
been elected on the Country Party platform, and who are supposed
to stand up and fight for Country Party ideas and principles,,
honestly represent the Party, or have they swallowed their prin-
ciples in order to remain in office with the Nationalists?
From past events there-appears to be no doubt that many of
these so-called Country Party representatives are not Country Party
men at all, but merely Nationalists in disguise.
WHAT DR. PAGE SAID HE STOOD FOR AND WANTED—
WHAT DR. PAGE HAS DONE.
During the. Federal elections,in 1922 Dr. Page put forward the-
policy of the Country Party, and when he was making arrange-
ments with Mr. Bruce for the formation of the Composite Govern-
ment, according to the “Sydney Morning Herald” of Bth February,.
1923, he submitted 15 conditions.
The following are some of the points of policy submitted by
Dr. Page; ]
1. Changes in the electoral law to provide amongst other things,
for the election of Senators on the system existing prior to the-
of preference voting.
NOTHING has been done in this direction.
2. Substantial reduction in Customs duties relating to farm:
implements and goods required by farmers and settlers.
EXCEPT for one or two minor items, nothing has heen.done in
this regard.
3. The appointment of a Federal Convention to' give effect to.
the New State Movement.


NOTHING has been done.
4. A public investigation and, where necessary, a Royal Com-
mission to inquire into all Government Trading concerns. The whole
of the activities of the P.M.G’s. Department to be investigated.
PRACTICALLY NOTHING has been done.
5. Public inquiry into the conduct of certain public officers
and their participation in active polities.
NOTHING has been done.
6. Investigation of the
(a) Anglo-Persian Oil Contract;
(b) management of the Commonwealth Government Line of
Steamers.
(c) sugar contract;
(d) administration of War Service Homes.
NOTHING has been done.
7. Thorough and immediate investigation of
(a) Wireless Agreement and other doubtful transactions
(policy speech).
NOTHING HAS BEEN DONE.
8. Abolition of Australia House and the substitution of a.
responsible Cabinet Minister in London.
NOTHING has been done.
Etc., etc., etc.
Which all goes to show that although Dr. Page, talked a lot
about wliat he wanted, what he represented, and what he was going:
to do, should he, get into office,
HE HAS DONE NOTHING EXCEPT CLING TO OFFICE.
Authorised by Albert Gardiner,. 108 Xewland Street, Waveriey.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by The Worker Trustees.
St. Andreev’s Place, Sydney.
