

NOTES ON CERTAIN OF THE INITIATION
CEREMONIES OF THE ARUNTA TRIBE,
CENTRAL AUSTRALIA.
Royal Society
of Victoria.
BY BALDWIN SPENCER, M.A., C.M.Z.S.,
University of Melbourne,
AND
F. J. GILLEN,
Sub-Protector of Aborigines, Alice Springs, South Australia.
(Read nth November, 1897).
Reprinted from Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, issued May, 1898, Vol. X. (Hew Series), Pt. II.
Ford & Son, Printers, Carlton, Melbourne.






ART. XVI. — Notes on Certain of the Initiation Ceremonies
of the Arunta Tribe, Central Australia.
By BALDWIN SPENCER, M.A., C.M.Z.S.,
University of Melbourne,
AND
F. J. Gillen,
Sub-Protector of Aborigines, Alice Springs, South Australia.
[Read 11th November, 1897.]
In a previous communication to this Society we have already
dealt with the Engwurra ceremony as performed by the Arunta
tribe. 1 In the report of the work of the Horn Expedition to
Central Australia one of us has also given a short account of
certain of the initiation ceremonies, a more detailed description
of which is included in the present paper. It must, however,
be understood that the details of the ceremonies vary to a
certain extent in different localities even within the limits
of the one tribe, and the following account may be regarded as
including the more important ones which are characteristic
of the various ceremonies as they are conducted in particular
localities.
It may be said that every Australian native, with possibly
rare exceptions as in the case of the W6tjo-balluk tribe of the
Wimmera district, Victoria, described by Mr. Howitt, 2 has, in
the normal condition of the tribe, to pass through certain
ceremonies of initiation before he is admitted to the secrets of
the tribe and regarded as a fully developed member of it.
In the case of the tribes inhabiting the east and south-eastern
coastal districts of the continent the ceremonies appear to be
entirely distinct from those of the tribes of the central area
amongst whom they are very elaborate and spread over a long
1 Proc. R. S. Viet., vol. x. (New Series), Pt. 1., p. 17.
2 Journal of Anthrop. Inst. London, May, 1885, p. 301.


series of years, the first taking place at about the age of ten or
twelve years whilst the final and most impressive one—that is
the Engwurra —is not passed through until probably the black-
fellow has reached the age of at least twenty-five or even
thirty.
In the Arunta tribe the ceremonies of initiation are four in
number:—
(1) Painting and throwing the boy up.
(2) Circumcision or Lartna.
(3) Subincision or Ariltha.
(4) The Engwurra or fire ceremony.
One of the most noticeable features of these ceremonies, from
a negative point of view, is the absence of the knocking out of
teeth as a general custom associated with the initiatory rites.
Amongst many tribes of the eastern coastal district this forms
a prominent feature, but amongst the Central Australian natives
whilst it may be performed it has nothing whatever to do with
initiation and is in fact practised by women as well as by men,
the rite having at the present day no “ sacred ” significance of
any kind. Amongst certain local groups, as for example the
natives living in the district now known as Bond Springs, a
short distance to the north-east of Alice Springs, it is much
more widely practised than elsewhere, but speaking generally
the knocking out of teeth is a matter partly of individual and
partly of local taste and fashion. 1 Possibly the custom may
be regarded as one which was at some long-past time prevalent
amongst the common ancestors of the central and eastern tribes,
but has undergone changes as the tribes became separated from
one another and developed, so far as their customs are concerned,
along different lines. In some it has retained its old significance
but in others, as for example all those inhabiting the central
area, it has lost its earlier meaning, its place has been taken by
other rites and now it is merely what may be called a “ rudi-
mentary custom.”
5
1 It is, however, attended with the performance of definite ceremonies, and has
evidently at one time been of greater importance than it is at present.


The First Ceremony.—Throwing the Boy up.
The first ceremony amongst the Arunta tribe takes place when,
at all events in the northern part of the tribe, a boy is between
ten and twelve years of age. The men, and also the women,
assemble at a spot near to the main camp and the boys who have
reached the right age are taken one by one and tossed in the air
several times by the men who catch them as they fall while the
women dance round and round swinging their arms about and
shouting “pow” “ pow ” “powa-a-a,” the last cry being very
prolonged. When this is over the boys are painted on their
chests and backs with simple designs, consisting of straight or
curved bands outlined by lines of red or yellow ochre. So far as
we can discover these have no special significance, they certainly
have no reference to either the class 1 or totem of the boys. 2
The painting of each boy is done by one or more men who stand
to him in the relationship of “ umbirna,” that is a man who is
the brother of a woman of the class from which his, i.e., the
boy’s, wife must come. The design is called “ Enchichichika,”
and while being painted the boys are told that the ceremony
through which they have just passed will promote their future
growth to manhood, and they are told by tribal fathers and elder
brothers that in future they must not play with the women and
girls, nor must they camp as they have hitherto done with them
but must henceforth go to the camp of the younger and
unmarried men which is known as the “Ungunja.” Up to this
time they have been accustomed to go out with the women as
they searched for vegetable food and the smaller animals such as
lizards and rats, now they begin to accompany the men in their
search for larger game and begin also to look forward to the
1 We use the term “class” in reference to the intermarrying, exogamous divisions of
the tribe.
2 In all the ceremonies of initiation the youth or man has certain designs painted on his
body, and in no case have they any reference of necessity to his own totem though they
are emblematic of some totem with which usually the man who does the painting is
associated. These designs come under the general term of “ Ilkinia” the name applied to
the series of designs which are emblematic of the various totems and, so long as the boy,
youth or man has one or other of these painted on, it does not signify which. It must
be remembered that the man who does the painting is the person who decides upon
the nature of the design. It may also be noted that in the performance of sacred
ceremonies men are constantly decorated with designs belonging to totems other than
their own.


time when they will become fully initiated and admitted to all
the secrets of the tribe which are as yet kept hidden from them.
The ceremony of throwing up is called “ Alkirakiwuma 1 and
very shortly after this the boy has his nasal septum bored
through, usually by his father or paternal grandfather, and
begins to wear the nose bone. This boring is practised by men
and women alike and the operation is not attended with any
special ceremony. Amongst the women the boring is usually
done by the husband immediately after marriage and, it may be
remarked in passing, that in both sexes the constant wearing
of the nose bone emphasises the flattening out of the lobes
of the nose.
A good many years may elapse between the throwing-up
ceremony and the performance of the two much more important
ceremonies of circumcision or Lartna and that of subincision or
Ariltha. Speaking generally it may be said that circumcision
may take place at any age after the boy has arrived at puberty.
Up to this time he is spoken of as “ Ulpmerka,” after the two
ceremonies have been performed he becomes an “ Ertwa-kurka
—that is an initiated man eligible' to take a wife and to be
admitted to all the tribal secrets, though it may be many years
before he is instructed in certain of them.
The Second Ceremony. —Circumcision or Lartna.
When it has been decided by the boy’s elder male relatives
(usually his elder brothers blood and tribal) that he has arrived
at the proper age, preparations are made, unknown to the
Ulpmerka, for the ceremony. These consist first of all in the
gathering together of a large supply of food material, for the
ceremonies are attended with the performance of what are
usually spoken of as corrobborees, which last over several days.
In the following account 2 which deals with the ceremony as
enacted by the natives living on the banks of the I inke near to
a spot called Undiara, one of the most important local centres
1 Derived from Alkira, the sky, and wuma, to throw.
2 l„ certain respects the details of the ceremony now described differ from those of the
■ceremony already described by one of us in the Report of the Horn Expedition This
owing to the fact that the details vary to a considerable extent in different localities.
5a


of the kangaroo totem, we omit certain details which would
necessitate for their proper understanding too lengthy a reference
to traditions dealing with the past history of the tribe. In the
performance of every ceremony the Arunta native is bound hand
and foot by tradition, what his fore-fathers did that he must
likewise do, and in connection with every custom, however
trivial, he has some tradition telling him exactly how he must
act and what he must do.
We may, however, very briefly refer here as follows to certain
of the traditions which have reference to the ceremonies of
initiation; a full account of them will be published subsequently.
The earliest period to which any tradition refers is always
spoken of by the natives as the “ Alcheringa.” At the very
beginning of this, so says tradition, there were no true human
beings such as now exist but only “ Inapertwa,” 1 that is almost
shapeless beings in which just the vague outlines of the different
limbs and parts of the body could be detected. Two spirit
beings who lived far away in the western sky and who were
called “ UngambTkulla,” a word which signifies “made out of
nothing,” or “self.-existing,” 'came down to earth and transformed
the Inapertwa creatures into men and women, and further they
performed upon some but not all of them the rite of circumcision,
using for the performance of the operation a fire-stick. It is
worthy of note that this tradition of the early use of the
fire-stick is widely spread through the various divisions of the
Arunta tribe. At a slightly later period, but in the Alcheringa,
certain ancestral individuals who belonged to the Ullakupera, or
little hawk totem, introduced the practice of performing the
operation by means of a stone knife. Shortly after this,
individuals belonging to the Achilpa, or “wild cat” totem,
introduced the rite of Ariltha or subincision.
It will be seen from this, which is the briefest possible outline
of lengthy traditions dealing with the subject, that the traditions
of the tribe refer to three distinct and successive periods: (1)
one in which circumcision was practised by means of a fire-
stick, (2) one in which the use of the stone knife was introduced,
and (3) a later period when subincision was introduced.
l In the Report of the Horn Expedition, vol. iv., p. 185, this word was by mistake
written “ Inaperlwa.” The spelling and account now given are correct.


At the present day the operation of circumcision is always
performed at a specially prepared spot to which the name of
“ Apulia ” is given. The nature of this can be seen from the
accompanying plan.
A path about five feet wide is cleared of grass and shrubs and
the surface soil is heaped up on either side so as to form a low
narrow bank (F F) of the same length as the path. The latter
is abways made so that it runs east and west. At a distance of
about fifty yards from either end a small brake of boughs is
made (d, e).
When all has been properly prepared the youth to be initiated
is seized early during the evening, while he is at the Ungunja or
camp of the men. This seizing of the youth is the duty of men
who stand in a certain definite relationship to him, viz., that of
(1) Okilia, or elder brothers, (2) Umbirna, or brothers of his
future wife, (3) Unkulla, or sons of his mother’s brothers. 1
As soon as they lay hands on him they shout loudly “Utchai,”
“ Utchai.” Not infrequently the youth, thoroughly frightened,
struggles violently and tries to escape in which case he is simply
carried off bodily to the Apulia ground. Once on the ground
and in the presence of all the men and women who have
assembled there he makes no further resistance but seems to
resign himself to his fate. The men are gathered together at
the eastern end of the Apulia close by the brake at the spot
marked A in the diagram, while the women are at the spot
marked C.
1 In the northern part of the tribe all the men and women assemble at the Apulia
ground while the boy is asleep, and then three men and two young women are sent to
awake and bring him in. The women carry shallow “pitchis” or wooden bowls, with
which, after creeping quietly up to him, they strike him sharply at the same time crying
out loudly “ Utchai.” Then the three men seize and earn' him off.


The youth who is as yet spoken of as Ulpmerka, that is an
uncircumcised boy, sits down amongst the men while the women
who have been awaiting his arrival at once begin to dance,
carrying shields in their hands. The reason assigned for this
is that, in the Alcheringa, certain women called Unthippa
carried along with them, as they travelled over the country,
a number of young boys who were just being initiated. As
they travelled along they also carried shields, dancing the whole
time, and therefore it is that, at the present day, the initiation
ceremony must commence with an initiation of the Unthippa
dance of the Alcheringa. Except upon this one occasion women
never carry shields, which are exclusively the property of the men.
While the women are dancing the men sing of the marching
of the Unthippa women across the country, and after the boy
has watched and listened for some little time his head is covered
with strands of fur string so as to give it the appearance of
being encased in a tightly fitting skull cap. A large Uliara, or
human-hair girdle, is also placed round his waist by a man who
is Gammona, that is mother’s brother to him, the girdle itself
being provided by a man who is Oknia 1 or “ father ” of the boy.
When this has been done a consultation of the men who are
Oknia and Okilia to the boy is held, and certain other men are
told off by them to take the boy away and paint him. These
men are always afterwards called Wutya or Wilya by the boy.
After the consultation is over they go away and, first of all,
build a brake of bushes at the western end of the Apulia, after
which they return and, taking the boy, lead him through the
dancing women to the brake, where some time is spent in
greasing his body and decorating him with a pinkish coloured
clay and lines of bird’s down. When this is over the Wilya
men tell the boy that he is no longer an Ulpmerka but is now
a Wurtja, that during the proceedings about to follow, he must
render implicit obedience and on no account must he ever tell
any woman or boy anything of what he is about to see. Should
he ever reveal any of the secrets both he and his closest relations
will surely die. He is not to speak until spoken to and even
1 It must be remembered that we have no equivalent expressions in English for the
native terms of relationship; thus, for example, Oknia includes not only the man whom
we call father but also all the men who were eligible as husbands for the boy’s mother.


then only in a subdued voice; when left at his brake—that is
the one at which the painting has been done —he must always
crouch down and on no account attempt to see what the men
are doing. Should he try to see what is going on at the Apulia,
except when taken there and told to watch, some calamity will
happen to him—Twanyirika, the great spirit, whose voice is
heard when the bullroarers speak, will carry him away. "W hen
these instructions have been given to him by the Wilya, some
Okilia come to him and repeat them over and over again. After
this he is left entirely alone behind his brake at the spot marked
X for an hour or two while the singing and dancing are continued
with vigour. Meanwhile the Oknia and Okilia again consult and
choose a man who is Mura to the boy to act as what is called
« Urinthantima.” Towards daylight the boy, now called Wurtja,
is brought back to the men from his brake, passing through the
group of women who have not yet ceased dancing, and is placed
upon the lap of the Urinthantima man.
The boy’s mother has previously brought from her camp a
fire-stick which she is careful to keep alight all night. In the
early morning she lights a fire with this and then lights two long
sticks with which she has provided herself. These she holds in
her hands as she sits behind the Urinthantima, one she hands to
the Tualcha-mura woman 1 of the boy and the other she retains and
takes back with her to camp where she is most careful to guard it
constantly and to keep it alight. It is fixed into the ground at
an angle so as to catch the wind. The "Wurtja guards his fire in-
just the same way, and is cautioned by the men with him that if
he loses it or allows it to go out he and his mother will be killed
by Kurdaitcha. On the day on which he is led back to the
Apulia he throws away the fire-stick as also does his mother.
While the men are singing a special fire song, the woman who
is Tualcha-mura to the boy approaches and ties round his neck
bands of fur-string after which she hands to him the fire-stick
which she has received from the boy’s mother. The latter has
taken up a position along with the sisters of the boy’s father
immediately behind the Urinthantima man. The woman tells
1 The Tualeha-mura is the woman whose daughter, born or unborn, has been allotted
to the boy as a future wife, so that she is potentially his mother-in-law.


the boy to always hold fast to his own fire-—in other words not
to interfere with the women who have been allotted to other
men. After this, and at a signal from an old Okilia, the Wurtja
gets up and runs away followed by a number of shouting boys
who after a short time return and, along with the women, leave
the Apulia ground and run back to the main camp.
The Wurtja is accompanied by some Okilia and Unkulla men
who remain out with him in the bush for usually three days.
During this time nothing of any special nature happens to him
beyond the fact that he may not speak unless spoken to, and that
he is not allowed to eat freely, though he is not as yet bound by
the food restrictions which he will very shortly have to obey.
The main object of this partial seclusion is to impress him with
the fact that he is about to enter into the ranks of the men, and
to mark the break between his old life and the new one; he has
no precise knowledge of what is in store for him and the sense
of something out of the ordinary being about to happen to him—
something moreover which is of a more or less mysterious nature
—helps to impress him strongly with a feeling of the deep
importance of strict compliance with the tribal rules and further
still with a strong sense of the superiority of the older men who
know and are familiar with all the mysterious rites, some of
which he is about to learn the meaning of for the first time.
When brought back to the Apulia, the Wurtja is placed first
of all behind the brake at the west end of the ground from where
he may not move without the permission of his Okilia. The
Apulia ground is in charge of a man wdio is an Oknia of the boy.
On this, the fourth night, the men spend the time, hour after
hour, singing of the marching of the Ullakupera men in the
Alcheringa, and of their operations with their celebrated Lalira
or stone knives. Every now and then they break out into the
Ullakupera Lartna song :
“ Irriyulta yulta rai
U 1 katchei’a ulkateherrai.”
Which is always sung in fierce, loud tones. About midnight
two Okilia go to the Wurtja and having blindfolded him bring
him to the group of men where he is made to lie, face down-
wards on the ground, until two men who are to about to perform


a ceremony are in position between the lines of the Apulia.
The quabarra 1 which they are about to perform is one of a
certain number which are only performed at times such as this
when initiation is taking place. When the boy is told to look
up he sees lying in front of him and on his side a decorated man,
whom the Oknia and Okilia, both speaking at once, tell him
represents a wild-dog. At the other end of the Apulia another
decorated man stands with his legs stretched wide apart and
holding twigs of eucalyptus in each hand j his head is decorated
with a small ornament called a Waninga to which further
reference will be made subsequently. The performer moves
his head from side to side as if looking for something and
every now and then utters a sound similar to that made by a
kangaroo, which animal he represents. Suddenly the dog looks
up, sees the kangaroo and begins to bark. Running along on
all fours he passes between the legs of the kangaroo man who
strikes him with the twigs, after which he lies down again for
a minute or two behind the kangaroo who keeps watching him
over his shoulder while he utters the sound. Then the dog gets
up, runs from behind between the kangaroo’s legs, is caught by
the head, shaken, and howls as if in pain while a pretence is
made of dashing his head upon the ground. This is repeated
several times and finally the dog is supposed to be killed by
the kangaroo. Then the dog runs quickly on all fours to the
Wurtja and lies down on the top of him ; he is at once followed
by the kangaroo who hops on to the top of the dog and so the
Wurtja has to bear the weight of both men for about two
minutes. When they get up, the Wurtja, still lying down,
is told by the old men that the quabarra represents an incident
which took place in the Alcheringa when a wild-dog man
attacked a kangaroo man and was killed by the latter. The
object which the kangaroo wore on his head was, he is told, a
Waninga, a sacred object, the name of which must never be
mentioned in the hearing of women or children, and that, in
fact, it represents a kangaroo. When this is over the Wurtja is
led back to his brake and the men continue singing at intervals
nearly all night. ____
1 Quabarra is the term applied by the Arunta natives to sacred ceremonies which only
initiated men may witness.


The quabarra which are performed at these initiation cere-
monies vary according to the locality in which they are being
performed and the men who are taking the leading part in them.
If, for example, the old man who is presiding belongs to the
Emu totem then the quabarra will, at all events to a certain
extent, represent incidents concerned with ancestral Emu men.
In the particular ceremony upon which the present account is
based, the old man presiding belonged to the Kangaroo totem
and thus quabarra concerned especially with this totem were
much in evidence. The totem of the youth who is being initiated
has no influence whatever on the nature of the particular
quabarra performed. Each old man who presides over, or takes
a leading part in, a ceremony such as this has possession of a
certain number of quabarra and naturally those performed are
chosen from this series. Remembering, therefore, that the
particular quabarra vary from ceremony to ceremony, the
account now given may be regarded as representing in essential
features the details of the initiation ceremony of circumcision
amongst the Arunta tribe. At the same time it is also necessary
to remember that ceremonial objects, such as the Waninga,
which figure largely in some districts are unknown in others
where th< ir place is taken by entirely different objects. Thus,
for example, in the northern part of the tribe a sacred pole
called a Nurtunga is used and this, where it is used, has
precisely the significance of the Waninga which is never met
with in the northern districts. For an outline of an initiation
ceremony in which the Nurtunga is used reference may be made
to the account already written by one of us in connection with
the ceremony of subincision amongst the northern Arunta. 1
On the next day another quabarra is performed, this time by
two kangaroo men and one man representing a dog. Once more
the dog is killed (it may be mentioned here that in similar
ceremonies associated with the wild-dog totem it is the kangaroo
which is killed), finally the three men throw themselves on top
of the Wurtja, after which the latter is once more told by the
old men what the ceremony means and is again taken back to
the brake at the western end of the Apulia.
1 Report of Horn Expedition to Centra! Australia, vol. iv., p. 173.


On the sixth day the Wurtja is taken out hunting by Okilia
and TJmbirna, and the succeeding night is spent by the men in
singing songs, to which the Wurtja listens and which have
reference to the wanderings of certain Alcheringa ancestors.
We have in our previous account of the Engwurra ceremony 1
dealt briefly with the traditions which are concerned with the
wanderings of various groups of individuals and have described
the connection of these with the totemic system as developed in
the Arun'ta tribe. Up to the time of his initiation the youth has
known nothing of these traditions and now for the first time he
hears of them and sees the ceremonies performed in which the
ancestors of the tribe are represented decorated as they were, and
acting as they did, during life. In various accounts of initiation
ceremonies of the Australian tribes, as for example, in the
earliest one ever published—the one written by Collins in 1804
we meet with descriptions of performances in which different
animals are represented but, except in the case of the Arunta
tribe, no indication of the meaning and significance of these
performances has been yet forthcoming. In the Arunta tribe
however they are seen to have a very definite meaning and to be
intimately associated with the totemic system. Whether this be
so in other tribes we have as yet no evidence to show, but it is,
at all events, worthy of note that, whilst the actual initiation
rite varies much from tribe to tribe, consisting in some in the
knocking out of a tooth, and in others in circumcision, etc., in
all an important part of the ceremony consists in showing to the
novitiates certain dances, the important and common feature of
which is that they represent the actions of particular animals.
In the Arunta tribe however they have a very definite meaning.
At the first glance it looks much as if all that they were intended
to represent was merely the behaviour of certain animals but in
reality they have a much deeper meaning, for each performer
represents an ancestral individual who lived in the Alcheringa.
He was a member of a group of individuals, all of whom, just like
himself, were the direct descendants or transformations of the
animals, the names of which they respectively bear. It is as a
re-incarnation of the never-dying spirit part of one of these semi-
1 Pro<\ R.S. Viet., vol. x., pt. i., p. 17.


animal ancestors that every member of the tribe is born, and
therefore when born, he or she, bears of necessity the name of tne
animal, or plant, of which the alcheringa ancestor was a transfor-
mation or descendant.
The nature of these performances may be gathered from one
which was, in this instance, enacted on the seventh day. As
usual in all these performances the man’s body is decorated with
ochre and lines of bird’s down, which is supposed to be arranged
in exactly the same way in which it had been on the body of the
Alcheringa man. From the waist is suspended a large ball of
fur-string which is supposed to represent the scrotum of the
kangaroo, and when all is ready, the performer, who has been
decorated behind the brake where the men sit, comes out hopping
leisurely along as a kangaroo does, and every now and then lying
down like the animal on his side to rest. The boy, as before, has
been brought, blindfolded, on to the ground and at first is made
to lie flat down, but, when the performer hops out, he is told to
sit up and watch. The performer for about ten minutes goes
through the characteristic movements of the animal, acting the
part very cleverly,'while the men sitting around the Wurtja sing
of the wandering of the kangaroos across the country in the
Alcheringa. Then after a final and very leisurely hop round the
Apulia ground the man comes and lies down on top of the
Wurtja who is then instructed in the tradition to which the
performance refers. He is told that in the Alcheringa a party of
of kangaroo-men started out from a place called Ultainta away
out to the east of what is now called Charlotte Waters, and that
after wandering about they came at last to a spot called Karinga,
far away to the north in the Macdonnell Ranges, where one of
the party who was named Unburtcha died, that is his body did
but the spirit part of him was in a sacred Churinga which he
carried, and did not die .but remained behind when the party
travelled on. This spirit, the old men tell him, went at a later
time into a woman and was born again as a Purula man, whose
sacred name was of course Unburtcha, and who was a kangaroo-
man just as his ancestor was. He is told that the old men know
everything about these matters and decide which ancestor it is
who has come to life again in the form of a man or woman.
Sometimes the spirit child which goes into a woman is one which


was associated with one of the sacred Churinga, numbers of
which each Alcheringa individual carried about with him or her,
for in those days the women were allowed to carry the Churinga
just like the men, and then, in this case, the child has no definite
name but, of course, it belongs to the same group as did the man
who had carried the Churinga about in the Alcheringa, that is if
he were a kangaroo-man so must the child be, and then the old
men determine what shall be his secret or sacred name.
It is in this way that the boy during the initiation ceremonies
is instructed for the first time in any of the sacred matters
referring to the totems, and it is by means of the performances
which are concerned with certain animals or rather, appaiently
with the animals, but in reality with Alcheringa individuals
who were the direct transformations of such animals, that the
traditions which deal with this subject which is of the greatest
importance in the eyes of the native, are firmly impressed upon
the mind of the novitiate to whom everything which he sees
and hears is new and surrounded with an air of mystery.
After the completion of this kangaroo ceremony the Wurtja
is taken back to his brake, and then a consultation of the Olalia
and Oknia is held for the purpose of selecting a man to perform
the operation and also a man to assist the chief operator. Both
these men are called “ Atwia-twia,” and in addition to them a
man is selected whose duty it is to hold up the shield upon
which the boy is seated during the operation, this man being
known by the name of “ Elucha.” The conversation is carried
on in whispers, the men when speaking placing their mouths
against each other’s ears. While this consultation is in progress,
the other men sitting close to the brake sing in fierce, loud tones,
the Ullakupera Lartna song—“ Irriyulta yulta rai, etc.”
After some little discussion it is decided that an old man who
is Mura to the boy is to act as “Atwia-twia,” and that a man
who is Gammona to him is to act as his assistant, his duty
consisting in pulling forward the fore-skin, while another old
man who is Ikuntira 1 to the boy is to be the shield bearer or
Elucha. It must be remembered that in addition to the
honour attaching to these offices there are certain emoluments,
for when the operation is all over the boy has to provide each
of these men with an offering of food.
l Ikuiitira is the name given to actual or tribal fathers-in-law.


As soon as the decision has been made the singing stops, and
the men arrange themselves in a line in front of the brake while
the three Okilia sit opposite to them at the end of the path
looking especially grave as if the business now to be performed
were of the deepest importance.
Each one of the three now gets up in turn and leads forwards
one of the appointed officials, who all make a show of reluctance,
and places him in front of the row of men who are seated in a
line beside the Apulia so that now there are two rows of men
facing one another. The old Mura man sits in the middle of his
row and opposite to him is the oldest of the Okilia. The latter
with his hand smooths the surface of the ground between the
two lines and then, picking up a spear-thrower by the end to
which the point is attached, he thrusts his beard into his mouth,
as does also the Mura man, and both glare fiercely at each other.
Then without taking his eyes off the Mura man he scoops up,
with the chisel end of the spear-thrower, a little soil, and gliding
along on his knees empties it into the hands of the former.
Then he embraces him, rubs their bodies together and finally
rubs his forehead against the stomach of the Mura man. After
this he repeats the whole performance with the two other
officials, and when this is over the three old men are embraced
in the same way by the other Okilia, who however do not
present them with dirt.
The meaning of the latter ceremony is to imply that the youth
is intrusted to them for the purpose of being initiated, with as
little hesitation as the dirt is placed in their hands.
This little ceremony is called “ Okoara ” and is conducted with
much solemnity. When it is over the men join the others and
once more the Lartna song is sung with much fierceness.
Singing is kept up all night with short intervals; the Wurtja
is brought from his brake early in the evening and sits the
night long amongst the men listening to, but taking no part in,
the singing.
The morning of the eighth day is spent in preparing for a
ceremony concerned with the “Illuta” (a rat) totem. The
particular rat-man or man-rat, for, as already said, the identity
of the human individual is sunk in that of the object with he
is associated and from which he is supposed to have originated,


to whom this ceremony refers is reported to have travelled in the
Alcheringa from a place called Pulkira west of the Finke River
to Walyirra, where he died and where his spirit remained,
associated as usual with a churinga. In connection with this
ceremony a large Waninga is made. This consists of a spear,
across which, close to each end, a short bar of wood is
attached; strands of human hair string pass along from bar
to bar, closely side by side and at each end pass off slant-wise
towards the central spear. The whole structure is supposed to
represent the body of a rat. The main part is supposed to be the
trunk of the animal, the point end of the spear is the tail, and
the handle end is the head. The Waninga is carried by one of
the Okilia men while another man walks behind to steady it.
Two other men are decorated so as to represent two “ Kutta
Kutta” or little night hawks. When all is ready the Wurtja
is led, blindfolded of course, to where the main body of men are
seated. The performers approach from the south side making
a circuit and walking with their backs towards the Apulia until
they are opposite and about thirty yards away from the Wurtja
when the bandage is quickly taken from the eyes of the latter.
Then the two “ Kutta Kutta ” men with both legs stretched
wide apart and hands holding a stick across their shoulders,
come along between the lines of the Apulia with a curious quick,
gliding movement, towards the audience and then rapidly retire.
Then the men with the Waninga run down the lines, stopping
every now and then as they bend the Waninga over towards the
Wurtja but without touching him ; then they stand erect and
perform the quivering movement which is such a characteristic
feature in all the native ceremonies. This is done several times
and finally all four performers come into the Apulia lines at the
same time, the “ Kutta Kutta” men being at first in front, then
they retire to the side and the men bearing the Waninga come
on close to the Wurtja when a man steps out of the audience,
touches the performers and the ceremony comes to an end. Then
a man who is an Ikuntira, that is a possible father-in-law, to the
Wurtja takes the Waninga and fixes it upright in the Apulia
path, and the Wurtja is told by the Oknia and Okilia men, who,
as usual, sit close to him during the performance, to go out and
embrace the Waninga which he does for some minutes, the


Waninga carriers standing close by and the men at the brake
singing of the Waninga and of the walking of the Illuta in the
Alcheringa. Then the Wurtja is told to lie down again and his
head is covered over, the usual instructions and cautions being
given to him. During this time another ceremony is being
prepared of a simple description as no decoration is used. The
men occupy the time in singing about a party of Alcheringa
individuals who started to walk from a place called Ayaiya.
After the singing has gone on for about an hour the Wurtja is told
to look up and he sees a number of men lying about the Apulia
ground ; as he looks up they begin to hop about and to utter the
sounds made by kangaroos. One old man in particular is notice-
able from the way in which he imitates the movements of an old
disabled animal. After hopping in and about the Apulia for
some minutes they bunch up together at the western end of the
ground and then suddenly rising with a loud shout of “ pow, pow,
pow,” they run away to a small gully out of sight of the Wurtja
who is told that these men represent a party of Alcheringa
kangaroo-men starting off from Ayaiya. After this and while
further preparations are being made the Wurtja remains with
the audience bufc has his head covered. The tradition dealing
with this special group of kangaroos relates that the party split
into two, a larger and a smaller one, and that the larger one
travelled on ahead of the other one. When preparing for the
ceremony the bodies are first of all rubbed all over with red
ochre, then two young men open veins, first in one arm and then
in the other, and allow the blood to flow out in a stream over the
heads and bodies of the men who are about to perform. The
latter who are ten in number are then ornamented with little
patches of down but, unlike the usual plan of ornamentation,
there is no regular pattern made, the reason for this being that
the Alcheringa men had not used any regular pattern.
When all are ready, they go, with the exception of three who
stay behind, on to the Apulia walking in single file and carrying
twigs of Eucalyptus in their hands. When they reach the
ground a young man who leads the column and represents a
young and frolicsome kangaroo which, according to tradition,
accompanied the marchers, lies down sideways across the entrance
to the path with his back turned towards the Wurtja. The


other men stand in the path with their legs wide apart shifting
their heads from side to side and making the twigs quiver.
Then the Wurtja is told to sit up and the performers at once
greet his appearance with imitations of the sounds made by
kangaroos; then the young kangaroo, called “ Kulla Kulla,”
begins frisking about pretending to rush at the other peiformers,
and finally darts between the legs of each man and emerges at
the western end of the column where he lies down quietly foi
a minute or two. After he has done this four times he is caught
up as he comes through the legs of the man who stands nearest
to the Wurtja and is carried up to the latter and placed upon
him and then all the other performers throw themselves upon
the top of him so that the Wurtja has actually to beai the
whole mass of men. (The Wurtja himself on this paiticmar
occasion did not appear to be any the worse for this trying
experience, but one of the performers fainted as soon as they
extricated themselves. The stoical calmness of the young
Wurtja was most marked throughout the whole ceremony).
The performers then seat themselves amongst the audience and
the remaining three men then come on and go through the same
performance, one of them personating a young kangaioo as
before. The latter is again laid on top of the Wurtja and the
other two men lie on the top of him. For this lying down on
the top of the novitiate there is a special term—“ wultha-
chelpima.” After the usual explanations and cautions the
Wurtja is again led back to his own brake by his Okilia.
During the evening w r hen the men are assembled at the Apulia
he is brought back and lying down listens to the singing which
continues with little interruption during the whole night.
On the morning of the ninth day the Wurtja is carefully
greased all over by the elder Okilia in whose special charge he
is and remains crouching or lying down at his brake until noon
when he is blindfolded and brought to the Apulia. Then the
kangaroo performance of the previous day is again, enacted, the
performance including the lying down upon the W urtja. Aftei
this two more kangaroo ceremonies are performed the second of
which is of some importance. The principal performer canies a
large Waninga on the top of which a smaller one is attached,
the large one representing a full grown kangaroo, and the
6


smaller one a young one. As on a previous occasion the
Waninga is taken by a man who is Ikuntira to the Wurtja and
fixed in the ground and then the latter is told by his Oknia and
Okilia to go and embrace it which he does for some minutes, the
performers meanwhile standing round. The showing of the
Waninga to the Wurtja is called “ umba-keli-irrima ” which
means “the child sees and knows.” The embracing of the
Waninga is called “eliaqua erkuma.” After the performance
the Wurtja is once more instructed as to what the Waninga
means, and cautioned not to reveal anything to women or to
uninitiated boys ; then as usual he is made to lie down and in
fierce tones the men sing the Lartna song—“lrriyulta yulta,”
striking the ground with their shields. Then the Wurtja is
taken back to his brake were he remains until about nine o’clock
at night when he is brought to the Apulia and there his head is
decorated with stalks of cane grass, while at the same time the
other men decorate themselves in the same way and in addition
have stalks inserted beneath their arm bands.
When this has been done the brake of boughs at which the
men assemble is built higher and the men all crouch behind it.
Then at a signal from an Oknia the women approach shouting as
they do so “ pai! pai! pai,” and taking possession of the Apulia
ground, dance upon it for some minutes and then leaving the
Apulia go to one side when the men come out and stand on
the Apulia. The women then come and join the men who dance
round while the women pluck the grass stalks from their heads,
shouting as they do so, “pai ! pai! pai !” While this is going
on the men all dance with their faces turned towards the east as
in the stripping dance at a later time, one or more women behind
each man. The mura woman, who is called “unchalkulkna,” after
stripping the Wurtja who has been dancing amongst the other
men, suddenly stops and placing her head through his legs from
behind hoists him on to her shoulders and runs off with him
followed by all the other women, to a spot behind and in a line
with the Apulia from which it is distant about fifty yards. Here
she places him sitting on the ground and then sits behind clasping
him in her arms, some Mias and Uwinnas sitting close behind
her. The other women continue to dance in front of the Wurtja
shouting, “ pai! pai! pai!” and making a movement of invitation


by slightly lifting the hands up and down, with the arms bent at
the elbow, in a way often adopted during various ceremonies.
At the Apulia the men sit down and sing the tire song :
“ Atnylinga etunja ilia althara wuntama,”
over and over again. Atnylinga is the red flower of a species of
Eremophila which in the Alcheringa was made red by much
burning, Etunja is a twig of Eucalyptus, Althara means blazing
up, and Ilia wuntama is the term applied to a fire which is
rushing along. This song is always sung on the night preceding
the preparation of the Arachitta poles, the twigs used for
swathing which are always put through a blazing tire. The
singing continues for about half-an-hour, after which the Urin-
thantima man as well as another mura man, and also an Okilia,
run to the lubras holding shields before their faces. The first-
named seizes the Wurtja, and assisted by the other two takes him
back to the Apulia, where he is told to lie down and his face is
covered, while the singing of the fire song continues at intervals
all night long. As soon as the Wurtja is taken from them the
women run away to their camp.
At daybreak the Urinthantima man rubs the Wurtja all over
with dry red ochre and then winds fur-string round his head so
as to completely hide his hair from sight while the other men
sing :
“ Purta purta airpinta airpintima,”
The song sung while preparing the Arachitta poles. Purta purta
is to arrange the leaves, to settle them in their places; Airpinta
airpintima means round and round again. While this is being
sung the women come up to the Apulia and dance up the lines
towards the Wurtja making with their hands the movement of
invitation and shouting, “pai! pai! pai!” Suddenly the Urin-
thantima man hoists the Wurtja up on his shoulders and runs off
with him followed by a number of the younger men upon which
the women at once run back to their camp and the singing ceases.
When out of sight of the Apulia the Wurtja is put down and the
men proceed to a spot about half-a-mile away from the Apulia
where they make large fires and cut down a number of slender
sapplings which are to be used for Arachitta poles. The
branches are scorched in the flames while the men sing the fire
6a


song :—“ Atnylinga etunja, etc.” When sufficient material has
been secured they sit down and begin to tie twigs on to the poles,
the men singing, incessantly, “ Purta purta airpinta airpintima.”
When the poles, about thirty in number—each of them about ten
feet long—are ready, which is about noon, the men start back
for the Apulia carrying the poles with them. These they place
in a heap about two hundred yards from the Apulia, and then
the ITrinthantima man assisted by an Okilia ties twigs of Eremo-
phila round the boy’s body and on to his head-—this being done
where the sticks have been deposited. A signal is communicated
to the men at the Apulia who then move away and shout to the
women who are waiting some little distance off and who then
approach at a run carrying shields in front of them and shouting
as they come along, “ pai ! pai ! pai !” They take up a position
one behind the other with their backs to the Apulia brake and
their faces turned towards the west from which direction the
Wurtja’s party is coming. As the latter approach the women
begin to dance up and down the lines making with their right
hands the movement of invitation and with their left hands
holding their shields against their breasts. The Wurtja party
approaches at a run, the Wurtja himself being concealed in the
centre, each man carrying several pieces of bark which are
thrown at the women while the men shout loudly, “ Whirra !”
and the women shield their faces. When close to the Apulia
the men fire a final volley and the women run away, pell mell,
their pace accelerated by the vehement shouting of the men who
are standing about in all directions away from the Apulia to
which they return as soon as the women have gone. The bushes
are taken off the W 7 urtja by the Urinthantima and Okilia and he
is told to remain in a crouching position.
The Apulia ground is now carefully cleaned and the Wurtja’s
brake shifted to within a few yards of the western end after
which a council, in which Okilia, Oknia and Gammona take
part, is held at the eastern end for the purpose of appointing a
man to act as “ Wulya,” his duty being to paint a design upon
the back of the Wurtja, the choice of the design resting with
the Wulya who is supposed to choose one of those which
are called !< Ilkinia,” that is a design belonging to a totem and
emblematic of the latter. He is also supposed to choose one of


a totem group of his own locality. During this conference two
Okilia men have been sitting opposite to each other, and as soon
as the choice has been made one of them smoothes the ground
between them and then the other, who in this instance belonged
to the same locality as the Wurtja, crosses over and sits down
between the legs of the first man. Them a Gammona man of
the Wurtja’s locality steps out and brings back an old man who
is Ipmunna to the Wurtja and upon whom the choice has
fallen. He comes with well simulated reluctance as if he felt
himself overpowered with the honour thus conferred upon him
and sits down in front of the Okilias, the front one of whom
takes up a boomerang and with much deliberation draws the flat
side three times steadily along the ground making thus a smooth
little trench out of which he scoops a little soil, and then
shuffling along on his knees empties it into the hands of the
Ipmunna man. Then he embraces him and rubs his forehead
and face against the old man’s stomach. Then the other Okilia,
the Gammona and Oknia, in the order named, embrace the old
man in the same way. The latter belongs to a northern locality,
and in choosing him a well recognised compliment has been paid
to the group to which he belongs. The old Atwia-twia who had
previously been chosen to perform the operation of circumcision
now comes up and holds a whispered conversation with the
newly appointed Wulya saying that he is an old man, that his
sight is failing and that he does not feel equal to the task, and
asks that his son may be allowed to act in his stead. This is
agreed to and then the son is called up, and after another
whispered conversation on the subject the meeting breaks up
and all the men begin to decorate themselves in various colours,
the designs having no special significance. The two Atwia-twia
are, however, prominently painted on the face, and their cheeks
are blackened with charcoal.
After the Wurtja has been crouching at his brake for some
time with his face turned towards the Apulia, the W ulya comes
and begins to paint a design upon his back. The design in this
instance is one associated with the Okranina (carpet snake) of a
locality called Tharlinga, a northern locality, and represents a
number of snakes around their hole which is indicated by a
series of concentric circles.


The Wulya first of all rubs the body of the Wurtja all over
with fat and then explains to the other men what he intends to
draw after which he proceeds to work with great deliberation,
more than an hour being spent over the drawing, while two old
Ipmunna men keep up a low monotonous chant, the words of
which have reference to the snakes (i.e. the ancestral snake-men)
of Tharlinga. When the design is at last complete, an Okilia of
the Wurtja’s locality comes up and places two bunches of owl’s
feathers in his hair and then goes away and brings the Atwia-
twia to inspect the design. The men who have previously made
the Arachitta poles then run away from the Apulia shouting
“ pai ! pai! pai ! ” and bring them in. When within about fifty
yards of the Wurtja they separate into two parties, one of them
crosses in front of the Wurtja- from left to right and deposits
their poles twenty yards to the right of him, while the others do
the same on the left side. No explanation of this can be given
except the usual one that it has always been thus in the
Alcheringa.
Just before dusk two Okilias go out and stand, one on the
eastern end of each of the raised banks, with their arms in a
somewhat curious attitude, the palm of the hand being turned
so that it faces backward, and the elbow bent so that the hand
lies in the armpit. The Uranthantina man goes and sits down
in the place usually occupied by the Wurtja when he is watching
a ceremony while the other men, seated around him, sing—
“ Elunja apirra arara”—“hark to the lizards in the trees.”
At a signal from an old mura man the women, who are waiting
out of sight, come and stand in two groups one to the right and
one to the left of the Apulia. It may be mentioned that in the
grouping of the men and women there is no separation of those
belonging to different classes. As soon as the women arrive,
the two Okilias who are stationed on the banks run off to the
Wurtja’s brake and quickly tear away the bushes which hide
him from view so that he is seen crouching down. One of the
Okilias then kneels down on each side of him and at once the
three men run quickly, on all fours, to the Apulia where the
Wurtja lies down on top of the Urinthantima, who is himself
lying down on his back, and the two remain in this position for
about ten minutes. While this is taking place a woman who is


Mia to the Wurtja comes and sits clown behind one of the Oknia
and two others sit behind two other Oknia. At the same time
the men who have brought in the Arachitta poles and are about
to wear these attached to their legs are busily engaged, with the
assistance of other men and some of the women, in fastening
them on. At the encl of the ten minutes the Urinthantima
wriggles out from underneath the Wurtja who remains lying,
face downwards, on the ground. The old Ipmunna stands close
by explaining the design on the back of the Wurtja, and after a
time calls up two women who are Ipmunna to the Wurtja to
come and rub out the design ; they come forward reluctantly, and
one after the other stoop down and with their foreheads efface
the drawing. The men with the Arachitta poles are now ready
and come on to the Apulia. Dancing and singing begin at
once, the men carrying the poles attached to their ankles run up
and between the banks of the Apulia, while the women follow
them about stripping the poles of their leaves. It is now dark,
and the only light is that given out by a big fire which has been
made by heaping the two brakes on top of one another and then
setting fire to the whole mass. The Wurtja looking on sits
between the legs of an Okilia, and the scene is one, as can be
imagined, of the weirdest description. Suddenly the old mura
man gives out a great roar, whereupon the dancing ceases and
the women quickly run off, followed by menacing shouts from
the men. At the same time the sound of bullroarers is heard
coming from each side of the Apulia, and at this signal the
Wurtja is laid down on his back and some of the Oknia and
Okilia men taking up a number of the Arachitta poles stack
them on top of him, and, lifting them up and down as if beating
time with them on his body, they all sing wildly—
“lngwa alkirna alkirnie li
Urtnathie alkirlie impara.”
Ingwa means night or darkness; Alkirna, twilight ; Alkirnie li,
a great clear light; Urtnanthie, a lot of trees growing close
together; Alkirlie, like the sky; Impara, rising red like the sun.
The fire is now giving out a brilliant light and the two
Atwia-twia men take up a position close to it at the spot
marked D on the diagram. With their beards thrust into


their mouths, their legs widely extended, and their arms
stretched forwards the two men stand perfectly still, the
actual operator in front and his assistant pressing close up
behind him so that their bodies are in contact with bach other.
The front man holds in his extended right hand the small flint
knife with which the operation is to be performed and as soon as
they are in position the Ikuntira man who is to act as shield
bearer comes down the lines carrying the shield on his head and
at the same time snapping the thumb and first finger of each
hand. Then, facing the fire, he kneels on one knee, just a little
in front of the operator who stands perfectly still. During this
time the bullroarers are sounding all round so that they can be
heard far away by the women in their camp, and by them it is
supposed that the roaring sound is the voice of the great spirit
Twanyirika who has come to take the boy away.
The Arachitta poles are now quickly snatched from the top of
the body of the Wurtja, and he is at once lifted up by Okilia
men who run, carrying him feet foremost, and place him on the
shield. Then in deep, loud tones the Lartna song is sung, indeed
almost thundered out, by the men :
“ Irrie yulta yulta rai
TJI katchera ul katch ar-arai
Irri yulta yulta rai
Ul katchera ul katch ai.”
The assisting Atwia-twia at once grasps the fore-skin, pulls it
out as far as possible and the operator cuts it off and immediately
along with all the officials of the ceremony retires out of the
lighted area, while the boy is stood up and held by Oknia and
Okilia who say to him, “ you have done well, you have not cried
out.” Then he is led back to the old brake where he receives the
congratulations of the men, and, at the same time, the blood
from the wound is allowed to flow into a shield which is given
to him by a young Oknia man to whom afterwards he will have
to give food just as he does to his own father.
While he is still bleeding an Okilia man brings up some of the
bullioarers and pressing them upon the wound tells him that it
was these which made the sound and not Twanyirika, that they
are sacred Churinga and must never be shown, or even mentioned,


to the women. To this the boy listens in silence. When the
bleeding has diminished he is led to the eastern end of the Apulia
where he stands, between two Okilia, looking towards the west
while two other Okilia, taking each an Arachitta pole, mount
the bank and holding their poles over the middle of the path
shout loudly, moving them up and down as they do so, “ Arara,
arara, arara,” which is the signal for the officials to return, which
they do, coming up one at a time. As each man comes up the
Okilia shouts, “this is Wulya (and so on through the list), do not
mention his name,” and then each of them embraces the boy in
turn, pressing their bodies closely together. As each man comes
up, and the presentation is made, the same ceremony is gone
through and in turn every one of those who have taken aiiy
special part is named by the Okilia whose cry, “ Arara, araia,
arara,” rings out sharply in the darkness, for the tire is now burnt
down. When the presentations are over the Okilia produces a
bundle of Churinga saying, “here is Twanyirika of which you
have heard so much, they are Churinga and will help to heal you
quickly, guard them well and do not loose them or you and your
mothers and sisters will be killed, do not let them out of your
sight or you and your mothers and sisters will be killed, do. not
let your mothers and sisters see you, obey your Okilia who will
go with you, do not eat forbidden meat.” 1
The newlv made Arakurta then remains for some time standing
by a fire, the smoke of which passes over his wound. Finally he
is taken away by a special man in whose charge he has to
remain until his wound is healed, when the ceremony of Ariltha
will be performed. This man is, if one be available, an unmairied
umbirna to whom the boy’s sister has been promised. Failing
such an one he may be an Oknia, Okilia or a Mura man.
There are certain restrictions and customs which must be
strictly observed by the more immediate blood relations of the.
l In the particular ceremony now described, as soon as these instructions had been
given to him a man brought on to the ground two young Arakurta who had been operated
upon six or seven weeks before. They at once knelt down with their backs to the newly
made Arakurta and he, acting on instructions from an Okilia, took a Churinga from his
bundle and holding it in both hands, scraped their backs. This is called, Untunga lruma
and places all three of the Arakurta upon the same footing and makes them fnen s. e
two kneeling Arakurta were then told to go away quickly to their camp. This, o coins
does not take place always, but only when two operations ha\ e follow ed close!} upon
another.


boy which may be here noticed, as they will serve to show
still more clearly the importance which is attached in the
native mind to the initiation ceremonies. From the time of
the handing of the firesticks until the recovery from the
subsequent operation of ariltha the Mia must have no inter-
course with the father of the boy until the whole proceedings
are at an end. Any breach of this rule would result in the
Arakurta growing up into “ Ertwa akurna ” —a bad man or
“ Atna-arpinta,” that is too much given to sexual pleasures,
while strict observance will ensure his growing up “ Ertwa
mura ” or a good man (using the words good and bad in the
native sense).
After presentation of the lirestick and until Lartna has been
performed the Mura tualcha woman (that is the future mother-in-
law of the boy) is “ ekirinja ” that is tabu, to the actual Mia of the
latter. When Lartna has been performed the Mura tualcha
woman goes to the camp of the Mia, and approaching her behind,
rubs her all over with red ochre, and the Mia hands to the other
woman a pitchi full of seed and in this way the tabu is removed.
While the Arakurta is out in the bush the Mia may not eat
opossum or the large lace lizard, or carpet snake, nor any fat,
as otherwise she will retard her son’s recovery.
Every day she greases her “yam” sticks and never allows them
out of her sight; at night time she sleeps with them close to her
head. No one is allowed to touch them. Every day she is
most careful to rub her body with grease and red ochre which
in some way is supposed to help her son’s recovery.
After the operation of Lartna the fore skin is handed over to
the boy’s Okilia—the oldest one present—-who also takes charge
of the shield in the haft of which the blood has been collected.
The piece of skin is greased by the Okilia and given to a young
man who is Witia (younger brother) of the Arakurta and he
is told to swallow it, the idea being that it will strengthen him
and cause him to grow tall and strong. The shield is taken by
the Okilia to his camp where he hands it over to his LTnawa or
wife who rubs the blood over the breasts and foreheads of women
who are Mia Alkulla (that is elder sisters of the boy’s actual
mother) and Ungaraitcha (elder sisters) of the boy. These
women must not on any account touch the blood with their


hands, and after it has been rubbed on them the women adds
a coating of red ochre. The actual Mia of the Arakurta is never
allowed to see the blood.
When the Arakurta is out in the bush the men go and visit
him occasionally and on these occasions he has to undergo a
painful rite called “ Koperta kakuma ” or head biting. He is
placed lying face downwards, men of all classes sitting round
him singing about the biting of the head of the Arakurta and
urging the biters to bite deeply. The men who are to do the
biting and who may be of any class and are usually from two
to five in number are chosen, on each occasion on which the
operation is carried out, by the eldest Okilia of the youth. Their
duty is to bite the boy’s scalp as hard as they can and until
blood flows freely, the patient often howling with pain. Each
man may content himself with one bite or he may bite two or
even three times. The object of this really painful operation
is, so they say, to promote the growth of hair and at times
the chin may be bitten as well as the scalp.
The Ceremony of Subincision.
As a general rule there is an interval of between five and six
weeks between the ceremony of Lartna and that of Ariltha, but
at times it may be even longer and it depends upon the time
occupied by the recovery of the boy from the effects of the first
operation.
The particular ceremony which is now described took place
when the operation was performed upon two Arakurta one of
whom belonged to the Purula and the other to the Kumara
class, and was carried out in the northern part of the tribe.
It must always be remembered that the details of all the cere-
monies vary to a certain extent in different parts of the tribe,
though the essential features are similar.
When the ceremony is to take place the men assemble at the
spot where the two boys have been camped after the operation of
Lartna. The boys are under the charge of an Okilia, who tells
them to lie flat down upon the ground, and covers over their
heads, all the young men who are of the same classes as the


two Arakurta also lying down. The men of the Panunga and
Bultharra classes sing about the marching of the Acliilpa or
“ wild cat ” men in the Alcheringa. During the night, first of
all, a quabarra dealing with the doings of certain Achilpa
men and afterwards one concerned with the Emu totem are
performed by men who are specially concerned with them.
These performances are, as usual, explained to the Arakurta,
who are once more cautioned against ever telling any woman
what they have seen and heard; they are now also told that the
Quabarra belong to men of particular local groups who alone
have the right to perform them. Then they are made to lie
down again and the old men go away to a brake of boughs which
has been built at a distance of about fifty yards and here they
begin to sing songs concerned with certain totems such as the
Quirra or Bandicoot. During the previous day an old Panunga
man has made a special pole which is called a “ Nurtunja ” and
which consists of a large spear ensheated with human hair string
and decorated with rings of bird’s down. In addition a small
number of Churinga are hung on to it. The old man who has
made it is Unkulla of one of the youths and Gammona of the
other, and he has been asked by the Oknia and Okilia of the
two boys to make the sacred pole. He has at the same time
been asked to perform a ceremony, and at day-break the two
Arakurta are brought from their camp to watch the performance.
The old man carries the Nurtunja on his back and, sitting down
on the ground, is another man who carries small bushes in his
hands. The one with the Nurtunja represents a Quirra (bandi-
coot) man of the Alcheringa who is attempting to catch a woman
and she is supposed to be warding him off with the bushes. The
audience, including the two Arakurta, dance in front of and
under the Nurtunja, and finally the old Quirra man fixes the
pole upright in the ground and the Arakurta are told, as usual
by Oknia and Okilia, to go and embrace the Nurtunja and while
doing so are informed that they are about to undergo the rite of
Ariltha, and that the embracing of the Nurtunja will prevent
the operation from being painful. The Okilia now says, “ who
will be Tapunga ?” Two men volunteer, one a Panunga and the
other an Ungalla. The former at once lies down on his stomach
and the latter gets on top of him, the two lying at the foot of the


Nurtunja. Then the Kumara Arakurta is laid down on them
and a man sits straddle-legged over his body, while the operation
is at once performed by an CJknaria man who is Ikuntira of the
Arakurta. The actual operation which is performed with a stone
knife only occupies a very short time, and consists, as has often
been described, in slitting up more or less completely the penile
urethra. As soon as the first Arakurta has been operated upon
the second one is led up, placed on top of the same Tapunga men
and quickly operated on. Then they are taken to one side and
the blood which flows fiom their wounds is allowed to drain into
shields on which they squat. They are now no longer Arakurta
but Ertwa-kurka or initiated men.
When the Arakurta is seized for the purpose of having the
rite of Ariltha performed on him the men set up a loud and
prolonged shout of “pirr-rr” which can be heard by the women
at the camp. They at once assemble at the Erlukwirra, that is
the women’s camp, and the Mia of the boy cuts the Unchalkulkna
woman across the stomach and shoulders and then makes similar
cuts upon women who are the boy’s mura, elder and younger
sisters, as well as upon those who are her own elder sisters.
While making the cuts she imitates the sound made by the
Ariltha party. These particular cuts which usually leave a
definite series of cicatrices are called “urpma’ and are often
represented by definite lines on certain of the Ohuringa.
It very often happens that as soon as the operation on an
Arakurta has been performed one or more of the younger men
present, but who have been operated on before, stand up and
voluntarily undergo a second ariltha operation. In such cases
the men do not consider that the incision has been carried far-
enough. Standing out on the clear space upon which the
Arakurta has been operated upon, with legs wide apart and
hands behind his back, the man shouts out “ Mura ariltha
atnartinja yinga aritchika pitchi ” —“ Mura mine, come and cut
my ariltha down to the root.” Then one mura man comes and
pinions him behind while another mura man comes up in front
and seizing the penis, first of all cuts out an oval-shaped piece of
skin which he throws away, and then extends the split to the
root. Most men undergo the second operation, and some come
forward a third time, though a man is often as old as thirty or


thirty-five before he submits to this second operation which is
called “ariltha erlitha atnartinja.”
The boy carries the Churinga about with him until he has
completely recovered. When this is announced by the man in
charge of him the men all assemble out in the bush and the
Oknia and Okilia, after consultation, appoint a man to act as
what is called “ Irkoa-artha.” It is his duty to remove all the
decorations from the body of the Ertwa-kurka, after which has
been done the youth is told to lie down on his face while the
men sing a chant which is supposed to promote the growth of his
hair, and he is told that he must not speak to the “ Irkoa-artha ”
until some time has elapsed, and not then before he has made a
present of food, which is called Chauarilya, to the individual in
question.
When this has been done the men and the Ertwa-kurka
assemble at some little distance from the main camp and begin
to sing in loud tones —
“ Chuk-ur-rokerai yaa li chaakaa-a
Yaama kank waa-a
Inkwurkna inkwurkna atnai
Inkwurkna inkwurkna atnai.”
The lubras hearing the singing assemble near the main camp and
begin to dance as they did at the Apulia. The song of the men
ceases as soon as they approach the lubras, and at a distance of
about fifty yards they halt, shouting “tirra, tirra, tirra,” a sound
which resembles that of whirling bull roarers, and which is
taken up by the lubras. The young Ertwa-kurka, who is now
completely undecorated, steps out from the men, runs close up
to the dancing women and suddenly wheels round and runs off
into the bush where he is followed by a number of men who
camp with him for the night, during which, without the
performance of any special ceremony, singing is kept up.
Before day-break the Ertwa-kurka is dressed up by Okilia and
Umbirna with all the ornaments such as forehead band, arm
strings, tufts of alpita tail tips, etc., such as are worn by a
native beau. He is also provided with a shield and spear-
thrower, and at daylight the party starts for the main eamp,
the young man walking in the centre by the side of his “Irkoa


artha ” while all shout loudly “ tirra, tirra, tirra.” When
within about fifty yards of the women who are dancing and
shouting as before, the men stop and the “ Irkoa-artha ” leads
the Ertwa-kurka out but only accompanies him for a few yards,
after which he goes on alone carrying his shield in front of him
so as to hide his face, and when close to the women one or two
Ungaraitcha (elder sisters) who are in the lead carrying pitchis
(all the other women carry tufts of alpita in their hands), throw
the pitchis at his shield and then press their hands on his
shoulders from behind and also rub their faces on his back,
after which they cut off' some locks of his hair which they
afterwards use to make up into hair-string ornaments for them-
selves. This ceremony is called “ Anainthalilima,” and after it
is over the Ertwa-kurka is free to go into the presence of the
various officials who have taken a special part in the ceremonies,
though he must not speak to or of them, nor must he speak
loudly in their presence for some months to come,
The ceremonies concerned with this part of the proceedings
vary considerably in different parts of the tribe. In the south
for example the young Ertwa-kurka is always shown a sacred
ceremony of the “ Akirra ” or owl totem, on the night preceding
the one on which he meets the women.
At daylight on the morning of the next day the men provide
themselves with firesticks, and surrounding the young -man
conduct him to the lubras who are again waiting to receive him.
The young man is fully decorated amd carries a shield and
boomerang and some twigs of Eremophila. When the party
is within a short distance of the lubras the men throw down
their firesticks and halt, and the young man steps out from the
centre of the group and throws his boomerang high up in the
direction of the spot at which his mother was supposed to have
lived in the Alcheringa. 1 Then he is led forwards by the
l This throwing- of the boomerang in the direction of the mother’s Alcheringa camp
occurs during the performance of other ceremonies such, for example, as those which
accompany the knocking out of teeth in eastern groups of the Arunta tribe, and also in
the Ilpira tribe, and may he regarded as intended to symbolize the idea that the young-
man is entering upon manhood and passing out of the control of the women and into the
ranks of the men. The fact that he is using the boomerang is indicative of this and his
throwing it towards his mother's camp is an intimation to her of the fact that he is passing
away from her control.


“ Irkao-artha ” man, holding his shield before his face, and is
placed squatting upon a fire which has been smothered with
green leaves which the lubras have prepared, and behind which
they stand, shouting “ tirra, tirra, tirra,” and making with their
hands the movement of invitation already referred to. The
Ertwa-kurka is then pressed down gently on the fire by the
women, and after remaining in this position for a few minutes
is taken off by the “ Irkoa-artha ” man, and handed over to a
few young boys who have not yet been initiated, and who are
told to camp with him but on no account to speak to him.
After three days during which he speaks to no one, men who
are his Okilia come out from the Ungunja and invite him
to come and join them after which he becomes a permanent
member of the Ungunja or men’s camp. Before, however, he
may speak to any of the officals who took part in the ceremony
he has to go out into the bush and procure game as an offering
to each one of them—this gift being called “ Chauarilya.”
At the presentation of “ Chauarilya ” the man to whom it is
presented always performs some sacred ceremony, after which
the mouth of the Arakurta and of all those who are present is
touched with some sacred object which has been used in the
ceremony, such as a Uurtunja, and in this way the ban of silence
is removed. When these ceremonies have been passed through
the native is regarded as an initiated member of the tribe and
may take part in all the sacred ceremonies of his group, though
it is not until he has passed through the Engwurra that he
becomes what is called Urliara or a fully developed man.
The following names indicating the different grades of initia-
tion are applied to the boy, youth and man at the times indicated :
(1) Ambaquerka, up to the time of throwing up.
(2) Ulpmerka , after throwing up and until circumcision
is performed.
(3) Arakurta , after circumcision and before subincision is
performed.
(4) Ertwa-kurka , after subincision and until he has passed
through the Engwurra.
(5) Urliara , after the Engwurra has been passed through.






