

* . yi \
S&><- 2- i&L**' l '#'' ■‘ •
NOTES OS AUSTRALIAN MESSAGE STICKS AND
MESSENGERS.
A. W. HO WITT, F.G.S.,
Corres. Memb. Antbrop. Inst, of Great Britain.
LONDON:
HARRISON AND SONS, ST. MARTIN’S LANE,
Printers in Ordinary to Her Majesty
1889.




F totii
A. W. Howitt. —Notes on Australian Message Sticks. 314
Notes on Australian Message Sticks and Messengers.
By A. W. Howitt, F.G-.5., Corresponding Member
Antlirop. Inst, of Great Britain.
[with mate xiy.]
It has been long known that the Australian Aborigines make
use of pieces of wood marked in various ways in order to convey
information from one to another. It has been stated even
in Australia that these so-called “Message sticks ” can be read
and understood by the person to whom they are sent, without
the marks upon them being explained by the bearer. I have
even known it to be said that persons other than he to whom
the message was addressed could read the marks much as with
us an educated person can read the words inscribed in one of our
letters. Indeed these message sticks are often spoken of as
“ Blackfellows’ letters.”
The subject is important in so far that a right understanding
of the method by, and the manner in which the markings on
the sticks are made to convey information, will be well cal-
culated to afford some measure of the mental capacity and of
the mental status of the persons using them.
In order to test the question thus raised, as for instance
whether these message sticks do or do not convey information
to those receiving them, apart from any explanatory message
given by the bearer, I made such personal investigations as I
found possible, and I also addressed myself to numerous cor-
respondents in various parts of Australia. My best thanks are
due to a number of them who kindly responded to my enquiries
and whose information I have recorded in these notes.
Unfortunately for the more complete success of my investiga-
tions it happens that the Kurnai of Gippsland, to which I have
the readiest access, are a tribe which did not use message sticks
excepting in their most rudimentary form, and therefore I could
not with them put the matter to such test as would otherwise
have been possible.
These notes were at first intended to refer only to the subject
of message sticks, but I soon found it necessary to say some-
thing about the messengers themselves, as well as of what may
be called the emblematic tokens which in some tribes they also
carry together with the message stick or without it.


Such emblematic tokens are for instance the sacred humming
instrument used in the initiation ceremonies, which is con-
veniently spoken of by its English name of Eull-ioaiei, the
man’s kilt which is carried on the point of a spear when the
message calls an assemblage lor war, and the lumps of pipeclay
or red ochre which some messengers of death or of festfv ity also
carry are likewise emblematic tokens.
I have, however, only touched upon these subjects because
their full consideration would lead me far beyond the scope of
this paper, which is intended to deal with message sticks espe-
cially.
The use of message sticks is not universal in Australian tribes,
and the degree of perfection reached in conveying information
by them differs much. Some tribes such as the Fieri do not
use the message stick at all, but make use of emblematical tokens
such as the net carried by the Pinya, an armed party detailed
by the council of head men of the tribe to execute its sentences
upon offenders. Other tribes such as the Kurnai use pieces of
wood without any markings. Other tribes again, especially I
think in Eastern Queensland, use message sticks extensively,
which are often elaborately marked, highly ornamented and even
brightly painted.
Taking Gippsland as a first example, it is to be noted that
the Kurnai used the message stick in its most rudimentary form.
For instance if a man desired to arrange with the men of another
locality for a meeting at a certain time and place he might do
as follows. I assume the message to be an invitation to meet
for a corroboree at a place indicated by name to the messenger,
that the time would be after an interval of “ two moons ’ and
that the persons to be invited lived in several distinct localities.
The sender of the message in giving it to his messenger (Baiara)
might, if he used anything to aid the memory, break off a
number of short sticks from some tree or bush at hand equal in
number to the localities to be visited, delivering them one by one
to the messenger as he named the places. The same method
would apply to the enumeration of individuals.
I have known the various stages to be made in travelling to
be counted to a messenger by enumerating them on the fingers
of one or both hands, and where these did not suffice by also
using the toes in his count.
It is not necessary that the message be carried by any
particular person, but in most cases the messenger would be one
of the younger men related to the sender. If, however, the
message related to the initiation ceremonies, the messenger would
be one of the older men. Such a messenger would carry with
him a Bull-roarer as a token. If the message related to a set-


fight, 1 the token might be q club or a shield, or if to gather a
war party a man’s kilt carried suspended from the point of one
of the jag spears. This would be passed on from locality to
locality until it had made its round.
The tribes nearest allied to the Kurnai were those to the
westward of Gippsland, and of which the Woiworung of the
Yarra River may be taken as an example. This tribe is now
all but extinct—one survivor is the intelligent old bard whose
songs Dr. Torrance has recorded, 2 and whom I have had before
occasion to refer to as my authority for the customs of his
people, of which he is a complete repository. In this tribe it
was the headman of some locality who sent out messengers to
collect people for festive occasions, for set-fights or for other
matters concerning the tribe, and he did this after consulting
with the other old men. The messenger was usually one of the
younger men, and if possible one whose sister was married to
some one in that part of the tribe to which the messenger was
to go, 3 for under such circumstances a man could go and return
in safety, being known to and protected by the people he
visited.
Berak gave the following illustrations of the practice which I
quote as nearly as possible in his own words : “ Suppose being
a Ngurungeta (headman) I desired to call the people from
all round to come to a corroboree and for ball playing, 4 I
should, after I had talked with my friends, say to one of the
young men, you go to such and such people and take this Kalk,
and give it to the Kgurungdta there and tell him this message.
The man then going would hand my Kalk to the headman there
and would give him ray message, who would then show it to his
men and repeat my message to them.”
No messenger who was known to be such was ever injured,
for people were always glad to receive news and messages. The
message stick called Mungu-Kalk (1), or Barndana(2), was made
1 I use the word “ set-fight ” for those expiations by spear-throwing or by
club in which some offender was brought to punishment in the presence often of
the whole tribe. See “ Kamilaroi and Kurnai,” p. 216.
2 “Music of the Australian Aboriginals,” Journ. Anthrop. Inst., Vol XYI
p. 335.
3 Probably also a man married to a woman of that part, or a man the son of
such a woman.
4 This game of ball-playing was also practised among the Kurnai, the Wolgal,
the Wotjoballuk as well as by the Woiworung, and was probably known to most
tribes of south eastern Australia. The Kurnai made the ball from the scrotum
of an “ old man kargaroo,” the Woiworung made it of tightly rolled up pieces of
opossum skin. It was called by them “mangurt.” In this tribe the two exoga-
mous divisions, Bunjil and Waa played on opposite sides. The Wotjoballuk also
played this game, with Krokitch on one side and Gramutch on the other. The
mangurt was sent as a token of friendship from one to another.


by the sender and was kept by the recipient of the message as a
reminder of what he had to do, as for instance, to meet the
sender at a certain time and place, and to take certain persons
with him. For friendly meetings for corroboree when there was
no cause of quarrel existing, the messenger carried a man’s kilt
(Braujep) and a woman’s apron (Kaiung) hung on a reed ; for
meetings to settle quarrels or grievances by a set-fight, or for
hostile purposes generally, as for instance to combine for an
attack upon some common enemy, the kilt was hung upon the
point of a jag spear made of ironbark wood (3).
The place of meeting being named verbally in the message
which the messenger “ carried in his mouth ” it might be neces-
sary to indicate the precise time upon which the people should
assemble. This could be done by counting the different stages
or camps to be made on the journey, or the number of “ Moons.”
If the number to be counted was large, recourse was had to
various parts of the body, each of which had a recognized name,
and an understood position in this method of enumeration. So
many parts thus enumerated, counting from the little finger of
one hand, meant so many stages, or days or months as the case
might require.
(1) Bubupi-muringya = child of the hand. The little finger.
(2) j ßuldto-rdvel = a little larger; the ring finger.
(3) Buldto = larger; the middle finger.
(4) Urnung-mdluk from Urnung = a direction, and Meluk =
a grub found in the boles of some Eucalypti ; the forefinger.
(5) Bahungyi-muringya = mother of the hand; the thumb.
(6) Krauel = the wrist.
(7) Ngurumbul a fork; the divergence of the radial ten-
dons.
(8) Jerauahil = the swelling of the radial muscles.
(9) Thdmbur = a round place; the iuside of the elbow
joint.
(10) Berbert = the ringtail opossum; also the name of the
armlet made of the pelt of that animal, hence used to designate
that part of the arm where the armlet is worn ; the biceps.
(11) Willing = the shoulder joint.
(12) Krakerap = the bag place, or the place whence the bag
hangs by its band, i.e., the collar bone.
(13) Gurnbert = Keed necklace, the neck or the place where
the necklace make of pieces of reed is worn.
(14) Kurnagor = the point or end of a hill, or of a spur or
ridge, hence the lobe of the ear.
(15) Ngdrabul = a range or the ridge of a hill, hence the
side suture of the skull.
(16). BUndale = the cutting place, i.e., the place where the


mourner cuts himself with some sharp instrument, from hUndaga
=to cut, e.g., Bwlagat kalk, cut the wood or log. This is the
top of the head.
From this place the count follows down the equivalent places
on the other side, thus giving a considerable scope for enumera-
tion. 1
This method of counting fully disposes of any belief that the
paucity of numerals in the languages of the Australian tribes
arises from any inability to conceive of more numbers than two,
three, or four.
My informant, Berak, made a message stick such as was
formerly used by his tribespeople. It is represented in fig. 1,
Plate XIY. His explanation of it was as follows :
The notches on the upper right hand side of the stick repre-
sent the sender, and other old men who join with him in the
message. Those on the under side represent the recipient and
the old men with him. The remainder of the stick being notched
along the whole length above and below means that all the men
of both localities are to be present. The markings on the flat
side at the right hand are merely ornamental, as are also the
crescent-shaped ends of the stick. This message is supposed to
be an invitation to some people at a distance to come' to a
corroboree.
The next example which I take is that of the Wotjoballuk,
of the Wimmera Eiver in Victoria. The particulars are obtained
by enquiry from old men of that tribe.
Messages were sent by the old men by messengers whom they
instructed, and to whom message sticks were given. Having
consulted together, and having arrived at a determination, as for
instance that some other part of the tribe should be summoned
to meet with their part of it on some festive occasion, or for some
other purpose, the principal man among them prepares a message
stick by making certain notches upon it with a knife. In old times
the marks were made with a mussel shell ( unio ). The man who is
to be charged with the message looks on while the headman
makes the message stick ( galk ), and he thus learns the connec-
tion between the marks upon the stick and his message. A notch
is made at one end to indicate the sender, and probably notches
also for those who join him in sending the message. A large
notch is made on one edge for each tribal group which is invited
1 I note the following as to messengers in tribes to the south west of the
Woiworung as given by Buckley (Morgan, “Life of Buckley,” McDougal,
Hobart Town, 1852).
“ A messenger came from another tribe saying we were to meet 'them some
miles off. Their method of describing time is by signs on the fingers, one man
of each party marking his days by chalking on the arm and then rubbing one
off as each day passes,” p. 35. See also similar statements, pp. 49 and 61.


to attend. If all the people are invited to attend, the stick
is notched on the edge from end to end. If part only are
invited, then a portion only of the stick is notched. If very few
are invited to meet, or referred to in the verbal message, then a
notch is made for each individual as he is named to the
messenger.
The oldest man (Headman) having made such a message stick
hands it to the old man nearest to him, who inspects it and, if
necessary, adds further marks and gives corresponding instruc-
tions. Finally, the stick having passed from one to other of the
old men present is handed to the messenger, who has received
his verbal message in connection with it. If any duration of
time is connected with the message, or if an enumeration of
stages or camps is made, a method is used which is almost
identical with that which I have given in speaking of the
Woiworung. Its occurrence in these tribes suggests that it
must have been general over a considerable part of Victoria.
Commencing at the little finger the enumeration is made as
follows: —
(1.) Giti-munya = little hand = little finger.
(2.) Gaiup-munya, from gaiup = one, and munya = hand;
the ring finger.
(3.) Marung-munya, from marung = the desert pine ( Callitris
verrucosa). This has reference to the middle finger being longer
than the others, as the desert pine is taller than the other trees
growing in the Wotjo country.
(4.) Yolop-yolop-munya, from yolop, to point or aim. Thus
yolop-huk is the act of aiming a spear. The forefinger.
(5.) Ba.p-munya, from Bap = mother.
(6.) Bart-gur, from dart = a hollow, and gur = the forearm ;
this refers to the hollow formed by the inside of the elbow
joint.
(7.) Boibun = a small swelling. This refers to the swelling
of the flexor muscles of the forearm.
(8.) Bun-darti = a hollow, referring to the hollow of the
inside of the elbow joint.
(9.) Gengen-dartchuk, from gengen = to tie, and dartchuk
the upper arm. This name is given also to the armlet of opossum
pelt which is worn round the upper arm, hence applied to the
biceps muscle.
(10.) Borporung, the point of the shoulder.
(11.) Jarak-gourn, from jarak = reed, and gourn neck,
that is, the place where the reed necklace is worn.
(12.) Nerup-wrembUl, from nerup = the butt or base of any-
thing, as nerup-galk, the butt of a tree at the ground. Hence
applied to the lobe of the ear ( wrembul ).


(13.) Wurt-wrembul, from wurt = above and also behind, and
wrembul = ear. That is, that part of the head which is just
above and behind the ear.
(14.) Doke-doke, from doka = to move.
(15.) Bet det hard. This refers to the crown of the head;
from here the count is carried down the corresponding parts
on the opposite side.
The messenger carried the message stick in a net bag, and on
arriving at the camp to which he was sent, he handed it to the
headman at some place apart from the others, saying to him,
“So and so sends you this,” and he then gives his message,
referring as he does so to the marks on the message stick; and if
his message requires it, also enumerates the days or stages as the
case may be by the above method. The headman having
examined the message stick hands it to the other old men, and
having satisfied himself how many people are wanted and how
many"hordes l are to be present, and having made such other
enquiries as may be necessary, calls all the people together and
announces the message to them.
The message stick is retained by the recipient, who carries it
back when he goes to attend the meeting it calls together. The
messenger meanwhile lives in the camp with some of his
connections or friends until they all depart, when he accom-
panies them. Such a messenger would never be interfered
with. No one would think of injuring a man who brought news.
If any one were to molest him the whole of the people v/ould
take the matter up, but especially his own friends.
The messenger in this tribe did not carry any emblematical
token in addition to the message stick, even when carrying a
message relating to a set-fight or to war, but a messenger of
death painted his face with pipeclay when he set out.
The illustration, fig. 8, Plate XIY, represents one of the message
sticks used in this tribe. It conveys a message from the head-
man of the Gromilluk horde, to the people of the Yarik-kaluk
horde at Lake Coorong, both being local divisions of the Wotjo-
baliik tribe. The message invited all the people to come to a
corroboree.
The notches at {a) represent the sender and his four friends,
being the principal men at Gromilluk. The notches at ( h )
represent the Yari-kuluk people. The notches continuing
along the edge to the end on each edge indicates that all the
people are to come. The shape of the stick is due to it having
1 Horde is used to designate one of the local divisions of a tribe ■which counts
descent through the female line. I only use the word clan for the local divisions
of a tribe which has descent in the male line.


been made from a crooked branch of a tree, and is not inten-
tional.
The next tribe to be mentioned is the Wirajuri of the Lower
Mnrumbidgee Eiver in New South Wales. This tribe has the
Kamilaroi organization into four classes, with descent in the
female line. Each class has a group of totems. In each locality
the oldest man of any totem is the head of the totem there, and
the oldest man of any totem is the head of that totem as a whole.
Important messages, such as those relating to the initiation
ceremonies {Burpting) are sent by a headman. The messenger
must be of the same totem as the sender, and the message
is sent to the oldest man of the same totem in the locality
to which the message is sent. This oldest man is the head
of the totem there. Thus, supposing the headman sending the
message to be a Kubi, his messenger is a Kubi, as is also the
man to whom the message is sent. The message is sent on
from one place to the other by men of the same totem.
On such a mission the bearer of the message is safe from harm.
He is provided with a stick, the notches on which remind him of
his message. If the message is one calling the people together
for initiation ceremonies, the messenger carries also a bull-roarer
( Bolu , or Mudjigang), a man’s belt ( Gulir ), a man’s kilt; Bur an,
or Talahttlga ) made of kangaroo rat skin ; a head-string (Ulungai-
ir); and a white head-band (. Kamhrum ). That is to say, in addi-
tion to the message stick the messenger carries the sacred emblem
which compels the attendance at the ceremonies of those to
whom it comes, and also the various articles with which the
novice is invested when he is “ made a man,”
The messenger having made known his errand to the man to
whom he has been sent, and delivered his message stick and the
other tokens of his message, the recipient assembles the men at
the council place {Ngulubul). He there shows them the message
stick and the tokens, and delivers to them the message.
Sometimes,when a kilt is sent, the strips of skin forming it are
used instead of a notched stick to remind the bearer of his message.
The recipient of the message sends it on with all the articles
he has received by one of his own people, and it thus travels
until the furthest point is reached.
The tribes which inhabited the Maneroo tableland and the
south coast of New South Wales also used message sticks much
as did those I have mentioned. The messenger, as in other
places was usually a young man related to the man who sent the
message, and he was chosen, if possible, as having relations or
friends at the place he was sent to. 1 If the message related to
1 The man who acted as messenger between me and the Miming people about
the holding of their initiation ceremonies was one of the Krauatun clan of the


a meeting for corroboree lie carried a kilt ( BUran ), a head-band
(Ngunumla ), and a nose peg (Ulungantu). If the message
related to a set-fight he carried a shield ( Birkumba ), and if the
message was to call together a war party he carried a jagspear
(JerumbUdi). In relation to the initiation ceremonies he carried
a bull-roarer {Mudji), and also a spear, boomerang, and shield.
The following account given to me by Mr. A. M’Keachie, of
Delegete, will show how these messages were sent in the early
days when Maneroo had not been long settled by the whites,
and while the aboriginal tribes were still in the primitive con-
dition.
When travelling, in 1840, on the Upper Snowy River, he met
two young men, one of whom carried two sticks, each about two
feet in length, and having notches cut on them. These, they told
him, were to remind them of their message, which was to the
Maneroo hlackfellows, asking them to meet those of the Tumut
River and Quoenbeyan in the Snowy Mountains, at the sources
of the Snowy River, for the purpose of feasting on the Bogong
moths.
I have now recorded these particulars which are known to me
about tribes with which I have personal acquaintance, and I
proceed to note information for which I have to thank correspon-
dents scattered over a wide extent of Australia.
The practice of the Kamilaroi tribes is indicated by the state-
ments of Mr. C. Uaseby, 2 of Maitland, whose knowledge of the
tribes in that district extends over fifty years. TheSfe MwUmes-
sengers in each clan, 3 who were like heralds, and as such were
well known, could safely go among neighbouring tribes even
when there was war. These men, being well known, needed not
to carry any emblems, but if a man was employed by a white
man as a messenger, he carried the letter entrusted to him in a
cleft stick, and he could then pass safely through even an
enemy’s country, because he was seen to be the “ white man’s
messenger,” and that, therefore, if any harm happened to him,
the “ tribe of the white man would become very angry.”
Mr. Cyrus E. Doyle, writing to me of the Kamilaroi blacks of
ne Gwydir River, says that the old men of the tribe formed a
council which managed all matters of importance. It was they
who sent messengers to distant places. Message sticks were
Kurnai. He had married a Maneroo woman and his mother-had come from the
same district. He was therefore free of that tribe (Wolgal) and he was the
recognised means of communication between his tribe and his wile’s. He spent
his time between the two.
2 For Mr. Naseby’s valuable information I have to thank also Mr. J. Fraser,
8.A., of Maitland, who kindly placed us in communication.
3 Mr. Naseby’s context shows me that he uses the word clan for a local sub-
division of a tribe and not for one of the social divisions.


used, but only had notches cut on the edges by the sender to
show the number of men required to meet together, or to help
the sender’s people against their enemies.
Messages of less moment were intrusted to the messengers to
deliver verbally.
In the Yualaroi tribe on the Ballone Eiver, in Hew South
Wales, according to Mr. Eobert Crowthers, “ men not specially
appointed can carry pieces of wood with marks on them from
one person to another, but they have to explain their meaning
as the marks alone go for nothing.”
Still further to the northward, in the Bunya-Bunya Mountains,
is the Kaiabara tribe, which divides into four exogamous inter-
marrying classes of the Kamilaroi type, but with descent in the
male line. Here also message sticks are used, and according to
my informant, Mr. Jocelyn £rffke, sub-inspector of native
mounted police, when the message relates to combats between
the Kaiabara and neighbouring tribes, which are to be arranged
in consequence of some man’s offence, as the abduction of a
woman, the challenge is sent by a messenger, who carries a piece
of wood cut in the form of a boomerang, with a shell tied at one
end. If the other tribe keeps the stick and the shell, the
challenge is accepted, and they send back word by the messenger
naming the place and time for the meeting ; but if they consider
themselves not strong enough and are afraid, they keep the shell
and send back the stick. This means that they decline the
challenge. They have to break the shell on a stone in the
presence of the messenger as a sign that they acknowledge them ■
selves to be beaten.
On the coast of Southern Queensland there was formerly a
considerable tribe, which has now almost perished. It was
called the Chepara. It was divided into a number of local
clans, but had so far as the most careful enquiries by my corres-
pondent, Mr. James Gibson, J.P., of Yataia, could discover, no
class divisions or totems. There are, however, indications that
these once existed.
In this tribe messengers were sent on tribal matters by the
principal headman of the clan, or in matters of great and general
moment by the principal headman of the tribe. The messenger
(Buira) has usually a son or a near relation of the sender, such
as his “ Kanil.” 1
If the message was an important one from the headman of
the tribe, the messenger carried with him a message stick called
“ Kahugabul-bageru.’’ The marks on this stick are said to have
1 Kanil is a sister’s son’s son, or a sister’s daughter’s son. Here we have
lingering traces of descent through the female line in the choice of a messenger.


been always the same, and to have been known to mean that
the recipients of the message were to pack up and start for the
appointed camp. The stick itself conveys the message, but the
bearer of it also carried a communication by word of mouth.
The messenger on his arrival delivered the stick to the head-
man of the clan to which he was sent, which was the one nearest
to his own. This man then sent it on by his own messenger,
and so on until it finally returned to the first sender.
This message stick was sent on all occasions when the whole
tribe was to assemble for corroborees, fights, or for the Bora
ceremonies. The messenger was painted and decked with
feathers, and when the message referred to the Bora, he carried
also in addition to the Kabugabul-bageru, a bull-roarer ( Bribun)
and a spear, to the point of which was attached a bag contain-
ing quartz crystals, which might only be shown to the various
headmen. It was not lawful for a woman to see the Kabugabul-
bageru, and if she saw the Bribun she was liable to be killed.
Along the coast to the northwards of the Chepara was the
Turribul tribe. Mr. Harry Aldridge, of Maryborough, has
kindly given me the following important information as to the
use of message sticks by that and the neighbouring tribes. Mr.
Aldridge has had great experience, having lived in the Turribul
country almost since its first settlement, and has not only fre-
quently observed the use of message sticks, but has also used
them himself in communicating with the blacks. He tells me
that the maker of a message stick makes it in the presence of
his messenger, and explains it to him. If the messenger cannot
deliver it himself, he in his turn explains it to some other mes-
senger, who undertakes to deliver it. If shown to a man to
whom it has not been explained, he will say, for instance, “ I
know this means something, but I do not know what it means.”
As an illustration of this means of sending a message, Mr.
Aldridge sketched a message stick and gave the following par-
ticulars. The sketch has been reproduced in fig. 17, Plate XIY.
He said, “ I assume that I am a black fellow living at some
place distant twenty to thirty miles from some friend to whom
I desire to send the following message —‘ lam here five camps
distance from you. In such and such a time (say ten days), I
will go and see you. There are so and so (naming them) camped
here with me. Send me some flour, tea, sugar, and tobacco.
How are Bulkoin and his wife, and Bunda.’ Having my mes-
senger by me, I should then prepare a message stick, say a piece
of wood, six inches long, half an inch wide, and on it I should
make the following marks shown in the sketch.
“ (a). Five notches representing thd five stages (camp) distant
from the recipient of the message.


“ (6). A flat place cut in the edge to show a break in the
message.
“ ( c ). Ten notches representing the time in days after which
the sender will visit his friend.
“ (d). Eight notches representing the eight people camped
with the sender.
“ (e). Four notches representing the articles asked for.
“(/). A flat place representing another break in the message,
“ (g) Three notches representing the three people asked after.
“ Having made these marks and explained them to my mes-
senger, I should carve the end of the stick to make it orna-
mental, and then give it to him for delivery.”
In fig. 13, Plate XIY, there is represented a message stick
used by the Miindainbura tribe at the Dawson Eiver, in
Queensland. This tribe divides into four classes, Kurgila,
Kunbe, Wiingu and Kuburu, having female descent.
My correspondent Mr. W. Logan, of Durham Downs, says of
this stick as follows : “ the notches in the upper edge 1 represent a
number of men of the Kurgila class of the tribe. The two rows
of dots below represent men respectively of the Kunbe and
Wungu classes. The notches on the lower edge represent men of
the Kuburu class. The message with it was to invite these
people to a corroboree.”
In writing to a valued correspondent, Mr. R. Christison, of
Lammermoor Station, on the subject of message sticks, I sub-
mitted to him a sketch of the Mundainbura message sticks with
a request that he would ascertain what the men living with him
of the Dalebura tribe could make of it; the Dalebura tribe has
the same class divisions as those above noted.
In reply he wrote as follows : “ I return the message you sent
in your letter and I will explain all the blacks here can make of
it. The top notches represent the Karagilla class; the bottom
ones represent the Kooberoo class and the dots represent a wish
to meet.”
This statement is important as showing that the notches in
the upper and lower edges have a definite meaning as the Kurgilla
and Kuburu classes respectively.
On the coast north of Rockhampton is the Kuinmurbura tribe,
which has a class organization on the Kamilaroi type, with
descent in the female line. Mr. W. H. Flowers, of Pine Moun-
tain, says as follows : “ Meetings for Boras (Initiations) are
called by means of message sticks. One lately sent here from
the blacks to the westward was from the Bau totem (Black
Eaglehawk) of the tribe to the Merkein totem (Laughing
Represented on the left side in the figure.


Jackass) of this tribe, was a piece of rosewood about five inches
by one and.a half inches, and one-sixth inch thick.”
I may add to this that both the Ban and the Merkein totem
are of the same primary class Witteru although occurring in
different tribes.
At the Belyando Kiver somewhat further north is the Wakel-
bura tribe which may serve as the type of a number extending
over a large extent of country and as to which I have received
many interesting particulars from a most competent observer,
Mr. J. 0. Muirhead, of Elgin Downs.
From his account I extract the following: A messenger is
chosen who has a number of friends in the tribe to which he is
to be sent or which he is instructed to bring. Should such a
messenger be killed or injured, his tribe would retaliate by
killing or injuring the man who did it. Message sticks are used
to send messages by such messengers.
The following instance will show how message sticks are used
in this tribe, figs. 15 and 16, Plate XIY, represent one which
was sent by one of the Wakelbura, to a member of the Yange-
bura tribe at Blackall. The stick being sent by an Obu is
Gidyea, 1 timber being Wutheru. The message refers to. game,
(a) being for Emu, (5) for Wallaby, to be found near a certain
wire netting fence, (c) on a station near Clermont. The marks
on the stick do not convey their meaning without a verbal
message. The man who takes the stick explains their meaning.
If the stick were sent by a Mallera, everything marked on the
stick would be Mallera, and it would be delivered to a Mallera.
But the above described and figured stick was sent by Obu to
Obu. The sticks are always painted, this one was coloured blue.
Here we have again a case analogous to the Wirajuri practice,
the message goes through the same totem. But the principle
involved is here much more comprehensive. The stick itself is
of wood which is of the same totem as is also the game noted on
it. In this tribe the two primary, and the four sub-classes
divide, I may say, the whole universe into groups. The two
primary classes are Mallera and Wutheru, therefore all objects
are either one or the other. The practice is carried to such an
extent that for instance a wizard who is Mallera can only use
objects for his magical practices which are also of the same
class as himself. Moreover when he dies the staging upon
which his body is laid out must be made of the wood of some
tree belonging to the Mallera class. Hence it is necessary as in
the case just given, that when a man of the Obu sub-class sends
a message stick it must be made of some wood which is also
Obu.
1 Acacia homalophylla.


I am indebted to Mr. E. Palmer, M.P., of Gamboola, for
examples of message sticks used by the Kugobathi tribe, at the
Mitchell River which flows into the Gulf of Carpentaria. The
one given in figs. 6 and 7 of Plate XIY, represents the front and
reverse of a message stick sent by a blackfellow at the Flinders
River to another at the Mitchell River, to inform him that his
wife was dead. The one shown by fig 5, Plate XIY, is a friendly
reminder or greeting, carried without any message excepting the
sender’s name by Mr. Palmer from a man of the Maikulon tribe,
to a man of the Maiapi tribe.
Unfortunately I have no descriptive statement of the message
and the marks connected with it as shown by figs. 6 and 7.
These are examples of the more ornamented class message
sticks which are used in some places.
In the country through which the Darling River flows in
Western Xew South Wales the tribes also used the message
stick extensively for conveying information from one to the
other.
The following details have been kindly communicated to me
by Mr. J. W. Boultbee of Tarella.
Message sticks can be sent by anyone, even by a white man.
The marks placed upon the sticks are aids to memory. Fig. 4,
Plate XIY, represents a message stick sent by a Tongaranka
blackfellow inviting two of his friends at a distance to come
and see him as his wife was ill and could not travel. The notch
{a) means the sender ; (b) and (c) the two men invited. The stick
was wrapped round with a piece of thread to render it less liable
to be lost.
Figs. 2 and 3 represent the two sides of another stick belong-
ing to a message sent from the son of the headman of the
Tongaranka tribe to a man at Tarella. The message was to tell
him that the sender and his two brothers, and also two old men
were at a certain water hole, and wished him to bring down
his son to be initiated (made a man), as there were two other
boys ready for the same ceremony. The notches (a) (b) ( c )
in fig. 3 represent the sender and his two brothers ; the notches
( d) ( e ) represent the two old men. The notches in fig. 2 are as
follows; (d) represents the recipient of the message; (c) is his
son, and (a) and (b) the two boys ready to be initiated.
This message stick is made of part of the small branch of a
tree, and is wrapped round with a few strands of the “ man’s
kilt ” with which article of man’s attire a boy is invested after
initiation. The whole is tied up by means of about two feet in
length of the cord made of twisted opossum fur for which the
novice wears for a time after his initiation, as evidence of being a
“ young man.”


In this instance, the “ emblematic tokens ” are made part of
the message, and are not, as in some ribes already referred to,
carried separately by the messenger.
Yorke’s Peninsula, in South Australia, was occupied by the
Adjadura tribe. 1 My informant, Mr. T. M. Sutton, of Point
Pearce Mission Station, has most obligingly made minute
enquiries for me as to the use of message sticks by that tribe,
the results of which I now propose to give shortly.
Meetings of head men of the clans, or of the clans, or of the
whole tribe for festive or ceremonial purposes were called together
by means of messengers who were told off for the duty by the
headman of that division or clan which initiated the proceeding.
These men carried message sticks. If a reply was required, the
same or any other man carried it back, sometimes by message
stick, sometimes by word of mouth only. There does not seem
to have been any established rule as to the return message. The
messenger carried the message stick (, Mdnk ) rolled up in the
skin of any kind of animal. At the present time a handkerchief
is used. The bearer on his arrival hands it to the person to
whom it is sent.
Various kinds of message sticks are used, or rather message
sticks bearing various marks. That for corroboree has its mark-
ings. If the meeting is for initiation a second stick is sent also
with markings peculiar to it. The two sticks in such a case are
rolled up together.
If the message relates to an expiatory fight the messenger on
delivering his stick says, “ Dudla,” which means “ fight.”
The two above-mentioned kinds of sticks are shown in Plate
XIV. The figs. 9 and 10 represent the two sides of a corro-
boree stick.
In fig. 9 ( a ) represents the sender; the notches at (b)
represents the singers ; and at (c) the women, that is to say the
women who perform the part of orchestra by drumming on their
rolled up skin rugs; the other notches represent the men who
will be present as dancers. In fig. 10 (a) represents the old men
who are invited; (h) the women to accompany them, and (c) the
men.
Figs. 11 and 12 represent the two sides of the^initiation stick.
1 I take this opportunity of correcting some inaccuracies in an account of this
tribe which I gave on information furnished by the Rev. Julius Kuhn, at p. 284,
Appendix H, “ Kamilaroi and Kurnai.” The tribal name is that above given.
It seems that the local and social divisions of the tribe are coincident. There
were four of each. The social divisions (classes) are Kari = Emu, Waui = Red
Kangaroo, Wilthuthu = Shark and Wiltu = Eaglehawk. Each class had a group
of totems. The classes were not exogamous. Thus Kari might marry Kari as
well as any other class. The children took the class name of their father. The
only restriction upon marriage depended upon nearness of kinship.


In fig. 11 ( a ) is a large notch representing the sender of the
message, the headman of the tribe; the two small notches
alongside are two of the old men who will assist him in seeing
that ° everything is conducted properly. The notches at (b)
represent all the men of his moiety of the tribe who will assist
at the ceremony. The five notches at (c) represent the boys who
will be initiated, and the pairs of notches at (d) the five couples
of men who are assigned to look after the five boys. 1 Fig. 12
represents the men of the other moiety of the tribe who are
invited to assist; (a) representing the two old men of that
moiety.
It seems from Mr. Sutton’s statements that among the
Adjadura there is an approach to a fixed rule according to which
these sticks are marked. For the persons who send them, the
persons who receive them and the matters to which they relate
are pretty much always the same. The variations between one
set of sticks and another would be in the relative number of the
sets of individuals referred to. The names of the persons and
the times and places referred to in the message would of course
never appear upon the record of the message stick. Thus one
can understand that such a stick could convey a certain amount
of meaning definitely to an Adjadura headman independently of
any verbal message.
Mr. Sutton says that the recipient of a message stick without
a verbal message, must have some knowledge of what is wanted
or of the subject to which it relates in order to explain it. As
an illustration he said that he had once carried a message stick
for one of the Adjadura which was merely a flat piece of wood
with one notch at one end and two notches close together at the
other. He delivered it without saying more than “ This is from
so-and-so,” not having received any message with it. The
recipient, however, knew that the sender had been separated
from his wife, and he understood the marks on the stick to mean
that the two had been reconciled again, and thus correctly read
the message which was intended to be conveyed.
I have spoken of the emblematical tokens which some mes-
sengers carry. I may now add to those referred to an instance
1 One of these two men is the hoy’s “ father’s brother,” own or tribal. If
there is no such person then the “ mother’s brother ” is chosen own or tribal.
In default of him some one nearly related is selected to act.
Here we have apparent the influence of descent counted through the father
with a recourse in emergency to the female line. In most tribes, e.g the coast
Murring, the two men who look after the novice would be of the opposite moiety
of the tribe to which he belongs. The men of one moiety initiate the boys of
the other. That is to say that moiety which has to provide wives for the men
of the other moiety have the right of saying when those youths shall be per-
mitted to exercise the privileges of manhood.


from a tribe on the northern shores of Australia, which combines
the features of both the message stick and the token.
Mr. E. 0. Eobinson, of Coburg Peninsula, wrote to me to the
following effect. The tribe there is known by two names, Oirig
and Mananelo. In fact, however, these names are the designa-
tions of the two divisions of the tribe, and as it seems the local
divisions and not class divisions, such as are found elsewhere.
Information is conveyed by means of sticks about eighteen
inches in length, and one-third of an inch in diameter. Such a
stick is not carved or marked, but a bunch of feathers like a
plume is tied on one end.
A stick dressed with white feathers is a token of peace and a
call to a friendly meeting or a corroboree. The sender is usually
the head of a family. There is not any rule as to sending such a
message by any particular person. Any one can carry it, even
a woman. If the recipient of the stick accepts the invitation,
he keeps it, and the time of meeting is arranged. If he is not
inclined to be friendly, he breaks the stick, or he pulls off the
feathers and replaces them with coloured ones and sends it back.
This means war.
Mr. Eobinson gave the following illustration: —
In 1879, when on his return from Port Darwin, he found two
such sticks dressed with coloured feathers in his camp at Croker
Island. Shortly before this his partner had been killed by the
blacks. Mr. Eobinson’s two blackboys at first thought that the
sticks were to tell them that some black fellow was dead. But
on further examination of them, they said, “ Black fellow not
dead —only gone.”
It turned out afterwards that the news intended to be con-
veyed was, that one black fellow had died, one had been killed
by Mr. Eobinson’s partner, and a woman had been killed by
some other blacks. The sticks had been left, where found, to
tell his two men of these deaths.
I have now detailed the evidence, which I have before me,
bearing upon message sticks, and upon the manner and degree
in which the markings upon them are designed to convey infor-
mation to the persons receiving them. Very much more evidence
might be collected. My evidence, although collected from places
spread over a large part of Eastern Australia, leaves vast areas
untouched, and does not at all show what the practice is in the
western half of the continent. Yet I venture to think that the
facts which I have recorded in these notes, will enable anthropo-
logists to arrive at a fair degree of certainty as to the general
practice, and also as to how far a message stick can be used to
carry information from one person to another.
It seems to me that so far as the evidence goes, it may be
b h


concluded with some degree of safety, that there is no recognised
system of marks which serves to convey information without
an accompanying verbal message. The stick with its markings
is a kind of tally to keep record of the various points or heads
of the message, and is merely an aide m&rnoire. There is no
reason to believe that any of the markings are anything but
arbitrary, and many of these shown in the illustrations are
merely ornamental.
But when persons have been in frequent communication with
each other by means of message sticks, and are acquainted
generally with each other’s concerns, it is quite possible for one
of them through familiarity with the system usually followed by
his correspondent, to give a guess with more or less certainty at
the probable meaning of any marked stick sent to him. Thus,
for instance, the partial reading by the Dalebura men of the
Mundainbura message stick, the statement by the Chepara that
their Kabugal-bageru sticks were always marked in the same
manner, and the definite arrangement of the marks on the two
message sticks of the Adjadura, lead to the belief that there
is a tendency for the markings to acquire a definite position in
certain kinds of message sticks, and, therefore, also a definite
meaning.
If this is so, we have in this what seems to be a first step
towards the ultimate result of a system of writing, where
symbols might bear some resemblance to the original notches
made upon the message stick.
Description of Plate XIV,
Fig. 1. Message stick of Woiworung tribe, Victoria, to collect
an assembly for corroboree. The reverse is plain. Scale
one-half linear.
Figs. 2 and 3. Message stick of Tongaranka tribe, New South
Wales, relating to initiation ceremonies. Fig. 3 (a), ( b ), (c),
the sender of the message and his two brothers; {d), (e),
two old men with the sender.
Fig. 2. Eeverse of fig. 3. (a), the recipient of the message (c),
the son of ( d ), (a), ( b ), two boys to be initiated with (c).
Half scale.
Fig. 4. Message stick from a man of the Tongaranka tribe, (a)
the sender of the message, (b), (c) the two men initiated by
(a) to meet him.
Fig. 5. Message stick sent by a man of the Maikulon tribe, to
a man of the Maiapi tribe in Northern Queensland, as a
friendly reminder. Half scale.
Figs. 6 and 7. Message stick sent by a man at the Flinders


f> 9 .i
2 a b c- “ h c fu,3
fy*
5
f l 9 & f*g 7
/uf 8
f'9 lu
/4
S*it *S
3 / e J.
/T m ii'i "~ III Min \
< ) n
\L. iJimmi —r v _ mu /
7toh chel/, c h a.
Journ. Anthrop. List., Vol. XVIIT, PL XU
AUSTRALIAN MESSAGE STICKS.


.


River in North Queensland, to a friend at the Mitchell
River.to inform him that his wife was ill. Half scale.
8. Message stick of the Wotjoballuk tribe, Victoria, sent to
invite an assembly for corroboree; (a) the sender of the
message and four friends,, (c) the recipient. The other
notches indicate that all the people with (h) are to attend.
Half scale.
i. 9 and 10. Message stick for corroboree of the Adjadura
tribe in South Australia. Fig. 9 (a) the sender of message,
(h) the singers, (c) women; other notches the dancers.
Fig. 10 (a) the old men invited, (b) women and, (c) the
men with (a).. One-fourth scale.
i. 11 and 12. Message stick for initiation of the Adjadura
tribe. Fig. 11 (a) sender of the message and the friends, (h)
all the men with (a), (c) five boys to be initiated, (d) ten
men to look after ( c) during the ceremonies. Fig. 12 (a)
the two old men who are invited. The remainder of the
notches represent the men with (a). One-fourth scale.
13. Message stick of the Mundainbura tribe, Queensland,
inviting to a corroboree. Upper line of notches represent
men of the Kurgila clan, upper line of dots, men of the
Kunbe clan, lower line of dots, men of the Wungu clan,
and the lower line of notches men of the Kuburu clan.
One-fourth scale..
14. Message stick of the Chepara tribe, Queensland, call-
ing upon that part of the tribe which received it to attend
for corroboree, or for initiation ceremonies. One-fourth
scale.
.15 and 16. Message stick from a man of the Wakelbura
tribe, to a man of the Yangebura tribe, Queensland, inviting
him to visit the sender to hunt for game near a certain wire
netting fence erected on a sheep run, (a) Emu, (&) Wallaby,
( c ) the wire netting fence. One-fourth scale.
17. Message stick as used by the Turribul tribe in Queens-
land, representing a message from one man to another, (a)
the distance of the sender from recipient of the message in
stages (camps), ( h) a break in the message, (c) the persons
camped with (a), (d) period in days after which the sender-
will visit the recipient, ( e ) four articles which the sender-
requests may be sent to him, (/) a break in tire message,
(g) persons with the recipient after whom the sender
enquires. One-fourth scale.


[22 eprinted from the Journal of the Anthropological Institute, May, 1889.j
Harrison and Sons. Printers in Ordinary to Her Majesty, St. Martin s Lane.


*
,
■
I"
L


t
*
