

NOTES
OX THE
FINANCIAL ASPECT
AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION
T. A. GOGH LAN,
GOVERNMENT STATISTICIAN OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
THE CONVENTION BILL AND THE FEDERAL
TARIFF.
SYDNEY: WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1898.




!h iiss/p&l+lf
U-S-77
NOTES ON THE FINANCIAL ASPECT
AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION.
The Convention Bill.
In the course of my duty as Statistician, I deemed it desirable to publish my
opinion on the financial proposals contained in the Commonwealth Bill now
under discussion by the Convention. The gist of that opinion was that a
federation based on such lines was impossible. It has been objected that an
opinion without the data on which ifc was founded was worthless, and I
therefore lost no time in publishing the materials on which it was based.
These data absolutely bear out the views I expressed, and neither opinion
nor data are to be set aside by mere general statements or personal abuse.
They must be accepted, or met by contrary facts and argument. The
position of the discussion in regard to federal finance warrants my again
reviewing the whole position, and subjecting the deliverance of the delegates
who have adversely commented upon my work to close examination. The
main questions affecting federal finance will be treated under separate
headings.
The proportions in which the Colonies will contribute to
the Federal Revenue.
It is not open to dispute that a customs tariff can only be applied to
imports retained for home consumption. Nor is it seriously disputed that,
allowing for public and private indebtedness, the volume of exports governs
the volume of imports. The tables prepared by me show that, excluding
intercolonial trade, New South Wales would export over 54 per cent, of the
whole of the domestic produce of the federation; these tables also show that
this colony imported 46 per cent, of the value of goods introduced into the
five colonies for local consumption, and from 48 to 50 per cent, of the goods
which would be dutiable under the tariffs now existing in the other federating
colonies. It is therefore not an improbable assumption that, out of a revenue
of £6,000,000, the people of New South Wales would contribute £2,717,000,
or 45 - 29 per cent., which is the assumption made in my “ Notes on the
Financial Aspect of Federation/’ The population of New South Wales amounts
to only 41-37 per cent, of the population of the five colonies, and it is plain
that if each colony contributed ratably, according to population, New South
Wales’ contribution towards a revenue of £6,000,000 would be £2,482,000,
or £235,000 less than it would seem that she is likely to be called upon to
pay.


The case of Western Australia is similar to that of New South Wales.
Towards a £6,000,000 Customs and Excise revenue her contribution would
he at least £858,000, while on the basis of population the contribution
expected from this province would be £264,000 only, showing an excess of
£594,000, due to the greater consumption of dutiable goods in Western
Australia than in the federation taken as a whole. New South Wales and
Western Australia would therefore furnish between them £3,575,000 out of
£6,000,000 of revenue, or 59-58 per cent., although their population, taken
together, does not amount to more than 45-77 per cent. This view of the
case is important, as a consideration of it has led the Convention to the
adoption of the so-called book-keeping system, which professes to provide for
a return of the federal surplus to each colony according to its contribution
to the federal revenue. So far as New South Wales is concerned, she could
look with equanimity to a smaller return from the surplus than she is theo-
retically entitled to. Not so Western Australia.
The data on which the conclusions just arrived at are based have been
published as “Tables to accompany Notes on the Financial Aspect of Federa-
tion,” and need not, therefore, be reproduced. It may be sufficient to say that
the assumption that New South Wales will provide at least 45-29 per cent, of
the total revenue of the federation may be deduced from the following facts.
In all cases the intercolonial trade is excluded.
New South Wales’ share of imports of merchandise for home consumption
into the five colonies was—
1893 ... ... ... ... 49-22 per cent.
1894 45-48
1895 ... ... ... ... 44-34 ~
1896 45-29 „
1893-1896 46-00
New South Wales’ share of imports of merchandise for home consumption
into the five colonies dutiable under the other tariffs was—
Victorian tariff—lB93-96 ... ... SOT 2 per cent.
South Australia ~ ... ... 48-68 ~
Western Australia ~ ... ... 49-26 ~
Tasmania ~ ... ... 48 - 02 ~
Of the total exports of the five colonies to countries outside the federating
area, New South Whiles’ share was—
1893 ... ... ... ... 56-59 per cent.
1894 52-35
1895 52-59 „
1896 55-30 „
1893-96 54-18
These facts have been either ignored in the discussion on the probable
contribution of each State towards the federal revenue, or at best met
by the expression of a hope that under federation there will be a revolu-
tion in trade; but even if such a thing were to be looked forward to


with complacency, no revolution would affect the proportion of revenue
contributed by New South Wales, unless the export trade of the colony was
also affected. In fine, to bring down the import trade of New South Wales
to the average of the other colonies, the export trade must be brought down
in the same degree.
The Financial Position after Federation.
Tasmania.
The use of the word “insolvent,” as applied to the future condition of some of
the States, has been characterised as wicked and unpatriotic. But it will be
seen that there is no other term that will so fitly describe the condition to which
they will be brought under the financial arrangement proposed by the Con-
vention. To understand this best it will he as well to glance at the revenue
and expenditure during recent years. Tasmania may first be dealt with. The
following figures show her financial condition during the last five years ;
Year. Revenue. [ Expenditure. Surplus. I Deficiency.
£
787,76 i
706,972
693,795
£
919,802
836,417
789,806
132,038
129,445
93,011
761,971 748,946
797,976 750,244
13,025
47,732
These figures, though in the nature of “ mere arithmetic,” make it evident
that this province cannot afford to part with much revenue without her
financial equilibrium being destroyed. Any one who knows Tasmania will
be aware that any change in her taxation system must be in the direction of
a remission of duties; that is to say, the province has reached the stage when
taxation is oppressive. Of her imports for home consumption 91 per cent, are
taxable, the duty levied thereon being equal to 24 - 2 per cent, ad valorem .
The land tax is at the rate of Id. in the £ of capital value, and the income
tax runs from Bd. in the £ to Is. where the income is derived from property.
If it be supposed that the Tasmanian tariff is imposed by the Federal
Parliament—and for the sake of illustration this tariff will serve as well
as any other —and that Tasmania gets back her share of the surplus according
to her contributions, then the effect of federation will be as follows:
Tasmania will lose the present intercolonial duties, which are estimated to-
yield a revenue of £38,500. She will be called upon to bear her share of
the federal expenditure, £82,100 —that is to say, the loss of revenue and
the new charges will amount to £120,600; the colony will be relieved of
present services, involving an outlay of £33,000; so that, financially, under
federation the province will be £87,600 worse off than she is at present. In
these and following estimates, the postal and telegraph revenue and expenditure
have not been considered, the diffei’ence between them alone being brought to
account. The Treasurer of Tasmania, therefore, will find himself with £87,600
less resources than he has at present, while the calls upon his purse are not in


any wise abated. It is idle to suppose that Tasmania could raise £87,600 by
additional taxation ; any attempt to force more revenue out of the colony
would neutralize the advantages of federation great as they undoubtedly are.
Nor could there be any appreciable lowering of expenditure, seeing that every-
thing that economy can dictate has already been practised. No one, therefore,
can gainsay the fact that unless Tasmania is specially treated, she will become
under federation a financial wreck. The whole question of federal finance
especially in relation to Tasmania, has been dealt with at length by Mr. R.
M. Johnston, the statistician of Tasmania, who has emphatically declared
that it is simply impossible for his colony to join the federation on the lines
of the Adelaide bill, as she would be compelled to overburden herself with
taxation to make ends meet.
South Australia.
The position of South Australia after federation is accomplished has
received little attention. It is generally conceded that a tariff on the lines of
that of South Australia would yield revenue sufficient to provide for the
necessities of the five colonies. Assuming, then, that such a tariff is in force,
and that South Australia gets back from the federation what she contributes
less her share in the expenses of federation, the position of the province
would appear somewhat as followsßy intercolonial free trade she would
lose £34,900, and her share in the federal expenditure would be £178,000; the
province would therefore suffer a reduction of revenue or its equivalent equal
to £212,900, while the utmost saving of expenditure by reason of services
transferred may be put down at £60,000 (probably £41,500). Her net
loss would be therefore not less than £152,900. The finances of South
Australia for the past five years are illustrated by the following figures : —-
Year. *Epvenue. Surplus. Deficiency.
£ £
1592-3 2,525,525 2,784,145
1893- 2,591,271 2,649,081
1
1894- 2,497,648 2,661,934
1895- 2,585,230 2,640,688
1896- 2,698,759 2,759,110
* Including Northern
remembered that a high tariff
a land tax of from |d. to 1
: varying from 4|-d. in the £ 1
* Including Northern Territoiy.
When it is remembered that a high tariff is in operation in South Australia,
coupled with a land tax of from £l. to lf o d. in the £of capital value, and
an income tax varying from 4|d. in the £ to Is., it will be admitted that this
province is not in a position to incur an additional burthen of £152,900, which
is equal to over 65 per cent, of the whole product of the present direct taxation,
including land and income taxes, and probate and stamp duties. This must,
however, be said in favour of South Australia, that if a per capita distribution
of the federal surplus be adopted, her position will be more than £llO,OOO better
than if the return be on the basis of contributions, and the South Australian
Government could view with equanimity the loss of £43,000 per annum
seeing the great and lasting benefits the colony would derive from federation.


Victoria.
The revenue and expenditure of this colony for the last five years were
as follow :
Year. Revenue. Expend! Surplus. Deficiency.
1892-3
6,959,229
6,716,814
6,712,152
1893-
1894-
1895-6
6,458,682
1896-7
6,629,613
t has been
is little pr
1,030,528
593,432
48,287
81,500
It is well known that every effort
down the expenditure, while there i
en made during
prospect of an;
taxation being agreed to by Parliament,
is perhaps more difficult to forecast than
financial
of any
mg the period to keep
any additional direct
condition of Victoria
of the other provinces.
There are, however, certain facts which cannot be disputed. The colony will
be relieved of some £307,500 by the transfer of services to the federation ; on
the other hand the customs duties now levied on intercolonial produce
average about £185,000, while Victoria’s share of the federal expenditure
would be about £580,500. If, therefore, there was a return of surplus revenue
according to contributions, the Victorian Treasury would be £458,000 worse
off than she is at present, supposing her own tariff were continued. It is
true the people of the colony would be none the worse off, but in dealing with
federation it is necessary to distinguish the interests of the government from
those of the governed. The Treasurer of the colony has had trouble enough
to make ends meet with his present revenue. How, then, would it be possible to
carry on the government with resources less by £458,000 1 And his difficulties
would be made still greater if a lower tariff were adopted. Under a
£6,000,000 tariff the £458,000 deficiency would be swollen to £676,000.
There is only one way in which the Victorian finances could be kept sound—-
that is, by a distribution of the surplus, not according to contributions, but
per capita. Without entering into the question of the tariff it may be assumed
that as the Victorian imports for home consumption now amount to 27• 11
per cent, of the total of the five colonies, and as her population is 37 - 45 per-
cent., the per capita system would benefit her to the extent of £10*34 out of
every £lOO distributed. The distributable sum is assumed to be £4,450,000 ;
so that by a per capita distribution Victoria would appear to gain £460,130.
(It may be said in passing that this is not the correct way to show the differ-
ence between the two methods of distributing surplus ; the true gain to the
colony would be considerably more.) Taking, however, the gain at the sum
stated, it would appear that the Treasury of the colony would be a loser to the
extent of £676,000 and a gainer by £460,130, showing a net loss of £215,870.
This sum would be a small price for Victoria to pay for the advantage of
federation, and no doubt the colony would readily agree to pay it. If the
distribution is not per capita it will not be possible for Victoria to join the
federation without ruining its financial position.


Western Australia.
The case of this province has already been discussed at some length. It
is proposed by the federation that Western Australia shall be entitled to levy
duties on intercolonial goods for a period of five years. This provision does
not affect the general finances of the federation. Of .£6,000,000 raised by
customs, Western Australia would pay at least £858,000 ; if she received back
on a capitation basis, the return would be £195,700 only, which would be
simply absurd. The fact seems to be now admitted by the Convention that
Western Australia cannot carry on her government if the return of the surplus
be made in any manner other than according to derivation of revenue. She,
therefore, stands in the -opposite position to the three southern colonies.
New South Wales,
This colony occupies entirely a different position to that of the others.
No system of disposal of surplus revenue would yield less than is now
enjoyed; so that whether the per capita distribution or the return of the
surplus according to contribution bo adopted, the finances of the colony would
remain undisturbed.
It may be well at this stage to reconsider the position of each colony.
Tasmania will be in difficulties under any form of return of the surplus,
but the per capita system will be most advantageous to her.
South Australia and Victoria will be embarrassed if the return be on the
basis of collections, but a per capita distribution would leave their treasuries
not greatly affected by federation.
Western Australia cannot submit to a per capita division of the surplus,
but a distribution according to contributions would leave the local finances
undisturbed.
Such being the position of the four colonies, it must be plain that were they
to attempt a political union without New South Wales, they Avould be involved
in financial disaster. The adhesion of New South Wales makes union
practicable; but even then it would seem that this colony would have, under
the existing proposals, to bear the whole weight of federation.
The Federal Tariff.
No part of the complicated question of federal finance has been so much
neglected as the probable federal tariff. It is contended in some quarters
that there will be a great expansion of trade under federation, and the revenue
will be greatly increased. This opinion belongs to the category of pious
hopes that are akin to delusions. There is nothing in the nature of federa-
tion which will tend to stimulate exports, and without the expansion of exports
there will be no increase in the imports—always supposing the federation
does not commence its career by raising a foreign loan. The most immediate
effect of federation will be to diminish exports, since with free interchange
between the colonies, and the expansion of the local markets, the provinces
will tend to trade more amongst themselves than with foreign countries.
This decrease in exports may probably be coincident with increased production ;
but, at the same time, there will be diminished imports. The fall in the
imports will be attended with a decline in the Customs returns —not an
increase of revenue, as some delegates vainly imagine. The conditions of


New South Wales
Victoria
South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania
£
... 1,968,000
... 1,782,000
546.000
839.000
315.000
Federal Government ...
£5,450,000
... 1,550,000
trade under federation affords food for many interesting speculations, but
the course of trade for the past few years may be taken as sufficient guide
for all practical purposes.
The present revenue conditions of the provinces are as follow (for obvious
reasons New South Wales has been left out of consideration) : —Victoria
levies duties equivalent to 36-2 per cent, ad valorem on 46-6 per cent, of her
imports other than stimulants and narcotics. This is equivalent to an all-
round duty of nearly 17 per cent.
South Australia levies duties equivalent to 21-8 per cent, ad valorem on
64-3 per cent, of her imports. This is equal to an all-round duty of over 14
per cent, ad valorem.
Western Australia levies duties equivalent to 13-6 per cent, ad valorem on
67-2 per cent, of her imports. This is equal to 10'5 per cent, ad valorem
on all goods.
Tasmania levies duties equivalent to 24 - 2 per cent, ad valorem on 91 per
cent, of her total imports. This is equal to 22 per cent, ad valorem on all
goods except, as in the other cases, stimulants and narcotics, which are subject
to special duties.
These figures do not give any absolute indication of what the federal tariff
will be, but they point to the fact that the range of duties will be very high.
The following deductions, however, may be made from the figures here and
elsewhere given in these “ Notes.’’
If the revenue of the colonies be pooled, and after the expenses of federation
have been defrayed the balance be returned to the different colonies in such
sums as will enable them to meet their obligations—in other words, if Few
South Wales is content to accept from the federation just the amount she now
obtains from the Reid tariff, all the rest of her contributions being absorbed
hi/ the necessities of the other States and of the Federal Government —a
.£6,000,000 tariff will suffice. To obtain £6,000,000 from customs and excise
duties, allowing £2,979,986 to be received from stimulants and narcotics, the
tariff must be equivalent to an ad valorem duty of 12-2 per cent, on all
imports from outside the federated area. This is higher than the present
tariff of Western Australia, but somewhat lower than that of South Australia.
There is another proposal requiring consideration—that is, what would be
the minimum tariff if Western Australia and Tasmania were guaranteed
their present revenue, and the distribution of the surplus made on the basis
of population so as to ensure the financial stability of Victoria and South
Australia. The revenue required to meet these conditions would be £7,000,000.
Deducting from this sum £1,550,000, the cost of federation would leave a
surplus of £5,450,000, and its distribution amongst the colonies would be as
shown below
£7,000,000


This tariff, and the distribution shown, would enable all the States to meet
their obligations, but would be very onerous, at least for New South Wales.
Allowing £2,979,986 for revenue from stimulants and narcotics, there would
remain £4,020,014 to be raised by duties on general merchandise. To obtain
such a sum, there would need to be an all-round ad valorem of over 16 per
cent. The tariff would therefore be higher than that at present in force in
Western Australia or South Australia, and closely approaching that of
Victoria.
Convention Criticisms.
In the course of the financial debate at Melbourne, a number of the federal
delegates, including Mr. Wise and Mr. Walker, of New South Wales; Sir
Edward Braddon, Mr. Henry, and Mr. Grant, of Tasmania; Mr. Holder, of
South Australia; and Mr. Higgins, of Victoria have taken me to task for
the figures presented and the views expressed in the various pamphlets I
have published on this cpiestion ; but, with the exception of Mr. Henry and
Mr. Holder, none of the gentlemen named have thought it necessary to bring
to their support anything in the shape of argument by way of refutation of
the opinions to which I have given expression, contenting themselves with
the general statement that ray opinions are fallacious because they are founded
on fallacious figures—meaning thereby that it is impossible, from the trade
figures of past years, to forecast with any certainty the proportions in which
the colonies would contribute to the federal revenue under a uniform tariff—
and, in some cases, going so far as to refer with satisfaction to the effective
manner in which it has been conveniently assumed I have been disposed of
by some other speaker.
It is surely not unreasonable to expect any gentleman who adopts- the
extreme course of denouncing as fallacious the views I have enunciated to go
to the root of the question, and attempt to show in what way they can justly
be regarded as fallacious. As a matter of fact, the great and knotty problem
of federal finance is an exceedingly simple one, and the threads are capable of
being unravelled too easily by anyone who is desirous of arriving at a proper
result to admit of my arguments being disposed of in such a summary
manner. All the statements with reference to my figures are mere empty
words, amongst which it would be vain to seek for any fact or argument,
save in the speech of Mr. Henry. The ex-Treasurer of Tasmania enters
into a comparison between New South Wales and Victoria, and he is
indignant because I showed that, on a population basis, the former colony
would contribute to the federal exchequer on a much heavier scale than the
latter. Certainly, Mr. Henry concedes that New South Wales is a great
colony; is a great producing colony; is a great exporting colony; is, therefore,
a great importing colon} 7 , but to nothing like the extent, in comparison with
the other provinces, that I would have the people believe. He vigorously
combats the view that New South Wales would contribute 45 per cent, of
the federal revenue, while Victoria would probably only contribute the propor-
tion of 27 per cent. Mr. Henry consulted with Mr. R. M. Johnston, the
able Statistician of Tasmania, and arranged with this gentleman to take out
the consumption of certain articles of food and drink—namely, spirits, wine,
beer, tobacco, tea, sugar, and molasses—in order to find how the various
colonies stood on this basis. Mr. Johnston is stated to have declared that the
average consumption per head of population in New South Wales was such that
the duty in respect thereof would be only one shilling greater than in Victoria


And, further, as this figure was obtained on the basis of one year only, and
Mr. Henry desired to he scrupulously fair, he got Sir George Turner to instruct
the Victorian Statistician to undertake the same work for five years—
-1891 to 1895—and the result w 7 as only Is. 7d. per head in favour of
Hew South Wales as compared with Victoria, after applying the existing
Tasmanian duties to the consumption in each colony as thus ascertained.
How, said Mr. Henry, under the Tasmanian tariff the articles specified would
yield <£4,200,000, and if a total revenue of £6,000,000 only be required, it
will be readily seen that no such difference can exist in the contributions of
the two States as I have endeavoured, from Machiavelian motives, to
induce people to believe. Hothing could be simpler, clearer to the mind
of the ex-Tasmanian Treasurer, than this simple sum in arithmetic.
It will, therefore, surprise Mr. Henry to learn that, without submitting the
figures established by the Tasmanian and Victorian Statisticians to investi-
gation, but conceding their accuracy without examination, I again put
forward the facts and figures previously brought under the notice of the Con-
vention, and that I see no necessary inconsistency between them and those
of Mr. Henry, for although to a revenue obtained from the articles of diet
specified Hew South Wales might only contribute at the rate of Is. 7d. per
head of population more than Victoria*, to the total revenue which it would
be necessary for the Commonwealth to raise from the Customs and Excise she
would yet contribute in practically the proportions that I have over and
over again indicated.
What Mr. Henry endeavours to show is, that having ascertained the
amount of revenue obtainable from the duties on certain articles, he can, by
a sum in simple proportion, work out the revenue obtainable from a compli-
cated tariff. Fifty-two per cent, of the Tasmanian revenue is obtained from
duties on certain articles; given the revenue derivable from the same articles
at Tasmanian rates in Hew South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, and
Western Australia, and the whole revenue from such tariff may be forecast.
Mr. Henry’s theory is a rough and ready mode of arriving at an approxima-
tion to the truth, and in the absence of anything better would be entitled to
consideration. Accepting Mr. Henry’s proportions and allowing for the
consumption of locally grown sugar in Hew South Wales, which his figures
do not include, I find that for the five years 1891-95 the average annual
revenue derived from the specified articles would have been under the
Tasmanian tariff, —
Hew South Wales ... ... ... 1,952,169
Five Federating Colonies ... ... 4,381,820
From these figures it will be seen that Hew South Wales would have
contributed 44-55 per cent, of the revenue of the federation. In the years
named, her population averaged 40-79 per cent, of the total of the five
colonies; now the population has increased to 41-37 per cent. A simple
proportion sum will show that whereas if Hew South Wales with 40-79 per
cent, of the population would have contributed 44 - 55 per cent, of the federal
revenue, with 41-37 per cent, of the population her contribution would have
reached 45-19 per cent, of the total. If Mr. Henry will turn to my “Hotes,”
he will find that I suggest the probable contribution would be 45-29 per
cent., an approximation to Mr. Henry’s rough method which ought to satisfy
him. In the tables prepared for the Adelaide Convention, Hew South
* The correct figure is 4s. Sd.


Loan proceeds received by New South Wales ..
Redemption of old loans...
. £11,576,200
4,079,300
Net sum remitted to colony
. £7,496,900
Loan proceeds received by Victoria
Redemption of old loans
. £11,107,000
3,969,100
Net sum remitted to colony
. £7,137,900
Wales’ contribution under the Tasmanian tariff is shown as 46-8 per cent., a
difference that in nowise affects the accuracy of the lesson the tables are
designed to illustrate.
In common with other delegates, Mr. Henry has attempted to explain
away the preponderating import trade of New South Wales by stating that
during the five years, 1891-95, the colony borrowed £5,000,000 more than
A ictoria, and that this borrowed money served to swell the imports.
To get at the amount of lean money introduced during 1891-95, the
borrowings of 1890 must be included, as the money obtained in that year
came to Australia during the succeeding year ; and, on the other hand, as
money raised in London in 1895 did not reach Australia until the succeeding
year, loans raised in 1895 must be excluded. This will be obvious when it is
remembered that the proceeds of the New South Wales loan of October,
1895, were not fully received in London until January, 1896, and not
remitted until late in the year.
The loan operations of Victoria and New South Wales for the five years,
1890-94, were as follows :
The slight difference between the two sums, when spread over a period of five
years, would not make an appreciable difference in the taxable imports, and
may be safely neglected. As a matter of fact, some of the other colonies
borrowed more largely in proportion than New South Wales.
Mr. Holder, of South Australia, has made some general statements to the
effect that under federation the imports into New' South Wales would decrease
in the face of the heavy duties likely to be imposed by federation. Ido not
think any intelligent observer will dispute that a perceptible decline in the
trade with foreign countries will follow' federation. The internal trade of the
Commonwealth will be stimulated by the removal of the fiscal barriers ; but
whatever may be the effect of the duties on the external trade of the federating
colonies, it is not likely that the proportions in which each will share in the
trade will be seriously altered. The broad fact to be borne in mind is that out
of a total export of domestic produce from the federating colonies, amounting
to 112 millions, New South Wales’ share in five years was 61 millions,
or 54 per cent. No healthy system of federation will seriously affect the
trade or the share falling to New South Wales; and I again declare that the
assumption that New South Wales will provide 45-29 per cent, of the total
revenue of the federation, if it were wrong, errs on the side of prudence.
I have thought it desirable to deal with the important question of federal
finance in an outspoken way, because it is certain that once a colony takes the
important step of joining the federation it cannot expect different treatment
from the other colonies on the ground that it was not fully aware of the


effect o£ the union into which it has entered. Tasmania can only join with
the hope that the Constitution will he so construed as to allow of special
help being extended to her in the event of her Treasurer being unable to
make ends meet. This is an invidious position for a sensitive people to
accept. It is a dangerous one also, as no one in the Convention openly
avows that the Bill contemplates special assistance being granted to any
individual State. Western Australia can join only in the expectation that
after the tentative period named in the Bill expires, special arrangements
in her favour will be continued. If special treatment be withheld, and there
be a division of the surplus on a capitation basis, the province will not be
able to pay her way. Victoria and South Australia need have no scruples
about joining, so far as their financial interests are concerned. The capi-
tation division would suit them, seeing that their actual contributions are
less than the average of the five colonies, and a return of the surplus per
capita would give them back proportionately more than they pay in, while
a division according to the ostensible derivation of revenue would, to a large
extent, be equivalent to annexing to these colonies for revenue purposes
the west and south-west of New South Wales. No business man supposes
that the book-keeping system will be taken seriously by customs officials.
It is true that this system is in theory the best and fairest that could be
adopted for New South Wales, but it may in the end prove most disadvan-
tageous to her interests. Foreign goods consumed in the districts of New
South Wales trading with Melbourne and Adelaide may not be identified as
such, especially if they are altered by manufacture or pass through several
hands, so that, although these goods pay duty, the amount of duty may be
credited to the colony into which they first enter and not to the colony in
which they are consumed.
New South Wales stands in a position of apparent security yet of grave
difficulty. She alone of all the group has a taxable reserve, and this
reserve may be drawn upon directly federation is accomplished. The reason
of this is not far to seek. A heavy tariff is not a matter of choice with any
of the other colonies, though it pleases their politicians to think so; it is
imposed upon them by the very necessities of their situation. Their govern-
ment must be carried on, and it cannot be carried on without high duties.
That the duties might produce more revenue if somewhat lower, does not
affect the question, for the fact remains no colony except New South Wales
could accept a low tariff and maintain its financial balance.
It is true that financial equilibrium may be attained under a £7,000,000
tariff, if the pecuniary wants of Tasmania and Western Australia are legis-
latively secured and a division of the surplus made amongst the other States
in accordance with their population. But this is not in the Convention Bill,
nor if it were would it prove palatable to New South Wales, which would,
under such arrangement, provide nearly the whole cost of federation, and,
worst of all, it may perhaps be impossible to raise £7,000,000 a year for any
lengthened period.
What then can make federation workable ? There seem to be two courses
open—to seek for it in a union comprehending fewer objects than are provided
for by the bill, or by enlarging the sphere of federal action. In either of
these ways the provinces may find that financial safety which there is no
prospect of achieving under the Convention Bill.
Sydney : William Applegate Gullick, Government Printer.—lB9B.


