

1896.
QUEENSLAND.
NOTES ON AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION: ITS NATURE
AND PROBABLE EFFECTS.
(A PAPER PRESENTED TO THE GOVERNMENT OF QUEENSLAND BY THE HONOURABLE SIR SAMUEL
WALKER GRIFFITH, G.C.M.G., CHIEF JUSTICE OF THAT COLONY.)
Presented to both Houses of Parliament by Command.
PREFATORY NOTE.— These Notes were written in response to a desire expressed in different parts
of Australia that I should write something in the nature of a short statement or exposition of the
general subject of Australian Federation. They are necessarily of an elementary character, and will
add little or nothing to the knowledge of those who are already familiar with the subject. But it is
hoped that they may assist the large number of persons who, although they take an intelligent interest
in the matter, are not fully acquainted with it, in forming a definite idea of the nature of the questions
involved in the establishment of a Federal Government for Australia, and some notion of the probable
consequences. They are as brief as seemed to be possible, consistently with an intelligible treatment of
the points under discussion.
After these Notes were written, and while I felt a difficulty as to the mode in which they should
be presented to the public, I happened to read a pamphlet published in 1826, called “A Paper on the
Currency: Presented to the British Government by Mr. Huskisson (a Minister of the Crown),” which
suggested the title that appears at the head of this Paper.
I may add that, for the most part, these Notes are in accordance with the views which found
favour with the Convention of 1891, and are embodied in the Draft Commonwealth Bill adopted by that
Convention.
I.—THE GENERAL NATURE OF A FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
The term “Confederation” has of late years been generally used to denote a political association of
several States, with a central Government and Legislature, but in which the central authorities have to do
with the constituent States only, having no direct relations with, or authority over, the people as individual
citizens. There have been very many such confederations in the world, but none of them has been
permanent.
The term “Federation,” on the other hand, is generally used to denote a political union of several
States, which, for certain purposes, and within certain limits, is complete, so that the several States form
one larger State with a common Government acting directly upon the individual citizens as to all matters
within its jurisdiction, while, beyond those limits, and for all other purposes, the separate States retain
complete autonomy.
The retention of autonomy by the several States, except so far as it is necessary to surrender it
for the general good of the Federal State, is an essential condition which must be always borne in
mind in considering the. subject.
The defects of a Confederation cannot be better stated than in the words of Hamilton, one of
the principal founders of the Constitution of the United States of North America, speaking from
experience of the first Confederation of the thirteen New England States:—
“The great and radical vice in the construction of the existing Confederation is in the principle of
legislation for States or Governments in their corporate or collective capacities, and as contradistinguished
from the individuals of which they consist.... The United States has an indefinite discretion to
make requisitions for men and money; but they have no authority to raise either, by regulations
extending to the individual citizens of America. The consequence of this is, that though in theory their
resolutions concerning these objects are laws, constitutionally binding on the members of the Union, yet
in practice they are mere recommendations which the States regard or disregard at their option.
“Government implies the power of making laws. It is essential to the idea of a law that it be
attended with a sanction; or, in other words, a penalty or punishment for disobedience The
penalty, whatever it may be, can only be inflicted in two ways—by the agency of the courts and
ministers of justice, or by military force; by the coercion of the magistracy or the coercion of arms.
The first kind can evidently only apply to men; the last kind must, of necessity, be employed against bodies
politic, or communities, or States Sentences may be denounced against them for violation of their
duty; but these sentences can only be carried into execution by the sword. In an association where the
C. A. 56—1896.


general authority is confined to the collective bodies of the communities that compose it, every breach of
the laws must involve a state of war, and military execution must become the only instrument of civil
obedience. Such a state of things can certainly not deserve the name of government; nor would any
prudent man choose to commit his happiness to it” ( a ).
Such a Confederation is, indeed, rather a league or alliance of States than a State. The
Colonies which "are associated in the existing Federal Council of Australasia are an instance of an
imperfect and limited Confederation.
It may be taken for granted. I suppose, that in speaking of Australian Federation it is intended to
describe a form of Government which will embrace Legislative and Executive Authorities having direct
relations with the individual citizens of Australia, which will consequently establish an Australian, as
distinguished from a merely colonial or provincial, citizenship, and which will offer to the rest of the world
the aspect of a single and undivided Commonwealth.
On the other hand, it is not, I apprehend, intended that the autonomous power of the several
Colonies shall be surrendered, except so far as is necessary for the establishment of a Federal G-overnment,
The recognition of the autonomy of the States involves the principle that the functions of the
Federal Authority must be confined within specified and strictly defined limits, and that, except as to
matters falling within those limits, the powers of the States shall be as large as before the federation.
The further principle is involved that the Federal Authorities, on the one hand, and the State
Authorities, on the other, while supreme within their respective appointed spheres of action, can do
nothing beyond them, and that any attempted exercise of power, whether legislative or executive, not
within the appointed sphere is absolutely void and ineffective. The validity of an Act of the Federal
Legislature is, consequently, as much open to question as that of an Act of the Legislature of any of the
States, and may be inquired into by any Court before which it comes in question. This idea, it may be
observed, is quite foreign to the notion of the sovereign power of Parliament, to which, under our
Constitutions, we are accustomed.
The division to be made between the sovereign powers of government to be surrendered to the
Federal Authority and those to be retained by the several States is, therefore, at the foundation of the
matter.
The Dominion of Canada, although sometimes called a Federal Government, does not conform
to the conditions of a true Federation. By the Constitution of that Dominion the Parliament of Canada
has authority with respect to all matters which are not assigned exclusively to the Provincial Legislatures.
On the other hand, the Dominion Government acts directly upon the Provinces in some matters. It has
power to veto their laws, and it appoints their Judges. The powers of the Provincial Legislatures are
confined within specified limits, within which, it is true, they are all-powerful, subject to the power
of veto of the Dominion Government. But they have lost the essential characteristics of autonomous
States, and have been, perhaps unjustly, but not without some excuse, compared to glorified Local
Authorities.
It follows from what has been said that a first matter for consideration in determining the nature
of a Federal Union of autonomous States is “What powers are they willing to surrender to the Federal
Authority ?” It may be said generally that the subjects which naturally fall within the sphere of federal
control have reference mainly to external relations, internal commerce, defence, the status of citizens,
and the general government of the Federation with respect to matters of common concern.
Although the definition of these subjects is of first importance, it does not, perhaps, present so
many difficulties or so much room for difference of opinion as many other questions involved in a Federal
Constitution.
It may be convenient, by way of illustration, to give the list of subjects which by the Draft
“ Commonwealth Bill” adopted by the Convention of 1891 were proposed to be assigned to the Federal
Parliament. It is as follows (Ch. I. s. 52) :
1. The regulation of Trade and Commerce with other Countries, and among the several
States;
2. Customs and Excise and bounties, but so that duties of Customs and Excise and bounties
shall be uniform throughout the Commonwealth, and that no tax or duty shall be imposed
on any goods exported from one State to another;
3. Raising money by any other mode or system of taxation; but so that all such taxation
shall be uniform throughout the Commonwealth ;
4. Borrowing money on the public credit of the Commonwealth;
5. Postal and Telegraphic Services ;
6. The Military and Naval Defence of the Commonwealth and the several States and the
calling out of the Forces to execute and maintain the laws of the Commonwealth, or of
any State or part of the Commonwealth;
7. Munitions of War ;
8. Navigation and Shipping ;
9. Ocean Beacons and Buoys, and Ocean Light-houses and Light-ships;
10. Quarantine;
11. Fisheries in Australian waters beyond territorial'limits ;
12. Census and Statistics ;
13. Currency, Coinage, and Legal Tender;
14. Banking, the Incorporation of Banks, and the Issue of Paper Money;
15. Weights and Measures ;
16. Bills of Exchange and Promissory Notes ;
17. Bankruptcy and Insolvency;
(a) Federalist, No. XV.


18. Copyrights and Patents of Inventions, Designs, and Trade Marks;
19. Naturalisation and Aliens ;
20. The Status in the Commonwealth of Foreign Corporations, and of Corporations formed
in any State or part of the Commonwealth ;
21. Marriage and Divorce ;
22. The Service and Execution throughout the Commonwealth of the Civil and Criminal
Process and Judgments of the Courts of the States;
23. The recognition throughout the Commonwealth of the Laws, the Public Acts and Records,
and the Judicial Proceedings, of the States;
24. Immigration and Emigration ;
25. The influx of Criminals ;
26. External affairs and Treaties ;
27. The relations of the Commonwealth to the Islands of the Pacific;
23. River Navigation with respect to the common purposes of two or more States, or parts of
the Commonwealth ;
29. The control of Railways with respect to transport for the purposes of the Commonwealth ;
30. Matters referred to the Parliament of the Commonwealth by the Parliament or
Parliaments of any State or States, but so that the Law shall extend only to the State or
States by whose Parliament or Parliaments the matter was referred, and to such other
States as may afterwards adopt the Law;
31. The exercise within the Commonwealth, at the request or with the concurrence of the
Parliaments of all the States concerned, of any Legislative powers with respect to the
affairs of the territory of the Commonwealth, or any part of it, which can at the date of
the establishment of this Constitution be exercised only by the Parliament of the United
Kingdom or by the Federal Council of Australasia ;
32. Any matters necessary or incidental for carrying into execution the foregoing powers
and any other powers vested by this Constitution in the Parliament or Executive
Government of the Commonwealth or in any department or officer thereof.
It was also proposed that the Federal Parliament should have exclusive power to make laws
dealing with the following subjects (Ch. 11. s. 53): —
1. The affairs of people of any race with respect to whom it is deemed necessary to make
special laws not applicable to the general community; but so that this power shall not
extend to authorise legislation with respect to the affairs of the aboriginal native race in
Australia and the Maori race in New Zealand;
2. The government of any territory which may by surrender of any State or States and the
acceptance of the Parliament become the seat of Government of the Commonwealth,
and the exercise of like authority over all places acquired by the Commonwealth, with
the consent of the Parliament of the State in which such places are situate, for the
construction of forts, magazines, arsenals, dockyards, quarantine stations, or for any
other purposes of general concern ;
3. Matters relating to any Department or Departments of the Public Service the control of
which is by this Constitution transferred to the Executive Government of the Common-
wealth ;
4. Such other matters as are by this Constitution declared to be within the exclusive powers
of the Parliament.
Although the list appears a long one, it will be seen on attentive perusal that, with the exception
of that first mentioned in s. 53, and to which reference will afterwards be made, it does not include any
subjects which specially concern the domestic affairs of the separate States. Their powers with relation
to the Constitution of their Legislatures, the disposition of Crown lands and mines, contracts and
transactions between individuals, local government, the regulation of trades, joint stock companies,
succession, criminal law, the administration of justice, education, police, direct taxation, public health,
public works, and the infinite variety of subjects which fall within the words of their several Constitution
Acts, “the peace, order, and good government” of the colony, are left unaffected and unabridged, except
so far as they may, under paragraph 30 of s. 52, invite the assistance of the Federal Legislature. Of the
Acts passed by the last Queensland Parliament not more than about half-a-dozen would fall within the
list of subjects proposed to be reserved for the Federal Parliament.
The importance of this division of authority cannot be too much insisted upon, for, if it is lost
sight of, it is impossible either to adequately appreciate the nature of the questions that arise with
respect to the nature of the Federal Constitution, or to form an intelligent conception of the probable
effect of federation upon the social and material condition of the people of the several Colonies.
Having determined the matters the control of which is to be surrendered by the several Colonies
the next question which arises is, “ In dealing with these matters, how, on the one hand, is effect to be
given to the voice of the people of the whole Federal Commonwealth regarded as an undivided people ;
and how, on the other hand, is the separate individuality of the several component States to receive
effective recognition ? ”
Unless provision is made for enabling the people as a whole to express their opinions, there can
be no real Commonwealth. And unless the individual identity of the States is recognised in the Federal
Parliament, they do not come into the Federation on equal terms, but the weaker in point of numbers
are always liable to be overborne by the more populous.
In a country like the Brazilian Republic, where the several States have never had an independent
autonomous existence; or in a country where the several States do not and are not likely to differ much
in point of population or climatic or social condition ; or, again, in a country like Canada, where the
autonomy of the Provinces is seriously impaired, this question would not perhaps be an urgent one.


But in the case of Colonies long accustomed to a practically complete autonomy, and unwilling to
surrender it, or in which climatic conditions are so diverse as in Australia, or in which the constituent
States have before union incurred large permanent external obligations, it is very urgent. One instance
may be sufficient. If, as must be assumed, an Australian Federal Parliament had sole control of the
Customs revenue, its legislation on the tariff would vitally affect all the Colonies. And it is hardly
conceivable that any less populous Colony would agree to a step which would in effect be a surrender of
its power to frame its own financial policy without at least stipulating that in a matter of so great
moment it should have an equal A r oice with its more populous associates.
Apart, however, from the improbability of any federation being established which would place the
whole of Australia under the control of a mere majority of the electors, the examples of the two most
conspicuous, if not only, instances of permanently successful Federal Constitutions—those of the United
States of America and the Swiss Republic*—tend to the same conclusion. In each case the Constitution
provides that in one House of the Federal Legislature the representation of the States shall be equal.
Some have gone so far as to say that the necessity for a House so constituted is self-evident.
Hamilton, however, was at first willing to make the representation in both Houses dependent upon
population. But his first “ Plan of Grovernment” was based upon a theory of Union very different from
that which was ultimately adopted. Some of the South American Federal Republics have adopted this
plan. And for reasons already indicated there might be no objection to such a scheme in those countries.
It will probably be thought that, whether the necessity of equal representation of the States in
one House of a truly Federal Legislature is or is not self-evident, it is at least certain that such
representation is an essential condition of the accomplishment of Australian federation at the present
time. The practical result would be that no law could be passed, that is to say, no change in the existing
law could be made, nor any future law passed, by the Federal Parliament, without the consent both of a
majority of the representatives of the people and of a majority of the States.
And this I shall assume as a fundamental principle so far as regards federal legislation. How far
it will apply to the executive branch of the Government will require further inquiry.
II.—THE HEAD OF THE FEDERAL STATE.
Every State must have a permanent Head in whose name all acts of State are performed
Whether the term of office be for life or for a term of years makes no difference in principle.
The Head of an Australian Federation under the Crown would be the Sovereign of the United
Kingdom. But as the Sovereign could not discharge the duties in person, it follows that She must be
represented by some person appointed by Her, and deriving his authority from Her. The nature of his
authority and office would not be affected by any means which the Sovereign might think fit from time
to time to adopt for ascertaining the wishes of Her Australian subjects as to the choice of Her
representative.
The functions of the representative within the limits of the duties and authority of the Sovereign
Herself must, of course, be defined by the Sovereign.
III.—THE LEGISLATURE.
For reasons already given it may be assumed that there will be two Houses of Legislature, in one
of which the States would be equally represented, while the other would directly represent the people
of the whole Commonwealth. The former may be conveniently called the Senate, the latter the House
of Representatives.
IV.—THE SENATE.
The members of this House being assumed to represent the States as States, it might be supposed
that it is the exclusive concern of the States to determine the mode of their election and the tenure of
their office. This simple and logical view is adopted by the Swiss Constitution. That of the United States
of America provides that the Senators, two from each State, shall be “chosen by the Legislatures thereof
for six years,” and that “the times, places, and manner, of holding elections for Senators shall be
prescribed in each State by the Legislature thereof, but the Congress may at any time, by law, make or
alter such regulations, except as to the places of choosing Senators.” Congress, in 186(3, passed a law
dealing with the mode of choice. But it must still be by the Legislatures of the States.
An advantage of the American mode of choice, by the Legislatures, has been said to be that “ it is
a recognition of their separate and independent existence, and renders them absolutely essential to the
operation of the national government” (a). There seems to be much force in this argument.
If the Swiss example should be followed, it might still be convenient to make provision as to
the constituencies to choose the first members of the Senate ; but as the elected House of a Federal
Parliament could not under any circumstances be chosen until the Colonies had established the
Federal constituencies, an operation which would afford time for dealing also with the choice of Senators,
even this seems to be not absolutely necessary.
It is sometimes suggested that the choice of Senators should be made directly by the same
electors who choose the members of the House of Representatives, but in larger constituencies, or by a
more limited body of electors. If, however, it is recognised that the Senators are to represent the States
as States, they ought, if so elected, to be chosen by the whole body of the electors. Such a plan,
although suitable in a community occupying a small territory, would be open to serious objection in
countries of such vast dimensions as some of the Australian Colonies.
Election by separate constituencies is not consistent with the notion of representation of the State
as a whole. Moreover, in Switzerland, in the few cases in which the members of the Second Chamber
are elected by popular vote, the whole canton is always one constituency. The cantons, however, for the
most part follow the American plan of entrusting the choice to the Legislature.
a) Kent’s Com, Part 1., 225.


The purpose for which a Second Chamber is established in a Federation is not to echo the voice of
the First. It is an independent representative body with equal powers. Those who would make it a mere
echo are open to the charge of either not understanding or not desiring a real Federation in which
the rights of the individual States will he conserved.
Y.—THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
It is plain that the apportionment of the representatives from each State in this House must be in
proportion to population. No other basis has, indeed, ever been seriously suggested. But it does not
follow that the gross population should be the basis. In the original Constitution of the United States
of America the number for the purpose of apportionment was arrived at by adding to the whole number
of free persons, excluding Indians not taxed, three-fifths of all other persons. It is now provided bv
the Fourteenth Amendment (18(58) that when in any State the political franchise is denied to any male
inhabitants of the State, being twenty-one years of age and citizens of the United States, or abridged
except for crime, the basis of representation of the State is to be reduced in the proportion which the
number of such male citizens bears to the whole number of male citizens of twenty-one years of age in
the State. An analogous, but not identical, provision is contained in the Draft Commonwealth Bill.
"With respect to the Federal franchise the American Constitution provides, as in the case of the
Senate, that “ the times, places, and manner, of holding elections for representatives shall be prescribed
in each State by the Legislature thereof,” and also that “ the electors in each State shall have the
qualifications requisite for the electors of the more numerous branch of the State Legislature. Much
has been said and written on the subject of a uniform Federal franchise. On this point it may be
observed that to require a uniform franchise appears to involve a violation of the principle that
the internal affairs of the States are to be interfered with as little as possible. It involves, further,
a disregard of the fact that the conditions of the several States may be very different,. and that a
franchise which would be very convenient for one State might be very inconvenient for another.
It would or might further produce the extremely inconvenient result that in some of the States
two different sets of electoral rolls would have to be compiled, unless, indeed, the Federal Authority
assumed the right to dictate to the States what that domestic franchise is to be an interference which
would probably be regarded as intolerable.
Moreover, the establishment of a uniform franchise, regarded as a matter of federal concern
necessarily involves the creation of federal Courts of Revision, and the appointment of federal electoral’
officers independent of the State authorities. It would also seem to imply the complete regulation of
all electoral matters, including the definition of electoral districts by the Federal Authority a duty for
which it would be manifestly unfitted —and the manner of holding Federal elections.
On the other hand, if all the States desire to adopt a uniform franchise they are free to do so.
At present some of the Colonies have a ratepayers’ roll of parliamentary electors, which is unknown in
others. One allows female suffrage. The others do not. The advantages of general uniformity or
symmetry may evidently be too dearly bought.
The history of the United States affords at least one example of the working of the system of
non-interference. An attempt to impose a uniform franchise as a condition of Federation would in all
probability seriously delay its accomplishment, and—a still more serious objection sow the seeds of
future dissension and discord.
Those who sincerely desire Federation will seek to lessen rather than multiply obstacles.
In dealing with this branch of the subject, a consideration of the nature of the matters which
would lie within the sphere of the Federal Legislature will go far to afford a satisfactory answer to the
questions that arise with regard to determining the persons by whom it should be chosen.
Whatever else is doubtful, this at least may be regarded as certain —that a Federal Constitution
which is to be lasting must not attempt to embody as fundamental principles any particular notions
that a majority of its framers may hold on the abstract question of the proper basis of the parliamentary
franchise.
VI.—THE POWERS OF THE FEDERAL LEGISLATURE.
The subjects which by the Draft Commonwealth Bill it was proposed to assign to the Federal
Parliament have been already enumerated. The list contained in s. 52 of Chapter 11. is perhaps likely
to be adopted without material variation in any Federal Constitution that may be framed.
With respect to these subjects it was proposed that the powers of the State Legislatures should
continue until the Federal*Legislature had dealt with then. (Ch. Y. s. 2.)
The second of the subjects which it was proposed should fall within the exclusive jurisdiction of
the Federal Parliament will be referred to later. The first of those subjects may give rise to some
difficulty, being, apparently, of an eminently controversial nature. The difficulty may, however, on closer
examination appear less formidable.
The question of the immigration of the coloured races is both a political and social question, and
involves important issues in both aspects. It seems necessary that the ultimate power of. dealing with
the matter should be left to the Federal Legislature, for it may give rise to difficult political problems
seriously affecting the external relations of Australia; and the question of the character of the future
civilisation of any part of the Federation concerns the whole of it. There may, however, be reluctance on
the part of the people of the Northern part of the Continent to entrust the uncontrolled exercise of this
power to a Legislature in which the majority would necessarily represent the people of other parts
differing in climate and natural conditions, and might have no adequate knowledge of the real nature of the
social and material aspects of the problem with which they were called upon to deal. But the probability
is that the representatives of the Nation would rise to the occasion, and would decline to do any act that
might inflict disaster on any part of the Continent merely in obedience to a popular cry. The gravity of
the matter with regard to both external and domestic consequences would be felt to be so great that it
could not fail to exercise that steadying influence which the undertaking of great responsibilities has
almost always exercised amongst the British race.


Perhaps, all that can at present he asserted with confidence on this subject is that the future
social history of Northern Australia will depend upon the effect which its climate produces on the
European race, an effect which is still quite problematical, and on which little, if any, light is thrown by
history. This is, indeed, so obvious to unprejudiced observers that it may be anticipated, with some
degree of confidence, that a Federal Parliament, imbued with a due sense of its responsibility, would not,
until it is in possession of much fuller knowledge than is at present attainable, permit any action which
would either result in the general substitution, within any part of the territory under its control, of
Asiatic for European civilisation, or in the definite condemnation of any part of that territory to
barrenness and desolation.
The anticipated difficulty may, therefore, prove, notwithstanding the strong differences of opinion
likely to arise with respect to it, to be by no means insoluble. Two modes of solution, in addition to that
already suggested, which is based upon a large confidence in the general intelligence of the representatives
of the Southern parts of the Continent, may be suggested. One is to provide that the subject of
Polynesian labour should be put upon the same footing as the subjects included in s. 52 of Chapter V.
of the Draft Commonwealth Bill —that is to say, that the existing laws should remain in force, with
power to the State Legislatures to alter them subject to the paramount authority of the Federal
Parliament. The other is to provide that those laws should not be repealed by the Federal Parliament
without the consent of the State Legislatures, as was proposed to be provided in the case of an alteration
of the territory of a State. The former mode would be founded upon confidence in the Federal
Parliament; the latter upon distrust of it.
But, whatever mode of solving the difficulty may be adopted, it is plainly not one of so serious a
nature as to stand in the way of a Federal Union between Colonies really desirous of effecting it.
VII.— I THE EXECUTIVE GOVERNMENT.
There must be Federal Ministers of State to carry on the Federal Government. History affords no
instance of the application of the system called “ Responsible Government” to a Federal State. The
system was not indeed invented, or rather had not been evolved from the free development of the British
Constitution, when the Constitution of the United States was framed. It is probable, however, that an
attempt will be made to introduce the system in any Australian Federation that may be formed in the
immediate future.
There are perhaps few political or historical subjects with respect to which so much misconception
has arisen in Australia as that of Responsible Grovernment. It is, of course, an elementary principle that
the person at whose volition an act is done is the proper person to be held responsible for it. So long as
acts of state are done at the volition of the head of the State he alone is responsible for them. But, if
he owns no superior who can call him to account, the only remedy against intolerable acts is revolution.
The system called Responsible Grovernment is based on the notion that the head of the State can himself
do no wrong, that he does not do any act of state of his own motion, but follows the advice of his Ministers,
on whom the responsibility for acts done in order to give effect to their volition naturally falls. They are
therefore called “ Responsible” Ministers. If they do wrong they can be punished or dismissed from
office without effecting any change in the Headship of the State. Revolution is therefore no longer a
necessary possibility; for a change of Ministers effects peacefully the desired result. The system is in
practice so intimately connected with Parliamentary Grovernment and Party Government that the terms
are often used as convertible.
The present form of development of Responsible Government is that, when the branch of the
Legislature which more immediately represents the people disapproves of the actions of Ministers or
ceases to have confidence in them, the Head of the State dismisses them, or accepts their resignation,
and appoints new ones. The effect is that the actual government of the State is conducted by officers
who enjoy the confidence of the people. In practice they are themselves members of the Legislature,
but it is plain that in principle they need not be members. The popular House might, if it thought fit,
bestow its confidence upon men who could not obtain, or were unwilling to seek, seats in the Legislature.
The “ sanction” of this unwritten law is found in the power of the Parliament to withhold the
necessary Supplies for carrying on the business of the Government until the Ministers appointed by the
Head of the State command their confidence.
In practice, also, the Ministers work together as one body, and are appointed on the recommendation
of one of them, called the Prime Minister. And, usually, an expression of want of confidence in one is
accepted as a censure of all. This is not, however, the invariable rule; and it is evidently an accidental
and not a fundamental feature of Responsible Government.
The introduction of this system into a Federal State, in which the relations of the two
branches of the Legislature are quite different from those existing in a single autonomous State, evidently
demands much consideration. Little assistance can be derived from history, and prophecy as to the
working of a new political institution is very hazardous.
The framers of the American Constitution were oppressed with the fear of a powerful Sovereign.
But they made provision for the choice of a President, whose power far exceeds that of any Constitutional
monarch. No danger is now to be apprehended from the power of the Sovereign. Perhaps the greatest
danger now to be feared is from the dogmatism of well-meaning persons who are so sure of their
possession of all requisite knowledge that they think they can afford to disregard the lessons of history,
and are able to frame a model Constitution which their successors for all time should thankfully accept.
The British Constitution, however, which is admittedly the freest ever known, and allows fuller
scope for the will of the people than any Republican Constitution yet devised, is absolutely free
from any dogmatic provisions on the subject of the appointment or tenure of office of Ministers of
State. It has grown up with time, and is still growing and developing. And it is hardly too much
to say that the permanent success of any human institution depends upon its capacity for growth and
development. Modifications in the working of the system of Responsible Government are already
apparent in Australia, where, also, the Constitutions of the Colonies contain no express provision dealing
with it.


When, therefore, it is a question of applying this system to a Federal Commonwealth, the rule
should be to so frame the Constitution that Responsible Government may—not that it must—find a
place in it.
It is not, indeed, likely to find a permanent place without some changes in its development and mode
of operation. This might be predicted, indeed, of the same system as applied to any existing Constitution.
But there are special reasons for thinking that modifications would develop themselves in a Federal State.
It has already been observed that in the present stage of development the life of a Government
depends oil its possessing the confidence of the popular branch of the Legislature. In a Federal Legisla-
ture, however, the position and power of the Senate would be very different from that of any of the existing
Australian Second Chambers. If it is accepted as a fundamental rule of the Federation that the laws shall
not be altered without the consent of a majority of the people, and also of a majority of the States, both
speaking by their representatives, why should not the same principle be applied to the no less important
branch of State authority —the Executive Government? Would the States, as States, be content to be
bound by the executive acts of Ministers merely because they possessed the confidence of the popular
House ? And if they insisted in withholding that confidence, and refused to provide the necessary Supplies
until a change was made, it is hard to see what alternative there would be to a change of Ministers.
Lately, in the French Republic, the Senate, by this means, compelled a change of Ministers. On the other
hand, the popular House might repose full confidence in the Ministers and refuse confidence and
Supplies to their successors.
Such a difficulty might be settled by compromise, as, indeed, it must, if the State Government is to
go on. But a succession of such difficulties would conceivably lead to the adoption in practice of some
other mode of determining the tenure of office of Ministers.
One mode is suggested by the American Constitution, which requires that the first appointment of
the Ministers of State must be made with the approval of the Senate. It might come to be adopted as a
working rule that the original choice of Ministers should be approved by the Senate, with the understanding
that they would not afterwards withdraw that approval, while on the other hand the Ministers should be
bound to retire if they did not retain the confidence of the House of Representatives. Another mode
is suggested by the Constitution of the Swiss Republic, where the Ministers of State are elected for a
fixed term by the Legislature. The formal appointment in a State “ under the Crown” would of course
be made by the Head of the State, but he might, in practice, accept and act on the direct nomination
of the Legislature, instead of an indirect nomination through the Prime Minister, as at present. Again,
it might be found that the presence of Ministers in Parliament was practically indispensable, or, as
is thought in the United States, inadvisable. It should be free to the Federal Legislature to act on
either view.
One other point should be referred to : Under a Federal [Constitution the popular House would
probably not be dissoluble at the wish of Ministers who failed to secure its confidence. This fact may, in
course of time, introduce considerable modifications into the working of the system of Responsible
Government.
The result of all these considerations seems to be that the provisions of a Federal Constitution
relating to Ministers of State should be limited to providing for their appointment by the Head of the
State, and for their holding office nominally during his pleasure, but should neither require nor forbid
their being members of the Legislature, and should not attempt to define their relations with either
House of Parliament.
VIII.—FEDERAL COURTS.
The Judicial Power is an essential branch of every Government. And in order to secure the due
administration of the laws of any State that power must, as pointed out by the Supreme Court of the
United States ( a ), be co-extensive with the legislative power, and must be capable of deciding every judicial
question which arises out of the Constitution and laws. It seems also to follow that it must derive its
authority from the State whose laws it is to interpret and enforce. The inconvenience which would
result if a Federal Government were obliged to depend upon the State Courts, with which it has no
direct relations, to carry out its own determinations is apparent.
It may be assumed, therefore, that in the Australian Federation there will be a Federal Supreme
Court and probably other Federal Courts, as in the United States. In that Republic the Supreme Court
has no general appellate jurisdiction. Its jurisdiction extends, and is limited, to cases arising under the
Constitution, the laws of the United States, and treaties made under their authority; cases affecting
ambassadors, public Ministers, and consuls; Admiralty and maritime cases; controversies to which the
United States are a party ; controversies between States, between a State and citizens of another State,
between citizens of different States, between citizens of the same State claiming land under grants from
different States, and between a State or its citizens and foreign States, citizens, or subjects. In cases
affecting ambassadors, public Ministers, and consuls, and those in which a State is a party, the Supreme
Court has original jurisdiction. In all the other cases it has appellate jurisdiction both as to law and
facts, with such exceptions as Congress may prescribe.
The want of a general appellate jurisdiction has given rise to a great conflict of decisions in the
Supreme Courts of the States as to many of the numerous matters not falling within the list just given
—for instance, questions of common law—on which the law in all the States was originally identical.
The advantages to be anticipated from a local Court of Appeal in Australia are very generally admitted,
and it is likely that the Australian Federal Supreme Court would be endowed with a general appellate
jurisdiction, although, in strictness, such a jurisdiction would be a derogation from the autonomous
powers of the States. The justification for such a derogation is, of course, to be sought in the practical
benefits as compared with the theoretical objections.
The necessity for a single Court of Appeal to determine questions as to the validity of Acts of the
Federal and State Legislatures is very apparent.
(a) Cohens v. Virginia, 6 Wheaton, 264.


IX.—THE FEDERAL CAPITAL.
The Federal Capital should" he central, easily accessible, and not unduly exposed to the risks of
war or invasion. And its climate should not be such as to render it an undesirable place of residence.
The framers of the Constitution of the United States were of opinion that the capital should not
form part of the territory of any State, but that the Federal Legislature should have exclusive power
within it. The reasons for adopting this view are thus stated by Madison :
“ The indispensable necessity of complete authority at the seat of Government carries its own
evidence with it. It is a power exercised by every Legislature of the Union, I might say of the world,
by virtue of its general supremacy. Without it, not only the public authority might be insulted, and its
proceedings interrupted with impunity, but a dependence of the members of the general Grovernment on
the State comprehending the seat of Grovernment for protection in the exercise of their duty might bring
on the national councils an imputation of awe or influence, equally dishonourable to the Grovernment and
dissatisfactory to the other members of the Confederacy. This consideration has the more weight as the
gradual accumulation of public improvements at the stationary residence of the Grovernment would be
both too great a public pledge to be left in the hands of a single State, and would create so many obstacles
to the removal of the Grovernment as still further to abridge its necessary independence” (a).
If the seat of Grovernment were a populous city, the dangers, anticipated by Madison, of
interruption, awe, or influence, would be intensified. The final selection of the Australian Federal
Capital will probably rest with the Federal Legislature ; but the weighty arguments of Madison may
be expected to have due effect. If this should be so, it is unlikely that any of the present great
Australian capitals would be selected, or even that the people of any Colony in which any such
capital is situated would desire its selection, inasmuch as the withdrawal of so large a population from
the State would largely diminish its representation in the popular House of the Legislature, and that
population would be deprived of a direct voice in the national Grovernment. These considerations may
lessen the alarm which is sometimes felt as to the possible dangers to be anticipated from an undue
aggrandisement or influence of any single city in the Federation which might become the Federal
Capital.
It should be remarked that the Swiss and Canadian Constitutions do not in this respect follow
the example of that of the United States. The conditions of Switzerland are, however, very different
from those of America and Australia ; and the Constitution of Canada is, as already pointed out, not a
true Federal Constitution.
X.-FEDERAL FINANCE.
Every State must have at its own direct command sufficient sources of revenue to enable it to
defray the cost of government. The principal objects of Federal expenditure, in addition to the salaries
of the Head of the State, and of the Ministers and officers of the State Departments and the Judiciary, and
the cost of collection of the revenue, would be the administration of the Post and Telegraph Departments,
Defence, and Marine Lights and Beacons. The sources of revenue would, it must be assumed, include
Customs and Excise duties, as well as the revenue from Posts and Telegraphs. The revenue at the
command of the Federal Government would thus, unless indeed the Customs revenue were reduced to an
extent which can hardly be contemplated, largely exceed the demands upon it.
Here, then, would be an obvious danger. The temptation, on the one hand, to find some pretext
justifying the expenditure of money which is available for disposal at will, and on the other to exhibit
the apparent generosity of remitting taxation the produce of which is not needed for direct expenditure,
is too great to be put in the way of any body of men. It has been proposed that the surplus revenue
collected by the Federal Government, after defraying the Federal expenditure, should be returned to the
several States. This plan, however, leaves the States exposed to all the consequences of the dangerous
temptation just adverted to ; for the amount to be returned to the States would form, on any basis of
division, so large a part of their ordinary revenue that any considerable diminution of it would throw
their finances into confusion, and compel recourse to direct taxation, perhaps of a burdensome or even
intolerable nature. In any case it would involve a compulsion of the several States by the General
Government to change their financial policy. The Colonies will probably endeavour to secure themselves
against this risk before entering the Federation.
It may be said that the representatives of the several States in the Federal Parliament might be
relied upon to protect the revenues of their States by refusing to agree to dangerous remissions of Federal
taxation or excessive Federal expenditure. Ho doubt they ought to do so. But experience (as in the
case of the United States) need hardly be appealed to to show that it is not safe to leave it to one body
of persons to say how much money shall be spent, and to another independent body to say how much
shall be available for expenditure. The amounts needed by the States for carrying on their own
Government would be fixed within narrow limits. The amounts which they must necessarily raise would,
therefore, be equally fixed. Yet the Federal Legislature might, on the assumption now under
consideration, suddenly deprive them of a great part of their Revenue. Moreover, there is no subject on
which the necessity of the retention of autonomous powers by the States is more apparent. And this is the
best of all reasons for not practically surrendering them to the Federal Legislature, however trustworthy
it may be in theory.
The only effectual protection would appear to be a provision by which the Federal Government
should relieve the State Governments of a part of their annual expenditure approximately equal to the
revenue withdrawn from them.
The Federal Revenue and Expenditure would thus more evenly balance, and an adjustment of the
difference would be comparatively easy.
In the year 1894-5 the Custoxns and Excise revenues of Hew South Wales and Victoria respectively
were a little more than the interest paid by those Colonies upon their public debts. Those of Queensland
(or) Federalist, No, XLIII,


and Tasmania were a little less, and that of "Western Australia much more, than their respective interest
hills; while that of South Australia was not much more than half. In the case of Western Australia,
a closer approximation may he expected in the immediate future (a).
Although the correspondence in these amounts is no douht accidental, it is likely to have some
element of permanence. Logically, no douht, the revenue from Public Lands and Public Works should
he compared with the interest hills; but while those sources of revenue could not he taken over by the
Federal Government, and the Customs and Excise duties almost certainly would he, the charge of the
Public Debts seems to he the branch of State expenditure that could most advantageously he assumed
by it.
This j>art of the subject demands full investigation. Probably, by a comparison of the actual
results for a series of years, and such forecasting of the future as may be done with some degree of certainty,
a basis of adjustment could be found which would relieve the States from the danger of having their
finances thrown into confusion by the action of the Pederal Legislature, and the members of that
Legislature from the double temptation already mentioned.
XI.—STATE FINANCES.
The effect of Pederation, as soon as a uniform tariff was established, would be to deprive the
separate States of all power to impose Customs and Excise duties. They would also be relieved of the
expense, and deprived of the Revenue, of the Post and Telegraph Department. All other sources of
Revenue would be open to them. But these would all be in the nature either of payments for benefits
or services, or of direct taxation, the advantages and disadvantages of which, as compared with indirect
taxation, must vary according to time, place, and circumstances.
The Colonies must, therefore, in considering the question of entering into a Pederation, always
remember that after its establishment their direct sources of Revenue (in addition to anything they may
receive by way of return from the Pederal Treasury) would be limited to the receipts from Public Lands
and Public Works and from direct taxation.
But although, for the reasons already given, the character of the initial financial arrangements of
the Pederal State would be likely to materially affect the future welfare of the Colonies, these arrangements
are properly to be regarded rather as conditions of a Pederal compact than as provisions of a
Pederal Constitution, and it is evident that their adjustment may call for ability of a different nature
from that required for framing the political Constitution.
XII.—THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
In a Republic the necessary and direct source of all authority is the people. Republican Constitu-
tions are consequently regarded as the direct embodiment of the will of the people, which is expressed
usually by a representative and quasi-legislative body called a “ Constituent Assembly” or “Convention.”
The functions and authorities of the Legislative, Executive, and Judicial bodies are defined by the
Constitution, and are regarded as powers delegated by the people, and to be exercised within the
limits prescribed by the Constitution. It is not unusual, for instance, in the Constitutions of the States
forming the great North American Republic, to find the powers of the Legislatures and the modes of
their exercise confined within limits which, in countries accustomed to regard the powers of Parliament
as unlimited, are calculated to create some surprise.
The theory of the British Constitution and of the Constitutions of the British self-governing
Colonies is essentially different. The British Constitution has grown up through long centuries of
development, but the Constitutions of the Colonies have been established by, and derive their
authority from, the Sovereign Power of the United Kingdom. They are contained in written
instruments, usually Acts of the Parliament of the United Kingdom or Orders in Council made by the
Sovereign under the authority of such Acts. The Colonial Legislatures and other Colonial Authorities have
such powers, and such only, as are expressly conferred upon them by the paramount authority. But in
practice the powers are almost unlimited, so that the Colonies are correctly termed autonomous. And the
practice for many years has heen that the Imperial Authority does not interfere, except with the consent of
the Colonies themselves, expressed, in matters relating to the constitution, by the Legislatures, and,in matters
relating to administration (such as treaties affecting the Colonies), by the Executive Government. But the
notion that the people of the United Kingdom or of a Colony can directly exercise or confer any
authority is quite foreign to the fundamental idea of British Constitutions.
If, therefore, a Federal Legislature and a Federal Government are to be established for Australia,
the necessary authority for their establishment is to be sought from the Parliament of the United Kingdom;
and that Parliament, it may be assumed, will not act except upon an expression of the wishes of the
(a) The exact figures are as follow (Year Book of Australia): —
Customs and Excise. Interest.
£ ■£
New South Wales 2,323,961 ... 2,287,044
Victoria ... 2,118,115 ... 1,982,496
Queensland 1,195,696 ... 1,256,581
South Australia 534,850 ... 923,137
Tasmania ... .... ... 299,661 ... 332,197
Western Australia ... 513,508 ... 148,964
£6,985,791 ... £6,930,419
The figures for the year 1895-6 (kindly supplied to me by the Under Secretary for the Treasury) are as follow:
Customs and Excise. Interest.
£ £
New South Wales 2,097,045 ... 2,318,392
Victoria 2,030,701 ... (approx.) 1,887,928
Queensland 1,361,212 ... 1,286,531
South Australia 559,242 ... 881,653
Tasmania (January-December, 1895) 322,754 ... 328,881
Western Australia 780,901 ... 162,954
£7,151,855 ... £6,866,339


Colonies by their Legislatures, not as legislative acts —for a surrender of sovereign power is beyond
the scope of their authority—but as the only recognised mode under the theory of the Constitution, by
which the wishes of the people can be declared.
The difference between the Republican and British theories of Giovernment may be not inaptly
described by saying that the former regards a Legislature as a body exercising a delegated and limited
authority, while the latter regards it as the embodiment of the sovereign power of the State. A truly
Representative Giovernment is founded on the idea that, as the people cannot directly take part in the
work of government, the sovereign power must be entrusted to a representative body, which is called
Parliament.
The first step towards the establishment of a Pederal Constitution is the framing of an instrument
of government which the Legislatures of all the constituent Colonies will agree in recommending for
enactment by the Imperial Parliament. All questions relating to the persons by whom, and the manner
in which, the instrument of government is to be framed are really questions as to the mode which the
Legislatures think most convenient for enabling them to come to a satisfactory conclusion on the final
question whether they shall or shall not make such a recommendation. Those whose inclinations lean,
consciously or unconsciously, towards the Republican theory that all authority is directly derived from the
people may be expected to favour a mode which, although inconsistent with the theory of the existing
Constitution, will as nearly as possible give practical effect to the Republican idea; while those who
favour what may be called the “ British” theory of Representative G-overnment will be less inclined to
do anything which may be supposed to derogate from the sovereign power of Parliament. But, as the
end is greater than the means, and as the end is to frame an acceptable instrument of government, it
would seem that the best mode of choice is that which is likely to best secure the framing of such an
instrument—that is, the mode which is most likely to bring to the task the persons best fitted to
accomplish it.
The framing of a Constitution is, however, but a step. If the draft submitted for acceptance is
not acceptable to the Parliaments it will not be accepted, and the work must be begun afresh. The
questions at issue are, therefore, not to be settled by a majority vote in a Convention appointed or elected
to frame the instrument of government.
The functions of the members of such a Convention are, in truth, rather those of negotiators than of
legislators, and their individual opinions upon matters of controversial politics must necessarily, if their
work is to be successful, be subordinated to the end in view, that of framing an instrument which will be
accepted by all the Colonies. It is, indeed, not easy to see how, having regard to the principle that the
autonomy of the Colonies is not to be interfered with, except for specified and limited purposes of the
character indicated at the beginning of this paper, any question of controversial politics can be
legitimately introduced.
It follows from what has been already said that any subsequent alterations in the Pederal
Constitution would have to be made either, as in Canada, by the direct act of the Parliament of the
United Kingdom, or by some process defined and embodied by its authority in the Constitution itself.
If the former mode were adopted, it maybe thought probable that the Imperial Parliament would require
unanimity on the part of the Parliaments of the several States affected by a proposed alteration ; while, if
the latter mode were preferred, very careful provision would have to be made for protecting the rights
of dissentient minorities.
Similar observations apply to the questions of the future division of the existing Colonies and the
admission of new States into the Federation.
XIII.—GENERAL POLITICAL AND SOCIAL EFFECTS OF FEDERATION.
An Australian Federal State, being a Federation of democratic communities, will, of course, be
democratic. That is a mere truism. The particular form of democratic tendency that may exhibit itself
will depend, not on the formal provisions embodied in the written Constitution, but on the wishes of the
people of the Federation. Australia will, in truth, be neither more democratic nor less democratic by reason
of Federation, unless, indeed, which is hardly conceivable, the Constitution should definitely prescribe a
limited franchise. The effects are to be looked for in a quite different direction. Democratic principles
are no more in question than the principles of monogamy or of freedom of conscience.
The first effect in point of importance, although some time may elapse before the effect is fully
felt, will be the creation of an Australian nation, forming a distinct constituent part of the British Empire,
having one mind, speaking with one voice instead of the six, often discordant, and sometimes inarticulate,
voices now heard, consulted on all matters of Imperial concern, and exercising a powerful influence in
the political affairs of the whole world. Many persons will see little or nothing in this. It may be admitted
that some enlightenment, some knowledge of the conditions of the rest of the world, some acquaintance
with the trammels which confine the men who, with a slight, and, perhaps, most often unconscious, note of
disparagement, are called “Colonists” or “Colonial” Statesmen or Politicians, and which indeed are
only rendered tolerable by the citizenship of the British Empire,, are no doubt necessary for a proper
appreciation of this phase of the subject. But the number of persons in Australia capable of this
appreciation is daily widening. And there is no good reason why, in a few years, a man should not be
as proud of his Australian nationality as of his British blood. I assume, of course, that the affairs of the
nation would be conducted in such a manner as to command respect; but that will depend upon the people
themselves, who may be safely trusted to see that their collective mind is expressed by competent voices.
For a time, possibly, there would be some dearth of men possessing an adequate knowledge of the diverse
• conditions of soil and climate existing in so vast a territory, extending from far within the tropics to the
43rd degree of south latitude; but the representatives of the different States would soon insist upon such
knowledge as a necessary qualification of Ministers of State. All this must be taken for granted.
It is difficult to estimate the effect of the change upon the material prosperity of the continent
as a whole. Yet it is not extravagant to anticipate that a powerful autonomous State embracing the
whole of the Australian continent would possess material attractions that cannot be found in small and
isolated communities. An Australian travelling out of his own country would meet other men with a


different feeling—a firmer sense of equality. And, when at home, his vision would no longer be limited to
his own corner of the continent, but everything affecting the welfare of any part of it would interest
him. The effect on his whole character could not be unimportant.
The Defences of the continent would be put in the hands of a central and competent authority,
and the maintenance of internal order would be effectually secured. There are, undoubtedly, many
persons who cannot be brought to regard the necessity for defence as a real one, but they are probably
a small minority. The era of war is not yet over, and the hunger for territory which might be gratified
by the annexation of some part of unoccupied Australia is not yet satisfied.
The establishment of a Federal Court of Appeal might be expected to bring about a greater
confidence in the speedy and inexpensive administration of Justice.
The objects of ambition—“ the last infirmity of noble minds,” perhaps, but one of the greatest
incentives to noble and unselfish action that has been manifested in the long centuries of history —would
be vastly enlarged. The regulation and administration of the finances of the Commonwealth would give
scope for the best financial ability. The task, indeed, of devising and wisely modifying, as occasion might
demand, schemes of taxation suitable to all the various and varying conditions of Australia would be a
hard one, but all the more honourable. The subjects of legislation reserved to the Federal Legislature
would afford room for the exercise of the best ability, which would not be hampered by the feeling that,
after all, the benefit of its efforts would be limited to a handful of people.
It may be that many of these effects are only to be appreciated by what has been called an
enlightened patriotism. But they are none the less real and substantial.
The Social Effects would probably be considerable. The Federal Capital, at which the leading
men of the nation would be resident, and where the work of the Grovernment would be carried on, might
be expected to form a real centre of social and intellectual life in Australia. Some political objections
to the selection of one of the great commercial cities as the capital have already been pointed out.
To these may be added others from a social point of view, which will readily occur to the reader.
If, on the other hand, the political capital is distinct from any of the commercial capitals, none of the
latter would suffer the disadvantages that would follow from an undue con centra tion of influence in any
one of them. Each of them would be dependent on its local situation and conditions for its prosperity,
while it would lose the adventitious aids afforded by special tariffs designed or adapted to attract trade
from its rivals or unfairly retain it for itself.
XIV.—EFFECTS OF FEDERATION ON THE POLITICAL, SOCIAL, AND MATERIAL AFFAIRS OF THE
SEPARATE COLONIES.
This is perhaps the aspect of the question which, as it would most nearly and directly affect the
individual citizen, excites most apprehension. But, although prophecy is proverbially dangerous, we are
not without some light thrown by the history of other Federal States.
The scope for Political Action would be restricted by the withdrawal of the subjects reserved
for Federal control. But the subjects remaining would, as already pointed out, include, with the exception
of the tariff, almost all the matters which have a direct bearing upon the social and material welfare of the
people. The attention of the Parliaments and Grovernments, no longer distracted by the necessity of
dealing with external affairs, would be more freely directed to those matters which are of such a nature
that legislation and administration with respect to them can exercise a direct influence, beneficial or
injurious, upon the community. It has been said, as already remarked, that the Colonies would be little
better than glorified municipalities. This is not true, however, even of Canada, where the paramount
power of the Dominion Parliament is much greater than any that is likely to be conferred upon a Federal
Australian Legislature. It is certainly not true of the United States of America. Indeed, a moment’s
consideration of the subjects reserved to the States affords a sufficient answer to the objection. Nor
does the history of those two countries afford room for the fear that so much of the available talent
would be absorbed in the conduct of Federal affairs as to impoverish the governmental capacity of the
States. There would still be a wide field for the exercise of political ability in State affairs; and it would
probably be found, as in the United States and in Canada, that the State Legislatures and Grovernments
would be the school for the development of the higher faculties needed in conducting the affairs of a
nation.
So far as the Social Condition is concerned there would probably be little change, and that little
would be mainly dependent upon the influence of the Federal Capital already sufficiently, referred to.
That capital would be the social centre, and a real social centre, for the Australian Nation, such as no capital
of a single Colony can ever be. But the individual social characteristics of the Colonies would not be
obliterated any more than in the United States, where Boston and New Orleans, New York and San
Francisco, retain their distinct individualities, just as Brisbane and Hobart, Townsville and Sydney,
Melbourne and Perth, must always be saved by their situation and climatic differences from the dismal
prospect of monotonous uniformity.
The question of the admission of the coloured races has been referred to from another point
of view. That the future State policy on this matter will exert the most material influence on the social
condition of the people cannot be doubted. It may, however, perhaps, be thought, for the reasons
previously given, that Federation will not of itself make any great difference in this respect.
The most important of the Material Effects of Federation would probably be those which would
follow from making “trade and commerce absolutely free” within the Federal territory, as must inevitably
happen when a uniform tariff is established for the whole Federation. This means the abolition of such
Customs duties as have the effect of protecting the industries of one Colony against those of another.
Those who believe in Freetrade would hail this result as an unmixed good. Those who favour the
doctrines of Protection would regard it as a necessary evil incident to Federation, and some of them as so
great an evil as to turn the scale against all its advantages.
On this point everyone will form his own conclusions. It may be remarked, however, that the
extent to which protection is afforded against the rival industries of our neighbours is, after all, not very
great. For the use of the Convention of 1891 careful calculations were made and submitted to the


Committee on Finance, from which it appeared that —to take the case of Queensland —the duties levied
on the importation of the produce of other Colonies, including New Zealand, amounted to only £102,000,
while the duties levied on Queensland produce imported into the other Colonies amounted to £98,000. (a)
It is clear that of the duties thus levied a considerable part have no protective operation. On the
other hand, the existing duties in some of the Colonies have probably, with regard to some manufactured
goods, such as machinery and woollens, a more or less prohibitive effect.
If trade and commerce were absolutely free, the sugar, rice, fruit, and cattle of Queensland would
have free entrance into all the other Colonies, which would be of advantage to the producers of those
articles. On the other hand, the wines, cereals, fruits, and manufactures of the other Colonies would be
imported free into Queensland ; and the Queensland producers of these things would be deprived of
whatever advantage the present duties may give them over their neighbours. Similarly in the case of
other Colonies.
There can, however, be no bargain if neither party will concede anything. Whether the necessary
concessions, without which the bargain cannot be concluded, are too great or not is a question to be answered
by the parties themselves. A large increase in the cultivation of sugar, rice, and fruit in Queensland might
certainly be expected. As to the crops and minerals which are produced or raised in several of the
Colonies, that one in which they can be produced or raised most cheaply would have the advantage,
unless the difference in cost of production were less than the cost of carriage. For the rest, each place would
reap the advantages due to its natural situation and climate and the energies of its people. A good port would
still have the advantage of a bad one. Places of easy access would be better off than those less favourably
situated. There being a fair field and no favour, the energies of the people would naturally and
necessarily come to be directed to those industries in the prosecution of which the conditions of Nature
and locality give them an advantage over their neighbours. There would be a strong disposition to attract
shipping to the ports by the removal of all charges not absolutely necessary for revenue purposes, and a
similar tendency to facilitate and cheapen the cost of transport of produce to market. It might, indeed,
be necessary to entrust the Federal authorities with some power of control over this tendency.
These effects of freedom of trade and commerce relate, of course, exclusively to the produce and
manufactures of Australia. The question of Protection against the rest of the world is a different one.
It may, however, probably be assumed, having regard to the extreme difficulty and inconveniences
involved in the levying of direct taxation at a uniform rate by a Federal Authority throughout so
immense a territory, that there would be of necessity a Federal Tariff of sufficient amount to produce a
large Revenue. Whether it was called by the name of a “ Revenue Tariff ” ora “ Protective Tariff ”
would be of little importance. If the views already expressed as to the extent of the State burdens to be
assumed by the Federal Gfovernment should be accepted, the produce of the Tariff would probably be
not much less than the aggregate amount now collected, and would not be open to much reduction,
although the incidence and amounts of the duties might be changed. Any reduction would, as already
pointed out, involve the imposition of direct taxation to a corresponding amount either by the Central or
State Legislatures. It is probable that resort would not be had to this expedient, except in case of
emergency.
The greater facilities for Tkayel that w T ould be afforded by the abolition of intercolonial Customs
barriers might be expected to bring about a large increase of intercourse between the people of the several
Colonies, with a corresponding increase in their acquaintance with one another and with the different
parts of the Continent. The effects, both social and material, of such an enlargement of knowledge and
extension of movement could not fail to be highly beneficial. The present lack of more general acquaint-
ance and intercourse is, indeed, probably, one of the most serious obstacles now existing in the way of
Federation.
Some alarm has been expressed as to the Additional Expense to be occasioned by a Federal
Government and Parliament. It is probable, however, that this expense, after allowing for the savings
effected by the union of the Customs and Postal Departments under single heads, would not be consider-
able. A fair estimate of the necessary initial additional annual expenditure would probably not exceed
£250,000. There would, no doubt, after the establishment of a uniform tariff, be a diminution of Customs
Bevenue by the loss of the duties levied on goods exported from one Colony to another ( b ), but this loss
might be expected to be balanced by a saving in the administration of the Public Debts, or, in any case,
could be met by a slight variation in the Tariff. This difficulty cannot be regarded as serious.
In this brief forecast of the effects of Federation, the element of the political views that may
probably be prevalent in an Australian Nation has, of necessity, been omitted from treatment. The sole
object has been to assist the reader in forming a more or less definite idea of the conditions of political,
industrial, and social life that may be looked for in an Australian Nation.
Brisbane, July, 1896.
By Authority: Edmund Gkegoby, G-overnment Printer, William street, Brisbane.
(а) The actual figures as supplied to the Convention are as follow :
Amount of Duties Amount of Duties
Levied by each Paid on the
Colony on the Produce of each
Produce of other Colony when
Colonies imported imported into the
into it. other Colonies.
£ £
New South Wales 112,509 ... 157,190
Victoria 230,647 ... 59,363
Queensland 102,313 ... 97,735
South Australia 33,819 ... 33,407
Tasmania 13,060 ... 37,472
Western Australia 19,004 ... 3,983
New Zealand 18,058 ... 140,260
,£529,410 .£529,410
(б) See preceding note.
Price 6d.]
