

[?]
NOTES
ON
The Genesis and Progress
OF
THE UNION CLUB
SYDNEY
For private circulation




NOTES
ON
THE GENESIS AND PROGRESS
OF
THE UNION CLUB
SYDNEY
By
ARTHUR DOWLING
Fellow, Royal Australian Historical Society
Ist July, 1924




NOTES ON THE GENESIS AND PROGRESS OF THE
UNION CLUB, SYDNEY.
In the year 1856, some eighteen years after the Aus-
tialian C lub was established, a number of leading citizens
met and discussed the possibility of forming a new social
club, to be known as the ** Union 011113,’’ when it was de-
cided to establish it without delay, and a provisional com-
mittee was constituted as follows:
_ The TTon. James Macarthur, Esq., M.P. (Chairman),
William Bradley, Esq., M.L.C., B. Buchanan, Esq., 11. G.’
Douglas, Esq., M.D., M.L.C., Thomas Holt, Esq., M.P., Ri
IM. Isaacs, Esq., Edward Knox, Esq., M.L.C., Gideon G,
Lang, Esq., M.P., A. Stanger Leathes, Esq., Patrick
Leslie, Esq., Francis Lord, Esq., M.L.C., William Macleay,
Esq., M.P., Thomas S'. Mort, Esq., T. Whistler Smith, Esq.,
W. 11. Snttor, Esq., M.P., Robert Tooth, Esq., M.L.C., R.
J. Want, Esq., M.L.C., and Edward Wise, Esq.
The following appeared in the Empire on December
20, 1856:
Sonic gentlemen, of whom the most nctivc is Dr. Dougins are
engaged in the preliminaries for the establishment of a third’club
in Sydney. The character of the new club is to be avowedly Cop-
servative, and in affinity with the Donaldson School of Politics, we
(the Empire) hear it is'to be styled the “Union Club.”
In an issue of the same paper of December 9, 1856,
the following appeared:—
“Union Club.”—lt is proposed to establish in Sydney a club
under the above denomination. Proposed entrance fee, £lO.
Annual subscription, £7/10/-. It is proposed as a fundamental
rule of the Club that members shall not be elected by ballot, but
by a Committee of Management, consisting of not less than seven-
teen members,
and concluded with the names of the members of the
above provisional committee


The club was shortly after duly formed, and the fol-
lowing members were constituted the first general com-
mittee on March 17, 1857:—The lion. James Maearthur
(President), Thomas Whistler Smith (Vice-President),
Thomas Holt and Benjamin Buchanan (trustees). Com-
mittee:—Messrs. IT. B. Bradley, Thos. Barker, T. C.
Breillat, William Brown, H. G. Douglas, M.8.C., Peter
Faucett, John Fairfax, G. R. Hirst, G. K. Ingelow, George
King, Walter Lamb, A. Stanger Leathes, E. IT. Lloyd,
George Macleay, M.P., William Macleay, Edye Manning,
Henry Moore, Michael Metcalfe, Henry Mort, Alexander
Macdonald, W. IT. Suttor, M.P., Robert Tooth, Edward
Wise, Edward Wylde, William Weaver, and Robert Wood-
house. Auditors:—Messrs. J. E. Graham and F. IT. Dan-
ger; and M. D. Woodhouse, secretary.
Temporary premises in George-street, Sydney were
secured for detail work, where the plans and arrange-
ments for the club were matured.
In the first report, that of February 28, 1858, the com-
mittee were able to state that success was assured, and
that a large number of members had already been elected,
and a considerable number of applications for membership
(many of whom were members of the Australian Club,
who were retaining their membership in the latter) had
been received, and were later elected.
The original members, who were elected by the com-
mittee within the first three months of its existence (elec-
tion by committee was later abolished in favour of that of
ballot by the members in July, 1861) were Messrs. George
Allen, George W. Allen, R. J. Alleyne, J. IT. Atkinson,
James Ascough, James Barker, Nehemiah Bartley, R. J.
Barton, Archibald Bennie, Julius Berncastle, E. T.
Blackett, George Bowman, William Bowman, William
Bradley, J. Ryan Brennan, J. Broughton, S. C. Brown,
William Brown, Marcus F. Brownrigg, Benjamin Buchan-
an, Ewen W. Cameron, F. Campbell, M.D.. George Camp-
bell, J. C. Campbell, Wm. F. A. K. Cape, J. W. Chisholm,
Walter Clarke, C. D. Clements, John C. Clements, James
Comrie, M.L.C., Joseph Cope, Archibald B. Cox, George
Henry Cox. John Croft, F. H. Dangar, J. B. Darvall,
William Davis, J. E. Davys, A. Dawson, George Desailly,
John Deuchar,, Joseph Docker, Stuart A. Donaldson, Dr.
H. G. Douglas, Rev. A. Douglas, Edward Druitt, John
Eales, John Eales, junior, O. B. Ebsworth, S. Elyard, Wil-
liam Elyard, G. J. Ewer. Peter Faucett, C. M. Finch,


Grosvenor Francis, H. Gardiner, James Garland,
John Gorman, J. V. Gorman, J. E. Graham,
Charles Hall, Captain Hugh Hamilton, James Hamil-
ton, John Hay, M.L.A., J. Henderson, IT. Herbert, T. Her-
bert, E. H. Herring, E. Hollinworth, Arthur T. Holroyd,
Thomas Holt, W. Humphreys, Thos. Iceton, Clark Irving,
R. M. Isaacs, Henry Jeffery, George Jenkins, Richard John
Keen, Edward Knox, J. Kennedy, John de Yilliers Lamb,
Walter Lamb, Gideon S. Lang, W. Lang, C. Lawless,
Edward Lee, John Lee, William Lee, Patrick Leslie, E. H.
Lloyd, J. C. Lloyd, Francis Lord, Geo. W. Lord, H. N.
Lough]an, S. L. Lyons, J. D. Macansh, James Macarthur,
Sir William Macarthur, John Maefarlane, A. D. Macleay,
George Macleay, William Macleay, John Macnamara,
Edye Manning, J. E. Manning, Sir W. M. Manning, A. L.
MacDougall, A. McKellar, D. McKellar, Michael Metcalfe,
Ludwig Michaelis, T. de Lacy Moffitt, Henry Moore, John
Morris, T. S. Mort, Henry Mort, J. S'. Mort, M. E. Murnin,
Sir Charles Nicholson, J. N. Oxley, C. Parbury,
H. W. Parker, F. W. Perry, J. Peter, W. J.
Pringle, W. Randle, G. Rattray, Dr. J. Robertson, J. S.
Rodd, F. Rothery, G. T. R. Rowe, A. Sandeman, Gordon
Sandeman, I). C. F. Scott, Captain L. 11. Scott, J. S. B.
Sargeant, J. B. Sharpe, R. T. Simpson, Thos. Skinner,
John Smith, S'. Smith, T. Whistler Smith, S. H. Smyth,
W. Spain, E. Spence, A. Stanger Leathes, W. D. S.
Stewart, W. 11. Suttor, W. H. Suttor, junior, Dr. F. Bar-
ker (Bishop of Sydney and Metropolitan), J. Tapson,
James Taylor, Wm. Taylor, William Teale, S. H. Terry, H.
A. Thomas, James Thompson, George Thorne (Queens-
land), E. M. Tobias, F. Tooth, R. Tooth, W. B. Tooth,
A. Walker, S. Walker, George Want, R. J. Want, A.
Warren, W. Weaver, J. C. Welman, Major T. Wingate,
Edward Wise, R. Woodhouse, J. Wright, Gilbert Wright,
W. Wright, E. Wylde, W. Wilson, and W. Young.
And up to and including January, IB6o:—Messrs.
Henry Davis, Alexander R. Reily, IT. W. Waldyn,
James A. L. Manning, James Larnach, Thomas Icely,
James W. Low, Adolphus Feez, R. Peel Raymond,
Rev. IT. Y. Hose, Rev. J. Blomfield, Don dutonia D’Arram
de Ayala, Edward Rolleman, James Howe, James Bingle,
Edward Maitland, Robt. Towns, Rev. Geo. Turner, Rev.
A. IT. Stephen, Geo. Martyr, Alfred D. Broughton, John
Fairfax, Edward Drury, Archibald Cunningham, Alexan-
der Macarthur, Rev. Mr, Nixon, Rev. Canon Walsh, J.


W. Buckland, Thos. Kennedy, Alexander Sage, Gilbert
Davidson, Ettiene d’Mestre, Robert F. H. Gore, Rev. C.
F. D. Priddle, Geo. K. Ingelow, Wm, Blaxland, Pollet
Cardew, 11. B. Fetz, J.P., Edward Bingham, J.P., G. R.
Hirst, J.P., John llosking, Rev. S. C. Kent, Rev. J. West,
Robt. A. Paterson, Geo. King, William Macleay Ellis,
George Moeatta, Thomas B. Boulton, Thomas Rutledge,
Augustus A. Carter, W. Elliott, Robt. Hunt, T. J. Blake,
George Thornton, Frank Gwyne, J. B. Montefiore, Thomas
Jones, A. J. Chisholm, E. Mackhine, W. J. Dangar, Alfred
Turner, Alexander Keith Collins, T. W. Smart, Fred S.
Cox, James Buchanan, Hugh Wallace, John Robertson,
John Paterson, Edward B. Cornish, William Macansh, D.
H. Thorne, 11. V. Wyle, William Graham, William Foster,
Robert Fitzgerald, William Tucker, Dr. Chas. Warren,
Joseph Smith, John T. McDougal, Thomas Lee, Edward
Brett, Peter Cloete, F. C. Naylor, William Norton, J. F.
McDougal, W. J. Brown, Thomas Lee, George Lee, Alexr.
Campbell, John Cowper, Edward Lotze, Osborne Offery,
W. J. Cuthbert, Arthur Gibson, Fredk. Chisholm, Arthur
King, Bruce McDougal, Rev. Mr. Croxton, R. P. Abbott,
Richard Coley, D. M. McDougal 1, Malcolm S. McDougal],
Alexander Barton, David Ramsay, jun., Alfred Denison,
Edward Pratt, J. Whitchurch, W. F. Buchanan, Randolph
Nott, George Moore, Rev. Henry Tingcombe, Francis Rus-
den, J. P. Roxburgh, Andrew Mackhine, J. R. Street, W.
D. Somerville, Thomas 11. Smith, Rev. W. V. Clark, P.
W. Wright, Richard Weaver, Dr. W. Hobbs, Rev. D. M.
Meares, Henry Norton, James White, Archibald Wind-
eyer, J. D. Maclean, Stewart Murray, James Cameron,
Maurice Harnett, Whittingdale Johnson, Arthur McAli-
ster, Samuel Clarke, Algernon Dumaresq, J. 11. Challis,
G. M. Sayers, J. Grafton Ross, Andrew Loder, J.P., E. M.
Stephen, Robert Lynch, Christopher Mcßae, F. Naylor,
Thomas.E. Lance, George Barker Boulton, Alexr. A. Cox,
H. M. Oxley, R. P. Richardson, Edmund Barton, Charles
Smith, Thomas B. Clarke, J. A. Bird, Robert Gilfillan,
Thos. Brindley, and Dr. Miles were duly elected in the
order mentioned.
The original Club House was located in a house on
the eastern side of Wynyard Square, four doors from the
intersection of the present Carrington-street and Wyn-
yard-street, which, after the Club vacating it, was occu-
pied by the then Town Hall (under the name of the
Municipal Council Chambers); “The Old Town Hall


Hotel, ” conducted by the Misses Horner, and later “The
Impem! Hotel,” which latter was conducted by Mr J.
h Mohmey, and subsequently by Mr. Thomas Asche,
lather of Mr. Oscar Asche, the tragedian. The adjoining
house was also part of the Club premises.
The committee held frequent meetings, arranging for
alterations and furnishing the premises, and in June, 1857,
they were properly equipped, and the members entered
into possession, and leases were arranged.
(1 have always been under the impression that prior
to this premises had been occupied in Margaret-street for
a short time, but as 1 cannot find my authority I let it
pass.)
Within two months of taking possession a billiard-
table was purchased, and shortly afterwards the follow-
ing newspapers were provided for the use of the members-
Sydney Morning Herald, Empire, Bell's Life in Sydney,
Melbourne Argus, Weekly Herald, The Bathurst Free
Press, Goulburn Chronicle, North Australian (Ipswich),
American Express, Maitland Mercury, Newcastle Tele-
graph, and Moreton Bay Courier, and through the liber-
ality of Mr. E. A\ ise (later Mr. Justice) the following
English papers and periodicals were procured:— The
limes, Ihe Daily News, The Spectator, Economist, Home
News, The Illustrated London News, Illustrated Times,
Punch, Army and Navy Gazette, Atheneum, Blackwood's
Magazine, Westminster Review, Quarterly Review, Har-
per's Monthly, Fraser's Magazine, Tail's United Service
Magazine, Hart's Annual Army List, The Observer, and
Collins' Monthly Nautical Magazine. A small number
of books were also procured.
1 he expenses of management for the first year were
£7,760, of which £2,000 was expended for altering the
premises, furniture, and house fittings, £SOB/6/8 for three
quarters rent, and the value of orders for wines and
liquors amounted to £824.
The total receipts for the first twelve months from all
sources was £8,232, and the Club closed its first year with
a balance of £571 to its credit.
The members had occupied these premises only a few
months when it became apparent that they were inade-
quate and unsuitable for the home of a. prosperous and


progressive club, so it became necessary to search for
and procure more commodious ones, either by purchase or
hire. Accordingly, negotiations were opened for the
purchase of land at the corner of Castlereagh and Hunter
streets, now the site of Royal Chambers, on which it was
proposed to erect the Club House, or for a lease of Lyons’
Buildings in George-street, which at considerable expense
could be converted into a convenient Club House and on
the failure in negotiations for a purchase or lease therefor
respectively, Messrs. Milson and Knox, agents for Mrs.
Campbell, wife of Mr. Robert Campbell, were applied to
for a lease of her dwelling-house and store on the site of
the present Club at the corner of Bligh and Bent streets,
which would serve the purpose.
After ]oug negotiations, at the end of 1859 Messrs.
Milson and Knox leased the house and large brick store
to the Club for five years at £I,OOO per annum (tenant
paying rates and taxes for repairs and improvements),
which was extended later, and it shortly after entered
into possession.
This house was of the Georgian style of architecture,
commodious, and of an attractive appearance, with the
front entrance supported by massive stone pillars on the
north side, inside the garden, just about where the late
addition to the present smoking-room joins the present
reading-room; and the front entrance, with an iron en-
trance gate affixed to stone pillars, was some few yards
further towards the north than the entrance to the present
building, and the western side faced Bligh-street, as at
present, a considerable portion of which was taken up
with a large bow window on the ground floor, and hav-
ing numerous rooms and fitted with conveniences, the
nearest approach to the necessities of the Club at that
time. This will be better understood on examination of
the two pictures of the building in the present smoking-
room.
The brick store facing Bligh-street is surmounted by
a stone pediment, on which the figures 1828 are decipher-
able, denoting the date of its completion. The building
was capable of being converted into sleeping accommoda-
tion, and accordingly it, or portion of it, was transformed
into a series of bedrooms, which were connected with the
main building, and were colloquially known as “The Bar-
racks.” Thus the Club accommodation was greatly


improved and the whole establishment brought up to date
as near as the circumstances permitted.
When the premises came into actual control and use,
it was found that although the dwelling house was the
nearest approach obtainable to the requirements of club
life, it was far from adequate for the purpose, being out
of repair, and had attached to it endless useless and in-
convenient buildings; consequently constant alterations,
additions, repairs and improvements became necessary
until the house and appendages were demolished and re-
placed by tbe present building, this being the cause of
constant expenditure of money which affected the finances
of the Club very considerably.
The present weatherboard billiard room (which with
attention and repair has been so well preserved) was erec-
ted at the end of 1867, and finally finished in 1868 (when
the Club was lessee of the premises), in time for the ex-
pected visit of 11.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, Duke of
Saxe Coburg Gotha, who became patron of the club, and
consequently was expected to be, and became, a constant
visitor.
On the extension of the lease expiring on December
31, 1873, it became necessary to obtain a further renewal
of, or purchase the, or other, property.
After rejecting the offers of sale of land in Bligh-
street (opposite the Club), in Bent-street (opposite the
Public Library), in Elizabeth-street, Hyde Park, and that
at the corner of Castlereagh and Hunter-streets before-
mentioned—all of which were offered as being suitable
upon which to erect the necessary premises, it was decided
to purchase the present site, which was completed about
the middle of 1873, the sum of £20,000 being paid for it.
It had been contemplated that after the purchase was
completed the dwelling house should be demolished and
a new club house erected. Accordingly, in 1875, the
present dining-room, half its present size (the first instal-
ment of the new house), and a new kitchen were erected
under the supervision of the late Mr. Benjamin
Backhouse, a well-known leading architect (father of
ex-Judge Backhouse), and were ready for use in 1877.
It Avas enlarged to its present size in 1880, new servants’
quarters having been erected previously, in 1878-79.


After the completion of the dining-room, the demoli-
tion of the whole of the original main building was com-
menced, and the erection of the present Club House
proceeded with. The centre portion was demolished first
and rebuilt, and on its completion the northern portion,
that facing the garden and Bent-street, was demolished,
and the continuation of the building on the site of the
present smoking-room was proceeded with and completed
(during the building of the centre portion, a temporary
passage-way connecting the smoking-room with the din-
ing-room was built and used—and thus the Club building
was made comfortable and convenient for its rapidly in-
creasing use, and possession of the completed building
was obtained in 1886. This building was erected under
the supervision of the late eminent architect, Mr. W. W.
Wardell.
In the course of time the whole premises were gradu-
ally affected by wear-and-tear, and became considerably
out of order, thus making it necessary to renovate them.
Accordingly, in 1922-1928, the whole establishment was
renovated and restored, and in some cases added to;
the verandah attached to the smoking-room being
removed and upon the space it had occupied, together
with some of the garden land, a large addition to the
room was erected. The barracks and servants’ quarters
were renovated and refurnished, as also many parts of
the Club proper, at a cost of about £25,000. Now the
whole property is in a good and up-to-date condition, to
such an extent that it will serve its purpose for many
years to come.
The entrance fee was at first £lO, but it varied in
amount from time to time until it was £25 as at present,
the highest being £SO and the lowest £lO. It was sus-
pended on one occasion for two years.
The first yearly subscription was £7/10/-, but it varied
in amount from time to time until it became £lB/18/-, as
at present. This was the largest, the smallest being
£7/10/-.
The following have been:—
Presidents :
Hon. James Macarthur . . . . . . 1857-1859
lion. Sir W. W. Burton, M.L.C 1859-1868


Hon. W. H. Suttor, M.L.C 1868-1878
Hon. Walter Lamb, M.L.C. . . . . 1878-1882
lion. Sir Edward Knox, M.L.C . . . . 1882-1901
lion. 11. C. Dangar, M.L.C. . . . . 1901-1908
E. W. Knox, Esq 1908-1921
A. Consett Stephen, Esq. (in office) . ! 1921-
Vice-Presidents ;
William Bradley, Esq. . . . . . . 1857-1859
Hon. W. 11. Suttor, M.L.C 1859-1861
Alfred Sandeman, Esq. . . . . . . 1861-1865
Hon. Walter Lamb, M.L.C. . . . . . . 1865-1877
Hon. James White, M.L.C. . . . . . . 1877-1890
Hon. 11. C. Dangar, M.L.C, . . . . .. 1890-1901
E. W. Knox, Esq. . . .. . . . . 1901-1908
A; A. Dangar, Esq. . . . . . . . . 1908-1913
A. Consett Stephen, Esq. . . . . . . 1913-1921
Shepheard E. Laidley, Esq. (in office) . . 1921-
Secretaries:
M( 'ssrs. M. D. Woodhouse, the first (until 17th Oc-
tober, 1867), T. Boulton (Acting), Thomas C. Bentley, P.
11. Wilson, Thomas Lake Crommelin, IT. Hill (Acting), H.
Thompson (Hon. Acting), C. E. Riddell, Allan Wilkinson,
C. R. Burnside, B. Blythman, W. Johnston, W. A. Tainsh,
and E. Hungerford (in office).
In conclusion, the authorities in the past were anx-
ious in respect of the finances, owing to constant demands
for the payment of large sums for necessary repairs, reno-
vations, improvements and contingencies; but, thanks to
the assistance of those early members, who, having faith
in future success, worked so strenuously and incurred per-
sonal responsibilities in the interests of the Club, further
concern is at an end, and the assets, which include valu-
able gifts from various members, far exceed all liabilities.
Since the late extensive alterations and improve-
ments were completed, the Club has made considerable
progress, both in expansion and satisfactory manage-
ment, for many new members have been attracted and
have been added to the roll, making a total of 558—a near
approach to the limit of 600, 459 of whom approximately
are active and 100 are supernumerary members.
The late decision, placing the domestic duties under
the supervision of a competent lady manager, the official


routine work under the secretary, and the employment of
efficient waitresses, was a judicious experiment, and has
proved an unqualified success.
Incidentally, it should be mentioned that Harry
Dean, who was first employed by the Club in 1885 as a
lad, then nineteen years of age, was two years later trans-
ferred to the hall porter’s office, where he has been
supreme for the past thirty-five years.
Those members in the past who were so liberal in in-
curring pecuniary obligations, working strenuously for the
welfare of the Club, and the late and present committees
of management are deserving of praise and the grateful
thanks of all the members for their unremitting attention
to and consideration for their welfare and comfort.
In the Empire of May 24, 1838, appeared the follow-
ing :
Arrangements have been made for carrying into effect the
long-contemplated Sydney and Asiatic Union Club. Those gentle-
men who feel inclined to join the establishment are requested to
intimate their wishes by prepaid letter to the care of Mr, Levien
with as little delay as possible.
This scheme undoubtedly never eventuated, but is it not
within the bounds of probability that the idea of form-
ing the Union Club had its birth in this abortive project?
D. S. Foui. Printers. 48-50 Heterroir St. clo«* to Central Railway Station.
Sydney
12




