

( Reprinted from Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of
N. S. WaUs , Vol. xl.)
NOTES on SOME NATIVE TRIBES of AUSTRALIA.
By R. H. Mathews* 1.5.,
Associe etranger Soc. d’ Anthrop. de Paris.
[Read before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, November 7, 1906.]




NOTES ON SOME NATIVE TRIBES OF AUSTRALIA.
By R. H. Mathews, 1.5.,
Associe etranger Soc. d’ Anthrop. de Paris.
[Read before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, November 7, 1906.]
In the following pages I shall deal with the sociology,
language, and customs of some native tribes located in
parts of the continent far removed from each other.
I. Sociology of the Kurnu Tribe.
In 1902 I contributed a short article to this Society con-
taining an elementary grammar and a Vocabulary of the
Kurnu language. 1 In 1904 I forwarded a supplementary
grammar of this language to the Anthropological Society
in Paris. 2 In the same year I submitted a description of
their initiation ceremonies to the Anthropological Society
in Vienna. 3 On the present occasion an account of their
sociology will be given. This tribe occupies both sides of
the Darling River, from Bourke down to Winbar Station,
extending back both northward and southward into the
hinterland of the Darling for long distances. Their country
also reaches up the Warrego River as far as Ford’s Bridge,
a small village on that stream. The information contained
in the three previous articles above referred to, as well as
in the present paper, was gathered by me direct from the
natives.
The community is nominally divided into two primary
cycles, moieties, groups or phratries, whichever of these
names we choose to employ for purposes of distinction.
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, xxxvi., pp. 154- 179.
s Bull. Soc. d’ Anthrop. de Paris, Serie v., Tome v., pp. 133 -139.
3 Mitteil. d. Anthrop. Gesellsch. in Wien., Bd. xxxiv., pp. 77-83.


These cycles are named Mukungurra and Kilpungurra, with
their feminine equivalents formed by suffixing ga to the
masculine name. The Mukungurra cycle is again divided
into two sections called Murruri and Kubburi, and the
Kilpungurra cycle is similarly divided into two, called
Ibburi and Ngumburi. In each of these four sections the
names of the women are modified so as to distinguish them
from those of the men. The following table exhibits the
masculine and feminine form of each section name, the
sections which normally or usually intermarry, and the
section name of the offspring.
Table I.
Cycle. Mother. Father. Son. Daughter.
v ... f Ngummundyerra Murruri Ibburi Ibbundyerra
Kilpungurra | Ibbundyerra Kubburi Ngumburi Ngummundyerra
f Murrundyerra Ngumburi Kubburi Kubbundyerra
Mukungurra Kubbuntiyerra Ibburi Murruri Murrundyerra
The above table gives the cycle, mother, father, son and
daughter on the same line across the page, and requires no
further explanation. Everything in the universe, animate
and inanimate, belongs to one or other of the two cycles.
And every individual in the community claims some animal
or plant or other object as his or her totem. The section
name is invariably determined through the mother, because
the women of a cycle reproduce each other, in continuous
alternation. The totems remain constantly in the same
cycle as the women and are accordingly transmitted from
a mother to her progeny.
11l an article contributed to this Society in 1905, 1 I
illustrated the sociology of the Barkunjee tribe as compris-
ing only two divisions, Mukungurra and Kilpungurra, the
men of one division marrying the women of the opposite
one. In studying the above table, we observe that there
is a bisection of each of the two divisions of the Barkunjee,


so that in the Kurnu there are four divisions of the com-
munity instead of two.
The Kurnu, like the Barkunjee, possess a further distinc-
tive division into Muggulu and Ngipuru, with their feminine
forms Mugguluga and Ngipuruga, meaning sluggish or heavy
blood and swift or light blood respectively. Again, like
the Barkunjee, the Kurnu are divided into Nhurre and
Winggu, the Butt and the Branch shade. A man of the
Muggulu blood and the Butt shade usually and normally
marries a Ngipuruga woman of the Branch shade, subject
to variations explained farther on. In regard to the off-
spring, a Mugguluga mother produces Muggulu children
who take their mother’s shade. A Ngipuruga mother pro-
duces Ngipuru children belonging to her own shade.
The castes of “blood” and “shade” are not necessarily
coincident with the other divisions. For example, a
Ngipuru man or woman may belong to either cycle or to
any section and a Muggulu individual has the same varia-
tions. In short, these castes divide the people of every
section into two sorts or degrees. The cycles, sections,
bloods and shades are used as the foundation upon which
the betrothals and marriages are regulated. Before deal-
ing further with this important subject, it will be desirable
to introduce another table.
Table 11.
I i I I
Ibburi C + A + Ngumburi B + Ngummundyerra D + Ibbundyerra
\/ . /\ /\
Kubbundyerra -f. Ibbundyerra -f- + Ibburi Ngummundyerra-)- + Nguinburi
I I I
Murruri No. 1 + marries Ngummundyerra + E + Murrundyerra
Murruri No. 2
marries Ibbundyerra -f- + Kubbundyerra
In this table, in the lower left hand corner, we have
Murruri No. 1; above him is his mother Kubbundyerra;
and above her, at A, is her tabular or No. 1 father. A
G—Nov. 7, 1906.


little way to the right of Ngumburi is his sister Ngum-
mundyerra, marked B, below whom are her children, a
daughter and a son. Her daughter Ibbundyerra has a
daughter Ngummundyera; and her son Ibburi has a daughter
Murrundyerra. Then Murruri No. 1, whom we shall assume
to be a Muggulu, marries Ngummundyerra E, as shown in
Table 2. She is his normal or No. 1 wife and belongs to the
opposite cycle as well as to the Ngipuru blood.
I must digress a moment to explain why Ngummund-
yerra Eis a Ngipuru. Because Murruri No. lis a Muggulu
his mother must have been a Mugguluga. His mother’s
father Ngumburi, in the normal course of things, must
therefore have been a Ngipuru to enable him to marry a
Mugguluga and so produce Kubbundyerra. Ngumburi’s
sister was consequently a Ngipuruga too, and as descent is
counted through the women, his daughter’s daughter
Ngummundyerra E must also be a Ngipuruga.
But Murruri No. 1 might be allotted Murrundyerra (see
Table 2), who belongs to the Muggulu blood like himself.
She is the daughter of Ibburi, a Ngipuru man, who must
have espoused a Mugguluga and his daughter is accordingly
a Mugguluga. In such a case Murruri No. 1 marries a
woman of his own cycle and of his own blood division. She
may be distinguished as wife No. 2.
Looking again at Table 2 we find Murruri No. 2 in the
lower left hand corner, with his mother above him ; and
higher up at 0, her No. 2 father Ibburi. Away in the
upper right hand corner is Ibburi’s sister Ibbundyerra,
marked I), with her children and grand children below her.
Then Murruri No. 2 marries Ibbundyerra, of the opposite
cycle and opposite blood division who may be styled wife
No. 3. Or Murruri No. 2 might have Kubbundyerra assigned
him as wife No. 4. She belongs to his own cycle and to his
own blood division. I have not considered it necessary to
trace out the blood divisions of the No. 3 and No. 4 wives.


The Kubbundyerra of our example in Table 2 had a
Ngumburi as her No. 1 father, or an Ibburi as her No. 2
father. She might instead have had a Murruri or a Kubburi
as her No. 3 or No. 4 father respectively, as follows: —
Table 111.
! I I I
Kubburi + + Murruri + Murrundyerra + Kubbundyerra
\ / / \ , / \
Kubbundyerra 4. Kubbundyerra-4- -4- Kubburi Murrundyerra 4. + Murruri
I I
Murruri No. 3+ marries Murrundyerra + + Nguuimundyerra
Murruri No. 4+ marries Kubbundyerra-4- -4- Ibbundyerra
Kubbundyerra is shown as the same individual for the
sake of simplicity, but the woman in Table 2 might be a
different Kubbundyerra to the one in Table 3. TJie Kub-
bundyerra of our examples represents the section rather
than the individual. This Kubbundyerra might have had a
husband from any one of four sections. Perhaps her
husband was Ibburi as in Table 1, or Kubburi, or Ngumburi,
or Murruri, but it makes no difference to her progeny which
of the four men she was mated with —her children are
Murruri and Murrundyerra just the same. Owing, how-
ever, to the above mentioned variations in her possible
husbands and her possible fathers, it is evident that there
could be four sorts or degrees of Murruris, depending upon
their mother’s pedigree as well as upon her marriage.
These four sorts of men are shown as Murruri Nos. 1,2, 3
and 4in the tables. It will be observed, however, that
the wife of each of the four men will have nominally the
same relationship to him, but through different channels.
The human subject, animals, plants, inanimate objects,
the elements, the heavenly bodies —everything on the earth
or above it —are divided into Kilpungurra and Mukungurra,
into Muggulu and Ngipuru, and into Butt and Branch
shades. The normal and general practice is for one of
these pairs of divisions to intermarry with each other. A


Kilpungurra marries a Miikungurra, a Mugulu a Ngipuru,
a Butt shade a Branch shade. In explaining Tables 2 and
3 we have seen that these general rules are subject to
certain modifications. Sometimes a Kilpungurra mates
with a Kilpungurra, a Muggulu with a Muggulu, and a
Butt shade with a Butt shade. Another custom of wide
prevalence is that a man of a given totem must espouse a
woman whose totem is not the same as his. This law,
like that of the cycles and other divisions, is subject to
departures. For example, a man who is a bandicoot might
be allotted a bandicoot wife, although this seldom happens.
There is no such thing as a cast-iron partition of the com-
munity into two exogamous moieties. The only law of the
Kurnu sociology which admits of no variation, is that the
cycles, sections, totems, bloods and shades, are irrevo-
cably transmitted through the mothers.
It is for the elders of the tribes to settle what par-
ticular genealogy will be adopted when choosing a husband
or wife for any particular person. Previous family mar-
riages and a number of other matters are considered in
arranging this point. There are also regulations depend-
ing upon the totems of the affianced parties, and upon
whether they are the elder or the younger members of
the family. The maternal uncles of the parties are in
all cases among the principal personages in conducting
tlie betrothals.
It is well known that in most Australian tribes a man’s
brothers are treated as the nominal or tribal fathers of
liis children, and that his wife’s sisters are treated as
nominal mothers. This fact introduces a disturbing element
into the genealogies, but it is an advantage rather than
otherwise, because it increases the chances of a given
man or woman obtaining a spouse. For example, Kub-
bundyerra’s father Ngumburi (Table 2) might not have a


sister, but some of his father’s brothers might have
daughters, who would be called his (Ngumburi’s) sisters,
and thus supply the Ngummundyerra marked B in Table 2.
This custom also serves another useful purpose, by
means of which we can explain why some old men have
very young wives. Let us suppose that the Ngumburi
last mentioned was the eldest of his father’s family. He
(Ngumburi) might easily have a younger brother who was,
say, fifteen years his junior. This younger brother, Z,
who would in time be the father of a daughter, who would
fill the place of Ngummundyerra Bin Table 2. Again,
Ngumburi might marry early and his tribal sister late, so
that by a number of circumstances, all probable
Murruri No. 1 might get a wife who was twenty or thirty
years younger than himself, although she would be of the
strictly proper lineage.
It lias been said in an earlier page that the totems, con-
sisting of everything alive and inanimate, are subject to the
same divisions and subdivisions as the people themselves.
Many of the plants, animals, etc., possess the same rela-
tionship to each other as the people, a few examples of
which will be given from the Kurnu. The iguana, carpet-
snake and brown-snake are brothers and sisters; the por-
cupine and bandicoot are similarly related; so are the emu
and native companion. The turtle has no relations; neither
has the mussel nor the crayfish. The relationships of
brother-in-law, maternal uncle and many others are also
current. These kinships extend to inanimate nature as
well; a spring may be related to a tree ; certain stars are
brothers and sisters, husbands and wives, and so on.
11. Sharing Game and other Food. 1
There is a universal custom in every native camp, which
regulates the partition of all kinds of game and vegetable
1 See also my remarks on food regulations in the article contributed to
this Society in 1904, Vol. xxxvm., p. 258, seq.


food among the relatives and friends of those who procure
the supply. Let us say a hunter has killed a padamellin.
Some of his relatives get their share from the fore part of
the animal, and others from the hind part. There is a
further regulation as to which side of the animal shall be
given. Some are alloted their portion from the right side
of the padamellin, others from the left side. For example,
a certain relation may be given the right hind leg, another
the left; the right and left fore legs would be similarly
distributed to others. One man would get the loin, another
the backbone, another the tail, another the head. The
brisket, ribs and internal parts respectively would go to
other relatives. The portion which each person would
obtain would depend upon his relationship to the hunter.
The worst parts would be kept by the hunter for his own
use. Emus, opossums, iguanas, fish and other animals are
divided on the same principle, with necessary variations
according to their shape and size. A somewhat similar
distribution is made of yams, grass seeds, berries and other
foods.
We have said that a man gets his share of food, accord-
ing to his relationship to the person who captures it; but
this does not restrict him to one special part of every
animal, because his relationship to another hunter will
entitle him to a different portion of such hunter’s game.
Say that a man, A , is allotted the left hind leg of an
opossum by his brother’s son. A may have a brother-in-
law in the camp who will perhaps give him the loin of a
kangaroo —the portion of the carcase given by a brother-in-
law differing from that given by a brother’s son, and so on.
Although a man distributes all the best portions of his
own catch of game and eats only a little of the worst parts,
yet he shares in the distribution of the game of his relatives
and thereby gets some good pieces. Moreover, it looks at


first sight as if a hunter’s own wife and children would
receive scant attention, but the father and mother of the
hunter, and those of his wife if present, see that his family
get a proper supply of food. Owing to the native law that
a man’s father’s brothers rank as his fathers, the hunter’s
children will probably have more than one paternal grand
father to look after their food supply.
A white man, unacquainted with the native food regula-
tions, on going through a camp at feeding time and seeing
them dividing the day’s takings, would conclude that the
animals were merely cut up and divided among all the
people. What actually takes place is, that each hunter
gives away all the choice pieces of his own catch and
receives donations from his relatives. In the'end the
result is substantially the same as if the game were divided
equally in the first instance, but with the advantage that
every person is taught to divide with his own kindred.
An old or feeble person, although not a relation, would
be given something out of the day’s catch; and if any of
the party had been unsuccessful in the chase or in obtain-
ing other food, some of the people would see that he did
not go hungry. I have often heard stockmen and other
uneducated white people say how greedy a blackfellow is,
and how he will sit and eat up food without giving his wife
any. He is acting in accordance with custom, because he
knows that it is the duty of certain persons among the
woman’s friends to give her a portion. The yarns we
sometimes read in books and newspapers regarding the
holding capacity of a blackfellow’s stomach are equally
baseless.
In 1882 Mr. Edward Palmer, when describing the cus-
toms of certain Queensland tribes, said: —“Division of
game takes place according to old established rules, in
which the natives practice considerable self denial, the


hunter often going short himself that others might have
their recognised share. When a kangaroo is killed, the
hind leg is given to the hunter’s father, with the back bone;
the other hind leg to his father’s brother; the tail to his
sister: the shoulder to his brother; the liver he eats him-
self. Sometimes his own wife will be left without any,
but in that case it seems to be the rule that her brother
gives her of his hunting, or someone else on her side. She
will not get much from her blackfellow, unless there is a
surplus. All game has to be shared according to rule, the
best part going to the father’s camp, the next to the father’s
brothers. A blackfellow would rather go short himself and
pretend he was not hungry, than incur the odium of being
greedy in camp, or neglecting the rights of hospitality.
Snakes were broken in pieces and handed round.” 1
At my request, a valuable correspondent in the Alice
Springs district, Central Australia, sends me the following
rules regarding the partition of game there. If a man kills,
say a kangaroo, he takes it to the camp and divides it
amongst his relations. He gives the tail to his father’s
brother’s son; the loin and fat to his father-in-law, if
present; the right hind leg to his brother; the left hind
leg to his father; the ribs to his mother-in-law, if present;
the forelegs to his father’s younger sisters; the head to his
wife. The hunter himself takes only the inner parts and
the blood. He then waits till he receives a share from
some of the other hunters who are related to him.
Mr. James Dawson, in dealing with the aborigines of the
south-western district of Victoria, in 1881, reported as
follows: —“There are strict rules regulating the distribu-
tion of food. When a hunter brings game to the camp, he
gives up all claim to it, and must stand aside and allow
the best portions to be given away, and content himself
1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xm., 285. „


with the worst. If he has a brother present, the brother
is treated in the same way, and helps the killer of the game
to eat the poor pieces, which are thrown to him, such as
the forequarters and ribs of the kangaroos, opossums and
small quadrupeds, and the back bones of birds. The
aboriginal narrator of this custom, mentioned that when
he was very young he used to grumble because his father
gave away all the best pieces of birds and quadrupeds, and
the finest eels, but he was told that it was a rule and must
be observed. The women also divide the food they collect,
which is mainly vegetable. This custom is called ‘ yurka
bawhar,’ meaning ‘ exchange.’ . . The grey bandicoot
belongs to the women and is killed and eaten by them, but
not by the men or children.” 1 <
Mr. J. P. Gell, reports that among the tribes about
Adelaide, in South Australia, grubs living in the bark of
trees were eaten by the men only. 2
111. Sociology of the Chau-an Tribe.
The Chau-an tribe have their hunting grounds on the
Katherine River and surrounding country. On the south
they are bounded by the Yungmunni community, about
Elsey Creek, whose sociology was described by me for the
first time in this Journal in 1900. 3 With the help of a
capable and reliable resident of that district, I have since
then been studying the sociology of the Chau-an people*
and am pleased to be able to supply the following infor-
1 Australian Aborigines of Western District of Victoria, (Melbourne,
1881) pp. 22 and 52.
2 Tasmanian Journal of Natural Science, (1842), 1., p. 112.
3 This Journal, xxxiv., 130. The equivalence of the section names of
the Chau-an, to those of the Yungmunni tribe about Elsey Creek, is as
follows: —Plienban is equal to Eemitch, Aratchbau to Uwannee,
Kamaranban to Unmarra, and Wamood to Tabachin. In the lower half
of the table, Kangala corresponds to Yungalla, and the remaining sections
correspond in the order in which they are printed.


mation, which has never before been published. Like their
Southern neighbours, their women can be classified into
two cycles of four sections each, making eight divisions in
all. Up to the present, I have not been able to discover
feminine forms of the section names.
lam informed that all the tribes from Katherine River
to Port Darwin, have the same sociology as the Chau-an.
The names of the eight sections are different from those
at the Katherine, but the principle is just the same.
Table IV.
Cycle. Mother. Father. Children
/ Kangala Plienban Paralee
I Watchban Aratcbban Pongaree
Paralee Kamaranban Watchban
l Pongaree Wamood Kangala
I Plienban Kangala Wamood
I Aratchban Watchban Ivamaranban
J Wamood Pongaree Aratchban
l Kamaranban .Paralee Plienban
Plienban
In studying the upper half of the above table, or cycle
A, we see that the women in the “ mother ” and “children ”
columns reproduce each other in an established order, and
this series is continaully repeated. Ivangala has a Paralee
daughter, who has a Watchban daughter, who has a
Pongaree daughter, whose daughter reverts to the original
Kangala section. A similar invariable order of succession
exists among the women of Cycle B. As regards the
marriages of the sections, a man of the Plienban section
can marry a Kangala, as his direct or tabular wife, which
can be called wife No. 1, or he can espouse Watchban as
No. 2, or Aratchban as No. 3, or Plienban as a No. 4 wife.
And as regards the progeny, if Plienban marries Kangala
his children will be Paralee, who may be called his No. 1
family. If he takes a Watchban as his wife, his children


will be Pongaree, which we shall distinguish as his No. 2
family. If he weds an Aratchban his children will be
Kamaranban, who can be denominated his No. 3 family.
And if Plienban should espouse a Plienban woman his
children would be Wamood, whom we shall set down as
his No. 4 family. From this we can readily see that the
children of a given man, may have any one of four section
names, this matter depending altogether upon the woman
who is his wife; and consequently there cannot be any
recurrent succession of the section names through the
men.
Two of Plienban’s possible wives and two of his possible
families belong to Cycle A, and two to Cycle B. A No. 1
wife, and consequently a No. 1 family, which are those
given in Table IV. on the same line across the page, are
the most general, and may be considered the normal
relationships. A No. 2 wife and family are the next most
usual, No. 3 and No. 4 wives and resultant families are not
so common, although quite legal in native society.
We have just seen that a man may have a wife or family
belonging to any one of four sections. Although a woman
may likewise have a husband from any one of four sections,
this fact makes no difference at all to her progeny. For
example, a Ivangala woman might be married to Plienban,
or Aratchban, or Watchban, or Kangala, but her children
would be Paralee all the same, because the succession of
the sections through the woman is absolutely invariable.
But owing to the four possible husbands obtainable by
women of the Kangala section, it is evident that there
could be four sorts of Paralees, according to whom their
fathers were.
In the Cliau-an, as well as in all the other tribes reported
by me, in the Northern Territory, succession of the totems
does not depend upon either the father or the mother, but


is regulated by locality, and I shall now endeavour to
describe how this is carried out. The folk-lore of these
people is full of fabulous tales respecting the progenitors
of every totem. Some of them were like the men and
women of our own time, whilst others were mythologic
creatures of aboriginal fairyland. In those olden days, as
at present, the totemic ancestors consisted of families or
groups of families, who had their recognised hunting-
grounds in some part of the tribal territory. They were
born in a specific locality, and occupied it by virtue of
their birthright. Some of them would be, let us say,
cockatoos, others dogs, others kangaroos, others snakes,
and so forth. The members of these family groups were
sub-divided into the same eight sections which we find
among the people now.
When one of these legendary individuals died, his spirit
was supposed to settle itself in some well known spot in
his own hunting grounds, such as a rock, or tree, or hill,
or soakage, or perhaps it went into the ground. The
individual might, during his lifetime, have identified himself
with different places, such as where he camped at various
times, or did a notable deed, or worked some ceremonial in-
cantation or the like. The sites of these several actions were
scattered over different parts of the locality he occupied,
as well as over the hunting grounds of neighbouring
friendly tribes, whom he was in the habit of visiting. All
the members of his own family group had, as a matter of
course, equal rights to the same hunting grounds as he,
and located their spirits at certain places in a similar
manner.
In the course of many generations, all the camping places,
water-holes, large rocks, springs, hills, trees and remark-
able objects in their own tract of country would become
saturated, so to speak, with spirits of all sorts. There


would be bandicoots at one place; frogs would infest
others ; some would be reeking with porcupines ; whilst
other spots would be haunted by snakes. Certain of these
fabled areas were large, and others were of small extent.
Some of the traditionary totems were invested with greater
authority than others, like the head men of totemic groups
at the present time. Some animals of a kind were
numerous, as now, and left a prolific family of spirits,
whilst others were few, and left behind a limited number
of representatives. The exact location of every one of
these notable retreats has been handed down by oral
tradition to all the present natives, who give a poetical
and much embellished account of the doings of their various
ancestors, freely mixed with superstition.
The people of the far past time used to assemble, as at
present, for ceremonial purposes, such as initiating the
young men, making rain, etc., and consequently every man
and woman had travelled over most of the tribal territory.
After the death of a given individual, his spirit would re-
visit all the places which had figured prominently in the
man’s life, sometimes sojourning at one of these spots,
sometimes at another, but the “headquarters” of the
spirit would be at a particular soakage, rock, etc., in the
old hunting grounds.
Whether in human shape or as monstrosities, these
creatures of aboriginal fancy or exaggeration were
possessed of supernatural powers. Some of them could
form springs and watercourses; some could raise up hills
and rocks at certain historic spots, whilst others could
cause trees or patches of scrub to grow in remarkable
forms. Moreover, these fabled retreats are related to one
another, in the same way that human beings are related.
For example, a soakage may be the mother’s brother of a
certain hill; a rock may be the father of a particular


sand-hill; a tree may be the brother of a rock-hole, and
so on.
In all aboriginal tribes there is a deeply seated belief
in the reincarnation of their ancestors. The original stock
of spirits, so to speak, perpetually undergo reincarnation
from one human being to another. The natives are quite
ignorant of the natural facts of procreation, and believe
that conception is altogether independent of sexual inter-
course. When a woman for the first time feels the move-
ment of the child in the womb, commonly called quicken-
ing, she takes particular notice of the spot where it
occurred and reports it to the people present. It is believed
that the spirit or soul of some deceased progenitor has
just at that moment entered the woman’s body. The entry
may have been by the way of some one of the natural
openings, or through any part of the skin, the mode and
place of ingress being immaterial to these ethereal beings.
When the child is born, it will have assigned to it the
totemic name of the mythic ancestor belonging to the
particular locality. For example, if the quickening
happened near a remarkable rock, or hill, or waterhole,
or camping place, which was known to be haunted by the
traditionary spirit of a galah, the infant would belong to
the galah totem, altogether independently of either the
father or the mother.
Regarding the succession of the totems, it is important
to remember that in all our aboriginal tribes, a wife is
taken away into the family group or triblet of her husband,
and roams about with him through his country. If he be,
for example, a crow, he and his wife will spend most of
their time amongst the specific haunts of his ancestors.
When his wife for the first time becomes conscious of
being enceinte, she will probably be staying at a spot
associated with some of the crows of earlier times, because


she is living in a crow man’s country. In such a case the
child, when born, will be denominated a crow the same as
its father. Should the woman, however, at the time of
the quickening, happen to be on a visit to her own people
in the district where she was born and brought up, the
chances are in favour of the interesting fact being con-
nected with one of her own ancestors, say a porcupine;
then the child will get the totemic name of the porcupine,
the same as its mother. Again, if the woman, at the
critical moment, happened to be at a part of the common
hunting grounds, where the pigeon spirits are supposed to
predominate, her infant would be a pigeon. In this way
there could be children of the same parents all possessing
different totemic names, many examples of which are found
among the Cliau-an, Ohingalee and other tribes. But as
the married pair of our example would naturally frequent
their own crow tract more than anywhere else, as stated
in the last paragraph, their crow progeny would probably
be the most numerous, or it might be that all their children
would be 1 crows. This has given rise to the erroneous
statements made by other investigators that the descent
of the totems is through the father.
In some of these historic places the spirits of several
different kinds of animals which were closely related to
each other, are now said to inhabit the same rock, tree,
spring, etc., or at any rate to occupy places in close prox-
imity to each other, and roam about in company the same
as they did when “in the flesh.” If a mother first felt
the movements of the foetus at that locality, it would be
almost impossible to say which of the spirits had entered
her body, and consequently in such cases it is always
difficult for the old men to decide the denomination of the
totem to which the child shall be deemed to belong.
Rev. L. Schultze, in speaking of the tribes on the Upper
Finke River, states: —“These natives believe that the


souls of the infants dwell in the foliage of the trees, and
that they are carried there by the good mountain spirits
‘tuanyiraka,’ and their wives, ‘melbata.’ The nearest tree
to a woman when she feels the first pain of parturition,
she calls ‘ngirra,’ as they are under the impression that
the ‘guruna,’ or soul, has then entered from it into the
child. Such a tree is left untouched, as they believe that
whoever should happen to break off even a single branch
would become sick. But if the tree should be injured or
broken down by winds or floods, that person would get ill
whose ‘ngirra,’ the tree was.” 1
When Rev. C. G. Teichelmann, and Rev. O. W. Schurmann
were engaged in missionary work among the aboriginal
tribes in and around Adelaide, the capital of South
Australia, in 1810, the blacks called them ‘Pindi-meyu,’ or
“men of the den,” because in their white complexions and
unusual activity, they believed that they recognised their
forefathers returned from the habitation of the dead.
‘Pindi,’ a large den or pit, was the place of souls, and was
situated in the far west, whence the souls of the unborn
came, and, hovering among the grass-trees, waited for the
hour of conception. When the infant into whom the spirit
entered, had finished its course on earth, and was buried,
the spirit, ‘towilla,’ returned to ‘Pindi.’ 2
Rev. Geo. Taplin, speaking of the tribes about Mount
Freeling, 300 miles northerly from Adelaide, describes how
these spirits manage to secure a mother. A tiny spirit
meets a woman in the bush and throws its little club at her
foot, the end of the weapon making a little puncture under
the great-toe nail, through which the spirit enters, and in
due time is re-born. The entry may be under the thumb
nail, and is accomplished in a similar manner, with the
1 Trans., Roy. Soc., S. Australia, (Adelaide, 1891), xiv., 239.
2 Tasmanian Journal of Natural Science, (1842), 1., pp. 11l and 120.


same result. The sex of the infant is determined by that
of the spirit who enters the woman’s body. 1 Mr. Schiirmann,
in 1846, reported the same belief among the tribes about
Port Lincoln, more than 350 miles by land, via Port
Augusta, from Adelaide. 2
On the Daly River, in the Northern Territory, Rev.
Donald McKillop reports that, souls are shut up in hills.
Daly River is twenty-one degrees of latitude distant from
Adelaide, which shows the wide geographic range of the
native belief in reincarnation. He says:—“A few miles
from where we live, and not far from the river (Daly),
there is a hill, called in the native language ‘Alalk-yinga,’
that is “the place of children.” The natives believe that
the souls of future children —or perhaps the children, bodies
and souls —are shut up there. They are under the care of
one old man. He has to see that they do not escape, and
to supply them with water. This he does by means of an
underground communication with the river about a mile
away. The range, of which the hill in question is the last
one, runs right to the river. When a child is to be born,
this old man sees to the business.”
Mr. G. W. Earl, when among the natives of Coburg
Peninsula, in the extreme north of Australia, in 1846,
stated that “ the spirits of the dead are recognised in the
strangers who visit their country.” 4 Coburg Peninsula,
where Mr. Earl observed the belief in reincarnation, and
Port Lincoln, where Mr. Schiirmann, in the same year,
reported a similar belief, are separated by 24 degrees of
latitude, or about 1,500 miles.
When residing at Perth, Western Australia, in 1842, Mr.
G. F. Moore reported that the word ‘djandga’ signified
1 Folklore, Manners, etc., S. A. Aborigines, (1879), p. 88.
2 Reprinted in Native Tribes of South Australia, (1879), p. 235.
3 Trans. Roy. Soc. S. A., (Adelaide, 1894), xvii., 262.
* Journ. Roy. Greog. Soc., (London, 1846), xvi., 241.
H-Nov. 7,1906.


“the reappearance of deceased persons. It is also applied
to Europeans, who are supposed to be aborigines, under
another colour, restored to the land of their nativity.” 1
Prom Adelaide, where the same belief was recorded, to
Perth, is about 1,300 miles in a direct line on a map of
Australia.
Mr. B. S. Parker, a protector of the aborigines of Victoria,
wrote in 1854: —“The aborigines had a distinct belief of
the existence of their souls after death. . . . There
were also well defined traces of a belief in transmigration
of souls. . . . It is well known that, on the first
appearance of the colonists, the opinion was taken up, and
long maintained among them, that they were their deceased
progenitors returning to their former haunts.” 2
The few examples I have quoted, show that the aboriginal
belief in the reincarnation of souls, has been known and
reported upon by white men, from 1840 to the present time.
The localities I have chosen for these examples are
situated in the extreme north, the west, and the south of
the Australian Continent.
IV. Languages of Tribes about Alice Springs.
Daring recent years, some friends of mine have had
business at the mining fields, in the Alice Springs district,
Northern Territory. The journey from Adelaide to Alice
Springs, although a somewhat long one, is quite easily
accomplished. A train leaves Adelaide for Oodnadatta,
737 miles distant, on every alternate Monday throughout
the year, arriving at Oodnadatta on Wednesday at 7 p.m.;
fares, first class £5 10s. and second class £3 17s. Gd. On
Thursday morning, at 8 a.m., a coach carrying mails and
passengers, starts from Oodnadatta for Alice Springs, the
1 Descriptive Vocabulary of the Language of the Aborigines of
Western Australia, (London, 1842), p. 28.
* The Aborigines of Australia, (Melbourne, 1854), p. 25.


through fare being £7, and the time occupied on the road
ten days. Passengers by the coach find their own rations,
a fresh supply of which can be had at the following
stations en route, viz.:—Hamilton Bore, Blood’s Creek,
Horse-shoe Bend, and Alice Well. Passengers are allowed
25 pounds weight of luggage, independently of their rations;
all over that weight is charged at the rate of six pence per
pound. Leaving Oodnadatta in the coach, Alberga Creek
is reached in 40 miles; 30 miles further brings us to
Hamilton Bore; 36 miles more is Blood’s Creek and in
another 30 miles we reach Charlotte Waters, 136 miles
from Oodnadatta. From Charlotte Waters to Goyder’s
Creek is 29 miles ; Old Crown Point is 25 more ; another
27 brings us to Horse-shoe Bend. From there to Depot
Well is 13 miles, and in 14 more we reach Alice Well, 108
miles from Charlotte Waters. From Alice Well to Frances
Well is 22 miles; Deep Well is 27 more; Ooraminna is
another 24 miles, and in 30 miles more we arrive at Alice
Springs, 347 miles from Oodnadatta.
I have given this short account of the journey to Alice
Springs, in the hope of encouraging scientific men residing
in any part of Australia, to go out among the aborigines,
for the purpose of supplementing our knowledge of their
dialects, beliefs, and customs generally. The expense of
the trip would be comparatively trifling. The two black-
fellows, “Jimmy” and “Warwick,” who acted as inter-
preters to Messrs. Spencer and Gillen, are natives of the
Lower Finke and Lindsay Rivers country, where they are
usually employed on stations and otherwise. They can be
heard of any time at Charlotte Waters. The tribe in which
these men were born and brought up contains four sections
in its social structure, namely, Panungka, Koomara,
Parulla, and Bultara.
A township called Stuart was laid out some 20 years ago
about a mile and three-quarters south of Alice Springs


telegraph station. The town is situated on the right bank
of the Todd River, somewhat less than half a mile below
the junction of Charles Creek, and is only a primitive
country village.
The journey from Stuart or Alice Springs to Port Darwin
is sometimes undertaken by bicyclists. Mr. McDonald
was the most successful, as he did the journey without any
outside help. He was, however, fortunate in having a
good rain on most of the sandy part of the way. Rain on
a sandy camel-pad makes it almost as good as asphalt for
a bicycle. Mr. A. Lennox was another of the successful
wheelmen from Alice Springs to Port Darwin. Several
others have done the journey, but have taken longer time,
and have had assistance in various ways from other
travellers. Footmen also make the trip right through.
Occasionally, by their own carelessness, they get into
distress and cut the telegraph wire, a recognised practice
in extreme cases. The line maintainers then go out and
succour them, as well as repair the damage to the tele-
graph line. The distance from Alice Springs to Port
Darwin is about 1,030 miles; the last 200 miles, from Pine
Creek to Palmerston, being covered by a railway.
To the east and north-east of Alice Springs, a good many
blackfellows are employed by the miners at Winnecke and
Arltunga, as water drawers, wood collectors and horse
shepherds. The native women do washing and general
laundry and scullery work. The younger and better
looking ones are often promoted to the position of temporary
wives of their employers. The übiquitous rabbit is very
numerous in that region, and is a valuable addition to the
aboriginal food supply. In 1899, I described the eight
intermarrying sections in this region, 1 and at present the
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., xxxvm., 76. The Kat'-tit-yaor Kat'-titch-a
tribe about Barrow Creek, have a similar organization to that of the
Arran'da, with some modifications in the section names. The Kattitya
tribe has been erroneously reported as the “ Kaitish ” by some writers.


grammatical structure of their language will be briefly
touched upon.
All the way from about Oodnadatta or Alberga Creek
to Alice Springs and Glen Helen Cattle Station, the people
speak the Arran'da language, or dialects of it. In 1890,
Rev. H. Kempe prepared a grammar and vocabulary of the
“ Language spoken in the Macdonnell Ranges. 1 He did not
however, observe that there are two distinct pronouns in
the first person of the dual, and also of the plural. In one
of these pronouns, the individual addressed is included with
the speaker, and in the other the individual addressed is
excluded. I therefore propose to supply a new tab)e which
has been forwarded at my request by a resident of that
part of the country.
f Ist Person I, Ta or yinga
Singular <; 2nd ~ Thou, Unta or nga
(3rd ~ He, Era
‘Ta’ and ‘unta’ are used with transitive verbs; ‘yinga’
and ‘nga*’ are used with intransitive verbs.
rut Person J We ’ mcl *» Ngilina
f Ist Pei son j \y e excl., Ilina
Dual < 0 , xz ’ A/ru„i„
2nd ~ You, Mbala
3rd ~ They, ' Eratara
rist Person I We ’ incL ’ Nganuna
P| , . j Abt leison | We, excl., Anuna
111 a j 2nd ~ You, Rankara
,, They Etna
Anuna
Rankara
Etna
In regard to the “ double we ” in the dual, there are
some variations, depending upon the relationship existing
between the speaker and the party spoken to. For example
if a father speaks to his son, he says ngilaki instead of
ngilina, as, Ngilaka araka larityika, we (dual), kangaroo
for must go. Emphatic forms are, ngilanta, we, (dual),
only. Ngunanta or ngunantara, we, (plural), only.
1 Trans. Roy. Soc., S. Australia, xiv., 1-54.


The Lo-rit-ya or Lo-ritcli-a tribe adjoins the Ar-ran'-da
on the west. Their country is approximately from the
Musgrave Ranges, northerly via Lake Amadeus, to the
Ehrenberg Ranges. In 1900,1 reported that the Lo-rit-ya
were divided into four intermarrying sections, called
Panungka, Koomara, Parulla and Bultara. I stated that
the same organisation, with some slight modifications in
the names of the four sections, as well as in the order of
their intermarriage, extended westerly from Lake Amadeus
across the State of Western Australia to the Indian Ocean.
I also reported that the children took their descent through
the mother. 1
The Lo'-rit-ya, in common with the Ar-ran'-da and other
neighbouring tribes, practice the rites of circumcision and
subincision. Certain mutilations are also performed upon
the young women, the result of which being that the
vaginal orifice is permanently enlarged. Full particulars
of all these rites, and of the impressive ceremonies con-
nected with them, were communicated by me to the
American Philosophical Society at Philadelphia in 1900. 2
The grammatical structure of the Lo-rit-ya language is
the same as that of the Ar-ran'-da. The nouns, pronouns,
verbs and other parts of speech, are declined in a similar
manner, and several words of their vocabulary are sub-
stantially the same. I shall therefore content myself with
giving a list of the pronouns, and a short vocabulary, both
of which have been obtained direct from the natives by a
throroughly capable correspondent residing in that district.
Below is a table of the personal pronouns in the nominative
case. The first person of the dual, as well as the first
person of the plural, contains two distinct forms, one of
which includes with the speaker the individual who is
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Philadelphia, xxxix., 89, with map.
* Op. cit., pp. 622-638.


addressed, and the other excludes him. The first of these
is marked “inclusive,” and the latter “exclusive” in the
following tabulation: —
f Ist Person I, Ngaiulu
Singular <( 2nd ~ Thou, Nuntu
l. 3rd ~ He, Paluru
,Ist Person i We ’ incL »
f ist 1 erson \ We, excl.,
Dual 2nd ~ You,
v3rd ~ They
Nuntungali
Ngali
Numbali
Palurukutara
Ppr<?nni We ’ incl -» Nguntunganana
i 11 ( We, excl., Nganana
Plural 2nd ~ You, Ngurangari
3rd ~ They Tana ,
The possessive pronouns are as under: —
f Ist Person Mine, Ngaiuku
Singular { 2nd ~ Thine, Nuntuba
13rd ~ His,
Palumba
,Ist Person I ° urs ’ incl ”
f lst reison \ ours, excl.,
Dual 2nd ~ Yours,
3rd ~ Theirs,
Nuntungalimba
Ngalimba
Numbalimba
Palumbakutara
,Ist Person I ours ’ incl ”
r lst lerson<j ourg> excL?
Plural { 2nd ~ Yours,
3rd „ Theirs,
Nuntunganamba
Nganamba
Ngurangarimba
Tanamba
Substantially the same dialect extends south-westerly
from the Lo-rit-ya country to the Blythe and Petermann
Ranges, and goes a long way into Western Australia.
Among the Lo-rit-ya people the septum of the nose is
pierced in both sexes, and they have the same belief con-
cerning re-birth, which I have reported in earlier pages as
existing among the Chau-an tribe. The same belief reaches
far into Western Australia.
Loritya Vocabulary.
The following list of eighty-nine of the most commonly
used words in the Lo-rit-ya language has been written down


from the mouths of the native speakers, by one of my most
valued correspondents in that locality.
Man,
Mankind,
Father,
Elder Brother,
Younger Brother,
Head,
Eyes,
Nose,
Tongue,
Teeth,
Ears,
Hand,
Elbow,
Moon,
Fire,
Water,
Camp,
Smoke,
Opossum,
Porcupine,
Rock Wallaby,
Red Kangaroo,
Grey Kangaroo,
Bat,
Tame Dog,
Grass tree,
Red-gum tree,
Family Terms.
pata Woman,
mutu Mother,
katu Elder Sister,
kuta Younger Sister,
malungu Infant, neuter,
Parts of the Human Body.
kata Foot,
kuru Knee,
mula Blood,
talinya Penis,
kadidi Yagina,
pina Anus,
mara Excrement,
nguku
Inanimate Nature.
tyintu Rock,
pira A Stone,
waru Sand,
kape The Ground,
ngura Pipe-clay
buyu Red Ochi
Red Ochre
Animals.
waiyuta
untia
Wild Dog.
Emu,
wari
malu
Eaglehawk,
Pelican,
kanala Crow,
ulbulbine Iguana,
papa . Louse,
Trees and Plants.
ulunkuru Beefwood,
itara Bullrushes
Bullrushes,
kunka
yako
kangura
malangu
pipiri
tyina
mardi
ngurka
kalu
tyuka
kunnatan
kunna
walu
buli
karu
manta
ukuna
ulba mapanu
papa inura
kalaia
kaluwara
kabilyalku
kanka
wongapa
kulu
iltyantyi
unka


Implements, etc.
Stone Tomahawk, ilipa Womera, meru
Stone Knife, tula Boomerang ulbarinya
~ ~ irkili Wooden Trough kuntila
„ ~ tangu Yamstick, wonna
Shield, kutityi Upper Millstone, miri
Spear, katyi Lower „ tyu-a
Adjectives.
Large, buntu Good, pala
Small, wima Bad, kuya
Straight, tukaruru Hungry, a-in-ma
Crooked, kalikali Stinking, boka
Verbs. 1
Stand, ngarange Talk, wonkanye
Sit, ninanye Beat, bunganye
Walk, yananye Throw, runkanye
Eat, ngalkunye Carry, katinye
See, nanganye Bite, patanye
Give, . yunganye
Numerals.
One, kutu Several, mankura
Two, kutara
V. Native Shoes in the Northern Territory.
To protect their feet from the sharp stones in rugged
country, when travelling any considerable distance, or from
the hot sand of the desert, the natives of the Northern
Territory sometimes make shoes or sandals from the bark
of the tea-tree, with a string tied over the foot to keep them
on. This string is made from the bark of a shrub with a
yellow flower, which grows on the sandhills. In some
districts the shoe itself is made with strands of the bark of
the same tree, worked in the manner of netting, and is
fastened on the foot as just stated. In other parts these
shoes are made of animal fur, woven into a net with very
small meshes. Shoes are also sometimes made of emu


feathers matted together to form the soles, and are
fastened on the foot with string in the usual way. It has
been erroneously said that such shoes, which are worn only
by old conjurors, do not leave any tracks on the ground
which could be detected by others, but the real explanation
of their immunity from pursuit is because no man would
attempt to follow the tracks of an individual using shoes
of this character, from a superstitious dread of the magical
powers of the wearer. Such shoes are very seldom worn,
but are occasionally used by the Shamans of the tribe
when engaged upon some special work, such as the making
of rain, driving away evil spirits, or such like.
Mr. E. M. Ourr thus refers to such shoes in his valuable
work: —“ It was discovered in 1882, or thereabouts, that the
blacks to the westward of Lake Eyre, on the Musgrave
Ranges, and it is believed in some other portions of Central
Australia, wear a sort of shoe when they attack their
enemies by stealth at night. Some of the tribes call these
shoes ‘kooditcha,’ 1 their name for an invisible spirit. I
have seen a pair of them. Their soles were made of the
feathers of the emu, stuck together with a little human
blood, which the maker is said to take from his arm.
They were about an inch and a half thick, soft, and of
even breadth. The uppers were nets made of human hair.
The object of these shoes is to prevent those who wear
them from being tracked and pursued after a night attack.
It is only on the softest ground that they leave any mark,
and even then it is impossible to distinguish the heel from
the toe. The blacks say they can track anything that
walks, except a man shod with ‘kooditcha.” 2
VI. Bullroarers.
In 1840, when the Lutheran Missionaries, Teichelmann
and Schurmann, already mentioned in this article, were
1 The i is sounded as in “ mite.
2 The Australian Race, (Melbourne, 1886), i., 148.


labouring among the tribes in the Adelaide district, they
discovered and described two kinds of bullroarers, a smaller
and a larger, used by the aborigines in their secret
ceremonies. The ‘ kadnomarngutta ’ they speak of as
being “a thin, oval piece of wood, about five inches long,
and an inch and a half wide, tied to a string by which the
natives swing it rapidly round, and thus cause a humming
noise. Females and children are not allowed to see it,
much less to use it.” The ‘wimmarri’ was the same in
shape as the ‘ kadnomarngutta ’ but larger. It was invoked
in the incantations of the natives whilst out hunting. 1 The
name of the instrument was also repeated while the bodies
of the youths were being scarred, believing that it would
soothe the pain.
VII. Naming of some Native Languages.
A custom of wide geographic distribution, is that of
naming a language after its negative adverb. In 1816, Mr.
G. Windsor Earl in his paper “ On the Aboriginal Tribes of
the Northern Coast of Australia,” reports as follows: —
“The Coburg Peninsula is occupied by four distinct tribes.
They are distinguished among each other by the term
which in the particular dialect of each designates the
monosyllable ‘ No.’ About Croker Island and Raffles’ Bay
the tribe is termed ‘Yaako.’ The Port Essington tribe
goes by the name of ‘ Yarlo ’; the western tribe by that of
‘lyi ’; and the great southern tribe by that of ‘Oitbi.’” 2
In 18GG, Rev. Wm. Ridley 3 in his book on the Kamilaroi
tribe of New South Wales, also records the nomenclature
of the language from the negative adverb. ‘ Kamil ’ mean?
‘No.’ This method of distinguishing a language, extends
1 Grammar of the Language of the Natives of Adelaide, 1840, pp. 7,
55, and 73.
3 Journal of the Royal Geographical Society, (London, 1846), vol. xvi.,
pp. 241 - 242.
3 Kamilaroi', Dippil, etc., (Sydney, 1866), p. 14.


from the Kamilaroi southerly, to Port Phillip in Victoria,
and northerly to the Mary River in Queensland. To Mr.
Earl and Mr. Ridley belong the honour of first discovering
this peculiarity in the naming of some of the Australian
languages. It is worthy of note that from the most
northerly of the tribes reported by Mr. Earl, to the southern
limits of the tribes practising Mr. Ridley’s discovery, the
distance is about 2,000 miles, which may be another link
in the evidence of the common ancestry of Australian tribes.
Between the two extreme points mentioned, there are
extensive regions occupied by tribes whose dialects are
not named in the manner referred to.
In 1903 I reported some other methods adopted by cer-
tain tribes of New South Wales and Victoria, in naming
their dialects, to which the reader is referred. 3
VIII. Gure or Avenging Party.
Among the aboriginal tribes inhabiting that portion of
the State of Victoria, watered by the Upper Murray,
Mitta Mitta, Ovens, Upper Goulburn and Yarra Rivers, if
one of their men had been slain by some person in a
neighbouring tribe, the method of avenging the injury was
known as ‘ gure.’ It was believed that if a man’s death
were not avenged, his spirit would saunter about and harass
his relations. In consequence of this superstitious belief,
the punishment of the offender was carried out at the
earliest auspicious juncture.
The following is an abbreviated account of the procedure
of a gure expedition, as narrated to me orally by an
aboriginal native of the Mitta Mitta River, in north-eastern
Victoria.
The brothers and friends of the murdered individual,
accompanied by the elders or leading men, muster at the
‘ngulubul,’ or private meeting place of the men, and discuss
3 This Journal, xxxyii., pp. 244 and 250.


the best course to be pursued in dealing out retribution to
the guilty party. Some of the hair, or it may be portions
of the skin, which had previously been secured from the
body of the murdered man, are produced at this meeting,
for the purpose of infusing into the minds of those present
a desire for speedy retaliation.
The population of a certain locality often consisted of a
number of families, who were so far independent, that they
might in the aggregate be called sub-tribes. It not in-
frequently happened that feuds arose between these family
groups, and murders occasionally took place. When a
wrong of this kind was inflicted upon a weak sub-tribe,
which was not able to retaliate, a messenger w&s sent to
report the facts of the case to the other family groups
with whom they were connected by ties of kinship, asking
for their assistance. The messenger carried with him a
flat stick about eighteen inches or two feet in length, and
about an inch and a half wide. This stick was marked or
ornamented with lines and nondescript devices by means
of a marsupial’s tooth, and was painted with red ochre.
Instead of a wooden message stick, the bone of an emu’s
leg, or that of a kangaroo’s leg, was sometimes used, being
marked with a flint in the same manner as the piece of
wood.
The neighbouring people who were summoned in this
way usually responded, because they might require similar
help some day for themselves. On reaching the common
meeting ground indicated by the messenger, a party of
warriors was selected to proceed into the country of the
wrong-doer. Then there was great greasing and straight-
ening and sharpening of spears. Boomerangs, clubs, shields
and other weapons were duly examined, and all necessary
preparations made for the projected foray. Some of the
cleverest sorcerers available were there with their para-


phernalia of enchantment, and instruments of deadly
potency. Every man pulled his beard up into his mouth
and bit it with savage grimaces. When all the preliminaries
had been settled, the chosen band, greased and painted for
the occasion, started forth on their mission. The minor
details of the expedition are so similar to those of the
‘Pirrimbir,’ which I have described elsewhere 1 that the
most important portions only need be here touched upon.
The party travelled on till evening and camped for the
night, screening their fires so that they could not be seen
at a distance. Early next morning a tree was marked
with zig-zag or irregular lines and ovals of the usual native
pattern, the marks extending from near the ground, up
along the bole as high as the men could reach by sitting
on each others’ shoulders. The marks were chopped into
the bark with sharpened sticks or chipped stones, or with
tomahawks. A gum tree, or a grey-box tree was preferred,
if available, on account of the smooth bark. Every man
of the contingent took part in marking the tree, in order
to transfer as much magical influence to it as possible,
until it was, so to speak, surfeited with mischief. Another
reason for all the men participating in the marking of the
tree is to strengthen the bond of union amongst them, so
that none of them can feel any remorse, or give such
timely warning to the doomed man as would enable him to
escape. While the work is in progress, some of the prin-
cipal magicians rub the marks with bullroarers, quartz-
crystals and human fat to augment the effectiveness of the
proceedings, and cause dismay in the heart of the enemy.
When the marking of the tree has been completed, the
men dance or jump around it, singing ‘ Wure buunungandha
dumballadha,’ several times in succession. The object
1 This Journal, vol. xxxvm., pp. 239 - 252. See also photograph of the
marked tree.


of the entire ceremony is to charm the intended victim so
that he will not go away from the camp he may then happen
to be in, but will remain there spell bound and powerless,
till his pursuers reach him. At each of their camping
places on the journey forward, exactly the same procedure
is gone through, including the marking of a fresh tree every
morning. Having reached their destination and discovered
the whereabouts of the tribe they are in quest of, they go
as near as may be considered safe and make a camp in
some secluded spot, where they are not likely to be observed.
Two clever men are now sent on ahead as spies, to make
full and careful observations of the hostile camp, for the
purpose of discovering in what part of it the man they are
in search of has his quarters, the numerical strength of
the tribe, any points of vantage, and so on.
During the time these spies are away reconnoitring
the men who are left behind have marked a tree, and
cleared the ground around it, as on the other occasions.
They have painted their faces and chests white, with
patches of the same colour on their upper arms. They
have likewise built a bough screen around and above their
little fire, to prevent its being seen at a distance after
dark. This bough covering is made in the following manner:
A few small saplings are cut and placed on end around the
Are, which is in the centre. The cut ends of the stems
of the saplings are inserted in the ground, with the upper
or leafy extremities leaning against each other over the
Are, in the form of a pyramid or cone. Another leafy
bough is now placed in the apex, with the stem downwards,
much in the same way that a keystone is used by stone-
masons.
As soon as the spies obtain the first glimpse of the
general camp of their adversaries, they crouch down in a
depression in the surface of the ground, or hide among


bushes. They then begin to chant in low tones a song
called ‘ guggarga,’ which is believed to possess the magical
gift of causing a smoke to ascend from the camp fire of the
culprit, and thus disclose his location. During the con-
tinuance of this far reaching song, the men watch intently
till they see a smoke issuing from a certain part of the
camp. They then steal up closer to the encampment on
the side indicated by the smoke, until they can recognise
the man they are seeking, and note the position of his
camp fire. Should the actual murderer not be present in
the camp, then the spies identify the spot occupied by one
of his elder brothers, or his father, who is then substituted
to suffer in his stead.
When the messengers have located the doomed man,
they return to their comrades, and report progress, with
the usual formalities. After some refreshments have been
partaken of, a few small pieces of wood are placed on the
lire to make sufficient light for tlie men to see what they
are doing. They all dance around the Are at which the
chief conjurers are seated, singing in a very low tone, and
working some enchantment upon the foe to render his
chance of escape hopeless. After a while most of the men
go to sleep, but there arc always some of the old fellows
on the watch. Some hours before daylight all hands are
roused up, and they march noislessly away to the outskirts
of the enemies’ camp, holding small boughs in front of their
bodies, so that they may not be observed. The song of the
first bird which greets the dawn is the signal for the attack.
The assailants divide, half of them marching off around
one side of the camp, while the other half goes round the
contrary direction, until they all unite on the opposite side
of the camp, their meeting place being close to the inten-
ded victim.
The details of the onslaught are similar to those already
narrated in the “ Pirrimbir Expedition,” to which the


reader is referred. When the victim falls, the avengers
make a sudden charge upon him, and portions of his skin,
flesh and fat are secured, the hands being sometimes cut
off and carried away. If any of the man’s friends interfere
in his behalf, they render themselves liable to the same
punishment. The invaders then retreat to their camping
place of the night before, where they dance and spit around
the marked tree, for the purpose of,withdrawing the magic
which it had absorbed from their former incantations and
necromancy. After this they pick up any food or baggage
which they had left there, and start on their homeward
journey. On getting back to their own people, a full
account is given of the result of the expedition. t
Among the tribes herein referred to, the Magellanic
clouds are supposed to be two native companions, the
larger cloud being the cock bird, the smaller represen-
ting the hen. When these clouds are at their lower
culmination, and consequently are not easily seen in
thickly timbered country, the aborigines have a superstition
that there is danger of neighbouring tribes organising a
gure party, to avenge some real or imaginary bloodshed.
At such times, therefore, unusual vigilance is exercised
by the young men, in watching the movements of their
enemies.






' ' '
