









NOTES AND SKETCHES
OF
NEW SOUTH WALES,
CUBING
A RESIDENCE IN THAT COLONY FROM 1839 TO 1844.
BY
MRS. CHARLES MEREDITH.
LONDON:
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.
1849.




TO THOSE DEAR ENGLISH FRIENDS FOE WHOSE AMUSEMENT,
AND AT WHOSE BEQUEST, THE FOLLOWING PAGES HAVE BEEN
WRITTEN, THEY ARE AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED,
BY
LOUISA ANNE MEREDITH.




PREFACE.
I would fain deprecate the censure of severe critics, which
the superficial character of the following pages might other-
wise call forth, by a few words of explanation as to my
motives and objects in publishing them.
Knowing that very many persons at “ Home ” are deeply
interested in these distant Colonies, as being the residence
of dear friends and relatives, and that, as in the case of my
own home-connexions, they really understand very little of
the general aspect of things here, I believed that a few
simple sketches from nature, however devoid of scientific
lore, would be a welcome addition to the present small fund
of information on common every-day topics relating to these
antipodean climes; and of such belief, this little work is the
result.
My aim has been simply to give my own impressions of
whatever appeared worthy observation. I cannot for a
moment flatter myself with the idea of conveying information
to those skilled in scientific detail; my desire was to give
true and general descriptions of scenery, people, and the
various objects which strike a new-comer as novel or remark-
able ; just, in fact, as they appeared to myself. I have


sketched every-day things with a faithful and homely pencil;
and if the learned find nothing new in my unvarnished
narrative, let them not condemn the unamhitious attempt to
amuse and interest the general, and more especially the
young reader. Books of reference I have none, nor can I
here obtain the use of any. My own observation, aided by
my husband’s long experience in these Colonies, is my sole
resource; therefore, however defective may be the finish of
my picture in detail, the outline is at least original.
As it is necessarily impossible that I can correct the press
myself, numerous typographical errors are almost unavoid-
able, and for which I can only entreat the kind indulgence
of my readers.
Spring Vale,
Great Swanport, Van Diemen’s Land,
December, 1843.


CONTENTS.
I’age
Preface ........... vii
CHAPTER I.
Embarkation Indisposition—Pleasures of a Sea Voyage—Fellow-pas-
sengers—Observance of Character—Devonshire Coast—Pilots—Land
Luxuries—H.M.S. Hercules —Eddystone Lighthouse—Last Land . 1
CHAPTER 11.
Bay of Biscay—Spanish Coast—Employment the best preventive of
Ennui—Phosphorescence of the Sea —Portuguese Men-of-war—Swal-
lows Teneriffe Speaking the Cherub Fear of Pirates —Por-
poises—Flying Fish—Capture of a Boneto—Dolphins . . . 7
CHAPTER 111.
Calm in the Tropics Sharks Turtle lanthina—Shovel-board —
“ Crossing the Line ” —Loss of the North Star—Southern Constellations
—Moonlight in the Tropics—Sunsets—Waterspouts—“ Sun-dogs” . 16
CHAPTER IV.
Whales and “ Jets d’eau”—Birds—Boatswain—Boobies—Cape Pigeon—
Mischief of Idleness —“ Mr. Winkles” at Sea —Great Albatross—Nelly
—Stormy Petrel—Blue Petrel—Sailors’ Delicacies—Stormy Weather 23
CHAPTER V.
Island of St. Paul’s—lslands in Bass’s Straits—Mutton-birds—Botany
Bay Heads—General excitement—Heads of Port Jackson —Scenery—
New Zealanders—First sight of Sydney—Pull ashore —Comforts of
Land Life—George Street, Sydney—The Domain—Eucalyptus, &c.
—Wooloomooloo—Government Gardens . . . . .31


CHAPTER VI.
Sydney Market—Fish, &c.—Dust, Flies, Mosquitoes—Drive to the
Lighthouse Flowers Parrots—Black Cockatoos—Hyde Park-
Churches Libraries “ Currency ” Population Houses Balls,
&c. —lnns—Colonial Newspapers ..... Page 43
CHAPTER VIL
Leave Sydney—“ Clearings”—Huts of the Working Classes—Chain-
Gangs Parramatta Creeks and Rivers —lnn Birds Road to
Penrith—Grasshoppers— Penrith—Nepean—Emu Plains—Ascent of
the Blue Mountains—Waratah ....... gg
CHAPTER VIII.
A “Country Inn”—Breakfast—Contrasts—A Bush Ramble and Digres-
sion about Ants —Mountain Scenery—Cattle Skeletons—“ Weather-
board” Inn—Supper and Night at “ Blind Paddy’s”—Mountains, and
the Surveyor’s Roads—Mount Victoria—Convict Gangs and Bush-
rangers—lnn at the “ Rivulet,” and its Inhabitants—The Ruling Vice 66
CHAPTER IX.
'* Hassan’s Walls”—Grass Trees—Mount Lambey—Victoria Inn—Speci-
men of Benevolent Politeness—Colonial Bridges—First View of
Bathurst—The “ Settlement”—Dearth—Climate—Hot Winds—Pro-
cessions of Whirlwinds—Hurricanes
CHAPTER X.
Bathurst Society and Hospitality—“ White Rock”—Native Dance and
Ceremony—Kangaroo Dance—Appearance of Natives—Children—
“ Gins ’’—Their marriage, slavery, and sufferings—Family Dinner-
party—Adopted Children—lnfanticide—Religion “Devil-Devil”
Language—Story of Hougong and Jimmy—“ Ay, ay ?”—Duties of
the Toilet—Native Songs—Mimicry—Fondness for English Dress-
Boundary Laws—Legal Parricide—Habitual Treachery , .90
CHAPTER XL
Native Huts—“ Gunyon”—Natives’ ingenuity in Duck-Snaring and
Pishing—Native Weapons—Green Frogs—Freshwater Shells—Platy-
pus Spur-winged Plover—Australian Harebell Convolvulus
Everlastings—Peppermint Tree—Opossums—Natives’ mode of taking
tl,em ! 103


CHAPTER XII.
Native Turkeys—Their mode of Incubation—Native Cranberry—Our
Return Locusts Manna Transformations Ground Grubs
Night at the Rivulet —New flowers—Heat and Dust —“ Weather-
board” Inn—Walk to the Cascade—Fringed Violet—Waratahs—
Fine View —Lories ........ Page 114
CHAPTER XIII.
Storm and fine view on Lapstone Hill—Farm-house in the “ public” line
—Arrive at Parramatta Steamboat Scenery on the “ River ”
Sydney Christmas Tree—Christmas Day—Tippling Servants . 124
CHAPTER XIV.
Homebush—Colonial Country-houses—The “ Avenue”—Gates—Slip-
rails Bushrangers Mounted Police Dingoes Flying Fox
Flying Opossum—Native Cats—Birds—Robins—Swallows—Knife-
grinder—Coachman—Bell-bird—Laughing Jackass—Larks—Game 129
CHAPTER XV.
Norfolk Island Pine—English Pear-tree—Daisy Bush Flowers—
Creepers—He-oak—Zamia—“ Wooden Pear-tree”—Native Cherry—
Insect Architecture—Twig-nests, &c. —Butterflies—Ground Spiders—
Tarantula—Silk Spiders—Scorpions—Hornets—Mosquitoes—Ants . 139
CHAPTER XVI.
Guanas—Lizards—Snakes—Salt Marshes—Fishing—Crabs—Toad-fish
—Mangrove-trees—Romance and reality—Night sounds Orange-
Groves—Gardens—Gigantic Lily—Scarcity of fresh water —Winter
Rains —Salt Well—Climate in Winter—Society Conversation—
Servants—Domestic matters—Embarkation for Van Diemen’s Land 150




NOTES AND SKETCHES,
&c. &c.
CHAPTER I.
Embarkation—lndisposition— Pleasures of a Sea Voyage—Fellow-passengers
—Observance of Character—Devonshire Coast—Pilots— Land Luxuries--
H.M.S. Hercules— Eddystone Lighthouse—Last Land.
Early in the month of June, 1839, we left England for New
South Wales; and although at the time the voyage seemed to
me very monotonous and devoid of incident, yet, in writing
any account of the interesting objects these colonies present, [
cannot pass altogether silently over the events, however few or
trifling, that served in some measure to vary the tedium of a four
months’ passage hither, which I can assure my readers is far
more irksome than any one would imagine who has not endured
that unpleasant captivity.
It is now more than three years since that time, but I remem-
ber most vividly my feelings of disgust on stepping from the
chair in which I was hoisted on board the Letitia, amidst the
strange melee on deck. I was too ignorant of nautical matters
to make proper allowance for the slovenly aspect of things in
their then incomplete state of arrangement.
Dirt and confusion seemed to share the sovereignty between
them, and the heterogeneous assemblage of trunks, chests, cases,
bags, hampers, hen-coops, pigs, dogs, coils of rope, sailors and
passengers on deck, made me gladly retreat to our own cabin,
where the final disposal of our various goods and chattels occupied
us the remainder of the evening.
B


I was greatly amused and puzzled by Mr. Meredith’s extreme
caution in lashing every article with ropes to the sides of the
cabin, as well as by having deep cleats of wood nailed to the
floor to keep our chest of drawers, &c. in place. Even my
dressing-case and work-box were tied fast, like a couple of ter-
rible wild animals, lest they should make a sudden rush at us, and
the candlestick was securely confined in their company. A con-
venient shelf, with a strong rail in front, formed an excellent
bookcase; and by the time our various little arrangements were
completed, our apartment, which was considered a most spacious
one, being eight or nine feet square, began to look more snug
and habitable than I had believed possible.
Having a stern-cabin, we had the advantage of half the sky-
light and two stern-windows, which enabled us to enjoy more
air and light, and be less annoyed by unpleasant odours, than in
any other part of the vessel.
Contrary winds rendered our progress very slow for some days,
and that miserable visitation, sea-sickness, kept me almost wholly
in my berth, where I lay wearily listening to the novel and
strange noises all around me, and hearing with some impatience
of our repeated approaches to the French coast, as we slowly beat
down, the Channel.
To a novice at sea, every hour, nay, every moment, brings
some greater or less misery. Even in comparatively still weather,
the motion of the vessel, however slight, seems almost intolerable,
and you helplessly roll from side to side of your narrow berth,
with many a thump and bruise—-the best preventive of the latter
being a pretty tight wedge, consisting of a desk or box, and pil-
lows. You watch the swing; tray, cloaks, towels, or whatever else
is hung up in the cabin, performing various extraordinary gyra-
tions, that make you most unpleasantly giddy as you contemplate
the extempore waltzing party, enlivened perhaps by the gentle
melody of a couple of sailors holy-stoning the deck overhead, and
you are fain to believe your discomfort at its height; but be not
too sanguine; skylights will sometimes have broken panes, and
11 bull’s-eyes”* are notoriously apt to be leaky, in either of which
* Thick glasses inserted in a ship’s deck to light the cabins, and favourite
spots for people to stand upon when you are reading below.


cases your toilet, such as it is, or your bed, becomes saturated
with dirty salt-water. Perhaps a cup of some inexplicable sea-
compound, called, by a stretch of courtesy, tea or coffee, is
brought to you, and, with the most laudable intention of convey-
ing it to your lips, you feel a sudden jerk, and perceive an empty
cup fast grasped in your trembling hands, and find that its former
contents are communicating an agreeable warmth and moisture
to your feet, not much to the improvement of the white counter-
pane, but greatly to the diversion of your more experienced com-
panion, who, with provoking coolness, inquires, “ Why do you
pour your breakfast down there ?”
At length, with a heroism not to be lightly appreciated, you
resolve to have done playing the invalid, and to go on deck ; in
an agony of fear, and great dubiousness respecting the relative
positions of horizontal and perpendicular, you perform a pain-
ful toilet, and may be considered fortunate in escaping any serious
hurt. The extraordinary activity of all inanimate articles is a
great annoyance and puzzle for a while ; nothing can stand still
where you put it. Every comb and brush seems possessed, going
jumping about in the most inconvenient manner the moment you
require them, and are nearly certain to hop into some impossible
corner, as though on purpose to perplex their distressed and un-
steady owner in the recovery. When, after all these trials, you
cautiously open the door, prepared to make a resolute sally to
the “ companion ” stairs, ten to one but some unlucky bucket,
lantern, or other obstacle, lies in wait to embarrass your waver-
ing steps ; or a sudden lurch of the ship plunges you headlong into
that singular combination of unpleasantnesses, the steward’s pan-
try ! At length, faint and bewildered, you gain the deck, and
sink down on the first resting-place you see, glad to feel the fresh
invigorating breeze, and enjoy the clear cheering sunshine. Such
at least were my own feelings on this my first voyage, and I
doubt not that most novices have a like ordeal of the uncom-
fortable to pass through.
As soon as I began to recover, and take a glance around, there
were the faces and aspects of our fellow-passengers to be perused
with something of anxiety, as it is a point of no trivial import-
ance on such a voyage, that the few persons with whom you can
associate, and with whom you cannot avoid coming in daily con-
b 2


tact for four months, should at least be companionable. I cannot
conceive any situation in life more favourable to the exposure of
real characters and dispositions than a long voyage. Assumed
manners of refinement, counterfeit blandness and courtesy, and,
in fact, every species and form of affectation, are insensibly for-
gotten. Those who are really ill-tempered, find so much for their
humour to feed on, that the surly countenance remains uncontra-
dicted by the soft and obsequious manner; the truly vulgar are
too much engrossed by dear self to seek the favour of others by
pretended refinement; and the harmless little arts of “ pretty
virginities,” finding how vain is the hope of stimulating to ad-
miration beings whose every faculty and thought are engrossed
by their own petty distresses, are fain to reserve their efforts
for a more favourable season. But when all the counterfeits
have lost their gilding, the true metal is the precious coin still;
and how valuable in so narrow a circle is unfeigned good-temper,
and that only true politeness which springs from kindness of
heart, none will perfectly understand who have not had specimens
of both kinds in their “ compagnons de voyage.”
We were fortunate in being able to select a very pleasant circle
from the small community on board, as one by one they sTiook
off' the prevalent indisposition, and reduced their unhappy, pale,
elongated faces to their wonted fair proportions.
When I came on deck on the Bth day of our voyage, I found
we were running along the Devonshire coast before a light breeze,
under as bright a blue sky as ever made England look thrice
lovely in the eyes of those who were leaving her, perhaps forever.
Many vessels which, like ourselves, had been detained by the
adverse winds, were now in sight, their white wing-like sails
fairly spread, and taking all advantage of the welcome change.
Sea-gulls swept majestically by, their arched and outspread wings
glancing brightly in the sunlight, and their easy, graceful
motion seeming a scornful reproach to the unsteady awkward
movements of such novices at sea as myself. As we neared
Plymouth, where we had to put in for some passengers, a pilot
came on board, and the careless yet secure activity with which
he sprang from his boat up the ship’s side and on deck seemed
worthy of Ducrow himself, unable as I was to go three steps
without holding on by something.


I felt quite a respect for that bronzed weather-beaten seaman,
as I thought of the inestimable services he and his fellows, the
Channel pilots, render both to our own and foreign shipping.
In rough or foggy weather, when vessels ignorant of the difficult
navigation of the Channel would, but for their guidance, be inevit-
ably lost, they are out in their boats braving such seas, that it
does seem almost miraculous such mere boats can live in them.
But however stormy the weather or dark the night, there are the
pilots ready at the known signal to run alongside and leap upon
the stranger’s deck. They are most brave and gallant fellows,
and many a good ship owes to them the lives of her crew and the
safety of her rich freight.
We entered Plymouth Sound in the evening, and for the last
time watched the sun set on English hills and woods. I felt
as if to set foot on land only for a few minutes would be the
greatest imaginable treat; but we cast anchor so late, that I was
compelled to forego the pleasure, and sat on deck watching the
boats as they went ashore, thinking their passengers must be
almost too happy. A late repast of fresh bread, clean, land-
made bread, fresh butter, strawberries, and clouted cream, how-
ever, almost consoled me for my previous disappointment. A
lucky mortal, permitted to taste the ambrosia of the Gods, would
not find it half so delicious as would a poor sea-sick creature, a
victim to the unknown atrocious compounds of a dirty black sea-
steward, think such a feast as mine!
We were up and on deck early the following morning, unwill-
ing to lose a minute’s view of the beautiful scenery around. A
man-of-war, the Hercules , lying in the harbour, sent a boat to
reconnoitre our crew, greatly to the discomfort and apprehension
of our captain, but fortunately without depriving him of any
“ hands.” I listened to the morning music on board the Hercules ,
and thought that our grand national air, “ Rule Britannia,” much
as I ever admired it, never sounded so beautiful as then ; and I
wept to think I should perhaps never more hear it in my own
beloved native land.
We weighed anchor between six and seven o’clock, and in
passing the Hercules made a polite nautical salutation, by lower-
ing our royals (an obeisance always expected by ships of war
from the humbler body of merchantmen) ; and the officer on duty


ordered the band aft to give us a cheering and melodious farewell
as we left the harbour.
We had a fine view for some time of the lovely shores of
Devon, and of that noble effort of human science and persever-
ance, the Eddystone Lighthouse. How mean and contemptible,
beside such a fabric, erected for so great and good a purpose,
seem by comparison the mere gewgaw palaces of luxury and
ostentation, so profusely scattered over our fair country ! and
yet how few, how very few erections of a like kind are there,
inestimable as is their value in the saving of human life , to say
nothing of less precious matters !*
A short time before sunset I went below, intending to return
on deck and watch the last land fade on the horizon, but on my
coming to look for it, an envious bank of clouds hung over the
spot, and totally hid it. Some one began singing, “ Isle of
Beauty, fare thee well !”•—had they felt half as much as I did,
they could not have uttered a single note.
* Why was not the “ Nelson Monument ” a Lighthouse ? I can conceive
no fabric of more grandeur and costliness half so acceptable to the spirit it is>
designed to honour, as the humblest erection devoted to such a service.


CHAPTER II.
Bay of Biscay—Spanish Coast —Employment the best preventive of Ennui-
Phosphorescence of the Sea—Portuguese Men-of-War —Swallows—Tene-
rifie—Speaking the Cherub —Fear of Pirates—Porpoises—Flying-Fish
—Capture of a Boneto —Dolphins.
We were now fairly “at sea,” with no chance of any pleasant
variety of scene, as, unluckily for us, our “ good ship Argo” was
to make a direct passage to Sydney, without touching at any
intermediate port. Like true philosophers, we consoled ourselves
by the reflection that, as some compensation for the disappoint-
ment, our voyage would be the more speedy from having no in-
terruption ; though to sail half round the world, and be near so
many interesting and beautiful spots, of which I had heard and
read so much, and not to see even one of them—not Madeira, with
its vine-clad hills—nor Teneriffe, nor even the Cape, that gene-
ral “ half-way house” for poor exiles like ourselves—certainly
appeared rather hard, and, as I considered it, great waste of time
and travelling.
The Bay of Biscay, so renowned in song and story for its
stormy winds and waves, was happily in a most pacific mood
when we crossed it with a fair light breeze and sunny weather;
and though the fine old song was often quoted at the time, we
had no disastrous consequences to remind us
“ Of the day
When we lay
In the Bay of Biscay O!”
We “ sighted ” the Spanish and Portuguese coasts, and with
glasses could discern trees and white houses or cottages ; and as
wishful imagination converted every green thing into an orangery
or a vineyard, our distant gazes made us still more anxious for a
nearer investigation of the good things we fancied there. But
the inexorable ship sailed on, and hills, vineyards, and cottages
faded into mist again.


I passed every day on deck, busy with that most pleasant of all
“ fancy-work,” wool embroidery; and to it I owe my exemption
from much of the overpowering ennui so general on a long voy-
age. To study is, I think, impossible, and I very soon disposed
of all the light reading to be found on board, when compelled by
illness or bad weather to remain below. But my work-basket
and frame were my daily companions, and I was often told how
enviable was my happiness in having something to employ me.
Many evenings we spent in watching the beautiful phosphoric
appearance of the sea after dark, and trying to reconcile the
various theories advanced by naturalists respecting it. That
it is caused by floating animalcula is the general opinion ; but if
so, they must be as innumerable as motes in the sunshine, or as
grains of sand upon the sea-shore, else how are the myriad mil-
lions of glittering lights to be accounted for that sparkle in a
single wave ? Some are much larger and brighter than the rest,
bearing about the same proportion to each other as do stars of
the first and sixth magnitude, and these larger points may, by
close watching, be traced for several seconds, whilst the smaller
ones flash and disappear simultaneously. I know of nothing to
v> Inch I can compare this most beautiful and wonderful appear-
ance, unless I have recourse to Sindbad’s Diamond Valley, and
beg you to fancy millions of millions of jewel-sparks, and a few
thousands of larger brilliants, all rapidly whirling and glancing
in one vivid glittering mass: but even diamonds would not shine
alone in a dark night, so that simile will not do. The bright
creatures if creatures they are—do not seem to extend far down
into the sea, because I have observed, in looking over the stern,
that immediately following the rudder there always remained a
small dark space beyond which the separated waves full of lights
united again, and formed a long bright pathway on the water in
the wake of the ship. The phosphoric lights seemed roused to
life by the passage of the vessel through them; a fish swimming
past produced the same effect on a smaller scale; a bucket of
water from the brightest part lost all the glittering appearance
almost instantly when hoisted on deck. The colour of the lights
was bluish, or just what a purely white light would be, seen
through the blue water. Perhaps the spray of a “jet d’eau,”
seen in a strong moonlight, would give the best idea of this most


indescribable phenomenon. I was never weary of watching it,
and often, after leaving my usual evening-seat by the taffrail,
could not help returning again and again for one more dazzled,
earnest gaze.
I first saw those curious and beautiful little animals the Por-
tuguese men-of-war, Physalus pelagicus of naturalists, in about
36° N. lat., and for many days they were very numerous, robbing
my work of nearly all my attention in gazing at their elegant
forms and colours. I had a few caught, to examine them more
closely. They consist of a flat, thin, transparent membrane,
from one and a half to two inches long, of an oval shape; and on
the upper side of this, down the centre, runs a similar membrane
standing erect, at right angles with the flat one. A whole wafer
laid on the table, and the half of another placed edgewise upon
it (the straight side downwards, of course), will give some idea
of the form of the animal, or rather of the tiny ship’s deck and
sail. The under part is furnished with several rows of tentacula
spreading out like a beautiful flower, varying in colour in differ-
ent specimens, and sometimes even in one, through many shades
of blue, pink, and soft purple. A slight coloured film also enve-
lops the transparent membrane above described, giving it a beau-
tiful iridescent appearance when sailing along in the sunshine.
By putting them in a basin of sea-water, I was enabled to keep
and observe them for some time; but when taken out of their
natural element, the delicate tentacula shrink and dissolve away
very soon ; though with care the thin glassy membrane with its
fragile sail may be permanently preserved by drying.
Their method of navigation is not the least interesting point to
notice in these fairy-mariners. I have frequently observed one
sailing complacently along, his arms, like the many oars of an
ancient galley, spread around him, and his delicate glassy sail
set full to the breeze; when a sudden puff of wind has overset
him altogether, and plunged the whole fabric under water: the
next instant he is up again as gay as before, but at first only
presents his sail edgewise to the wind, and then seems to tack
about very cautiously, as if to try how much canvas he can
carry in safety. This may not be really the case, but I have'
watched many do exactly as I describe, and must therefore be-
lieve in their nautical skill. Like other creatures of their class,


they no doubt feed on minute mollusca and animalcula, which
they entrap in their numerous tentacula, or arms. Their lower
side very much resembles some of the beautiful sea anemones*
so common on rocks covered at high-water on this coast,| and,
from what I remember, there are similar ones on those of
England.;j;
Some poor little swallows, apparently worn out with fatigue*
alighted on the rigging one day, and hovered about the ship.
The sailors caught and tried to feed some of them; and one that
flew into our cabin through the stern-window, I endeavoured to
tempt with soaked biscuit, crumbs, and water, but could not pre-
vail on my poor little patient to eat anything. I left him alone,
hoping he would grow more assured, but he escaped, and was
found lying dead on the deck a day or two after. I imagine the
poor birds had either been blown off the land, or, having been
baffled by contrary winds in their migratory voyage, had become
too much exhausted to fly any farther : no doubt many thousands
of them must perish at sea from similar causes. I have heard
Mr. Meredith mention that on his voyage home (to England) in
1838, a beautiful little bird, of a species he was quite unacquainted
with, flew on board the ship, and fed greedily on soaked biscuit;
so greedily indeed, forgetting the needful precautions to be ob-
served by starving people, that he literally died from repletion.
Finding we should pass tolerably near Teneriffe, I became ex-
tremely anxious for a good day-view of the Peak, and only feared
sailing by in the night and losing it. We certainly passed by
day, about midway between Teneriffe and the “ Great Canary,”
but the mountain was thickly veiled in clouds, nearly to the
* Actinia anemone, or Actinia calendula, probably,
f Oyster Bay, Van Diemen’s Land.
t.l believe De Blainville mentions six species of Physalus; and from
having seen descriptions of P. pelagicus differing in many points from my
own observation of the animal, I am induced to believe that various species
are described as the same by different persons. In the ‘Tasmanian Journal
of Science,’ a paper (by A. Sinclair, Esq., Surgeon, R, N.) descriptive of a
Physalus pelagicus, mentions, among other features I did not observe in it,
the property of stinging severely, possessed by the tentacula, and retained
even after the animal has been dried; also that the water in which it had
floated had caused violent pain and inflammation in the hands and arms of
two boys employed to wash out the tub. As I repeatedly handled the speci-
mens I had caught, both before and after death, and received no injury, there
o ust be an essential difference in the species.


water’s edge, so that a mere shoal or sandbank had been as fine
an object. If I could only have seen the merest point of the
summit, I had not cared ; I sat u like (im-)patience on a monu-
ment,” wailing for one clear loophole in those gloomy morose
clouds, but in vain—and I still have to take on credit all the
grand and inflated descriptions of other more fortunate travellers.
As I did not at the time think I should ever require any memo-
randa of our monotonous voyage, I kept no regular “ log-book,”
or journal, which now I much regret, as I am without exact data
for many occurrences. About the beginning of July we spoke
a homeward-bound vessel, the Cherub , and gladly availed our-
selves of the opportunity to send letters home. The prudent
ones had all letters ready written, but I confess I was not one of
that number, and a few hurried words of love and greeting were
all the homeward-bound Cherub bore from me.
There is something peculiarly grand, and withal touching, in
that meeting of ships on the wide ocean. People who never
heard of each other before, who might live in the same street of
the same city for years without knowing each other’s face, thus
meeting on that trackless highway of the world, the sea, look on
one another as if some mysterious communion between them were
at once established. Ido not mean individually, but generally,
for, although I might not accurately observe the face of any one
human being on board that vessel, yet I felt as if they were
friends whom we had met; and as she afterwards went on her
way, and we on ours, I looked after her lessening sails with real
regret.
After being for days and weeks at sea without any object to
break the line of the horizon, that seems to shut in the same eter-
nal circle of water, it is absolutely a treat, an indescribable de-
light to the eye, to see so beautiful an object as a vessel in full
sail gradually nearing, and so occupying a greater portion of the
wearisome sea-view. Everything about her is busily discussed, and
not unfrequently the inexperienced are gravely informed that she
is an “ ill-looking craft,” “ a rakish-looking brig,” “ very much
the cut of a privateer,” &c., and mysterious hints are given
about muskets, cutlasses, and ammunition, till the well-known
ensign with its union-jack is seen spreading to the breeze as
they hoist it on board the stranger, and in reply to “ Ship ahoy!


What ship’s that ?” a gruff English accent, made thrice gruffer
and rougher by bawling into a speaking-trumpet, informs you
that the suspicious craft is the Mary or Betsey , or some
other good old household name, of London or Liverpool, bound
from ; whereupon the captain of our ship returns a
like series of explanations, latitudes and longitudes are compared,
and the interview closes.
As we neared the line, I confess I used to pay most especial
attention to the various conjectures raised on the approach of a
strange sail, especially if those learned in such matters seemed
suspicious of her aspect or manoeuvres; but lam most happy to
say I have no thrilling narratives of fearful engagements or
providential escapes to relate, as we were never molested by any
of the piratical fraternity. This was fortunate, as our ship, like
most merchantmen, carried her guns snugly and securely stowed
away in the hold along with her cargo ; which arrangement,
though doubtless originating in a praiseworthy care of her means
of defence, was not exactly calculated to facilitate the use of them,
had it been needed. A few rusty muskets, and some pistols of
most pacific temperaments, were ostentatiously ranged round the
mizen-mast in the mess-cabin ; but, like the broken teacups on
the alehouse chimney-piece, were, I fear, only “ kept for show.”
Porpoises were a frequent source of amusement to me; for I
exceedingly enjoy watching their ponderous gaiety as they leap
and flounce about, and the agility with which they bound out of
the water is most astonishing. We often saw them leap as high
as the fore-yard, and I used to think they would fairly alight on
the forecastle; but I fancy they knew better than to trust their
lives and oleaginous bodies to the tender mercies of the sailors,
who would infallibly have despatched and eaten them very
speedily. Prodigious shoals of them often crossed our track,
and might be seen in thousands gambolling as far as their black
bodies were visible above the water. My admiration of their
elephantine frolics became so well known, that if I chanced to
be below when a shoal was seen, I immediately received a mes-
sage informing me of the event, and lost no time in hastening
to see the sport.
What a contrast to the unwieldy monsters I have just men-
tioned are the elegant little flying-fish (Exocetus volitans ) !


I had no idea they were so beautiful, having been misled by bad
engravings, which represented them as thin, shrivelled, starved-
looking things, while in reality they are beautifully proportioned,
and quite plump, with shining bluish silvery scales, that flash
brightly as they glance in the sun. They are about nine or ten
inches long, the pectoral fins, or wings, about six inches, and
capable of expanding to about three inches and a half at the
broadest part; and from tip to tip, when spread, must measure
above twelve inches. The eyes are remarkably large and fine,
giving an expression to the head more like the glance of a bird
than a fish ; “ fishy eyes” being proverbially dull and lustreless.
Only one fell on board, which was brought to me, and, in justice
to the memory of the poor defunct, I must confess that, after pre-
serving his wings and tail, I found his remains very delicate
eating.
So many arguments have been held with respect to these
curious creatures, as to whether they really Jly, that is, flutter
and turn in the air, or merely leap from the top of one wave to
fall on the top of another, that nothing but positive proof could
induce me to say a word on the subject. I have attentively
observed them rise from the water, flutter their fins rapidly, not
unlike a lark when first rising ; then sail along a short time, turn,
at various angles from their course, whether in a breeze or calm ;
and, after being many seconds in the air, dip again into the sea,
preparatory to another flight. I have continually mistaken them
for birds, being quite deceived by their fluttering motion, so
different from what I should have supposed any fish capable of.
Some very eminent naturalists affirm that they can neither turn
nor flutter ; having seen them do both repeatedly, I am greatly
inclined to differ from them in opinion, and to suppose that they
must have observed these beautiful little creatures under some
circumstances which prevented or disguised their real move-
ments.
With all their beauty and accomplishments, the poor little
flying-fish seem to lead a most restless and unhappy life. As
they swim through the sea, the swift and hungry boneto pursues
them with a keen and deadly purpose, seeming quite as well
aware as myself of their delicate flavour; the dolphin also
wages war against them ; and the moment they quit the water to


escape these ravenous foes, a voracious sea-bird is nearly sure to
pounce upon some of the quivering fugitives.
We were sailing for three days through shoals of boneto, and
all kinds of murderous devices were adopted for the capture of
some, but to no purpose. Fish-hooks, harpoons, &c., were all
*• in request, and the excitement became extreme, to see shoals of
fish all around, darting hither and thither in hundreds, all “ fit
to eat,” as the sailors declared, and none to be got! It was
terribly exciting, and figures might be seen in every direction,
attired in all imaginable variety of costume, and in more than
every imaginable attitude, most perseveringly hurling among and
hauling in again their innocent weapons. At last, Mr. Meredith,
who had constantly told them it was of no use, that the fish were
scarcely ever taken, &c., went out on the lower studding-sail
boom with a grains (a large strong fork of five barbed points)
and a long line attached ; he had scarcely sat five minutes, when
he struck and hauled up a fine boneto, to the exceeding great
delight of the spectators, whose mania for the sport was tenfold
increased by the seeming ease of the achievement. But it was
a lucky accident that was not repeated by any one, and Mr.
Meredith, being quite satisfied with having caught one, did not
make another attempt.
It was a large handsome fish, very much the shape of a salmon,
and presenting a succession of rich iridescent colours, such as
are described in the dolphin when dying. It was cooked, and
served, at least part of it, at our table; but being fried, and
rather dry and hard, it was not much admired.
I was extremely curious to see a real live dolphin, for my
ideas of the creature w,ere such a singular medley of classical-
picture dolphins as big as calves, with fat tritons astride upon
them; and Routing-fountain dolphins, much of the same chaiac-
ter, with -heads, bored like the rose of a watering-pot; and public-
house sign-board dolphins, something between St. George s
dragon, and a legless, curly-tailed pig—that I wished to have
my wavering notions somewhat settled t and one bright day in
the tropics, as we lay becalmed or nearly so, I was leaning over
the vessel’s side, looking deep, deep into the bluest of all blue
water, clear and bright as crystal, when three fish, of a kind
quite new to me, came close to the ship, swimming to and fro, as


if examining the state of our coppering; some one said very
quietly, “ Hush! those are dolphins,” and so I guessed, but not
from any resemblance they bore to my ancient friends of the
name. These were really very beautiful; their size I cannot
accurately tell, for I found myself so often deceived in the rela-
tive proportion of things seen in a similar manner. The boneto, as
it swam past, only seemed to me the size of a large mackerel, and
when brought on deck I found it exceeded that of a salmon. The
dolphins might be four feet long, or more, of a slender shape,
with a head rather blunt than pointed, but not in the least heavy
or clumsy-looking : on the contrary, I never saw anything more
elegant than their form and motion; their long bodies, as they
swam, making a perfect “ line of beauty ” of several curves, and
their large fins and tails waving like fans in the water.
Their colour appeared a delicate silvery blue, deepening by
parts into purple; and as they partially turned up their bright
sides to the sun, a gleam of prismatic colours gave evidence of
there being at least some truth in the story of their rainbow hues
when dying.
Much to my satisfaction, no attempt was made to capture any
of these; I noticed them for some time sporting round the ves-
sel, and then they passed on, having most permanently established
my faith in the beauty of the dolphin and the ignorance of his
carvers and limners.


CHAPTER III.
Calm in the Tropics—Sharks—Turtle—lanthina—Shovel-board—“ Crossing
the Line ” —Loss of the North Star —Southern Constellations —Moonlight
in the Tropics—Sunsets—Waterspouts—“ Sundogs.”
A calm at sea in the tropics, though by no means desirable
for a continuance, is yet very beautiful for a short time; one
may well endure a few hours’ delay, even in such a climate, for
the sake of observing the novel expression of the face of nature.
The usually restless sea, the very emblem of life and vigour,
seems in a deep slumber; not a ripple nor the tiniest wave that
ever broke ruffles its glassy smoothness; it might now serve to
typify death rather than life, but for a slow, long, heavy swell,
that seems to lift up the drowsy waters as it rolls along ; now
and then the peculiar dorsal fin of a shark cuts through the still,
sluggish mass, or a turtle, fast asleep, floats by, basking in the
fervid sunshine.
On such a day as this, when every one felt particularly dis-
posed to envy the fishes, and the life of a frog in a cool bro Dk
seemed the height of luxury, a boat was lowered, and a party of
five, including Mr. Meredith, put off a considerable distance for
the purpose of bathing, though the ostensible reason was “ merely
to see how the ship looked.” I sat at work under the awning,
looking from time to time at the boat, until it was so far away
that the swell hid it from my view, and then heard those who
could still see it from the shrouds say that the five were bathing,
and some of them far away from the boat, among whom I very
justly supposed was my husband, from his being an excellent
swimmer.
The next instant one of the men aloft screamed out, “Oh
God ! there are two large sharks close to them !” My feelings may
perhaps be imagined —certainly not expressed. The probability
was that the swell would hide the monsters from their victims


until too late for escape. I could see the sharks, which were on
the ton of a swell, but not the boat, which lay in the hollow
beyond; and, almost wild with terror, joined my weak voice to
the shouts of warning sent from the ship, till 1 heard the welcome
cry, “ They are all safe.” The bathers had not seen the sharks
till after they returned to the boat, when immediately the huge
monsters rose alongside and followed for some distance, doubtless
in the hope of another chance, in which, I scarcely need say,
they were disappointed.
Several turtle were seen that day: the boating party nearly
captured a large one, but it escaped; with a smaller one they
were more adroit, finding it soundly
“ Sleeping on the water,
And by good fortune, gliding softly, caught her,”
much to the satisfaction of the “ gastronomesbut either the
cook or the turtle was deficient in good qualities, for it was
greatly inferior to the same article as dressed on shore.
During the morning’s excursion many of those beautiful and
delicate shells the lanthina fragilis were observed floating
about. Mr. Meredith brought me two fine ones with the animal
in, and I put them in a basin of sea-water to observe them. The
head of the creature, instead of being close to the aperture of
the shell, seemed some distance within, half a whorl at least, and
the intervening space filled by a quantity of bubbly membrane,
which likewise protruded from the aperture, of a deep violet
colour ; the shell was a lighter shade of the same lovely hue, and
on removing the animal from it after death, my hands were so
deeply stained with purple that it was some days before they
lost the marks. The bubbles, which occupied the mouth of the
shell, appeared only filled with air, and I supposed them to be
employed by the creature as a float; most probably he has the
power of discharging the air from them (in the same way that
the nautilus is supposed to do, from the inner chambers of his
shell) when he wishes to sink, although I did not observe any
effort of the kind ; but very possibly some of the delicate organs
might have been injured, and their power destroyed, before the
fragile things reached me.
Every one remembers the wise and cogent reason which
worthy “ Master Slender ” assigns for his “ not abiding the smell
c


of roast meat,” namely, that he once “ broke his shins when play-
ing at shovel-hoard with a master of fence for a dish of stewed
prunesbut perhaps many, like myself, have been long in igno-
rance of the nature of this renowned game. One of our friends
on board having proposed it as a good amusement in calm days,
and when the ship was tolerably steady, it became very popular
among the gentlemen, and proved a source of much diversion to
me as a looker-on.
A square of about three feet diameter, divided into nine small
squares, is chalked on the deck, forward, and a figure marked
in each square, from 1 up to 9. The players have each two
or three “ boards,” being circular pieces of inch-thick wood,
about four inches wide; these are thrown slidingly along the
deck, and of course aimed at the highest numbers; if they are
lucky enough to rest there, the next player endeavours to shovel
them out, and leave his own in ; those counting most at the end
winning the game. Any one standing in the way of a well-
thrown shovel-board, and feeling the keenness of the blow, will
fully commiserate poor Master Slender’s mischance.
As we neared the “ line,” many grave discussions were held
as to the degree of licence to be allowed the sailors in their usual
commemorative sports on the occasion of crossing it; and poor
Neptune’s humble and complimentary petition lay so long unan-
swered at head-quarters, that few or no preparations were made
among the crew. Unfortunately the harmony and good feeling
which uninterruptedly pervaded our own especial “ coterie ” was
far from universal in the small community on board; and any
general participation in the mummery and somewhat rough usage
of the sea-king’s visit was therefore refused, the maskers being
forbidden to come on the quarter-deck.
This being understood, the usual ceremony of Neptune’s hail-
ing the ship was effectively performed overnight, the god taking
his departure in a fiery chariot, which matter-of-fact people will
persist in explaining to be only a tar-barrel lighted and set afloat.
The next day his Majesty, gorgeously attired in a painted canvas
crown, and robes to correspond, with a magnificent display of
oakum in the shape of hair and beard, accompanied by his secre-
tary, chaplain, coachman, and other general officers of state
similarly accoutred, approached the quarter-deck, on which we


were all assembled, and made a very clever speech. Mr. Mere-
dith, as spokesman of our party, replied with due form and
etiquette, and begged to offer, as a token of our allegiance and
duty, a tribute of certain monies, which his Majesty most
graciously ordered his secretary to receive with all due acknow-
ledgments. Mr. Meredith then ventured a supposition that his
Majesty was fond of sporting, and expressed a hope that he was
not much annoyed by poachers in his kingdom.—“ Why, no, sir,”
replied the god, “ not much; but you know, sir, there are some
daring rascals who don’t care whose fish they catch and in the
laugh that followed this attack on the captor of the boneto, his
Majesty and suite, which included a nondescript dragon-like
monster, with a very extensive canvas tail, whom Neptune
termed his dog, turned towards their allotted scene of action;
and the uproar and riot that followed, caused by the determined
resistance of the “intermediate” passengers to his godship’s
baptismal ceremonies of shaving and washing, soon drove me to
my own cabin, where I remained till order was restored.
Our Neptune on the occasion was a fine tall fellow, usually
known as “ Long Bill,” who had served some years in a man-of-
war, and was a general favourite on board ; and being rather a
genius in his way, would no doubt have “ got up ” the “ masque”
much more effectively, had he known it would be permitted.
We happened to cross the line on my birth-day, July 20th, so
chat I began my new year in a new hemisphere.
Among the many strange changes which a passage from one
side of the world to the other has shown me, I do not know one
thing that I felt so much as the loss of the North Star. Night
after night I watched it, sinking lower—lower; and the well-known
“ Great Bear ” that I had so gazed at even from a child, that it
seemed like the face of an old friend, was fast going too; it was
like parting from my own loved home-faces over again. I
thought of so many times and places associated in my mind with
those bright stars; of those who had gazed on them beside me,
some of whom had for ever passed from earth, —and of the rest,
who might say that we should ever meet again ? Those stars
seemed a last link uniting us, but it was soon broken—they sunk
beneath the horizon, and the new constellations of the southern
hemisphere seemed to my partial eyes far less splendid.
c 2


The Magellanic clouds made me constantly wish for a view ot
their starry hosts through a good astronomical telescope, as I be-
lieve they are among the “ resolvable ” nebulae. The southern
portion of the galaxy, too, is very beautiful, tracing its double
path of glory over the heavens, and showing so much brighter
in the clear atmosphere of the tropics. The Southern Cross
scarcely satisfied my expectations : I hardly knew myself what
those were, but it seemed less clearly defined than the celestial
maps had represented it. I think many other groups of stars
form quite as perfect crosses. But the crowning glory of tropi-
cal nights is the moon. I remember an enthusiastic friend, on his
return from the shores of the Mediterranean, telling me I had
never seen moonlight— that there never was such a thing m
England ; and I now began to believe him. There is certainly
as much difference between moonlight in England and in the
tropics, as between twilight and sunshine. The full flood of
radiance that is shed on every ooject renders all as plainly visible
as in broad noon-day, but the soft colour of the light is delight-
fully refreshing to the eye wearied by the insupportable glare of
a tropical sun. It almost seemed as if we ought to follow the
moon’s bright example, and “ turn night into day,” for it was by
far the pleasantest time to be awake.
Having an excellent common telescope, we enjoyed tracing
out the well-known map of the moon’s disc, much more clearly
than I ever saw it before. The same glass enabled us to observe
well the belts and satellites of Jupiter, the moon-like form of
Venus, and, more indistinctly, Saturn and his ring. We fre-
quently saw beautiful meteors and “ shooting starsand the
bright silent lightning, flashing in the horizon, beguiled many a
weary half-hour.
The sunsets too ! the indescribably glorious sunsets, so swiftly
changing, and so splendid in every change, were among my con-
stant°enjoyments. Pen and ink are vain to tell their wondrous
beauty; nothing but the pencils of Turner or Danby, in their
most inspired moods, could give a shadow of it. I remember one
evening a most singular appearance ; a dense bank of dark clouds
had totally obscured the sun whilst yet high in the heavens, and
behind which he sunk, leaving, as a record of his past glory,
golden lines traced on the higher ridges of the thick vapoury screen.


Some minutes afterwards a strange light gleamed redly forth;
and on looking towards the sunset clouds, we saw, as through
small windows in the dark wall, close to the water’s edge, the
sun’s fiery eye, glaring along the sea in a track of molten flame.
The effect was as strange as it was new to me; and we never
after saw a similar appearance.
Frequently the sunset sky seemed a celestial “ Field of the
Cloth of Gold,” with regal banners of purple streaming across
it. At other times bright landscapes of fairy cloud-realms
spread forth, where
“ Hills above hills, and Alps on Alps arose,”
glowing in gem-like hues, as fleeting as they were fair. How
often have I exclaimed, “ This is the loveliest sunset we have
had !” for all were so beautiful, the present one seemed ever the
brightest.
We had comparatively few of the heavy falls of rain common
in the tropics, but one day they visited us pretty liberally, in
sudden squalls, between which the sun blazed out with double
intensity. On that day several waterspouts appeared, traversing
the sea with great velocity, but fortunately they only permitted
us a distant view of their dangerous performances. One seemed
to travel a considerable way in the wake of the ship, and we
almost feared would overtake us. We could clearly see the
column of whirling water, ending in a cloud above, and the
churning foam at its base, as it rapidly advanced, but it appa-
rently dispersed in a sudden squall that crossed its path.
Many of the appearances called by sailors “sun dogs occurred
during the showery weather. They exhibit the prismatic colours,
and fused to think them portions of rainbows, which they ex-
actly resemble, but are broad and short, and always rest on the
water. A lunar rainbow was seen one evening, but it was fast
fading before I observed it, and had then but little more colour
than a halo.
It is curious to notice how much more we observe the aspects
and objects of the sea and sky when our own especial ele-
ment, the earth , is absent from our view ; how much more de-
sirous we feel to cultivate our acquaintance with the sun, moon,
and stars; the clouds, rainbows, meteors; the ocean and its


mighty mysteries, when thus severed from accustomed scenes,
pursuits, and speculations. In the monotony of all days at sea,
any variation is an event; a new fish seen swimming by, or an
oddly >shaped .cloud, makes a white day in one’s calendar; and
the remembrance of their comparative greatness at the time has
perhaps caused me to invest with undue importance many trivial
matters scarcely worth the recital.


CHAPTER IV.
Whales and “ jets-d’eau ” Birds —Boatswain —Boobies—Cape Pigeon—
Mischief of Idleness —“ Mr. Winkles” at Sea—Great Albatross —Nelly—
Stormy Petrel—Blue Petrel—Sailors’ Delicacies—Stormy Weather.
Very different from the doubtful notions I held about dolphins
were my ideas of a whale as seen at sea, for in the representation
of these huge monsters of the deep, all painters and gravers are
unanimous in opinion, and alike in their mode of portraiture. Ac-
cordingly I knew perfectly well, when summoned from my cabin
by the report of a whale being in sight, that I should behold an
enormous black mass standing far out of the water, with a huge
.semicircular mouth surmounted by two trumpet-like apertures,
from which a double stream of clear water was perpetually flung
some forty or fifty feet into the air, falling again in a graceful
curve, precisely like the “ jets-d’eau ”in ancient gardens. With
such a foregone conclusion as to what was to be seen, I came on
deck, and gazed round in search of the living fountain I describe ;
my inability to discover it being rendered tenfold more vexatious
by hearing the sailors and others exclaim, “ There she spouts!”
“ She spouts again !” till Mr. Meredith, seeing me vacantly scan-
ning the whole horizon, drew my attention to one particular
spot, where, after looking intently for about a minute, I observed
something like a puff of steam rise gently from the water; and
this was the spouting of a whale! Many a time since have I
laughed at the recollection, but the shock my faith then received
it will never recover, nor shall I ever forget the useful lesson
1 then learned, not to take too much on credit.
This absurd habit which people have got into, of depicting the
whale as spouting distinct streams of water to such a height,
though it may have originated in ignorance, cannot in these
days of universal knowledge be permitted that apology for its
continuance. But having once created so charming a fiction, I
imagine these good folks are loth to rob the poor whales of the


childish admiration our school-book pictures receive, and so
doubtless they will spout steeple high till the whole real race is
extinct—a palpable proof of the triumph of romance over reality.
Tl f spout-holes are simply the nostrils of the animal, and
when) as he swims along, these chance to be below the surface of
the water at the moment he breathes, the act of respiration blows
the water from within and above the nostrils into the air in the
form of vapour or steam.
The only time when anything like a stream proceeds from the
blow-holes is when the creature is severely wounded; then he
sometimes spouts blood. Frequently a thin haze is observed by
whalers blowing along the sea, like the foamy crest of a wave
scudding before the wind ; and following back the course of this
with the eye, the “ blow ” of a whale is often observed, sending
off these whiffs of vapour. If seen between the boats and the
shore, an inexperienced person would often mistake it for smoke
on land.
A parasitical polype, peculiar to the whale, is generally found
firmly attached to the skin of the animal when full-grown, espe-
cially about the head and lips; but it is a curious fact, and one
which I do not remember ever to have seen noticed, that at
the time of birth (and even previously) the young whales are
marked with exact impressions or scars, of the precise form of
the polypes, in those parts where afterwards the real parasites
invariably appear.
We had hitherto seen very few birds; one day a beautiful
white one, with two very long tail-feathers, flew over and round
the ship, and many murderous proposals were made by the idlers
to shoot it; but my entreaties for its life, strengthened by the
superstitious warnings of the sailors, who seemed to regard it as
a good omen of something or other, preserved the poor thing,
and I had the happiness of seeing it fly away unharmed. It was
the boatswain, or frigate-bird. We only saw that one bird of the
kind during the passage, and certainly it was the most beautiful
as well as the rarest of our feathered visitants.
Soon afterwards two or three boobies paid us a flying call, very
possibly to see some relatives on board; of course the ties of
affinity preserved them from molestation. Lord Byron, in his
inimitable description of Juan’s shipwreck, very aptly associates


the noddy with the boobies, but no noddy accompanied ours, that
I am aware of.
We fell in with numbers more of the feathered people, as we
increased our distance from the equator; most abundant were
the Cape pigeons, or “ passenger’s friend” (Procellaria Cipen-
sis). Had the sobriquet been “ passenger’s victim ,” it had been
far more appropriate, for it appears the universal custom —shame
on those who make it so !—to massacre these poor harmless and
really beautiful birds for the mere wanton love of destruction.
Every one possessed of a gun, powder, and shot aids in the
slaughter, or at least does his worst; and besides the killed, I
have watched many and many a poor wounded bird, disabled
from dying or procuring food, doat helplessly away to perish in
pain and starvation, because some heartless blockhead had no other
resource to kill time than breaking its leg or wing. Often did I
think of the line in the good old nursery hymn,
“ For Satan finds some mischief still
For idle hands to do
and never was its truth more fully exemplified.
Hooks, baited with pork, were also used to fish for them; but
as very few were caught in this manner, it proved a far more
harmless amusement, and the exhibition of their natural voracity,
which it occasioned, somewhat dulled one’s sympathy with them.
The moment a freshly-baited hook was dung astern, a crowd of
pigeons would assemble round it, dying, swimming, scuffling
through the water, as the tempting morsel skipped along the sur-
face, scolding and driving each other away with most expressive
cries. Very probably a great albatross is watching the result, as
he hovers with a still, solemn aspect above the bustling, squabbling
crowd. The pigeons succeed in pulling the pork from the hook,
and the tumult is redoubled when, in the heat of the battle, the
booty is dropped, and the wary albatross, with a sudden and sure
plunge, relieves them from all further contention by appropriat-
ing the dainty morsel to his own use. Such a scene., is acted
twenty times a day ; sometimes the bird greedily swallows the
bait and hook together, and dies high into the air, whence the
fisher gradually winds him down; but this is no warning to the
survivors, who are as eager for the next throw of the treacherous
bait as if none of their number had suffered by its deception.


The Cape pigeon is a small kind of albatross, much larger in
the body than a pigeon, and with a great span of wing for its
size. The plumage is white, beautifully marked with black on
the back and wings, and their black eyes have a very peculiar,
but soft and pleasing expression. The various attitudes of a
group of these pretty birds, as they are seen closely following
the ship—some swimming, others sitting on the water, or run-
ning along it with outspread wings, or just lighting down—are
really very graceful and beautiful, and were a constant source of
amusement to me, whenever their valorous enemies allowed them
a truce.
A sportsman of the “ Winkles” school is quite dangerous
enough on shore, but when to all the awkwardness of such cha-
racters is added their utter helplessness at sea, and their inva-
riable rule of stumbling along, with a loaded gun on full cock
aimed directly at the nearest person’s head, it may easily be con-
ceived what perilous chances occur. Of this class were several
violent specimens on board our vessel, all most determined, but
most innocent foes of the unfortunate pigeons, as it most fre-
quently happened that they hit a rope or a sail, instead of the
bird, having no idea of allowing for the motion of the vessel.
The appearance of these gentry on the quarter-deck, weapon in
hand, soon became my signal of retreat.
The Cape pigeons are very rarely met with beyond their pecu-
liar track, which extends from 35° to 55° south latitude, within
which boundaries they encircle the globe as with a living zone.
The great white albatross (Diomedia exulans ) fully realized
all my ideas of its grandeur and solemnity. I never saw it
without thinking of Coleridge’s wild and wondrous tale of the
“ Ancient Mariner;” nor can there possibly be any creature
more fitted to take part in such a dread and ghostly narrative
than this melancholy, grave, and most majestic bird. It soars
along with widely-expanded wings that often measure fifteen or
eighteen feet between the tips, with an even, solemn flight, rarely
seeming to stir, but as if merely floating along. Now and then
a slow flapping motion serves to raise him higher in the air, but
the swift movement and busy flutter of other birds seem beneath
his dignity. He sails almost close to you, like a silent spectre.
Nothing of life appears in his still, motionless form, but his keen


piercing eye, except that occasionally his head turns slightly,
and betrays a sharp, prying expression, that somewhat shakes
your belief in the lordly indifference he would fain assume ; and
if you fling overboard a piece of rusty pork, the disenchantment
is complete, and you see that long curiously-crooked beak exer-
cising its enormous strength in an employment so spectral a
personage could scarcely be suspected of indulging. There is
another kind of albatross, nearly as large as the “ great” one,
with a small portion of black on its wings, that appears exactly
similar in habits to its more renowned relative ; but these pied
ones are more numerous.
Another kind, that the sailors called “ Nelly” (Diomedia
fuliginosa?), of a dusky, smoky hue, was very abundant, and, I
am sorry to say, very frequently destroyed, although, by the
great thickness of the plumage or some other protecting cause,
their lives were often most strangely preserved. After falling
plump into the water, to all appearance shot dead, many would
float away a short distance, and then, turning over to their
proper position, perting up the head, and giving their wings an
experimental flutter, as if to ascertain that no damage was done,
away they flew unharmed, greatly to my delight and the con-
fusion of their enemies. These surprising resuscitations gained
for them with us the name of “ immortals.”
All the various species of albatross have the same kind of
expressive eye I mentioned in describing the Cape pigeon; a
gentle, yet withal shrewd glance, and in some a few darker
feathers round the eye, add to the soft expression, just as long
dark eyelashes do in a human face.
What the flying-fish is, compared with the porpoise, such is
the light, swift little petrel beside the slow, solemn albatross.
Glancing, dipping, skimming about, or running along the water
with half-spread wings, they are all life and activity :
“Up and down, up and down,
“ From the base of the waves to the billow’s crown
they appear mere happy little birds; whilst those awful, fune-
real creatures give one the idea of unhappy disembodied spirits,
condemned to sail about these inhospitable seas till their penance
is done.
There are two species of petrel in the vicinity of the Cape : one,


the common kind, is nearly black, and, I believe, is the same
which frequents the northern British islands; the other, far more
beautiful, is a very delicate blue, and more slight in form than
the dark one. The two kinds keep in separate flocks, and I
could only obtain a good view of the blue ones with a glass, as
they are very shy, and never ventured near the ship—a very wise
precaution.
Nothing comes amiss to sailors in the way of eatables; nor,
when we consider the wretched fare on which they usually sub-
sist in merchant vessels, can their ready adoption of anything
that promises a variety create surprise. The rank, oily, dis-
gustingly high-scented sea-birds that were caught by the passen-
gers, were all begged and eaten by the crew. One day a very
large gull or albatross was handed over to them, and duly
demolished ; and on some one's inquiring how it tasted, a steerage
passenger very gravely declared it to be “ very like partridge !”
When the bird came on deck, quantities of pure oil poured from
its beak, —and then to hear of its eating “ like partridge I”
Very soon after passing the Cape, wet, cold, stormy weather set
in, and banished me from my accustomed place on deck to my
cabin, where, with dead-lights securely stopping the stern-win-
dows and the skylight closely shut, I slept away as much of the
weary day as I could, and sat shivering in cloaks and furs the
remainder, for there was not a stove on board. That was a
weary time; tremendous gales blowing, seas being constantly
shipped, and streaming into the mess-cabin, though rarely into
ours ; the galley-fire continually being put out; and, worst of all,
the ship rolling and pitching so violently that one would think
each plunge must be her last. Often in the night, when the
roaring din around drove away all chance of sleep, I have had a
light struck to lie awake by, the darkness seemed so terrible amid
those horrid noises. The howling and screaming of the wind,
the roaring and dashing water sounding close in one’s ears, and
every part of the vessel complaining, in its own particular tone
of creaking, cracking, or groaning, made up such a frightful
uproar, that it seemed sometimes as if a whole legion of fiends
were aboard.
Frequent terrific crashes among the crockery and glass ware
produced crashes of words, not “ writ in choice Italian,” but


spoken in a rough and wrathful tone, from captain and steward ;
the result being a sad diminution of cups and wine-glasses. Such
was our dilapidated condition, that two or three old powder-
canisters and preserve-jars formed the entire drinking equipage
of the cabin table, when the last wine-glass, long the innocent
cause of direst jealousy, was lamentably broken. Being rich in
the possession of two small white respectable-looking marmalade
jars, we took especial care of our valuable “ breakfast service,”
and, until one of our treasures went to pieces in a squall, were
the envy of our less fortunate fellow-voyagers; but this general
poverty in conveniences was productive of so much merriment,
that I doubt if the finest services of china and cut-glass would
have served half as well to while away the slowly passing time.
A little wit, as of any other good thing, must go a great way at
sea, where any change of the too-often grumbling tone of conver-
sation is acceptable.
It is very common for people to talk and write of waves run-
ning “ mountains high,” but I confess I always used to make a
very liberal allowance for exaggeration and imagery in these
cases ; and I well remember once joining in the laugh of incre-
dulity, when a gentleman told myself and other young people
that he had seen waves of which two would fill the breadth of
the Menai Strait, where we then were. I had not then been a
long voyage myself; I had not looked and trembled at the scene
I witnessed one Sunday morning after a two days’ gale, during
which I had remained below. The wind had abated considerably,
but we could only carry a close-reefed mainsail, and were
“scudding” along. Any attempt to describe the vast, awful
grandeur of the scene seems absurd—it is so impossible for any-
thing but the eye itself to represent it to the mind ; I feel dizzy
with the mere remembrance.
When I came on deck, the ship lay as in an immense valley of
waters, with huge waves, mountain waves, indeed (one of which
would have flooded both shores of the Menai), circling us all
around: then slowly we seemed to climb the ascent, and, poised
on the summit of the rolling height, could look along the dark and
dreary waste of ocean heaving with giant billows far and wide;
then, plunging down into the next frightful abyss, the labouring
vessel seemed doomed; —I fancied already the rush of water in


my ears, when, with a violent pitch and shudder, the ship bounded
along again, over another mountain, and down another valley,
in long and slow succession again and again, till I grew accus-
tomed to the scene, and could gaze without thinking I looked
upon our vast and miserable grave.
There were the ghost-like albatrosses sailing solemnly above
the tops of the towering billows, or diving beside us into the
yawning gulf,—sailing about with the same unruffled plumes,
the same quiet, wary eye, and majestic demeanour, that they wore
in the brightest calm. Who could doubt their supernatural
attributes ? Certainly not a spirit-chilled landswoman, with Cole-
ridge’s magic legend perpetually repeating itself to her. I wish
some of its good and beautiful lines were as familiar and impres-
sive in the minds and thoughts of others as they are in mine:—
“ Farewell, farewell—hut this I tell
To thee, thou wedding guest!
He prayeth well, who loveth well
Both man and bird and beast
He prayeth best, who lovetli best
All things, both great and small;
For the dear God, who loveth us,
He made and loveth all.”


CHAPTER V.
Island of St. Paul’s —Islands in Bass’s Straits —Mutton-birds —Botany Bay
Heads —General Excitement —Heads of Port Jackson —Scenery—New Zea-
landers—First sight of Sydney—Pull ashore—Comforts of Land Life—
George Street, Sydney —The Domain—Eucalyptus, &c.—Wooloomooloo —
Government Gardens.
A view of the little volcanic island of St. Paul’s was the only
thing that served to vary the tedium of our stormy passage across
the Indian Ocean ; and our view being rather a distant one, the
only benefit we derived from it was the introduction of a new
topic of conversation.—l believe excellent fish are very abundant
there; and, as the story goes, you may stand and pull your
dinner out of the cold salt-water with one hand, and drop it into
a hot fresh spring to cook with the other ! I know not if the re-
nowned Baron Munchausen ever visited St. Paul’s, but this savours
something of his quality. A few wild pigs are there now likewise ;
but the island is a mere volcanic rock, or rather the crater of an
extinct volcano, with no trees or bushes, and but very scanty
vegetation of any kind. The hot springs show that volcanic
agency is still busy there.
Violent gales, cold and rainy weather, were long our portion,
but a favourable change occurred in time to decide our route to
be through Bass’s Straits, which would not have been prudent in
the more boisterous weather ; and the longer passage round Van
Diemen’s Land seemed an intolerable prolongation of our most
irksome captivity.
Never shall I forget the feeling of intense pleasure with which
I greeted the sight of land again, as we passed among the nume-
rous islands in the Straits. Bare, barren as they were, I thought
them lovely as the Elysian fields, for they were land, solid, firm,
dry land. How we leaned over the vessel s side, smelling the
shore! —enjoying the fine earthy, fragrant smell that our sea-
seasoned noses were so quick to detect in every puff of wind that


came over the islands. We passed several very singular rocks*
early in the morning of this most happy day, and went sailing
on, with a fair breeze, a bright sunny blue sky, and an ever-
changing, ever-new prospect around. We passed so near the
islands of “ Kent’s Group,” and another called the “ Judgment,”
as to discern flocks of seal sleeping on the rocks; thousands of
sea-birds, named by sailors “ mutton-birds,” were flying or float-
ing around us, and often diving for a considerable distance; and,
most beautiful of all in this bright picture, numerous vessels
were in sight, all bound for the same port as ourselves; and after
each traversing a different path, were here, as it were, falling
into the common high road for the Australian metropolis.
Those “ mutton-birds” I have just mentioned form a most
curious and interesting community. I know not if their habits
have been observed by naturalists, being myself totally out of
the reach of books of reference on all similar subjects ; but the
particulars I have heard from my husband, whose early wander-
ings familiarised him with many of the native creatures of the
Australian islands, struck me as being very curious. The
birds are about the size of a wild-duck, with handsome black
plumage, shot with metallic shades of green or brown, accord-
ingly as the light falls on it; they are web-footed, and the beak
is similar in form to that of the albatross family. They live
wholly at sea the chief part of the year, but on one particular
day in spring—November Ist, never varying many hours in the
time—they come in from sea in countless myriads, filling the
air with clouds of their dark wings as they hurry ashore on some
of the islands in Bass’s Straits, where their “ rookeries,” as the
sealers term them, are made. These are burrows in the earth,
covering many of the islands ; and the first care of the birds on
returning is to scratch them out clean from any rubbish that
has accumulated, and put them in order for habitation, and often
to make new ones. This preparatory business occupies about a
fortnight, and then the swarming squadrons put to sea again for
another fortnight or three weeks, not a bird remaining behind.
At the end of this time they return in a body as before, and with
much noise and bustle take up their abode in the rookeries, and
* Called, I think, the Judge and Clerks.


there lay their eggs and sit. The parent birds share between
them the “ domestic duties,” taking it in turns to remain on the
nest or go out to seek their food, which chiefly consists of a green
slimy matter like sea-weed. They remain on shore until the
young ones are a third part grown, and immensely fat, like masses
of blubber, when the old birds leave them and go off to sea. The
young ones, unable to leave the rookeries, are sustained mean-
Avhile by their own fat; and by the time that is tolerably reduced,
their wings are grown strong enough for flight, and they also
quit the rookery and go to sea.
The men employed in sealing on these islands derive their
chief sustenance from the mutton-birds, which they take in
various ways. One very successful method of snaring them is
thus practised : A high pen of stakes wattled together is
made on a low part of the coast, into which the poor mutton-
birds, who always run down to the water to take wing, are driven
with dogs and shouting, and there, as they cannot rise off the land,
they can be killed at leisure. An extensive trade in their feathers
is also carried on, but these have generally a strong and un-
pleasant smell; so that a “ mutton-bird pillow” is spoken of as
something proverbially disagreeable. Great quantities of the
birds are cured by the sealers for sale, and I am told that their
flavour is similar to that of a red-herring.
Yery early on the morning of September 27th, Mr. Mere-
dith was requested to go on deck and identify the land we were
then passing, cloudy weather for two days having prevented any
observation being taken, and our exact whereabouts being there-
fore doubtful. The unknown cliffs were immediately pro-
nounced to be the headlands of Botany Bay!—Our weary way-
faring was nearly done, the next break in the iron-bound coast
that rose dark and threateningly before us would be our welcome
haven, Sydney Cove!
In an absolute whirl of delight and excitement, with bright
looks and quick eager voices all around, I hastened to put up a
few packages ready to take ashore, continually interrupting my-
self to go on deck and mark our progress. The agitation on
hoax’d was universal, and the transformations little short of mira-
culous ; passenger-chrysalids were turning into buttei'flies every
instant. Gentlemen, whose whole outer vestments for the past
»


month would have scarcely brought half-a-orown in Rag-hair,
suddenly emerged from their cabins exquisites of the first water ;
and ladies, whose bronzed and scorched straw-bonnets would have
been discarded long before by a match-girl, now appeared in
delicate silks or satins of the latest London fashion. Gala dresses
and holiday faces were the order of the day; perhaps a child
going home from school may feel as happy as I did, but the
degree of delight could scarcely be excelled.
The entrance to Port Jackson is grand in the extreme. The
high, dark cliffs we had been coasting along all morning, suddenly
terminate in an abrupt precipice, called the South Head, on
which stand the lighthouse and signal-station. The North Head
is a similar cliff, a bare bluff promontory of dark horizontal
rocks; and between these grand stupendous pillars, as through a
colossal gate, we entered Port Jackson.
The countless bays and inlets of this noble estuary render it
extremely beautiful; every minute, as we sailed on, a fresh vista
opened on the view, each, as it seemed, more lovely than the
last; the pretty shrubs, growing thickly amid the rocks, and down
to the water’s edge, added infinitely to the effect, especially as
they were really green, a thing I had not dared to expect; but it
was spring, and everything looked fresh and verdant.
Here and there, on some fine lawny promontory or rocky
mount, white villas and handsome cottages appeared, encircled
with gardens and shrubberies, looking like the pretty “ cottages
ornees” near some fashionable English watering-place; and
perched amid as picturesque, but less cultivated scenery, were the
cottages of pilots, fishermen, &c., making, to my ocean-wearied
eyes, an Arcadia of beauty. Near the Noi'th Head is the
quarantine-ground, off which one unlucky vessel was moored
when we passed ; and on the brow of the cliff a few tombstones
indicate the burial-place of those unhappy exiles who die
during the time of ordeal, and whose golden dreams of the far-
sought land of promise lead but to a lone and desolate grave on
its storm-beaten shore.
We very narrowly escaped a serious accident even in the
port. A large vessel was moored in mid-channel, and our
pilot could not decide on which side he would pass her, until
we were so near that a collision seemed inevitable, but we for-


tunately cleared her, with not two feet to spare, and pursued our
course.
During a light shower which fell shortly after, amid the bright
sunshine, a most beautiful rainbow appeared, seeming like a smile
of welcome to my new country. It spanned over one of the
many lovely little bays, and was very broad, so that, although the
centre had a considerable elevation, it wholly rested on the water,
which, with the rocks, trees, and hills beyond, and the snow-
white sands of the bay, shone in all the graduated shades of the
bright prismatic colours. It was beautiful beyond description.
The pure white silvery sand which forms the beach in several
of these picturesque coves, gives them a peculiarly bright
appearance ; it is much valued, I believe, by glass-makers at
home, and often taken as ship’s ballast, for that purpose.
As we neared Sydney, several rocky islets appeared, some
rising like ruined forts and castles, and richly adorned with ver-
dant shrubs down to the edge of the bright, clear, deep blue
water, that reflected them so perfectly, one could scarcely tell
where substance and shadow joined. One of them is named
Shark Island; another larger one, Garden Island; and a little
one, bearing the unmeaning and not very refined name of “ Pinch-
gut,” is now the site of a small fort or battery.
The remarkable clearness of the atmosphere particularly struck
me, in looking at distant houses or other objects, everything,
however remote, seeming to have such a clean , distinct outline,
so different to the diffused effect of an English landscape; not
that I should like it in a picture so well as our softer and more
rounded perspective, but in a new place, where one likes to see
everything plainly, it is very pleasant. The bright white villas
seemed almost to cut into their surrounding trees, so sharp the
corners appeared ; and the universal adjunct of a veranda or piazza
in front, served to remind us that we were in a more sunny clime
than dear, dull Old England, Avhere such permanent sun-shades
would be as intolerable as they are here necessary.
The harbour-master’s boat w'as soon alongside, and he, with
the physician, came on board, to perform their respective duties
of inquiry and examination, and to hear the last news from
home. No vessel had arrived from thence for a month, an un-
usually long interval, and intelligence was anxiously expected ;
» 2


but during the day of our arrival and the following one, above
a dozen English vessels poured in.
The pilot had informed us that wheat was at an enormous price
in Sydney then, but his statement was not credited ;it was, how-
ever, only too correct, twenty-seven shillings per bushel being
the average price, in consequence of the severe droughts, which
had for two successive seasons destroyed the crops.
The crew of the harbour-master’s boat were New Zealanders,
fine intelligent-looking, copper-coloured fellows, clad in an odd
composite style, their national dress and some British articles of
apparel being blended somewhat grotesquely. The New Zea-
landers are much the noblest specimens of “ savages ” that I have
ever met with. During our residence in Sydney I saw a chief
walking along one of the principal streets, with his wife follow-
ing him. I had often heard of and seen what is called majestic
demeanour, but this untutored being, with his tattooed face and
arms, and long shaggy mantle, fairly outdid even my imaginings of
the majestic, as he paced deliberately along, planting his foot at
every step as if he had an emperor’s neck beneath it, and gazing
with most royal indifference around him. There was the con-
centrated grandeur of a hundred regal mantles of velvet, gold,
and ermine in the very sway of his flax-fringed cloak; I never
beheld anything so truly stately, I cannot say so much for his
lady, a black-haired, brown-faced body, in a gaudy cotton-print
gown, and (so far as I could judge) nothing else. She trotted
after her lordly better-half, staring with unsophisticated curiosity
at everything, apparently quite a novice in the busy scene ; but
I verily believe, had you placed the man amidst the coronation
splendours of Westminster Abbey, that he would not have been
so “ vulgar” as to betray surprise. Nor is their courtesy of
manner in any degree inferior to their magnificent demeanour. I
have heard my husband say, that when at New Zealand, he was
treated by the chiefs with such kind, anxious hospitality, and
true gentlemanly bearing, as might put to shame many an educated
but less civilized European.
About noon we cast anchor opposite Fort Macquarie, a neat
stone building, with a few cannon planted around it. Close along-
side of us lay a Scotch emigrant ship, her deck thronged with
crowds of both sexes and all agesi, enlivened by the fearful din of


some half-dozen bagpipers, who were all puffing, squeezing, and
elbowing away with incomparable energy and perseverance,
though, as they all seemed to be playing different airs, the melody
produced was rather of a complex character.
Behind, or rather to the right of Fort Macquarie, was Go-
vernment House, a long low building with a spacious veranda,
in which sentinels were pacing to and fro; before it lay a fine
green lawn, sloping towards, though not to, the water’s edge,
(quays intervening,) and around it grew noble trees, both Euro-
pean and Colonial, the English oak in its early spring garb of
yellow green being here and there overtopped by the grand and
more sombre Norfolk Island pine. A few other good houses
were in view, but the chief of the town, or, as it must now be
called, city, is built on the sides and at the head of a cove running
at right angles with the stream in which we lay, which prevented
the best parts from being observed, and the main portion of what
was visible had an air of “ Mapping ” about it, by no means
engaging.
The opposite or north shore of Port Jackson, here about two
miles across, is of rather a monotonous character. Hills of no
great elevation and very tame outline rise from the beach, dotted
here and there with villas and cottages, their adjoining gardens
making a pleasant green contrast with the uniform brown hue ox
the scrub. Numberless boats were pulling and sailing about,
giving animation to the scene, and several of the vessels we had
passed in Bass’s Straits were working up the port; the life and
bustle all around making a delightful change after our long soli-
tary voyage; and when the boat came to take us ashore, my joy
was complete. Once more seated in the slung chair, wrapped in
the British flag, I gladly bade adieu to the good ship that had so
long seemed to me a weary “ prison-house,” and soon, with-a
delight that must be felt to be understood, stepped again on
land.
And how happy a time it is—the first few days on shore after
such a voyage ! Every action of life is an enjoyment. I could
walk, without the floor jumping about and pitching me over ;
could use both hands to brush my hair, instead of keeping one to
hold on by; could absolutely set my wine-glass on the table
without fear of its upsetting into ray plate, though, by the bye,


I often caught myself carefully propping it up against something,
or looking above for the swing-tray to put it out of danger.
Then the abundant supply of water for ablutionary purposes is a
priceless luxury when first enjoyed after the limited allowance on
board ship ; and I often made the chambermaid smile by asking
if she could spare me another ewer-full. It is fresh, clean water
too, not flavoured either by a vinegar or rum cask, and can be
used without being “ left to settle! ” Perhaps few ship-stewards
are very clean, but all are not extremely dirty, and therefore our
exquisite enjoyment of clean cups, glasses, Jdates, and forks, may
not be imagined by the generality of voyagers. Vegetables too,
after a long diet of pork and rice, were most acceptable. Fruit
was not in season, except loquats, a pleasant acid berry, the size
and shape of a gooseberry, with large kernel-like pippins. The
tree is a very handsome one, bearing large long leaves, and droop-
ing clusters of white, deliciously fragrant blossoms, which are suc-
ceeded by the golden-coloured fruit.
When we remember that Sydney has risen within little more
than fifty years from tire first settlement of the colony, its size,
appearance, and population are truly wonderful. It is a large
busy town, reminding me of portions of Liverpool or Bristol,
with many good buildings, though few have any pretension to
architectural beauty. The newer portions of the town are laid
out with regularity and advantage. One long street traverses its
whole length, about a mile and a half, full of good shops exhibiting
every variety of merchandise; and in the afternoon, when the
ladies of the place drive out, whole strings of carriages may be
seen rolling about or waiting near the more “ fashionable empo-
riums,” that being the term in which Australian shopkeepers
especially delight. The vehicles are sometimes motley enough
in their equipment. Here and there appears a real London-built
chariot, brilliant in paint and varnish, and complete in every
luxury; with a coachman, attired something like worthy Sam
Weller, “ as a compo of footman, gardener, and groom,” sitting
on a box innocent of hammercloth, and driving a pair of mean-
looking, under-sized horses terribly out of proportion with the
handsome, aristocratic-looking carriage behind them. Some-
times, but very rarely, you see a consistent, well-appointed equi-
page ; I think the tandem is more frequently turned out in good


style than any other kind : and as no “ lady ” in Sydney (your
grocers’ and butchers’ wives included) believes in the possibility
of walking, the various machines upon wheels, of all descriptions,
are very numerous; from the close carriage and showy barouche
or britzka, to the more humble four-wheeled chaise and useful
gig. Few ladies venture to risk their complexions to the expo-
sure of an equestrian costume, and accordingly few appear on
horseback.
George Street seems to be by common consent considered as
the Pall-Mall, or rather as the “ Park” of Sydney, and up and
down its hot, dusty, glaring, weary length go the fair wives and
daughters of the “ citizens,” enjoying their daily airing ; whilst
close to the town is the beautiful Domain, a most picturesque
rocky promontory, thickly wooded and laid out in fine smooth
drives and walks, all commanding most exquisite views of Sydney
and its environs, the opposite shore, and the untiring ever-beau-
tiful estuary of Port Jackson. It was our favourite spot; even
after driving elsewhere out of town (for alas! the splendour ot
George Street had no charms for me) we generally made one
circuit round the Domain, and as generally found ourselves the
only visitors. It was unfashionable, in fact, not the proper
thing at all, either to walk or drive in the Domain. It was a
notorious fact, that maid-servants and their sweethearts resorted
thither on Sundays, and of course that shocking circumstance
ruined its character as a place for their mistresses to visit; the
public streets being so much more select.
Lady Macquarie had this Domain laid out after her own plans ;
walks and drives were cut through the rocks and shrubs, but no
other trees destroyed; seats placed at intervals, and lodges built
at the entrances. On the high point of the promontory some
large horizontal rocks have been slightly assisted by art into
the form of a great seat or throne, called Lady Macquarie s
Chair, above which an inscription informs the visitor to whose
excellent taste and benevolent feeling he is indebted for the im-
provement of this lovely spot. It always reminded me of Pierce-
field in Monmouthshire, but is far more beautiful, inasmuch as,
instead of the black-banked Wye, here the bright blue waves of
the bay wash the lower crags, and in place of looking only at
one opposite bank, here is a noble estuary with countless bays


and inlets, pretty villas and cottages, and dainty little islands,
all bright and clear and sunny, with a cloudless sky above them,
The trees are chiefly different species of Eucalyptus, or “ gum-
tree,” some of which bear large and handsome, flowers, having a
remarkably sweet and luscious scent, like honey, with which they
abound. The name Eucalyptus is admirably descriptive of
the flower, meaning covered well with a lid; and each closed
blossom is shaped like a goblet, with a pyramidal cover, which
in due time falls, or is thrust off, by the crowd of squeezed-up
stamens within, that quickly expand into a starry circle when
released from their verdant prison. The leaves are mostly of a
dull green, with a dry sapless look about them, more like old
specimens in a herbarium than fresh living and growing things,
and, being but thinly scattered on the branches, have a mea-
gre appearance. They are, however, u evergreens,” and in
their peculiarity of habit strongly remind the observer that he
is at the antipodes of England, or very near it, where every-
thing seems topsy-turvy, for instead of the “ fall of the leaf,”
here we have the stripping of the bark, which peels off at certain
seasons in long pendent ragged ribands, leaving the disrobed
tree almost as white and smooth as the paper I am now writing
on. At first I did not like this at all, but now the clean stems
of a young handsome gum-tree seem a pleasing variety amidst
the sombre hues of an Australian forest.
Several species of tea-tree (Leptospermum) form the chief por-
tion of the shrubbery here, producing their small pretty blossoms
very abundantly, whilst various other shrubs and many species
of acacia (generally called Mimosa or Wattle here) display
innumerable novelties of leaf and flower to the admiring eyes of
an English visitor. One beautiful shrub grows on some of the
low rocks, which I have not observed elsewhere: the leaves are
large, and not unlike those of a Camellia; the flower, in form,
size, and colour, resembles a fine single yellow rose.
Opposite the south shore of the Domain, and forming the
other boundary of a beautiful cove, is another similar point or
promontory, called still by the native name of Wooloomooloo
(the accent being on the first and last syllables), on which a
number of elegant villas have been erected by the more wealthy
residents in Sydney, being to that place what the Regent’s Park


is to London. The views from many of these are beautiful in
the extreme, looking down into two bays, one on either side, and
beyond these to the town and port, with the magnificent heads
of the harbour closing the seaward prospect. T mes flourish
here luxuriantly, and many tropical plants and trees mingle with
those of European growth. Hedges are often formed of gera-
niums, and sometimes of the fruit-bearing cactus, called the
prickly pear (C. opuntia, or C. nana?), a detestable thing,
which if touched, even with strong leathern gloves, so penetrates
them with its fine long spines, that the hands of the unluc y
meddler are most annoyingly hurt by them. Some of our rares
greenhouse passion-flowers grow here unsheltered, and flower pio-
fusely; and the Brugmansia often forms the centre of a grass
plot, with its graceful tent-like white bells hanging on it in hun-
dreds. Geraniums thrive and grow very rapidly, but I did not
see any good ones; none that I should have thought woith cul-
tivating in England. A Horticultural Sdciety has now been
established some years, and will doubtless be the means of
m TL U Xve™nent Gardens are tastefully laid out round the
sloping head of a small bay between the Domain and Govern-
ment House, and contain (besides abundant vineries, an a
other productive matters) a strange and beautiful assemblag
dwellers in all lands, from the tall bamboo of India to the low y
English violet. A group of graceful weeping-willows overhang
a pretty shady pool, where a statue, by an English sculptor
(Westmacott, I think), is now erected to General Bourke,
merly governor of New South Wales. It had not arrived when
we left Sydney, or I should have much rejoiced to see the first
specime/of high art which the colony has obtained, placed in so
** - favourite a spot, lire grand Norfdk
Island pine, the fig, orange, mu berry, and court!* trees,
shrubs and flowers new to me, add to the gay bea >
gardens; and when tired of roaming about the sunny and fra.
grant walks, there are grassy lawns and shaded 8
a lovely prospect around, that, much as I should dislike to dwell
in Sydney, I left its beautiful gardens with great regret. let,
will it be believed, that even these are very little frequented by
the inhabitants? They are evidently, from some cause unknown


to me (but doubtless nearly allied to the cause of the Domain’s
desertion), net considered correctly fashionable by the fancied
exclusives ” of the place, though constantly frequented by all
Hjew-comers; at all events, the former prefer the hot, glaring-,
duMy, pavement of a town street for their promenade, to these
delicious gardens.*
nanpf wiv Z the above ’ 1 have seen some remarks in a Sydney news-
111066I 11066 B eneral re sort to the “Domain” than was the case
f.Vn VT 6 Of , W UCI - 1 speak - 1 rejoice to find that the beauties of so delight-
ful a spot are becoming more properly estimated. eiigtit-


CHAPTER VI.
_ , ~ , . -p-i, o, 0 Dust • Flies—Mosquitoes—Drive to tlie Light-
i "cochatoAnyde Part-Churches-
Libraries —“ Currency” population-Houses-Balls, &c._lnns_Colorual
Newspapers.
The market in Sydney is well supplied, and is held in a large
commodious building, superior to most provincial market-houses
at home. The display of fruit in the grape season is very
beautiful. Peaches also are most abundant, and very cheap ; apples
very dear, being chiefly imported from Van Diemen s Land
and frequently selling at sixpence each. The smaller Lnglis i
fruits, such as strawberries, &c., only succeed in a few situations
in the colony, and are far from plentiful. Cucumbers and all
descriptions of melon abound. The large green water-melon,
rose-coloured within, is a very favourite fruit, but I thought it
insipid. One approved method of eating it is, after cutting a
sufficiently large hole, to pour in a bottle of Madeira or sherry,
and mix it with the cold watery pulp. Ihese melons grow to
an enormous size (an ordinary one is from twelve to eighteen
inches in diameter), and may be seen piled up i'e mge cannon
balls at all the fruit-shop doors, being universally adorned in
hot, thirsty climate.
There are some excellent fist, to be procured here, but I hnorv
them only by the common Colonial names, which are frequently
misnomers. The snapper, or schnapper, is the largest with whic r
I am acquainted, and is very nice, though not esteemed a proper
dish for a dinner-party why, lamat a loss to guess; but I neve,
saw any native fish at a Sydney dinner-table-the preserved
cured 'cod and salmon from England being served instead, at a
considerable expense, and, to my taste, it is not comparable vn.h
the cheap fresh fish, but being expensive, it has become o -
able ” and that circumstance reconciles all things. The guar -
fish ’is long and narrow, about the size of a herring, with a very


singular head, the mouth opening at the top, as it were, and the
lower jaw, or nose, projecting two-thirds of an inch beyond it.
I imagine it must live chiefly at the bottom, and this formation
enables it more readily to seize the food above it. They are
most delicate little fish. The bream, a handsome fish, not unlike
a perch in shape (but much larger, often weighing four or five
pounds), and the mullet, but especially the latter, are excellent.
I he whiting, much larger than its English namesake, is perhaps
the best of all; but I pretend to no great judgment as a gastro-
nome. I thought the rock-oysters particularly nice, and they
are plentiful and cheap; so are the crayfish, which are very
similar to lobsters, when small, but the large ones rather coarse.
I must not end my list of fish that we eat without mentioning
one that is always ready to return the compliment when an
opportunity offers, namely, the shark, many of whom are habit-
ants of the bright tempting waters of Port Jackson. Provisions
vary much in price from many circumstances. was
very dear when we landed in New South Wales, and at the pre-
sent time prices are much too low to pay the producers.
Ihe dust is one main source of annoyance in Sydney. Unless
after very heavy rain, it is always dusty ; and sometimes, when the
wind is in one particular point, the whirlwinds of thick fine pow-
der that fill every street and house are positive miseries. These
dust-winds are locally named “ brick-fielders,” from the direction
in which they come; and no sooner is the approach of one per-
ceived than the streets are instantly deserted, windows and doors
closely shut, and every one who can remains within till the
p;ague has passed over, when you ring for the servant with a
duster, and collect enough fine earth for a small garden off your
chairs and tables. J
Flies are another nuisance; they swarm in every room in tens
of thousands, and blacken the breakfast or dinner table as soon
as the viands appear, tumbling into the cream, tea, wine, and
gravy with the most disgusting familiarity. But worse than
these are the mosquitoes, nearly as numerous, and infinitely more
detestable to those for whose luckless bodies they form an attach-
ment, as they do to most new comers ; a kind of initiatory compli-
ment wmch I would gladly dispense with, for most intolerable is
the torment they cause in the violent irritation of their moun-


tainous bites. All houses are furnished with a due attention to
these indefatigable gentry, and the beds have consequently a
curious aspect to an English eye accustomed to solid four-posters,
with voluminous hangings of chintz or damask, and a pile of
feather-beds which would annihilate a sleeper in this climate.
Here you have usually a neat thin skeleton-looking franm of
brass or iron, over which is thrown a gauze garment, consisting
of curtains, head, and tester, all sewn together; the former full,
and resting on the floor when let down, but during the day tied
up in festoons. Some of these materials are very pretty, being
silk, with satin stripes of white or other delicate tints on the
green gauze ground. At night, after the curtains are lowered,
a grand hunt takes place, to kill or drive out the mosquitoes from
within; having effected which somewhat wearisome task, you
tuck the net in all round, leaving one small bit which you care-
fully raise, and nimbly pop through the aperture into bed, clos-
ing the curtain after you. This certainly postpones the ingress
of the enemy, but no precaution that my often-tasked ingenuity
could invent will prevent it effectually. They are terrible pests,
and very frequently aided in their nocturnal invasions of one’s rest
by the still worse and thrice-disgusting creatures familiar to most
dwellers in London lodgings or seaport inns, to say nothing of
fleas, which seem to pervade this colony in one universal swarm.
The thickest part of a town, or the most secluded spot in the
wild bush, is alike replete with these small but active annoyances.
One day we drove out to the lighthouse on the South Head,
about eight miles from Sydney. Soon after leaving the town
the road passes the new court-house and gaol, and its handsome
front, in the Doric or lonic style (I forget which), is the only
architectural building the “ city” could boast when I was there,
though I suppose that ere this the new Government House, a
mansion in the Elizabethan-Gothic style, is completed. We
beo-an shortly to ascend a bill, the road being all sea-sand appa-
rently, and nothing but sand was visible all around. Great green
mat-like plats of the pretty Mesemhryanthemum aquilaterale,
or fig-marigold, adorned the hot sandy banks by the road-side.
It bears a bright purple flower, and a five-sided fruit, called by
children “ pig-faces.” A very prickly species of solanum also grew
here, with large green spiky leaves, more difficult to gather even


than holly, and pretty bluish potato-like blossoms. The uni-
versal tea-tree, and numberless shrubs which I knew not, adorned
tiie sandy wastes in all directions. As we continued to ascend,
the road became very rough, huge masses of rock protruding like
gigantic steps, over which the wheels scraped and grated and
jumped in a way that made me draw rather strong comparisons
between the character of roads at home and abroad. As we
approached the summit, the hollow formed by the road was sud-
denly filled by a background (forgive the paradox) of deep blue
water; it was the open sea that gradually rose before us, seen
over the rocks, and spreading out bright and blue, with small
waves sparkling in the fervid sunshine, and the white diamond-
crested spray dashing high against the iron-bound coast, here
broken into a low craggy amphitheatre, into which the rolling
waves came surging on, breaking over the groups of rocks, and
forming bright little basins among them. On either side the
rocks rose again in large masses, presenting a precipitous face to
the sea, being part of the dark formidable cliffs we had seen in
approaching the Heads by sea. The road, after descending the
hill, turned to the left, through some sandy scrub, crowded with
such exquisite flowers that to me it appeared one continued garden,
and I walked for some distance, gathering handfuls of them—of
the same plants that I had cherished in pots at home, or begged
small sprays of in conservatories or greenhouses! I had whole
boughs of the splendid metrosideros,a tall handsome shrub, bearing
flowers of the richest crimson, like a large bottle-brush; several
varieties of the delicate epacris; different species of acacia, tea-tree,
and cornea, the brilliant u Botany-Bay lily,” and very many yet
more lovely denizens of this interesting country, of which I know
not even the name. One, most beautiful, was something like a
small iris, of a pure ultra-marine blue, with smaller petals in the
centre, most delicately pencilled ; but ere I had gathered it five
minutes, it had withered away, and I never could bring one home
to make a drawing from. Surely it must have been some sensi-
tive little fay, who, charmed into the form of a flower, might not
bear the touch of a mortal hand !
Numbers of parrots, those
“ Strange bright birds, that on starry wings
Bear the rich hues of all glorious things,”


were flying from tree to tree, or crossing the road in chattering,
screaming parties, all as gay and happy as splendid colours and glad
freedom could make them. Often they rose close before us from
the road, like living gems and gold, so vividly bright they shone
iu the sun; and then a party of them would assemble in a tree,
with such fluttering, and flying in and out, and under and over;
such genteel-looking flirtations going on, as they sidled up and
down the branches, with their droll sly-looking faces peering
about, and inspecting us first with one eye, then with the other,
that they seemed quite the monkeys of the feathered tribes.
On nearing the lighthouse, after ascending one or two slight
hills, we passed several small houses, and others were building;
the views from thence are doubtlessly very grand, but it must
be a most exposed situation, with nothing to break the force of
the strong sea-breezes, and but little vegetation to moderate the
glare of the sun.
The view from the cliffs is indeed grand,
“ O’er the glad waters of the dark-blue sea
and looking down over the dizzy height, the eye glances from
crag to crag, till it catches the snowy puffs of foam flung up from
the breakers that roar and dash in the cavernous chasms below,
booming among them like subterranean thunder. A. s 1 feat fully
gazed down, something leaped between me and the dark water
it was a goat, and there were some half-dozen of the agile crea*
tures far down the slippery precipitous crags, leaping, jumping,
and frolicking about, with scarcely an inch of foot-room, and only
the boiling surf below.
Opposite to us rose the corresponding cliff, called the North
Head, bluff and bare, and wearing on its hoary front the hues
with which thousands of storms have dyed it. Myriads of sea-
fowl were soaring and screaming around, and several vessels in
the offing, and nearer shore, were apparently shaping their course
to the port, but too distant for us to wait their entrance through
these most grand and stupendous gates. The lighthouse itself is
not in any way remarkable ; close by is the signal-staff, by means
of which the intelligence of vessels arriving is speedily trans-
mitted to Sydney and Paramatta.
We drove back by a different road, nearer to the port, and
less hilly, but equally beautiful with that by which we came. It


led us through a moister-looking region, with more large trees,
greener shrubs, and more luxuriant herbage, and commanding
most lovely views, that appeared in succession like pictures seen
through a natural framework of high white-stemmed gum-trees
and tall acacias. Here and there peeped forth a prettily situated
residence, with its shady garden and cool piazza, looking down into
one of the small bays I have before mentioned, and beyond that
to the estuary.
On one large dead gum-tree a whole council of black cockatoos
was assembled in animated debate, sidling up and down the
branches, erecting and lowering their handsome gold-tipped top-
knots, as if bowing to each other with the politest gestures ima-
ginable ; and accompanying the dumb show with such varied
intonations of voice as made it impossible to doubt that a most
interesting discussion was going on, all conducted in the most
courteous manner: perhaps a reform of the grub laws was in
agitation, for the business was evidently one of grave importance,
and we respectfully remained attentive spectators of the ceremony
until “ the House ” adjourned, and the honourable members flew
away. These birds are by no means common in the neighbour-
hood of Sydney, nor did I see any more during my stay in the
colony.
The same deep sandy road continued: it appeared to me that
this part of the country must have been gradually elevated from
the sea, and a long succession of beaches consequently formed,
and left inland by the retreating waters; for the prodigious
accumulation of true sea-sand here seems difficult to account for
in any other way. In the Domain, too, and many other situations,
are raised beaches, consisting wholly of sea-sand and shells
(recent ones, so far as I examined them), above which, in a thin
stratum of soil, great trees are growing; so that, although these
beaches have formed part of the dry land long enough for a body
of soil to be deposited upon them, and for aged trees to have
grown in that, they are still of modern elevation.
Sydney boasts her “ Hyde Park but a park utterly destitute
of trees seems rather an anomaly. It is merely a large piece of
brown ground fenced in, where is a well of good water, from
which most of the houses are supplied by means of water-carts.
There is also a racecourse between the town and Botany Bay,


racing being a favourite amusement among the gentlemen of the
colony, and sometimes among the ladies, for I was told of a race
somewhere “up the country,” in which two “ young ladies were
the riders, the prize being a new side-saddle and bridle, which
was won in good style by one of the fair damsels ; the horse
of the other receiving a severe castigation from his gentle mistress,
for having swerved and lost the race.
Most of the country gentlemen near Sydney, and for many
miles round, are members of the “ Cumberland Hunt; they
have a tolerable pack of hounds, and the destructive native dog,
or dingo, serves them for a fox. So long as they hunt the
really wild ones, the sport is certainly useful; but when, as
frequently happens, a bagged dog furnishes the day s amusement,
I cannot but think the field of mounted red-coats as something
less than children. Dinners and balls of course form a part
of the arrangements for the races and hunts, and everything
is conducted in as English a manner as can be attained by a
young country imitating an old one.
There are several large churches in Sydney, plainly, but
substantially built; and one was in progress when we were there,
which promised a more architectural appearance. The Bishop of
Australia is a resident in Sydney. The Roman Catholics, and
various dissenting congregations, have also neat and commodious
chapels.
I heard that there was a Museum of Natural History ; and the
« Australian Library ” contains an excellent selection of books
for so young an institution. The circulating libraries are very
poor affairs, but, I fear, quite sufficient for the demand, reading
not being a favourite pursuit. The gentlemen are too busy, or
find a cigar more agreeable than a book ; and the ladies, to quote
the remark of a witty friend, “ pay more attention to the adorn-
ment of their heads without than within .” That there are many
most happy exceptions to this rule, I gladly acknowledge; but
in the majority of instances, a comparison between the intellect
and conversation of Englishwomen, and those of an equal grade
here, would be highly unfavourable to the latter. An apathetic
indifference seems the besetting fault; an utter absence of interest
or inquiry beyond the merest gossip,—the cut of a new sleeve, or
£


the guests at a late party. “ Do you play ?” and “Do you draw ?”
are invariable queries to a new lady-arrival. “Do you dance ?”
is thought superfluous, for everybody dances; but not a question
is heard relative to English literature or art; far less a remark
on any political event, of however important a nature: —not a
syllable that betrays thought , unless some very inquiring belle
ask, “ if you have seen the Queen, and whether she is pretty V
But all are dressed in the latest known fashion, and in the best
materials, though not always with that tasteful attention to the
accordance or contrast of colour which an elegant Englishwoman
would observe.
The natives (not the aborigines, but the “ currency,” as they
are termed, in distinction from the “ sterling,” or British-born resi-
dents) are often very good-looking when young; but precocity
of growth and premature decay are unfortunately characteristic
of tlae greater portion. The children are mostly pale and slight,
though healthy, with very light hair and eyes—at least such is
their general appearance, with of course many exceptions. They
grow up tall; the girls often very pretty and delicate-looking
whilst young (although very often disfigured by bad teeth) ; but
I have seen women of twenty-five or thirty, whose age I should
have guessed to be fifty at least. They marry very young, and
the consequent “ olive branches ” are extremely numerous. The
boys grow up long, and often lanky, seldom showing the strong
athletic build so common at home, or, if they do, it is spoiled by
round shoulders and a narrow chest, and, what puzzles me
exceedingly to account for, a very large proportion of both male
and female natives snuffle dreadfully; just the same nasal twang
as many Americans have. In some cases English parents have
come out here witli English-born children ; these all speak clearly
and well, and continue to do so, whilst those born after the
parents arrive in the colony have the detestable snuffle. This
is an enigma which passes my sagacity to solve.
Of course a large proportion of the population are emancipists
(convicts who have served their allotted years of transportation),
and their families or descendants ; and a strong line of demarca-
tion is in most instances observed between them and the free
emigrants and settlers. Wealth, all-powerful though it be, —


and many of these emancipists are the richest men in the colony,—
cannot wholly overcome the prejudice against them, though
policy, in some instances, greatly modifies it. Their want of
education is an effectual barrier to many, and these so wrap
themselves in the love of wealth, and the palpable, though mis-
placed importance it gives, that their descendants will probably
improve but little on the parental model. You may often see a
man of immense property, whose wife and daughters dress in the
extreme of fashion and finery, rolling home in Ids gay carriage
from his daily avocations, with face, hands, and apparel as dirty
and slovenly as any common mechanic. And the son of a simi-
lar character has been seen, with a dozen costly rings on his
coarse fingers, and chains, and shirt-pins, glistening with gems,
buying yet more expensive jewellery, yet without sock or slock-
ing to his feet; the shoes , to which his spurs were attached, leav-
ing a debatable ground between them and his trowsers ! Spurs
and shoes are, I imagine, a fashion peculiar to this stamp of
exquisites, but among them very popular.
Many instances occur of individuals of this class returning to,
or perhaps for the first time visiting England, with the pur-
pose of remaining there to enjoy their accumulated wealth, and
after a short trial, coming back to the colony, heartily disgusted
with the result of their experiment. Here, as “ small tritons of
the minnows,” they are noted by their riches, and courted
for them; but at home, shorn of their beams by the thousands
of greater lights than their own, and always subject to unplea-
sant prejudices and reflections touching “ Botany Bay, and
other like associations, they find their dreams of grandeur and
importance wofully disappointed, and gladly hasten with all
speed from the scenes of mortified vanity. One of these
adventurous worthies made the voyage to England, landed, and
remained in London a very brief space, not more, I believe,
than one or two weeks, —when, fully satisfied, he took ship and
set forth back again. On arriving in Sydney, his friends in-
quired his opinions of England ; —Did he not admire the magni-
ficent buildings and streets in London? “Oh ! very well; but
nothing like George-street!” At all events, the extraordinary
perfection and beauty of the English horses must have delighted
£ 2


him ?—“ No, not at all; nothing to be compared with Mr,
Cox’s breed.”
The good people of Sydney have yet many wise things to learn,
and many silly ones to unlearn, before they can attain that resem-
blance to the higher middle classes at home which is their
anxious aim; and the shallow petty pride, or rather vanity,
which causes so many heart-burnings and such eager rivalry
among those who can often but ill afford its cost, is the main-
spring of their follies. The existence of such feeling in a colony,
where all, with very rare exceptions, have sprung from needy
emigrants or transported criminals, is too absurd to require a
comment. Yet pride, of a right kind, might be the best agent
a new country could possess ; but it must be a generous, not
selfish pride ; it must strive for renown in a general good, not an
individual aggrandisement; it must show a wise and liberal, not
(as is too much the case at present) an ignorant and sordid
spirit; its effort must be, not to rise above its neighbours, and,
if possible, thrust them lower still, in contrast to its own exalta-
tion, but aid, by an example of strict integrity and honour,
careful industry, increasing knowledge, and true morality, the
interests of the community at large.
The distinctions in society here remind me of the “ Dock-yard
people,” described by Dickens, that keen and kindly satirist of
modern follies. Thus—Government officers don’t know mer-
chants ; merchants with “ stores” don’t know other merchants
who keep “ shops;” and the shopkeepers have, I doubt not, a
little code of their own, prescribing the proper distances to be
observed between drapers and haberdashers, butchers and pastry-
cooks. The general character of the invitations to the entertain-
ments at Government House has caused much discussion and
animadversion ; the citizens who drive chariots not liking to be
mingled in company with their tradespeople who only keep gigs.
But all this pride of place is so very ridiculous and unbecoming
in such a community, that were not its tendency so mischievous,
it could only provoke a smile.
English customs and fashions are carefully followed, and fre-
quently outdone by the more wealthy and (if I may be allowed
the phrase, in speaking of commoners) aristocratic of the colo-


nists. Their extravagant mode of living, combined with the
mania for speculation, has greatly contributed to the late and
still existing embarrassments of the colony. Many of then-
houses are elegant villas, with rooms of noble dimensions, expen-
sively furnished with almost every luxury to be found m a gen-
tleman’s residence in England, and environed by beautiful
gardens, where every description of fruit, both European an
tropical, is cultivated. The numerous servants too are a great
and universal expense. The smaller houses of merchants and
various professional and official men, have much the style of those
in suburban streets in England, standing alone or in pairs, al
protected from the sun by verandas from six to twelve feet wide,
with pretty gardens in front, often fenced by high hedges of gay
geraniums. Several of these villa-streets are very pretty, and a
most refreshing contrast to the dust, dirt, noise, and closeness of
the lower part of the town, which is, from the climate and other
causes, some shades more unpleasant than any place I ever was
in before. „ , , ,
These rambling “ Sketches” of mine are fortunately not ic-
quired to be a complete “ Guide” to all the lions, wonders, and
beauties of Sydney and its vicinity, for of many I am totally
ignorant. I know it possesses a pretty theatre, and that freque .
concerts and public balls are given at all seasons ; but as my health
did not allow of my partaking in any amusement which demanded
attendance in close and heated assemblies, I cannot speak of them
from experience. Three annual “national” balls were given
whilst I was in the colony, which those present described as very
gay affairs; the tutelar saints of the three kingdoms being made
patrons extraordinary on the occasion-St. George presiding
over the English ball, St. Andrew over the Scotch, and St.
Patrick, that “ gentlemanly” saint, over the Irish entertainment.
A fourth ball was then arranged, being a combination ot the
forces, and at this fancy dresses were very generally worn, an<
some well supported. All these balls were very numerously
attended, it being quite a matter of course for families o
come above two hundred miles, even in that climate, and
over such roads, to attend a ball. How any one at home
would laugh at the idea of journeying an equal distance on


like errand ! even with all the aids of rail and turnpike-
roads, stage-coaches and post-chaises! But young ladies are
so numerous, and balls so comparatively rare, that it seems an
act of policy not to lose these occasional opportunities for the
display of charms that might otherwise “ waste their sweetness
on the desert air.”
There are several good inns in Sydney, much frequented by
bachelor settlers, and one, to which the married ones take their
families, at about double the expense of accommodation in a
first-rate English hotel; and whilst you are served with “ King’s
pattern ” plate, and by half a dozen waiters, you miss many of
the commonest comforts to be found in every wayside hostel
at home. These and similar inconsistencies are perpetually strik-
ing a new-comer, in every circumstance of life and every grade
of society.
A stranger cannot fail to notice the prodigious number
of public-houses in this place, and, judging from general
appearances, I fear they are only too well supported, and
receive the greater part of the earnings of the lower classes,
among whom habits of intemperance are unhappily very pre-
valent. The advocates of the temperance and tee-total socie-
ties have, I believe, effected considerable good, but much more
remains to be done.
My readers doubtless remember the inimitable passages in
‘ Pickwick,’ descriptive and illustrative of the “ Eatanswill
Gazette,” and “ Independent,” with their rival editors, Mr.
Pott and Mr. Hurk. It is my sincere opinion that some of the
colonial editors here have mutually resolved on attempting an
exact imitation of the style and manner of these renowned papers,
for their leading articles bear a most curious resemblance,
fraught with the most deadly hatred of each other, and the same
unmeasured powers of abuse and wholesale condemnation. Such
terms as “ Our base and mendacious contemporary“ That
tissue of ignorance and conceit, the “ That mean-spirited
creature, whose vile insinuations we despise together with
torrents of <£ rascal, liar, scoundrel, booby, fool, venom, viper,
toad,” &c. &c., give an indescribable piquancy and interest to
their charming productions ; their brethren of Port Phillip,


Hobarton, &c., often zealously emulating their spirit and in-
comparable choice of language; though some are of a very
different stamp, and, strange to say, are preferred by many per-
sons who have the curious taste to peruse with more sahs-
faction European news, and quiet discussions of general topics
than the most fluent and animated harangues of these eloquent
opponents.


CHAPTER VII.
Leave Sydney—“ Clearings ” —Huts of the Working Classes—Chain-Gangs
Parramatta Creeks and Rivers—lnn—Birds—Road to Penrith—Grass-
hoppers—Penrith—Nepean—Emu Plains—Ascent of the Blue Mountains
—Waratah.
In the last chapter I have given my general impressions of
Sydney; the result of our entire residence in the town and
neighbourhood, rather than a mere first view, which could only
observe the surface of things, my first sojourn there being only
for a fortnight, when, our baggage being landed and stored, and
all other arrangements completed, we prepared for a journey “ up
the country. My husband required to visit his sheep-stations on
the Murrumbidgee; but my travels were not to extend farther
than Bathurst, about 120 miles.
Our first day’s journey was merely an afternoon drive to
1 arramatta, fifteen miles from Sydney, through alternate cleared
land and “ bush,” but all enclosed. The chief of the way-side
houses were those of publicans, round which drays and carts were
usually assembled, whilst their drivers refreshed themselves
within, and swarms of flies added to the torment and weariness of
the miserable horses and oxen, who often wait for hours the
return of their brutal ajid drunken guide.
The system of “ clearing ” here, by the total destruction of
every native tree and shrub, gives a most bare, raw, and ugly
appearance to a new place. In England we plant groves and
woods, and think our country residences unfinished and incomplete
without them ; but here the exact contrary is the case, and unless
a settler can see an expanse of bare, naked, unvaried, shadeless,
dry, dusty land spread all around him, he fancies his dwelling
“ wild and uncivilized.” About some of the older houses in the
colony a growth of fruit-trees, and often British forest-trees, has
succeeded the despised aboriginal productions, and sometimes a few


I‘ the grand Norfolk Island pines tower above the lower groups,
ngrafted quince and peach trees form hedges in many places;
id° when not hidden in the thick coat of dust which covers
ferything near a public road, their greener hue is a pleasing
mnge amidst the brown landscape. Where land is not required
)r the plough, the trees are frequently only cut down within a
ard of the ground, which remains thickly encumbered with the
o-ly blackened and burned stumps, giving the appearance at a
ttle distance of a large and closely occupied graveyard ; gru -
ing, or taking up the roots, being a far more expensive opera-
ion. Many large trees are destroyed by a ring of bark being
aken off the trunk, when they die in the course of a year, and
heir huge leafless skeletons have an indescribably dreary and
lesolate aspect. . „
Maize, or Indian corn, which I here saw growing for the fiis
ime is a most ornamental crop, each plant being placed by
itself, and its long, broad, green leaves and crowning spire of
blossoms having a very graceful appearance. It is generally
cultivated here in lieu of other grain, for which the climate is
less adapted, and is always understood by the term corn, all other
corn, such as wheat, barley, &c., being called gram.
The habitations of the working classes, for poor there are
none, are the least pleasing objects one meets with in this colony.
Instead of the neat clean cottage of an English labourer with its
little glazed windows, and tidy though old curtains looped on one
side; its small garden-plot of vegetables, pot-herbs, and sv\e
flowers, and cheerful, though humble aspect,-here you pass a
wretched hut or hovel, built of heaped turf, or more frequently
of “ slabs ” (rough pieces of split timber, set on end like a
strong paling), and thatched, and which, if plastered with mud,
would be weather-proof and comfortable ; but for the most part
the slabs are all falling asunder, the thatch half torn off, the
window, or rather the place for one, stopped with pieces of wood,
hides, and old rags; and the door, without hinges, inclining
against the wall. A heap of ashes and chips usually lies m front,
broken bottles, old casks, old rags, bones, and shoes, and various
similar articles are scattered around. Not a herb, not a cabbage
is to be seen; no attempt at making a garden, although a fence
mi-ht be had for the trouble of cutting it, and, by very little


labour, abundant crops of vegetables and fruit produced. Unfor-
tunately, at the time I speak of, wages were so high, thaf by
working only a third or fourth part of his time, a man could gain
an ample livelihood, and consequently those disposed to be idle
had both time and money to spend in drunkenness ; the improve-
ment and comfort of their homes had no share in their thoughts;
and the wife in many cases was as bad as her husband ; whilst the
unfortunate children, growing up without instruction, and under
such examples, cannot be expected to adopt any very moral
or religious ideas. The rate of wages is no doubt now much
lowered by the increased number of emigrants ; and this, by com-
pelling many to acquire more industrious habits, will do immense
good. I remember the wife of a turnpike-keeper near our house,
who was scarcely ever seen sober, and as rarely without a broken
head or a black eye. One day Mr. Meredith was driving a
friend to the races at Parramatta, and, on reaching the turnpike,
this engaging female was discovered seated at a table by the door,
with a cup and a half-gallon bottle of rum beside her, the effect
of which was already evident; she offered Mr. Meredith a ticket,
which he told her was not required, as she knew him so well
from his passing constantly—“ Oh, sir, you’d better take it, for I
shan’t know anybody by the time you come back!”
It is amusing enough, in traversing this colony, to come upon
a spot in the midst of the wild bush, where a great finger-post
stands to inform you that you are in the “ township ” of Mon-
mouth, or Rutland, or some other old country name, with other
posts at certain distances, bearing the names of streets, squares,
&c., where not the semblance of a human dwelling is visible,
though all arrangements seem made for a large and populous
town. These, I imagine, are some of the “ town allotments,” in
which such extensive and fatal speculations have been made in
all parts of the colonies.
We passed several “ chain-gangs ” working on the road ; these
are convicts, who, from their great and repeated crimes, are sen-
tenced for various periods to work in irons in the service of the
government; and the villainous countenances of the greater
number, the clank of their chains, and the thought of how awful
an amount of crime had led to this disgraceful punishment, made
me positively dread passing or meeting a band of the miserable


wretches. Very erroneous opinions relative to the state of con-
victs in these colonies exist at home as to the degree of hardship
they endure. I think I can in the course of these pages relate
enough from my own observation, to prove how much very many
humane persons are misled in their ideas on the subject Even the
chain-gangs, the lowest grade of this class, do not perform on an
average the third part of the labour which any English mechanic
or labourer does gladly and cheerfully. Their rations of food are
wholesome and abundant, and their huts or barracks provided
with every necessary. When sick, they have the best medical care,
and whatever additional luxuries their state may require; and
when I apply to them the term “ miserable wretches I would
be understood as applying it to their crimes and social degrada-
tion, not to their corporal sufferings. They work under the super-
intendence of overseers, and sentinels with loaded muskets, who
would shoot any one attempting to escape ; but notwithstanding
every precaution, they do frequently evade the vigilance of then
guards, and, “taking the bush,” that is, running away into the
forests, they often become formidable in their attacks on trave -
lers in the lonely roads up the country. Not long ago, I saw an
account of eleven murders having been committed by one of these
desperadoes, and accompanied by such horrors of mangling, burn-
ing, and otherwise disposing of his victims, as far exceed all the
fearful tragedies of a like kind we read of in the English papers.
Several parties of bushrangers were out at the time of our jour-
ney, but as that is generally the case, it made no difference in our
“'raS’maUa is a straggling and extensive place, with good wide
streets, containing houses and shops of every size and descnp.ion,
which are most agreeably diversified by the pretty gardens -i-
-compassing many of them, shadowed with fine mulberry, orange,
and fig trees, and gay with luxuriant shrubs and flowers, among
whiclfthe large American aloe forms a prominent feature, an
frequently one appears in bloom. From its low situation, Par-
ramatta il many degrees warmer than Sydney, and though seate
on the shores of Port Jackson (here called the Parramatta river ~
it feels little if any benefit from the sea-breeze, which in Sydney
is so great a relief. I may here add another link to the chain


of antipodean absurdities enumerated by Mr. Baron Field,* by
asserting that all the rivers are creeks, and all the creeks rivers;
thus you hear people continually talking of the Parramatta river,
which is neither more nor less than the higher portion of the
estuary of Port Jackson, and perfectly salt: whilst if by chance
you meet with a precious little stream of fresh water far inland,
rest assured it is nothing but a “ creek l was most amusingly
puzzled by hearing of “ creeks ” far away from the coast, and
began to suspect my geography to be in fault, when I soon found
them to be what in England we should call a brook or rivulet.
Orange-groves and vineyards are numerous in the vicinity of
Parramatta, and supply the “ metropolis ” with the chief of its
fruit. Various kinds of oranges are grown, both sweet and bit-
ter ; among the latter, a very small one, called the mandarin
orange, is a pretty and fragrant fruit, and makes a delicious pre-
serve. The lemons are very different from those used in England,
being much the shape of an ill-formed Seville orange, but well-
flavoured and juicy.
Some of the houses are covered with vines, and the verandas
of others richly tapestried with jasmine, woodbine, roses, and
climbing plants of every description. The church is a singular-
looking edifice, having two blunt spires, one of which only is
surmounted with the usual vane and weathercock. The Court-
house has a handsome Grecian portico of cut stone, and the “ fac-
tory,” or house of correction for female prisoners, the hospital,
schools, and other public institutions are large establishments,
* “It is New Holland—where it is summer with us, when it is winter in
Europe, and vice versa; where the barometer rises before bad weather, and
falls before good ; where the north is the hot wind, and the south the cold; where
the humblest house is fitted up with cedar ( Cedrela Toma ); where the fields
are fenced with mahogany (Eucalyptus robusta. ) ; and myrtle-trees (Myr-
tacece) are burnt for fuel; where the swans are black, and the eagles are
white; where the kangaroo, an animal between the squirrel and the deer, has
five claws on its fore-paws, and three talons on its hind-legs, like a bird, and
yet hops on its tail [lt is almost needless to say that this absurd idea has
long been exploded.—L.M.]; where the mole (Ornithorhynchus paradoxus) lays
eggs, and has a duck’s bill; where there is a bird ( Melliphaga ) which has a
broom in its mouth, instead of a tongue; where there is a fish, one half be-
longing to the genus liaia, and the other to that of Squalus; where the
pears are made of wood (Xylomelum pyriforme), with the stalk at the broader
end; and where the cherry (Exocarpus cupressiformis) grows with the stone
on the outside.”


It I never was within any of them, although subsequently re-
ino- in the neighbourhood for some time.
After passing a particularly pretty garden, in which stood a
i K low house, with a spacious piazza in front, I was surprised
Mr. Meredith’s driving up to the door, and still more so on
iding that this was our inn, where we had engaged rooms. 1 y
lief that it was a private residence was natural enough, for the
m of the “ Red Cow ” on the roof had escaped my notice;
It we were most comfortably accommodated in every way.
he garden was full of beautiful flowers, particularly the
■i ff ht scarlet blossoms of the pomegranate, the soft and Ira-
rant oleander, and quantities of pink and crimson china-roses,
ai enormous prickly-pear (Cactus. opuntta?) grew near the
ouse (I think it must be twenty feet high), and was full o
ellow blossoms and dark red fruit, in picking up some of whic.i
o taste, 1 stuck my gloves so full of the fine penetrating prickles
hat it was some days before I extracted them all from my hands.
Two beautiful birds were living tame in the garden ; they were
ailed curlews, but I doubt if correctly. They were much t e
bape of the avosetta, with long straight legs, long straight bill,
t prettily-marked brown plumage, and the finest eyes I ever saw
n any but the eagle or hawk tribe. The female was very shy,
having had her nest and eggs repeatedly destroyed by mischievous
boys and visitors; but the male was very familiar, fo lowing us
aU about, uttering a plaintive cry, which I afterwards used to
hear frequently at night near our own residence, where they were
very numerous, though scarcely ever seen. , ,
Several of the native parrots were caged m the veranda, an
talked a little; one kind, as large as the grey and green parrots
SO often seen in England kept as pets, tad a elegant pin-
maee the back, wings, and upper part of the tail being pa e
lavender-colour, and the breast and tai Uinings the most delicate
ptak Beside tkese hung the prison of a lovely little creature,
railed the Bathurst parrot or parroquet, or, as I named it then,
and have done ever since, the “ painted lady,' as on each cheek (or
whatever ornithologists call the part of a birds face which c
responds to that human feature) there is a round spot of soft crim-
son orange-colour ; the rest of the fair lady s attire being blnis
lavender, with a pale primrose-coloured breast; a ong ai , « .


pretty sly eyes, make her one of the most beautiful of this nu-
merous and gay tribe of birds. In the streets, too, we met a
“ natiy e companion,” or gigantic crane, walking about perfectly
tame and fearless, being a sort of general pet among the inhabi-
tants ; he was between three and four feet high, and his enormous
bill, keen eyes, and grave demeanor gave him a most sapient and
dignified appearance as he stalked along, peering about, and some-
times pausing before one of the shop-doors, to take a more minute
survey of matters within. But the chief glory of Parramatta
in the bird-line is now, alas ! no more. This was a tame mag-
pie at one of the inns, of whose fluent conversation and wonder-
ful ventriloquism I have heard most surprising stories, but I
never saw the prodigy myself.
On quitting Parramatta the following day, w r e passed near
Government House, which is beautifully situated in a fine do-
main, and frequently visited by the governor. Sir. Maurice
O’Connell, commander of the forces in Australia, now resides
there. The road to Penrith passes occasionally through pleasant
scenery, though chiefly monotonous enough, and the intense heat
made me almost incapable of enjoying anything; added to which,
the indescribable chirruping, creaking, and whirring of myriads
of grasshoppers more properly), that seemed to fill
all space around us, was almost intolerable; and what was very
extraordinary, these unwelcome musicians were wholly invisible,
nor could the most rigid observation detect them. They seemed
to be a little below the surface of the loose dusty soil, and ceased
their noise when I approached them. I afterwards detected some
of their kindred at Bathurst, at least the voices were the same,
and found them to be insects of the true grasshopper shape, with
small wings, and about an inch long; but these colonies swarm
with an immense variety of these long-legged insects of all sizes,
from a quarter of an inch to two inches in length, and of all
colours; brown in every shade (particularly the tints of withered
grass and dead gum-leaves), green of the brightest hues, grey,
black, reddish, and purple. Many of the large ones are very
handsome and curious creatures.
Penrith is a long village, containing a few pretty, and many
new, raw-looking houses, profusely adorned with green paint on
the windows, shutters, verandas, and railings, and some had


very nice flower-gardens in front. We drove through the town
to an inn some distance beyond it, close to the ferry over the
Nepean, the first river I had seen in the colony, and the only
one I did see there. The fine view of the Blue Mountains, rising
beyond the level Emu Plains on the other side the river, beguiled
me into walking in a garden on the banks till driven away y
the clouds of mosquitoes ; and as we sat in the veranda alter
dusk, I observed a single bright fiery spark glancing swiftly
about in front of the house, now rising high into the air, and
again falling, darting quickly to and fro, and occasionally rest-
ing a few seconds. On inquiry, I was told it was a fire-fly ; bu
I was not aware that the bright creatures were found m New
South Wales, nor did I ever observe more than this one.
I was told of an amusing incident which occurred to a new
arrival during our stay. The traveller in question, putting on a
most important aspect, walked into the stable, where the ostler
was busy in his various duties, and pointing to a horse, inquire
if he had been fed. “ Yes, sir.” “ Give him another feed
now directly.” It was done. “ Now, ostler, let that horse be
ready for me at six o’clock to-morrow morning. Do youi hear.
« That horse, sir? That isn’t your horse, sir !” “No . ihen
which is my horse ?” The steed was pointed out, and the pro-
prietor departed. “ Who is that person?” asked Mr. Meredith
of the grinning functionary. “ Can’t say, sir; but I reckon le s
a gen’leman wot’s newly cotched !
Early the following morning we resumed our journey, in com-
pany with a friend with whom we had arranged to travel the
remainder of the way. Ourselves, carriages, and horses were
safely ferried over the Nepean in a large punt, or railed raft, and
landed on the opposite bank, when we drove merrily along
the Emu Plains, so named no doubt from the flocks of emu for-
merly found there ; but as civilized, and therefore doubly destruc-
tive, man advances in a new country, he invariably exterminates
or scares away the timid creatures that have for ages dwelt there
undisturbed ; and now these noble birds have become unknown,
except in the almost untrodden districts of the interior I saw
two tamed ones in a part of the government domain at Sydney,
they are most noble-looking birds, and seemed quite happy m the
comparative freedom they enjoyed. Their eggs are of a nc i


dark-green colour, with a rough surface, like the rind of a coarse
orange, or shagreen, and are about the size of those of an ostrich,
which bird the emu resembles in general appearance, though
handsomer and less awkward.
We had a fine view of the long range of the Blue Mountains
before us, and of the abrupt gorge through which the Nepean
Hows before reaching Penrith. This pass is described as being
extremely grand on a nearer approach, as indeed it must be, from
the perpendicular height of the mountains, and the large volume
of water pouring through so narrow a channel.
After driving for about two miles over the level plains, we
reached the foot of Lapstone Hill, the first ascent, up which an
excellent road has been made, winding along the side of the
mountain, with high overhanging rocks on the left hand and a
deep wooded ravine on the right. The wild scenery and the
zigzag road reminded me of some of the “ passes of the Alps,”
as drawn by Brockedon, save that our ravine had no foaming
torrent roaring down it; and it was only by most intent observa-
tion that I could detect something like moisture trickling over
the rocks, where an opening in the trees left the far-down stony
bed visible.
It was October, and, as I have before remarked, the spring
months are by far the greenest in this land of ever-browns;
so that I saw the country under rather favourable circumstances,
although the severe droughts of the two preceding years had de-
stroyed the artificial crops, and even the native grasses, to a
deplorable extent. Still, among these lofty mountains and in
their shady recesses the trees and shrubs grew in unchecked
luxuriance, and yielded me many a new and beautiful flower. As
we slowly wound up the steep ascent, and the folding hills nar-
rowed the view behind us, the scene was most picturesque and
striking. Far on before us we could see the white-gleaming road
still climbing higher and higher; looking back, the plains,
reduced to a triangular section by the closing hills, were fast
receding from the landscape; gigantic crags, piled high overhead,
were mingled with an endless variety of tree, shrub, and flower;
and far below, from the depths of the ravine, the opposite side of
the pass rose almost perpendicularly, till its upper trees seemed
to cut against the bright, unclouded, blue sky I was quite de-


lighted, and thought that if all our progress over the dreaded
Blue Mountains were as pleasant and interesting as the com-
mencement, the journey would be much less wearisome than I
anticipated.
I had often been told of the “ waratah ” ( Telopea speciocissima ),
and its grand appearance when growing; and as we drove along,
instantly recognised from the description the first of these magni-
ficent flowers we saw, and soon after came more into their especial
region, which is about half-way up the height of the mountains,
few being seen either far above or below this range. From the
temperature, I should think their cultivation at home would be
easy, and it would well repay some pains to have such noble
flowers added to the treasured wealth of English gardens. The
stem is woody, and grows perfectly straight, from three to six
feet in height, about the thickness of a walking-cane, and bearing
rich green leaves (something like those of the oak, but much
larger) all the way up. At the top of this stem is the flower,
entirely of the brightest and richest shade of crimson-scarlet. A
circle of large spreading petals forms its base, from which rises
the cone or pyramid of trumpet-like florets, three, four, or five
inches high; the whole flower being much the size and shape of
a fine artichoke. Sometimes the stems branch off like a candela-
brum, but more generally the flowers grow singly, one on each
stalk, and look like bright flambeaux amidst the dark recesses of
these wild forests. Unfortunately I had no opportunity of mak-
ing a drawing of one, having no materials at hand on our journey,
and failed to procure a flower during our stay in Sydney. The
few plates I have seen give but a very faint idea of this most
stately and regal flower.


CHAPTER VIII.
A “Country Inn”—Breakfast—Contrasts—A Bush Ramble and digression
about Ants —Mountain Scenery—’Cattle-skeletons—“ Weather-board ” Inn
—Supper and Night at “Blind Paddy’s”—Mountains and the Surveyor’s
Roads—Mount Victoria—Convict-gangs and Bush-rangers—lnn at the
“ Rivulet” and its Inhabitants —The ruling Vice.
After driving for some miles nearly all up-hill, we stayed to
breakfast at a small way-side public-house, where the slovenly
slipshod women, dirty floors, and a powerful odour of stale
tobacco-smoke, gave me no very favourable expectations of
cleanliness or comfort. On the smoke-stained walls hung some
very highly coloured and showily framed prints, representing
young gentlemen with red cheeks and very blue coats trying to
look very hard at young ladies in pink gowns with very large
sleeves ; and severally inscribed, “ The Faithful Lovers “ The
Betrothed“ The False One,” &c.; ingenious distinctions of
character, which it would have been extremely difficult to dis-
cover from the portraits alone.
In many places you find some particular dish more generally
in vogue than others, but in New South Wales one universal
reply follows the query of “ What can you give us to eat ?” and
this is, “ ’Am an’ eggs, Sir“ mutton-chops ” forming the
usual accompaniment, if required. So ham and eggs we had,
and mutton-chops too ; but from their being fried all together, in
the same dark-complexioned fat, the taste of these viands was
curiously similar, and both of impenetrable hardness. Unless
great care is taken, meat spoils so soon in this climate, that the
custom among most persons is to cook it almost as soon as killed,
which of course precludes the possibility of its being tender.
Tea, with black sugar, but no milk, and bread without butter,
completed the repast, with the addition of “ damper,” a composi-
tion respecting which there are divers opinions, some persons
preferring it to bread, whilst I think it the worst way of spoil-


ing flour. The etymology is perhaps “ Darnpier,” this indigestible
food (an excellent damper of a good appetite) being supposed
by some persons to have been invented by the great circumnavi-
gator, and the manufacture is this:—A stiff dough is made of
flour, water, and salt, and kneaded into a large flat cake, two or
three inches thick, and from twelve to eighteen broad. The
wood-ashes are then partially raked from the hot hearth, and the
cake being laid on it, is heaped over with the remaining hot
ashes, and thus bakes. When cut into, it exceeds in closeness
and hard heaviness the worst bread or pudding I ever tasted,
and the outside looks dirty, if it is not so: still, I have heard
many persons, conversant with every comfort and luxury, praise
the “ damperso I can only consider my dislike a matter
of taste. In “ the bush,” where brewer’s yeast cannot be pro-
cured, and people are too idle or ignorant to manufacture a sub-
stitute for it (which is easily done), this indurated dough is the
only kind of bread used, and those who eat it constantly must
have an ostrich’s digestion to combat its injurious effects.
At the period of which I am writing, wheat in Sydney had
reached the exorbitant price of 10Z. 16s. per quarter, to which
every mile of distance from thence added cost, and this naturally
induced every one to economize flour as much as possible; accord-
ingly ground maize, boiled rice, and other things were added to
the bread for this purpose, making it hot, bitter, or unpleasantly
moist, as the case might be, but I do not remember seeing one
instance of the flour being used unsifted, as it is in so many
families at home, from motives of health or preference, although
it might have been so used at such a time of dearth with manifest
advantage.
Adjoining to this comfortless habitation (called an inn) was
a small plot of potato-ground, but no attempt at neatness or
improvement was visible; all was slovenly and neglected. The
dirt and indescribable combination of ill smells within, was but
a type of the state of things without. In the rear of the house
one vast undistinguished rubbish-heap spread around, bounded
only by some wretchedly dilapidated outhouses and stables, and
reeking with foul exhalations, on which, and its more tangible
delicacies, a large conversazione of pigs seemed to luxuriate most
satisfactorily. Several children were lying or lounging about in
F 2


close companionship with the pigs, equally dirty, but apparently
less lively. Miserable creatures ! I thought of the contrast between
them and children in a similar station at home, for this wretched
place would rank with the “ Lion” or “ Traveller’s Rest” of a
country village in England, with its couple of clean white-draped
spare chambers, and its gay best parlour as neat and bright as a
new pm. The landlady, a rosy comely dame with a cap of
driven snow and smart flowered gown; the landlord, in cords
and blue stockings, velveteen coat, and sturdy figure, a beau ideal
of an English yeoman; and the children—most of them are at
school, but the rest, what clean, shiny, red, laughing, frolicsome
young rogues they are! Look on this picture and on that I
No—not again ; so whilst my companions enjoyed their cigars in
the cobwebbed veranda, I crossed the road, and was at once
in the wild bush, where I rambled for some time, interested by
everything around me, though careful to keep tolerably near the
house. Strange birds were fluttering and whistling in the trees;
thousands of grasshoppers, large and small, leaped up wherever
I went, tumbling down again in their helpless way, with all
their legs abroad, and taking a few seconds to gather themselves
into place again for a fresh jump; myriads of ants, of various
sizes and species, were as busy as ants always are, running hither
and thither, up and down the smooth-barked gum-trees, in long
lines reaching from the ground far beyond my sight into the tall
branches ; and here and there, near some old or fallen tree, a swift
little lizard would dart into his hole, giving me barely time
enough to see that he was not a snake, of which fearful creatures
I have a just and most intense terror.
In the course of this and the following day’s journey we passed
many of the gigantic ant-hills common in some parts of New
South Wales. They are great conical heaps of finely worked
earth cemented into a hard mass, and from six to ten feet high,
with no visible orifice outside, nor did I see a single ant about
them, though I closely examined several. I have been told they
are the work of a white ant, and, from their magnitude, should
suppose them the habitation of a species of termite. When cut
open, they display numerous small cells, but on our journey I
had neither time nor inclination to destroy and investigate their
domestic arrangements myself. The earth of which these ant-


hills are formed, is so finely prepared by the little architects
that it is used by the settlers in the neighbourhood as plaster,
and frequently as cement for floors. Many various kinds of ants
inhabit New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land; I know
about a dozen species myself. One is a very formidable-looking
personage, full an inch long, with a shiny coat of mail gleam-
ing purple and blue, and a threatening sting, which I am told
inflicts a most painful wound, as severe as that of the hornet.
Besides these are several other large kinds, some entirely black,
others with red heads, bodies, or legs. One, with black body and
yellow forceps, not only acts on the defensive, but openly
attacks any one passing too near him, by jumping at them, and
stinging or biting severely ; I have often been surprised to ob-
serve the distance they can spring when irritated or disturbed.
Of the smaller kinds the numbers “are as the sands upon the sea-
shore.” They swarm in every part of the bush, and infest houses
to an intolerable degree. In our house near Sydney, and also
our present residence in Van Diemen’s Land, I have been
excessively annoyed by them ; not an atom of anything sweet can
be hidden from their attacks : sideboard, pantry, storeroom,
cellar, and kitchen, are all alike besieged by the industrious little
torments. They bury themselves in sugar, and drown in jam,
cream, custards, or tarts; and their odour and taste are so in-
describably nauseous, that their repeated visitations become rather
expensive. Setting the forbidden viands in vessels of water
seemed a perfect remedy, but still the ants gained access to them,
and to my amazement I saw whole squadrons of the tiny black
army deliberately marching across the water, and climbing the
dishes within. Some particles of dust had no doubt fallen on the
surface, and enabled them to step over dry. Ants are certainly
most interesting creatures (always providing they preserve a
respectful distance from one’s grocery and sweetmeets), and in
the bush I often watch them with great pleasure and without an
idea of disturbing them. One day I observed a bright yellow
circle on the ground, and on stooping to see what it might be,
discovered a quantity of the golden-coloured petals of a small
kind of cistus which grew near, neatly cut up into little bits
(about the sixteenth of an inch wide), heaped all round an ant-
hole, and crowds of my tiny household foes or their relatives busy


in various ways. Some were running about the low branches of
the cistus bushes, carrying fragments of the petals towards the
heap ; others, busy “ getting in” the harvest, would come up
the hole, seize on a bit of the treasure, and, with the aid of
four or five more, pull it down below. Sometimes two parties
would bring their burden just to the opening at the same
moment, and as the passage was only wide enough for one
set at a time, a furious and determined, struggle took place
as to which should first succeed, which, like many disputes
among larger animals, seemed to make up in violence what it
wanted in magnitude. I watched the indefatigable little crea-
tures for some time, until I became quite cramped from my
crouching position, and still the same routine of business went on
with unabated activity.
« Mais revenons a nos moutons !”—We continued our journey
through a wild and barren country, utterly destitute of herbage ;
the inhospitable Blue Mountains were before, behind, and on
either side of us, rising in grand and dreary monotony of form
and colour. Forests of tall gum-trees covered them from base
to peak, but instead of a beauty in the landscape, these were a
deformity. All bore the marks of fire far up their branchless,
blackened stems, and in many places the burning had been so
recent, that for miles the very earth seemed charred, and not
even a stunted shrub had sprung up again. The trees, huge
masses of charcoal to all appearance, had no branches till very
near the summit, and these bore only a few scattered tufts of
rusty leaves, scarcely casting a visible shadow, and affording no
shade. The steepest ravines had not the semblance of water
in their dry dreary depths, and but for the fearful quagmires
and deep holes in the road (which made the utmost care in driving
requisite to avoid an upset over the precipice), one would not
have thought that rain or dew ever visited this desert region.
The main portion of the road is had beyond an English com-
prehension ; sometimes it consists of natural step-like rocks pro-
truding from the dust or sand one, two, or three feet above each
other, in huge slabs the width of the track, and over these
“ jumpers” as they are pleasantly termed, we had to jolt and
bump along as we best might. How our springs stood such
unwonted exercise is an enigma still; but as a vehicle of the ba-


rouche species, crammed in every imaginable corner with live
freight and luggage, had passed the inn whilst we were at break-
fast, I am inclined to think that springs in colonial use must br
made of sterner stuff than I had hitherto given them credit for.
The track we were now traversing usually winds terrace-wise
along the side of a steep mountain, and is barely wide enough any-
where to allow of two vehicles passing each other. All the produce
of the settlers in the upper country is conveyed to Sydney by this
road, and farm supplies taken up from thence: therefore it is no
uncommon thing to meet a train of six or eight heavily laden
drays (for the continual depredations of bush-rangers render it
advisable that several should travel in company), each drawn by
eight, ten, or twelve oxen; and to encounter such a caravan
on the narrow mountain road is by no means a desirable incident.
The patience and docility of the ox are justly proverbial, but un-
fortunately colonial drivers are less gifted with these virtues, and
their violence, ill-temper, and brutal usage often seem to bewilder
the poor weary creatures, who, having no harness but bows and
yokes, twist round and entangle themselves, much to their own
peril and that of any passing horses or carriages. We once
narrowly escaped a serious accident from this cause, by driving
down the bank, steep as it was, out of the way.
Two years of desolating drought had preceded our arrival in
Sydney, and the melancholy proofs of its ravages among the
brute creation met us here at every turn, in the remains of un-
fortunate oxen, that had perished of want in their toilsome
journeys over the mountains, where neither food nor water re-
mained for them; and as the dray-journeys from the distant sta-
tions to Sydney occupy from three to six weeks, the lingering,
protracted misery endured, even by the wretched animals who
survived, is horrible to contemplate. In some places by the road
side white skeletons alone remained ; farther on we saw other car-
casses still covered with hide ; then bones again; and so on, con-
tinually meeting these terrible proofs of the poor brutes’ suffer-
ings and death. It recalled to my mind descriptions I have read
of the caravan-tracks in the sandy deserts of Africa, where the
bleached bones of animals that have perished in the journey
serve as guides to future travellers.
The climate changed materially as we gained the higher re-


g-ious of the mountains, becoming quite cold, and I gladly
wrapped up in cloaks and furs ; our companion, who usually drove
within hail of us, retired into a grotesque cloak-hood-and-coat
sort of a garment, made of the thick furry opossum-skins of the
Colony, and looked like an exaggerated Esquimaux, as we caught
a glimpse of his portly figure now and then through the thick
flurries of sleety rain that swept round us, the sudden squalls
being too furious for any umbrella to live in them. So, laughing
merrily (when the wind did not take our breath away), we drove
briskly on, our destination for the night being the “Weather-
board ” inn (so named from its being built, like many houses in
the Colony, wholly of wood, the avails consisting of thin boards
lapped one over another, nailed to upright slabs or posts, and
lathed and plastered within). What was my dismay, as I was
just ready to alight, cold, tired, and hungry, at the door of this
mountain refuge for the destitute, on our being informed that
the house was full, and not a sleeping-place to be had ! A native
settler returning from Sydney to Bathurst with his wife and
family were in possession of all the accommodation. These were
the occupants of the loaded carriage I had seen, who, with more
foresight than ourselves, had pushed on as rapidly as possible in
advance, and seized upon the whole establishment. After a short
debate it w ; as determined to go on six miles farther, to a smaller
hostel, known as “ Blind Paddy’s,” though it was nearly dark,
and raining fast. However, on we went, “ through bush and
through brier,” to say nothing of holes and rocks in the road ;
and in process of time, long after dark, reached our little inn, very
wet, and colder and hungrier than ever. A couple of decent
elderly women appeared to do the honours, and ushered us into a
small but clean whitewashed room, gaily adorned with feathers,
shells, and the droll little pictures usually found in such houses :
a bright wood-fire was soon crackling and blazing merrily on the
white hearth; the homely table was quickly spread with a coarse
but snowy cloth, and supper most expeditiously prepared, con-
sisting of the never-failing dish “ ham and eggs,” chops, damper,
tea, and—crowning luxury of all—a dish of hot mealy potatoes,
smiling most charmingly through their cracked and peeling
skins. Wine in such houses as this is rarely drinkable, but ex-
cellent English ale (at 3s. 6c?. per quart bottle) is generally found


in them, so that our repast was by no means contemptible, and
flie air of plain homely cleanliness about the arrangements added
to all an unwonted relish.
A tolerable night’s rest in a room about the size of our ship-
cabin, with a clean dimity bed and window-curtains, and no worse
nocturnal visitants than a moderate party of the universal “ light
infantry,” left me quite recruited and ready for setting forth
again on our onward journey, after a breakfast very similar to
our supper, or rather dinner, of the preceding evening.
Our route still lay through the same wild, monotonous scenery
as the day before. The sight of vast mountain-ranges spread
all around, folding in and behind each other as if they filled all
space, could not be otherwise than grand in the extreme, but it
was most dreary, desolate grandeur. Trees without foliage, hills
and valleys alike destitute of verdure, chasms and ravines yawn-
ing beside us, without a thread of w r ater in their arid, stony
depths, made up such a world of desolation, that the contempla-
tion of it became absolutely oppressive, and I gladly listened
to glowing descriptions of the green and beautiful plains of
Bathurst, which we were to reach the following day.
In one place w r e came to an almost precipitous descent in the
road, called “ Soldier’s Pinch,” or “ Pitch,” most probably from
some accident which has happened there. It was a mass of loose
stones, continually rolling from under the horses’ feet, and so
steep as to be very fatiguing even to walk down, which I pre-
ferred doing, not being quite reconciled to such roads for driving
on. At the foot lay huge masses and heaps of wood, trees of all
sizes having been hooked on to the drays at the summit of the
Pitch, to prevent their rushing down suddenly, despite locked
wheels, and overrunning the unfortunate oxen. If Major
M'tchell, when Colonial Surveyor, had turned his attention
and directed his men’s labour to such places as this, and reme-
died their dangerous character, he would have rendered great and
essential service to the colonists ; but in the generality of instances
his road has been made where a good bush-track formerly existed,
and the really bad and dangerous portions remain in very many
instances untouched—at least such was the case when I crossed
the mountains. I could not avoid noticing likewise, that Major
Mitchell’s road, wherever originally marked by him, was almost


invariably carried over the summits of hills, whilst level valleys
lay within a few hundred feet; and as we proceeded, I looked
out for the highest peaks ahead of us, knowing by experience that
the surveyor’s road would lead us over them. I was informed
that a determination to adopt no other person’s suggested line of
road was the reason of this most inconvenient and fatiguing
route being resolved on, and I have since heard that a new sur-
vey is to be made, and a more level and rational track marked out.
The only portion of the present road for which I can give
Major Mitchell great credit is the Pass of Mount Victoria,
by far the most grand and striking scene in this mountain region.
A s we approached it, a huge barrier of rocks seemed to close up
the onward path, till a sudden turn showed us a gorge cut in them,
through which we drove, with a high wall of crags on the right
hand and the lofty summit of the mount towering up on the
left. Another turn brought us out of the chasm, and in full
view of a most grand and beautiful landscape. The road was
carried (from the opening of the chasm) by an arch and em-
bankment across a deep valley that lay below, called the Vale
of Clwydd, and along the side of the opposite mountain, till it
gradually reached the level of the valley beyond. We stayed
some minutes on the embankment to enjoy the prospect, so re-
freshing to eyes weary of the dark desolate sterility of the scenes
we had just emerged from. On the left hand, the high rocky
range of which Mount Victoria forms a part nearly enclosed the
narrowing valley, the lower portions being overgrown with gum
and wattle ( Acacia ) trees, amidst which grotesque rocks rose
up here and there like fantastic ruins. From the deep water-
courses that were plainly visible on the mountain-sides, the
stream running through the vale must sometimes be considerable ;
but at the time we passed it was dry, and its tolerably green
banks, shadowed by groups of graceful young gum-trees, had
quite a smooth and lawn-like aspect as compared with the rough
country around. On the right hand the same long range of pre-
cipitous rugged heights continued, stretching away to the north-
east ; and safely girdled by their fortress-like and frowning walls
lay the pretty vale of Clwydd.
Clustering richly about the shrubs near Mount Victoria I first
the lovely “ native indigo” of New South Wales (Kenne-


dm ovata ?). It is a delicate little climbing plant, with slender
stems, long, narrow, blunt leaves, and a profuse quantity of smad,
violet-blue pea-shaped flowers, growing in long sprays, and
completely clothing any bush or fence where it flourishes. We
had alighted on the archway, to enjoy the view at leisure, and I,
as usual, indulged my rambling and scrambling propensities by
a descent into the ravine below, where I found many lovely
flowering shrubs, including some dozen species of acacia, some of
them very fragrant.
A. large gang of convicts were stationed here road-making,
and several of them importuned us for money or tobacco, show-
ing such truly villainous countenances that the idea of being
waylaid by bush-rangers gained tenfold horror, and the know-
ledge that many were out made me often look very earnestly
at a misshapen gum-log or crooked tree, fancy transforming it
to u a highwayman, with pistols as long as my arm. In one
place, we met a couple of soldiers in search of some newly-
escaped convicts ; they were running about in a half-stoopmg
position, peeping and thrusting their fixed bayonets into every
thin bush and low tussock of grass where a man could not by
any possibility be hidden, with most valorous resolves no doubt,
but cutting rather a ludicrous figure. lam not aware if they
succeeded in their chace, but have strong suspicions that they
did not.
A comparatively level road succeeded to the grand mountain
pass, and we journeyed on to our mid-day resting-place, called
the “ Rivulet,” the little stream at this place being by some re-
markable accident rightly named. A new, glaringly smart-
lookino- inn here promised tolerable accommodation; it was as
fine as twenty differently coloured kinds of paint could make it.
Panellings and “ pickings-out” of rainbow hues were set off by
pillars of imitative and varnished marble, the like of which no
quarry ever knew; and these again, touched up with bronze-
paint and gilding, gleamed in the sun with almost dazzling lustre.
A good veranda led by French windows to the two front rooms,
into which I walked, without seeing any inhabitants or attendants.
A few gaudily painted chairs, a small bad mirror m a large gi t
frame thickly shrouded in yellow gauze, and a new cedar table


covered with tobacco-ashes and liquor-stains, composed the fur-
niture of either apartment. After a long and ineffectual sonata
on the hand-bell (no other description being seen, save in a very
few of the very best colonial houses), just as I began to despair
of its power, a young girl shuffled along the hall from some of
the back settlements, and holding fast by the door-handle, for
she was almost too much intoxicated to stand, took my orders
for luncheon, and after many vain attempts at length succeeded
in wiping the table with a ragged, very dirty apron. Her dull
light-coloured hair hung in matted tangles about her neck and
ears; her dress was disordered, torn, and dirty; and her face
bloated and stupid from the effects of drink never did drunken-
ness wear a more revolting aspect, and I felt relieved when the
wretched creature left the room. My companions had a similar
tale to tell of the male portion of the establishment; every soul
was drunk, and it was some time before they could arouse any
one to attend to the horses. The same unfortunate girl I had
before seen, laid our cloth, and brought what we wanted, or
rather what we could get, for I imagine the copious libations
indulged in by the whole household had made them regardless
of eating, and the larder was accordingly very ill supplied.
Bread and a few eggs (positively without ham!), which our
ministering Bacchante rolled on the floor as she staggered in with
them, formed our repast, but she took pains to impress upon us
the pleasing assurance that “ There was plenty o’ ale an’ sperrits.”
We strolled down to the banks of the little rivulet, where I
found many beautiful flowering shrubs, and the verdure of the
adjacent little flats showed how excellent a garden might be made
there, but I fear never will; idleness and drinking are such be-
setting sins, and money to provide them both so easily earned by
44 keeping a public” in this Colony, that nothing demanding
bodily exertion is attempted. Meat can run about and feed itself
on the wild hills, and flour they can buy ; fruit and vegetables
they il don’t heed,” as they would demand some little labour to
produce.
As we returned towards the house, I looked at it again, as it
stood in raw, shiny, comfortless newness, like a great toy freshly
unpacked. Behind it lay a crowd of dirty, old, ruinous hovels,


that formerly served in its stead, and still were used as outhouses,
stables, &c., all broken, and half unthatched. All the fences
within sight exhibited the same dilapidated aspect, whilst ash-
heaps and other less sightly things lay all around. Plow different
would be the state of almost everything in this Colony, w r ere that
greatest curse man ever created out of God’s good gifts, intoxi-
cating liquor, less easily obtained by those who ought to be the
industrious and prosperous, but, alas ! too generally are the idle
and worthless part of the community. Time, money, character,
decency, feeling, principle, ambition, and honesty—all are sacri-
ficed to the demoralizing passion for rum, when once it gains the
ascendency ; and to know how often that is, we need only observe
and listen to the sad evidence so continually passing around us.
I perhaps praise the tidy appearance and good cookery of a
friend’s servant: “ Ah ! yes, she is an excellent cook, but we can
so seldom keep her sober” The coachman of another seems
quite a model for his class, till you hear he is so confirmed a
drunkard that his mistress dares not trust him to drive her home
alone from a party. Another family have an honest old “ major-
domo,” faithful and good in every other point; may be trusted
with “ untold gold,” but not with a bottle of rum. It is a uni-
versal failing, and a really sober servant or mechanic may con-
sequently be held as a pearl of great price. Age and sex make
no difference ; your dainty lady’s-maid or pretty young nurse-
girl is just as likely to be over-liberal in her libations to
Bacchus as your groom or shoeblack ; and no threats, no bribes,
no punishments avail to keep the besotted creatures from the
dram-bottle, if it be by any means or in any shape accessible. I
have known a female servant drink camphorated spirits of wine,
and suspect the same individual of consuming a pint of hartshorn
which mysteriously disappeared about the same time from my
room ; its evident strength being no doubt too tempting. Eau
de Cologne and lavender-water, I know, they drink whenever
they are left about, or anything else believed to contain spirit.
The universality of this vice is most dreadful to contemplate,
and far worse to witness and endure. Almost the only exceptions
among the lower classes are the families of English emigrants,
who, accustomed to poor living and hard work at home, continue
sober and industrious, thankful for the many hitherto unknown


comforts and luxuries they can enjoy, and carefully and fearfully
abstaining from all excess. Of this class I have known excellent
examples, both old and young, male and female, and can only
hope that in time their better and wiser course may be ap-
preciated and emulated by other portions of this now numerous
population.


CHAPTER IX.
‘•Hassan’s Walls” —Grass-trees —Mount Lambey—Victoria Inn—Specimen
of Benevolent Politeness—Colonial Bridges—First View of Bathurst
The “ Settlement”—Dearth—Climate—Hot Winds—Processions of Whirl-
winds—Hurricanes.
Ouk road now lay over hilly ground again, sometimes skirted by
live trees and a slight semblance of herbage, and often approach-
ing in wild and sterile grandeur the scenery we had before tra-
versed. A singular range of perpendicular cliffs form a striking
feature in the landscape at a place called “ Hassan’s Walls.’
These walls or cliffs rise, I should think, to a height of about
300 feet perpendicularly above the road, and their summits,
broken and fissured in various fantastic forms, exactly resemble a
ruined castle crowning the brow of the sheer precipice, with
here and there a stunted tree or graceful shrub growing from
crevices in the dark rock. Had I been travelling in an old
country, I should at once have decided that these were truly the
ruins of some mighty mountain-fortress of former days; loop-
holes, arches, battlements, and buttresses were, as it seemed, so
clearly remaining, and extending far along the airy heights of
these genii-haunted crags, for such I half fancied them, especially
when a turn in the road gave to view a colossal head standing
well out against the clear, bright, blue sky, and bearing a
strong resemblance to the venerable and veteran Duke of Wel-
lington. We paused to contemplate the rude though striking
likeness ; and then, as we slowly drove on, the features changed,
and a judge with a flowing wig stood frowning down on us;
another turn, and another change came over the mountain statue,
and then it again resolved itself into a mere turret of the hoary


ruin. I thought of the mysterious castle of St. John,* with its
wizard transformations, and of how much romance would attach
to these fantastic crags in a romantic or legendary country ; but
the existence of poetry or imagination in New South Wales is
what none who know and have felt the leaden influence of its
ledger and day-book kind of atmosphere would believe it guilty
of suffering.
The grass-tree (Xanthorrhcea arboreal) is one of the most
strikingly novel plants I observed in our mountain journey, and is
common in most hilly or rocky places both in New South Wales
and Yan Diemen’s Land. A young grass-tree appears merely a
large reedy-leaved plant without a stem, the leaves being very
long, narrow, and sharp, and growing erect for a foot or more,
then curving over and nearly touching the ground, forming
a thick boss or circle ; but as the tree becomes older, the lower
circles of leaves drop off, the young growth all rising from the
centre; and in time a thick stem appears, from one to eight or
ten feet in height, and two feet in circumference, rough with the
scars left by the fallen leaves, and bearing on its summit an im-
mense drooping cluster of foliage, which reminded me of a palm-
tree (although, it must be confessed, by rather a clumsy resem-
blance). From the centre of this cluster the scape rises like an
enormous bullrush or typha, frequently measuring ten feet and
* “ Midmost of the vale, a mound
Arose, with airy turrets crown’d,
Buttress, and rampire’s circling hound,
And mighty keep and tower.
Seem’d some primeval giant’s hand
The castle’s massive walls had plann’d.
* * * *
But the grey walls no banners crown’d;
Upon the watch-tower’s airy round
No warder stood his horn to sound ;
No guard beside the bridge was found;
And where the Gothic gateway frown’d,
Glanc’d neither bill nor bow.
* * * *
This dismal keep.
Which well he guess’d the hold
Of wizard stern, or goblin grim,
Or Pagan of gigantic limb,
The tyrant of the wold.”
For the magic and graraoury of the Castle, vide Sir Walter Scott’s * Bridal
of Triermain.’


more in height, the spike being about a foot long, of a yellowish
brown colour. Groups of this very singular plant often give a
picturesque and somewhat Oriental aspect to an otherwise unin-
teresting landscape, some being old, crooked and deformed,
hump-backed and knobby ; others erect and stately, bearing their
verdure like a royal diadem ; whilst the young ones, sitting close
to the ground in all humility, look up to their patriarchal neigh-
bours with the patient hope of one day rivalling their nobler
growth. A resinous gum exudes from the grass-tree, said to
resemble in great measure the “ dragon’s blood ” prepared from
the Pterocarpus and Calamus. Boiled with oil, it has, I believe,
been successfully used for covering the bottom of vessels, instead
of pitch. I have also heard that the natives cut out the pith of
the trunk to eat.
The next point of our route having any claim to the pictu-
resque was the rocky ravine at Cox’s Elver; the sight of clear
running water is always pleasant, but nowhere more delightful
than in so dry and thirsty a clime as this. The ruins of numer-
ous huts, formerly occupied by a convict-gang at this spot, gave
it rather a desolate look i but the clear little brook (for such in
England should we call this river) gurgling merrily over its
pebbly bed, had a sweet music in its voice that made me forget
all disagreeables. We tasted, and then crossed it, and imme-
diately began the steep ascent of Mount Lambey, which rises
abruptly from the river’s bank. This mount had been the highest
point in our landscape all day, and accordingly, despising all
humbler and easier tracks, over its very summit passes Major
Mitchell’s vaunted road. Seven long miles of climbing were
before us, up as bare, sterile a mountain as ever gloomed on a
wayfarer’s path. The rock is a splintery slate, not unlike many
in old South and North Wales, and its dark grey and purple hue,
stained in places with a rusty tinge, gave a dismal monotony to
the scene, which scarcely a shrub or herb appeared to relieve.
An inn has very wisely been built half-w r ay up this inhos-
pitable mountain, and there, at the auspicious sign of the Queen
Victoria, we purposed remaining the night, which was fast
approaching, for the rapid departure of twilight leaves little time
after sunset available for travelling. After a weary pull of four
miles, the gracious countenance of our fair Queen (somewhat
G


libelled by the artist, it is true) beamed on our most loyal and
rejoiced eyes from amidst a chaos of crown, sceptre, red drapery,
and ermine; and our tired horses, after a last resolute effort,
stopped at the inn door. At the same moment we heard a hand-
bell sharply and loudly rung within, and after a minute's delay
the landlord appeared at our summons, with the pleasing intelli-
gence that he was very sorry indeed, but he could not accommo-
date us. As it was impossible to proceed farther in this case,
there being no other habitation within a long stage, and our
horses knocked up, Mr. Meredith and Mr. Campbell declared
their determination to stay at all events; and again questioned
the landlord, who then admitted his own willingness to receive
us (and who of his class ever voluntarily rejected good cus-
tomers ?), which he could easily do at some trifling inconvenience,
but Mrs. (whose party had the preceding evening excluded
us from the “ Weather-board ”) was there, and the instant we
stopped had ordered that no one else should be admitted, as they
had taken all the house! This most overbearing monopoly, how-
ever, did not prevent our being comfortably installed in a snug
little parlour, and a tolerable bed-room, which some of the land-
lord’s family vacated for us, whilst the sofa in the sitting-room
was made up into a bed for our companion. lam well aware
that had we been known at the time, the conduct of this “ lady ”
would have been very different; but at such an hour, and in such
a place, no woman possessed of common humanity would have
desired to turn a. beggar from the door. The pride of wealth,
unmixed with aught of better or nobler feeling, is too often the
sole and engrossing principle and characteristic of persons raised
by some fortunate chance to that kind of rank which in these
Colonies, where the worship of Mammon reigns triumphantly, is
at once accorded to the rich : 11 What has he?” not “ What is
he ?” being the test; and this petty superiority is often the
foundation of absurd and selfish importance, of which the above
trifling incident is an apt illustration.
I am happy to say we found the members of this royal esta-
blishment sober, industrious, and civil; a most welcome contrast
to the inn at the Rivulet, and, despite our unpropitious reception,
were tolerably comfortable.
The following morning we again set forth, and after complet-


ing the ascent of Mount Larabey, proceeded to descend its oppo-
site side, a far more pleasing task, especially as the surrounding
country gradually assumed a less wild and inhospitable aspect.
There is one little peculiarity in Colonial bridges, at least those
usually met with on roads like the one of which I am treating,
which it may be proper to mention; namely, that it is always
far safer to plunge into the stream, morass, or ravine they stretch
across, and wade or scramble out the best way you can, horses,
carriage, and all, than to trust their treacherous and far more
dangerous conveniency, for, like the celebrated bridge planned by
Jack the Giant-killer for the destruction of the two-headed
Thundel, they are apt to part company just as the passenger has
passed too far to recede. In one place 1 remember seeing men
erecting a stone bridge, with strong, good masonry ; but the usual
contrivance of a few long poles, covered with turfs, is far from
satisfactory.
We rested about mid-day at a tidy public-house, which, al-
though the fair hostess is believed to suffer from the prevailing
thirst after strong drinks, we found very neat and clean; the
miniature apartments set forth with bright Birmingham tea-trays,
conch-shells, and the beautiful tail of the lyre pheasant, whilst
the whitewashed walls and dimity curtains preserved their purity
most surprisingly in this fly-tormented country. We had expe-
rienced the effects of the drought in the exorbitant charges made
for the horses at every place we stopped at; and here, for a few
handfuls of bad hay, ten shillings were added to the other items
of the bill.
Journeying on, we arrived in process of time at the spot whence
the first view of those lovely and verdant plains of Bathurst, of
which I had heard so much, was to greet my delighted eyes.
“ There, look ! Do you not see them through the trees ?”
I did look, anxiously and eagerly, directing my eye-glass to-
wards every point of the compass in succession ; still nothing green
could I discern, but on a nearer approach beheld a wide extent
of brown earth, with occasional flurries of dust passing across
it; and this was all that remained of the so-vaunted Bathurst
Plains ! Every blade of grass and every green herb had disap-
peared during the drought, and a dry desert usurped their place,
whilst a few thin, weak, widely-separated little roots of dry,
a 2


withering everlastings ( Gnaphalium ) were the only things bear-
ing the semblance of vegetation. It was very dreary !
We drove along the tedious road across the plains, which just
undulate enough in places to prevent a person from seeing en-
tirely over them, and that is all; no hill, grove, or tree, scarcely
a bush, breaks the heavy, weary monotony, till the tired eye
rests on the dim outline of the distant hills. -A.t length a few
straggling houses and a church showed us that we approached
the settlement; but as this is divided into two portions about a
mile asunder, with the deep channel which is sometimes (water
permitting) the river Macquarie between them, we had yet farther
to go. The second division of the township contains the gaol,
police-office, female factory, barracks, Scotch chapel, and bank,
with several stores and small shops of a most heterogeneous cha-
racter, where you may find iron pots, writing-paper, blonde lace,
fire-arms, Dutch cheese, “ P. coats,” crockery, and various other
commodities, though very rarely the one article you require.
The private dwellings are of all grades, but chiefly of the smaller
class; and the public-houses, as compared with the others, very
numerous.
The bank, then the residence of near relatives, was our desti-
nation, and most welcome to me were the happy quiet and rest of
the next few days, after our not very long, but tedious and
fatiguing journey.
Bathurst, being the last township on the “up-country road,” is
comparatively a place of some importance, and frequently visited
by settlers from the less civilized districts beyond, to whom
it is a kind of half-way metropolis, as well as being in their direct
road to Sydney, whence there is a mail-cart twice a week (the
distance being 120 miles) ; a strange-looking two-wheeled vehicle,
carrying the post, the driver, and two passengers when required.
Travelling both night and day, and over the chief part of the
delectable roads I have faintly described, at a hand-gallop, it is
not exactly the conveyance to be selected by nervous or com-
fortable persons. How the whole concern escapes destruction, at
least once a week, seems miraculous ; but with the favourite bush
assurance of “No fear, Sir!” away they go, driving at the pace
of a hunt over ground that would make a steeple-chaser look
twice ; and if there be no fear, there is certainly far less danger


than might be supposed, for I do not remember hearing of above
half a dozen accidents during our residence in the Colony.
We found Bathurst still suffering severely from the devas-
tating and ruinous consequences of the terrible drought. Every
article of food was extremely dear, and nothing good could be
procured at any price. IVleat was lean to staivation, and flour
liberally adulterated with various cheaper ingredients ; vegetables
there were none butter and milk, had long been but a name
and all horse corn, hay, &c., so extremely scarce, and exorbitantly
dear, that the neighbouring families had for some time ceased to
use their carriage-horses, the poor animals not having strength
to perform any work. The cost of a horse at livery was then one
pound per night, and it had recently been two pounds. Visiting
Bathurst under such peculiarly unfavourable circumstances, I
could not be expected to form any very high opinion of its beauties
or advantages ; every one told me how very charming a place it had
always been, and so I am bound to believe it was, and may be
again; but as I saw it, the inevitable impression on my mind was
of a most dreary and unpleasing character. Its position, in the
middle of a large plain, some twenty miles across, combines many
disadvantages, one of the greatest being the distance which all the
fire-wood used in the settlement has to be brought, and its conse-
quent high price; one pound being given for a small load, which
in most places in the Colony, where it costs nothing, would not
serve for more than a winter day’s consumption in a moderately-
sized household (indeed I believe more is burned in our kitchen
alone), but here a much greater economy is necessary ; and as
the cold is often as extreme here in winter as the heat is in sum-
mer, the scarcity of fuel is a serious evil.
I found the climate of Bathurst still less pleasant than that of
Sydney, as in the latter place, however oppressive be the heat, the
mid-day sea-breeze moderates it in some degree ; but the plains
of Bathurst (although considerably elevated), being shut m on all
sides by lofty ranges of mountains, must endure without any re-
lief their own oven-like atmosphere, the temperature of which is
frequently increased tenfold by a “ hot wind,” when it seems
as if a fiery blast from a huge furnace pervaded all space around,
rushing into the house through every opening with the force of
a hurricane. My English habit of flinging wide open all doors


and windows in warm weather, I here found (as a matter of
course, so near the antipodes) a most imprudent course to pursue,
as the only chance of preserving a moderately endurable exist-
ence during the continuance of the sirocco is, immediately on
its approach to shut every door and window, and with closely-
drawn blinds to await, as patiently and movelessly as half-suffo-
cated mortals may be expected to do, the abatement of the terri-
ble visitation. With us, however, a few hours of faintness, thirst,
and misery generally comprise the whole evil (though sometimes
the hot winds blow almost without intermission for several days),
but the luckless fields and gardens escape not so easily. Every
green thing looks as if a salamander had been held over it, either
drooping and dying, or dried up like half-burned paper. I have
seen large tracts of cultivated land, covered with luxuriant green
crops of wheat, barley, or oats just goi£g into ear, scorched,
shrivelled, absolutely blackened by the heat, and fit for nothing
but to cut as bad litter. Less important, though extremely vex-
atious, is the destruction caused in gardens, where the most deli-
cate and beautiful flowers are ever the first to wither under the
burning breath of this fervid Air-king.
These siroccos always blow from the north-west, and by
some persons are supposed to derive their heat from tracts of un-
known deserts in the intertropical regions of this island-continent.
Their power is felt strongly, though less frequently, in Van
Diemen’s Land. One might almost fancy the Ancient Mariner to
have experienced one during his ghostly voyage, he so accurately
describes their aspect: —
“ All in a hot and copper sky
The bloody sun at noon
Right up above the mast did stand, *
No bigger than the moon.”
I several times observed at Bathurst a phenomenon by no means
unusual on the large plains of New South Wales, in dry weather,
being a procession across them of tall columns of dust—whirl-
winds in fact, which preserve a nearly uniform diameter through-
out their whole length, the upper end seeming to vanish off, or
puff away like light smoke, and the lower apparently touching
the earth. They move in a perpendicular position, quietly
and majestically gliding along one after another, seeming, at the


distance I saw them, to be from seventy to a hundred feet
high, and about twenty broad. Thus viewed, they do not
appear to travel particularly fast, but Mr. Meredith tells me
he has vainly endeavoured to keep pace with them for a short
time, even when mounted on a fleet horse. When they are
crossing a brook or river, the lower portion of the dust is lost
sight of, and a considerable agitation disturbs the water, but im-
mediately on landing the same appearance is resumed. As some
vanish, others imperceptibly arise, and join the giant-waltz ; and
when I first observed this most singular display, I amused myself
by fancying them a new species of genii relaxing from their
more laborious avocations, and having a sedate and stately dance
all to themselves. When the dance ends, these dusty perform-
ers always appear to sit down among the neighbouring hills.
I never heard of these gregarious whirlwinds being at all mis-
chievous; they only pick up dust, leaves, little sticks, or other
light bodies, which whirl round in them with great velocity ; but
other and far more terrible visitations occur in the hurricanes,
which, like those of the western world, devastate the tract of
country over which they pass. Mr. Meredith, in returning from
his visit to the Murrumbidgee, encountered one of the most fear-
ful of these terrific tempests. At Bathurst on the same day we
had a violent thunder-storm, with a heavy fall of rain and large
hailstones, but the fury of the tempest passed chiefly near the
river Abercrombie. I shall avail myself of my husband s obser-
vations in his own words:—
“ I have often seen the effects of former hurricanes in New
South Wales, the indications being the total destruction of all trees
in the course the hurricane had taken, which course I generally
observed to be from the north-west. The length to which the
devastation extended I had no opportunity of estimating, but the
breadth averaged from 400 to 800 yards. On one occasion I
saw the spot where a hurricane had terminated in a whirlwind.
My companion and myself had ridden for some distance along the
path it had pursued, the direction of which was plainly indicated
by the trees it had uprooted in its course all lying one way; the
termination was as plainly shown by a circle, in which the trees
lay all ways; and such is their partiality, or rather, so clearly
are the boundaries of both hurricane and whirlwind defined, that


in cases where the blast did not reach the trunk of a tree, the
branches were torn off from one side, without uprooting the
stem.
“In the beginning of November, 1839, I was journeying
from Goulburn to Bathurst by the direct route of the Aber-
crombie river, through a wild country, covered almost entirely
with forests of very lofty gum-trees. On my departure from
Mr. McAllister’s station in the morning, the wind was blowing
strong, and the sky betokened tempestuous weather. As the day
advanced, the gusts of wind became more and more violent, occa-
sionally bringing down the branch of a tree. When I had
arrived within three or four miles of the Abercrombie river the
air became suddenly warm, and a few flashes of vivid lightning
accompanied by loud thunder denoted the approach of a storm.
A strong instinctive sensation of fear came over me, such as I
never before experienced ; and in a short time, perhaps a minute,
I heard a strange, loud, rushing noise; the air grew rapidly dark
and thick, and my horse was evidently, like myself, under the in-
fluence of intense fear, and trembling violently. I exclaimed
(although alone), ‘ This is a hurricane ! ’ and jumped off my horse
at the end of a fallen tree; the poor animal endeavoured to
shelter himself by backing under a growing tree, which I pre-
vented by a violent pull at his bridle, and then for the space of a
minute or two saw nothing; the hurricane, for such it was, had
reached me, and everything was in total darkness. I fell on my
knees, still holding my horse’s bridle. The roaring, crashing
sound was deafening, but it soon passed by, and the atmosphere
again became clear enough to admit of my observing surround-
ing objects. My horse and myself stood alone in what a few se-
conds before had been a high and dense forest; every tree was
prostrate, either broken or uprooted, including the one from
under which I had luckily pulled my horse, its ponderous trunk
lying within a few feet of us. Fortunately the track of the hur-
ricane was in the same direction as that in which the fallen tree
lay at the end of which I dismounted, and thus the small space
was left which saved us both. Immediately that the hurricane
had swept by, the rain fell in torrents, exceeding anything I
ever witnessed in the tropics, and a heavy gale continued for two
davs.”


The horse Mr. Meredith had with him then, a beautiful crea-
ture, and a great favourite, retained an evident recollection of
his terror in the hurricane long after—indeed, until we parted
with him, on leaving the Colony. If a branch of a tree only
lay before him in the road, or a twig blew across him, he
would look fearfully at it, start, snort, and tremble, which, as
he never used to notice such things before the occasion above
mentioned, we believed to be the result of some remembrance or
association in his mind. Perhaps the term mind is wrong as
applied to a brute, however noble in nature, but this evident
memory seems something above instinct.


CHAPTER X.
Bathurst Society and Hospitality—“ White Rock”—Native Dance and Cere-
mony—Kangaroo Dance —Appearance of Natives —Children —“Gins;”
their marriage-slavery and sufferings—Family Dinner-party—Adopted
Children—lnfanticide —Religion—“ Devil-devil” —Language—Story ot
Hougongand Jimmy—“ Ay, Ay ? ” —Duties of the Toilet Native Songs
Mimicry—Fondness for English Dress —Boundary Laws—Legal Parricide
—Habitual Treachery.
It savours strongly of an Irishism to say so, but the chief
inhabitants of Bathurst live at some distance from it; many of the
wealthy, and also higher class of settlers, having farms and good
residences within a few miles, which renders the society superior
to that of Colonial settlements in general. Nearly all are situ-
ated on the verge of the plains, combining both the flat and hilly
country in their surrounding scenery, and their gardens and vine-
yards, which at the time we were there were slowly recovering
their former verdure and luxuriance, seemed morsels of a brighter
world, when compared with the arid waste around the township.
Among these the pretty and picturesque residence of our good
and venerable friend Captain Piper is as ranch distinguished by
its beautiful situation as by the long-proved worth and hospitality
of its owner, than whom I heard of no person in New South
Wales more universally respected. Hospitality is so general a
feature in Australian society, and I remember with so much
pleasure the kind attentions which I, as a “ stranger in the land,”
received for my husband’s sake, that only a very remarkable pre-
eminence would induce me to break my prescribed rule of ab-
staining from all personal allusions in these pages.
About three miles from Bathurst, near a pretty cottage on the
Macquarie (in a district chiefly granite), is a singular group of
low rocks rising abruptly from the turf of the plains, and per-
fectly white ; they appeared to me to be masses of pure quartz,
of which many specimens occur a few miles higher up the river.


Pebbles of very clear quartz crystal are sometimes found in the
neighbourhood, but the natives search for them so successfully,
that I only picked up one or two small ones.
These crystals, although by no means rare, are preserved as
“ charms ” by the Aborigines, being given to them by their
doctors, or “ Crodjees,” after a variety of ceremonies, which Mr.
Meredith describes to me as highly absurd, he having been pre-
sent at the rites, when performed by a tribe at Dundunemawl
on the Macquarie, about forty miles below Wellington Yalley.
Great preparations were made, as for a grand Corrobbory, or
festival, the men divesting themselves of even the portions of
clothing commonly worn, and painting their naked black bodies
in a hideous manner with pipe-clay. After dark they lit their
fires, which are small, but kept blazing with constant additions
of dry bark and leaves, and the sable gentry assembled by degrees
as they completed their evening toilettes, full dress being painted
nudity. A few began dancing in different parties, preparatory
to the grand display, and the women, squatting on the ground,
commenced their strange monotonous chant, each beating accu-
rate time with two boomerangs. Then began the grand corrob-
bory, and all the men joined in the dance, leaping, jumping,
bounding about in the most violent manner, but always in strict
unison with each other, and keeping time with the chorus,
accompanying their wild gesticulations with frightful yells and
noises. The whole “ tableau ”is fearfully grand : the dark wild
forest scenery around —the bright fire-light gleaming upon the
savage and uncouth figures of the men, their natural dark hue
being made absolutely horrible by the paintings bestowed on
them, consisting of lines and other marks done in white and red
pipe-clay, which give them an indescribably ghastly and fiendish
aspect their strange attitudes, and violent contortions and
movements, and the unearthly sound of their yells, mingled
with the wild and monotonous wail-like chant of the w T omen,
make altogether a very near approach to the horribly sublime, in
the estimation of most Europeans who have witnessed an
assembly of the kind. In the midst of the performance on this
occasion, tw r o men advanced, bearing between them a large piece
of bark, about six feet high and three feet wide, rudely painted
with red and white clay, the design consisting of a straight line


down the middle, and diagonal ones thickly marked on each side.
The exhibition of this wonderful and mystic specimen of art
caused extreme excitement and admiration, and the bearers held
it in the midst of the dancers, who bounded and yelled around it
with redoubled energy. Presently the oldest “ Crodjee” present
approached the charmed bark, and walked slowly round and
round, examining it in every part, and then carefully smelling it,
up and down, before, behind, and on all sides, with grave and
reverential demeanour. This was to “ find where the charms
lay,” which charms, consisting of small crystals, he had of course
concealed about his person. After a great deal of smelling and
snuffing, he commenced violently sucking a part of the bark, and,
after some other manoeuvres, spat out a “ charm” into his hand,
and went on sucking for as many as w r ere then required.
These charmed crystals are kept with great care by the posses-
sor, his wife usually having charge of the treasure, which she carries
in the family “ wardrobe,” and the loss of one is esteemed an
awful calamity. The charm-sucking ceremony takes place at the
full moon, the time generally chosen by the natives for such cele-
brations. In this instance the Crodjee’s part of the performance
was very clumsily done, and Mr. Meredith asked one of the men,
the following day, “ if he were such a fool as to believe that the
Crodjee really sucked the crystals out of the bark ?” The fellow
winked, nodded, and looked wondrously wise, and intimated
that he certainly knew better, but that it would not do to say so.
And thus is fraud perpetuated, alike by savage and by civilized
men, and thus ever do policy and expediency take the place of
truth and honesty!
One of the aboriginal dances is called “ the Kangaroo dance,”
and one man, wearing a long tail, drops down on his hands and
feet, pretending to graze, starting to look about, and mimicking
the demeanour of the animal as nearly as possible; the others, in
t'm character of dogs and hunters, performing their part of the
play in a circle round him, at a very short distance.
The natives I saw at Bathurst were less ugly and better pro-
portioned than I expected ; the men being far superior to the
women, though none of them are tall or largely made; six feet is
a most extraordinary size among them. The sable picanninies
were naked, long-armed, large-stomached, little bodies, giving


one the idea of a new sort of spider; I never had seen a black
child before, and did not see enough of them then to familiarize
me with the novelty. Several of the men knew Mr. Meredith,
and whilst I was one day making some purchase in a store, one
of them accosted him at the door, pointing at the same time to
me. u Lady there, that Gin ’long o’ you? —Ay, Ay ? ’ “ Les,
that’s my Gin.”
“ Bel you got Gin (you have no Gin) ; poor fellow you you
no Gin !” A “ poor fellow ” meaning a bachelor, and the pos-
session of a wife, among them, being in fact equivalent to keep-
ing a servant, as the unfortunate Gins perform all the labour.
Judging from what I have heard, I imagine that their marriage-
customs are as truly savage as any other of their strange cere-
monies. Polygamy is general among all who can attain the
desirable wealth of several wives, though few have more than
two living with them at one time.
Female children are sometimes “ promised ” in infancy to
their future husbands (frequently decrepit old men), and others
appear to be taken by means of force and ill usage, as is the case
among many savage nations. r l he men are always tyrannical,
and often brutally cruel to their unfortunate wives, who really
seem to occupy as miserable and debased a position, in every
respect, as it is possible for human beings to do. I never before
heard of, or could have conceived, any state so pitiable and so
utterly degraded. If some of the zealous Missionaries of whom
we hear so much were to endeavour to raise the moral and social
condition of these wretched creatures, and to teach them a few of
the simple principles and virtues of Christianity, they would in-
deed be worthily employed.
Severe personal chastisement is among the lesser grievances
of the poor Gins. One day Mr. Meredith saw one of them crying
most bitterly, and asked what was the matter. She replied, that
she was going to get a beating because she had accidentally broken
her husband’s “ pyook ” (pipe). Mr. Meredith directly went to
the fellow, and tried to dissuade him from his brutal purpose;
but in vain, unless another pyook were given him, on which con-
dition he would let her off 1 . Unfortunately there was not one to
be procured ; and notwithstanding all my husband’s persuasions,
and his representations to the black tyrant of the simple fact,


that even if he killed his wife, that would not make him a new
pipe, he remained doggedly sulky, and the next morning the
poor Gin appeared with her arm broken , from the cruel beating
he had given her with a thick stick. Such instances are of fre-
quent occurrence.
These poor unhappy wretches are slaves , in every social sense,
and are not even permitted to feed but at their husband’s plea-
sure, and off the offal he may choose to fling them, although on
them devolves the chief care of providing the materials for the
repast. Two meals a day is the full allowance of the natives;
but as they cook all they have for supper, and gorge themselves
then to their utmost ability, breakfast depends on the possible
remains of the feast. Their usual food consists of kangaroos and
opossums roasted whole, without any portion being rejected ; and
they greedily devour garbage, entrails, &c. of any kind they can
pick up, quantity rather than quality being the desideratum as
regards provisions. Sometimes they feed more daintily, procur-
ing turtle, fish, wild turkeys’ eggs, guanas, snakes, and some
large kinds of grubs, which are reckoned great luxuries. Occa-
sionally the women dig up a bitter hot root, not unlike a bad
radish, which serves them for a meal, in default of better
viands.
Each family have their own fire, round which they sit to eat.
The husband first takes the opossum, &c., tears it to pieces and
gnaws off his own favourite morsels from the joints, which he
then hands over his shoulder to his wife, who waits patiently
behind him; and should food be scarce, her supper is a tolerably
light one. The children are “ helped” much in the same manner;
and when, either from having eaten as much as they can, or all
they have, the family have finished their repast, they crouch
round the fire and go to sleep.
The single men, emphatically termed “ poor fellows,” have
one fire in common; and with them, as with the family group, it
is a point of etiquette to hand round their half-gnawed bones to
one another.
Great fondness is usually displayed by parents for their children
(if they survive the perils of infancy), and instances have often
occurred of a couple, who had several little ones of their own,
adopting some poor friendless orphan, and freely bestowing on


it an equal share of their scanty food. Such cases I have known
frequently among the poor at home : they who have least to give,
and are consequently most intimate with the misery of want,
have the greatest compassion and charity for fellow-sufferers.
Although they appear to treat their children kindly when they
can in some measure help themselves, yet infanticide is frequent
among the women, who often dislike the trouble of taking care
of their babies, and destroy them immediately after birth, saying
that 44 Yahoo,” or 44 Devil-devil,” took them. One woman, whom
Mr. Meredith saw a day or two after the birth of her baby, on
being asked where it was, replied with perfect nonchalance, 44 1
believe Dingo patta !”— S'he believed the dog had eaten it!
Numbers of the hapless little beings are no doubt disposed of
by their unnatural mothers in a similar manner.
I never could make out anything of their religious ideas, or
even if they had a comprehension of a beneficent Supreme Being ;
but they have an evil spirit, which causes them great terror,
whom they call 44 Yahoo,” or 44 Devil-devil:” he lives in the tops
of the steepest and rockiest mountains, which are totally inac-
cessible to all human beings, and comes down at night to seize
and run away with men, women, or children, whom he eats up,
children being his favourite food; and this superstition is used
doubtless as a cloak to many a horrid and revolting crime com-
mitted by the wretched and unnatural mothers, who nearly
always, when their infants disappear, say 44 Yahoo” took them.
They never can tell which way he goes by his tracks, because he
has the power of turning his feet in any direction he pleases, but
usually wears them heels first, or, as they express it, 44 Mundoey
that-a-way, cobbra that- a-way” (feet going one way, and head
or face pointing the other). The name Devil-devil is of course
borrowed from our vocabulary, and the doubling of the phrase
denotes how terrible or intense a devil ne is; that of Yahoo,
being used to express a bad spirit, or 44 Bugaboo,” was common
also with the aborigines of Van Diemen’s Land, and is as likely
to be a coincidence with, as a loan from, Dean Swift; just as their
word 44 coolar” for anger, very nearly approaches in sound our
word choler, with a like meaning.
I have seen a vocabulary of the language used by the native
tribes near Adelaide, together with a few particulars touching


their superstitions and customs,* but the words wholly differ
from those used to express the same thing by the tribes about
Bathurst, Goulburn, and the Murrumbidgee. I have been told
by a friend of Mr. Meredith’s, who had made himself thoroughly
acquainted with many of the tribes, and was known among them
as the “ chief who spoke their tongue,” that great diversity of
dialects exists among them—not slight variations merely, but a
distinctly different vocabulary, of which he gave me many strik-
ing instances. As my few examples of their patois will show,
the natives who are acquainted with the settlers soon acquire a
curiously composite tongue, where Hnglish words sometimes mas-
querade in most novel meanings, but so arranged as to be very
soon understood, especially if used to beg anything.
In all the tribes some particularly solemn ceremonies are per-
formed previously to a youth’s being permitted to rank among
the warriors, or “ menbut these take place in a very secret
manner, not even the women being present. One of the initia-
tory rites, as practised among some tribes, is the knocking out*
one of the novice’s front teeth.
The natives pay great respect to old age; that, and valour,
comprising the only distinctions of rank allowed among them.
The best fighting man is the chief or head of his tribe, and in
case of his death, the next best takes his place, and inherits his
wives. The other warriors and the old men form a sort of
council, which is convened as occasion demands, when peace,
war, and all other points of importance are discussed and decided
upon.
A man named Hougong was some time chief of a Maneroo
tribe, and another, called Jimmy the Rover, was second-best man.
Jimmy mortally hated Hougong, but contrived to conceal his
animosity under the mask of extreme friendliness, which, as
his chief was no doubt as great an adept at hypocrisy as himself,
was of little consequence. One day Jimmy went to a stock-
keeper in the neighbourhood, to propose that he should ask them
both to go duck-shooting, and requesting the loan of two guns,
one of which should be loaded with ball, for himself, the other
with powder only, for Hougong, “ Well, me and Hougong go
* In a paper by John Philip Cell, Esq., of Hobart Town, published in the
Second Number of the ‘ Tasmanian Journal.’


out look for duck, ay, ay. Bel make-a-light duck!—Den me
pialla Hougong —‘ Good many time you want fight along
o’ me ; now fight, like it white man, along o’ musket.’ Well, me
pialla— ‘ You shoot first time.’ Well, that fellow shoot. ‘Ah !
you ’tupid fellow, bel hit it!’ Den me shoot; directly tumble
down Hougong!”
Which notable speech, rendered into English, would be,
“ Well, I and Hougong shall then go and look for ducks. Ay,
ay —we don’t see any ducks. Then I say to Hougong, ‘You
have wanted to fight me many times; let us fight now, like white
men, with muskets.’ Well, I say, ‘You shoot first.’ He shoots.
—‘ Ah, you stupid fellow, you did not hit me'!’ Then I shoot,
and Hougong falls dead !”
Shortly after the failure of this most treacherous and cold-
blooded scheme of murder (for of course he w'as refused the
guns) Jimmy heard that Hougong was dead. Great were the
lamentations raised for their brave chief by his tribe, and most
vehement and vociferous of all were the bowlings and groanings
of Jimmy the Rover. A friend of Mr. Meredith’s, who was pre-
sent at part of the mourning, found Jimmy full of public w r oe
and private exultation, venting the latter in theatrical asides to
those in his confidence, during the impetuous outpourings of his
tumultuous stage-effect grief, beginning at the top of his voice,
and howling most hideously down its whole gamut, more like the
yelling of a discontented dog than any other vocal performance
I am acquainted with.
“ Oh ! oh ! oh ! oh ! 000-00-00-00-ah ! [Cabou (big) rogue that
fellow Hougong !] Oh ! oh ! oh ! oh ! 00, 00, 00-00. [Now he
dead, directly me maan (take) his Gins !] Oh ! oh !” and Da Capo.
Accordingly, as soon as decorum and etiquette permitted, the
triumphant Jimmy prepared to go and take possession of his new
honours, when who should arrive, alive and well, but the defunct
and bemoaned Hougong himself!—and who, on hearing of
Jimmy’s kind intentions, promised him a sound beating for his
pains.
The various expression conveyed by the peculiar “ Ay, ay,”
so constantly used by the natives in speaking, is perfectly inde-
scribable. It is used doubtfully, positively, interrogatively, or
responsively, as the case may be, and contains in itself a whole
H


vocabulary of meanings, which a hundred times the number of
words could not convey in writing. Suppose you inquire of a
native if he have seen such and such a person pass, as he has
gone that way: —“ Ay, ay?” (interrogatively.) “Yes, a tall
man.”—“Ay, ay” (thoughtfully). “A tall man, with great
whiskers.” “ Ay, ay (positively). Good way up cobbra, cabou
grasse; ay, ay” (corroboratively).
“ Good way up cobbra,” means “ head high up ;” grasse is used
to express hair, beard, or moustache; and cabou means great
deal, or very much. The aborigines wear no beards themselves,
but a friend of ours, who had cultivated a most patriarchal
growth of that commodity, excited great awe and admiration
among them.
The labour and pains they bestow on their corrobbory toilets
prove them by no means insensible to the advantages of personal
beauty, although their manner of enhancing their natural charms,
in adding a thick stratum of pipe-clay to their usual coating of
grease and other accumulations, seems indeed “as wasteful and
ridiculous excess ” as “ to paint the lily, or throw a perfume
on the violet.” In lieu of
“ Rowland’s inestimable oil Macassar,”
their black elvish locks are always plentifully loaded with opos-
sum or snake fat, which unsavoury unguent, as may be imagined,
adds its share to the powerful and not too-pleasing odour natural
to them.
A sable exquisite preparing for an evening party first undresses,
then thrusts a large lump of pipe-clay into his mouth to soften,
and when of a proper consistency uses his forefinger as a pencil,
dipping it into the composition, and carefully dispensing the
cherished ornament over his person. Having, with infinite regard
to the general effect of the pattern, accurately striped and crossed,
and wavy-lined and dotted every accessible part of his figure, he
selects a trusty friend on whom devolves the important and re-
sponsible office of finishing off the work of adornment; and this
done, no reigning belle of the season ever entered Almack’s
with more consciousness of all-powerful beauty than he' feels in
taking his place among the equally elaborate costumes of his
companions. I fear the poor young squaws, or “ Gins,” have
but little to do with their own disposal in marriage; but doubt-


less many a tender heart must be touched by these D’Orsays of
the wilderness ; and many a pipe-clayed hero is painted in inde-
lible tints on the memory of love. My husband’s animated and
pantomimic descriptions of these scenes have often made me
laugh heartily; but a second-hand detail must of necessity lose
much, if not all the interest.
The aboriginal songs which I have heard are far from unpleas-
ino- in sound, and some have considerable melody, with much
more tune and variety than those of the New Zealanders, which
surprised me, as the latter people are so immeasurably superior
to the natives of New South Wales in everything else. The
words which the latter sing usually celebrate some great feast,
nearly all being about eating. One (translated) runs nearly
thus: “ Eat great deal; eat, eat, eat: eat again, plenty to eat!
eat more yet; eat, eat, eat!” &c. &c.; and this is sung to a
rather plaintive, pretty air! Another song consists of a like
repetition of AVind blow, blow ; wind blow, &c.; the air being
really pretty. The events celebrated by these songs are seldom
of a very dignified description. On one occasion a bullock-
driver, known to some of a tribe, got drunk, fought his com-
panions, and had a black eye, which occurrence was imme-
diately immortalized by his black friends in a ditty, of which the
burden, chiefly English, was “ Black-eye, black-eye,” with repe-
titions endless, the remainder being in their own language. I
remember once hearing some one say of modern fashionable songs,
“ AVhat is the use of saying the same thing so many times over ?”
but these native troubadours far exceed the most echo-weary of
drawing-room ballads, for, as I conceive, the self-same reason, a
lamentable paucity of ideas.
Most of the natives are shrewd and clever mimics ; one learned
to waltz very correctly in a few minutes ; and the slightest pecu-
liarity of face or figure never escapes their observation, so that
in speaking of any person you know, although his name be not
mentioned, their accurate impersonation of his gait, expression of
countenance, or any oddity of manner, is so complete as to leave
no doubt of the identity. Their fondness for portions of European
clothing is well known, and I have heard of many amusing instances
of its display. One Wellington boot was sometimes worn, unac-
companied by any other article of apparel, and great was the pride
ii 2


and grandeur of him who could button his upper man in a dress-
coat, that alone being considered an ample costume. Other gar-
ments were subjected to various modes of wearing, for which
they were never intended, legs being inserted where arms should
be, and vice versa.
The gift of a brass medal, formerly a rare distinction, is now
made so frequently by settlers to natives who have served them
well in any way, that the honour of the badge is somewhat di-
minished ; but the pride with which the possessor wears and
displays the insignia of his order is most amusing. The “ medal ”
consists of n piece of brass in the form of a crescent, not much
less than a cl eese-plate, engraven with the name and style of
both owner and donor, and worn hung round the neck by a brass
chain.
Some of the native “ attaches ” to the establishments of settlers
become useful servants, and are comfortably attired in suitable
clothes, and their more than erect carriage (for a plumb-line
dropped from the top of the head would fall some inches behind
the heel) is still more striking in their civilized than savage cos-
tume. These men often accompany their masters’ drays to Syd-
ney, and sometimes join the long and toilsome stock-driving ex-
peditions across to Adelaide; but even after a sojourn of many
months with Europeans, and in a comparatively civilized state,
they invariably return to their old habits, and relinquish their
smart and comfortable clothes for the corrobbory costume of
nudity and pipe-clay.
The companionship of natives in the overland journeys above
alluded to might perhaps be supposed of service in preventing
injury or attacks from other natives, but this is far from being
the case. The whole of the aborigines, as hitherto known, main-
tain most rigid laws touching all boundary questions, each tribe
having a certain allotted portion of country, beyond which they
cannot pass but in peril of their lives, or at least without risk of
a battle; and when, even in company with and under the pro-
tection of their white masters, they traverse these forbidden
climes, and meet parties of the rightful inhabitants, the adven-
turous travellers manifest the most intense fear, which, judging
from the threatening and angry aspect of their foes, is tolerably
well grounded.


Neighbouring tribes are generally at war, some of the chief
causes being acts of trespass and abduction of women ; but the
battles between them are less murderous than might be expected,
all being great bullies, and perpetually vaunting of their grand
resolves, and the numbers they mean to kill; whilst it often
happens, that after their spears and boomerangs have been flying
about for an hour or two, both armies quit the field with un-
diminished numbers.
A tolerable idea of their <£ manners and customs” may be
formed from an occurrence which took place within Mr. Mere-
dith’s knowledge. An intimation being given by a neighbour-
ing tribe to that settled near Goulburn, that they would kill a
certain old man among the latter, a council was held forthwith
on the subject, and means discussed how this indignity should be
prevented ; when, after much deliberation, the elders and fighting
men decided on a most strange and horrible expedient, being that
the old man’s own son should kill him then, and so deprive their
foes of the pleasure ! The young man immediately rose, took
two spears, and gave his miserable old father his death-wound as
he sat, unconscious of any harm, by his fire, although it was
some hours before he expired; his son meanwhile tending him
with the utmost care and affection. After his death his son and
the whole tribe mourned and howled over him several days; and
then, taking their weapons, they set forth to go and kill as many
as they could of the other tribe, to avenge the death of the old
man. They were very successful, leaving several of their foes
dead ; but the police magistrate of Goulburn, annoyed by their
fightings, threatened them with punishment, which caused them
to set off in a large body, and well armed, on a peaceful visit to
the Bathurst tribe, who received them with all honour and
civility, and gave a grand corrobbory on the occasion, inviting
the strangers to see them dance. The Goulburns accepted, but
came armed with all their weapons; which Mr. Meredith ob-
serving, he asked them why they came to a dance armed as i
for battle. They evaded the question some time, at length
saying “If we keep our weapons, very well, all go right;
if we come without, directly they jump up coolar” K pick a
quarrel, or get angry). A greater proof of the habitual treach-
ery of these people could not be given than this distrust and


suspicion of their own countrymen. From all I have heard,
I am very much inclined to think my husband’s maxim is
the prudent one: —“Never trust a savage: you may serve
them, and they may serve you; but never give them the chance
of an advantage.”


CHAPTER XI.
Native Huts —■“ Gunyon”—Natives’ ingenuity in Duck-snaring and Fishing
—Native Weapons—Green Frogs—Freshwater Shells—Platypus—Spur-
winged Plover —Australian Harebell —Convolvulus—Everlastings—Pep-
permint-tree—Opossums—Natives’ Mode of taking them.
I have often wondered that constant intercourse with Euro-
peans, and experience of the comfort afforded by a permanent
and substantial shelter from the inclemency of the seasons in the
variable climate of New South Wales, has not induced the
natives to make some rude attempt at building themselves huts,
especially as they are always very glad to enjoy the benefit of
dwelling in those of the settlers. But their idleness is wholly
unconquerable; the uttermost effort they ever make towards
the formation of a residence being to raise a few strips of bark
slantingly against a tree, under which they crawl during bad
weather. Had not these primitive erections been pointed out to
me as “ natives’ huts,” 1 confess I should not have had an
idea that they were anything more than accidental heaps of
bark.
One very wet miserable day a black was crowding in the warm
chimney-corner of a “ squatter’s” hut, where my husband was
present, and some of the party were asking the native why he
was so idle and stupid as to go shivering about without a home,
when he might soon build himself a warm hut. He listened very
quietly to all they had to say, merely observing at last, with
the air of a man who has arrived at a most philosophical conclu-
sion :—“ Ay, ay ! White fellow think it best that-a-way —Black
fellow think it best that- a-way.” “ Then black fellow’s a fool
for his pains,” was the uncourteous rejoinder. “ I believe so,”
returned the sable stoic, and straightway folding his blanket
around him, walked calmly out into the pouring rain.
A native one day was wistfully eying a snug pigsty, where


the fat grunting inmates were awaiting their supper, which was
being cracked in a mill by a convict servant; doubtless their
idle and obese condition must have seemed to him the ne plus
ultra of luxury, for he thus feelingly apostrophized the pigs:
Ay, ay, budgeree fellow you! sit in gunyon all day—white
fellow for you !” (Ay, ay, you ’re a lucky fellow, can lie in
a house all day, whilst a white man grinds for you !)
The word “gunyon,” or house, they apply to everything that
seems appropriated to contain any article. My husband had a
silver pipe-case for the pocket, and they used to say his pyook
had a “ gunyon all along of himself.” A dog-kennel would be
“ gunyon ’long of dingo,” &c.
To make them industrious is utterly hopeless ; nothing but the
present urgent want* of anything can induce them to make the
slightest exertion. If a man have one “ fig”* of tobacco, and
you promise him another if he will do such or such a service,
you must wait until his stock in hand is exhausted, before there
is a chance of his trying to earn more, though they are always
anxious enough to beg for “ Pyook, nyook, owrangey bit o’
bacco” (A pipe, and a knife, and a little bit of tobacco).
A small kind of crayfish frequent the Macquarie, called by
the natives “ moramy,” and I was desirous of obtaining some,
to see and taste, but nothing short of an exorbitant bribe could
induce the blacks to procure any. They are generally expert
fishermen, and in their methods of capturing their prey, making
snares, and other occupations requiring patience and ingenuity,
they show considerable intelligence and perseverance, despite
their inherent idleness.
The contrivance adopted by a tribe on the Murray river for
catching ducks is particularly clever. They place nets (very
similar to those used by wild-duck trappers at home) over a
narrow portion of the river or “ creek” which the ducks frequent,
and then, by chasing and frightening them at a distance, gradu-
ally drive the birds near to the snare; the risk is then that they
* Mr. Meredith tells me that the term “ fig of tobacco,” so general here, will
not be understood at home, where the same description is not used. That kept
here for general use is “ Negrohead,” and comes in large kegs, packed closely
in layers of twisted rolls, about eight inches long, and one inch broad; each
of these being technically termed a “ fig.” Idle smokers employ their serv-
ants to cut it up and rub it, ready for use.


may fly over it; to prevent which, the blacks fling up three-
cornered pieces of bark high into the air, at the same time
accurately imitating the cry of a hawk, and the poor ducks,
stooping to escape the supposed enemy, dart into the snare and
are caught.
A very fine and excellent fish is often taken in the Macquarie,
called the cod, and though not really a species of cod, greatly
resembles that fish in its general shape and appearance, though
far more delicious in flavour. The Macquarie cod sometimes
weighs seventy pounds or more. The natives catch them with
spears made expressly for the purpose, in the use of which they
are very adroit. These fishing-spears are twelve or fourteen
feet long, made of hard wood, usually some kind of Eucalyptus,
well sharpened at the end, but not barbed in any way. The
native thus armed crouches or lies down on the overhanging
bank of the river, or on a fallen tree or old log over the
water, intently and motionlessly watching his prey. He then
slowly and stealthily glides his spear down towards the water;
then dips it a little way, then pokes it farther and farther,
so softly as not to alarm the fish; and when quite certain,
with one thrust runs it through the unfortunate cod, and brings
him up.
The hunting or war spear is quite a different weapon to this,
made of the same kind of wood, but much shorter and thicker,
about seven or eight feet long, and barbed for some distance from
the point, either by notches cut in the wood, or with sharp fish-
bones, or crystals securely bound on with kangaroo sinews.
These are most savage-like and fearful weapons, and are thrown
to a distance of from seventy to one hundred yards, but rarely
with certain effect beyond sixty. A great additional impetus is
gained by the manner in which they are throwm. A piece of
wood called a “ wammara,” about tw o feet long, has a notch
or socket made in its upper end, into which the blunt end of the
spear is inserted before throwing. The wammara is held in a
slanting position with the spear horizontally resting in its upper
end, and on the hand of the spearman, who, in flinging it, suddenly
gives the wammara a perpendicular position, and adds greatly to
the force of the blow.
The “ nullah-nullah” is another fighting weapon, made like


the others, of hard wood, with a round handle widening towards
the end into a broad knob, well sharpened on the lower side,
like the edge of an axe. They have also formidable clubs, for
which I do not know the native name.
The “ boomerang” had become familiar, by name at least, in
England before I left, although the toys sold in shops as boome-
rangs are very unlike the real ones, the use of which is extremely
curious and ingenious. This weapon consists of a very slightly
curved, nearly flat piece of hard wood, about two and a half feet
long, and two and a half inches wide; its curve, weight, and the
manner in which it is feathered off to catch the wind, being most
accurately calculated for it to take the intended direction when
thrown, different ones being adapted for different aims. It is
never aimed at the object intended to be struck, but thus:—
suppose A, B, and C form a triangle; a man at A throws
the boomerang towards B, to which point it flies, strikes the
ground, and, rebounding, turns towards C, where it strikes
(like a good “ canon ”at billiards). The accuracy with which
the natives can hit any object with this singular weapon, and
the ingenious invention of it, seem worthy of a higher order
of intelligent beings than they are usually considered. I have
heard of several persons who have practised throwing the
boomerang, but none could succeed so as to bear comparison
with a native.
The word “ waddle,” though commonly applied to the weapons
of the New South Wales aborigines, does not with them mean
any particular implement, but is the term used to express wood
of any kind, or trees. “ You maan waddie ’long of fire,” means
“ Go and fetch firewood.”
The shields used by the natives are pieces of solid wood about
two feet long, something in a long diamond shape, with a loop
or handle to hold them by, hollowed from the inner side. These
they use with extreme adroitness, fending off blows in every
direction, which perhaps may partly account for the non-mur-
derous character of so many fierce encounters among themselves.
I have heard some of their white friends confess to having found
an hour’s “ excellent sport ” in shying at them cobs of Indian
corn, from which the grain had been threshed, but which would
still inflict rather a heavy blow; not one of which ever hit the


sable target, so nimbly did he ward off every cob with his
shield, from his legs just as surely as his head, jumping about and
grinning all the time in high glee.
I believe these are all the weapons used by the natives of their
ow'n manufacture, and these were formerly all cut and made with
sharp flints or crystals ; but now those acquainted w ith Europeans
procure more convenient tools. The women make neat baskets
and bags of the fine long dry grass common in these colonies
(and which I have often thought would make beautifully fine plait
for hats or bonnets) ; they use the currijong bark, too, for the
same purpose, and carry about with them in these bags a most
strange and useless accumulation of trash. I hey also sew the
skins of kangaroos and opossums together (with sinews for thread,
and fish-bones for needles), and fashion these into garments, rugs,
or bags. Many of them procure English needles and thread
from the settlers, and sew with tolerable neatness.
In the Macquarie, near Bathurst, I first saw the superb green
frogs of Australia. The river, at the period of our visit, was
for the most part a dry bed, with small pools in the deeper holes,
and in these, among the few slimy water-plants and Confervas,
dwelt these gorgeous reptiles. In form and size they resemble a
very large common English frog; but their colour is more beau-
tiful than words can describe. I never saw plant or gem of so
bright tints. A vivid yellow-green seems the groundwork of
the creature’s array, and this is daintily pencilled over with other
shades, emerald, olive, and blue greens, with a few delicate mark-
ings of bright yellow, like an embroidery in threads of gold on
shaded velvet. And the creatures sit looking at you from their
moist, floating bowers, with their large eyes expressing the most
perfect enjoyment, which, if you doubt whilst they sit still, you.
cannot refuse to believe in when you see them flop into the deli-
cious cool water, and go slowly stretching their long green legs,
as they pass along the waving grove of sedgy, feathery plants in
the river’s bed, and you lose them under a dense mass of gently
waving leaves; and to see this, whilst a burning, broiling sun is
scorching up your very life, and the glare of the herbless earth
dazzles your agonized eyes into blindness, is almost enough to
make one willing to forego all the glories of humanity, and be
changed into a frog I


In the same pools I found some fresh-water shells, chiefly be-
longing to the species Unio, Lymncea , Stagnalis, and Physa ,
and, I think, identical with my English specimens. The mora-
mies, or crayfish, live in holes in the muddy banks of these
pools; I saw many of their deserted shelly coats, but not any
living ones.
That most enigmatical of all the strange animals found in
Australia, the Platypus, or Ornithorhynchus paradoxus , is also
a dweller in the Macquarie, but, being extremely shy, is not
often found near Bathurst. So many descriptions have been
published of it, that I imagine it is nearly as well understood in
England as here. A full-grown specimen is twelve or fourteen
inches in length, and much the same shape and proportion as the
common mole, with a very thick, soft fur, dark brown on the
back, and light coloured beneath; the head and eyes are per-
fectly animal , but in lieu of a mouth or snout, a small flat bill,
similar to that of a duck, completes the very odd countenance of
this most paradoxical creature. The short furry legs end in half-
webbed feet, the hind ones being armed with sharp spurs, which
are perforated, and through which, when the animal is annoyed,
it is believed to eject a poisonous fluid as it strikes an enemy ; but
this fact is still doubted by some naturalists, and, like other ano-
malous peculiarities, is still the subject of argument amongst the
learned, to whose information I regret that it is not in my power
to add. The creature is very rarely seen on shore, and is usually
killed by being shot from a high bank ; but this is only practicable
when it swims very near the surface.
Among the few living things that frequented the dreary desert
plains of Bathurst during ray sojourn there, were some flocks of
the spur-winged plover; beautiful little birds, whose plaintive
cry seemed unceasingly to bewail the dreariness of the spot. It
seemed such a miserable place for birds—the gay creatures we
love to watch fluttering, and coquetting, and sporting about in
the green leafy trees—flying in and out —circling and soaring
high into the air, then darting back into a thick shady covert,
where only the light quivering of the leaves their quick wings
fan into motion tells of their hiding-place ! Here were neither
bush nor tree—nor branches dancing in the sunlight—nor
deep clusters of rich dark leaves—nothing but a scorching sky


and a desert earth, and the poor plover’s sad, melancholy cry,
instead of the full, varied choir of airy voices that fills the
heart with gladness on a day in spring in green, beautiful old
England!
Here and there, amidst the scanty and withered herbage,
where the flocks of miserable sheep were vainly trying to pick
the fraction of a feed, gleamed up an eye of blue, a bright blue
starry flower, looking fearlessly to the fervid sky from its slight
and hair-like stem; but its bolder aspect did not pi-event my
claiming a loving acquaintance with it as a relative of an ancient
friend in my own dear land, the harebell. The Australian hare-
bell ( Campanula gracilis') is scarcely a bell at all—rather a star
—the corolla being very deeply cleft, and widely expanded; but
it is as beautiful: yes, with all my life-long love of the English
one, I must acknowledge her antipodean cousin to be even as
beautiful as the “ poet’s harebell,” that so merrily dances and
waves over British heaths and hills.
In the same barren spots, too, I found a likeness of another old
friend, the small meadow convolvulus, the new one being far
brighter in hue than the sly, mischievous little sprite that frisks
over our English fields, and baffles the sagacity of the neatest
farmer when he strives to exclude it. The garb of my new
friend is veritable couleur de rose, with scarcely a tint of yellow
or a gleam of white. The plants were very small and quite com-
pact ; the flower growing on a short footstalk, which sprung direct
from the root, without any climbing stem. This excessive
dwarfishness was probably the consequence of the withering
droughts, as in Yan Diemen’s Land I often gather the same
kind in streamers half a yard long, or more; but they usually
run along the ground, instead of twining up a bent of grass or
any other support.
During our few drives and rambles among the nearest hills,
to the north-west of Bathurst, I found some pretty everlastings,
Gnaphalium apiculatum , and others, with the names of which I
am unacquainted. Some of the white ones were large, and grew
in handsome clusters, with the soft central florets yellow ; look-
ing, at a distance, not unlike the English ox-eye daisy. Others
were entirely yellow, and larger than the white ones, growing
singly on the stalk, and very handsome, showy flowers, but


from their wide open, staring look, always reminded me of those
full-blown representations of the sun, so much patronized by
country sign-painters. The dry, harsh, juiceless everlastings
seemed exactly the kind of growth we might expect to meet in
such an arid, parched region as this. They seem as if they could
be quite independent of droughts, hot winds, and every other
destructive agent of this withering climate, and thrive just as
well, or better, on a whirl of dust, than in a shower of rain. I
began almost to dislike them for daring to blossom and flaunt in
such bright array, when so many fairer and sweeter things were
drooping and dying all around. Some of the hills we climbed
(having driven across the weary plains to their feet) had really
very pretty spots among their little glens and slopes, being well
clothed with trees living and growing ; and as green as trees in
New South Wales usually are, chiefly consisting of the common
acacias, and various kinds of gum, or Eucalyptus, all very much
resembling each other, except two species, one of which, the
blue gum,” bears large, broad, rather blunt leaves, with a pale
blue bloom upon them, which makes a pleasing contrast to the
dark olive-green tint of the commoner kinds. The peppermint-
tree (Eucalyptus piperita ) is also a very distinct species, and
usually a handsome tree; I have seen some old ones that an
artist would delight to sketch. The bark is often very various
in colour, the smooth white portions being overlaid in places
with a thin coat partially peeled off, tinted with light and dark
grey, red, fawn-colour, and brown of many shades, whilst to-
wards the ground the rough, thicker, more orthodox kind of
bark generally remains. The foliage is denser and casts more
shade than any other gum-tree ; the loaves are small and very
narrow, both sides alike (as are those of the whole family), and
thickly, yet lightly grouped on the spray; their colour also is
much brighter and greener than the other kinds, and when in
flower, the tree is often a dense mass of blossoms, sweet, luscious-
smelling, white-fringed little stars, with myriads of birds flutter-
ing and chirping about them, sucking the honey, and showering
down bunches that they pull off' in sport and mischief. The
scent of the leaves when rubbed, and also their taste, which is
very pungent, is exactly similar to that of our English herb pepper-
mint, and I should think an essence might be distilled from them,


to serve for tlie use oi botli the druggist and confectioner, fhe
leaves are commonly supposed to form the chief food of the opos-
sum both in New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land. These
beautiful animals live in hollow trees, and ai’e rarely visible by
day, unless, as X have sometimes done, you can see one sitting
at his front door (as I suppose we may term the entrance to his
habitation), usually a hole far up the tree, whence they descend
at night to feed on grass and herbs, and may be seen scampering
and playing about like squirrels among the branches. The marks
left by their sharp claws in climbing trees are constantly seen,
and on the trunks of large old gums tracks of scratches are
visible in such numbers as to prove them very favourite places
of resort. A full-grown opossum is larger and heavier than a
very large cat, with a pretty innocent-looking face, the expression
of which is both like that of the deer and the mouse, the shape of
the nose and whiskers strongly resembling the latter. The eyes
are very dark and brilliant, the ears soft and delicate, the legs
short and strong, with monkey-like feet and long sharp claws.
They sit up, holding their food in the fore-paws, like a monkey.
The tail is eighteen or twenty inches long, about the thickness at
the base of a sable boa, and tapering to the end ; the under side is
quite smooth and devoid of hair, the upper being covered with the
same thick woolly fur as the other parts of the body, the colour
being either black, dark grey, dark brown, or deep golden brown,
like very yellow sable, but always beautifully shaded off from the
sides towards the under part, which is lighter. These differen
colours are most probably also distinctions of species, as no
blending or mixture of them is ever observed, which would very
likely be the case if they were merely accidental varieties in the
same animal, just as we see the common colours of the domestic
cat mixed indiscriminately. The tail is strongly prehensile, and
holds so tightly, that they often swing their whole weight upon it,
and when shot dead, sometimes hang for a minute by it, before
falling. Tine moonlight nights often prove fatal to the poor
creatures,, being the time chosen for shooting them by scores,
either for the sake of their warm skins for rugs, or to feed dogs
with their luckless bodies. Sometimes they commit sad ravages
among the young corn, and then the war waged against them
Z certainly a fraction more of j .>ltc in it, but too often the,


are, like my poor favourites the Cape pigeons, shot in mere
wanton cruelty, which, to gild its villany, assumes the name of
“ sport.” All dogs pursue them to the death, and often in the
day-time find one who has either been too idle or unsuspecting to
run up his tree, who, unless he can instantly climb one, falls a
victim to his imprudence, though not without a most vigorous
resistance of sharp bites and scratches, and many a shrill and
piercing squeal of agony : as is the general course in this world,
either among men or brutes, might is victorious over right, and
poor “possey” rarely escapes. The noise they usually make at night,
when undisturbed, is something like a very hoarse laugh, a kind
of grating throat-chuckle ; and on a still night many of them
may be heard calling to and answering each other for a consi-
derable distance.
Like all other animals of their class, they are marsupial, and
have rarely more than one young one at a time, which the doe
carries about with her, at first in the pouch, and afterwards on
her back.
The blacks procure opossums by climbing trees where their
holes are, and have evidently some means of ascertaining whe-
ther the animal is turned with its head or tail towards them,
before touching it; if the former, they frighten him, or by some
means indjice him to turn round, when, instantly seizing the tail,
they forcibly drag him out. If the hole extends too far for them
to reach their prey, they cut a larger hole with an axe or toma-
hawk.* They often show great brutality in torturing the unfor-
tunate animals they take, long before putting an end to their
wretched sufferings. Mr. Meredith on one occasion remonstrated
with a black who was cruelly and inhumanly maiming one of
these poor harmless creatures, but the only reply the savage
made was by a broad grin, and the cool remark, “ Bel ’possum
cry ! ” —(Opossum don’t cry !) The natives, like most savages,
are very agile in climbing trees, making small notches in the
* Formerly these implements were made of flint or crystal, but now the
natives procure English ones.
My omitting all allusion to the kangaroo may be deemed an oversight, but
the reason I do not describe them here, is, that I did not see one in New
South Wales, nor has Mr. Meredith, in all his wanderings there, met with
more than half a dozen. So effectually is the race being exterminated. In
Van Diemen’s Land they are much more abundant.


bark as they ascend, just large enough to rest the end of the
great toe upon, which member seems in them particularly strong,
for even in riding on horseback, which many of them do, well
and fearlessly, they never put the fiat foot in the stirrup, but only
lay hold of it with the great toe.


CHAPTER XII.
Native Turkeys ; their mode of incubation —Native Cranberry—Our Return
Locusts —Manna —Transformations —Ground-grubs—Night at the Rivulet
New Flowers—Heat and Dust—“ Weatherboard” Inn—Walk to the Cas-
cade-Fringed Violet—Waratahs—Fine View —Lories.
Emus and native turkeys are not now seen near Bathurst, al-
though still very numerous in the less populous districts. The
bush-turkey is about the same size as a tame one; the colour
dark brown, with light grey feathers on the breast, and full
plumage on the head and neck. They are very shy, and,
being excellent eating, are much sought after by both Euro-
peans and natives. On foot it is all but impossible to ap-
proach within gunshot of them, as they take wing on the least
alarm; but they will allow persons on horseback, or in a vehicle
of any kind, to come close to them, and by such means they are
usually taken.
A most extraordinary account is given by Mr. Gould and
other naturalists of the manner in which these birds provide for
the artificial hatching of their young, by scratching together a
great heap of vegetable matter, in which the females lay their
eggs, and leave them, trusting to the heat which the mass ac-
quires during fermentation, to bring out the brood. I his, if true
of any Australian bird, is certainly a mistake as regards the
turkey, which frequents the wide, open plains of the interior,
and forms scarcely any nest, but in some accidental hollow lays
several bluish-spotted eggs, which afterwards become much
darker in colour, and are hatched in the usual manner. Were
the birds to form so large and conspicuous a receptacle for their
eggs as I have seen described, namely, a mound of rubbish thirty
feet round, and eight or ten high, none would escape discovery,
and as both eggs and birds are valued as food, the race would ere
this be totally extinct. I never had an opportunity of seeing the


nest of a bush-turkey, and therefore my account is but the tran-
script of what I have been told ; but of my informant’s veracity
and knowledge I cannot entertain a doubt.
One staple article of consumption, both with emus and
turkeys, is the berry of the low-creeping prickly plant called the
native cranberry (Astroloma humifusum), which is so very hard
that I should think their digestive organs must be akin to those
of the ostrich. This semblance of a fruit is about the size of
a currant, and with its peach-like bloom looks rather tempt-
ing, but a marble covered with thin kid would best represent
its flavour and consistence. I remember the shock of disap-
pointment I received on attempting to taste some on a hot thirsty
day, and have never since deprived the emus of a single berry.
The blossom is very pretty, not unlike a small fuchsia, growing
abundantly on the under-side of the trailing sprays, and not
often noticeable until a piece is gathered, so closely they lie on
the ground.
After a sojourn at Bathurst of about a month, we set forth on
our return to Sydney, and the summer being more advanced,
and the heat much greater, the weariness and discomfort of the
journey were increased tenfold. The mountains were just as
dreary as when we crossed them in coming; the roads not quite
so bad, the great holes and reservoirs of mud in them being a
little dried up, and the really dry portions rising in continuous
volumes of dust.
Equally annoying with the dust was the loud, incessant, and
indescribable noise of myriads of large and curious winged insects,
commonly and incorrectly called locusts, but which are totally
different from any kind of locusts I ever saw either represented
in books or in collections. They literally swarm in the summer
time on the gum-trees, and are seen flying about in immense
numbers; the noise they make when on the wing being a loud
hum or buzz, not nearly so disagreeable as their note when settled
on a tree, which most closely resembles the sound of a miniature
watchman’s rattle ; and when this is multiplied by thousands and
millions of these noisy creatures, the din is intolerable. A
stocking or lace manufactory is not more distressing to a person
unaccustomed to the rattling and riot of the machinery. Whilst
we rested one day, a couple of the locusts were caught, and I no
i 2


longer wondered so much at their loud notes, for they are power-
ful-looking creatures, something the form of an enormous fly,
with stout brown bodies two inches long, six rough legs, a
squarely shaped head like a grasshopper’s, half an inch or more
in breadth, with large prominent black eyes, and a long pro-
boscis, which when at rest lies very compactly under the chin.
(I must pray entomologists to forgive my unscientific descrip-
tions, as I am unacquainted with their technical phraseology.)
On the front of the head are some jewel-like markings of yellow
and red ; the wings are very large, and as transparent as glass,
traversed by some very strong and many finer fibres in a beau-
tiful net-work. Altogether they are very handsome and most
harmless-looking insects, and I liberated those caught for me, as
soon as I had well examined them.
Since leaving New South Wales, I have become rather better
acquainted with the locusts, as a species but slightly different
inhabits Yan Diemen’s Land. These are somewhat smaller,
with coral-red eyes, instead of black ones, and of a blacker
colour generally. They frequent certain kinds of Eucalyptus in.
countless numbers, but only in particular localities ; we some-
times drive several miles without hearing one, and then suddenly
find ourselves in the midst of a whole swarm.
In both Colonies a kind of manna is found upon and lying be-
neath the trees chosen by the locusts, in snow-white flakes, some-
times soft, and often nearly as hard as a sugar-plum, with a sweet
and rather pleasant flavour; its medicinal properties being the
same as those of the manna sold by druggists. Children are very
fond of it, but I have never seen it in any quantity.
I have heard very many discussions as to the origin of this
manna and its connexion with the locusts, some persons believing
that the insc us made it, as bees make honey, others that it was
a natural exudation from the tree, which attracted the locusts
to feed on it. But since I have had opportunities of observing
the matter more attentively, I have been convinced that neither
of these is the true solution of the mystery, but that the following
explanation, given me by our worthy medical attendant here
(Yan Diemen’s Land), Dr, Storey, is the true one.
Beneath the outer bark of some gum-trees is a sweet kind or
mucilage, free from the very strong aromatic flavour which per-


vades the rest of the tree ; and the locusts, perforating the outer
bark with their long, sharp proboscis, suck out the juice, which
continues to flow for a short time after they leave the aperture,
and drying in the sun, falls to the ground in flakes of manna.
I have had many corroborative proofs of this fact, and, before
knowing it, had often vainly endeavoured to conjecture what
the locusts could be doing, when I saw them covering the
smooth stem of a tree for many yards, and the greater portion of
them motionless.
They evidently pass through one, if not more stages of exist-
ence, preparatory to their becoming perfect winged insects. In
the summer, towards evening, it is common to see on the trunks of
trees, reeds, or any upright thing, a heavy-looking, hump-backed,
brown beetle, an inch and a half long, with a scaly coat; clawed,
lobster-like legs, and a somewhat dirty aspect, which is easily
accounted for, when at the foot of the tree a little hole is visible
in the turf, whence he has lately crept. I have sometimes care-
fully carried these home, and watched with great interest the poor
locust “ shuffle off his mortal,” or rather earthy coil, and emerge
into a new world. The first symptom is the opening of a small
slit which appears in the back of his coat, between the shoulders,
through which, as it slowly gapes wider, a pale, soft, silky-look-
ing texture is seen below, throbbing and heaving backwards and
forwards. Presently, a fine square head, with two light red eyes,
has disengaged itself, and in process of time (for the transforma-
tion goes on almost imperceptibly) this is followed by the libera-
tion of a portly body and a conclusion ; after which the brown
leggings are pulled off like boots, and a pale, cream-coloured,
weak, soft creature very slowly and very tenderly walks away
from his former self, which remains standing entire, like the coat
of mail of a warrior of old, ready to be encased in the cabinets
of the curious; the shelly plates of the eyes that are gone, look-
ing after their lost contents with a sad lack of u speculation in
them. On the back of the new-born creature lie two small bits
of membrane doubled and crumpled up in a thousand puckers,
like a Limerick glove in a walnut-shell. These begin to unfold
themselves, and gradually spread smoothly out into two large,
beautiful, opal-coloured wings, which by the following morning
have become clearly transparent, whilst the body has acquired


its proper hard consistency and dark colour ; and when placed on
a gum-tree, the happy thing soon begins its whirring, creaking,
chirruping song, which continues, with little intermission, as
long as its happy harmless life.
When the locusts happen to come out in the morning, the
heat of the sun often dries their unopened wings so suddenly
that they cannot expand, and thus, quite helpless, the poor things
become a prey to the numerous birds and swarms of ants that
are always ready to attack and devour them.
What state the locust passes through previously to its exist-
ence as an underground beetle, I am not aware ; but in newly-
ploughed peat land* great numbers of fat, white, inactive cater-
pillars or grubs are constantly found, some of which, judging
from their size and shape, are probably locusts in their fii’st stale
of being. I find these grubs some inches below the surface,
coiled round in little cells exactly their own shape and size, hol-
lowed in the moist ground, whence they apparently derive their
sustenance. When disturbed, they slowly crawl under another
piece of earth, where they soon form a new cell, similar to the
old one.
Another locust, resembling the one I have described, in every
respect except size, is perhaps the male insect, the body being
much slighter in proportion, and not exceeding an inch in length.
The circumstance of these two sizes in the locusts exactly cor-
responding w ith those of two kinds of the ground-grubs, induces
me to think that the latter are locusts in their first or lowest
form; but my opinions, being formed solely from observation,
without that aid which a previous knowledge of entomology
would afford me, may very probably be erroneous. The cruelties
which all persons learned in that science are perpetually guilty
of, and, as it seems, irresistibly tempted to commit, always
rendered it abhorrent to me, and consequently I am now 7 nearly
if not wholly useless as an observer of my interesting neighbours
of the insect kingdom in this populous region; but lest my
modest fear of telling what is already known should by any pos-
sibility nip some wondrous discovery in the bud, I simply detail
my small sums of knowledge, only regretting that the total
amount is not greater.
* In Van Diemen’s Land,


As we journeyed on, we found it convenient to rest one night
at the Rivulet Inn (the scene of such bacchanalian orgies during
our up-journey). The inmates were certainly not so tipsy, and
more of them were visible than before ; but as to cleanliness , the
word and the meaning seemed equally unknown within, though
the paint outside was as bright as ever, reminding one so much
of a newly-furbished-up caravan at a country fair, that I almost
expected to see a picture of a giant and dwarf in the veranda,
or to hear a great drum. On our retiring for the night (in com-
pany with a dark-brown fat candle that smelt most insufferably
ill, as it fizzled and flared by turns) to a freshly painted room with
very scanty furniture, and a most sombre coloured, hide-the-dirt
kind of bed, I instituted an examination into the state of the
linen, and believe that half a dozen unwashed chimney-sweeps
occupying the same bed for a fortnight could not have left evi-
dences of a darker hue than presented themselves to my horror-
stricken eyes. The blankets corresponded well in colour, but
as to exchange those was totally hopeless, we dispensed with their
services, and after great difficulty, and most eloquent grum-
bling from the rum-inspired landlady, I obtained some coarse
cotton sheets (linen ones being rarely seen in the Colony), the
dampness of which was satisfactory, as it proved they had been
acquainted with the wash-tub.
Thrusting the other sable and not inodorous coverings into
the farthest corner of the room, I washed my hands, and re-
arranged the bed, and had begun to think of sleep, when a loud
knocking at the door aroused us—
“ Who’s there ? ”
“ If you please, ma’am, Missus wants them sheets you pulled
off your bed, for a gentleman as is just come in ! ”
With my parasol I poked the things out on the landing, inly
congratulating the happy man destined to enjoy such sweet re-
pose ; but I could not help thinking, at the same time, how many
pairs of sheets might have been bought with the money the
household were drinking at our previous visit; or even that a
white-washed house with clean linen would have been pre-
ferable to gilding and rainbow paintings without that humble
luxury.
The beauty of the vale of Clwydd had become much enhanced


during the interval of our visits by the blossoming of the young
gum-trees, and the greater degree of verdure generally percep-
tible. I gathered many flowers by the road-side that were quite
new to me, including several orchideous plants, and a bright rich
blue flower, with gold and black stamens, growing on a straggling
branched stem from out a large tuft of tall reedy leaves. I named
it then the “ Knight of the Garter,” and have often met it since
in both Colonies.
Mount Victoria, too, towered above far greener glens and ra-
vines than when we had crossed the pass before; but once again
amidst the forests of those dreary, black Blue Mountains, and
all improvement was at an end. Burned trees, bare ground, and
interminable hills once more surrounded us; the scorching heat
of the sun was to me almost overpowering, and, reflected as it
was by the dusty, shadeless road into our faces and eyes, became
absolutely painful. Still the time and the journey wore on, and
we reached the Weatherboard inn, then wholly at our service,
and where an ever memorable luxury awaited us, in the shape of
a capacious dish of young potatoes at tea, being the first vege-
tables we had seen for some time. Here we also found a clean
bed, though the possession thereof seemed a point of dispute with
its numerous tenantry; but this is an almost universal evil in
New South Wales, and in wooden houses like the one in
question is, I believe, incurable. A tolerably neat and pro-
ductive garden adjoined the house, and everything about bore
an air of more comfort than the generality of such places in the
Colony.
After an early breakfast the following morning, we set forth
on foot to visit a waterfall. Entering a little valley with low
hills on either side, we soon reached the borders of a bright
brook, that, as it gurgled and glittered over its rocky bed, spoke
to me of many a lovely valley and verdant meadow at home,
where, instead of being, as here, precious as a fount in the desert,
such a stream would be but one among the thousands that
gladden the teeming earth. After our dry and parching journey,
it was delightful to walk close beside it—to be quite sure that it
was water —and when wetted feet did not suffice, to stoop and
dabble in it—and scoop it up in tightly-clasped hands to drink—
and to step over on its large dry stones, with no very great


objection to a splash if one’s foot slipped. All the valley was
green too,—think of that! And how exquisitely refreshing
such moist greenness was to our dust-blinded eyes! Tall rushes
grew there, and half-immersed water-plants, from amidst which
we heard the sonorous “ clop, clop” of the great green frogs;
and bright dragon-flies darted about among the high waving
reeds ; and there were gay flowering shrubs with pleasant odours,
and the delicate “ fringed violet, a gem worthy to grace Tita-
nia’s rarest crown. It is an humble lowly flower, about the
size of a violet, growing alone on a thin transparent stem some
two or three inches high, of a deep bluish lilac rather than
purple, and somewhat the shape of the iris, having also the
same peculiar lustre, so well described by my poet-friend Mary
Howitt—
“ As if grains of gold in its petals were set.”
The sepals of the flower are edged with the finest fringe, like
that which adorns our English bog-bean. It fades so very soon
after being gathered, that I could not even carry one alive to
the inn, and never meeting with it again, had no opportunity of
sketching it.
As we walked on, a group of slender young gum-trees at-
tracted my attention by their very graceful forms and polished
verdure ; and when opposite to them, we saw, as through a pur-
posed entrance, that they formed a nearly circular bower, be-
neath whose leavy canopy dwelt a sisterhood of queens—a group
of eight or ten splendid waratahs, straight as arrows—tall,
stately, regal flowers, that with their rich and glowing hue,
« Making a sunshine in the shady place,”
seemed like the magic jewels we read of in fairy-tales, that light
up caverns by their own intrinsic lustre.
It would have seemed a small sort of sacrilege to distmb this
beautiful picture, this temple of the mountain nymphs ; so I con-
tented myself with gathering some less fine flowers of the
waratah that grew near, and we pursued our way still along the
green little valley, and close beside the streamlet, which, as we
advanced, flowed much more swiftly, and a sound of pouring
water reached us, the cause of which was soon explained by one


of the most stupendous scenes I ever beheld, bursting 1 unex-
pectedly upon us.
Suddenly we found ourselves standing on the brink of a tre-
mendous precipice; for though I have spoken of traversing a
valley , be it remembered that this was on one of the highest parts
of the Blue Mountains, and the valley itself merely a water-
course. I know not how to describe the scene without a com-
paratively insignificant simile, namely, a theatre, but supposing a
space of three or four miles between the centre of the audience-
portion and the back of the stage, with a proportionate width.
We stood, as it were, in the front of the gallery, which was the
summit of a colossal amphitheatre of precipitous and most pic-
turesque cliffs, rising in many places above the point where we
stood, and in others broken by rugged ravines, fantastically
adorned with trees, that seemed to hold on, like the natives, by a
great toe only. At a depth of some hundreds of feet below us
lay a thickly wooded undulating vale, a billowy ocean of verdant
foliage, stretching far away, and rising again in the distance,
until bounded by a towering wall of rocks, their sharp outlines
telling in strongly marked light and shade against the clear, deep
blue sky.
On our left hand, the bright waters of the mountain stream
poured over the rocks in one smooth, glassy, unbroken torrent
for some distance, and then, scattered by projecting crags into
smaller jets, were lost to view amidst the overhanging trees that
fringed the sides of this natural Colosseum.
That portion of the rock near us seemed certainly of an
igneous origin, and some more distant parts had much the aspect
of basalt, being apparently columnar. Some of the small frag-
ments I picked up had a beautifully crystalline structure, and
glittered like “ ruby-blende.”
I much regretted the impossibility of remaining to have a day
or two’s exploration about this grand and interesting spot. I
should have liked to visit the foot of the cliffs as well as the brow,
but this would have incurred a circuit of many miles, and too
much fatigue for me to dream of; and with excessive reluctance
I retraced my steps to the “ Weatherboard,” whence we imme-
diately started on our onward journey.
Near the inn we saw some lories, the most brilliant of all the


parrot tribe ; the back and upper portion of the body being a
bright gleaming blue, whilst the breast and under parts are the
most intense rose-colour, or ponceau. Gay as were all the parrots
I had previously seen, I gazed on these in sheer wonder, scarcely
believing they could be real , as they rose in a flock from the
road before us and flew past, brightening the very sunshine with
their glorious colours.


CHAPTER XIII.
Storm and fine View on Lapstone Hill—Farm-house in the “ Public” line—
Arrive at Parramatta—Steamboat—Scenery on the “ River”—Sydney—
Christmas-tree—Christmas-day—-Tippling Servants.
In the afternoon we encountered a storm of lightning, thunder,
and rain, just before reaching Lapstone Hill, and whilst we
wound down it we enjoyed as perfect a picture of a landscape
as ever eye beheld. How I wished, and wished in vain, for some
rare artist to see it with us! —and fancied the versions of its
beauty that Constable, Creswick, Copley Fielding, Cox, or
Turner might give to an admiring world. I have before en-
deavoured to describe Lapstone Hill (Chapter VII.) : but if
beautiful then, how much more so was it now, —with tall and
graceful gum-trees loaded with their white and honied blossoms,
lifting up their garlanded heads from the deep ravine, —amidst
groups of the delicate, feathery-leaved acacia, whose countless
clusters of pale-golden, hawthorn-scented flowers were bending
with the heavy rain-drops, that glittered and sparkled like dia-
monds on the shrubs, trees, and deep-crimson ’waratahs on the
rocks above us ! Before us lay the green Emu Plains, the broad
Nepean, and town of Penrith ; the view being bounded on either
side by the rocky gorge through which we looked. One half of the
sky was black as night, with the yet unspent wrath of the thun-
der-clouds, whose artillery still reverberated grandly amongst the
mountains; the other half of the Janus-faced heaven was blue,
and bright with sunshine: and over both, like a beautiful spirit
of concord, blessing alike the darkness and the light, beamed a
most brilliant rainbow. The whole scene was so indelibly
painted on my mind, I can fancy now that I see each individual
rock and tree that helped to make up the beautiful whole.
Crossing the Nepean as before, in the punt, w r e took up our
quarters again at the Ferry Inn, and early the next day continued
cur journey. Seeing a tolerably large house by the roadside,


with stacks, cows, pigs, and other farm-like things about, and a
tall sign-post, or what appeared such, in front, we alighted, to
see if we could procure a glass of milk, and entered a room, evi-
dently in the “ public” line of business, smelling dreadfully of
rum and- tobacco, and garnished with pipe-ashes, dirty glasses,
and empty bottles in abundance. A continuance of loud knock-
ing brought a stupid, dirty, half-dressed, slipshod woman from
an inner room, in which, as she left the door open, I could see
several messy, unmade beds, soiled clothes all about the floor,
and three or four more women of different ages, and of as un-
pleasing aspect as the one who had obeyed my summons, and
who, after some delay, brought me a jug of nice sweet milk, and
a dirty glass to pour it into ; seeming to me as if she had ably
assisted in the bottle-emptying of the preceding evening. This
universal addiction to drink, and the consequent neglect of all
industry and decency, are truly shocking. Here was a substantial
farm-house (sometimes performing in another character, it is
true), with the female inmates half-drunk and scarcely out of
bed at ten o’clock on a summer’s morning, rooms unswept, beds
unmade, and the whole establishment telling of plenty, sloth, and
drunkenness. .
We reached Parramatta about noon, and remained, in luxu-
rious idleness, at the pretty inn I had so much liked on our pre-
vious visit, for a day or two, until lodgings were prepared for us in
Sydney. We then embarked in a steamboat named the Rapid
or the Velocity , or some like promising title, on the Parramatta
river (alias Port Jackson), and moved away from the wharf
at a most funereal pace, which I for some time accounted for by
supposing that other passengers were expected alongside, but at
length found, to my dismay, that it was the best speed with
which this renowned vessel could travel without fear of an ex-
plosion. One advantage it gave us was a good and deliberate
view of the scenery on either side ; a moderately quick draughts-
man might have drawn a panorama of it as we slowly puffed
Some of the cottages and villas on the banks are very prettily
situated, with fine plantations, gardens, and orange-groves around
them, and nice pleasure-boats moored beside mossy stone steps
leading to the river. As we neared Sydney the banks became


much more rocky and picturesque, skirted and crowned with
pretty native shrubs, with here and there a fantastic group of
crags, like a little fort or castle, perched among them.
The animation of the scene in the harbour, the numerous ves-
sels at anchor, and the busy little boats plying in every direction,
gave by no means unpleasing evidence of our return to the Aus-
tralian metropolis. Viewed from any point, Sydney cannot fail
to strike a thinking mind with wonder and admiration, as being
the creation of so comparatively brief a space. A large and
well-built town, abounding with all the expensive luxuries of
civilized life—streams of gay equipages and equestrians traversing
the wide and handsome streets —throngs of busy merchants,
whose costly and innumerable goods are being landed from whole
fleets of noble ships that bring hither treasures from all climes—
all this, and more—where, but a few years ago, the lonely native
caught and eat his opossum, or paddled his tiny canoe across the
almost matchless harbour !
Not without strong misgivings as to the equity of such appro-
priations generally, do I make these remarks; but, in the cruel
annals of colonization, I believe that of New South Wales to be
the least objectionable. For the most part it has been peacefully
effected, and the great disproportion of the scanty aboriginal
population to the vast extent of habitable country still
leaves a superfluous abundance to the natives, of both land and
sustenance. Unlike the nobler and far more abused natives of
New Zealand, they attach themselves to no particular spot, but
within a certain wide boundary, which separates them from other
aboriginal tribes, they wander about, without attachment or in-
terest in one portion of country more than another, so that they
can find abundance of food, the vicinity of Europeans’ residences
being sought and preferred for that reason.
We now made a few weeks’ sojourn in Sydney, which, could
we have laid the dust, moderated the heat, and dismissed the
mosquitoes and their assistants, would have been very pleasant;
but as it was, my colonial enjoyments were limited to our usual
drives, and when able to walk at all, an idle, languid stroll in
the beautiful Government gardens. For some days before Christ-
mas, in our drives near the town, we used to meet numbers of
persons carrying bundles of a beautiful native shrub, to decorate


the houses, in the same manner that we use holly and evergreens
at home. Men, women, and children, white, brown, and
black, were in the trade ; and sometimes a horse approached, so
covered with the bowery load he bore, that only his legs were
visible, and led by a man nearly as much hidden ; carts heaped
up with the green and blossomed boughs came noddingly along,
with children running beside them, decked out with sprays and
garlands, laughing and shouting in proper Christmas jollity.
I liked to see this attempt at the perpetuation of some of our
ancient homely poetry of life, in this new and generally too pio-
saic Colony, where the cabalistic letters £. d. and RUM
appear too frequently the alphabet of existence. It seemed like
a good healthy memory of home; and I doubt not the decked-out
windows and bouquet-filled chimney in many a tradesman’s house
gave a more home-like flavour to his beef or turkey, and aided
in the remembrance of old days and old friends alike numbered
with the past.
The shrub chosen as the Sydney “ Christmas ” is well worthy
of the honour (the rough usage it receives rendering the quality
of the post it occupies rather problematical, by the way). It is
a handsome verdant shrub, growing from two to twelve or fifteen
feet high, with leaves in shape like those of the horse-chestnut,
but only two or three inches broad, with a dark green, polished,
upper surface, the under one being pale. Ihe flowers, which are
irregularly star-shaped, come out in light terminal sprays, their
chief peculiarity being, that they completely open whilst quite
small, and of a greenish white colour ; they then continue increas-
ing in size, and gradually ripening in tint, becoming first a peail
white, then palest blush, then pink, rose-colour, and crimson : the
constant change taking place in them, and the presence of all
these hues at one time on a spray of half a dozen flowers, has a
singularly pretty appearance. Their seem when freshly gathered
is like that of new-mown hay. Great quantities of the shrubs
grow in the neighbourhood of Sydney, or I should fear that
such wholesale demolition as I witnessed would soon render
them rare.
The “ Christmas dinner ” truly seemed to me a most odd and
anomalous affair. Instead of having won a seasonable appetite
by a brisk walk over the crisped snow, well muffled in warm


winter garments, I had passed the miserable morning, half-dead
with heat, on the sofa, attired in the coolest muslin dress I pos-
.
■ t remember the enviable times when I had touched a lump of
a snowball, and vainly watching the still, unruf-
K fled curtains .of the open window for the first symptom of the
afternoon* Sea-breeze.
I have heard persons who have lived for years in India say
that they found the climate of Sydney by far the most oppressive ;
and I partly account for this by the better adaptation of Indian
habitations to the heat, and their various contrivances for relief,
which English people, choosing to build English houses in an
un-English climate, never dream of providing. The only cool
arrangement generally adopted is the substitution of an oiled
cloth or matting for a carpet on sitting-room floors; some of the
mattings are fine and rather pretty-looking, but the oiled cloth
has always a kind of hair-dresser’s-shop look about it, which not
the most elegant furniture of every other description could re-
concile to my old-world prejudices; and the noise which the
softest step makes upon it is always unpleasant.
The prevailing vice of drunkenness among the lower orders is
perhaps more resolutely practised at this season than any other.
I have heard of a Christmas-day party being assembled, and
awaiting the announcement of dinner as long as patience would
endure ; then ringing the bell, but without reply; and on the
hostess proceeding to the kitchen, finding every servant either
gone out or rendered incapable of moving, the intended feast
being meanwhile burned to ashes. Nor is this by any means a
rare occurrence; as the crowded police-office can bear ample
testimony.


CHAPTER XIV.
Homebush —Colonial Country houses—The “Avenue”—Gates—Slip-rails
—Bush-rangers —Mounted Police—Dingoes—Flying Fox—Flying Opos-
sum—Native Cats Birds —Robins—Swallows —Knife-grinder—Coach-
man—Bell-bird—Laughing Jackass—Larks Game.
In January, 1840, we removed to “ Homebush,” an estate
within eleven miles of Sydney, on the Parramatta river, where
we proposed residing for a year or two ; and rendered the ill-ar-
ranged and dilapidated old house a tolerably comfortable home.
It contained two good rooms and five smaller ones ; the veranda
in front was one hundred feet long, by twelve in width, and was
carried round the ends of the house in the same proportion, the
whole neatly flagged ; at the back, the line was broken by the two
wings, leaving a shorter veranda in the centre, with the garden
(or rather wilderness) before it, commanding a beautiful view of
the river (a creek of which ran up towards the house), the oppo-
site shores, and several wooded jutting points on our own side.*
Homebush was a fair specimen of a New South Wales settler’s
residence, possessing many of the Colonial peculiarities. Ihe
house stood on the highest ground in the estate, and for some
hundreds of acres all around not a native tree nor even a stump
was visible, so completely had the land been cleared, although
not worth cultivation. This desert bareness was a little relieved
close to the house, by three magnificent Norfolk Island pines, which
towered far above the roof; and by the then broken and ruined
fruit-trees of what had been two very large orchards, which were
K
* On one of these was a school for young ladies, and any one addressing
the principal by letter would be somewhat amused at the very alarmingly
soft nature of the superscription, which would run thus :
“Mrs. Love,
Harmony House,
Concord,
Near Kissing Point! ”


formerly well stocked with mulberry, plum, cherry, pear, apple,
peach, orange, and loquat trees, but at the time of our taking
the place, after its being vacant some years (or only occupied by
a drunken overseer), the cattle had free ingress through the bro-
ken fences, and the fine orchards were utterly destroyed.
A curving road, nearly half a mile long, and some twenty
yards wide, with a good four-rail fence on either side, led from
the entrance gate, on the public road, to the house, and this, be-
ing unadorned by a single tree, was, according to a Colonial stretch
of courtesy, termed the “Avenue ; ” much to my mystification,
when, on inquiring for Mr. Meredith one day, a servant told
me, “ Master had just gone down the £ aveny.’ ” I pondered this
announcement some moments, and not being able to recollect
any thing of the kind near the place (for I confess my thoughts
were wandering in search of some gum-tree likeness of the
stately aisles of elms and limes that I loved so well at home),
I was compelled to inquire where this “ terra incognita ” lay ;
and having once discovered that we had an “ avenue,” I never
failed to remember its style and title.
Proceeding, then, along the avenue towards the house, a
stranger might be apt to fancy he had entered at a wrong gate,
for he would find himself led into the midst of all the farm-
buildings ; stock-yards, cow-sheds, barn, stable, and piggeries
ranging on his left hand, whilst huts for the farm servants lay
on his right; and in front, commanding a full view of all these
ornamental edifices, the hall door of the house ! Such being the
almost universal arrangement in the Colony; and, as compared
with many other settlers’ houses, this was rather aristocratic.
Why the approach to a farm-house here should be so much more
dirty, unpleasant, and intrusive than in England, I know not; but
certain it is that in visiting a colonist you are generally obliged
to inspect every other portion of the establishment before you
can reach the apartments of the family.
Another universal inconvenience is, that you never see a gate ,
or so rarely as only to be the exception to the rule, “ Slip-
rails” are the substitute; five or six heavy long poles loosely
inserted in sockets made in two upright posts. They may be
stepped over by a horse if only lowered at one end, but to allow
anv vehicle to enPr, each one has to be lifted out and put aside;


and it often happens that four or five of these troublesome and
slovenly contrivances occur in the approach to one house, with the
invariable additional charm (in winter) of a deep squashy pool of
mud around each one; yet, most probably, when you do gain your
destination, if a dinner-party be the occasion, you find a table
spread with abundance of plate, glass, damask, and costly viands,
and a profusion of expensive wines. Such inconsistencies per-
petually struck me, showing the general preference for glitter
and show, rather than sterling English comfort. A settler will
perhaps keep two or three carriages, and furnish his house in a
costly style, yet grudge the labour of a carpenter to convert
some of the useless wood around him into gates for his farm and
grounds. Homebush did possess a gate, but, as was requisite,
to be in proper Colonial “ keeping,” one half was off its hinges,
and the companion-moiety never consented to open unless it was
lifted ; therefore, on the whole, it was remarkably convenient.
During nearly the whole time of our residence here the public
road near us was infested by a gang of bush-rangers, or rather
footpads, who committed many robberies on persons travelling
past; but although we and our servants constantly traversed the
dreaded road, we were never molested. Possibly the shelter and
concealment they very probably found in some of the dense
scrubs and thickets which skirted part of our ground near the
scene of their exploits, induced them to adopt the fox’s policy,
who rarely “ robs near his own den but the constant depreda-
tions we heard of rendered our drives far less pleasant to me,
although a double-barrelled gun usually accompanied us. One
day we met the clergyman of Cook’s River,* wdio, on his way to
dine with the Governor at Parramatta, had been stopped by three
of the party, who took his money and a very valuable watch.
He had directly ridden to the nearest public-house, not a quarter
of a mile off, and, with some of the inmates and an old musket,
had diligently scoured the bush in pursuit, but w ithout again
seeing the gang, who within an hour robbed some persons in
another road. They one day took from a poor woman even her
wedding-ring, and for several months continued the same prac-
ic 2
* Cook’s River is an arm of the sea, running inland from Botany Bay,
and on its banks are many pleasant residences, and the prettiest church in the
Colony.


tices on this, the most frequented public road near Sydney,
almost without an attempt being made for their capture ; for so
constantly were they “ at work,” that had the police been
desirous of taking them, they could not have failed. In the case
of the more formidable gangs of bush-rangers, who by their out-
rages often become the terror of a wide rural district, the
“ mounted police” is an excellent and efficient force. It con-
sists of picked and well-paid volunteers from the regiments in the
Colony, and the officers are generally brave and intelligent young
men, who, when they look for a bush-ranger, generally find him ;
two terms by no means synonymous among the constabulary.
During our stay at Bathurst, a party of the mounted police
went in search of a very daring gang of bush-rangers, or, as they
are sometimes called, “ bolters.” After some search, the officer
in command, Lieut. Hilliard (of the 86th or 28th, I forget
which), divided his force, taking one route himself, accompanied
by a single trooper, and sent the rest in an opposite direction.
He had not gone far before he found the gang of seven despera-
does comfortably bivouacking, with eleven stand of arms, loaded,
beside them ; and by a sudden and gallant attack, secured them
all, and brought them into Bathurst; his prowess being duly
appreciated by the settlers, who presented him with a valuable
token of their gratitude.
The plan usually pursued by the bush-rangers in robbing a
house (which I imagine they very rarely do without collusion
with the servants) is to walk quietly in, and “ bail up,” i. e.
bind with cords, or otherwise secure, the male portion, leaving
an armed guard over them, whilst the rest of the gang ransack
the house, taking all firearms, money, plate, or valuables, toge-
ther with what clothes or stores they require. Resistance is out
of the question, silence or death being the alternative. One
friend of ours on such an occasion sprang across the room to
seize his gun, the moment the bush-rangers entered, but they
fired, and he was severely wounded, without gaining his object;
another gentleman had several fingers shot off, but the wretches
seldom commit murder if their victims quietly submit to their
peremptory demands.
Another unpleasant class of neighbours were the native dogs,
or dingoes, evidently a species of wolf, or perhaps the connect-


ing- link between the wolf and dog. These creatures were very
numerous around us, and their howling or yelling at night in the
neighbouring forests had a most dismal, unearthly kind of tone.
They are more the figure of a Scotch colly, or sheep-dog, than
any other I can think of as a comparison, but considerably larger,
taller, and more gaunt-looking, with shaggy, wiry hair, and
most often of a sandy colour. Their appearance is altogether
wolfish, and the expression of the head especially so, nor do
their ferocious habits by any means weaken the likeness.
We had a number of calves, which, for greater safety from
these savage animals, were folded at night in one of the old
orchards adjoining the house; but several of the poor little
ones fell victims to the dingoes. Shortly after our arrival at our
new residence, we were one night alarmed by a fearful outcry
among the calves, and Mr. Meredith, who instantly divined the
cause, got up, and found several dingoes dragging along one of
the youngest of the herd ; as they ran away he fired, but the
night being thickly dark, the brutes escaped. 'I he cries of terror
among the poor calves had brought all the cows to the spot,
and the indescribable moaning and bellowing they continued
until morning showed their instinctive knowledge of the danger.
The poor wounded calf was so much injured that it died the fol-
lowing day, and its unhappy mother, after watching and com-
forting it as long as life remained, never ceased her cries and
moans till she entirely lost her voice from hoarseness: I have
rarely seen anything more distressing than the poor animal’s
misery ; and to prevent such an occurrence again, the youngest
calves were always locked in the stable at night.
The dingoes rarely kill their victim at once, but coolly com-
mence eating it, at whatever part they chance to have first laid
hold of, three or four often gnawing at the unfortunate animal
together, whilst its agonised cries do not seem to disturb their
horrible feast in the slightest degree; and unless by chance a
vital part is destroyed, the maimed creature probably lingers
during hours of protracted and unimaginable torture.
Their audacity, too, is quite equal to their other engaging
qualities. Finding that our veal was not to be obtained, a party
of them made an onslaught on our pork, and very early one morn-
ing carried off a nice fat pig, nearly full grown. Luckily pigs


are not often disposed to be silent martyrs, and the one in ques-
tion made so resolute a protest against the abduction, that the
noise reached Mr. Meredith, who immediately gave chace, and
soon met the main body of porkers trotting home at a most un-
wonted speed, whilst the voice of woe continued its wail in the
distance; on coming to the spot, he found two dingoes dragging
off the pig by the hind legs towards a thick scrub; he fired,
wounding one, when both released their victim and made off, the
poor pig trotting home, telling a long and emphatic story of its
wrongs and sufferings, from which it eventually recovered. In
about two hours after this, a lame white dingo, the same which
had been so lately shot at, boldly chased my two pet goats into
the veranda!
On one occasion Mr. Meredith was travelling from one station
to another with a number of cattle, both old and young, and at
night had, as usual, placed them in a secure stock-yard, the
calves being with the cows. On going to see them turned out
in the morning, the peculiar moaning of a cow struck him as
being similar to that of one which had lost her calf; but knowing
they were all right the night before, he paid little attention to it,
until, on observing a skin and fresh blood just outside the rails,
he examined more closely, and found that the dingoes had con-
trived to drag a young calf through the bars of the stock-yard,
and had devoured it (doubtless nearly alive) within a foot or two
of the miserable cow, who could see and hear, but not help, her
poor little one.
Frequently, when their visits are interrupted, a foal or calf is
found with a limb half-eaten away, and the utmost vigilance is
requisite to protect the yet more helpless sheep from their raven-
ous jaws. All flocks are folded at night and watched. Two
yards or folds are usually erected near together, between which
the watchman has his box, and a large bright fire, and frequently
during the night lie walks round with his dogs.
I had not the satisfaction of seeing any of the marauders about
us taken, though they were continually seen by the servants
skulking about, early in the morning, and I have seen them pass
through our veranda before sunrise, followed by our own dogs,
barking and growling their evident dislike of the intruders. The
dingoes do not bark, but howl and yell most dismally. The


Cumberland hounds meet occasionally in the neighbourhood of
Homebush, and I hoped they would find and destroy some; but
though repeatedly on the scent, they did not succeed, and the
members of the “ hunt” seemed generally to prefer having their
fox (dingo) in a bag, to the trouble, or, as I should have supposed
it, sport of finding one in the forest.
The “flying fox” of New South Wales is an animal I do not
remember to have seen any published account of, yet it is a very
remarkable one. I had often heard Mr. Meredith speak of the
quantities of these creatures that he had seen on the shores of the
Hunter’s River, but was not aware we laid any of them near us,
until one moonlight night, whilst initiating an English friend
into' the barbarous mysteries of opossum-shooting (familiarly
termed “ possumin ”), he heard a great flapping and rustling
amongst the branches and leaves above his head, and firing,
brought down a very fine specimen of the flying fox.
I forget the dimensions which Dr. Buckland assigns to the
pterodactyle, the gigantic bat of a former world ; but this seemed
a not unworthy representative of the species, the wings measur-
ing between four and five feet at their full expansion, and the
body being larger than that of a well-conditioned rat. The head
more resembles that of a dog than a bat, covered, like the middle
and hinder portions of the body, with thick black fur, that round
the neck being fox-coloured. r lhe claws and limbs of the wings
are very strong, and the membrane very tough and elastic.
These giant bats are especially destructive in orchards, as they
have a great penchant for ripe fruit, particularly peaches, and
their mode of gathering their dessert not being economical, they
knock off' great quantities while buffeting about in the trees;
added to which, their scent is so exceedingly unpleasant that no
fruit they have once touched is eatable.
I never saw any other large bats here. Several of a small
kind, apparently very similar to the common little English bat,
used to flit about the house in an evening; but I liked them too
well to molest them.
One dead specimen of the flying opossum was brought to me.
The head greatly resembles in its gentle expression those of the
other kinds of opossum, and with a still greater length of pre-
hensile tail. The fore and hind legs on either side are enclosed


in the soft, elastic, furry membrane, which spreads like a bat’s
wing from the back, leaving only the sharply clawed feet exposed.
On having the body skinned, I observed that this membrane was
double, and easily separated, but without the slightest particle of
any other substance between the two thin, almost transparent
textures. The upper portion was covered with warm black fur;
the under part had a thinner covering of soft, greyish white
hair.
Several of the mischievous little animals commonly called
native cats (Dasyurus ?) were destroyed by our dogs. They
seem to occupy the same place in Australia that the weasel and
ferret family do at home, being terribly destructive if they can
get into the henhouse; not only killing to eat, but continuing to
kill as many fowls or turkeys as they have time for, leaving a
sad spectacle of mangled corses behind them. They are pretty,
but have a sharp, vicious countenance, very different to the deer-
like expression of the herbivorous animals here. Their common
colour is grey, finely spotted with white; the tail thin, covered
with rather long, wiry hair, which forms a sort of tassel at the
end. They are about the size of a lean, half-grown domestic
cat, very agile, fierce, and strong, and extremely tenacious of
life. Dogs seem to have a natural propensity to destroy them,
but sometimes find the engagement rather more equal than they
might wish.
Very few birds came near our house, but among those few
was the robin (Petroica phoenicea?), as much more beautiful in
plumage as he is inferior in note to our winter darling in Eng-
land, but with exactly the same jaunty air, and brisk, quick
manner. His attire is, I really think, the most exquisite of all
the feathered creatures here: the breast is the most vivid gera-
nium-colour, softening to a paler shade towards the wings, which
are glossy black, with clear white markings across them; the
back is also black, with a white spot on the crown of the head,
and the tail-feathers are also barred with white. The colours
are so clear and distinct as almost to convey the idea of different
garments put on and fitted with the most exquisite taste; whilst
the gay, frolicsome air, and intelligent, bright, black eyes of the
little beau tell you that he is by no means unconscious of the
very favourable impression his appearance must create. He


hops about, sings a few notes of a soft, lively little song; flies to
a rail or low tree, and arranges some fancied impropriety in a
wing-feather; then surveys the glossy spread of his tail as he
peeps over his shoulder, and after a few more hops, and another
small warble, very sweet and very low—a passing glance, like
the flash of a tiny flambeau, and he is gone!
Some robins, which I supposed the females, have a less vivid
scarlet on the breast, though similar in all other respects.
When we first came to Homebush, I observed fragments of
many swallows’ nests in the veranda, and marks where others
had been, but had wholly crumbled away, the constant heat so
drying the mud that it could not stick, and the poor birds were
in constant danger of losing both their patient labour and their
helpless young. To obviate this sad distress, I had a few little
shelves nailed up in the most retired part of the veranda, as
foundations for the nests, and soon had the satisfaction of seeing
a nice strong superstructure raised on one of them, from which
in process of time five downy little heads emerged, opening very
wide mouths for the food constantly supplied by the parent birds.
Only one family placed themselves thus under our immediate pro-
tection, but many others built in the old barn and other outhouses.
One bird which frequently came near the house has a very
singular note, which has gained for him the Colonial sobriquet
of the “ knife-grinder a portion of his song bearing a most
accurate resemblance to the sound of grinding a knife on the
grindstone, giving exactly the crrew whiss - ss - ss -, but in
a most musical and dulcet tone. His attire, as befitting an
artisan, is somewhat sober and plain.
Another equally singular voice among our feathered friends
was that of the “ coachman,” than which no title could be
more appropriate, his chief note being a long clear whistle, with
a smart crack of the whip to finish with. Although I have often
heard his fine clear voice sounding far above me, from his
favourite perch in the top of the highest tree near, I never had a
distinct view of Mr, Jehu.
The “ bell-bird ” has, as may be supposed, won its appellation
from the resemblance of its deep full voice to the tones of a bell;
and that general favourite, the “ laughing jackass,” equally well
merits the first portion of his title, by his merry and most musical


peals of laughter ; but why he should be called a “ jackass” at
all, lamat a loss to divine. Under this name, however, he is
generally respected in the colony, being ah adroit destroyer of
snakes, guanas, and other reptiles. When many of these merry
birds congregate together, the effect is extremely droll: first one
begins alone, and laughs lustily out at the top of his voice; a
second, third, and fourth then take up the strain, like glee-singers,
till the whole party are fairly off, and the very trees seem to peal
out along with them. lam half inclined to fancy that Martini’s
popular laughing chorus, “ Vadasi via di qua,” must have been
suggested by the voices of my friends the Australian jackasses;
certain it is, that both songs have an equally infectious spirit,
and set the most gloomy-minded listener laughing in concert,
whether he will or no. The poor birds often fall victims to their
own accomplishments, for, being much esteemed as “ pets,” they
are frequently maimed to prevent their escape, and tied by the
leg or closely caged, whilst their less human persecutors spoil
their naturally merry voices by teaching them a few lame bars
of some London-alley tune ; and “ All round my Hat,” “ Jump
Jim Crow,” or “ Sich a getting up Stairs,” tells a melancholy
story of their miserable fate.
Many small birds, with which I am not sufficiently acquainted
to describe them, inhabited our woods ; and one or two kinds of
“ larks,” as they are called, used to rise in considerable numbers
from the dry grass-tufts, as we walked over the cleared land. A
few quail, a chance wild duck or teal, and one solitary snipe,
formed our list of game at Homebush, and I scarcely saw a par-
rot during our stay.


CHAPTER XV.
Norfolk Island Pine—English Pear-tree —Daisy—Bush Flowers—Creepers
—“ He-oak” —Zamia—“ Wooden Pear-tree”—Native Cherry—lnsect Ar-
chitecture —Twig Nests, &c.—Butterflies—Ground-Spiders—Tarantula—
Silk-Spiders—Scorpions—Hornets—Mosquitoes —Ants,
The Norfolk Island pine (Aracauria excelsa), of which, as I
have before remarked, we had three magnificent specimens close
to the house, is certainly the most noble and stately tree of all
the pine family that I have ever seen, beautiful as are they all.
The tall, erect, and tapering stem (seventy or eighty feet high),
the regularity of the circling branches, lessening by small degrees
from the widely-spread expanse below, to the tiny cross that
crowns the summit of the exquisite natural spire, and the richly
verdant, dense, massive foliage clothing the whole with an un-
fading array of scale-armour, form altogether the finest model of
a pine that can be imagined. The cones too are worthy to
grow on such a tree; solid ponderous things, as large as a
child’s head—not a baby's head, neither—with a fine embossed
coat of mail, firmly seated on the beam-like branches, as if defy-
ing- the winds to shake them.
Mr. Meredith climbed very nearly to the summit of our tallest
pine, and said he had never seen anything more beautiful than
the downward view into and over the mass of diverging branches
spread forth beneath him. He brought me down one cone, with
its spray, if so I may call the armful of thick green shoots that
surrounded it, and I was gazing at it for half the day after; it
was so different from anything I had seen before, so new, and so
grandly beautiful. The rigidity of the foliage had a sculpture-
like character, that made me think how exquisitely Gibbons
would have wrought its image in some of his graceful and stately
designs, had he ever seen the glorious tree.
One of those at Homebush grew near to the front veranda,


and some of its enormous roots had spread under the heavy stone
pavement, lifting it up in an arch, like a bridge.
When the cones ripened, the large winged seeds fell out in
great numbers; they require to be planted immediately, if at all,
as the oil in them quickly dries out, and with it the vegetative
properties are lost. ,
Close under the towering pines grew a common English pear-
tree ; a crooked, wide-spreading, leafy, farm-house-garden sort of
pear-tree, that won my especial love, from the good old-fashioned
pictures of gable-ended houses and neat garden-orchards it
brought into my mind, and the glory and delight of its spring-time
blossoms was an earnest and most child-like joy to me. Surely
never was pear-tree so watched and gazed on, both morning,
evening, and moonlight!—for Sydney moonlights are like tro-
pical ones, so clear, so silver-bright, that I could see to read
small print as well as by day—and the old pear-tree shone out in
them like a beautiful vision of home, telling store of pleasant
stories in each fluttering leaf that fell from its thousands of
flowers—telling of bloomy fragrant gardens, with velvet turf
paths, and shady arbours, and singing birds, and little running
brooks, one of whose silver threads near our thirsty home would
have been a priceless treasure —oh ! it was an exhaustless remem-
brancer of pleasant by-gones was that old pear-tree !
Its rival in my home-loving regards was a little root of the
double daisy, which, as a great treasure, my husband brought me
one day from a gardener’s. It lived, as very few daisies do at
home, I can tell them, in a pot by itself, and was carried into
the shade, and watered daily, and tended with as much solicitude
as any rara avis of the choicest conservatory. It bore two nice
pinky-white daisies, just like real English ones ; and then, during
an illness I had, in which I could not attend to it, it withered
away, and my first glance into the garden showed me the
scorched remains of my poor favourite.
Many very pretty native flowers and shrubs adorned our
“ bush,” or rather forest, and the graceful native indigo crept up
many bushes and fences, sometimes totally hiding them with its
elegant draperies. Another handsome climber of the same
family ( Kennedia ) has rich crimson flowers, very long in the part
called the keel, with bright yellow stamens protruding from its


point. This species climbs to a height of twenty or thirty feet,
and the dark leaves and drooping flowers hang down in elegant
pendulous wreaths. But the most beautiful climbing plant I
have yet seen in Australia, I know not the name of, nor can I
find any botanical description to suit it, except that of Bignonia
Australis, which it possibly is. The leaves resemble those of
the jessamine in form, but are much larger, and of a rich glossy
green; the flowers fox-glove shaped, in long axillary sprays,
their colour being a delicate cream-colour, beautifully variegated
within by bright purple markings. I only found one plant of it,
in a (comparatively) cool moist thicket in our Homebush wood.
Great quantities of a tall, handsome, herbaceous plant, com-
monly called the “ mock-cotton tree,” grew near us, and by the
roadsides around Sydney, it having at one time been introduced
as a probably profitable speculation, but the cotton was not found
to be a marketable article. The clusters of white flowers aie ex-
tremely beautiful, having very much the structure of the Hoya
carnosa, and are full of clear honey. I used to put them to a
very ignoble use, namely, as fly-cages, to attract the troublesome
swarms from our picture-frames, which the honey-laden blossoms
effected to a great extent.
The seed-pods are large, and full of most beautiful soft fila-
ments, like white floss silk, which before they are ruffled by the
wind have a bright and silvery gloss, that might well tempt a
trial of so fair a material in manufactures. It looks as if it
might be spun into an exquisite stuff between cambric and satin ;
and I think still, that some clever genius of the spinning-jennies
might weave us a most dainty and gossamer fabric of its fine and
even threads, which are the wings of the seeds, and being so
light and long, waft them an immense distance, often to the an-
noyance of the agriculturist, who would by no means partake in
my idle admiration of his insidious foe. I suppose it is a species
of Asclepias.
Small shrubs with yellow and orange papilionaceous blossoms
abounded everywhere, some clinging to the ground like mosses,
and others, with every variety of soft and hard, smooth and
prickly leaves that can be imagined, growing into tall shrubs,
ail very pretty, but with so strong a family likeness that I grew
fastidious among them, and rarely gathered more than t\v o or


three. A small scentless violet and a bright little yellow sorrel
(which is an excellent salad-herb) made some few patches of the
dry earth gay with their blue and golden blossoms, and the ground
convolvulus and southern harebell seldom failed to greet me in
our rambles. Various kinds of epacrisalso abounded, with deli-
cate wax-like pink and white flowers.
The trees called by the Colonists “ he-oak” and “ she-oak” ( Ca-
suarina stricta and C. torulosa) form a remarkable feature in
Australian scenery. They are usually of rather handsome forms,
with dark, rough, permanent bark, and brownish-olive foliage, re-
sembling in structure the “ horse-tails” of English brooks, con-
sisting of long tufts of jointed grassy branchlets, hanging down
like coarse hair, or a horse’s tail. The he-oak has much shorter
tresses than the she-oak, which may perhaps have given rise to
the absurd Colonial distinction of the species (as they belong to
the order Moncccid). The blossoms in spring appear like a small
crimson fringe on portions of the branches, and the succeeding
cones are the size of a pigeon’s egg, very roughly tubercled.
Perhaps none of all the novel trees in this Colony have so com-
pletely strange and un-English an aspect as these; and in a
moderate breeze the tones uttered amongst their thousands of
waving, whispering strings are far from unmusical, and reminded
me of the lower, wailing notes of an iEolian harp. However
luxuriant may be the foliage of one of these singular trees, the
skeleton form of the branches is never hidden, but every twig
shows itself, making a drawing of one rather a puzzling affair to
so humble a limner as myself.
She-oak is especially liked as fuel. It is said that this name
has been borrowed from the sheac , or cheoak, of America, in con-
sequence of some resemblance in the wood.
The zamia, now so well known in English stoves, I have often
observed near Sydney, with its handsome coronet of palm-like
leaves gracefully spreading round the central cone. Hear the
road to Cook’s River they grow very numerously.
The name, and some resemblance in form between the seed-
vessel and the fruit, form all the likeness which the famed
“ wooden pear-tree” of Australia bears to its more useful name-
sake at home. One or two large specimens of the wooden fruit
which I saw were the size of a good Jargonelle pear. When


ripe, they split open from end to end, showing a solid wooden
structure, with the thin winged seeds scaling off' the inner sides.
Several other shrubs bear similar seed-vessels of a smaller size.
The “ native cherry” ( Exocarpus cupressiformis') has no
better claim to its borrowed title than the pear-tree, being in
foliage more like a cypress, but of a brighter and yellower green
than the generality of trees in this ever-brown region. Its form
is usually handsome, although it seldom attains a large size, and
the wood is remarkably close, hard, and fineiy grained, well
adapted for turning or carving. The fruit, so celebrated among
Antipodean contrarieties for having the “ stone outside,” is like
a small yew-berry, but still less pleasant in flavour, with a hard
seed growing from its end, fancifully termed the stone. Of all
countries or climates, I think that of Australia must be the most
barren of useful natural products of the vegetable kingdom ; for
this miserable “ cherry” is the best specimen of its indigenous
fruits, if not the only one; nor am I aware of any one edible
grain or root fit for human food. Some florid descriptive
writers have, I know, luxuriated in depicting imaginary gardens
of “ parsley and wild carrots,” amidst which the cattle are said
to revel in abundance ; but whilst in the Colony I never heard
of such things. Perhaps the wretched root which, as I have
before mentioned, the aborigines dig for when all other suste-
nance fails them, may be the u carrot” in question; but it is too
hot, stringy, bitter, and small to be of the slightest use to Euro-
peans.
Some of the insect-architects here are most extraordinary
creatures; but I grieve to say I know comparatively little about
them, my chief acquaintance being with their deserted houses,
of which I have several kinds. Some of these are formed of
straight twigs, the sixth or eighth part of an inch thick, and
from two to four inches long, placed side by side in a circular
form, and very strongly webbed together within, so that it is
impossible to tear them asunder without breaking the twigs, the
ends of which usually project beyond the closed portion of the
cell, which is suspended by a strong web woven over the spray
of a tree or shrub, so as to let it swing with the wind. I have
sometimes seen a large white caterpillar inside an unfinished cell,
and on one or two occasions have observed a bush or tree so full


Strong bags of web, with sticks strongly fastened
round them.
Bag of silky web, with small twigs
woven and cemented on it.
Cone of web, with dry leaves
loosely attached to it.
Cone of web, with small twigs
and grass straws attached.
Cell like an egg, stuck on a twig.


of these pendent berths as to give them the appearance of a
good crop of some fruit or seed ; but (very stupidly) I always
limited my collection to the vacant ones, or I might have learned
much more of their economy. How such a creature could cut
off, and carry to their destined place, pieces of twig four or five
times its own weight, I cannot imagine: that they were cut
expressly for the purpose is evident from the neat manner in
which the ends are rounded off: they are left of uneven lengths,
and not webbed on the outside, which, together with their being
hung so as to wave with the leaves of the tree, seem all pre-
cautions against discovery.
Some are formed in the same manner of much smaller twigs ;
others are pointed bags of strong web, with small bits of stick
fastened at intervals on the outside ; and some are formed of a
webbed bag, to which quantities of small dead leaves are attached
by one end only, so as to cover it entirely, and flutter like a
withered bunch of leaves ; but all are hung upon trees as much
resembling the nests in colour and aspect as possible. Those I
have opened are lined within with the smoothest white silken
web, the outer portion being brown or ash-coloured, to corre-
spond with the tint of the twigs or leaves.
I have two examples of another kind of cell, like a very small
bird’s egg, of a brown ash-colour, with one end open and the
other firmly attached to a twig. At first it might be mistaken
for the empty seed-vessel of a plant (had I not gathered it from
a pod-bearing shrub) ; but on inspection the cell seems evidently
built upon, not grown out of, the spray. Ihe egg-shape is per-
fect, and the open end smoothly finished. Both those I found
were empty, their texture was quite smooth and hard, the same
substance to all appearance as the bark on which they were so
firmly lodged.
I saw very few butterflies in New South Wales, not more than
two species, I think, both of a finely spotted copper colour.
Large moths are more numerous ; but of these I did not notice
many remarkable ones. Whilst we were at Bathurst, the settleis
were complaining of a kind of white grub which infested the
roots of the corn, and by eating through the stalks destroyed the
crops; I have seen half a dozen, or more of them, at one root.
Before we left Bathurst, a prodigious number of small copper
I,


butterflies were seen flying about, and I had strong suspicions o£
their being identical with the destructive grubs.
The ground-spiders may well be ranked among, the wonderful
native architects of Australia; they are of various sizes, and
differ in their colour, form, and markings. They hollow a
circular hole in the earth, adapted to the size of their body,
and more beautifully formed and perfectly round than any
engineer with all his scientific instruments could have made
it. Within, it is nicely tapestried with the finest web, woven
closely over the wall of this subterranean withdrawing-room, the
depth of which I never accurately ascertained, as at a certain
distance they seem to curve, or perhaps lead into a side-cell,
where the feelers of fine grass I have introduced could not pene-
trate. Some of these tunnels terminate at the surface with
merely a slight web spun over the grains of soil close to the
aperture, as if to prevent their rolling into it; the holes being
from one-sixth of an inch to an inch or more in diameter. Some
of them boast the extraordinary luxury of a front door ; these
I imagine to be rather first-rate kind of spiders, and their doors
are as beautiful instances of insect skill and artifice as any that
our wonder-teeming world displays to us. When shut down
over the hole, nothing but the most accurate previous knowledge
could induce any person to fancy they could perceive any dif-
ference in the surface of the soil; but, perhaps, if you remain
very still for some minutes, the clever inhabitant will come
forth, when you first perceive a circle of earth, perhaps the size
of a wedding-ring or larger, lifted up from beneath, like a trap-
door ; it falls back gently on its hinge side, and a fine, hairy,
beautifully pencilled brown or grey spider pops out, and most
probably pops in again, to sit just beneath the opening, and wait
for his dinner of flies or other eatable intruders. Then we see
that the under side and the rim of his earthen door are thickly
and neatly webbed over, so that not a grain of soil can fall away
from its thickness, which is usually about the eighth or tenth of
an inch, and although so skilfully webbed below, the upper
surface preserves exactly the same appearance as the surrounding
soil. The hinge consists also of web, neatly attached to that
of the lid and the box. I have the greatest respect and admira-
tion for these clever mechanics, and though I very often, with a


bent of grass or a soft green twig, try to persuade one to come
up and be looked at (which they generally do, nipping fast
hold of the intrusive probe), I never was guilty of hurting one.
I have picked very large ones off ground that the plough had
just turned over, and have carried them to places unlikely to be
disturbed : and I generally have two or three particular friends
among them, whom I frequently take a peep at. They often travel
some distance from home, probably in search of food, as I have
overtaken and watched them returning, when they seldom turn
aside from hand or foot placed in their way, but go steadily
on at a good swift pace, and, after dropping into their hole, put
forth a claw, and hook the door to after them, just as a man
would close a trap-door above him when descending a ladder.
The tarantula is not quite so great a favourite with me, as I
have strong suspicions of its bite being venomous. At first I
understood them to be harmless, although servants and ignorant
people hold them in great abhorrence, and, unless too frightened
to approach, always kill them when discovered. Certainly the
appearance of a full-sized tarantula is by no means prepossessing.
An oval body nearly an inch long, and a proportionably large
head and shoulders, are surrounded by eight bent-up legs, tw o or
three inches long, covered, as are also the head and oody, with
thick, fine, browm, hair-like fur. When disturbed they scramble
along at a rapid rate, and are very frequent residents behind pic-
tures or furniture against the wall, often causing terrific screams
from one’s housemaid, which are somewdiat alarming, until, on
inquiry, the dreadful words “ A Triantelope , Ma’am !” are
gasped out, and the tragedy ends in the death, or, as I usually
arrange it, the careful expulsion of the intruder.
Not being learned in entomology, I know not if the tarantula
is a spinning spider or not, but 1 never saw one in a web, or
detected any thread attached to their bodies. Out of doors their
favourite haunts are old trees, where they, live between the loose
bark and the wood, or in cracks of wooden fences; and from the
large families of several generations which I have sometimes dis-
covered, I imagine their habits to be somewhat patriarchal.
Several persons of education and intelligence have assured me
of their dangerous nature, but 1 have never yet witnessed an
instance of it, and they are such patient and industrious fiy-
l 2


catchers, that so long as they confine their perambulations to the
ceiling, or the upper portion of the walls of a room, 1 never dis-
turb them.
Many other large kinds of spider are common, and frequently
in the woods I have found some with immense webs of dark
yellow silk, which would bear a tolerable pull without break-
ing ; the threads being far thicker and stronger than those
of the silkworm, and often stretched from tree to tree in a
length of several yards. The weavers of these are very hand-
somely marked spiders of various colours, blight green being a pre-
valent one. If, as I remember hearing some years since, spiders’
web can be spun into gloves and lace, the manufacturers would do
well to procure a supply of the raw material from Australia.
"We once found what appeared to be the first essay of a nume-
rous family of young spiders at setting up in life on their own
account. The large parent web, of strong bright silk, was spread
out in all its exquisite and regular divisions across a path, with
the portly owner daintily arrayed in green, with leopard-spot
markings, staidly poised in the centre; and close by, scattered
amongst the twigs and leaves of the thick shrubs, hung a multi-
tude of little starry webs, with a little spider seated in the midst
of each, all exactly the same size, and bearing a strong filial
resemblance to the large one.
The scorpion is a far more truly formidable creature than the
tarantula, and, as it frequently lives in old wood, is apt to be
brought into the house with the fuel. It is the real, orthodox,
zodiacal scorpion, with its hideous scaly, claw-armed body, and
long jointed tail, ending in a fearful sting, a wound from which is
severely painful, and often of dangerous consequence. It is, with-
out doubt, the most horrible-looking of all the creeping and crawl-
ing fraternity that lam acquainted with; and even my philanthropy
cannot defend the detestable scorpion, which I ruthlessly kill when-
ever an opportunity offers. Those I have seen in these Colonies
are about two inches long, the tail being about half the entire
length; and when the creature is disturbed, this diabolical tail seems
to turn on a dozen pivots, darting in every direction, until, when
hard pressed or wounded, the creature most assuredly stings itself
(even without being “ girt by fire”), but whether accidentally, or
with intent to commit felo de se, of course no one can decide, unless


some vicious, venomous individual who was a scorpion “ in Pytha-
goras’ time” can throw light on this poesy-honoured question !
On several evenings I was driven from the veranda, where we
commonly sat for some time after sunset, by the sudden appearance
of great numbers of large hornets flying in all directions; and
the cattle and horses seemed, by their half frantic demeanour and
loud cries, as well aware as ourselves what dangerous visitors had
arrived, although we did not find that any of the animals were
stung. All the fences near the house were thickly occupied by
the hornets, who seemed, by their loud buzzing and rapid move-
ments, to be themselves in a state of great excitement. These
tumultuous and most unpleasant assemblies took place for severa.
evenings in succession, but fortunately the terror of all our house-
hold sufficed to keep every one as much within doors as possible,
and we all escaped being stung. I did not even see a single hornet
in the house, which, with such countless swarms careering through
the air all around, and even in the veranda, seems rather singular.
Mosquitoes used to rise in positive clouds from the banks of
the creek in the evening, and if I dared to remain then near the
water, they severely punished my temerity, their long sharp pro-
boscis piercing like a fine needle through shoes, gloves, dress, or
shawl, and the shrill hum of some hundreds round my face seem-
ing to promise a still further increase of their delicate attentions.
A precipitate retreat was my only resource, for most fortunately
we were rarely annoyed by them within doors, and there at least
I could escape the torments.
But the house, as if no place in this Colony could be free from
nuisances, was assailed by myriads of ants, that made their way
into every description of sweet stuff, through every kind of bar-
rier ; jars, canisters, boxes, and papers were alike unavailing;
whatever I touched seemed alive with ants, and their industry
was unwearied ; day and night the “ runs,” or paths they tra-
versed, were always black with their countless millions, like a
miniature Cheapside or Ludgate Hill, and none of our destruc-
tive or protective measures seemed to make the least difference.
If one million were scalded, two more supplied their place,
and I have met some of the little foragers with bits of sugar
in their mouths far down the garden, showing their plans
of business to be on a most extensive scale.


CHAPTER XVI.
Guanas —Lizards—Snakes —Salt - Marshes —Fishing—Crabs Toad - fish
Mangrove-trees —Romance and Reality—Night Sounds Orange-groves
Gardens —Gigantic Lily—Scarcity of Fresh Water Winter Rains Salt
Well—Climate in Winter—Society—Conversation—Servants—Embark
for Van Diemen’s Land.
Many large kinds of guanas inhabit Hew South Wales; some,
which have been described to me, must be enormous reptiles. I
have only seen two species, the most common being generally
called the sleeping lizard, and is found also in Van Diemen s
Land. It is about a foot or fourteen inches in length, the body
dark coloured, fat, and bloated-looking ; the tail short and thick ;
the head broad, with a snaky expression, and a long blue tongue,
which gives the poor animal a terrible reputation among the
vulgar, who declare that so blue a tongue must be a proof of its
venomous nature. I believe, if the poor stupid creatures had
the sense to keep their ill-hued tongues out of sight, many hun-
dreds would escape violent deaths. Contrary to the habits of
most lizards, which are remarkable for their extreme activity and
timid alertness on the approach of a footstep, or the slightest
noise, the sleeping guana is often seen lying in the midst of the
road, and frequently the crushed body of one bears disastrous
evidence of the fatal consequences of indolence. Sometimes we
have turned aside to avoid driving over them, or have bestowed
a light lash of the whip in passing, which only caused them to
crawl slowly away, as if our friendly hint were a most officious
and impertinent proceeding, and they had rather a preference for
being trodden or rolled to death. They are most undeniably
ugly creatures, although without the hideous pouch-cheeks of
the West Indian guanas; but we always considered them quite
harmless, until a little incident which occurred since our resi-
dence in Van Diemen’s Land led us to suspect them of being at


least capable of mischief. One day, last summer, we found one
lying- in our path, during a bush-ramble; and without any inten-
tion to hurt or annoy the animal, but merely to intimate that its
place of repose was an unsafe one, Mr. Meredith touched it
gently with the barrel of his gun, when, instead of retreating as
might be expected, it turned fiercely round, and snapped re-
peatedly at the gun, just as a savage dog would do, and bit so
sharply and strongly as to cut into the solid iron with its teeth,
as deeply as a hard stroke of a diamond cuts into glass. Had a
hand or foot been in the place of the gun, a fearful wound must
have been inflicted. Still, as they appear only to act on the
defensive, I see no reason for wantonly destroying them, although
I would not advise any one to incur their bite.
My other acquaintance in the guana family is a far less loath-
some creature; I have only seen one specimen, which Mr. Meie-
dith shot, as it was swiftly climbing a tree, with only its head
exposed, watching his movements. The head and body of this
together were not more than ten inches long, but the slender
tapering tail measured more than twice as much. 'I he head had
no pouch-cheeks, but was a sharp, knowing-looking lizard’s head,
covered with small, close, hard scales, as were the entire body, tail,
and legs ; the feet had long toes, and long, sharp, black claws, evi-
dently well adapted for climbing trees, and seeming as if, like
the natives’ yahoo, it could turn its feet any way required.
The whole of the creature was most beautifully piebald black
and white, and in some parts the old scaly coat was shelling off,
leaving a brighter new one below. This guana had moveable
teeth, like those of the snake, but, I need scarcely say, we were
not anxious to experimentalize upon their qualities. Ly the
ignorant, and even by some persons who might be supposed to
know better, these animals are termed goannas, and I have heard
of a “ great pianna ” among them.
Numbers of a small kind of lizard, about five or six indies
long, used to frequent the garden as well as the “ bush,” and two
took up their abode in my china-pantry, where I often saw them
crouching motionless on the dresser, watching the flies till one
came near enough to be snapped up in their nimble jaws. Flies
were so great a torment, that I respected anything which aided
to destroy them, and accordingly wever molested the lizards ;


but my housemaid, who, I fear, was destitute of all taste for
natural history, had a great dread of my poor friends, and either
used to run shrieking away, or fling something at them when-
ever they ventured into her sight. They were agile, delicate
little creatures, with bright black eyes, slender long-tailed bodies
of a mottled grey and pale brown colour, and extremely fine
small feet and toes. Still, they were reptiles, and the common
prejudice against their race extended even to these very harmless
little creatures.
With the snake tribe in New South Wales, I am happy to say
my personal acquaintance is very limited, for I fully partake in
the horror usually and very reasonably entertained of them.
Our servants had frequently raised an alarm about a “ large black
snake,” which lived in an unoccupied hut near the house, but it
always vanished before a gun could be brought, and we rather
iiscredited the story, until on one occasion the alarm being, I
suppose, more quietly given, Mr. Meredith succeeded in shooting
it through the head, to the extreme satisfaction of the whole
household. It was not a large snake, not being more than four
feet long, of a purplish black colour, with a kind of damson-
bloom on the skin, instead of a polished appearance, which most
of them have, and down each side was a streak of dim red. The
extreme tenacity of life in these reptiles, or more probably the
long continuance of muscular power and motion, even after the
head has been wholly severed from the body, has given rise to a
common idea that at whatever time of the day a snake may be
killed, it cannot die until sunset. The extraordinary activity
with which the tail-end of the creature will leap and jump about,
whilst the head is swiftly travelling in another direction, is
horrible to see; it seems as if every joint had a vitality of its
own, entirely independent of brains, or spinal cords, or any other
imagined seat of life.
One of our men-servants told a story of a large black snake
which lived in his hut a long time, and used to lie on his bed at
night, until he took unto himself a wife, who, very naturally,
demurred at the presence of so suspicious a bed-fellow, and in-
duced him to kill it. The large kind called the diamond snake
is (for a snake) as handsome a creature as can be conceived,
being most exquisitely adorned with various colours, like mosaic-


work. Could a lapidary imitate its varied markings in a girdle
or bracelet of gems and gold, his fortune would be made.
During our walks in the forest we frequently saw a smaller
kind of snake, about two feet long, and so exactly similar in
colour to the dead sticks and leaves with which the ground was
covered, as not to be observed until they moved: I several
times have most narrowly escaped treading on them, which, as
all the snakes known in this Colony are venomous, would be a
dangerous accident. Some species are far more fatal than others,
and of a few the bite is certainly mortal. Among the latter,
the small one commonly called the whip-snake, or death-adder,
is the most rapidly fatal of all. Several instances of immediate
death from its bite were related to me. On the victims in two
cases, my informant, our friend Mr. Dunn, of the Hunter Diver,
had, as coroner for the district, held inquests; the evidence
proving that in one instance death ensued in seven minutes after
the bite, and in the other in eight, the sufferers being scarcely
conscious of having been hurt, so very slight had been the punc-
ture, and so wonderfully subtle the poison. It may well be ima-
gined that these dreadful occurrences did not tend to diminish
my terror of snakes.
One portion of our land at Homebush consisted of salt-water
marshes, covered in high tides, and producing immense quanti-
ties of a species of samphire. Through these marshes deep
drains had been cut and embankments formed, evidently at an
enormous expenditure of labour, but for what purpose we never
could divine. One of these drains, which, being very old, had
become quite natural-looking, with shrubs, trees, and all kinds
of growth adorning the banks, had a sort of wide flood-gate next
the creek, through which the tide flowed and ebbed, bringing
with it quantities of fine fish, bream and mullet especially. A
couple of narrow logs formed something of an “ A 1 Sirat ” across
the deep channel, which was about twenty feet wide, and on this
crazy bridge Mr. Meredith used to station himself to fish; but
not being a votary of the (so called “ gentle craft” of quaint old
Izaak Walton, he found a spear armed with a strong barb a
more efficient weapon than the rod, and often caught some very
fine fish. I, meanwhile, read, sketched, or more frequently idled
away an hour or two in watching the myriads of small crabs w ith


which the muddy banks were thickly peopled. At a certain
state of the tide they might be seen scrambling out of the water
by thousands, and often reminded me of a hungry cargo of stage-
coach passengers, to whose dinner only a limited time can be
allotted; for the whole troop, after sidling a short distance from
the water, immediately commenced eating most expeditiously,
picking up some mysterious comestible from the soft rich mud,
first with one claw and then with the other, and continually
carrying the supplies to the mouth, which, being situated in the
broad central region, always gave the idea of a person very busily
engaged in filling his waistcoat-pockets; and the effect of some
thousands of these odd little bodies all engaged in the same
manoeuvres was droll in the extreme. If disturbed, they in-
stantly began turning round and round on one claw, as it seemed
in a kind of pirouette , using themselves as an auger to work their
way down, and in an incredibly short time were all lost to view.
Occasionally, two happened to fix on the same spot to bore into,
or probably old holes remained in the mud, only slightly hidden
by the last tide, and access to the known sanctuary was disputed ;
in this case there was usually a great deal of clawing and turning
under and over, which ended in the combatants both waltzing
away together under the mud. These crabs were of various
colours, some red, others black, and some dark green. On the
sandy beaches near Sydney I have seen some very small ones, of
a fine blue, just as busy pirouetting into the white sand as my
Homebush friends were in the black mud. The larger ones had
bodies the breadth of a dollar, whilst some of the small were not
bigger than a fourpenny-piece.
A disgusting tenant of most of the shores around Sydney, and
of ours in particular, is the toad-fish: most admirably named;
it looks precisely like a toad elongated into a fish, with a tough,
leathery, scaleless skin, and a bloated body, dark mottled brown
above and white beneath. It is usually about five inches long,
and disproportionately broad, but swims very swiftly, and is, for
its size, as bold and voracious as the shark. When I said Mr.
Meredith did not fish with a line and rod, I might have added
that he could not, for the toad-fish, which swarm everywhere,
no sooner see anything dropped in the water, than they dart
towards it by dozens, and fight among themselves for the


honour of swallowing your hook, generally taking the precaution
to bite off the line at the same time. This extreme anxiety to be
caught might perhaps be pardoned were the greedy little wretches
fit to eat, but they are highly poisonous; and although I should
have thought their disgusting appearance sufficient to prevent
their being tried, I know one instance, at least, of their fatal
effects, a lady with whose family I am intimate having died in
consequence of eating them. As they thus effectually put a
stop to our angling, by biting off every hook dropped in the water
before any other fish had time to look at it, they especially en-
joyed the benefit of the fishing-spear, upon which many hundreds,
if not thousands, must have been impaled in succession. This
sounds very wantonly cruel, I doubt not, but let no one pro-
nounce it so who is not well acquainted with toad-fish; from
those who are, I fear no reproof. When speared, they directly
inflate their leathery skins to the shape of a balloon, and eject
a stream of liquid from their mouths, with a report as if they had
burst. If flung again into the water, however wounded, they
instantly swim about and begin eating; and should one be a
little less active than his fellows, they forthwith attack and eat
him up. Even my poor little harmless friends the crabs become
their victims; when these usually well-armed troops have just
got their soft new coats on, and are almost defenceless, then
come the cowardly, ravenous toad-fish, and make terrible on-
slaughts among them—an attention which, I believe, the crabs
eventually repay with interest.
A tree which we, I know not if correctly, called the man-
grove grew very luxuriantly on the brink of the salt-water all
along the embankments. Many of the trees, from their gnarled
and twisted appearance, seemed very old, but all were clothed m
a rich glossy verdure, something like the laurel, the leaves not
being quite so large.
In the too-completely cleared space around Homebush these
belts of green trees skirting the water were of great value xn our
view, and the sailing boats which daily passed up the creek,
o-lancing behind and between the groups of mangroves, added
infinitely to our home-pictures, and served to build many a plea-
sant little fiction upon as they gaily glided past; distance ren-
dering all blemishes invisible After a time, however, the.se


“ light barks” were stripped of half their interest and all their
romance by an officious friend, who heartlessly remarked, when
I one day pointed out a particularly nice effect of light and shade
on the white sails of one, he “ did not know before that Jones’s
brick-boats came up that creek !”
Twice a day too the Parramatta steamer puffed in sight, as
she passed the mouth of the wide creek down which we looked
towards the estuary. And with a telescope, on a Sunday morn-
ing, we could plainly see the carriages and pedestrians going to
the new church at Kissing Point, on the opposite shore ; besides
having a view of the half-way signal-staff; and on a still night
hearing the drums beat at the Parramatta barracks. Thus, in
our quiet retreat, “ the contingent advantages” were almost as
extraordinary as those which the inimitable Dick Swiveller dis-
covered in the apartments of Mr. Brass. Often, when we have
sauntered in the garden and veranda late in the evening, espe-
cially on a dark moonless night, I have listened for a long time
to the wild tones and voices that rose from the forest and the
marsh, whilst the wind, gently sweeping through the string-like
foliage of the casuarina, made a soft flowing music in unison with
them all. From the marsh arose the multitudinous, incessant
gurgling, croaking chorus of the lesser frogs, with at intervals
the deep sonorous clop, clop , of a great one, the Lablache
of the small fry, whose note is extremely melodious and solemn
withal, not unlike a single stroke on a very mellow musical bell.
The long clear treble note of the shy curlew often came from
many points at once, now near, now distant—calling and answer-
ing each other. Many persons dislike their cry, but to me it
has a most plaintive, melodious tone, and sometimes the conclud-
ing cadence is far from melancholy. I often tried to see the
curlews, but they retreat on the slightest sound or motion, and,
except the tame ones at Parramatta, I only knew them as an
airy voice heard in the “ stilly night.” The least pleasing part
of our natural concert was that taken by the troops of dingoes,
and unfortunately it was often the most prominent. Their inde-
scribably wild and dismal yelling and howling seemed like the
cries that evil and tortured spirits might utter in their dire agony,
and often drove me within; for though not usually a “ nervous”
person, they made me feel positively uncomfortable, and conjured


up all the fearful stories of ravenous wolves in howling wilder-
nesses, and packs of jackals, and all the natural-history-book hor-
rors that I used to shudder over when a child.
Some of the vineyards and orange-groves near us were exten-
sive and very beautiful. The large orange-trees, gay with their
golden fruit and exquisitely fragrant bridal-blossoms, are among
the noblest of all the acclimatized products here, and, with the
many other exotics common in every garden near Sydney, were
quite a delight to me to see. The handsome bushy pomegranate,
adorned with quantities of its large red fruit, is tempting in ap-
pearance, but its beauty is very deceptive. The rind is thick
and as hard as wood, containing nothing but seeds, each enve-
loped in a thin coat of acid astringent pulp ; but the tree is al-
ways highly ornamental, with its rich glowing scarlet blossoms
and handsome foliage. The large-leaved magnolia-like loquat
is beautiful, whether laden with its pendent clusters of fragrant
blossoms or their succeeding bright amber fruit. The mandarin
orange is an elegant dwarf species, with fine, smooth, bitter fruit
the size of an Orleans plum. The lemons grown in this colony
resemble a Seville orange in their rough, deformed shape, al-
though well flavoured. Huge bushes of the delicate oleander
are very common, and how lovely they are may well be imagined.
Geraniums of the old-fashioned kinds are almost like weeds, but
very few good varieties have reached the colony.
That magnificent indigenous flower the gigantic lily (. Doryan-
thes excelsa) is often and easily cultivated in gardens, and well
deserves a place in the stateliest. From the centre of an im-
mense group of long, broad, curving leaves the flower-stalk rises
to a height of fifteen or twenty feet, and of proportionate thick-
ness, crowned with a great cluster of the gorgeous crimson lilies.
It is, truly, a colossal flower.*
Gardens in this neighbourhood might be small editions of
* The folloAving little poem, written for a juvenile work (not yet com-
pleted), may perhaps be permitted a place here: —
THE GIGANTIC LILY.
Who loves to cull gay flowers ?
Come hither, all, to me ;
I ’ll show ye rare and strange ones,
On grass and shrub and tree.
Do ye love the modest lilies,
Each shrouded in its leaf.
And hanging down its gentle head
As full of fear, or grief?
I have.


Paradise, had they sufficient and regular moisture ; but the un-
certainty of the seasons, and the impossibility (not to mention
the expense) of supplying the deficiency by artificial means,
render the most industrious and anxious attention to them a
source of annoyance rather than pleasure. The want of water
is a drawback of which no dweller in England can imagine the
curse. I well remember my husband’s admiration of our English
rivers, brooks, and the little narrow, trickling lines of bright
water that traverse our meadows and gardens; and when I used
to laugh at so much good enthusiasm being thrown away on a
ditch, he would say, “ Ah ! only wait until you have lived a few
years in a dry country, and then you will better understand the
inestimable value of such ditches!”
I have a lily here,
A nobler one than those;
The tulip may not vie with it,
Nor the dahlia, nor the rose.
Its long broad leaves are spread
Down curving to the ground;
And I doubt if, as they grow,
Four yards would span them round.
One stem from out the centre
Of those bright leaves ascends;
As straight as is an arrow,
It neither twists nor bends.
Month after month it higher grew,
We watched it day by day,
Impatient to behold the flower
In all its bright array.
It grew above the cottage eaves,
Full fifteen feet in height,
Before one bud had shown a streak
Of hidden treasure bright.
At length our wondering eyes beheld
The tall stem richly crowned
With silken-petalled lilies, all
In one bright cluster bound.
But not the pale and timid flowers
Of northern climes are these;
Not shrinking from the temp’rate sun,
Nor trembling in the breeze.
In robe of regal hues they ’re drest,
And to our fervid sky
With bold, unblenching gaze, is bent
Each bright and glowing eye.
They scorn to share with humbler
flowers
Kind Nature’s smile or tear,
And proudly above all their kin
Their crowned heads uprear.
In lofty, solitary state
They ope, and fade away ;
Whilst far below, their scorned friends
Dwell socially and gay.
The bright pomegranate’s smiles re-
The oleander’s blush, [fleet
And roseate passion-flowers lend
Pale clematis a flush.
The twining indigo enwreaths
Full many a gentle flower,
That dwell together lovingly
In some acacia bower.
The humble and the lowly, all
Contented, happy, gay.
Laugh on, whilst in their lonely pomp
The lilies fade away.
But think—how grand they are!
How tall, and how arranged!
How far beyond those little bells
That tremble in the shade!
Choose ye between the two—
And then I ’ll truly tell
If ye in lordly pride and pomp
Or in happier love would dwell.


Our whole and sole dependence whilst at Homebush for a
supply of water on the estate consisted of two or three holes, like
old clay-pits, which were about half filled during heavy rains,
and as no shade was near them, very rapidly evaporated in warm
weather. At these the cattle and horses drank, and we had a
water-cart to convey the daily supply to the house; but in the
heats of summer these water-holes were completely dry, and then
our unfortunate cattle and horses were driven three or four miles
to another clay-pit, where we also sent the cart, with, of course,
the constant fear lest, with so many claimants on its bounty (for
all our neighbours were in as ill a plight as ourselves), even that
source should fail us too. Some of our friends were at the same
time sending five and eight miles for water, and such water! I
did indeed then bethink me of the English meadow ditches , and
how luxurious a draught their fair bright streamlets would afford.
And as I commiserated our poor cows and oxen, parching amidst
dry, brittle hay, for it were absurd to call it grass, without a
chance of slaking their thirst till their daily toilsome pilgrimage
along the dusty road, I used to think of the deep shady rivers at
home, where I have seen whole herds stand in the summer noons
with the rippling water often meeting over their sleek backs, and
green, juicy herbage nodding at them from the bank, and such a
world of luxury around as made the heat seem but a means for
its enjoyment. •
I would have all discontented grumblers in England, who
growl alike at November fogs and April showers, and who always
carry umbrellas by way of an implied reproach to the seasons of
their native land—l would have all such sent to New South
Wales on a “ probation ” system : let them enjoy sunshine, since
they like it so much ; let them v really luxuriate in a veritably “ dry
atmosphere ” for a few years, and then see if their hydrophobia
will not wonderfully abate !
When a winter rainy fit does assail the sky in this land of
extremes, it certainly takes care to leave no doubt of its inten-
tions, —for down comes such a thorough, right-earnest deluge, as
not only washes away half your garden, but generally inundates
the house, parched and warped as every part is by the previous
baking process of the summer months. We enjoyed two visita-
tions of this kind at Homebush, each of about a week’s duration.


and giving us the healthful advantage of an unexpected shower-
bath in nearly every room. Every imaginable vessel was enlisted
in the water-catching service; the tide in the clay-pits rose se-
veral feet, and our spirits in proportion ; but the old dry, exhaust-
ing weather soon returned.
A large well in front of the house, which had been closed over,
excited our curiosity, for although we were told the water in it
was salt, still, at so considerable an elevation, this seemed impro-
bable, and we opened the well. To describe the anxious excite-
ment which pervaded the assembled household as the first bucket-
full was slowly drawn up, were impossible—perhaps Wilkie
might have jiainted the scene, had he witnessed it: even our fa-
vourite old pointer stood wagging his tail, and pretending to lick
his thirsty lips, as he by turns looked down into the well or
wistfully into my face :—the housemaid ran for a cup that “ Missis
might taste first,” but I was compelled to confess that the sin-
gular variety of unpleasant flavours the liquid combined left me
quite in doubt whether it were salt or fresh.* Every one so ar-
dently wished it fresh, that very daring anticipations were formed
of the effect which the air might have on it, and various other
possibilities ; but the experience of a week fully proved that our
labour had been in vain. When poured into the trough, some of
the pigs and one old horse used to drink the brackish water, but
for aught else, save washing kitchen-floors, it was useless. The
salt must have been derived from some saline beds in the soil, for
the bottom of the well, though very deep, was far above the sea-
level. Another half-closed well remained in one of the orchards,
showing that every pains had been taken to find good water, but
in vain.
After all ray own grumblings at the climate of Sydney, which
my impaired health and languid frame proved to be not without
reason, I must give its two months of winter unqualified lauda-
tion, for then existence is no longer a burthen, nor walking
exercise absolutely unpleasant. The early morning is often
* Some years since, Mr. Meredith and an old servant, being out together on
some expedition, were seeking fresh water near the coast, for themselves and
their horses, and after vainly trying the qualities of many small pools, GOil-
bold dismounted to test another, but instantly began spitting out the water
again with a sad wry face. “Is that fresh?” inquired ray husband. “Fresh
to me, Sir, for I never tasted any thing so bad before ! ”


frosty, with a light white rime on the grass and a bracing sharp-
ness in the air, making a bright fire very good company at break-
fast-time. By nine o’clock the frost entirely vanishes, and a
warm sun and clear Italian sky tempt us to desert the fire and
sit by open windows, or ramble about without even an additional
shawl over a light morning dress. Towards evening we begin
to notice the darkness of the hearth, and a pile of blazing logs
merrily lights up the dining-room. In some houses grates and
Colonial coal are used as a luxury, but after being accustomed
to a cheerful, broad, good humoured-looking hearth of logs, they
seem to me very dull and sulky by comparison. The coal which
I have hitherto seen used is less bright itself and emits less
blaze than what we should term good coal in my native county
of Warwick. It comes, very appropriately, from Newcastle, on
the Hunter’s River, a part of New South Wales I much wished
to visit, and had a land-journey been easy, might perhaps have
enjoyed the trip ; but to make a sea voyage, however short, for
pleasure, is an anomalous proceeding I cannot comprehend.
One great pleasure we enjoyed at this time, but have since
been wholly deprived of, was that of having plenty of books, as
we subscribed to the Australian Library in Sydney, and could
send for a fresh supply once or twice a week. We did not
obtain many new works of fiction, but of less fashionable litera-
ture, as Biographies, History, Travels, &c., we had abundance.
Neither were we by any means deficient in society, but, with a
few memorable exceptions, I soon found that Colonial ladies
seldom speak of aught besides dress, and domestic events and
troubles, “bad servants” being the staple topic. And most
gentlemen have their whole souls so felted up in wools, fleeces,
flocks, and stock, that I have often sat through a weary dinner
and evening of incessant talking, without hearing a single syl-
lable on any gather subject. Some of our friends had been among
the early adventurers who made the perilous overland journeys to
Adelaide, with large herds of cattle and sheep, and their narra-
tives were always highly interesting, seeming like a romance,
often a most sad one too —after the dull wool-gatherings of more
every-day people. Far be it from me, in these slight remarks,
to imply want of respect for the worthy enthusiasts in wool;
still there are times and places for everything. In English
M


society the lawyer does not carry his briefs and special pleadings
into the drawing-room ; the physician dreams not of occupying
the attention of a dinner-party with his last wonderful cure;
even the author refrains from volunteering a recitation of his
new book; and surely, according to our old-world notions of
propriety, the wool-merchant also should sometimes divest him-
self of the “ shop,” and not be always encompassed and engrossed
by his bales and fleeces. However fascinating may be the com-
pany of his “ fine-woolled sheep ” and peerless breed of Merinos,
he should not insist on taking them out to dinner. I had to
endure a perpetuity of mutton in the wool; whilst choice
“ samples,” tied and labelled with most fond accuracy* were
passed from hand to hand, and contemplated with the profound
and critical air of a connoisseur passing judgment on a master-
piece of art. So long as the conversation conveyed intelligence
respecting different parts of the Colony, as connected with sheep-
farming or other occupations, I could derive amusement and
knowledge from it, but the eternity of wool, wool, wool—wearied
my very soul. Perhaps some excuse is admissible for this un-
social style of conversation in Colonial gentlemen, from the
rarity of Colonial ladies who are disposed to take a part in any
topic under discussion, and many, though not disposed or qualified
to express an opinion on general subjects, would feel insulted if
you asked their advice how to make butter or cure a ham; thus
rendering it difficult to know what they would like to talk about
when the servant-stories are exhausted, which usually prove
lengthy and very'circumstantial.
I alluded to “ bad servants” as being a constant source of
complaint amongst my friends, and I am well aware that in most
families the relative Comfort or discomfort may pretty nearly
be proportioned to the scarcity or number of servant-women in.
the establishment. Free women usually demand such exorbitant
wages, and are here such apt illustrations of the proverb, “ Evil
communications corrupt good manners,” that the generality of
married persons apply for prisoner-women to be assigned to their
service. Among these, a few prove willing, good servants, some
tolerable, many very middling, and the largest portion totally
unfit for a respectable place, not only from their inability to do
good, but from their inherent propensities to do evil, every


shape of vice and depravity seeming as familiar to them as the
air they breathe. We were fortunate in having two decent
emigrant families, the men as head farm-servants, and their
wives and one daughter as cook, dairy-woman, and housemaid ;
being honest, sober, valuable servants, I was thus spared much
of the annoyance suffered by others. I certainly had one very
bad specimen in an old nurse, and who, although free at the
time of her being recommended to me, had been doubly con-
victed formerly, and at the end of her five days’ sojourn carried
off with her several articles of value; for at that time I had not
become accustomed to the vigilant care of my locks and keys,
which is imperatively necessary here, and was, to me, extremely
difficult to acquire. Having in various instances purchased
experience somewhat dearly, I have since made considerable
progress in this essential and troublesome accomplishment,
and now as systematically lock my drawers, work-box, and
other similar temptations, as if they were caskets of untold
diamonds.
Wine or strong liquor of any kind is never safely left accessible
to servants. The unlimited allowance of good beer common in
English households is here scarcely credited, nor could such a
custom be practised, for not a soul on the establishment would
quit the barrel so long as any liquor remained in it. Tea, at
every meal, is the Colonial kitchen beverage, with a good allow-
ance of Cape wine on extraordinary occasions; but the quantity
of meat eaten at least thrice a day may well compensate for
the loss of beer. The fryingpan is in perpetual requisition,
and seems to have scarcely time to cool between its performances;
that, and a small iron pot in which the tea and coarse sugar are
boiled together, form the sole cooking utensils of many a
labourer’s household : his bread is “ damper,” baked in the ashes,
and varied occasionally by a “ fat cake” done in the fryingpan,
vegetables being rarely cared about. In stock-keepers’ huts, and
others where candles are not attainable) a light is procured by
a bit of rag rolled up, stuck into an old cup or pannican full of
dripping, and lighted. Home-made mould candles are generally
used in houses where wax-lights are dispensed with, and cer-
tainly vary more in quality than any other article of domestic
manufacture ; but nothing beyond Common care and attention is


required to make them equally good with those sold by English
chandlers.
Various circumstances having combined to determine us on
quitting New South Wales, and permanently settling in Van
Diemen’s Land, we prepared for our removal thither, and in
October, 1840, again returned to Sydney for a few days, which,
as if to confirm my dislike of the place, and increase my joy at
quitting it, were the most disagreeable I had ever passed there.
The heat, even at that early period, was most oppressive, and
the detestable mosquitoes (with their horrible allies) besieged us
in swarms, cruelly tormenting my poor child, whose chubby face
and fair fat arms were covered with their mountainous bites,
despite of all my care and contrivances.
We embarked in a lumbering Colonial-built vessel named
the Sir George Arthur (since wrecked off Bermuda), and once
more passing the beautiful coves and bays of Port Jackson,
sailed forth through its mighty gates on our way to a new home
in Tasmania.
THE END.
London: Printed by William Clowes and Sons, Stamford Street












