

/-/*7 w




NOTES'ON THE DISCOVERY OF SOME
KEYS IN THE SHORE FORMATION
OF CORIO BAY, NEAR GEELONG.
MASTS’
By T. Rawlinson, C.E.
[Read at an Ordinary Meeting of the Royal Society on the
16th November, 1874.]
In a conversation with Mr. Alex. F. Mollison, some few
days ago, he informed me of a statement made to him
in England, by Mr. C. J. Latrobe, formerly Lieut. Governor
of Victoria, of a singular incident which occurred about
1845 or 1846, namely, the discovery of some iron keys in
the vicinity of Corio Bay, embedded in what presented
all the characteristics of an old sea beach, and overlaid by
15 feet of diluvium, at a level of 10 feet above the present
high water mark in the Bay.
Mr. Mollison was at Geelong the day after the discovery,
and personally examined the locality, and to this extent
can confirm the statement made; and owing to his know-
ledge of the occurrence so far, he, on the occasion of a recent
visit to England, requested Mr. Latrobe to -narrate the
circumstances in writing for him. Mr. Latrobe complied
with this wish about four years ago, by dictating to
his daughter the particulars as set down in the accompany-
ing paper.
The high character of the narrator, his known keenness
of observation, and his shrewdness in sifting facts, combined
with the confirmation of the statements to a certain point
by Mr. Mollison, a well-known colonist of many years,
gives an importance to the narrative which it would not
otherwise possess unless so vouched for; and beyond all
this there is the want of motive for Boucher to attempt
trick or deception in practising on Mr. Latrobe’s credulity.
To reject the statements made, vouched for as they are by
persons of undoubted integrity, involves to my mind a
much greater degree of hardihood than their acceptance.
The statements may be at present inexplicable, but I have
yet to learn that this is a valid reason for their rejection.


The above considerations have induced me to think the
matter worth laying before the members of the Royal
Society, as a record of a singular experience, wholly irre-
spective of its value from a scientific point of view.
Mr. Latrobe’s narrative of what came under his own
notice is one thing, his hypothesis to account for what he
saw is quite another affair, and the latter being but a
matter of opinion, cannot influence the value of the state-
ment which 1 now propose reading.
Mr. Latrobe’s statement, copied from an original document
in the possession of Alex. F. Mollison, Esq., 2nd November,
1874, by the reader, Mr. Rawlinson.
“ The Boucher Lime Kiln, near Geelong, and a Memo-
randum about Three Keys found there.
By C. J. Latrobe, C.B.
Formerly Lieut. Governor of Victoria.
“I believe it was either in the year 1845 or 1846, during
one of my occasional visits to Geelong, that I, understand-
ing from Mr. Addis, our Crown Lands Commissioner, that a
man, of the name of Boucher I think, who had a license
for lime burning on the shore half a mile or more below
Geelong, had made a new excavation for a lime kiln, I
proposed to walk down and see it, as I thought it would
give me some further information on the geological
structure of that portion of the coast line.
“We walked over the open down, descended the abruptly
swelling banks to the sea-side, a little beyond the first
point to the southward, and then proceeding along the
shore, entered the excavation from below over the rubbish
which had been thrown out.
“A labourer on the spot was sent up to the hut above,
to inform the lime burner of our visit!
“ As soon as I entered the circular excavation, which was
about twenty feet deep, my eye was immediately attracted
by the appearance of a line of calcareous matter, presenting
itself about the level of my head, and I saw at a glance
that it was composed of decayed calcareous shelly matter,
the upper line of which was thickly strewn with sea-shells
of different species, exactly similar to those which lay on
the beach, a few yards below us. Many of these were
so little altered as to be scarcely decayed, even preserving
their enamel.


“ I directed my companion’s attention to the fact, and
to the certainty that at no very distant period this line
of shells must have formed the beach. This stratum was
so far consolidated as to render its removal, except by
the pick, very difficult.
“ I was working with my knife, to detach some of the
shells, when the lime-burner joined us. On seeing how
I was engaged, and overhearing the conversation with
my companion, he said, ‘I found a bunch of keys yesterday,
just where your honour is picking the shells.’ ‘ Keys ? ’ I
said. ‘ Keys, your honour,’ he replied. ‘ What can you
mean?’ I enquired. ‘Yes, here,’ he said, laying his hand
just upon the shellbed. I asked him ‘ Where are they ? ’
‘Up at the hut, your honour,’ he replied. ‘Let me see
them,’ I said. He immediately left the excavation and ran
up the bank to his hut, returning a minute or two after-
wards with two keys, each about two inches in length,
which he handed to me, saying that there had been
three, but that the children had been playing with them,
and he could only lay his hand upon the two. There could
be no question but that they were keys, very little, if any
way corroded with rust, very similar to those of the present
day, except that they were a little longer in the shank, and
the wards smaller than is now usual. The latter were not
only distinguishable, but were partially filled and encrusted
with the calcareous matter upon which they had lain. They
were just of the description still used for a box-or trunk, or
seaman’s chest, and I should judge from the form that they
were not more than a hundred or one hundred and fifty
years old at most. The position in which they were found
gave me the impression of their having been dropped on the
beach at the time when the shellbed formed the shore line.
“ I am thus circumstantial, in order to convey to the mind
the feeling of certainty that I have entertained from the
first, that there could be no doubt as to the fact, that these
three keys (probably only originally tied together) were
found at the time and in the position I have stated.
“ I immediately took a rough measurement of the over-
laying soil, which consisted of a compact bed of dark brown
sandy loam, tinged with iron, underlying a thin layer of
vegetable mould. This overlay was about 15 feet in thick-
ness, and the height of the old shelly beach above the
present high water mark about 10 feet, and the distance
from the actual shore being about 40 feet inland. I was


very careful to see that the sloping down of the land above
showed no marks of a land slip, or wombat holes, or springs,
or any interstices through which the keys might have
reached the position in which they were found. In fact, I
came away thoroughly convinced that none such had existed,
but that at the time the keys were deposited the matrix
was an open beach, forming the then shore line.
“ Now, presuming that the facts above related be incon-
testible, two things are to be accounted for—
“ Ist. The existence of a shore line so many feet above
that now existing.
“ 2nd. The overlapping and overlaying of that shore line
by the undulating down, descending to the shore from the
interior.
“ With regard to the first hypothesis, many may be tempted
to account for it by referring it to upheaval of the coast, an
occurrence of which in past periods at least the whole
southern Australian coast line affords so many undoubted
proofs, and it may be said there is no reason why such
should not have occurred here in very recent times; but the
second difficulty, however, presented by the overlapping of
the adjacent country, cannot be thus accounted for.
“ Port Phillip was first discovered by Lieut. Murray, in
1802, and actually entered by Flinders the same year; and
as the latter mentions visiting Indented Head, and even
Station Peak, he may have visited Corio Bay.
“The first settlement was made by Col. Collins, in 1803,
on the Nepean side.
“ Possibly Lieut. Grimes, who was sent from his camp to
report upon the extent and character of the bay, may have
made the circuit, as it may be supposed the runaway Buckley
must have done before he permanently took up his residence
with the tribe of blacks frequenting the vicinity of Corio
Bay.
“No actual survey was made before the visit of the
‘ Rattlesnake,’ under Captain Hobson, in 1836, Batman
having in the previous year formed his first station on
Indented Head. It is not impossible that runaway convicts
or shipwrecked mariners may have visited these shores prior
to the recorded discovery, and visits as above-mentioned.
“ I remarked above that the first idea which might present
itself to the mind on viewing the signs of a former higher
level in the beach line in this and other localities in Port
Phillip, would be that there had been a sudden or gradual


upheaval of the land ; but I have been led to reject this
idea, and to ascribe the appearance of this elevated shore
line to an alteration in the level of the waters of the bay,
and their subsidence caused by the outbreak of the waters
through the great gap in the coast line, now existing between
Point Lonsdale and Point Nepean.
“ There is every sign of the violent disruption of this part
of the enclosing barrier, and that one might be led to suppose
within a very limited geological period.
“No one who has remarked the phenomena of the ripple,
and of the continuous line of foam (it might almost be
said ‘breakers’) which extends from Point Nepean to Point
Lonsdale at times, when the wind and tide coincide in
causing an extraordinary rush of the Port Phillip waters, or
returning tide through the opening, can doubt that the
foundations are still existing, and that they present proofs
of a disturbance of no ordinary character.
“ Although the soundings ordinarily given at Port Phillip
Heads and the entrance of the bay show no very great
variation of depth, being generally from 9 to 16 fathoms
inside the bay, I would not only refer to the discovery since
my time of isolated pinnacles of rock rising here and there
much nearer the surface, and only detected by accident, but
also to the positive existence of cavities marking a most
extraordinary disturbance of the sea bottom.
“ The survey of the ‘ Rattlesnake’ in 1836, points out the
existence of such a hole just inside the ripple, the
Point Lonsdale side, the depth being 24 to 28 fathoms,
adjacent to soundings showing from 6 to 10 fathoms only.
“ In the year 1854, in the month of February, I was with
the late Captain Ferguson upon the ‘Pacific,’ crossing from
Shortland’s Bluff towards Point Nepean, making for the
Quarantine Station, or Capel Sound. The tide was running
out with great violence, and the wind failing us as we
approached the Point Nepean side, we found that we could
not with safety continue our course, and that it was abso-
lutely necessary for us to cast anchor where we were until
the turn of the tide, or the south wind would allow us to
proceed.
“ The anchor was let go in what we supposed to be about
10 fathoms, but to our great amazement the cable ran out,
and did not take the ground until it marked a depth of 35
fathoms. We found that we in fact must have cast anchor
in the middle of an enormous depression, like a crater of, as


we found, but limited area, and a pretty arduous task it
was to heave anchor and disengage ourselves from this pit
when the tide turned.
“ It may be gathered from the foregoing that I am inclined
to the opinion that before the epoch of the disruption of the
coast line at the present Heads, the waters of this large
interior bay were at a higher level, and I believe it probable
that the former outlet for its surplus waters is to be found
in the line of the present low marshes and lakes which
extend from Corio Bay to the Barwon Heads.
“ The two key's in question were long in my possession, and
the original pencil memorandum and sketch (but unfor-
tunately not the precise date) still remain so.
“The circumstances of the finding were of course well
known among my friends, and if I remember right, were
the subject of a correspondence with my friend Ronald
Gunn, one of the few scientific men with whom I was then
acquainted in Australia. I have an idea that the keys were
given to the Mechanics’ Institute, which unfortunately
received from me before it went to the bad, many objects of
interest which are now seemingly lost. I do not recollect
that there was any mention of the finding of the keys at the
time in the Melbourne papers, but think it possible that
as it excited some curiosity among a few at the time, such
mention may have been made in the Geelong paper, then
conducted by Mr. Harrison.
“My only companion at the time was, as I have said,
Mr. Commissioner Addis, now unfortunately no more.
“ I may still add, that circumstances during my residence
in the colony led to my becoming much better acquainted
with the character of a large extent of coast line, and of the
extraordinary phenomena it displays, than might have been
supposed.
“ Many portions of the coast, from the mouth of the Glenelg
to the Albert River in Gipps Land, came under my personal
observation; and some divisions, for instance that from
Portland to Cape Bunbury, east of Cape Otway, were in
fact explored chiefly on foot, and under circumstances which
have left an indelible impression upon my mind.
f Signed) “ C. J. Lateobe;


Such is the copy of Mr. Latrobe’s narrative to Mr.
Mollison, with verbal alterations only, such as are commonly
requisite in oral statements when committed to writing, but
every fact remaining intact, as dictated by Mr. Latrobe to
his daughter.
I now propose to briefly discuss the paper, and review the
causes, as suggested by Mr. Latrobe, in explanation of the
alleged facts as narrated.
The hypothesis of the waters of Port Phillip Bay having
at one time been impounded to a height of 10 or more feet
above their present level, is set at rest by an examina-
tion of the shells (see note annexed) from the elevated beach
line; for if the waters were ever impounded, as suggested, the
gulph must have been a fresh water lake, and the shells
would be of the usual lacustrine character, common to such
waters; but as the shells prove to be marine, it is clear
that the impounding theory must be abandoned.
It must also be, I think, admitted, that with such an
extensive area of inland waters as those of Port Phillip,
any intermittent theory of alternate opening and closing,
according as the dry or wet seasons prevail, is untenable,
owing to the enormous scouring power existent in such a
channel when once opened out.
The second hypothesis, of recent upheaval, is countenanced
by various facts known to exist along our coasts ; and some
years back this question was discussed by the members of
the Royal Society, in connection with the alleged elevated
coast lines at Williamstown. The upheaval theory accounts
for some of the difficulties; but there are yet two serious
ones left, namely, the time and the causes required to produce
the deposit of the 15 feet above the old beach line, and the
additional elevation of 10 feet of the old beach above the
present sea level, in the period within which it is possible
that the keys could have lain there.
Always supposing that Mr. Latrobe’s examination of the
superincumbent strata was sufficiently minute to preclude
the possibility of the accidental lodging of the keys where
found, and dismissing as to the last degree improbable, the
possibility of Mr. Latrobe having allowed himself to be
imposed upon, the question naturally arises as to where the
keys could have come from originally, or by what means
could they have been lodged in such a locality at so remote
a period, as to allow of so great an accumulation above them
as described, namely, 15 feet.


The earliest known visit to Port Phillip was about 1802,
and the time which has elapsed since then appears very
inadequate to produce so great results under present known
conditions ; and admitting the statements made as within
the range of possibility, I do not see any alternative
but to extend the period for from 200 to a little over
300 years back, during which period the Buccaneers
had made their presence felt in the Pacific; we know
that some of them visited Australia in their wanderings,
and it is almost a certainty that many of them left little
trace of their presence, except in traditions of lost ships and
ruined towns.
It may appear visionary to travel so far on mere conjec-
ture for a cause, but the whole of the circumstances are so
exceptional, that suggestions may be hazarded which could
not be tolerated under other conditions, and in doing this
I beg to remind the members of Hamlet’s warning to his
friend —“ There are more things in heaven and earth than is
dreamt of in our philosophy.”
In New Zealand, not far from Hokitiki, there has been
seen the decaying remains of a ship’s keel, with a tree
growing through it, and evidences of copper fastenings found
in the vicinity, but no trace of its origin, or how it came
to be embedded in an inland basin far away from the
sea. Whether the ill-fated bark was driven in on an earth-
quake wave, or on one of the more terrible rollers which at
times break against Tristan da Cuna, and in the bay of
Panama, coming in like a wall 20 to 30 feet high, and tearing
ships from their moorings, rolling them over as if but a child’s
toy-boat, who can tell? Some such fate has been the closing
scene doubtless of many a gallant expedition in an unknown
sea, divided from civilisation by half a world; and the
discovery of the lost keys on the old Corio beach is full of
suggestions as to their possible history, and that of their
adventurous owners.
Since writing the above it has come to my knowledge
that the subject matter of the discovery of the keys was
communicated to the proprietors of the Argus many months
ago ; but even with this knowledge I yet think the records
of the Royal Society the proper storehouse for narrations
such as the foregoing.
Thomas. E. Rawlinson.
2nd November, 1874.


In a personal inspection made of the shore of Corio Bay
since the above notes were penned, and after an inspection
of the geological maps of the district, I incline to the opinion
that there may have been an outlet for part of the bay
waters across the low lands from Corio Bay via Connewarre
and the Barwon River to Bass’s Straits, as suggested by
Mr. Latrobe, and as indicated by Mr. Selwyn on the geological
maps; but it must have been under very different conditions
to those conjectured by the former, namely, a disruption of
the coast line between Point Nepean and Point Lonsdale,
because the deposits are marine, and as a consequence the
land must at that time have been submerged to a con-
siderable depth below the present level of the sea.
Between the Geelong wharves and Limeburners’ Point
there is still the remains of an old excavation, showing in
section the exact features as sketched and described by
Mr. Latrobe, although the Limekiln is a thing of the past.
Above the limestone is a thin bed of broken shell, Turritella
and others, and coarse sand, and above this a bed of clay and
two thin succeeding beds, surmounted by surface soil. The
whole of the beds present the usual features of an aqueous
deposit.
Towards Limeburners’ Point the limestone rises con-
siderably, and the superior beds are reduced to one bed of
clay about 4 feet thick, and about 2 feet of clay and
vegetable soil above, and from this point the whole surface
declines to the eastward to below the level of the Samphire
flats, between Point Henrytown and Connewarre.
Assuming that the land was submerged sufficiently to
permit the tidal flow of waters across the estuary beds of
Connewarre, it is probable that owing to the then changed
physical features of the country, a large body of water may
have entered Corio Bay from the north-west along the valley
west of the You Yangs, now drained by the Moorabool and
Duck Ponds rivers; and such being the case the several
deposits above the limestone of Corio Bay at Boucher’s Kiln
can be accounted for, the only really serious element of
difficulty remaining being the brief period of time within
which such a considerable upheaval (nearly 30 feet vertical)
is possible, although the extent of such a movement in the
time is not an insuperable objection.
On the table I submit sample of materials from the old
beach, and of a boring pholas embedded in the limestone, the
shell being as perfect as if dead only a few years.


No. 1 is a sample of the old sea beach shells from the
locality of Boucher’s Kiln, as described.
No. 2 is a sample of the old sea beach shells from Lime-
burners’ Point.
No. 3 is a sample of the soft white limestone, with pholas
shell as described.
Thomas E. Bawlinson.
6/11/74.
Sections to illustrate paper :
Mr. Latrobe’s sketch, section of Boucher’s Kiln.
No. 1. Section from Mud Island to Two Sisters.
No. 2. Section from Low Light, Shortland’s Bluff, to
Quarantine Station.
No. 3. Section about one-third distance from Point
Lonsdale to Shortland’s Bluff to Point Nepean.
No. 4. Point Lonsdale to point Nepean.
No. 5. Sketch, Plan of Entrance to Port Phillip and of
Corio Bay.
N.B. —In the discussion on the paper the President,
in reply to a question, stated “ there was no doubt as to
the shells of the old beach exhibited being marine.”
This decision is conclusive against Mr. Latrobe’s theory
of an inland lake.
One member stated that the circumstances of the dis-
covery of the keys were notorious at the time, and much
discussed, as he knew from having heard his father frequently
allude to the circumstances; and this is the more valuable,
as being still further an additional confirmation of the
accuracy of Mr. Latrobe’s notes of byegone events.
It was pointed out that owing to the peculiar formation
of the superincumbent beds at Boucher’s Kiln, and their
limited extent, an indent or short gully probably existed at
this point, and this would account for the lowness of the
limestone rock at this place, and the three distinct layers
of clay and loam between it and the soil, each deposit being
made at intervals of time, as the upper surface showed a
black line of deposit straight on the upper surface, and
evidence of settlement on the lower edge, into the fine
deposit below. Still water in a shallow gully would be
quite sufficient to account for the several deposits, and


under such conditions the accumulations would be rapid,
owing to precipitations of mud from the surcharged waters
of the valley north-west of the You Yangs.
The nature of the superincumbent beds being clay,
points decidedly to precipitation in still waters, or those
having little current, and such being the case, the keys,
if lost overboard from a boat, would in the course of
time sink by their own weight through the soft impalpable
mud to the denser material of the old beach overlying the
limestone.
Several instances were given of such settlement.
T. E. R.
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.




To aCCOTTZ^OTZ-Z/
TtzirtzTUOTZfS TzeZes
cm lost /beys 000 CorzoTaz/.
FJZJBatjrZzTzsert aZ<?Zi




To ccccoTTZpany
Jfyr'Jtatrt t/zsons , notes
on tost keys on Corzo pays
ATV
T£.J?ofwtz7lSo7Z ctett




j<? accompany
M?JZcnrZiTtsorts. notes
on Zosl keys in Co no J9<
JV?&




To OiCCOTTZpCt.TZy
Hayylinsons notes _
on lost keys in Cono Toy




J.O a CCCTTZTVCtTZZ/
Jc#vrZz.7zst?7z-s Ttafces „
Q 7& Zosß Tcezss zrzo<?r'zo_Z>a. r,
M? 4
jPP. 7£xir?z/zSO?z
Pt IsoriscZate tePtJV'epfan






