

tern, 7lh Ilu±
%sth Batten/. 71
AUSTRALIAN MILITARY FORCES
Notes on the Duties of
Platoon Commanders
Communicated from a Corps Head-quarters,
British Expeditionary
Force.
BY AUTHORITYi
ALBERT J. MUULETT. GOVERNMENT PRINTER. MELBOURNE.
0.1*714.


L j
fi \s_Sydney Gazette J>res3^~^^
# I
CollectionA^
i


AUSTRALIAN MILITARY FORCES
Notes on the Duties of
Platoon Commanders
Communicated from a Corps Head-quarters,
British Expeditionary
Force.
BY AUTHORITYI
ALBERT J. MULLETT, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.


S/Sth Battery, 7 th F.A Brigade (A.I.FJ
NOTES ON THE DUTIES OF PLATOON
COMMANDERS.
COMMUNICATED FROM A CORPS HEAD-
QUARTERS, BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY
FORCE.
The platoon commander must devote his principal
efforts towards making his four section commanders
good non-commissioned officers, and must encourage
them to exercise initiative. He must ruthlessly rid
himself of all non-commissioned officers who are useless
as leaders in the field, and who have neither the confi-
dence nor the respect of the men.
A paper on the duties of a platoon commander,
written by a platoon commander, is attached for dis-
tribution.
The following suggestions are offered for the train-
ing of platoon commanders by company commanders:—
1. In the first place, a platoon commander should
know his men and all about them. For
this purpose he should keep up to date a
hook with their names arranged in sections.
2. He should be shown how to inspect his platoon
on the section system.
3. He should he instructed in simple drill, and
know how to move his platoon so as to get
it into any required position.
4. He should be- shown how to organize a task
allotted to him, such as telling off a working
party, occupying a line of trenches, placing
a line of sentries, and arranging their posts
and reliefs.


5. He should be handed over a certain amount of
trench stores, bombs, periscopes, pumps,
&c., &c., and be made responsible for their
safe custody.
6. He should, in trenches, thoroughly know the
geography of his battalion trenches and
where his company and battalion head-quar-
ters are, and keep a certain number of
trained guides, who can quickly find their
way by day or by night.
The company commander should inform the battalion
commander who he considers his best platoon com-
mander.
NOTES ON THE WORK OF PLATOON
COMMANDERS IN THE TRENCHES.
The following notes are not intended to be an exhaust-
ive statement of a platoon officer's duties, but are
designed as suggestions for the use of officers ■vvho have
not yet had experience of trench work in the firing line.
Many of the duties referred to can properly be devolved,
at least occasionally, upon platoon sergeants or section
commanders \ but the platoon commander remains
generally responsible for their performance.
The notes are divided for convenience under two
heads, viz.:—
(i) Going up into trenches.
(ii) In the firing line.
They contain no special reference either to coming
out of trenches or to the work of a platoon commander
in support trenches. But the arrangements for leaving
trenches are roughly the converse of those for going
in; and the work of a platoon in support trenches differs
chiefly from that of a platoon in the firing line, in that
it is not usually necessary to post more sentries than


can rouse the line quickly if required, and, in some
cases, also control the exits from and entrances to the
trench.
(i) Going up into Trenches.
The general arrangements for the relief of pne party
by another in the trenches, e.g., as regards the hour of
relieving and the succession in which different parts of
the line are relieved, are, of course, usually made inde-
pendently of platoon commanders. The approach to
the trenches is, moreover, everywhere different, so that
not much can be laid down as regards the detailed con-
duct of a relief. It may, however, be said that platoons
should not generally go up by more than two sections
at a time, each party separated by at least 150 yards
from any other. Apart from the danger of shells, this
arrangement prevents a delay at the entry to the com-
munication trench. This is a point at which stray
bullets are often encountered, especially at night, and if
more than two sections are taken up together, the men
in rear are certain to be kept waiting outside while the
leaders check at the step in to the trench.
Before leaving billets, platoon commanders should
explain as fully as possible to their platoon sergeants
and section commanders what piece of trench they are
taking over, and any step's that can be suggested before-
hand in case they are caught by shelling or by a burst
of rapid fire. Generally speaking, they should try and
so arrange that if unexpected casualties occur among
the leaders, the relief will proceed as intended.
(ii) In the Firing Line,
It should be impressed on men relieving a fire trench
that they should carry their rifles in such a way that
they do not show over the parapet, and that they must
make no noise. This is not only of importance when
the enemy’s trenches are close. There is always the
possibility, especially at night, of a hostile listening post
at some unsuspected point near the firing line, which
may discover and report that a relief is proceeding, and
so bring shell fire upon the outgoing party. The incoming


party should lead silently along the trench which
they are to take over. Each man should pair off with
one of the party occupying the line, and should find
out from him any points about the particular post he
is taking over. In the meantime, the commander of
the incoming platoon should consult the officer or non-
commissioned officers in charge of the outgoing party,
and should get all possible information from him with
regard to the position. When he is taking over the
trench for the first time, he will naturally have much
more to learn than when he is merely coming back to a
trench which he knows already.
Among the points upon which he should inform him-
self are: —
(a) The behaviour of the enemy during the period
preceding the relief, and any points in their
line requiring special observation. For ex-
ample, it may have been noticed that the
enemy have strengthened their wire, or, on
the contrary, that they may have cut it, as
though preparing for an attack. A ma-
chine-gun emplacement may be suspected at
some particular point in the enemy’s
trenches.
( h ) Anything ascertained by patrols about the
ground between the two firing lines. It
sometimes happens, through the defective
passing on of information, that the same
place gets reconnoitred twice by different
battalions, when a single reconnaissance
would have been sufficient.
(c) Any standing arrangements for patrols at
night, including the point at which they can
best pass through any wire in front of the
trench, the ground they should patrol, or
the place where they can lie under cover.
( d ) Any parts of the trench from which it is not
safe to fire, except in emergency. Such posi-
tions are apt to occur in a winding fire


trench, and are not always recognisable in
the dark.
(e) Any special features of the trench, such as
recent improvements, work planned but not
completed ( e.g., the provision of dugouts in
a communication trench), dangerous points
{e.g., any on which machine-guns appear to
be trained at night), and useful loopholes
for observation purposes.
(/) The places from which wood and water can
safely be obtained.
(g) The amount of ammunition and the number
of picks, shovels, and empty sandbags in
that section of the line.
It is sometimes difficult, where a relief is hurried or
where particular points in front of the line cannot he
made out in the darkness, to insure that information of
this kind is properly and completely passed on. It is
as essential for written notes and plans to be handed
over to a platoon or company commander taking over
for the first time as it is to a battalion or brigade.
In the meantime, the incoming party should lead
(unless they have already done so), should fix their
bayonets, and should all go temporarily on sentry at the
posts which they have taken over. Arrangements should
also be made for occasional shots to be fired, since a
complete cessation of fire is apt to arouse suspicion,
while a heavy fire is likely to provoke a return, and so
cause needless danger from stray bullets to the outgoing
party. As soon as the line has been taken over in this
way, and the outgoing platoon is in a position to start,
the word to move should be passed down very quietly.
As soon as they are clear the relieving party should he
numbered off by a non-commissioned officer passing
down the line according to the number of men whom it
is found desirable to keep on sentry (e.g., “one, two;
one, two,” where the sentries are to be one in two at
night). By day it is generally sufficient to keep one


man in four, five, or even six on the look-out. The pro-
portion, however, should not he less than one in six,
since this arrangement, apart from other requirements,
insures that there will he sufficient men on the alert
along the line to rouse or call up the remainder quickly
in case of need. The platoon sergeant or other sergeant
on duty will be responsible for the changing of sentries
at fixed intervals. In practice, it has been found best
not to leave men on sentry for more than an hour at
a time.
At this stage, also, packs should be taken off, and
every man should be required to see that he has a good
firing position. There is always a tendency for men to
take up positions from which they can see over the
parapet for look-out purposes, but cannot fire freely
in all directions with a good elbow rest in case of rapid
fire being required to meet an attack across any part
of the ground in front. Section commanders should be
made to satisfy themselves on this point as regards each
individual man in their sections, and to report that they
have done so. Hot only should section commanders
themselves test each man’s firing position, but certainly
the platoon and company commander, and even the
commanding officer. As soon as these arrangements
have been completed, the word should be passed down
quietly for men not on sentry duty to stand clear.
Thereafter it should only be necessary to make the whole
line “ stand to ” during the hour before dawn and when
there is any special alarm ( e.g ., during a continued and
unexplained burst of rapid fire at night).
After dark (unless or until the moon is bright) every
man’s rifle should be left lying in a firing position upon
the parapet. By day, or by bright moonlight, all men
except those on sentry duty should keep their rifles, with
bayonets fixed, in the trench. Tor this purpose it is
sometimes convenient to make narrow vertical slots in
the side of the trench, with shallow scoops for the belts,
in which the rifles can stand. By this means rifles can
be kept out of the way in a narrow trench, and can also
be kept clean and ready to fire.


Certain points in tlie work of a platoon commander
after a section of trench has been taken over are dealt
with in the notes under particular headings which
follow:—
(a) Observation. —The observation of the enemy’s
line is not generally sufficiently accurate or consecutive.
In trenches which are being held for any considerable
period it should he possible to arrange an almost con-
tinuous survey of the enemy’s line through disguised
steel loopholes. Such loopholes may well he set facing
sideways, so that one loophole covers a section of trench
opposite another. Sites for such loopholes can be
chosen by day, and they can he inserted and disguised
with very little risk by night. They should be chosen
with a view to bringing the whole of the enemy’s line
in front under observation by sections. Steel loopholes
should not be placed too low in the parapet, unless well
protected at the look-out hole, for a bullet coming
through would hit a man in the trench. The Germans'
appear to have some of their loopholes on the ground
line, but their trenches are very deep, and a man’s head
would probably be below this, A sandbag should be
split and hung as a curtain over the back of each loop-
hole, and it may be convenient to burn a number on
each curtain. This is useful for reference, and helps to
prevent loopholes, as marked, being obscured or built in
during repairs to a parapet, as is apt to happen when a
party unfamiliar with a particular section of trench
has taken it over. It is a good plan to insert two steel
loopholes about 3 yards apart. A man can then wait
with levelled rifle at one while another man with field
glasses watches for targets through the other. Men
vary greatly in value as observers, but those who have
any natural gift of observing soon show themselves on
ordinary sentry duty. Those selected for the purpose
should be put into relays of three or four to each loop-
hole, and should then be required to keep up a prac-
tically continuous observation of the section of trench
allotted to their loophole.


The results of a consecutive observation of this kind
are greater than the amount of information derived
from ordinary sentries looking over the parapet for
short spaces at intervals would suggest. An observer
watching persistently through glasses in practically
complete security will see the enemy cleaning or repair-
ing his trenches. He will often see wood, hurdles, or
wire being carried down the communication trench. He
should make himself so familiar with the look of the
section of trench which he is observing as to be sure of
observing any substantial alterations in the enemy’s
wire entanglements or any new sap run out from his
trench under cover of night. He should count any
corpses lying out to his front, and if he is ever doubtful
as to the genuineness of any of them should put a bullet
into it. He may well see a sentry from time to time
looking pver the enemy’s parapet for a few seconds, and
can put a sniper on to catch him. He can watch any
points suspected of being machine-gun emplacements.
This applies especially to night observation, when shots
fired can be detected by their flashes, and when the Ger-
mans seem largely to employ machine-guns, often
trained on particular points, firing single shots or
groups of two or three shots, at intervals. Observers
should, moreover, be told what marks to look for
(cockades, piping, &c.) on any man exposing himself.
Arrangements should be made for any observations
made by them or by the ordinary sentries to be reported
at once to the officer or non-commissioned officer in
charge of the platoon at the moment.
( h ) Upkeep and Improvement of Trenches. —Men
should be strictly forbidden to undercut or widen their
trench in any way without leave. Trenches, however,
generally require at least some small amount of daily
repair. They can often be improved by the provision,
for example, of dugouts in communication trenches or
other ground in rear of the firing line. Such work,
even if not urgently required, helps to keep a platoon
in good training for digging, and teaches the men to be


warning
.ssWHo
J the t&jnch.
opt " $s they
, if Wtie they
/>*
i<5n\bf
self-sufficing in this respect. A platoon commander
should take an early opportunity of examining his
trench by daylight with his platoon sergeant, and with
the section commander concerned with each part of it.
They can then decide in consultation what work, if any,
requires to be undertaken. Men are often to he found
with mining experience who are specially useful in
■directing the work of squads. Once any piece of work
has been decided on, the section commander concerned
•or a particular corporal should be made responsible for
its completion.
Before a trench is handed over to a relieving party
the platoon commander should inspect it to see that it
is clean, and that the latrines are being left in a satis-
factory state. The cleaning of a trench should include
the removal of all old tins, paper, scraps of food, &c.,
from trench, dugouts, and parapet. Such rubbish
should be buried in latrines or elsewhere rather than
merely thrown out of the trench, unless it is desired to
scatter tins in such a way as to give
enemy’s approach. It should, however,
that tins so scattered may prove embarrai
or even to an attacking party leaving the -- '
cartridges should also be cleared opt.
subsequent digging and cleaning if osb<
bedded in the trench floor.
(c) Sentries. —The proport:
of an
embered
» patrols
Empty
hinder
get em-
sentries required
has already been dealt with, antf the notes upon obser-
vation given above, apply. aSsb in some degree to
ordinary sentries in the. - fiting line. Especially when
the enemy is close, sehtnfes can usefully be provided
with small periscopes to - ' fix on to sticks or bayonets.
They should be iuStrttcted to keep their magazines as
full as possible, to put in a fresh clip as soon
as there is one in the magazine.
A sentry sßbtfld not look over the parapet continu-
ously, but he should do so frequently, and especially
after dark, when lights go up on either side. Generally
speaking, fire at night has a better chance of catching


hostile working parties or patrols than sentries who will
often be watching through steel loopholes. With this
object, shots should be fired when no lights are showing,
and should be aimed low in view of the natural tendency
to fire high in the dark. The instructions usually given
to sentries at night is for each man to fire an occasional
shot. They should also be warned against replying to
a burst of rapid fire from the enemy, or even against
taking up without order rapid fire on their right or
left unless they have a definite target to aim at.
( d ) Watches. —In normal circumstances arrange-
ments can generally be made for the commanders of
two or three neighbouring platoons to divide the night
between 10 o’clock and the time for “ standing to ” be-
tween them. The platoon commander on duty in each
watch should patrol the line constantly, satisfying him-
self that the proper number of sentries are on duty, and
that they are all keeping a sufficient lookout. He should
look generally to see that they have proper fire posi-
tions. In each platoon, the platoon sergeant and sec-
tion commanders should similarly keep watch in turns
during the night, and should be responsible for sending
up lights from different places in the line at intervals,
which will vary according to the darkness and other
local conditions.
( e ) Inspection of Rifles. —Rifles should be inspected
each morning in trenches, occasionally by a platoon
commander, and at other times by the platoon sergeant
or section commanders. It should be impressed on men
that it is essential to keep their ammunition clean, as
rifles are apt to jam if dirty ammunition is used.
(/) Arrangements for Patrols. —The working of a
patrol is outside the scope of these notes. There are,
however, certain points which have to be attended to in
the firing line, when a patrol is going out in front of
it. Thus every man in the section of firing line con-
cerned must be warned that a patrol is going out, and
may return to the trench by his post. It is not suffi-
cient merely to warn the sentries on duty at the time


when the patrol goes out, since they may he changed
before the patrol comes in, and men cannot all be
trusted to pass on any instructions given them to their
reliefs. Word should he taken quietly down the line
by non-commissioned officers in person; the message
should never he passed from man to man. At the same
time, instructions should he given about firing. It is
not desirable to cease all firing while a patrol is out, as
this is likely to rouse the enemy’s suspicion. A satis-
factory plan is for a few of the most trustworthy men
to he instructed to fire high at intervals. * They must
not, however, fire in to the air, as such shots are be-
trayed by the direction of the flashes. Arrangements
must also he made to insure that no Very lights are
sent up while the patrol is exposed, and this prohibition
should extend some hundred of yards along the line.
In the cast of a stationary post under cover, it is, of
course, safe, and indeed desirable, to send up lights in
the usual way once they have got into position. In the
case of a patrol who is going to be stationary not too
far from the trench, it is sometimes convenient to estab-
lish communication between them and the line behind
them by means of a string. Derelict telephone wire is
useful for such a connexion. Wfiere patrols have to lie
out long hours on end, or in trying conditions of weather
or ground, it has sometimes been found useful to appro-
priate a special dugout for them where they can dry
and rest themselves on their return. They can then
also be excused from “ standing to ” before daybreak.
( g ) Saving of Ammunition and Equipment. —ln any
system of trenches which has been held for a long time,
and especially in trenches where there has been much
fighting, there is apt to be much dirty ammunition and
equipment lying about. It should he impressed on every
man that such ammunition should always be picked up
and cleaned, or, if too dirty for cleaning on the spot,
returned to the company quartermaster-sergeant.
Equipment and rifles found in similar conditions
should also be returned to him in the first instance.


( h ) Latrines. —Each section commander should he
made responsible for finding out the latrine nearest to
his section directly after he has come into the trench,
and for seeing that the men under him know where
it is. Latrines in use should be plainly marked, and
it is also desirable that some record should be left of
their existence after they have been covered up and
disused. Where possible, it is better to dig them out
of a communication, than out of a fire or support,
trench. It is very important that latrines should be
handed over clean, i.e., those parts of them which have
been used by the men of the outgoing platoon should
be filled in. If this is not done, it becomes no one’s
business to fill them in, and not only they, but the main
trench itself, becomes in a filthy state. A free use of
chloride of lime is desirable, and, indeed, a necessity.
By Authority : Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne.
