

(Reprinted from Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of
NOTES on the ARRANDA TRIBE.
etran. Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris.
By R. H. Mathews, 1.5.,
[Read before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, November 6, 1907.]




NOTES ON THE ARRANDA TRIBE.


NOTES ON THE ARRANDA TRIBE.
By R. H. Mathews, 1.5.,
Associe etran. Soe. d’Anthrop. de Paris
[Read, before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, November 6, 1907.]
In the following monograph it is proposed to supply a few
notes on the beliefs and sociology of the Arranda tribe,
located upon the Upper and Middle Finke River, partly
in the Northern Territory and partly in South Australia.
The information is either wholly new or is in extension of
fragments previously published by others, whose works are
quoted.
If this article and my contribution of the 7tli August last
be studied together, they will be found to present a con-
densed account of the leading elements of the sociology of
the Arranda and Chingalee tribes, in both of which descent
is counted through the mother, quite irrespective of the
father. Matrilineal descent also prevails in all the eight
section tribes from the north-western portion of Queens-
land, right through a wide zone of the Northern Territory,
into the Kimberley District of Western Australia. Tribes
with four sections in their social structure, and having
matrilineal descent, occupy more than half of the entire
area of Western Australia.
Mr. N. W. Thomas assumes that the tribes of the four-
section system in Western Australia have patrilineal
descent, 4 but I am at a loss to know upon what grounds he
does so. My reports just quoted are conclusive that
descent is through the mothers.
1 Proc. Amer, Philos. Soe., Phila., xxxix., 574-578, with map; also
p. 124. Queensland Geographical Journal, xix., pp. 52, 53 ; lb., xxn., p.
78. This Journal, xxxv., p. 220.
2 “Kinship and Marriage,” (London, 1906), p. 40.


Birth and After-life.
I have in former articles briefly referred to the ignorance
of the natives of the Northern Territory in regard to the
mechanism of procreation, giving examples from the Worn-
baia, 1 Chingalee, 2 Chauan, 3 Warramonga, 4 and Yungmunni 5
tribes. According to the Arranda belief, a woman maybe
camping with her husband close to a certain rock, soakage,
etc., and a spirit child will come out of the ground, or from
the rock, etc., and will throw a tiny tjurunga at her where
she is lying asleep. This magical implement enters the
woman’s body and becomes a child. 6 Another version of
this belief is that a woman, whilst out walking in the bush,
may pass near to a certain tree where a little spirit child
is nestling among the leaves, and it throws a small invis-
ible tjurunga with the same result. Clumps of mistletoe
growing on the branches of gum trees are believed by the
blacks to be favourite dwelling places of spirit children in
quest of a human mother. It is also believed that spirit
children are borne along in whirlwinds, and if they pass
close enough to a woman will cast a small tjurunga at her
in the way described. These mythic infants are very
diminutive and may be in the form of any sort of creature,
or even invisible altogether.
In the Arranda tribe a tjurunga is allotted to every child,
whether male or female, shortly after its birth. If the old
men know of a spare tjurunga belonging to the place where
the spirit child entered the woman’s body, it is conferred
upon the new arrival; if not, a new instrument is made
and in either case is placed in the knanakala, an unfre-
1 Queensland Geographical Journal, xx., p. 73. * lb., xxn., pp. 75, 76.
3 This Journal, xl., p. 110.
* American Antiquarian, xxvm., p. 144.
5 Bull. Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris, vn., Serie v,, p. 171.
8 Compare with quotation from Rev. Geo. Taplin, given at p. 112 of
Yoi. xl., this Journal.


quented spot where these sacred amulets are kept, out of
the reach of women or the uninitiated.
Rev. L. Schulze, in speaking of deaths among the Arranda,
says the souls of all go to laid, a mythical lake situated
north of Hermannsburg, on whose shores the souls live,
eating fruit and other good food, which is found there in
abundance. Mr. Schulze gives another version of the
resting place of the departed. He says the Itana , ghost,
goes away to the tmara altjiri , or place where the mother
of the dead person was born. 1 He remarks that the natives
were unable to explain the variation in the two statements.
During several years past I have been endeavouring to
obtain from my correspondents full details of the native
belief in an after life, but in carrying out this work they
were beset with numerous difficulties. It was hard to
make the natives understand what information was wanted
about the disposal of the soul or ghost, and when that had
been partially overcome, it was found that the native
notions in regard to the soul generally were not very clear
or well established. In these matters, as in their legends,
their views possess a childlike simplicity, natural enough
in a primitive people.
Instead of a lake, as reported by Mr. Schulze, some of
my correspondents say that the souls go to subterranean
caverns, where there'are running streams, plenty of food,
and sunny days. These mythical places are supposed to be
situated a little way beneath the surface of the portion of
the tribal territory occupied by the local division to which
their mothers belonged. The spirits come up out of the
ground and sit in trees or rocks, or journey about in whirl-
winds. Although the weight of evidence seems in favour
of reincarnation of the original stock of spirits, yet we find
1 Trans. Boy. Soc. S. Aust., xiv., pp. 238 and 244.


natives in the Arranda, Loritya, and Erlistoun tribes, as
well as among the Ohingalee and their neighbours, who
state that a spirit child is only born once of a human
mother. 1
Some of my friends found a confirmation of the belief
recorded by Mr. Schulze, that when a man dies, his spirit
part goes back to the tmara altjira. Altjira means any-
thing mysterious or which has been handed down from
unknown times; or something which a native cannot under-
stand or account for. Tmara means a camp, and in an
extended sense also signifies the district in which a native
dwells. Tmara altjira may be translated as the dwelling-
place of one’s people, right back to the mythical past.
The Arranda have a tradition that in ancient times the
people were shapeless creatures and all of one sex, until a
lizard man, whose name was Mangarkunjerkunja, took a
sharp stone and by a surgical operation differentiated them
into males and females as they are now. This is very
similar to a legend reported by Mr. S. Gason in 1874, as
existing among the Dieyerie tribe respecting lizhrds called
Moonkamoonkarilla. 2 Among the Parnkalla natives at Port
Lincoln, 700 miles south of Hermannsburg, a lizard was
accredited with the same functions, according to the Rev.
C. W. Scliiirmann. 3
The Arranda natives believe in evil spirits called Tatu-
ratura, of imaginary forms, who injure men, women or
children during the darkness. The souls or spirit parts of
living people also wander about at night to extract the fat
of their enemies.
1 Queensland Geographical Journal, xxii., pp. 76 and 79,
2 The Dieyerie Tribe, republished in *• Native Tribes of South Aus-
tralia,” pp. 260 and 283.
3 The Aboriginal Tribes of Port Lincoln, republished in " Native Tribes
of South Australia/’ p. 241.


Sociology.
In an article read before this Society on 7th August last
I very briefly referred to the sociology of the northern
portion of the Arranda tribe, with eight intermarrying
divisions. 1 I now intend to shortly describe the sociology
of the southern branch of that tribe, in which there are
four divisions, instead of eight, as follows:
Cycle. Wife.
j Purula
i Paltara
i Pananka
Kamara
Table A.
Husband.
Pananka
Kamara
Purula
Paltara
Offspring.
Paltara
Purula
Kamara
Pananka
In 1877 a Mission Station was established at Hermanns-
burg on the Finke River, in the territory of the southern
branch of the Arranda. To this Mission Station there also
came natives from the northern part of the country with
eight partitions in their sociology. The two parts of the
Arranda nation, the northern and the southern, which we
may provisionally distinguish as Factions, for want of a
better name, never became quite consolidated, although
they intermarried and mixed freely with each other. The
northern faction pursued the laws of marriage set out in
Tables I and II of my paper of August .last; whilst among
the southern faction the four section system shown in
Table A above, was considered the primary or fundamental
one, and the additional four sections of the northerners
were merely looked upon as complementary.
It now becomes necessary to introduce a table showing
actual examples of the marriage of individuals who are all
well known to my correspondents.
1 This Journal, Yol. xli., pp. 67 - 70, Tables I and 11.


Table B.
Individual answering the questions.
Section of
Section of Indi-
vidual's Children.
Individual's Father.
Proper Name. | Section.
Pananka
Purula
Paiarola
Ndatjika
Paltara
Mbitjana
| Knuraia
Knuraia
Ngala
Jonathan
Emily
Paltara
| Knuraia
Mbitjana
Knuraia
Purula
Thomas
Katarina
Paltara
| Knuraia
Mbitjana
Bangata
Mbitjana
Jakobus
Lydia
Panaka
Ngala
| Bangata
Pananka
Purula
Makana
Nakara
Bangata
Kamara
| Pananka
Kamara
Paltara
Toby
Mathilde
Purula
Mnuraia
| Kamara
Kamara
Paltara
J ohannes
Maria
Purula
Knuraia
| Kamara
Ngala
White man
Abel
Ruby
Mbitjana
Kamara
| No child
In the above
seven married
table,
men, a
3, Nos. 1 to 7 indicate tl
all of whom are united
the pedigrees of
id to alternative
or No. II wives. An explanation of one of the married
couples will answer for all the rest. Paiarola, No. lin the
table, is a Paltara, and is married to Ndatjika, a woman
of the Mbitjana section instead of to a Ivamara woman.
That is, he has an “alternative” instead of a “tabular”
spouse. It is also noticed that the descent is not in
accordance with Table I of my article of August last, but
the children are Knuraia instead of Pananka. In examin-
mg the marriages Nos. 2 to 7 inclusive, we find that each
man has an alternative wife, and also that the children do
not follow the table referred to.


It will require a little explanation to make this variation
in the descent clear. If we were to study out Table Awe
would discover that the section name of the child corres-
ponds with that of its father’s father, as well as that of its
mother’s mother, just the same as in the four sections of
the Kamilaroi tribe. When the southern faction amalga-
mated with the northern, the four additional sections of
the latter were treated as complementary of the four
primary sections in Table A. For example, when Paiarola
married Ndatjika, although she was a Mbitjana woman,
she was considered the complement or equivalent of
Kamara. Her children consequently would be ranked as
Kamara’s children, and take the section name of Knuraia
instead of Pananka. Looking at Table Bwe observe that
Paiarola’s father was Knuraia; and if we refer to Table I
of my paper of August last, it can be shown that a Mbit-
jana’s mother must be a Knuraia. Therefore the child of
Ndatjika and Paiarola has been given the section name of
its mother’s mother as well as that of its father’s father.
The offspring of the married pairs Nos. 2 to 7, receive their
section names in the same way.
Further study of Table B teaches us that Ndatjika’s
father must have married an alternative wife to enable
him to be the father of a Mbitjana woman. No. 3a,
Katarina, likewise had a father who must have married an
alternative wife. These two examples are interesting and
valuable, because they illustrate that Ndatjika’s mother
was an alternative wife like herself, and that Katarina’s
mother also had the same status as herself. The men Nos.
1 to 7 inclusive have alternate wives, and the two additional
examples just mentioned bring the total up to nine men
who have married alternative or No. II wives.
In 1898, 1 when confirming Rev. L. Schulze’s report of the
“alternative” marriages, I had not sufficient information
1 This Journal, xxxii., p. 72.


to enable me to clear up his statement that “whether
Paltara has a Kamara or a Mbitjana for his wife, the children
are Pananka.” 1 I was however, able to state that descent
was counted through the mothers, instead of the fathers as
reported by Mr. Schulze.
At that time I was confronted with the following
problems: (a) That a certain Paltara man with a Kamara
wife had a family of the Knuraia section, like Peter and
Rebecca, for example, in Table II of my paper of August.
( b) That another Paltara man in the same locality, with a
Mbitjana wife, had children which also belonged to the
Knuraia section, such as Thomas and Katarina in Table A
of this brochure, (c) Then again Mr. Schulze said that a
Paltara man’s children should be Pananka, whether he had
a Kamara or a Mbitjana wife.
I had sufficient confidence in my informants to feel
assured that every one of these conflicting examples was
perfectly true. I then asked my correspondents to send
me comprehensive lists of married persons with whom they
were well acquainted, going back one generation and for-
ward one generation. The cases (a) and (b) have already
been answered, leaving only (c) to be explained.
The Paltara man of Mr. Schulze’s example probably or
certainly belonged to the faction of the tribe which had
only the. four sections exhibited in Table A. By all the
traditions of his forefathers his wife should be a Kamara,
and if he contracted marriage with a Mbitjana she would
be treated as the equivalent or complement of Kamara and
her offspring would be classified as Pananka, the same as
Kamara’s offspring.
It appears, then, that there are three methods of reckoning
the descent of the offspring in the mixed community of the
1 Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Australia, xiv., p. 224.


Arranda. One method is exemplified by the four marriages
in Table 11, p. 69 of my paper of August last. This prac-
tice is in accordance with the tabular marriages of the
Chingalee, Binbingha, Wombaia and other northern tribes.
Another method is exemplified by seven of the marriages in
Table B of this treatise, in cases where a man takes an
alternative spouse. This law apparently had its origin in
the coalescence of the southern and northern factions of
the tribe. A third method, in which descent is counted as
in Table A, is a continuance or survival of the old law of
the southern branch of the Arranda. In the last two
methods, which may be bracketed together, the child
receives the section name which corresponds to that of
both its father’s father and its mother’s mother.
Looking at Table B, we discover an example of still
another variation in the marriages of the Arranda. Abel,
No. 8, is a Mbitjana man, married to Ruby, a Kamara.
She is what I have called a No. 11l wife, in dealing with
the Chingalee sociology at p. 71 of my monograph of
August last.
Referring to Table I of my paper of last August, we see
that tlie pair of women, Purula+Ngala, are the mothers
of the pair of women Bangata + Paltara, and this series
recurs in perpetual alternation. Bach pair consists of one
woman from a primary -section in Table A, and another
woman from a complementary section in Table I of August
last. These pairs could be tabulated as follows:
Table C.
Cycle. Wife. Husband. Offspring.
j Purula + Ngala Pananka 4- Knuraia Bangata + Paltara
t Bangata + Paltara Mbitjana + Kamara Ngala + Purula
g ( Pananka + Knuraia Purula + Ngala Kamara + Mbitjana
* Kamara + Mbitjana Paltara + Bangata Knuraia + Pananka


In the above table, the men of the pair of sections
Pananka + Knuraia intermarry with the women of the pair
of sections Purula + Ngala, and the children belong to the
pair of sections Bangata + Paltara.
It will be convenient to call each of these pairs of sec-
tions a “dual” division and speak of it in the singular
number. For example, Pananka + Ivnuraia, the first pair
in the “Husband” column, may be spoken as a “dual”
husband or father; Purula+Ngala as a “dual” wife or
mother; and Bangata + Paltara as a “dual” child. We
can now illustrate that the “dual” Bangata + Paltara child
takes the section name of its “dual” father’s (Pananka +
Knuraia’s) “dual” father, Bangata + Paltara. We also see
that this child takes the section name of its “dual” mother’s
(Purula+Ngala’s) “dual” mother, Bangata + Paltara,being
in accordance with the well-known law of the Kamilaroi
tribe, in which descent is always in the maternal line.
A few pages back it was pointed out that according to
Table A, with only four divisions, the child ta/kes the
section name of its mother’s mother as well as that of its
father’s father. In Table 0, with each of the four sections
duplicated, we find that the succession is the same as in
Table A, because a primary and a complementary section
are treated as one.
In what we may distinguish as “Mr. Schulze’s reckoning
of descent” that is, where the section of the offspring is
the same no matter whether a given man marries a
“tabular” or an “alternative” wife, the rules of Table O
will meet all the cases Nos. 1 to 7in Table B. But in
those instances where descent is counted as in Table I, p.
68 of this Journal, although a child inherits the name of
its father’s father in “tabular” marriages, yet when a man
takes an “alternative” wife the succession of the father’s


father’s section is extinguished, just as it is in the Ohingalee,
Wombaia, Binbingha, Chauan and other tribes.
This can be better illustrated by taking an example from
Table I, p. 68. If Pananka marries his “tabular” wife
Purula, the child will be Bangata, the same section name
as its father’s father; but if he marries his “alternative”
wife Ngala, the child will be Paltara, regardless of Pan-
anka’s father Bangata. That is, the name of Pananka’s
child varies according to which of the two women he
marries, because the section names have succession in a
prescribed rotation through the women, as stated in the
explanation of Table I, p. 68. This is the law of the nor-
thern faction of the Arranda.
Among the southern faction, as we have seen above, it
is necessary, in “alternative” marriages, according to “Mr.
Schulze’s method,” that the child shall take the section
name of its mother’s mother as well as that of its father’s
father, as illustrated in the marriages Nos. 1 to 7 in Table
B. This law is in accord with that of the Kamilaroi, and
therefore we are justified in saying that the child of an
“alternative” wife likewise obtains its section name
through the mother.
Spencer and Gillen state that “in the Arunta (Arranda)
and in all the tribes from there to the Gulf of Carpentaria
descent is counted in the paternal line.” 1 By means of
thoroughly reliable correspondents, I have been working
the Arrauda, Warramonga, Ohingalee, Binbingha, Wombaia,
Warkaia and other tribes since 1895, and have published
the results of my labours at various times from 1898 until
now. I am satisfied that in all the tribes mentioned
descent is counted through the women and not the men.
Spencer and Gillen in speaking of wliat I have dis-
tinguished as “alternative” marriages among other tribes
1 Northern Tribes of Central Australia, p. 74.


say: “This custom is not met with in the tribes forming
the Arunta (Arranda) nation.” 1 Table Bof the present
monograph will be a sufficient refutation of such an asser-
tion.
Professor Spencer says: “Mr. Mathews deals with the
organisation of certain tribes in the northern parts of
Central Australia. In every tribe he arbitrarily arranges
the subclasses (sections) to lit in with maternal descent.
In every case in which I have been able to test Mr.
Mathews’s description of the organisation I have found
that either his information or the conclusion which he has
drawn from it, is incorrect.” 2 If what has been said in
the present article, and in the one of August last, cannot
be controverted, it will be found that it is Spencer and
Gillen’s conclusion which is incorrect and not mine.
The Arunta (my Arranda) tribe are reported by Spencer
and Gillen to have assembled at one place for “ more than
four months.” 3 A statement of this kind, without an
explanation of the circumstances, has misled some English
writers into the belief that the Arunta natives ppssess a
higher degree of culture than other Australian savages, to
enable them to provide food for such a large assemblage at
one spot for so long a time. 4 The facts of the case are
briefly as follows: —Spencer and Gillen established a depot
at Alice Springs, and invited the aborigines of the surround-
ing country to meet them there. All the people of both
sexes who came in response to the invitation were provided
with a liberal supply of food, clothing, cooking utensils,
edged tools of iron and steel, personal ornaments, and
everything which was likely to conciliate and please them.
In return for this kindness, the conditions were that the
1 Op. cit., p. 107.
2 Rep. Austr. Assoc. Adv. Sci., x., p. 380.
3 Native Tribes, pp. 118 and 272.
4 Secret of the Totem, pp. 88, 89.


natives should rehearse all their old ceremonies of every
kind, and explain their marriage, burial and other customs,
as well as describe all matters upon which information
was sought.
Such an extensive programme necessarily occupied a
considerable time —apparently more than four consecutive
months. It is unnecessary to repeat the well known fact
that the habitat of the Arunta tribe is a dry and arid
country, in which animal and plant life is of the most
scanty and precarious description. It is probable that all
the people assembled would have died of starvation in less
than a fortnight if they had been depending upon the
natural food products of the forests and plains of that
locality. Moreover, it is not unlikely that the wise men of
the Arunta prolonged all the details of the meeting to their
utmost limit, in order to extend their sojourn in such a
veritable “Tom Tiddler’s Ground.”
Boy Companions for Men.
Several of my most trustworthy correspondents, who
have resided many years in different places in the Northern
Territory and in the northern and central portions of
Western Australia, inform me that unmarried men are
generally accompanied by young boys, who are allotted to
them by the old men. No man has the privilege of obtain-
ing a boy until he has himself passed through the ceremonies
of circumcision and subincisiou. The boy is a brother,
actually or collaterally, of one of the woman whom the
man will be permitted to marry by and by. Such a boy’s
mother, therefore, is the potential mother-in-law of the
man, and consequently he must neither speak to nor look
at her.
This custom has given rise to a widespread belief among
the white population that pmderasty is practiced; but from
very careful inquiries made by friends at my request, lam


led to the conclusion that the vice indulged in between
the man and the boy is a form of masturbation only. A
resident of the Victoria River informs me that girls who
are too young to admit of natural intercourse with them
are sometimes used by the men in precisely the same
manner as the boys, except that the little girls do not
accompany them. I have original descriptions of how the
vice is carried out, but the details are not suitable for
publication.
Mr. E. T. Hardman, during his travels in the Kimberley
district of Western Australia in 1883-4, observed the custom
of single men being presented with what he calls “a boy
wife.” He says: “There is no doubt they have connexion,
but the natives repudiate with horror and disgust the idea
of sodomy.” 1
Mr. A. G. B. Ravenscroft published some details in 1892
of this practice among the Chingalee tribe at Daly Waters
in the Northern Territory, which go to confirm my state-
ment that the indulgence is practically masturbation. 2
Conclusion.
t
In consequence of some important differences of opinion
between Dr. A. W. Howitt and myself regarding descent
in certain tribes I think it right to bring a few of our
conflicting conclusions under the notice of other investi-
gators.
In his, “Native Tribes of South-east Australia,” Dr.
Howitt refers to the Kumbainggeri tribe on the east coast
of New South Wales, and after mentioning the four inter-
marrying divisions, says: “It is not possible to say how
these four subclasses (my sections) are placed in pairs
representing the two moieties of the tribe, without which
knowledge it cannot be said whether descent is in the male
1 Proc. Roy. Irish Academy, Series 3, Yol. i., p. 74.
2 Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Australia, Yol. xv., p. 121.


or the female line.” 1 He places the Kumbainggeri amongst
others under a general heading of “Tribes with male
descent.”
In 1897 2 and again in 1901 3 I published a table of the
four intermarrying sections of the Kumbainggeri tribe,
exhibiting how the sections are divided into two phratries
or cycles, and supplying lists of totems belonging to each
cycle. I stated that “the rules of marriage and descent
are precisely the same as in the Kamilaroi tribe.” I
showed that Kurpoong corresponds to Murri, Marroong to
Kubbi, Wirroong to Ippai, and Womboong to Kumboofthe
Kamilaroi divisions. I also pointed out that whether a
woman of the Womboong section marries a Kurpoong or
Marroong husband, her offspring is always Wirroong, thus
illustrating the alternative law of marriage, as well as the
normal or tabular law.
Having been engaged in sociological, linguistic and other
investigations among the Kumbainggeri natives for a
number of years, I am unwilling that Dr. Howitt’s asser-
tion that “the line of descent cannot be given” should go
forth uncontradicted, especially as my works above quoted
have made it indisputably clear that descent of the sections
and totems is counted through the mother in all cases.
Dr. Howitt states that the tribes on the Brisbane River
and at the Bunya Bunya ranges have descent in the male
line. 4 In 1898 I reported that in both the tribes mentioned
descent is counted on the female side, the children always
taking the phratry (cycle) and totem of their mother. 5
In 1883 Dr. Howitt published a table of the four inter-
marrying divisions of the Mycoolon tribe, stating that
1 Op. cit., pp. IGS and 269.
2 This Journal, xxxi., pp. 169, 170.
* Queensland Geographical Journal, xvi., p. 41.
4 Native Tribes of South-east Australia, pp. 136, 137 and 229.
5 Proc. Arner. Philos. Soc., Phila., xxxvii., pp. 328-331, with map.


descent was through the father. 1 In 1898 I contradicted
that statement and showed that descent is maternal. 2 Dr.
Howitt in his late work, “Native Tribes of South-east
Australia,” does not allude to my contradiction, from which
it may be inferred that he maintains his statement of 1883.
Whether he does so or not, it becomes necessary for me to
repeat that I am quite certain that descent in the Mycoolon
tribe is indisputably maternal.
I wish to make a few further remarks on Table VI of my
monograph of August last, which represents Spencer and
Gillen’s table of the Chiugalee intermarriages. These co-
authors profess to have discovered that the first four men
in the “Husband” column of Table VI are called by the
collective name of Willitji, and that the remaining four
men in that column are known as Liarit ji, thus constituting
two independent moieties, in which the fathers are said to
pass on their moiety and section names to their sons from
generation to generation. This succession holds good only
while the four men marry No. I or No. II wives, but breaks
down altogether when we examine the progeny qf No. 11l
or No. IV wives. For living examples of these four sorts
of wives, see Table IV, p. 72 of this Volume.
For example, let us suppose that each of the said “Hus-
bands” of the so-called Willitji moiety marries a No. 11l
wife. Then Chimitcha marries a Cliuna woman and his son
is Ohenfara; Ohuna espouses Chimitcha and his son is
Ohampina; Tungaree weds Taralee and his son is Chula;
and Taralee marries a Tungaree wife and his son is Chun-
galee. These four sons belong to the moiety which
Spencer and Gillen call Liaritji. If the four “Husbands”
of our example had married No. IV wives, the result would
have been the same.
1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., London, xm., p. 346.
2 This Journal, xxxii., pp. 82, 83.
K—Nov. 6, 1907.f|


It is evident that half of a man’s possible wives and half
his possible families belong to the Willitji moiety, and half
his possible wives and families to the Liaritji moiety —the
section and the moiety of the children depending altogether
upon the mothers in every case. Whatever may be the
meaning of the terms Willitji and Liaritji it is quite clear
that they cannot be the names of two independent moieties,
because the sons of the Willitji men are liable to be scat-
tered up and down through all the sections of the entire
community. Exactly the same confusion will arise if we
take our example from the four “Husbands” comprising
the Liaritji moiety, see Table VI, p. 82. The partition of
the men into the two parts Willitji and Liaritji utterly
fails either to prove descent through the fathers, or to
establish exogamy of such moieties. These facts also con-
trovert the conclusion arrived at by Mr. N. W. Thomas
when he says: “ The existence of phratriac [moiety] names
enables us to say definitely that the descent in this tribe
is in the male line.” 1
Corrections.
In Vol. xxxiv of this Journal, p. 129, and in Vol. xxxv,
p. 218, I reported a variety of totems appertaining to some
tribes about Oresswell Downs, Sturt’s Greek and adjacent
country. The information was gathered for me by Mr.
Innes, Mr. Stretch, Mr. Wilson and other residents of those
regions. Upon continuing my inquiries through these men
and gathering further details, I find that the totems are
not arbitrarily attached to the particular pairs or quartettes
of sections mentioned in my former papers. All the totems
therein enumerated are found among the different sections,
but instead of being inherited from either parent, are
determined by the locality where the mother first became
aware that she was enceinte, in accordance with the beliefs
1 Kindship and Marriage, p. 150.


reported in my account of the Chau-an tribe in this Journal,
Vol. xl, pp. 107-111. Metaphorically speaking, it is a
certain tree, rock, spring, sandridge, or other natural
feature in the family hunting grounds, which produces or
bears the child, and confers its totem upon it, instead of
these functions being performed by a human mother.
The above correction applies to Vol. xvi, p. 71, of the
Queensland Geographical Journal.






