

PPryn
NOTES ON VICTORIAN FUNGS.
By Baron Von Mueller, K.C.M.G., M.D., Ph.D., FR.S.
In the eleventh volume of the fragmenta phytographice Australia
four years ago a list was given much from the manuscripts of Dr.
M . C. Cooke, the celebrated mycologist, of all the fangs then known
from Australia ; this enumeration contained 770 species, including
the 275 recorded for Tasmania by the Rev. M. J. Berkeley, the
greatest living specialist in this branch of knowledge. The rev.
gentlemen had also extensive collections of fungs from the botanic
department of Melbourne successively since 1858, largely brought
together by myself, but a considerable portion also furnished by
correspondents, who were animated by me to institute observations
locally in this direction. The first list of fungaceous species thus
arose for Eastern Continental Australia in 1878. giving the specific
names of 235; but Berkeley had enumerated already in 1815 for
Western Australia 120 species, and the great Elias Fries in 1846
recorded from the same region 42. Failing strength obliged the
Rev. Mr. Berkeley, to withdraw at a venerable age from the field of
mycology, on which he had shed so much light for half a century;
thus all my later collections went to the distinguished Dr. M. C.
Cooke, except some particular kinds, which the last mentioned
great mycologist submitted to the Rev. C. Kalchbrenner, I was
able to insert also in the list elaborated for the fragmenta many more
species, obtained partly by Mr. F. M. Bailey in Queensland (examined
by Berkeley and Broome conjointly,) partly brought together by
myself from various contributors, whose names I have recorded then.
This brought the list for the fragmenta in 1881 up to 1179 species.
It was my intention, to publish the additions made since then by
my friends and myself (from determinations, kindly undertaken by
Dr. Cooke) in the 12th volume of the fragmenta; but as latterly
many extra-engagements arose in the department for the exhibitions
in Amsterdam, Calcutta and London, for the completion of the
Eucolyptography , for the geographic and literary census of Australian
vascular plants (8788 up to 1884,) for the illustrated monography
of Myoporinse, for two new editions and two translations of the
volume on “ Select Plants for Industrial Culture and Naturalisation”
and now also for the key to the system of Victorian plants (needing
about 7500 entries and 200 wood-cuts,) I found it impossible to
continue meanwhile the fragmenta, although the descriptions of
about 150 new vascular species and numerous other notes
accumulated for it already. But Dr. Cooke has issued in the 10th
and 11th volume of the Grevillea an enumeration of all fungs from
Australia known to him up to 1888, by which means the total was
advanced to the number of 1241. Reasons have arisen, to withhold
no longer from publication the list of those fungs, at least which
came as new for Victoria from myself to Dr. Cooke since 1881 ;
and I now avail myself of Obe kind offer of the Editor, to have it
printed for the October nunlmuTif the “ Victorian Naturalist;” and I
hope to follow this up in the next number, by an enumeration of all
species of fungaceous plants rendered known through Dr. Cooke
from ray Department as new for Australia during the last four years,
the number being very considerable. Mere neAv geographic annota-
tions must be reserved for later publication. To those not initiated
in mycologic studies I would like to point out the desirability of
sending Australian fungs to specialists through any great phytologic
institution, so as to avoid clashing of various professional observers’
studying on similar material. That now-a-days each great class of
evascular plants needs special investigators will be comprehended,
when I say, that Dr. Streinz enumerated in 18G2 already 11014
fungaceous plants specifically, irrespective of an extensive supplement
issued the same year, and of course not counting over 50000
synonyms then furnished by him also.
The descriptions given by Dr. iSaccardo merely of the tribe of
Pyrenomycetes (not one of the largest group of fungs) from 1882-
1883 occupy not less than IG4B large-octavo pages irrespective of
indices. Indeed we find now-a-days, when evascular plants from all
parts of the globe require to be connectedly investigated, when very
slight differences are deemed sufficient for specific demarcation, and
when repetitive resemblances among these forms of vegetable life
have been shown to be often widely dispersed, that the mycologist
can no longer work even with real advantage on Algs, or Lichens,
or Mosses, each of which now extensive group requiring not only a
particular devotee, but also a life-long study of that particular field,
over which for progressive reliable work, proportionate to the sacri-
fice of time, the command is to be exercised.
LIST OF FUNGACEOUS PLANTS,
Obtained ly the Botanic Department of Melbourne from 1882 to
1884 as New for Victoria.
Compiled from successive records furnished by
Dr. W. C, Cooke, M.A.
Agaricus clypeolarius, Bulliard ( Lepiota)
„ melleus, Vahl (Ar mill aria )
~ ditopus, Fries ( CUtocybe)
~ infundibuliformis, Fries, ~
~ radicatus, Relhan ( Collybia )
„ nirosulus, Berkeley, ~
~ trachycephalus, F. v. M. and Kaleh. (fMycend)
„ galericulalus, Scopoli ~
„ luteo-albus, Fries „
~ polygrammus, Fries „
~ umbelliferus, Linne ( Omphalia )
~ Aethiops, Fries ( Leptonia )
~ atro-coeruleus, Fries ( Pleurotus )
~ applicatus, Batsch „
~ caryophyllus, Berkeley „
Agaricus mutahilis, Schaeffer ( Pholiofa)
~ peregrinus, Fries ( Flammula )
~ picreus, Fries ~
spumosus, Fries ~
„ conspersus , Fries ( Naucoria)
„ subglobosus, Fries „
„ pactolus, Cooke {Crept do tuff)
„ fascicu’aris, Hudson ( Ilypholama )
r r'ceeus , Persoon ( Psilocybe )
~ Jimiputris , Fries {Panaolus)
„ disseminatus, Persoon ( Psathyrella )
Paxillus hirtulus, F. v. Mueller.
Hygrophorus nigricans Berkeley.
Marasmus calobates , Kalchbrenner.
Panus riscidulus, Berkeley and Broome.
Panus rivulosus, Berkeley.
Xerotus papyraceus , Berkeley.
Lenzites betulina , Fries.
Polyporus anthracophilus, Cooke.
~ atro-rinosus , Cooke.
~ australis, Fries.
~ borealis, Fries. .
„ campylus, Fries.
„ fragilis. Fries.
~ illotus , Kalchbrenner.
„ laetus , Cooke.
~ lignosus, Klotzsch.
„ marginatus, Fries.
„ ochroleucus, Berkeley.'
~ pelliculosus , Berkeley.
~ pisiformis, Kalchbrenner.
„ proteus, Kalchbrenner.
„ proteoporus, Cooke.
„ seriatus, Kalchbrenner.
~ spiculiferus, Cooke.
„ tardus, Berkeley.
~ trizonatus, Cooke.
~ rarius, Fries.
~ Weinmanni, Fries.
Hydnum cirrhatum, Fries.
Irpex flavus , Klotzsch.
Grandinia Australis, Berkeley.
Thelephora pedicellata, Schweinitz.
Hymenochaeta purpurea, Cooke.
Clavaria rugosa, Bulliard.
~ cristata, Holmskiold.
~ corallioides, Linne.
Calocera stricta , Fries.
Tremella albida, Hudson.
Hirneola polytricha, Fries.
Dacrymyc.es deliquescens, Dubr.
~ stellatus, Fries.
Podaxon pistil! are, Fries.
Mesophellia arenaria, Berkeley.
~ ingratissima, Berkeley.
Geasier for if'ormis, Vittadini.
Ly coper don pusillum, Batsch,
„ coelatum, Fries.
Polysaccum pisocarpum, Fries.
Cyathus desertorum, F. y. Mueller.
„ fimicola, Berkeley.
Spumaria alba, Fries.
Didymium farinaceum, Fries.
Stemonitis fusca, Roth.
Aecidium microstomum, Berkeley.
~ Lagenophora, Cooke.
„ Prenanthis, 1 dime.
Credo bulbipes, Kalchbrenner.
~ Gichoracearum, Candolle.
Puccinia Lagenophora, Cooke.
„ Prunorum, Cooke.
Ustilago carho, Tulasne.
~ digitaria, Rabenhorst.
Podosporium grande, Cooke.
Sporidesmium atro-fuscum, Cooke.
Penicillium candidum, Cooke.
Antennularia scoriadea, Berkeley.
~ Rohinsoni, M. and Berkeley.
Geoglossum Muelleri, Berkeley.
Peziza fusipora , Berkeley.
~ vesiculosa, Fries.
„ apicidata, Cooke.
„ applanata, Fries,
Asterina Rosa, Fries.
Nectria ferruginea, Cooke.
The 101 fungi, enumerated on this occasion, bring up the number
for Victoria to 340 ; those added in 1885 through the exertions of
the writer will be published early next year, when probably likewise
the very large number of Mosses, Lichens and Algs, accumulated
during the few last years as new for the central Australian colonies,
can connectedly be recorded together with the many additional fungs
obtained from beyond ALctoria. That for years to come much
novelty will be discovered yet particularly among Australian fungs,
cannot be doubted, when we consider, how much they depend for
their development on favourable seasons, how capriciously many of
these kinds of plants do make their appearance, and how local many
of the species anyhow are in their occurrence, —not to speak of the
need of microscopic search for the minutest of these memorable
organisms, even if new vegetable immigrations were not constantly
adding to the fungus-flora also.
Extra-print from the Victorian Naturalist , October, 1885.
