

NOTE
ON THE
ABORIGINAL RACES
AUSTRALIA.
(A Paper read at the Annual Meeting of the National Association for the Promotion
of Social Science, held at York, September, 1864.)
FLORENCE NIGHTINGALE.
LONDON:




iVt/fc on d/te Aboriginal Races in Australia. By FLORENCE
Nightingale.
At the last meeting of (he Association a paper of mine was read on
the Sanitary Statistics of Colonial Schools and Hospitals. By the
kindness of the Duke of Newcastle, copies of that paper were seat
to all the colonies, and have called forth numerous communications
of interest addressed to the Colonial Office. Mr, Cardwell has been
good enough to place these papers at my disposal; and I now beg to
lay before the Association extracts from two or three of the most
important of those beax-ing on the fate of the aborigines of Australia.
The allusion made in my former paper to the Benedictine estab-
lishment of New Norcia has led to a long report from the Roman
Catholic Bishop Salvado (of Port Victoria) on the practical working
of this institution, containing points of considerable interest, strongly
confirmative of the views advanced as to the general principles on
which the natives should be trained.
Bishop Salvado combats the idea that the mortality among Abori-
gines is produced by diseases, simply as such. The considerations he
adduces all lead to one conclusion, viz., that so soon as native
habits and customs begin to undergo change under European in-
fluences, the work of destruction has at the-same time begun. “ Few
sick aborigines,” he says, “ are restored to health,” whereas, under
similar circumstances, “ few Europeans would die.”
The native appears to have little or no chance of recovery from
the moment he sets foot within a house or hospital and conies under
medical treatment. He longs to return to the bush; he escapes;
“ and yet that dying native, a few weeks afterwards, when every one
that knew him believed him to be dead and buried, is as strong and
healthy as ever, having travelled perhaps fifty or more miles on foot.”
The native dislike to hospitals is confirmed by a communication
from Dr. Hale, our Bishop of Perth, in which he says :
“As regards hospitals, I am sorry to say that it is so impossible to keep the
poor natives (i. e., the uncivilised natives) under any kind of restraint when they
are sick—they so completely set at defiance all rules and regulations—that
anything like regular hospital treatment is quite out of the question in their case.
•They are I’eady enough to take medicines and such other things as may be
thought needful for them, but they will not tolerate restraint or confinement.
Their unmanageableness in illness arises from a deeper feeling than that of mere
restlessness. A positive and very strong dislike to any locality where they have
been for some time sick takes possession of their minds, they persuade themselves
that there must necessarily be some connection between the locality and their
illness, and they are constantly haunted by the idea that they would be better
almost anywhere else than where they are.”
It would seem from this extract that the natives have an instinctive


dread of quiescence in one place. And this natural feeling is doubt-
less founded on some physiological law of their organisation.
A curious illustration of this instinct is mentioned by Bishop
Salvado;
A native belonging to the institution became ill with spitting of
blood: a sure mark of fatal disease, if the patient is treated in the
usual way. The patient begged to be allowed to go into the bush;
and after three days’ hunting of horses, he returned sufficiently re-
covered to resume his occupations.
Guided by experience of this class, Bishop Salvado has been led to
conduct the institution at New Norcia upon the following principles,
which I give in his own words (he “ apologises ” for his “ foreign
English ”): —
“Having fixed my residence here in the year 1857, and admitted successively
a good number of native boys, I thought and did establish for them three daily
hours of light work in the morning, and three daily hours of school in the
afternoon. I left free the other hours of the day for them to play, as necessary
gymnastic exercises.
“My object in fixing them physical work has been threefold, viz,, to prevent
sickness by the daily development of their exercised body and strength; to have
them busy in doing some useful thing; and to introduce them by degrees into
the habits of civilised and industrial life. Although I acknowledged the great
advantages of mental work by fixing a certain time for their school, including
religious instruction, I greatly feared the deathful consequences of indoor restraint.
“We ought to bear in mind that the aborigines are exotic or foreigners to our
civilisation. They cannot stand at once, not even our food, much less our daily
hard work, let it be mental or physical. For this reason I have always been
rather indulgent in the exact keeping of their hours of school or work. In
ploughing, shearing, and reaping seasons I dispense them of their school, and
every one of them, according to their age and capabilities, is employed in the
general work of the season. Indeed, the work of most of them is no other thing
than a continual childish playwork, but it is by playing that they learn by
degrees how to work.
“ Of the two works, viz., physical and mental, I have given the preference to the
former; for, according to my own ideas, a native that knows how to cultivate his
field, I believe him to be much more advantageously initiated in the civilised life
than another that knows how to read and write.
“ I have seen aborigines, males and females, read and write quite correct as
I thought, yet they were nothing better for it. Reaching and writing are things
utterly useless to them as far as their living is concerned, for not to starve they
are obliged to return to the bush to live by hunting as their forefathers did.
We look at them with European eyes, consider them as Europeans, and try to
train them as such, but in doing so we delude ourselves. Their case is quite
another, quite different from ours, and we ought to bring them to our case and
high position not at once, but by the same way we came to it, by degrees.
“Physical work, as ploughing and so forth, will bring them the means of their
living; mental work, as reading and writing, will bring them, what we have
many a time seen, vices and debauchery. There are many things that in theory
are really beautiful, yet cannot bear to be put in practice.
“There is an establishment, I will say, for the sake of argument, where one
hundred or more aborigines have been well and highly educated, in fact every
one of them is a good Christian and a good scholar. Their schooling time is
over, and then what ? Are they to remain all their life’s time in that establish-
ment ? Are they to be supported always and in all their wants by that estab-
lishment ? If this neither can be nor is intended by the rules of that establish-
ment, can they support themselves, and perhaps their wives and children, by
their learning when out of that establishment? Once out of that establishment


where will they go ? What will they do ? All these questions have already
been answered by the fact that all the time, trouble, and expenses in having
brought them to that state of civilisation did them no good, all has been lost;
for those aborigines, having no means of support, become the worst specimens of
their race.
“ I am well aware that when a Mr. Anybody sees the aborigines of such or such
school read well their lessons, write clear their copy-books, and sing in good
time certain favourite songs, he remains highly gratified, and everywhere he goes
and to every one he speaks, he praises it to the skies. He and all will applaud
it as a true blessing, never dreaming that the whole of it will have no good
result at all, and ail will disappear as the smoke before a strong current of wind.
That gentleman thought he was seeing all this in a school of European children,
but he was mistaken, as well as in all he thought would follow it.
“ As a principle, I think that in civilising the aborigines of Australia the learn-
ing of the A B C, <%c , ought to be a secondary thing; religious instruction and
physical work, both at the same time, ought to take the first and leading place.
“ I will make a hypothesis and suppose an establishment where the aborigines
are daily and practically instructed in religious matters, and gradually trained
in the doings of a well-directed farm. Their daily school is not long, neither is
their daily work, yet the latter is encouraged by all means, and the aborigines
arc paid for it. In many cases, and perhaps in most of them, their work and the
benefit of it do not cover the expenses of their support; nevertheless, they are
rewarded for it, and faithfully.
“The aborigines, seeing the real and positive advantage they are getting for
their work, will exert themselves the more, and thus by degrees they will become
acquainted with the various branches and different works of a farm. They are
trained in everything save in minding sheep, cattle, pigs, or goats, which thing
does no good to them. Even tailoring, shoemaking, and similar trades are con-
sidered too sedentary and unwholesome for them; nevertheless, if any of them has
an inclination to be a shoemaker or to learn any other trade, he is allowed to
follow it. But, as a general rule, they are trained in the branches of agriculture.
“ When any of them gets to be of a proper age and sufficiently instructed to
cultivate by himself a field, a parcel of land is apportioned to him for that
purpose. That land is to be cleared by himself, the other natives helping him,
for which work the establishment pays them. It pays also somebody else for the
rooting out of large trees and old stumps; for that work is considered too hard
and even injurious to the health of the aborigines ; pays as well for the fencing
of the land, and thus the land is ready for the plough at the expenses of the
establishment, At ploughing season that native being supplied by the same
establishment with a team, plough, seed, harrow, and other necessaries, he
ploughs that parcel of land or part of it.
“ At the latter end of November our native is reaping the wheat of his field, and
as cheerful as any man can be. The other natives are paid by the establishment
for helping him; the native owner of the field is not paid for his reaping, nor
has he been paid for his ploughing; he is not paid for any work he does for
himself, but he is supported and supplied with everything he may be wanting at
those times.
“ The crop of the field is respected as his property, but it is also well understood
that whatsoever money that crop will produce to him, that money shall be em-
ployed in buying tools and utensils of agriculture; and if those means are
enough, a bullock or more are to be bought. Of the money he receives as
wages for the works he does at the establishment he may dispose at his pleasure,
although he is often advised to employ it usefully.
“If he is a single or unmarried man, the establishment provides him with a
cottage at its own expenses, but he had been provided with it before that time if
married.
“ Should the single native find any of the girls at the same establishment willing
to become his partner, they, supposing them both well instructed in their
Christian religious duties, will be married. If there is no girl at the establish-
ment or none of them is willing to marry him, then he may obtain any from out
the establishment, and when instructed and baptised he may marry her.


“ That native once married, the establishment supports him, as before, his wife
and children (if they have any) for some time, perhaps for two or three years,
and then by degrees the means of the establishment are shortened to him in due
proportion to the increase of his own means.
“ The children of that native, or natives, as the case may be, will be a great
step further advanced in civilisation than their parents were at their age. They
will have a better chance of having from their early days a good Christian and
civil education, and the children of those children will be further advanced still.
“ Thus by means of practical religious and physical work, education together
■with but little school in the beginning, and over all by the blessing of the
Almighty, in the course of time a village of industrial small farmers and good
Christians will be gradually formed.
“To this hypothesis it may be said that after all there is no more in it than a
theory. Indeed it is a theory, but such that the fathers of our grandfathers by
putting it into practice have fully demonstrated to have been the medium, and
the high road by which they reached to their high state of civilisation, and even
ourselves to the enjoyment of that we have the happiness to possess at present.
“After religion, 1 believe reading, writing, and what follows it, to be, so the
already civilised people, one of the greatest, if not t he greatest blessing of civilisa-
tion, but I do not think it to be so in the case of savages or uncivilised people,
as the aborigines of Australia are. Nature itself teaches us that the first thing
a newly-born child looks after is the breast of its mother, and no man can make
use of his mental or intellectual faculties if he has not the necessary physical
powers to enable him to do it.
“ It would be, perhaps, not out of place to add that even to the most of civilised
people who do write, their pen is their plough, their ink their seed, and their
paper their field. Very few indeed are those whose thought, and not whose ink
is their seed; in fact, the more get their living by the plough, and the privileged
(exceedingly) few by the thought.
“Anyhow that theory has regulated my operations here, and that hypothesis is
nothing else buf the same theory put here into practice, in order to attain our
charitable and heartily wished-for-end, viz., the conversion and civilisation of
the aborigines of this province.
“ There are already better than eighteen years since I first came to this colony,
but only seven since it has been my privilege to begin this benevolent work in
my own way. For nearly the first four years (out of seven), the whole system
worked well; at the latter end of the fourth year, the measles and its conse-
quences were a great drawback to our efforts, nevertheless we continued exerting
ourselves, and I have no reason to complain of the general result,
“A period of seven years is rather too short to expect in it great things from a
work and system depending on the age of children. We had several young
natives able already to work for themselves when the measles decimated them,
but at present of 33 native boys and girls we have -with us, four young men only
are able to plough for themselves, and their joined crop yielded, this year,
200 bushels of wheat save 10.
“ They themselves alone, ploughed the ground, threw the seed, harrowed the
field, and at the proper season reaped materially the fruit of their hard labour.
“ Self-interest is the oil that makes every wheel go. Take away self-interest,
and not one will move; for nothing is done for nothing.
“ Surely, if the aborigines are left to themselves, they cannot but follow their
forefathers’ traditions and customs, but if properly and timely trained, I, for one,
do not see the impossibility of their being truly civilised. A great deal depends,
there is no doubt, I think, on the system adopted, and on the way and manner of
carrying that system out. The experience of many past years has taught us
that the time, labour, and expense of civilising the aborigines of Australia by
only teaching them how to read, to write, &c. &c., has been as yet an unfortunate
failure. I have no doubt that neither want of zeal nor of means have been the
cause of it, therefore it must lie in the system adopted. It seems to me that the
physical work system as adopted in this Benedictine mission answers better, the
practical result of it shows this, although in a short time, and on,a small scale. T
regret not being able to carry it out on a larger scale, but the simple reason is no


other than our scanty means or private income. I thankfully acknowledge in
this place, in justice and with gratitude to the colonial government, their helping
us in our charitable work these three years with £lOO sterling per annum.
“An enterprise of this magnitude cannot be properly carried out, even on our
small scale, without incurring great expenses (and I know it too well), but, after
all, the conversion and regeneration of man is not the work of man alone.
“We generally do select the best means as the medium for the better and surer
attainment of our ends; but in the conversion of man, not the medium of that
system, nor the other; not the scanty means nor the ample ones; not the manage-
ment of that man nor of the other can alone succeed, for ‘ neque qui plantat
est aliquid neque qui rigat; sed qui incrementum dat Deus,’ ‘neither he that
planteth is anything, nor he that watereth ; but God that giveth the increase.’
“ Nevertheless, if we in such a charitable work comport ourselves as ‘ God’s
coadjutors,’ and if as such we persevere in doing our best, every one of us ‘ shall
receive his own reward, according to his labour.’ ”
I have introduced this somewhat lengthy abstract from Bishop
Salvado’s paper, because it explains the method of civilising adopted
by him, —and which in his former communication, cited in my last
paper, he stated had been successful in training the aborigines
without destroying them. The method employed pre-supposes the
possession of considerable capabilities on the part of the native
population. But the direction given to these is more towards
physical improvement and introduction of better physical and moral
habits, than towards mere head-knowledge.
In dealing with uncivilised races, it has hitherto been too often
the case that the Roman Catholic Missionary has believed : “ Sprinkle
this child with holy water; and then, the sooner it dies the better
that the Protestant Missionary has believed: “Make this child
capable of understanding the truths of religion, and then our work
is done.”
But the wiser Missionary of this day says : “ What is the use of
reading and writing to the natives, —it does not give him a living.
Show him his duty to G-od. And teach him how to plough.”
Otherwise, he does but fall into vice, worse than before.
Ceres comes before Minerva.
As for the Australians, in their present state, very few of the
human race are lower in the scale of civilisation than these poor
people: excepting indeed, those who trample upon and oppress
them, —who introduce among them the vices of European (so-called)
civilisation.
What must be the condition of a people of whom an English lady,*
conducting a native school, can write, as she does to me:—•
“ There is not in nature, I think, a more filthy, loathsome, revolting
creature than a native woman in her wild state. Every animal
has something to recommend it; but a native woman is altogether
unlovable.”
And yet the daughters of these degraded women can give examples,
like the following, cited in the same letter
“Bessy, the girl, has just commenced to play the harmonium in church, a
* Mrs. Camfield, of Annesfield, King George’s Sound, Western Australia.


superior instrument with two key boards (Alexandre’s), and it is very gratifying
to hear her, she plays so well, and with such coolness and composure, and not
with any idea that she is doing what I suppose was never done before by an
Australian native. She is very simple-minded, but quite equal in knowledge
and intelligence to an English girl, who has not had greater advantages.”
It is an advantage of an Association, such as this, that it enables
difficult social problems to he subjected to discussion, and public
opinion to be brought to bear on abuses which would not perhaps be
otherwise reached. The voluminous papers, of which I have given a
few extracts, are the first fruits of last year’s discussion —by making
them public, further good will ensue. This question of the fate of
aboriginal populations is one closely concerning our national honour,
and every day enhances its importance, I cannot better conclude, in
the way of application, than with the following words from Bishop
Hale’s paper, already cited:—
“ Upon the Australian races European civilisation (Christian in name, but far
from Christian in reality) has come suddenly and with overwhelming force.
It has found them utterly unable to hold their own against it, equally incapable
of joining with and flowing onward with the advancing tide ; and therefore these
races have been, since the contact first took place, and still are, going down before
and beneath its, to them, destructive progress.
“If their condition had been less degraded, or if the tone of our civilisation had
been less overbearing, self-seeking, and oppressive, or even if the irruption of the
one upon the other had been less sudden and less violent, the result might have
been different. But it is vain to speculate upon what might have been; we
know, too well unhappily, what has been taking place, steadily and surely, from
the moment when Europeans first set foot upon the Australian continent until
this present time. The native races sink down and perish at our presence.”
Here we have the undoubted fact graphically described. The only
question is, whether Bishop Salvado’s plan of training the children
of the disappearing race will save the race. His method is founded
on sound physiological principles; and being so, is one of the most
likely to succeed.
Emily Faithfull, Printer and Publisher in Ordinary to Her Majesty, Victoria Press,
83a, Farringdon Street, E.C.
