

NOTES ON THE ZODIACAL LIGHT:
BEING A SUMMARY OF OBSERVATIONS
MADE AT SEA SINCE 1889.
FRANCIS J. BAYLDON, R. N. R.
[Reprinted from Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, No. 72, 1900.!




Q fi
/> v
2 HAY ms
O A>
NOTES ON THE ZODIACAL LIGHT:
BEING A SUMMARY OF OBSERVATIONS MADE AT SEA SINCE 1889.
By Francis J. Bavldon, R. N. R
During the last ten years I have paid great attention to the
Zodiacal Light, whilst engaged in a nautical career, in all lati-
tudes from 55 0 N. to 35 0 S. Having lately found that its appear-
ance causes great interest amongst many people who have less
favorable opportunities for observing it, the following brief sum-
mary of my observations may prove of interest, though scientific
accuracy is not pretended, owing to my rough, primitive modes
of observations, my attention to the Light being chiefly given
to while away otherwise tedious watches on deck. And no
undue importance must be attached to these notes; for they are
simply the results of one individual’s observations, totally uncor-
roborated by reference to observations by others.
The actual observations given have all been made during the
past twelve months, in the Pacific Ocean, whilst on board the
Canadian-Australian R. M. S. Aora?igi, trading between Syd-
ney, N. S. W., and Vancouver, and are chosen out of scores
of observations, as being of more especial interest.
As the result of my observations, it seems to me
I. That when favorably situated, as in tropical regions, an
observer may see the eastern and western cones every morning
and evening, provided the sky is clear and the Moon is in her
first or last quarter.
11, That on every very clear moonless night the Light is
visible as a band, reaching across the entire sky throughout the
whole night.
HI. That frequently when the night is not clear enough for
this entire band to be seen, portions of both eastern and western
branches may be observed at midnight.
IV. That that part of the band situated in direct opposition
to the Sun is generally (especially near the solstices) brighter
than the surrounding portions. This brighter portion, elliptical
in shape and about 15 0 long, is known as the Gegenschein, and
appears to change its position slightly, from 2 0 or 3° east to 2°
or 3 0 west of the anti-solar spot.
V. That the Zodiacal Light forms an unbroken band uniform


in breadth, around the Earth. This uniform breadth being,
approximately, 29 0 . (See pages 23-24 of this article.)
VI. That this band is inclined about 4 0 to the plane of the
Ecliptic, its line of central axis (approximately) crossing the
Ecliptic in R. A. o b , reaching its most northerly Declination of
2j%° in R. A. 6 h ; again crossing the Ecliptic in R. A. i2 h ,
reaching its most southerly Declination of 27%° in R. A. i8 h ;
again crossing the Ecliptic in R. A. o h .
VII. That as an observer moves to the northward, this line
of central axis appears displaced to the northward; and as he
moves to the southward it appears displaced to the southward,
the displacement being i° for about 19 0 change in latitude.
This displacement seems to be greatest at small elongations from
the Sun, as at the base of the cones, and seems to decrease as
the elongation increases, towards the apices of the cones, and
opposition. Besides this displacement, there is also another,
evidently due to the refractive and absorptive properties of the
atmosphere, whereby the base and lower portions of the cones
are thrown still farther to the northward in north latitudes, and
to the southward in south latitudes.
VIII. That there are probably slight seasonal changes in the
angle which the band makes with the Ecliptic; but owing to my
ever-moving, seafaring life, all such changes I have to associate
with my change in latitude, especially as I never record observa-
tions ashore, those obtainable in the clearer air at sea appearing
to me to be so much more reliable and better.
IX. That the apparent eastern and western cones (or spindles)
are chiefly formed by atmospheric effects on the band lying
immediately above the horizon, and partly by the increasing
extent of circles of altitude from the zenith downwards, but that
really the band is uniformly about 22 0 broad from horizon to
zenith. These cones are particularly exaggerated in extra-tropi-
cal regions, in the tropics being hardly noticeable.
X. But that the Light is considerably brighter to an elonga-
tion of about 105° on either side of the Sun, and under favorable
conditions the apices of eastern and western cones always appear
to be situated at this elongation, though if the night is unfavorable
they are, of course, not seen to this extent.
XI. That beyond these cones the Light can still be traced,
very faint, with varying breadth, according to the clearness of the
atmosphere, from 5 0 broad to an average breadth of 12 0 , to an


extreme breadth of 22 0 , which is seldom seen, lying beyond the
zenith right down to the eastern horizon at p. M., and to the
western horizon at A. m. Whereas the cones rapidly taper from
an apparent breadth of, say 30°, at the horizon to io° at their
apices, beyond them the band tapers only 2 0 or 3 0 in its path
across the entire sky; and as the western cone sets and is followed
by the band, so the band assumes a cone shape (very faint in inten-
sity); or over the eastern horizon the light appears cone-shaped,
but as it rises to the zenith it becomes of a uniform breadth.
XII. That the appearance of the Light is that of a soft white
luminosity, and although slight tinges of color are occasionally
noticeable, these are entirely due to atmospheric conditions. In
brightness the Light, at elongation less than 105° from the Sun
frequently exceeds the brightness of the Galaxy, though at greater
elongations it seldom approaches it. Occasionally I have seen
the cones so bright that only stars of the second magnitude were
discernible in them, but as a rule those of the third magnitude
are visible. The connecting band between the cones is very faint
indeed, though at times I have traced it across the sky about as
bright as the Magellanic clouds. Both in the cones and the
connecting band the Light appears brighter and more concen-
trated towards the line of central axis. So faint is the connecting
band that frequently the brighter Gegenschein can be seen, on
moderately clear nights, as a'separate luminosity, no sign what-
ever of the band being visible.
XIII. That the Moon adds sufficiently to the Zodiacal Light
to make it visible during her first and last quarters; but that
from her first to last quarters her light totally absorbs its light,
until she is below the horizon.
XIV. That the very faintest cirrus haze is most annoying
and aggravating to observers of the Zodiacal Light, as it causes
its boundaries to be apparently continually changing, and also
its brightness to be constantly waxing and waning, whilst the
presence of the haze itself would otherwise be hardly discernible
in the sky.
XV. That Honolulu is most favorably situated, as regards
latitude and clearness of air, for observations of the Zodiacal
Light; that the air over the Pacific Ocean appears clearer and
better adapted for observations than that lying over The Atlantic
Ocean; and that from high upland plains the Light must present
a magnificent spectacle.


A Few Remarkable Observations of the Zodiacal Light
AS SEEN FROM THE PACIFIC OCEAN, FROM NOVEMBER 30,
1898, to August 18, 1899.
Nov. jo, Dec. 1 and 2 , 1898. —-7 P. M. to about g :3c P. M.
(Lat. of R. M. S. Aorangi being respectively 2°S., 7°S., 12 0 S.,
and Long. 172 0 W. to 176° W.)
During these nights the Light was distinctly visible from
Sagittarius , in the western horizon, to Pisces , at the zenith, to
Gemini , rising in the eastern horizon. Each of the three nights
it was thus visible from soon after sunset until a little after
moonrise, when gradually its light was absorbed about 9 P. M.,
9:30 p. M., 10:15 p. M., respectively. At the western horizon
the Light was diffused over some 30° of arc, gradually becoming
of less extent, Until at the borders of Pisces , 6o°' above the
horizon, it had contracted to about io°. To this point the Light
surpassed the brilliancy of the Galaxy in Aquila and Cygnus , and
thence continued as a faint but distinctly visible band, from 15 0 to
io° broad, across the sky until lost in the Galaxy at the eastern
horizon. The line of central axis coincided with that given on
pages 23-24 of this paper. Moonshine prevented further observa-
tions being made during the night. A brighter ill-defined glow,
was apparent between the Pleiades and the Galaxy (evidently the
Gegenschein), and situated on the line of central axis of the
band.
January 16th Midnight,
R. M. S. Aorangi —Lat. xB° N.; Long. 160 0 W.
Moonset, 10:45 P. M. Light nearly equal to the Galaxy from
Pisces (western horizon) to near the Galaxy in Taurus. Then
between 11 p. m. and midnight perfectly discernible, though very
dim and diffused, from the Galaxy in the zenith through Gemini
and Cancer , where it brightened a little (the Gegenschein), widely
diffused through Leo into Virgo and Corvtis at the eastern horizon.
After 11 p. M. the sky was remarkably clear had it been only
moderately so, the only trace of the eastern Light would have been
a bright glow over the eastern horizon, as had been seen the
previous night in Virgo and Leo , 30° high, and also on the
succeeding night to the same extent.


February Ist 8 - 11:30 p.m.
R. M. S. Aorangi, at Comox, Vancouver I. — Lat. 49 0 25' N.
Very clear, frosty night. Thermometer 20°. Western cone
bright as the Galaxy in Perseus to the Pleiades, about 65° altitude.
Twenty degrees broad in Aries , lower portion apparently enor-
mously displaced to the northward, but land interfered with obser-
vations at a low altitude, as did the Galaxy at very high ones.
However, the band was distinctly visible from Gemini to near
eastern horizon below the Sickle. After 11:30, clouds formed.
July 1st — 7-7: 30 p.m.
R. M. S. Aorangi. — Lat. i° N.; Long. 169° W.
Light extraordinarily bright over western horizon, to an alti-
tude of about 20 0 and breadth of 6o°, extending from the head
of the Lynx to Monoceros. Intensity nearly equaled that of a
second-magnitude star, the only stars in Leo Major which could
be distinguished in its glow being a, /3, y. The Galaxy could not
be compared to it. Above Leo it assumed its ordinary breadth
and intensity to a little beyond Spica, over 90° from the western
horizon. After 8 P.M. ordinary conditions prevailed, until cirrus
haze spoilt further observations at 11:30 p.m., a faint glow having
hung over the eastern horizon in Aquarius and Capricornus since
10:30. At midnight this eastern glow had increased in intensity,
but moonrise, soon after 2 A. m. , put an end to observations.
July 3d —o: 30- 2:30 a.m.
R. M. S. Aorangi. — Lat. 9 0 N.; Long. 167° W.
Sky totally overcast till midnight; then clouds dispersed, leaving
the heavens beautifully clear. From 0:30 to 2:30 a.m. the east
branch was distinctly visible, being bright and cone-shaped within
Aries and Ceius up to the Southern Fish; then faintly diffused
light some 17 0 broad through Aquarius and Capricornus-, then,
very faint, it continued through Sagittarius into the Galaxy,
broadening out into the Gegenschein at the border of the Galaxy
around <r, r, x, °, v Sagittarii. The western branch was too
low to be suitable for observation. At 2:30 a.m. clouds again
formed. The following evening, from 9 p. m. to midnight,
through breaks in the clouds, the Light could be seen in Leo,
Virgo , and Libra; the Gegenschein was also visible; and a slight
glow over the eastern horizon in Capricornus, Aquarius, and
Pisces.


The evening of July 4th (Lat. 15 0 N.; Long. 162° W.), also
corroborated the visibility of the Light in the above-mentioned
constellations, — and probably in Scorpio also, — over both east-
ern and western horizons, from 9 p.m. to midnight, when clouds
formed. The Gegenschein was also visible.
On the evening of July sth, 7:45 to 8: 15 p.m. , the Light was
intensely bright, practically equal in intensity to a second-magni-
tude star, to an altitude of 20° above western horizon (in Leo),
with a maximum breadth of only 15 0 , there being no diffused
light visible. At 9:30 p.m., the Gegenschein was inclosed by
the stars i° south of cr, r, if/, 7r, o, £, v Sagittarii. Glouds
interfered later.
July 6th 8 - 9 p. M.
R. M. S. Aorangi , off Isle of Oahu, H. I.
Light equal to star of magnitude 2.5, again in Leo; then
gradually declined. Much broader than last night, with a big
northerly displacement (nearly to/a Ursce Majoris). Gegenschein
as last night, perhaps a little more easterly. At midnight eastern
horizon had a good glow over it.
July ‘jth. Very good bright observations again obtained till
midnight of both western and eastern branches and of the Ge-
genschein.
July Bth. (Lat. 30° N). — Throughout the entire night no
clouds came to spoil observations, so that the Light could be
seen uninterruptedly from horizon to horizon, and also the Gegen-
schein, during all the night. From 3to 4 A.M., the east branch
was magnificently bright. During this night the Light was visi-
ble in every zodiacal constellation excepting Ca7icer and Gemini,
the two nearest the Sun.
Another fine “run of luck’’ was experienced when bound
south, from August sth (Lat. 15 0 N.) to August 18th (Lat 30° S.).
The outlines, as well as my “home-made” charts would allow,
are given, and show apparent change in the line of central axis
as we proceeded south.


Augicst yth,
st yth, 8 p. m. , to August 6th , 3 a. m,
Aorangi. — Lat. 15 0 -14 0 N., Long. i6i^°
R. M. S.
Lat. 15 0 - 14 0 N., Long. W,
Northern Boundary.
Line of Central Axis.
Southern Boundary.
2° N. /3 Leonis.
3 0 N. S Virginis.
i° N. I
i° N. f 3 Virginis.
V
2° N. a
About 2 0 N. 0 Crater is.
2° N. S Corvi.
3 0 N. y Hydrce.
5° S.
4° S. /3 Librce.
i}4° S. a Librce.
5 0 N. *■
2° N. 20 Librce.
[Gal
laxy interve
7 t Sagittarii.
n e s. ]
o Sagittarii.
i° N. cr Sagittarii.
1 0 S. (3 Capricoriii.
0 Capricorni.
i Aquarii.
Just N. cr Aquarii.
i° S. x Capricorni
Just S. y and 77 “
e Piscium.
t Arietis.
i° S. Pleiades.
S Aquarii.
4 0 N. 1 Ceti.
/3 Piscium.
S. y Pegasi.
Just S. 20
Arietis.
£ Persei.
2 0 S. v Piscium.
S Tauri.
8-9 p.m.—A faint diffused light visible over the western
horizon. Line of central axis not as far north as when I last saw
it, in Lat. 42 0 N.
10 P.M. — Night clearer. Gegenschein distinctly visible in the
center of the body of the Goat.
11 P.M. —The Gegenschein has faint bands extending 4 0 broad
east and west. Westward in Capricornus and Sagittarius; east-
ward through Aquarius and Pisces to Aries at the horizon,
being cone-shaped between Pegasus, Pisces, and Cetus.
0-0:30 A.M. —Eastern branch faintly visible from horizon,
Taumis to Galaxy.
3 a.m.— Eastern branch distinctly visible to Galaxy. Gegen-
schein distinct.
The above outlines were obtained in the course of the night.
August 6th- — Lat. n°N.
8-10 p.m.—Night cloudy. Observations of the western
branch and Gegenschein only obtained.


August jth Lat. 6° N; Long. 167° W.
8 - iop.m. Cloudy. Western branch moderately distinct
widely diffused through Virgo, Libra to Galaxy. Gegenschein
visible.
11 - Midnight.—Sky clear. Gegenschein distinct, but bound-
aries vague oval-shaped roughly, lying between 2 0 or 3 0 north
of r and 29; 6, e, k, 8 Capricorni, 2 0 south of A Aquarii.
Eastern branch visible from Aries to Galaxy.
1:30 A.M. —Very good observations. Light quite plain, from
a little north of Pleiades to Galaxy.
Outlines obtained this night are contained in the next list.
August Bth —Lat. i° N.; Long. 170° W.
8:30 P.M. Light moderately bright, nearly equal to Galaxy;
visible from Virgo (western horizon) round to Aquarius over
eastern horizon, including the Gegenschein.
9 P.M. — Could distinguish connecting bands from Gegenschein
to Galaxy, and Gegenschein to io° above eastern horizon.
iop.m. This eastern branch more distinct from Cetus to
Galaxy.
10-Midnight.— Cone-shaped glow from Aries (eastern hori-
zon) to Galaxy, quite distinct. Gegenschein region during the
nights of the sth, 6th, 7th, and Bth, was very puzzling and irreg-
ular. It appeared as an oval-shaped luminosity contained between
curves drawn from 2 0 south of A Aquarii, i° north of 6 Capri-
corni, 77, x. C 36, v, p. Capricorni. South of the curve, \x, v, j 6
Capricorni , there seemed to be no light at all, and then another
bright narrow curve surrounding j 6 e, k, 8, v, /x Capricorni.
The whole region being in the Zodiacal band.
1 a.m. -3:30 a.m. — Beautifully clear night. Eastern branch
very distinct from horizon (Aries') to the Galaxy ( Sagittarius ).
Outlines given in next list. Cloudy at 4 a.m.
August gth —Lat. S.; Long. 172 0 W.
8; 30 - Midnight.— Cirrus haze and cumulus prevalent. At
intervals west branch fairly bright. East branch well visible as
before; also, the Gegenschein, the dark southern portion not
being so plainly marked. Observations most satisfactorily corro-
borated previous nights. These outlines are now given :


Outlines of the
Light seen on August yth,
Bth, gih.
R M. S. Aorangi
Lat. 6° N. to 4)4° S., Long,
167° to 172 0 w.
Northern Boundary.
Line of Central Axis.
Southern Boundary.
e Virginis.
3/4° S. y Virginis.
“
i° S. a Librce.
y Corvi.
2° N. y Hydrce.
if N.ir “
JustN. 4.0 Librce.
V- “
2 0 N. /3 Librcs.
8 Scorpii.
48 “
i°N. X “
[ Galax
y interven
es . ]
Bet’ n £ and o Sagittarii.
i° S. (3 Capricorni.
Just S. i Aquarii.
“ S. y and 77 Aquarii.
/3 Piscium.
cr Sagittarii.
'C Sagittarii.
i° 5 .6 Capricorni.
i° S. i Aquarii.
2° S. 8
A Aquarii.
I Piscium.
l Ceti.
3 0 S. y Pegasi.
a Arietis.
Just N. a Piscium.
Just N. of Ecliptic.
N. v Ceti.
August 10th.
R. M. S. Aorangi. Lat. g%° S.; Long. 175 0 W.
9 P.M. — After moonset west branch fairly bright—brighter
than of late —to the Galaxy. Outlines much as before, but not
quite so far north. Gegenschein visible from 8 P. M., nearly
circular, with blank space as before; but the whole Gegenschein
is brighter than of late, and the blank space showed the slightest
luminosity, though still darker than the surrounding portions,
towards 11 p. M. , when it was overhead.
10 p.m. — Night magnificently clear. East branch quite dis-
tinct and very broad, rather more to the south than of late. The
full outlines easily seen were 19 0 broad, across the sky, the
broadest I have yet seen the connecting band. Its center was
brighter and more concentrated for a breadth of io°, and the
Gegenschein formed part of this brighter central portion.
Midnight. The Light formed a uniform broad path of lumi-
nosity across the sky, fully equal to the less illuminated parts of
the Galaxy.
1 A.M. Still continued to a uniform breadth of 19 0 or 20°
from the Pleiades to the Galaxy in Sagittarius , and appeared
so strikingly that I woke up our fourth officer to witness the
spectacle. The Gegenschein appeared as a brighter patch in the


midst of the band, with a darker central portion, which was the
darkest portion of the sky in the track of the Light from
Taurus to Sagittarius —i. e. from the eastern horizon to some
40° above the western.
4-5 a.m. —Light very distinct, forming a cone fully equal to
a third-magnitude star, from eastern horizon between Procyon
and about yr Auriga , then maintained a contracted uniform
breadth of 15 0 to 12 0 to the Galaxy in western horizon. The
bright cone was of uniform brilliancy throughout, and crossed
the Galaxy, which was not visible at all.
Outlines given in next list.
August nth —Lat. 14 0 S.; Long. 178° W.
11: 45 P-M. — Overcast until now. Clouds moving away from
the eastward, leaving that direction intensely clear.
0-0:1 5- —Eastern branch ridicutously bright, equal to the
normal condition of the Galaxy, for which it has just been mis-
taken by a friend! from horizon to the Gegenschein, the light
being uniformly distributed in breadth and intensity, as last night.
Last night’s outlines will do. Gegenschein showed the darker
patch again with slightest luminosity.
Outlines are now given:
As seen on August 10th
R. M. S. Aorangi —Lat. to 14° S ;
and nth
Long. 17;
;. X 75 9 to 178° W.
Northern Boundary.
Line of Central Axis.
Southern Boundary.
ft
i° N. 8 Virginis.
i “
i° S. 8 Libra.
Bet’n rj and y Libra.
2 0 N. v Scorpii.
[ G a
2 0 N. t Sagittarii. \
/3 Capricorni.
$ Aquarii.
7?
P Piscium.
i° S. y Pegasi.
i° N. a Arietis.
£ Persei.
2 0 N. 0 Aurigce.
About 51 ‘ *
4v° S. y Virginis.
1° S. a
S. a Libra.
i° S. a Scorpii.
axy interve
t Sagittarii.
■§° N. x Capricorni.
2° S. t Aquarii.
2° S. A
i° S. Dec.; R. A. o h
£ Piscium.
i° S. 8 Tauri.
3° S. fi “
i° N. e Geminorum.
3 0 N. 8
8 Corvi.
i° N. y Hydrce.
3 0 S. 40 Scorpii.
nes . ]
y Corolla;.
2 0 N. a Microscopii.
2 0 N. 7] Piscis Aust.
2 0 N. 88 Aquarii.
2 0 S. i Ceti.
5 ° N. 6 “
2 0 N.y “
o Tauri.
4° S. a “
2° S. v Orionis.
Procyon.
22
Publications of the


My next observations were obtained (owing to cloudy weather)
from midnight to 1:30 a.m,, on August 15th, in latitude 19 0 S.
Light was discernible from Aries to the Galaxy; not as clear as
on the nth and 12th, but still forming a broad band. Gegen-
schein but little brighter than the band, with a darker interior as
before. On August 16th, Lat. 22 0 S., Moon set at 1 a.m., and
Light was again very distinct, with same outlines as last given from
Gegenschein to Aquarius , then southern border remained the
same to 2 0 north of a Ceti , whilst northern border was fore-
shortened, passing 2 0 south of rj Aquarii , thus placing line of
central axis slightly to the southward of that given in the above
list. Gegenschein region very indistinct and puzzling, —the band
is very faint there, — and Ido not believe the Gegenschein itself
is visible.
On the mornings of the 17th and 18th, between 4 and 5 a.m.,
the Light was fairly bright traceable to about 40° from the
western horizon. No Gegenschein was discernible.
A long stay ashore in Sydney then interfered with my obser-
vations.
Below are given the outlines of the Zodiacal band as ob-
tained from observations taken in both north and south lati-
tudes. They give an extreme breadth to the band of 2g°-3o°.
To an observer in a fixed locality the average breadth appears
about 22 0 only, at the favorable elongation of 40° from the Sun;
but if he were to move to the northward or southward he would
find the northern or southern boundary extending, and thus
this extreme limit of 29 0 - 30° has been obtained.
Extreme Outlines of the Zodiacal Band (and Normal
Line of Central
xal Axis) Forming a Band About 29 0
the Entire Sky.
ral Axis; Forming
the Entire Sky.
Line of Central Axis.
Just S. S Piscium.
JustN. e Arietis.
Pleiades, just N. rfTauri.
JustS. /3 Tauri.
i-| 0 S. /3 Geminorum.
N. y Cancri.
Broad Across
Northern Boundary.
Southern Boundary.
2° N. y Pegasi.
2-f° S. l Ceii.
a Tria7ig.
i° S. a Piscium.
4 0 S. [i Persei.
1 “2° N .7] Aurigcs.
2 0 S. /3 “
o Tauri.
4 0 S. a “
i° S. v “
iof° N. a Gemin.
i° N. £ Geminorum.


2 4 Publications
of the
Astronomical Society ,
&c.
i° N. a Lyncis.
if° N. 8 Leo. min.
2-|-° N. £’ Virginis.
i*° S.
r] Leo. majoris.
a ‘ ‘
I-} 0 N. /3 Cancri.
i*° N. £
4-2 ° N. Sextan.
P “
i° S.
a 1 ‘
i° N. 7 Corvi.
2 i° N. y Hydrce.
4 |° S. 7T “
N. k Centauri.
JustN. 6 Scorpii.
24° S. I Ophiuchi.
4i°S. v
3i° N.
JustN,
20 Libra;.
7r S cor pH.
3|° N, eSagittarii.
i° N. e Aquarii.
i° N. y.
i° S.
i*° N
8 Sagittarii.
2° N. l Sagittarii.
1J 0 S. 7] Piscis Aust.
i°N./3
i° S. a
Just N
X Capricorni.
2° S.
i Aquarii.
£ “
4J 0 N. y Piscium.
2i° S.
Just S. q 8 Aquarii.
A. o h ; Dec. o°.
104 “
The above are the outlines as they appear to me, deduced
from observations in all latitudes from 55 0 N. to 55 0 S.
It also seems to me that to a northern observer the northern
boundary will appear about the same, and the southern boundary
less southerly than here given, with a consequent displacement
to the northward of the line of central axis of about i° for every
19° of latitude he is distant from that part of the sky he is
observing (vice versa in southern latitudes). At times, also, the
band appears broader than here given, as if the Light extended
still farther; but so faint, attenuated, and vague are such bound-
aries, that I have ignored them.
Extreme accuracy must not be expected, for only star-charts
of a primitive nature have been employed for laying off my
observations.
R. M. S. “ Warrimoo,” Vancouver, B. C., Dec. 4, 1899,


25


