

Published by Authority of the New South Wales Commissioners
for the World’s Columbian Exposition, Chicago, 1893.
NOTES ON THE ABORIGINES
NEW SOUTH WALES:
THE HON. RICHARD HILL, M.L.C.,'AND THE HON. GEORGE
THORNTON, M.L.C.
WITH PERSONAL REMINISCENCES OF THE TRIBES
FORMERLY LIVING IN THE NEIGHBOURHOOD OF SYDNEY
AND THE SURROUNDING DISTRICTS.
(Sgbneg:
CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, PHILLIP-STREET.
1892.
m 128—92 (a)




f{otes oi] the Aborigines of New South Wales
BY THE HON. RICHARD HILL, M.L.C.
When the writer, a native of Sydney, was a young fellow, some sixty years
ago, he remembers perfectly well that the aborigines used to assemble at
intervals in large numbers, sometimes on very friendly terms, and at other
times to settle, by fighting, difficulties arising, sometimes from murder, and
perhaps oftener from the taking away of a “ gin ” (woman) by force, but in
either case such misdeeds were never allowed to pass without punishment.
Sydney was looked upon as the central position, where at most times the
blacks met to settle their grievances, and when a large meeting, 300 or 400,
was to take place, regardless of the cause, whether it was to be a friendly
“ corroboree,” which was a dance and thorough merry-making, or to adjust
differences of a serious character, it was really surprising how the messages
were set going from one tribe to the other as if by magic, even at long
distances.
The “ Cammaragals ” were blacks belonging to the North Shore, and the
district “Cammara,” extended from the northern part of our harbour, say,
from North Head to the Lane Cove River, w Estuary, right away north to
the Hawkesbury, and away east to the sea-coast. This was a very powerful
tribe, and the more so as it was often joined by the Parramatta, and sometimes
by the Windsor and Richmond blacks, and although in near proximity to
each other, the language differed a little, yet many words were alike, which
enabled them to understand each other pretty well; but it was apparent to
the whites who took an interest in these meetings that a difficulty in their
language existed, and so with those that came from Liverpool, and the tribes
of which extended down in one way along the southern shore of Greorge’s River
away to Botany Heads, embracing “Nannunggurrung,” now “Bottle Eorest,”
down along the northern shore of Port Hacking to the coast, where they
joined the well-known Botany blacks. At the two places they amounted to
a pretty large number. 1 may say fairly that I have seen hundreds assemble
on “ Hyde Park ” on more than one occasion, either to corroboree (dance)
or for a man to “stand punishment.” The culprit had to stand alone, about a
hundred yards from the assembled mob, with nothing to defend himself with
but a small piece of wood, sometimes bark (Heillamong) made thin, say,
from 3 to 4 feet long, and about a foot wide in the centre, where a place
was formed to put the hand in, and from the centre to each end it was
tapered along the sides to a point, and the dexterity with which a man could
defend himself against showers of spears was a marvel to those that witnessed
it at various times, and it was a rare thing, indeed, if he did not defend
himself successfully; but when a man was hit, either fatally or otherwise,
his friend rushed in, which was a signal to stop the spear throwing, and in
almost every instance, the row was ended after some fighting with waddies
among the offended parties ; but as night drew on most of them repaired to
“ Wullamulla,” now Woolloomooloo, and fires were lit in all directions, and
yarning and cracking jokes took place until nearly daylight. At this period
\2h 128—92 (b)


oysters, muscles, and fish were plentiful, which enabled them to get food
without stint. Not so now ; we have taken away nearly all that nature had
given to them. Their fishing and hunting grounds are gone, and, by way of
exchange, we have introduced into their midst, in its worst form, disease, to
say nothing about intoxicating drinks, which have helped in a large degree to
kill them out. But happily, as a last resource, mission stations have been
formed, and an Aboriginal Protectorate Board has been established in Sydney
to attend to the wants of these poor people; and to do this, a large grant
of several thousands annually is voted by Parliament.
It was the writer’s habit, even up to a very recent date, to spend weeks
at a time fishing, shooting, and kaugarooing, which enables him to say that
a blackfellow in his way, as a rule, is very clever, and if properly managed
is always the life and soul of the party, full of humour, an excellent mimic,
and with the mutting (four-pronged spear) are not easily surpassed as
fishermen, and in the bush hunting he has no superior; untiring, and
always first to see the game. When our hunting has extended over a large
area of several miles, and kangaroos are caught, especially in the morning,
they are hung up on trees to be picked up on our way to the camp ;
then it is something wonderful to see how, apparently without an effort,
the blacks go from tree to tree, even though miles separate them, to get the
game, and when they reach the camp, mostly B ed anr 1 ;ooted, after some
tea, something to eat, a glass of grog, their humour and tun, or rather tone of
talk, begins. In fact, if you will talk with them, they will keep it up to a
very late hour ; but when morning (daylight) comes, they are the most diffi-
cult beings in the world to rouse; but when once up, as I said before, they
are the life and soul of the party, if in good hands.
Their habits are pretty nearly the same from one end of the country to
the other, of a migratory character, never long in one place, owing perhaps
to this fact, that having to find their own food they are compelled to
move on from place to place, mostly confining themselves to their own
district.
A blackfellow never thinks of to-morrow. If you give him in the shape of
food as much as should last him two days, he will consume it in one, if
possible, and trust to chance for the next. In almost every instance they
are kind and affectionate to their children aud most indulgent. In the early
days in the districts to which I have alluded hundreds were to be found, but
nearly all are dead—certainly not a Botany aborigine is now living; and I
may say the same of Sydney, Cammerray, Parramatta, or Liverpool—all are
gone, and drink has been the principal cause!
BY THE HON. GEORGE THORNTON, M.L.C.
W hen the continent of Australia was first taken possession of by the British
the aborigines were very numerous, especially along the eastern coast (New
South Wales), which was for a long time the only part populated by Euro-
peans. At that time the natives were physically a superior race to what
they are at present, the men being robust and muscular, and the women
being exceedingly well formed and good looking. The average height of the
men then was about 5 feet 10 inches ; and, as stated before, they were
excellently proportioned, as also were the females. I refer especially to the
aborigines who then inhabited the coast to as far north as Point Danger.
Being a native of the Colony, I have been familiar with the native blacks
and their customs from childhood, and from my own observation can assert that


NOTES ON THE ABORIGINES OE NEW SOUTH WALES. 8
they are possessed of great natural intelligence, and their power of sight
and hearing is phenomenal. Their ability to track a person, even over the
surface of a rock, is too well known to need any reference to it here.
In their primitive state they were more than gallant, they were chivalrous,
in their sense of natural and mutual duties. In the case of an offence which
infringed their laws relating to the protection of their females, the culprit
was punished in the following manner :—He was placed by himself, away
from any cover, and a band of the most expert spearsmen of the tribe stood
at a distance of sixty to a hundred yards; at a given signal, the latter threw
their weapons at the law-breaker, at exactly the same moment, and if he
managed to evade the spears his life was spared ; this, however, as may be
imagined, was a matter of extreme difficulty.
No doubt, like all uncivilised, races, the Australian aborigines have all the
cunning and selfishness which is inseparable from a primitive state, but from
Grabo Island to Point Danger (which is as far as my knowledge extends)
I have found them to be bold and spirited, and generally speaking
they have pleasing countenances, and my opinion of them is that they are
not, as is asserted, lazy and good for nothing. As an instance of their
chivalry and courage, I may mention a custom which prevailed among
them: —When two men, for any reason, agreed to fight “to the death,”
came together, each would invite the other to strike first, in fact, the
orthodox greeting or signal in matters of this kind was “hit me first,” each,
at the same time, offering his head to be struck. A well-known historical
instance of their bravery may be gathered from the well-known anecdote
referring to their stubborn resistance to Grovernor Phillip at a place
in Sydney Harbour, the native name of which was “Kayeemy”; as
the boat approached the shore the natives rushed into the water up to
their necks to try and prevent the party from landing, but Grovernor
Phillip persisting, one of the natives, named “ Willemerung,” threw a
spear, which pierced the G-overnor’s back. To commemorate the event, and
appreciating this display of courage and determination, Governor Phillip
called the place “ Manly.” As before stated, the spot where the spear
was thrown was called in the native tongue “ Kayeemy,” but the aboriginal
name of Manly proper was “ Cannae.”
The aboriginal race have no idea of a Supreme Being, and, in my opinion,
are not susceptible of religious impression, but have a strong universal belief
in evil spirits. Though the belief in these spirits is general, each district
or tribe has its own particular theory as to the shape in which the dreaded
phantom appears. In every instance, however, the blacks believe that the
aim of these “ Devil Devils” (which is the anglicised term) is destruction to
those unfortunates who happen to fall in their way. The evil spirit of the
Sydney, Botany, and southern district, including Port Hacking, was called
by the natives of that tract of country “ Boonbolong,” and their belief was
that it was represented by a very little man, a dwarf in fact, who prowled
about at night, and was impervious to shot, ball, spear, or, in fact, any
weapon. There was, however, a chance of escape for the unhappy creature
who encountered this demon; if he knew a certain password, he was let go,
but if not he (or she) would be devoured. The belief was that when the
“ Devil Devil ” met a black, the latter would be accosted as follows, in the
native tongue—“ Name your mother”; if the answer were immediately given,
“ Boonbolong,” the native was to liberty to depart, but failing to give the
password would be devoured. The evil spirit in the Newcastle and Port
Stephens districts was called “Koen,” and was represented as being an


animal very much like a camel, but much larger. Their theory was that this
“ Devil Devil” would devour any blackfellow whom he found asleep, in the
same manner as “ Boonbolong.”
Not all the philosophy in the world (in my opinion) will ever dispossess
the aboriginal mind of the idea of evil spirits, nor do they seem able to grasp
the doctrine of a Supreme Being. They are firm believers in the doctrine
of Metempsychosis, or the transmigration of souls, and have a firm convic-
tion that a chatterer, whether man or woman, will reappear on this earth as
a laughing-jackass, a sly sneaking fellow will be a “ Warrigal,” or native dog,
and so on, the animal that the soul reinhabits corresponding with the
nature of the person ; for instance, a savage spiteful man would reappear as
an eaglehawk.
The natives all over the continent, at the time the first white people
arrived for the purposes of settlement, were subject to a disease resembling
small-pox ; the native name of this disease was “ Galgala,” and it was known
to the early settlers as “ Native Pock.” Most of the aborigines, especially
the men, were subject to this malady, which left “ pock marks” on the cheeks,
and on the nose. The English small-pox, which was introduced among the
natives in the early days of the Colony, carried off hundreds of them. At
North Shore, Botany, and other places wherever it had spread, their bodies
were found years afterwards in scores, especially along the coast.
Their strength and muscular power, to which I have alluded before, I
attribute to the nature of the food in use along the coast by the aborigines,
such as fish, oysters, mussels, kangaroos, opossums, and abundance of game,
which was to be found at that time along the coast, and on which the
aborigines subsisted for some fifty years after the colonisation of the
country. It is worthy of mention that no aboriginal native will eat an
oyster* uncooked, and I myself share their opinion that a raw oyster is
most indigestible, despite what medical men may say to the contrary. About
fifty years ago I asked one of the natives of the Port Stephens district why
they roasted the oysters before eating, and told him they were good eaten
raw, at the same time asking him to open some for me. “ No, master,” was
the reply, “if we eat them that way, give sore here” (at the same time
pointing to his abdomen). At several places along the coast there are to
be found piles of oyster-shells, which have been roasted; these are, I dare-
say, the accumulations of perhaps centuries. In many instances these piles
or heaps are as much as 50 feet deep.
They were extremely skilful in throwing the spear, being capable of
killing kangaroos, &c., at very great distances. They also had two or three
sorts of “ Boomerangs” ; one for amusement, known in their own language
as the “ Come-back” boomerang ; another for warlike purposes, which was
cut a slightly different shape from the “ Come-back”; and also a third variety,
for killing game, or anything that ran along the ground. They caught their
fish with the aid of a spear called a “ Mutting,” which had four prongs,
pointed with fish-bones, and made fast with a gum which exudes from the
grass-tree. They sallied forth for the purpose of catching fish at night,
armed with the “ Mutting” and a torch. As is well known, fish are attracted
to a light, and as they swam towards the light thrown by the torch the natives
struck them with the “ Mutting,” capturing great numbers in this manner.
The spear is generally made from the common “ bulrush,” or grass-tree.
As a general rule, the blacks are very affectionate, exhibiting extreme
fondnessfor their families. Polygamy existed, and does exist, all over the con-
tinent, a man not being restricted to one wife ; if he were able to feed two
or three, he was at perfect liberty to have that number, and families of this
description lived in perfect unity.


A well-known personage, in the time of Governor Macquarie, was
“ Bungaree.” He was recognised as the king of the tribe inhabiting the
Sydney and surrounding district, and as such Governor Macquarie, on
the king’s birthday, used to decorate old “ Bungaree” with his (the
Governor’s) cast-off uniform, red coat, with epaulettes, &c., and Bungaree,
arrayed in this costume (with the exception of the trousers, which he could
not be induced to wear), was a well-known figure in the streets of Sydney,
clothed in the Yice-regal dress, including the cocked hat, but minus trousers
and boots. The name of “ Bungaree” has since become common, steamers,
&c., being so called; but this king (who was a native of Brisbane Water) was
the original. The blacks, as stated elsewhere, are naturally mimics, and this
“ Bungaree” could imitate the Governor and several of the principal officers,
marvellously well.
Each tribe had what they called a “ Carradygan,” or native doctor, who
used to prescribe for them in sickness, and attended to matters of wounds
and fractures, in some instances very skilfully. The medicines given by
them were in most cases prepared from herbs, and generally proved effica-
cious. These doctors, in return for their services, were allowed special
privileges in their tribe, in consideration of their always holding themselves
ready to treat the sick and wounded.
The first civilised black that we have any record of, and who was taken
great notice of by Governor Phillip, was named “ Benilong.” The Governor
gave him a little hut to live in, and supplied him and his wives with food,
fishing tackle, &c. The place was called “ Toobergoola,” and was situated in
that part of Sydney Cove where the North Shore horse boats now start from ;
but the name of “ Toobergoola” also applied to the point itself, which is now
known as Fort Macquarie. The name of Benilong’s wife was “ Barangaroo.”
The Governor used, some years ago, to give the natives an annual feast
at Parramatta, all the natives of the districts attending, and they were treated
to a really substantial repast, I was present at some of these feasts.
I may mention here, in support of my opinion as to the intelligence of the
blacks, that they have particular names for, and can distinguish certain
colours —black, white, red, &c.
In some parts of the continent, circumcision is practised, mainly, I think,
on sanitary grounds, as it is mostly in the hotter regions that this is performed.
With regard to the language of the aborigines, although, in my opinion,
it has sprung from the one root, each tribe has its own particular dialect,
which dialect generally extends over a space of about one degree of latitude
or longitude ; so that the language of one tribe will be quite different to
that of a tribe at a distance of perhaps a few miles. The language of the
aborigines is divided into two classes, one extending nearly over the whole
of the continent, and is called the “ Komloroi,” the other is called “ Werad-
gery.” These are the bases of the native language of Australia. As stated
before, these are divided into various tribal tongues, which, although almost
entirely different from one another, have, in some instances, words bearing
a common meaning. As an example of this similarity, I will quote a few
words from the dialects of the natives inhabiting the Port Stephens district
and the district adjacent to Sydney respectively. In the dialect of the Port
Stephens district the sun is called “ Wingun ” ; the moon, “ Gheewong ” j a
wild duck, “Berrumma”; a large kangaroo, “Wapera.” The Sydney district
aborigines’ terms for the above are —the sun, “ Euroka,” or “ Koen ” ; the
moon, “ Tanala ” ; a wild duck is “ IJrani ” ; a large kangaroo, “ Butti-
gorang.” These few instances show the difference between the languages


at places not sixty miles apart. When I mention Sydney district I mean as
far south as Botany. As a still further and stronger proof that all these
languages have risen from a common root, I may state that the native
numbers are almost identical. The Port Stephens district terms for one
and two respectively, are “Wogul” and “Bulla”; for three they say
“ Wogul bulla ” ; and for four, “ Bulla bulla.” The natives in the neigh-
bourhood of Sydney designate one, two, three, and four as “Wogul,”
“ Bulla ”or “ ATillowe,” “ Boorooi,” and “ Callinalong.” Beyond four they
cannot go, expressing large numbers by means of their fingers, as for in-
stance, ten would be represented by holding up both hands with the digits
extended. This is not only an illustration of their mode of reckoning, but,
as stated before, proves conclusively to my mind that the original basis of all
these languages was the same. It is worthy of note that nearly all native
names have some special significance, for example, the word “ Parramatta”—
the original capital and seat of Government of New South Wales—is derived
from “Parra,” an eel —“Matta,” “this place,” signifying “Eels here.”
The disputed word now called “ Woolloomooloo ” was originally “Wulla
Mulla,” and I have an indistinct recollection that it meant a burial-ground
or place of interment. Many well-known colonial names of towns,
&c., are corruptions of old aboriginal words, such as “ Wagga Wagga.”
The native name for a crow is “ Worgan,” and when the natives wished
to express that there are great numbers of any certain thing they
repeat the word twice; where the town of Wagga Wagga now stands
was designated by the natives “ Worgan Worgan,” on account of the
enormous number of crows to be found there. The bullock drivers and
others rendered this “ Worga Worga,” and it gradually became changed to its
present appellation of Wagga Wagga. With respect to the word “ Tocal,”
the name of an estate on the Paterson Elver, this was so called as it was
celebrated for the number of ducks to be found on the swamps there, and was
for this reason called by the natives “Tocal,” meaning plenty or abundance.
Brewarrina, a well-known town of New South Wales means the fishery or
place to fish. The name of “ Coogee” (a watering place near Sydney) is a
corruption, and ought not to have been kept up ; it is derived from “ Coojah,”
meaning bad smell, and received its name in the following manner : —At a
certain season of the year a kind of weed is blown or washed ashore, and as
it dries in the sun a most unpleasant odour is emitted, the blackfellows’
name for such an odour or stench is “ Coojah or Koojah,” and this in time
gone by was used by the natives in referring to that particular place. Most
of the names of places along the coast of New South Wales are corruptions
of native words, and fall far short of their original beauty. Eor example,
there are Wollongong, Kiama, and Ulladulla. Wollongong should be
“ Wolyungah,” which means a place where fish may be caught with hook
and line. Kiama should be “ Kiari Mai,” signifying a fertile district.
The correct native name of Ulladulla should be “ Wooloodorr,” meaning a
harbour of refuge. “Elouera” is what Jllawarra is derived from, and means
fine country.
The native name of the wild-fig is “ Cooroowul.” The aboriginal name
of the waratah is “ Mewah,” and the gigantic lily is called by the natives
“ Gomea.”
With respect to the word “ Kangaroo,” this is undoubtedly an aboriginal
name give by the natives to that well-known animal, the same being noticed
and chronicled by Captain Cook in the accounts of his early voyages. In
my opinion, despite what may be said to the contrary, this is the true
aboriginal name of the animal, as may be found in Captain Cook’s records.


The native name o£ the country lying between Longnose Point, Balmain,
and South Head was “ Caddie,” and the aboriginal term for a tribe or clan
being at that time “ Gal,” the tribe inhabiting that stretch of country
between the points named were called “ Caddie Gral.” The native name of
North Head was “ Boree” ; Pinchgut Island was called in the native tongue
“ Mattiwunye” ; Middle Head was “ Cubba Cubba,” and Sydney Cove,
“Warrane.” The native name of Groat Island was “ Memel,” and North
Shore was called “ Cammeray.” It was inhabited by a tribe of powerful
and fighting blacks, who were nearly always victorious ; they were known
as “ Cammeray-gal.” There was another tribe a little west or opposite
Sydney Cove; these were called “ ‘Walumetta.” The tribes west of that,
and between the:n and Parramatta, were called “ Wanne ” and “ Wangal,”
and lived between Walumetta and up to Parramatta.
The names of some of the old blacks well known in the Sydney district are
given hereafter: —“ Boorong” was the first aboriginal girl civilised (in 1790) ;
“ Coleby” was the name of another civilised black in the very early days ;
“ Balladery” was an aborigine well known in Sydney in 1790. The tribe of
blacks between Parramatta and the Hawkesbury was called “Buruberongal.”
“ Meroot” and his wife, “ G-rang Grang,” were the parents of “Boson,” a
civilised black well known in Botany many years ago. “ Meroot” was
killed in Sydney by a black named “ Blui,” and was buried near Eushcutters’
Bay, exactly where Mr. John Williams’ (late Crown Solicitor) house stands.
“ Yaranabi” was the King of the Darling Point tribe at that time. Another
chief of a tribe a little south of Coogee was called “ Maroobera,” and the
beacji is still called so after him. “Pemullaway” was the chief of the Botany
tribe, and “ Nambarre” was a native boy of Botany. The native name of
the south head of Botany was “ Kundull,” which has been corrupted to
Kurnel. The north head was “ Bunnabi.” The tribe of blacks inhabiting
that region, and extending a little to the north and south, were called
“ Gweagal.” The name of a native girl well known at Parramatta was
“ Bedia Bedia.” One of the old blacks was called “ Balladeery.” An old
Sydney aborigine named “Krooi” had his camp at the point known as
“ Lady Macquarie’s Point,” the N.E. end of the present Botanical Gardens.
He used to fish from a small detached rock a few feet distant from the N.E.
part of the point. It was known as “ Krooi’s Eock.”
The native name of the cockatoo is “ Warrianbah.”
In every tribe there was a wit, and it was a recognised and orthodox fact
that whatever this wit said or did was to be accepted as being humorous,
and their etiquette required that such should be laughed at. As a general
rule, however, this person was witty.
Their idea of divorce is very primitive and exceedingly simple. If they
are tired of their wives they tell them to go, as they wish to have some one
else ; the woman being a mere slave is forced to consent, and she is then at
liberty to have another husband. But for all this, the husbands are as a
general rule fond of their wives, and the wives loyal and affectionate to their
husbands.
A remarkable superstition of the aborigines is that when a blackfellow is
dead it is wrong to even mention his name; they believe this to be forbidden,
and are as firm in this belief as we are taught to be in the belief of our
common Christianity.
The blacks have a great love of song, and a very good idea of tune and
time, in fact, on special occasions, they have festivals of music. For instance,
when one tribe visits another, the receiving tribe treats its guests to
what might be called a “ new opera,” and at such times, where different


%ItUO
Sydney : Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lB92.
8 NOTES ON THE ABORIGINES OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
animals are sought to be imitated, the natives go to great trouble to
make the resemblance as perfect as possible, when imitations of kangaroos
are attempted they even fix on false tails, and the same trouble is taken
in presenting likenesses of other animals, much to the interest and
amusement of their visitors. They practise their songs, and it is considered
a great accomplishment to be able to sing. I have never been able to gather
from their songs whether it is really words that are pronounced, and have
asked them, but they do not seem to know themselves what the songs mean,
in fact, it is a sort of gibberish sung to a particular melody. I have tried to
show them that in our songs there is a sentiment, but have come to the
conclusion from their replies that the words of their songs correspond to
choruses, such as “ tooral-ooral,” Ac., in our own language, but are sung to
the gratification and amusement of themselves. These songs are brought
from tribe to tribe sometimes seven days’ journey from one another. They
are very tuneful and pleasing, and the blacks themselves are severe critics of
their own particular style. No mistake of even a note in the cadence must
be made, or the performer will be put out. The blacks at Albany (West
Australia), who are inferior in intelligence to those inhabiting the east
coast, laughed at the songs which are described to them as being sung by
natives in this part of the continent. Their songs have nothing in common
with those peculiar to the east coast, either in tune or action, the only
similarity being that the language has originally been the same —derived from
the same root. It is evident that the blacks of A 7 an Diemen’s Land are a
distinct race from those inhabiting the continent of Australia, the former
having curly “negro” hair, and the latter possessing smooth wavy locks;
besides, the features of the two races are not at all identical, thus indicating
a different origin, but this point I leave to someone else to theorise on, and
also to determine from whence these races originally came.
A ceremony which is common among all tribes is that of conferring on
youths the title of manhood, and this is called at any rate in the Sydney
district “ Toolangh.” This ceremony, after the early discovery of the
Colony, used to take place at that place which is now called Farm Cove, and
the candidates were brought from all the surrounding districts, the several
tribes being informed that on a certain day this rite would be performed.
The ceremony, which gave to youths all the privileges of manhood, consisted
of knocking out the front tooth with a piece of stone ; when that was done
the young man was entitled to seek a wife, but no matter what his age
might be, until this ordeal was gone through he was treated as a boy, and
was under subjection to his parents. This course of initiation was gone
through with an almost religious solemnity, and corresponds in its importance
among the aboriginal race with the ceremony of circumcision in the Jewish
nation. A very important feature of their ceremonies is to paint themselves,
which is done with white pipeclay and red ochre. On some occasions this
painting is a symbol of grief for the loss of a relative ; sometimes, when they
are going to war, and on such occasions they strive to make themselves as
hideous as possible, trying to appear, as nearly as they can, like skeletons,
marking white ribs on their bodies.
When the ceremony mentioned above, viz., “ Yoolangh,” takes place, there
are generally songs and other performances and feastings.
The aborginal name of Newcastle is “ Moolabinba.”




■
