

Price 2s. 6d.
W ’ : ■ ..* i r
%i $ x -
THE
ORIENTAL
HERALD,
CONTAINING
A FAITHFUL DIGEST OF SUCH INFORMATION AS MUST BE
CONSIDERED GENERALLY INTERESTING FROM THE
BRITISH INDIAN PRESIDENCIES,
THE EASTERN NATIONS.
SMITH, ELDER, AND CO.
65, CORNKZX.I..
STEWART AND MURRAY, OLD BAILET.


EDINBURGH
LIFE ASSURANCE COMPANY,
ESTABLISHED IN 1823,
AND CONSTITUTED BY ACT OF PARLIAMENT.
CAPITAL £.500,000.
STREET, CITY.
KINQi WILLIAM
LONDON
BOARD.
Right Hon. Lord Reay.
Hon. Robert Dundas.
Henry Barkly, Esq.
\V. A. Eade, Esq.
Evan Baillie, Esq.
John Richardson, Esq.
Francis Whitmarsh, Esq. Q.C.
R, W. Dallas, Esq.
John Abel Smith, Esq. M.P.
Richard Hart Davis, Esq.
George Mackintosh, Esq.
James Bonar, Esq.
Charles Staniforth, Esq,
Resident Director.
Bankers —Messrs. Smith, Payne, and Smiths.
Physician—James Hope, M.D., F.R.S
Solicitors —Messrs. Rowland and Young.
This Company combines the advantages of the Mutual Assurance System with the
security and influence of a proprietary body, who must themselves be assured with
the Company.
1. The Assured may (Table I.) secure a precise sum at rates which challenge
competition with those of any other Company.
2. They may participate (Table II.), without the liability of partnership, or
mutual guarantee, to the extent of four-fifths in the whole profits of the Company
the largest proportion that any proprietary office has hitherto divided, and much
more than can safely be given by any mere Mutual Assurance Society, where at least
one-third of the profits must be laid aside to form a guarantee fund.
The first division of profits (1835) varied from 20 to 38 per cent, on the premiums
paid, according to the age of the Policies.
Assurances may be effected on an increasing and decreasing scale, on joint lives
or survivorships, or in any way that parties may require .l
No entry money or other charge beyond the policy stamp.
Liberty to pass to any part of Europe, without extra premium.
Annuities and reversions, present and contingent, to survivors, &c.
Claims paid within three months after proof.
Money advanced to any amount on Redeemable Annuity, &c.
The usual commission allowed to Solicitors and Agents.
The Prospectus, with every information, may be had at the Office.
lal commission allowed to solicitors and Agents,
ispectus, with every information, may be had at the Office.
SPECIMEN OF RATES FOR ASSURING £lOO.
TABLE I. TABLE 11.
__
WITH
WITHOUT PARTICIPATION. j pARTICI PAT!ON.
Age. | One Year. iSeven Years. For Life. Age. For Life.
j 20 £0 17 3 '£o 19 11 £1 14 2 j 20 £ 1 17 4
! 30 1 1 3 1 1 4 8 2 3 7 I 30 2 7 7
1 40 1 610 i 111 10 21711 40 322
' AO 1 15 1 2 4 5 4 1 7 50 4 9 0
i 60 | 3 18 31811 | 6 4 4 t 60 ' 615 8


Oriental Herald Advertiser.
No. XIX.
Under engagement to leave the Docks the 25th July, for SYDNEY, Direct, the
well-known fast-sailing Frigate-built Ship,
EUPHRATES, A 1.
617 Tons Register—Coppered and Copper-fastened, ROBERT WYTIE WIL-
SON, Commander. Lying in the St. Katherine’s Dock.
Has an elegant Poop, and other Cabin Accommodations, with very lofty 'twixt
decks, and will carry an experienced Surgeon.—For terms of Freight or Passage,
apply to the Commander, on Board; at the Jerusalem Coffee-House; or to
PHILLIPPS and TIPLADY, 3, George Yard, Lombaid Street
Will be despatched immediately, having the principal portion of her Cargo en-
gaged, for HOBART TOWN, Direct, the well-known fast-sailing new Barque,
PERSIAN, A 1.
330 Tons Register Coppered and Copper-fastened, JOSEPH SPARKS, Com-
mander. Lying in the St. Katherine’s Dock.
Has an elegant Poop, and other Cabin Accommodations, with very lofty ’twixt
Decks—For terms of Freight or Passage, apply to the Commander, on Board ;
at the Jerusalem Coffee-House; or to PHILLIPPS and TIPLADY,
3, George Yard, Lombard Street.
To Sail on the 10th July, for CANTON, Direct,.the well-known fast-sailing Ship,
ELIZA STEWART, A 1.
433 Tons Register—Coppered and Copper-fastened, ROBERT MILLAR, Com-
mander. Lying in the St. Katherine’s Dock.
This Ship has superior accommodation for Passengers.—For terms of Freight or
Passage, apply to the Captain on Board ; to Messrs. Sanderson, Frys, Fox, &
Co., 6, Old Jewry; or to PHILLIPPS and TIPLADY,
3, George Yard, Lombard Street.
To Sail on the 15th of September, for MADRAS and CALCUTTA, the fine Teak-
built Ship,
MARION,
• 800 Tons, W. L. POPE, Commander. Will lie in the West India Dock.
Her Accommodations for Passengers are very superior, and she will carry an
experienced Surgeon. —For Passage only, apply to Messrs. Grindlay, Mat-
thews and Co., 16, Cornhill; and for Freight or Passage to Captain Pope, Jeru-
salem Coffee House; or to JOHN PIRIE and Co., 3, Freeman’s Court, Cornhill.


From the special and extensive engagements made both for Cargo and Passengers,
will meet with unusual despatch, and proceed Direct for SYDNEY, New
South Wales, the splendid fast-sailing Teak built Ship,
INCrIiIS,
Coppered and Copper-fastened, EDWARD ROUTH, H. C. S. Commander.
Burthen 1400 Tons. Will Load in the East India Dock.
The spacious Poop of this Ship and her very lofty, roomy, and well ventilated
'twixt Decks, offer to Cabin, Intermediate, and Steerage Passengers intending to
proceed to Australia, a decidedly superior conveyance, where due regard will be
paid to the comfort of all who may embark.—Carries an experienced Surgeon.
For Freight or Passage, immediate application to be made to Messrs. Daniel
Dickinson and Co., 6, Great Winchester Street; or to JOHN MASSON,
5, Lime Street Square.
Has a large portion of her Cargo engaged, and will meet with unusual dispatch,
direct for SYDNEY, New South Wales, the remarkably fine Ship,
THOMAS KING, A. 1.
Coppered and Copper-fastened, JAMES LEMAN ROUNCE, Commander.
Burthen 350 Tons. Lying in the London Docks, and will Load at the New Jetty.
The Accommodations for Passengers are lofty, and fitted in a decidedly superior
manner, to admit of every possible comfort.—For Freight or Passage, immediate
application to be made to the Commander, on board; or to
JOHN MASSON, 5, Lime Street Square.
To leave Portsmouth, 15th July, for
CAPE OF GOOD HOPE, MADRAS AND BENGAL,
The Fine Teak Ship
I.A BELLE ALLIANCE,
676 Tons Register.—CHAßLES ARKCOLL, Commander.
For Freight or Passage apply to PASSINGHAM & NAIL, 106, Fenchurch Street;
Messrs. J. H. STOCQULLER and Co., East India Agents, 8, Craio-’s Court
Charing Cross, and 85, King William Street; or to
CAPTAIN ARKCOLL, Jerusalem Coffee House.
N.B. Carries an experienced Surgeon.
For CALCUTTA, will sail on the 15th August, the Teak Ship
THOMAS GRENVILLE,
1000 Tons. Captain ROBERT THORNHILL. This Ship is fitted as when in
the Honourable Company's Service.—For Freight or Passage, apply to
T. HAVISLDE & Co. Sun Court, or 69, Cornhill.


To leave the Docks on the 15th July, and Embark Passengers at Portsmouth, for
CALCUTTA, the Teak Ship,
LORD HUNGERFORD,
724 Tons per Register, RICHARD SAUNDERS, Commander. Lying in the
West India Docks.
Will carry an experienced Surgeon.—For Freight or Passage, apply to Messrs.
Cockerell and Co., Austin Friars; to Capt. Saunders; to C. Farquharson ;
or to
T. HAVISIDE and Co., Sun Court, or 69, Cornhill.
For CALCUTTA to Sail from Gravesend
on the 10th August the Ship,
RICHMOND,
520 Tons per Register, N. MacLeod, Commander.
Lying in the London Docks. On her fourth voyage.
Has first-rate accommodation for Passengers, and carries a Surgeon.
For Freight or Passage, apply to the Commander, or
Mac LEOD and Co.,
38, Fenchurch Street.
DELICIOUS CURRIES, BOMBAY MANGOES, AND
MANGOS SAUCE.
COOKE and Co., 24, PRINCE’S-SXREET, CAVENDISH-SQUARE, re-
moved from 99, Hatton Garden, respectfully beg to draw the attention of
their Indian and other friends, to their very superior CURRY POWDERS
which they will warrant to produce Curries equal to any made in India if their
easy directions for cooking them are only attended to.
New instructions are now given to make Vegetable, Fish, and Dali Curries, by
the equal admixture of their Curry Powder and Curry Pastes, which impart that
Oriental flavour so delicious in the Hindoo-made Curries, viz.—
CALCUTTA CURRY POWDER, adapted to the Bengal, Bombay, and China
Tastes, in cases, at Is. 6d., 25., and 3s.
INDIA CURRY POWDER, suitable to the Madras, English, American, and
West Indian Tastes, do. do.
INDIAN CURRY and MADRAS Mulligatawny Pastes, in Jars, at Is. 6d
2s. 6d., and 4s. 6d. ’
MADRAS FISH CURRY PASTE, for Fish Curries, at do. do.
IMPROVED MANGOE SAUCE, delicious with Curries, Fish, Veal, Cold
Meats, &c. in bottles, at Is. 6d. and 3s.
HINDOO or TAMARIND VINEGAR, for souring Curries, Dali, Mulliga-
tawny, Veal, and made Dishes, in Bottles at Is. and 2s.
BENGAL CHUTTNY, excellent with Venison, Game, Curries, Cold Meats,
&c. instead of Pickles or Mustards, in White Pots, at Is. 6d., 2s. 6d., and 4s. 6d!
BENGAL CHUTTNY SAUCE, highly piquant with Fish, Wild Fowl, Steaks,
Cold Meats, &c. in Bottles, at 2s. and 3s. 6d.
CAUTION.—PIease tp beware of some meagre imitations of the above.


EAST INDIA GENERAL AGENCY,
22, THROGMORTON STREET.
Mr. JAMES RUNDALL, Agent for Securing Passages to India free from any
additional Charge, renders every Information and Assistance connected therewith,
viz. superintends outfits, clears and ships Baggage, effects Insurances, and procures
Servants, &c. Further, Mr. J. R. furnishes supplies to Regiments and Individuals,
notices Promotions, Casualties, and Alterations in the Army; receives and remits
Pay, Pensions, and Annuities, &c.; registers the Addresses of Persons returned to
this country, and the Addresses of Widows and Families of deceased Officers, also
particulars respecting the arrival and departure of Ships; and transacts all business
connected with India generally.
N.B.—Removed from New City Chambers, Bishopsgate Street.
SILVER TEA SERVICES.
A. B. SAVORY and SONS have the pleasure to submit the prices of the following
Patterns of Silver Tea and Coffee Services, which have been generally approved. The
form of either is new and elegant, and the workmanship such as no cost can excel.
COTTAGE PATTERN.
£ s. d.
Silver Tea Pot with fancy flower ... 12 0 0
“ Sugar Basin, gilt inside... ... 6 16 0
“ Milk Ewer, ditto ... 4 10 0
“ Coffee Pot 15 0 0
The Set complete £3B 6 0
RICHLY CHASED KINO’S PATTERN.
£ s. d.
Silver Tea Pot, with fancy flower ... 12 0 0
“ Sugar Basin, gilt inside... ... 710 0
“ Cream Ewer, ditto ... 6 10 0
“ Coffee Pot 15 0 0
The Set complete £4O 0 0
MELON PATTERN.
£ a. d.
Silver Tea Pot, fancy ornament ... 12 6 0
“ Sugar Basin, gilt inside 7 2ft
“ MUk Ewer, ditto 4 18 0
“ Coffee Pot 15 g g
The Set complete £39 12 6
Silver Tea Pot,with fancy flower ... 13 4 0
“ Sugar Basin, gilt inside— ... 8 0 0
Cream Ewer, ditto 6 6 0
“ Coffee Pot 16 11 0
The Set complete £44 1 0
A variety of upwards of fifty different Patterns of Silver Tea and Coffee Services may
be selected from, varying from the plainest or the most richly embossed.
4. B. SAVORY and SONS, Manufacturing Silversmiths, 14, Comhil',
opposite the Bank of England.


OUTFITS TO INDIA ANT> THIS COLONIES.
LADIES and Gentlemen proceeding to India, Naval and Military Officers, Writers,
Cadets, and Assistant-Surgeons, may be completely fitted out, their passages
engaged, the baggage packed and shipped, and Cabins furnished and arranged in
a manner combining real utility with economy and despatch, by
CHRISTIAN & Co. No. 11, WIGMORE STREET.
N.B. —Every information given respecting the sailing of Ships for India or else-
where.
TRAVELS IN SOUTH EASTERN ASIA.
Now ready, in two handsome Volumes, post Bvo, with many Wood Engravings,
and an Original Map, price 16s.
Travels in burmah, malaya, siam, china, and Hindustan,
with a full Account of the Manners and Customs, Society, Commerce, &c.
&c. of the Burmese and other Inhabitants of South Eastern Asia. By the Rev.
Howard Malcom.
Charles Tilt, Fleet Street.
Now ready, Third Edition, in one large Bvo. vol. price 31s. 6d.
THE ROMANCE OF NATURE,
OR THE
FLOWER SEASONS ILLUSTRATED
Bv Louisa Anne Twamley.
“ This is a book of singular beauty and taste. Twenty-seven exquisite coloured drawings
of favourite flowers, are accompanied by graceful quotations from the various authors who
have felt their ‘ sweetest inspiration,’ and some charming original poems. Whether for
tasteful decoration, originality, or grace, we have seen no superior to this most beautiful
volume.” —Literary Gazette.
Charles Tilt, Fleet Street. Of whom may be had,
In a handsome volume, price 21s, morocco,
OUR WILD FLOWERS, familiarly described and illustrated with Coloured
Plates from Original Drawings.
By Louisa Anne Twamley, Author of “The Romance of Nature.”
FLORA’S GEMS. A Series of Twelve Splendid Groups of Flowers, drawn
and coloured by James Andrews, with Poetical Illustrations by Miss Twamley.
Imperial 4to. 425. cloth; 525. 6d. morocco.
Just Published, in one Vol. Bvo. price 7s. cloth,
PRODROMES, or AN INQUIRY into the FIRST PRINCIPLES of REA-
SONING; including an Analysis of the Human Mind, by Sir Graves
Chamney Haugiiton, K.II. M.A. F.R.S. &c. &c. Member of the Institute of
France, &c. &c.
“ All men are as the vulgar in what they do not understand.”— Burke.
London: W. 11. Allen and Co. Leadenhall-street.


In the course of July will appear, in two vols. Bvo. price 245.
With a Portrait,
MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE AND CORRESPONDENCE OF
ROBERT MORRISON, D.D., F.R.S., M.R.A.S.
&c. &c. &c.
COMPILED BY HIS WIDOW.
To which is appended, besides other Interesting Documents, a Critical Essay on
the Literary Labours of Dr, Morrison, by the Rev. Samuel Kidd, Professor of
Chinese in the University College.
London : Longman and Co. Paternoster-row; and Allen and Co. Leadenhall-street.
Will be Published, on the 22nd July, price 7s. 6d., in one Volume, post Bvo.
handsomely bound in Cloth,
THE EAST INDIA VOYAGER,
OR TEN MINUTES’ ADVICE TO THE OUTWARD-BOUND.
By Emma Roberts, Author of Scenes and Characteristics, of Hindostan, &c.
This Work will be found to comprise all the information necessary to those who
may go out to the East Indies in any department of the Queen’s or Company’s
Service, including also an ACCOUNT OF THE OVERLAND JOURNEY.—
Directions for the best mode of living to be observed in India, with reference to
diet, clothing, and climate, together with the outfit, and other particulars of interest
and importance.
J. Madden and Co. (late Parbury and Co.) 8, Leadenhall-street, and all
Booksellers.
FINDEN’S ROYAL GALLERY OF BRITISH ART.
THE THIRD PART of the above Work, now Published, contains the fol-
lowing :
Painted by Engraved by
HAPPY AS A KING W. Collins, r.a E. Finden.
INTERIOR OF A HIGHLANDER’S
COTTAGE.
E. Landseer, r.a W.Finden.
,C. L. Eastlake, r.a... .F. Bacon.
ESCAPE OF CARRARA
Price of each Part, containing Three Engravings, in a Portfolio,
Prints, £l ss. o d. Indian Proofs, £2 2s. o d. Proofs before Writing, £3 3s. o d.
London :—Published by the Proprietors, at 18 & 19,Southampton Place, Euston
Square ; sold also by F. G. Moon, 2oThreadneedleStreet; R. Ackermann and
Co., Strand; and by every other respectable Book and Print-seller in
the Kingdom.


IMPROVED PRINTING PRESS.
IMPERIAL ARMING PRESS.
INVENTED AND MANUFACTURED BY
SHER W I N, COPE, AND CO.,
ENGINEERS AND MILLRIGHTS,
5, CUMBERLAND STREET, SHOREDITCH, LONDON.
S. C. and Co. continue to receive the most flattering testimonials from all parts of the United
Kingdom as well as from abroad, in favour of their IMPERIAL PRESSES, whose reputation is
established by a twelve years circulation, and a continued and increasing demand for them.
S. C. and Co. also manufacture Imperial Printing Machines ; Hydraulic Presses to any extent or
power; Screw Presses of any size; Copper-Plate Presses upon the most improved principles;
Kolling Machines for Bookbinders, Card Makers, and Embossers ; Chases, Roller-moulds, &c.
Steam Engines to any extent of power, and upon the best principles ; and machinery of every
description for home use and exportation.
in? lfc! r *t.ard Cyclopaedia.—The Imperial Print • Extract from the Mechanic’s Magazine—August, 1832.— “ To
imnression Lof P ul M * al] id Cope, for speed, ease, and evenness of the Bookbinder—for working off extensive letterings, large
tifnl and cnmnum tal **©d considerable celebrity. In this beau- toolings or embossments, the Imperial Arming Press is invalu-
denends are nlnsn-I 113 ?* 1 1? 6 ’ w ,° , 9 VP°. n power able ; and there are many other purposes to which they may
press, and are in COncea e< l head of the also be applied, with equal advantage and success.”
* dim dre m tnemselves extremely few and simple.”
Testimonials and every requisite information maybe obtained at the Manufactory.


UNIVERSAL LIFE ASSURANCE SOCIETY.
1, KING WILLIAM STREET, LONDON.
Confirmed by Act ofi Parliament,
FOR THE ASSURANCE OF LIVES
AT HOME AND ABROAD,
INCLUDING GENTLEMEN ENGAGED IN
THE MILITARY AND NAVAL SERVICES.
Directors.
Sir Henry Willock, K.L.S., Chairman.
John Stewart, Esq., M.P., Deputy-Chairman.
M. Gen. Sir Richard Armstrong, C.B. William Kilburn, Esq.
John Bagshaw, Esq., M.P,
Augustus Bosanquet, Esq.
Charles Dashwood Bruce, Esq.
Raikes Currie, Esq., M. P.
Ellis Watkin Cunliffe, Esq.
CharlesDtway Mayne, Esq.
John Rogers, Jun., Esq.
Robert Saunders, Esq.
James Duncan Thomson, Esq.
Capt. Samuel Thornton, R.N.
Auditors.
Robert Hichens, Esq. | Crawford Davison Kerr, Esq.
John Arnold Mello, Esq.
Bankers. —Bank of England, and Messrs. Curries and Co,
PHYSICIAN. SOLICITOR.
George Burrows, Esq., M.D. | W. H. Coterill, Esq.
INDIAN BRANCH,
ESTABLISHED AT CALCUTTA.
Directors.
James Pattle, Esq., H.C.S., Chairman.
Alexander Beattie, Esq. Francis Macnaghten, Esq., ILC.C.S.
Colonel Wm. Dunlop, Bengal Army. Chas. R. Prinsep, Esq., Bar.-at-Law.
John Grant, Esq., Surg , Bengal Army. Major James Steel, Bengal Army.
George Dougal, Esq., Merchant. Captain John Thomson.
Auditors.
John Lowe, Esq., Merchant. ( A. H. Sim, Esq., Accountant, Union Bank.
Medical Officer. —Alexander Garden, Esq., Presidency Surgeon.
Treasurer. —Bank of Bengal.
Solicitor. —George Henderson, Esq.
Rates of Premium as moderate as are consistent with perfect security, an Annual
division of three-fourths of the Society’s profits amongst the Assured, and a prompt
adjustment of all claims, are among the advantages of this Society.
The attention of Gentlemen connected with India is particularly requested
to the Regulations of this Society, as, on comparison with other Offices, its Rates
will be found very advantageous, having been accurately calculated from extensive
data and Tables, showingthe true risk of Life during residence in India, and after
retirement from any Foreign Service, exclusively in the possession of this Society.
Policies taken out in England may be continued in India, or those taken out in
India may be continued in England, or definite and equitable terms; while Pre-
miums and Claims may be paid in either country, at the entire option of the Parties
interested.
Terms and full Particulars may be obtained at the Office as above, or of the
AGENTS IN INDIA.
Messrs. Bagshaw and Co., Calcutta.
Messrs. Hall, Bain bridge, and Co., Madras.
Messrs. Leckie and Co., Bombay.
By order of the Board, David Jones* Actuary,


THE MINERVA LIFE ASSURANCE COMPANY,
KING WILLIAM STREET, MANSION HOUSE, LONDON.
CAPITAL ONE MILLION.
Trustees.
Francis Mills, Esq.
Claude Edward Scott, Esq.
Archibald Hastie, Esq. M.P.
Thomas Halifax, Jun., Esq.
Directors.
Francis Mills, Esq., Chairman.
H. C. Bowles, Esq.
| Wm. Venables
i, Esq., Aid. Dep. Chairman.
William Lyall, Esq,
Thomas Morgan, Esq.
John Stewart, Esq.
James Walkinshaw, Esq.
G. B. Whittaker, Esq,
J. J. Zornlin, Jun., Esq.
James G. Gordon, Esq.
John Harvey, Esq.
Thomas Heath, Esq.
William Hunter, Esq.
Isaac Lawrence, Esq.
Edwin Leaf, Esq.
Thomas Brook, Esq.
Wm. Chippindale, Esq.
Wm. M. Christy, Esq.
Edward Sept. Codd, Esq.
Henry T. Danvers, Esq,
Auditors.
John L. Bennett, Esq.
H. R. Mortimer, Esq.
j William Scott, Esq
Its distinguishing features are—
Moderate Rates of Premium, with Participation of the Profits every five years
to the extent of four-fifths, or 80 per cent.
The Profits may be added as a Reversionary Bonus, or its value applied to
the reduction of future Premiums, at the option of the policy-holders.
Premiums by Ascending and Descending Scales.
Liberty granted to reside abroad; to pass and repass the seas between Brest and
Hamburg without obtaining permission of the Directors.
Personal appearance before the Directors is dispensed with, the certificates of
the respective medical advisers being deemed sufficient.
Age 25 I 35 1 45 J 55 I 60
£2 5 4 j £2 17 0 1 £3 14 11 | £5 4 8 J £6 7 2
Every facility is afforded consistent with the security of the Company.
JOHN TULLOCH, Actuary.
A NEW SEA COUCH OR CAMP BED
Has been introduced by
MAYNARD and Co. 27, Poultry, constructed on a principle combining the
convenience of a SOFA with the advantage of a swing cot, the instant
the change of weather requires it, and from its portability is peculiarly adapted for
Officers in the Indian Army.
A great choice of CABIN FURNITURE is constantly on show. OUTFITS
both for Ladies and Gentlemen embracing every detail of Wearing Apparel
finished in the best manner at very low prices.
REGIMENTALS and MILITARY EQUIPMENTS, including SADDLERY,
completed with perfect accuracy according to the regulations recently ordered for
the Array in India.
MAYNARD AND CO. 27, POULTRY,
NEXTSTHE MANSION HOUSE.


WHITE’S ESSENCE OF EGLANTINE.
HIGHLY fashionable and peculiar Handkerchief Scent, possessing extracts
T from the most fra S rant flowers, and forming a Perfume at once sweet
durable and refreshing. In bottles, at 2s. 6d. and 4s. 6d. each.
WHITE’S AROMATIC PUNGENT ESSENCE.
So exceedingly useful in Head-Aches, Fainting, &c , and particularly reviving in
crowded rooms. In neat stoppered bottles, enclosed in Morocco Cases, 3s. each.
WHITE’S GENUINE COOLING APERIENT SEIDLITZ POWDERS.
These Powders, possessing absorbent as well as aperient properties, are superior
to all others in heartburn, indigestion, bile, or acidity of the stomach, arising from
a too free use of wines, spirits, or highly-seasoned viands; they may be had
recourse to as an agreeable and efficient saline remedy, the fixed air they contain
rendering them as refreshing as Soda Water. In red boxes, lined with tin-foil
2s. each, (warranted to keep, in any climate).
Prepared and Sold only by THOMAS WHITE, Chemist, 24, Cornhill, London.
N.B.—The Essence of Eglantine, and the Aromatic Pungent Essence, can be
obtained of any respectable chemist or perfumer in the kingdom.
MEDICINE CHESTS, FOE THE EAST AND WEST INDIES, THE
ARMY, NAVY, AND SHIPPING.
lilllljjl -UUjJI $l4


PATENT PERRYIAN RILTER-INKSTAND.
THIS novel and useful Invention secures an instantaneous supply of clear Filtered
Ink, which is not affected by the atmosphere, and will remain uninjured for any length
of lime in any climate. It never thickens or moulds, as the process of filtration keeps
the colouring matter in suspension. An Inkstand of moderate size will contain
sufficient Ink for six or twelve months ; hence the trouble and inconvenience occa-
sioned by unsuitable Ink, generally found in ordinary Inkstands, are completely
obviated by the use of the FILTER-INKSTAND.
Manufactured by JAMES PERRY and Co., Patentees, 37, Red Lion-square,
London; and sold by all Stationers and other dealers in such articles.
CAUTION.
SMORDAN and Co. solicit the attention of the Nobility and Public in
• general, that when purchasing the PATENT EVER-POINTED PENCIL,
or LEADS for the same, to observe if the names of S. MORDAN & CO.,
Makers and Patentees, are on the body of the case; this will insure a Solid Gold
or Silver Pencil Case that may be relied upon and prevent much disappointment
and vexatious interruption when used.
S. M. & Co. beg to draw attention to their
NEW METALLIC PENS,
which are of a very superior and improved manufacture, and are giving universal
satisfaction ; they may now be had of all respectable Stationers throughout the
United Kingdon, neatly packed up in dozens, with Holder to each Pen, avoiding
that unpleasant task of taking out the Pen when done with.
S. M. &, Co’s IMPROVED MEDICINE CHESTS, with air-tight Glass
Stoppers, without increasing their price, which may be purchased of all respectable
Chemists in the Kingdom. Also their Locks that defy the most ingenious and
notorious burglar to pick or open, thus affording positive protection to every
description of valuable property, Wills, Deeds, &c. This description of Lock is
in general use at Newgate, Whitecross Street, and many other Prisons. S. Mor-
dan and Co. are Locksmiths and Pen and Pencil Makers to the Government
Offices in General.
MANUFACTORY, LONDON.
52, FLEET STREET.
A NEW DISCOVERY.
Mr. HOWARD, Surgeon-Dentist, 52, Fleet-street, begs to introduce an entirely
NEW DESCRIPTION of ARTIFICIAL TEETH, fixed without springs, wires,
or ligatures at STRICTLY MODERATE CHARGES. They so perfectly resem-
ble the natural teeth as not to be distinguished from the originals by the closest
observer ; they will never change colour or decay, and will be found very superior
to any teeth ever before used. This method does not require the extraction of
roots, or any other painful operation, and will give support and preserve teeth
that are loose, and guaranteed to restore articulation and mastication; and, in
order that Mr. Howard’s Improvement may be within reach of the most econo-
mical, he has reduced his charges to the lowest scale possible.
Tooth-ache instantly cured, and decayed Teeth rendered sound and useful in
mastication. ,
52, Fleet-street. —At home from 10 till 5.


JOHN CARTER,
CHRONOMETER MAKER TO THE ROYAL NAVY.
61, CORNHILL,
AND 207, TOOLEY STREET, LONDON.
JOHN CARTER, in compliance with the wishes of his numerous Friends, begs
to inform them that he has opened a City Establishment for the sale of his Marine
Time-pieces at No. 61, CORNHILL, where Merchants, Captains, and other
scientific men may always meet with Chronometers, Clocks, and Watches, of the
same sterling quality as those which have called forth from the Astronomer Royal
the following important Certificate:—
Royal Observatory, Greenwich, Oct. 1838.
I certify that since the commencement of the Annual Trials of Chronometers at
the Royal Observatory, in competition for Rewards offered by the Government
for the best Chronometers, Mr. Carter, Chronometer Maker, of Tooley Street, has
obtained a greater number of Rewards than any other Chronometer Maker, and
that he obtained the two last Rewards given by the Government.
I certify, also, that since I have had charge of the Royal Observatory, several
Chronometers, constructed by Mr. Carter, either belonging to the Royal Navy,
or on trial for purchase by the Government, have been rated at the Royal Obser-
vatory, and that they have generally been extremely good.
(Signed) G. B. AIRY.
N.B.—Chronometers carefully corrected, timed, and rated .
THE LATEST NEWS FROM INDIA
MAY be obtained by ordering the BOMBAY TIMES, a Journal published twice
a-week at Bombay; comprising the most authentic intelligence up to the moment
of publication, from all the Presidencies of India, and from the Up-Country
Provinces, and which will be regularly forwarded to Subscribers in England by
the Steamers from Bombay, via Egypt, Postage Free.
Subscribers’ Names will be received by, and the Terms known on application
to the Agents in London, Messrs. Smith, Elder and Co. 65, Cornhill.


CONTENTS.
e. NOTICES OF THE NORTH-WEST COAST OF AUSTRALIA, AND ARA-
FURA SEA. By Miss Emma Roberts 1
SONNET.—SCENE IN THE VALLEY OF BERAR. By Major Calder
Campbell 11
ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE ATMOSPHERIC FALLACIES RELATIVE
TO EASTERN CLIMES 12
SONNET—THE SUBALTERN’S HILL-PICQUET, PROME, IN AVA.
By Major Calder Campbell 16
LINES FROM THE PERSIAN OF SHAH ABBAS 16
SYUD KURRUM ALLY (continued). By Robert Neave, Esq 17
NARRATIVE OF A DETENTION AT RANGOON 29
LINES FROM THE PERSIAN OF MEER ABDUL HUK 33
IMPROVEMENTS IN LONDON 34
LINES FROM THE PERSIAN OF MEER RUSTEE 35
LAMENT FROM THE MORISCO. By Lieut.-Colonel Cameron 36
THE ZOOLOGICAL GARDENS, REGENT’S PARK 37
LITERARY NOTICES 39
SYNOPSIS OF INDIAN INTELLIGENCE
Calcutta.—Lord Aukland—Conversion of a Hindoo Youth —Runjeet Sing—
Captain Stewart —Calcutta Lottery—The Mail—General Allard—The Army,
its probable return—Note on Darjeeling 41
Bombay.—Rajah of Satara—Education—Aden—Wreck of Native Vessels—Pin-
darries—'Map of Bombay 47
Madras.—Poisonous Fish—Military—Horticultural Society—Philanthropic As-
sociation—French Presents to Runjeet Sing—Murder at Poonah —Disturb-
ances in the Joonere District—Guzerat 48
Persian Gulf—China—Penang 51, 52
Australasia 53
Home Intelligence 56
Postscript, containing an Abstract of the latest Intelligence 63




THE
ORIENTAL HERALD.
NOTICES OF THE NORTH-WEST COAST OF AUSTRALIA
AND ARAFURA SEA.
MISS EMMA ROBERTS.
The settlement of a colony on the north-west coast of Australia is an
object of such vast importance to the commercial interests of Great Britain,
that too frequent opportunities cannot be taken to acquaint the public
with the advantages derivable from it, and to induce mercantile men to
afford their most zealous assistance in the furtherance of its best interests.
We may now hope shortly to hear detailed reports of the movements of
the expedition sent out for the desirable purpose of establishing an em-
porium, which will embrace the trade of the most eastern portion of the
Indian Archipelago; and in the meantime some account of the scene, and
the prospect it holds out can scarcely fail to be acceptable.
The abandonment of two settlements formed by the British Government
on the north coast of Australia, one on Melville Island, and one in
Raffles Bay, though proving at the time a great disappointment to all
those persons who were acquainted with the commercial capabilities of the
Indian Archipelago, was, perhaps, a fortunate circumstance, since neither
were perfectly adapted for the purpose of establishing an advantageous in-
tercourse with the natives. Melville Island lies completely out of the
track of the Bughis of Macassar, the most enterprizing people of this part
of the world, while the harbour, though good, is difficult of access, the
attempt to enter being attended with some danger. Raffles Bay was not
obnoxious to the same objections, but being colonized from Sydney, those
whp were averse to the introduction of convicts, rejoiced at the removal of
so great a moral pest before it could be mischievously exercised, to the de-
terioration of the British character in these remote regions. The settle-
ments were given up in consequence of a premature alarm respecting the
climate, which was most erroneously supposed to be detrimental to human
life. Experience, however, having proved the fallacy of these notions, a
new expedition has been dispatched to this interesting portion of the world,
with the view to form new settlements, which we may venture to hope
will be conducted on principles calculated to secure every advantage that
can be attainable, either by the colonists themselves, or the numerous
Oriental Herald. — Vol. 4.— No. XIX.


classes of natives with whom they will become associated. It is of the
utmost importance that a free port should be established, similar to that
which has flourished so remarkably at Singapore, and which has attracted
the greater portion of the native trade of the adjacent islands. A free port
on the north-western coast of Australia would not, however, be calculated
to rival Singapore in any injurious manner, the intention being to afford
the same opportunities to the more easterly islands of the Archipelago,
which their neighbours have enjoyed, of carrying on a lucrative trade in
their own vicinity, the distance to Singapore being so considerable as to
deter many from undertaking the voyage. The difficulties to be encoun-
tered in the navigation of Torres Straits are still very great, and a settle-
ment at Raffles Bay or Port Essington, would afford a place of refuge to the
crews of vessels bound from New South Wales to India, who may be
shipwrecked in this dangerous passage.
During the winter months a heavy sailing ship can scarcely venture
round Van Dieman’s Land and Cape Lieuwen, and is therefore compelled
to take the more practicable, but still hazardous route through the Straits.
The numerous English whalers that cruize in the adjacent seas, are
often compelled to put into the Dutch port of Coepang, in Timor, in order
to obtain refreshments for their crews, and that place being particularly
unhealthy, it seldom happens that the vessel can depart without leaving
some of her people behind, victims to the pestilential nature of the climate.
The want of a British Consul in this vicinity has been also very severely
felt, there being no authority of the kind nearer than Singapore, or Ben-
coolen, on the coast of Sumatra, the Isle of France, or Sydney; and British
traders have on more than one occasion been compelled to submit to the
outrages of the natives, or the aggressions of the Dutch, without being
able to obtain any redress. Indeed, there is great reason to fear that the
jealousy entertained by the latter named nation towards every commer-
cial competitor, renders them anxious to encourage rather than repress
the hostilities of native tribes, who not being yet acquainted with their
true interests, have committed many unjustifiable acts of violence against
the crews of British ships. It has been very justly remarked, that “ the
great amount of property belonging to British merchants employed in
the Sperm Whale Fishery, is certainly such as to entitle them to protec-
tion, either by having a small vessel of war as a cruizer, or the establish-
ment of a consulate at some of the islands,” The part of the north-west
coast of Australia, which has been pointed out as the most eligible situation
for a British settlement, lies within a short distance of the track of vessels
passing through Torres Straits, the place of all others the most dangerous,
both from its coral reefs and from the uncivilized nature of many of the
inhabitants. No fewer than fourteen or fifteen wrecks [are supposed to
have taken place in this dangerous passage during the last few years. The
fate of many of the crews have not been ascertained; but it is probable
that numbers of Englishmen, as well as other Europeans, are now living
in a state of bondage among people with whom we have at present little
acquaintance, except from the narratives of the few sufferers who have
escaped. The natives who inhabit the islands in the vicinity of these
dangerous Straits, have been stigmatized as “ the most barbarous set of
savages that ever furnished the mariner with a talebut there is abund-
ant reason to believe, that notwithstandiag the justice of the accusation,
they only require intercourse with civilized nations, who come protected


against their aggressions, and who will put them in the way of improve-
ment, to exibit a very different character.
Although a short time might elapse before the Bughis, and other
enterprising people belonging to these seas, should discover the new port,
and resort to it for the purpose of carrying on their commercial specula-
tions, the north coast of Australia offers at once several very valuable
articles for the immediate freight of merchant vessels. These principally
consist of trepang, sago, bees-wax, and tortoiseshell. Trepang is a large
sea slug* which abounds on all parts of the coast; there are two varie-
ties, the white and the black, much resembling the English garden slug
in appearance, only considerably larger, some being nearly a foot long,
and weighing half a pound each ; the black is usually esteemed to be best,
although one kind of the white variety, which is larger, enjoys great
repute in the Chinese market, where trepang generally is in much demand.
The people of China, who delight in dishes made up of mucilage and grease,
make the trepang into soup, which, though flavourless, is considered to
be highly nutritious. Care should be taken that the worm is not in it,
and when prepared it should be purchased in large pieces. The Bughis par -
boil the trepang, and then dry it upon bamboo frames over charcoal fires;
it should be done gradually and thoroughly, and its value would be much
improved could these industrious people remain long enough upon the
coast to complete the process ; hitherto they have been prevented from
making the required stay, in consequence of the hostility of the natives,
and are therefore obliged to take great care of the article on their voyage
home, to prevent it from being injured by the damp. In the event of
the establishment of a British settlement, however, the Bughis traders
would be protected during their visits, and thus enabled to perfect the work.
Sago might in a very short time become a valuable export, the sago
palm being found on the north and north-west coasts, the nuts supplying
the natives with food. Singapore has been a great mart for pearl-sago,
although the tree which produces it does not grow there, the pith being
brought from Sumatra, Borneo, and other parts of the Indian archipelago,
and prepared by the Chinese for exportation. The tree, when it has
reached maturity, is thirty or forty feet in height, and is formed of a
spongy, mealy substance, surrounded by a hard bark, about an inch in
thickness, and resembling the pith of an elder tree. When felled, the sago
is loosened from the bark, and reduced to the appearance of saw-dust, the
filaments being separated by frequent washing, the finest part of the meal
is sifted, and then baked in thin iron pans, which are shaken with a
circular motion, in order to give it a granular appearance. This is the
state in which it is imported to England; inferior descriptions obtain a
ready sale with the Chinese, who trade very largely in sago, which they
import in their own junks from the eastern islands. That species of turtle
which produces the shell so much prized as the material for many orna-
mental articles, and manufactured to so great an extent both in China and
in Europe, abounds on the north-western coast of Australia. During the
occupation of Raffles Bay, the natives were induced to take some pains to
procure these turtle, as they found the settlers willing to exchange axes
and nails in barter for the shells, and now being provided with iron for the
points of their turtle-pegs, they can much more readily obtain them, than
with their former inefficient implements of hard wood. The quantity of
* Nearly allied to the genus Orchidium,


teak timber growing upon the coasts forms one of its greatest advantages,
since it is the only species of wood found in eastern India, which is suffi-
ciently durable to be adapted for the purpose of ship-building. The only
places at present where it is known to exist to the eastward of the Straits
of Malacca, are Sumbawa, Java, and Chantibon, in Siam. In Sumbawa,
there is considerable difficulty in procuring it, in consequence of the woods
being situated in the interior of the island. In Java, there is the same
objection ; for though there are still extensive forests to be found, the timber
in the neighbourhood of the coasts has been cut down, the present supply
coming from an inconvenient distance. The Dutch government, well
acquainted with the value of teak wood, will not allow a single stick to be
exported, while they have laid a very heavy duty upon the timber em-
ployed for ship-building. At Chantibon, the teak timber is monopolized
by the King of Siam, and is only used in the construction of his own
ships and junks.
The intercourse with a British settlement, established at a convenient
spot on the north-west coast of Australia, and the islands of the Arafura
sea, is expected, by persons who have made themselves well acquainted
with the population of these remote realms, to be very great indeed. The
northern portion of the extensive group, under the name of the Arrii
islands, have been hitherto the principal resort of the native traders of the
Indian archipelago, who are better acquainted with them than with those
to the south, which have never yet been explored by Europeans, and are
supposed to have only reached a very low state of civilization. The
town of Dobbo, situated in a harbour on the west side of the Arrii islands,
is the place chiefly frequented by the native traders, who appear to carry
on a very extensive commerce, receiving in exchange for European and
India calicoes, coarse cutlery, china ware, chopping knives, gunpowder,
musquets, elephants’ teeth, &c., pearls, pearl-shell, tortoiseshell, nutmegs,
trepang, and other articles of equal value. Europeans, who may proceed
thither, are recommended to take tobacco and aniseed, as presents to the
chiefs, and to conciliate the schoolmasters, by offerings of stationery ; the
natives of Dobbo, being Christians, converted by native missionaries and
schoolmasters from Amboyna. Through the exertions of these people,
Christianity has been spread throughout nearly the whole of Wama, and
other extensive islands in the neighbourhood ; the Mahommedan religion
has been established at Wadia and Wassia; but the remainder of this very
interesting group appear still to be idolaters of the most barbarous descrip-
tion. The Ki, or Key islands, differ only from those of Arrii situated in
their immediate vicinity, by being more populous, and in a higher state of
cultivation ; the natives, though in other respects strongly resembling the
people of Arrii, are not so mush attached to maritime pursuits, employing
themselves in husbandry and manufactures; one village, near the north-
east point of the great Ki, is celebrated for its potteries, and supplies the
whole of the portion of the adjacent countries, which have learned to
appreciate the comforts of life, with earthenware. Another of the islands
is celebrated for its shipwrights, numerous prahus being built by the inha-
bitants with the excellent timber abounding in their forests. These prahus
being in great request, particularly with the people of Banda, who
seldom employ any other. Rice, Indian corn, and vegetables of several
kinds, are grown in great abundance, and in many places any quantity of
hogs, poultry, and cattle, may be obtained. A large portion of the Arafura


sea remains yet to be explored, and some of the people belonging to the
almost numberless islands which gem its bright waters, being still in a
state of barbarism, at present much precaution must be taken by ships
taking refuge either from distress of weather, or from want of provisions.
An English brig, supposed to be the “ Lady Nelson,” was in 1823 boarded
by the natives of a large island of the Timorlaut group, while half the
crew were on shore, killing them all, with the exception of two youths,
who were still in captivity, when a Dutch vessel visited that part of the
coast; and from the same authority, we learn that the people of the island
of Tepa had murdered the crew of an English brig putting in there for
refreshments. Lieutenant Kolff, the Dutch commandant, suspected that
something of the kind had happened, in consequence of the conduct of
the inhabitants, who deserted their village upon his landing, evidently from
the consciousness of guilt, or from a hostile feeling of some kind. Upon
inquiry, he ascertained the cause of the shyness of the people; but, unfor-
tunately, careless of aggressions committed upon the subjects of a rival
power, offered no remonstrance to the men who had been guilty of this
act of cruelty and inhospitality. The catastrophe which occurred to these
two ships could not in either case have happened, had the most common
precautions been taken for security, since the natives entertain a more
than ordinary dread of fire-arms, and would certainly not have offered
violence, had the strangers been properly prepared for resistance.
A mercantile settlement, conducted in that generous spirit which offers
mutual advantages, and manifests as strong an anxiety for the welfare of
others, as for personal aggrandizement, situated within an easy distance of
the hitherto unnumbered islets of the Arafura sea, would soon spread
throughout the whole of this interesting region the benefits produced by
industry, civilization, and a widely extended commerce. Nature has per-
formed wonders for these remote and unexplored haunts, the groves are
fragrant with spices, and rich in all the most valuable products of the
vegetable tribe; sandal, and other precious woods abound, and beautiful
trees are tenanted by still more beautiful creatures—crown birds, birds of
paradise, and others belonging to the most splendid varieties of the
feathered tribe, glitter like meteors as they dart along the sunny skies.
The shallow waters are rich with pearl-banks, and the pearl-shell; while
biche-de-mer, the trepang so often mentioned, is found, as well as the
tortoise, on many parts of the coast. Another valuable product consists
of the edible birds’-nests, which are so much in request in the China
market.
At present, the great carriers of the trade between this little-known
portion of the world, and the ports in its vicinity, are the Bughis of Celebes,
an active and enterprising race of people, who, in despite of many disad-
vantages arising from the unwieldy nature of their vessels, and the danger
of encountering pirates, in seas left almost wholly unprotected, have per-
severed in their commercial and maritime pursuits, and have at length at-
tracted the attention of the British Government. The Island of Celebes
occurring between Borneo and the Moluccas, being long and narrow, in
proportion to its breadth, seems from its conformation, and the extraordi-
nary extent of the sea-coast, to invite to maritime adventure; since, not-
withstanding its very considerable size, there is no part of the inland
country, distant more than thirteen miles from the sea. Hitherto the
Bughis have suffered very severely from their intercourse with Europeans.


The defenceless nature of their coast, and the facilities which it afforded for
the capture of the inhabitants of whole villages, induced the Dutch, who
may justly be charged with the most cruel recklessness of the interests and
happiness of other nations, to seize these unfortunate people for slaves.
They suffered equally at the early period of Portuguese conquest in the
East, and nothing but the most determined spirit of perseverance could
have enabled them to struggle through the disasters and afflictions brought
upon them by their unprincipled aggressors ; who, bent upon the monopoly
of every advantage, pursued their own selfish interests at the expense of
every just and generous principle. The impolicy of such a system has
been exhibited in the downfal of the Dutch and Portuguese power in the
East, although the former nation still endeavours to maintain an ascen-
dance in the Archipelago, and by their late settlement on the coast of New
Guinea, appear to entertain hopes of securing the trade of the Arafura Sea;
but, unless they should at length be induced to adopt a very different line
of conduct towards the native traders, than that which they have hitherto
pursued, they will never be able to cope with the British settled in their
neighbourhood.
The success attendant upon the colonization of Singapore, will shew how
rapidly a port established on similar principles will rise to wealth and im-
portance ; and we may hail the departure of the expedition which is so
shortly to replace the British flag upon the shores of Northern Australia,
as the commencement of a new and brilliant era in our commercial annals.
It is scarcely possible to calculate all the advantages which must accrue
both to the mother country and to these distant scenes, whenever she sends
out her sons, well skilled in every useful art, and desirous to impart every
advantage which superior knowledge can confer. The colony now medi-
tated, may be considered merely as the precursor of many others, which
will introduce British manufactures and British luxuries, to the most
distant recesses of wilds hitherto untrodden, excepting by savages in their
most barbarous state; while those people who have almost miraculously
(considering the neglect which they have experienced) arrived at an ad-
vanced stage of civilization, will derive immediate benefit from the estab-
lishment of a mart for their trade, conducted on just and liberal principles.
The agricultural capabilities of the north-west coast of Australia, are de-
scribed by competent authorities as being very great, the soil and climate of
the country in the vicinity of Raffles Bay, are stated to be well adapted
to the growth of cotton and pepper ; cotton in particular, which need only
to be mentioned, to show how much advantage the colony would derive
from its produce; and it is thought that tobacco,the castor oil plant, sugar-
cane, and even spices might also be grown without difficulty. The expense
of procuring free labour, which has operated so strongly against the pros-
pects of the settlement at Swan River, and which has, in a great degree,
damped the ardour of colonial enterprise, would on the north-west coast of
Australia be reduced within very moderate limits. Any number of emi-
grants may be obtained from China, and from many of the islands in the
Archipelago. Fair wages, kind treatment, and the prospect of improving
their condition, form inducements which have been found sufficiently
powerful to attract the natives of all the adjacent countries, who are suffer-
ing from the effects of poverty or a tyrannical government, to every colony
throughout the East. Cheap land, and cheap labour, will not fail to bring
commercial speculators to the new establishment, and no apprehension of


wanting supplies need deter tlic proprietor from engaging any number of
men whom he may require for the purpose of preparing the soil. The
island of Bali, which was very little known at the period of the British
occupation of Raffles Bay, is only 900 miles distant from the site pointed
out as the most eligible for the new settlement. Bali deals largely in
exports, hitherto principally despatched to the China market; rice and
maize may be had in very considerable quantities, together with cotton,
hides, tobacco, and coffee. The natives of Bali have a method of drying
beef, which keeps for a considerable time, and is superior to the jerked
beef of South America; the meat is cut into strips and is first dipped into
brine, then powdered with pepper and dried in the sun. Thus prepared,
the beef affords wholesome and agreeable food, while the advantage of its
easy attainment by the inhabitants of a new settlement, are too obvious
for comment. Cattle and hogs may be procured from the same place, as
also cocoa-nut oil, which is reported to be cheap and of good quality. The
Arrii Islands, before mentioned, are situated within an easy distance from
Raffles Bay, and the passage can be made at all seasons ; the trade from
Batavia to the group does not amount to more than one vessel annually,
so greatly has the Dutch commerce fallen off, in consequence of the im-
politic measures of its colonial government. Several prahus are, however,
despatched every year from Macassar, for the purpose of procuring bees-
wax, tortoise-shell, and birds of Paradise, in exchange for cotton cloths,
cutlery, arrack, and English piece goods of every kind; fire arms, gun-
powder, opium, and a vast catalogue of other articles will find a ready sale
in every portion of the wide circle, which the capabilities of an emporium
for trade at Raffles Bay would embrace. It has been truly said that the
want of local information has proved fatal to the infant settlements of the
English, and Sir Stamford Raffles, while making this observation, endea-
voured, with all the ardour and energy of his truly comprehensive mind,
to bring the experience which he had gained, relative to the East Indian
Archipelago, fully before the public. To his zeal in the cause, and to the
success attendant upon his establishment at Singapore, may without doubt,
be attributed the exertions of those who have followed in his footsteps.
The members of the present expedition have the advantage of being
made acquainted with all the information that is extant concerning the
bright and fertile territory opened before them. They possess data, which
will enable them to form an accurate judgment of the various tribes which
people the wild shores of the adjacent seas, whose characters, though here-
tofore stigmatized as Malay in its worst form, differ very considerably in
many points, and they will thus have it in their power to adopt those
measures which offer the best prospect of general advantage. That, not-
withstanding the brilliant expectations held out to the settlers, unforeseen
events may arise to disappoint the hopes so justly entertained, is but too
probable, but under all the favourable circumstances attendant upon the
undertaking, we may confidently predict that they will be of a nature to
be overcome by spirit and perseverance. Ignorance of the habits and
manners of the native tribes, and particularly with the language, have, as
we have before observed, hitherto proved the greatest obstacle to the estab-
lishment of a friendly intercourse with persons whose customs and modes
of thinking and acting differ so widely from our own; and much of present
success, and of future prosperity, must depend upon the temper and talents
of the party to whom the conduct of the expedition shall be entrusted; for


an absence of kind feeling, or a want of judgment, might suffice to plunge
the whole concern, at the very outset, into almost inextricable difficulties.
The propriety of forming the garrison of the projected settlement of
native troops, has been suggested. Accustomed to the climate, and more
easily complying with oriental habits, somewhat differing from their own
native troops from Ceylon or the continent of India, would he fed with
less difficulty, and suffer less inconvenience than Europeans, who must
necessarily be subject, at first, to considerable hardship. What is called
apathy in the Indian character, and what frequently amounts to a blame-
ful degree of submission to evils capable of remedy, as often assumes a
higher character, and may be termed fortitude. Native troops are patient
under many privations, while they certainly suffer much less from want of
shelter, the substitution of an inferior kind of food, and the atmosphere of
land newly reclaimed from a state of nature, than the European, who, after
a very short exposure to these injurious tendencies, begins to droop, and
too frequently sustains a shock, which the constitution is never afterwards
able to recover.
It will be necessary to give every sort of publicity to the intended set-
tlement, in order to make those persons acquainted with the fact of its
existence, whose interest and peculiar pursuits would lead them to seek
wealth and occupation on the now desolate shores of the Indian Archipelago.
It is not only from England that we may expect to find colonists anxious
to settle upon the Australian coast: had the circumstance of the establish-
ment at Raffles Bay been more extensively known, there can be little doubt
that it would have been visited by a considerable number of Anglo India-
men, who, long severed from England, and apprehensive that their pecu-
niary resources would be insufficient to maintain the degree of style which
is deemed essential to grace the career of the returning exile, feel desirous
to increase their capital, by commercial speculations in some promising
colony. There are many landed proprietors of this denomination to be
found at Sydney; Swan River immediately attracted persons, who, re-
quiring change of climate, preferred a permanent residence in a country
blessed with a cooler temperature than the plains of India, and offering
novelties and advantages which they deemed to be superior to those they
could enjoy upon the Continent, notwithstanding the richness of the soil,
and the cheapness of the labour. It may perhaps be necessary to say,
that it is only persons possessing some capital who will be likely to reap
much benefit from emigration to the settlements now contemplated. The
working classes would find themselves entirely superseded by Chinese
labourers, and by the clouds of industrious and poverty-stricken Bughis,
Javanese, and others, who would flock to the spot as soon as they knew
that employment could be obtained there; and there is every reason to ex-
pect that the supply will always be equal to the demand, since
lation on the one hand, and political aggression on the other, afford a con-
stant stimulant to the destitute and the persecuted, to seek in new coun-
tries the tranquillity and comfort denied them in their own. It is only ne-
cessary to recur to the extraordinary influx of emigrants at Singapore, to
be assured, that wherever competent wages are given, there will always be
labourers ready to undertake the required work.
Every season brings to this Queen of the Eastern seas (Singapoie) multi-
tudes of Chinese wanderers, who land without a farthing in the world, and
trust entirely to their own industry for their support; nothing comes amiss


to these men; they will work in mines, engage in any thing, in fact,
which will afford them subsistence, and, by their frugality and industry,
generally contrive to raise themselves in the scale of society, and thus make
way for others who follow, equally destitute, and with the same desire to
better their condition. Of course there will be numerous rogues and va-
gabonds amongst these adventurers, who, coming from a country boasting
a certain degree of civilization, are well versed in the science of knavery,
and are accomplished thieves; but under the influence of wholesome laws,
there is no difficulty in keeping these people from becoming troublesome;
and the greater number, however ill-disposed at first, soon perceive
that they are more likely to succeed by honest than dishonest means, and
therefore determine to amend their ways. A>very considerable number of
Bughis are settled at Singapore; and as these enterprising people visit the
north coast of Australia annually, for the purpose of gathering trepang,
there can be little doubt, that when assured of protection from the proxi-
mity of a British settlement, they will plant a colony on its shores. In
addition to the places already enumerated, which would come under the
influence of a commercial establishment on the northern coast of Australia,
viz. the eastern islands of the Archipelago and Arafura Sea, New Guinea,
&c., there are the countries in the vicinity of the Mendozo, or Sula Sea, con-
sisting of the rich and extensive islands of Magendano and Palawan, the
Sula group, and the north, and north-eastern portions of Borneo. The ca-
pabilities of these countries were well known to the East India Company,
who formed a settlement in their neighbourhood some years ago, which,
owing to some mismanagement, did not succeed. Their importance, from
that period, seems to have been overlooked; but they have lately been brought
again into notice, and will, in all probability, speedily become the resort of
trading vessels bringing European commodities in exchange for the rich
and inexhaustible treasures of Borneo.
The intercourse which we shall carry on with new countries, in the
event of a settlement on the north-west coast of Australia, will bring us
into intimate acquaintance with people who at present scarcely know
the greatest maritime power in the world, even by name. Many of the
inhabitants of the remote islands of the Arafura sea, if they have ever
heard of the English at all, have been taught to imagine them to be a
barbarous people, dwelling in the interior of a country of which the Dutch
are in possession of the whole coast. This idea is very natural, since it
accords so well with the state of affairs in every part of the world known
to them; the tribes in the inland districts being less advanced in wealth
and importance, and more subservient to the inhabitants of the sea-shores,
who are in possession of all the advantages which accrue from the com-
merce carried on with foreign nations. The great natural beauty of
these far islands of the east, the splendour of their productions, the
riches which have been buried in them for centuries, and the destitute
condition of the inhabitants, all combine to render them objects of
great attention to European adventure. It is, perhaps, most fortunate
that their capabilities have never been duly appreciated before, since
it has preserved them from the clinging evils attendant upon Dutch,
Portuguese, or Spanish rule.
It appears surprising that, with the old voyagers and travellers for their
guides, men of talent and enterprize should have been so fully bent
upon African adventure, as to persist, in despite of all failures, year after
Oriental Herald.— Vol. 1 .—No. XIX. ' c


year, in fruitless attempts to establish a commercial intercourse with the
interior of that barbarous and inhospitable part of the world, to the utter
neglect of some of the fairest scenes imaginable. Fifty years have elapsed
since many of the principal ports of the eastern islands have been visited
by a British ship ; no surveying expedition has been fitted out, or vessel
of war sent to cruise in their neighbouring seas; the energies of nautical
men being wasted upon endeavours to discover a north-west passage,
which, if successful, would have been almost wholly unprofitable. Generally
speaking, all the information latterly obtained has been wasted upon igno-
rant men, —the crews of whalers, who were neither aware of its importance,
nor capable of imparting their own knowledge to others; and in examining
the map of the world, persons smitten with a desire for foreign travel,
seem wholly to have overlooked the countries whence by a circuitous
route, the pearl-shells, and the birds of paradise, so much esteemed as orna-
mental appendages, have been obtained from time immemorial. It is
rather extraordinary that winged messengers of so much beauty as the
birds of paradise should not have attracted more attention to the countries
of their birth, especially as so many fabulous tales have been connected
with their history. The native haunts of these lovely creatures still re-
mains a terra incognita , and were it not for the taste for ornithology,
manifested by a gentleman of Macao, we might at this time be uninformed
respecting the actual fact of the possession of feet by the birds of this
genus. A living specimen of these feathered wonders existed a few years
ago in the aviary of a resident at Macao ; it had been procured with con-
siderable difficulty ; but there seems no good reason to doubt that with
sufficient care individuals of the same species might be brought alive to
England, the countries producing them at some seasons of the year being
cold, while the fact of their existence at Macao, shews that they can
endure a low temperature. Should it be thought too hazardous to bring
such delicate exotics round the Cape, a passage in which they would have
to sustain sudden alternations from heat to cold, they might be conveyed
to Bombay and up the Red Sea, and there can be little doubt that they
would prove equally attractive with the Giraffes, or any other rare animal
procured from distant realms at an enormous expense. In addition to the
extreme beauty of its plumage, the bird of paradise in its living state has
the advantage of great elegance of form, and gracefulness of action. It
is described as seeming to be fully conscious of its own claims to superiority,
and to spend considerable time in pluming and arranging its feathers,while
every movement betrays the pride which it takes in its appearance. In
its disposition and temper it is amiable, readily becoming familiar, and
attaching itself to man, though in order to secure its contentment in a
state of confinement it must be taken from the nest. When captured
after it has become acquainted with the sweets of liberty, it is apt to beat
itself against its prison bars. In fact, all birds intended to be kept in
cages, should be secured before they are fully fledged, several individuals
being taken at the same time. Those that are strong and able to endure
an unnatural state of existence, will survive the experiment, and in all
probability live many years; by this means there is a tolerable certainty
of retaining one or two at least; while after they have been upon the
wing, it is scarcely possible with all the care in the world to keep them
alive. Pearl shells, which are now considered to be more valuable articles
of commerce than the pearls themselves, are suffered to remain in the


places on which they have been opened in consequence of their hulk, the
traders being enabled to fill their vessels with articles which take up less
space. The pearl banks on which they are found, and which are exceed-
ingly productive, on account of their having been permitted to remain
undisturbed by any extensive fishery, stretch from the Arrii islands
towards New Guinea, and would prove a source of wealth to their possessors
in the event of their being visited by foreign ships, or having a convenient
port in their neighbourhood where they might be advantageously disposed
of, in exchange for the manufactures of Europe or Continental India.
The Dutch have settlements at Amboyna, Banda, and Timor, which are
all well situated for trade with the Arms, and other islands of the Ara-
fura sea ; hut these people, who are of a warlike character, and have
always resisted the attempts made by Holland to subdue them, have
imbibed so strong a hatred against their short-sighted neighbours, that
they are anxious to avoid all intercourse with them, and seem well
aware that their only chance of maintaining their independence, is by
keeping at a distance from a power whose influence has been already so
injuriously felt by the inhabitants of the Indian Archipelago.
SONNET:
SCENE IN THE VALLEY OF BERAR.
MAJOR CALDER CAMPBELL.
A BEAUTEOUS scene in India! Well-a-day,
That all these woods, green glancing in the sun,
Should breed fierce denizens, that may be won
By no expence of care, to court the sway
Of human love ! —Two winding rivers run
Through a fair, fertile valley,* stern and grey,
Unequal mountains throw their shadows wide;
Whilst mosque and shrine gleam in the glassy tide,
That shows the frequent Fakeer on his way,
With gnarled staff, patch’d robe, and grisly hair
Coiled snaky o’er his stalwart shoulders; while,
Not far apart, a troop of Almehs smile
As they invoke his blessing, and in air
Scatter the tiny coins, that pay his purchased pray’r !
* The Wurdaand Beyn-Gunga.


. ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE ATMOSPHERIC FALLACIES
RELATIVE TO EASTERN CLIMES.
Many Anglo-Indians are apt to declare, -when suffering inconvenience
from the warmth of a summer’s day in England, that they are as hot as
ever they had felt in Bengal ; and those who maintain the utter impro-
bability of the thing, upon any calorific principle which is known to rule
the atmosphere, gain no credit with the uninitiated, in the teeth of such
assertions. Whenever the remark was made in my hearing, I resorted to
a very infallible method of convincing my old brother Qui Hi's, that they
were mistaken, when they equalled the hottest heat of England to even
that of a middling month in the East, —and thus it was. When I have
met one of them panting along “ the sweet shady side of Pall Mall,” in
the middle of July, and he has wiped the “ sweat of his brow ” away, and
exclaimed—“ Bless me ! I never felt any thing equal to this in India 1”
I have quietly said, “ Just stop a moment, and answer me one question:
Did you eA’er walk, either for pleasure or business, with a broad-cloth frock
coat on, and no umbrella (or chatta , as we call it) held over you, in the
middle of July, or of any month between March and October, in any part
of Bengal, Bahar, or Orissa ? Did you ever sit down to breakfast, dinner,
or supper, at those times of the { rolling year ’ in a cloth coat, from choice,
or without a servant to punkah, or fan, your perspiracious body ?” He
could not, of course, answer these questions in any manner calculated to
support his thoughtless theory of England being as hot as India; but the
fact being, that present sufferings coming always more home to one’s
business and bosom, than the mere memory of the past, the former are
unconsciously exaggerated by a comparison with their predecessors; and
a hundred circumstances are forgotten, which, if called to mind at the
moment, would convince the complainant that his grumbling was un-
founded, and his comparison odious. I should like to have the man who
carps at the heat of an English summer, suddenly set down at Cawnpore,
at two o’clock in the afternoon, in the month of May, in his blue cloth
coat and his Merino inexpressibles; no umbrella over his houseless head;
and himself compelled to walk a distance equal to that of the India House
from the Oriental Club. Why, even when the thermometer does, on some
rare occasions, crawl up to ninety of Fahrenheit in Great Britain, Wales,
Ireland, or the town of Berwick-upon-Tweed, the kind of heat is as
different from that which forces up the mercury, in “ double march ” with
us, as (to use an original simile) chalk is from cheese. One warms, but
the other burns, you; and lam certain I have had the skin more com-
pletely peeled off my devoted face, by half-a-dozen hours’ exposure to the
glow of an Indian sun, than ever even, by comparison, the most delicately-
cheek’d maiden I know has been tanned by a romping day of amateur
hay-making,
Sol is there, indeed, a thirsty soul, —a water-drinker to be sure, (for
wines and spirituous liquors are kept out of the way!)—but what a swal-
low he has got! No hydrophobia does he ever know ; and so little is an
ordinary pond to him, that he almost sucks up the Ganges herself, and
dwindles her into the narrowest part of her rainy-season channel, as


easily as a thirsty duck would empty a table-spoon with its own spoon-
bill. He sucketh the very inmost juice out of every blade of grass, more
thoroughly than the hungriest spider extracts that of the devoted fly;
and long before the month of May is over, there is less moisture in the arid
earth than in the dry bones of threescore and ten.
There is a cause which augments the sufferings experienced by Anglo-
Indians in a sultry day in England, of which the unreflecting are never
aware; namely, that during their residence in a much hotter climate they
have imbibed so large a portion of caloric, as to materially assist the in-
fluence of the atmosphere. A fire is always smouldering within, which a
spark will kindle into a flame. Every distressing symptom experienced
in India returns. We suffer from prickly heat, and we attribute to the
climate of England, what in reality is the effect of the previous process
undergone in the fiery furnaces of Bengal. The heat of Bengal, however,
though probably more productive of fever to those exposed to it, is scarcely
comparable to the burning horrors of the hot winds in the upper country,
where every tiling is literally scorched, parched, withered, and dried up ;
but how refreshing the first shower, after such aridity ! The very cats
enjoy it, and that is, I think, the climax of description. For my own
part the first shower seems to renovate the muses’ fount within me, and
I make my rejoicings not only audible, but melodious; so that when the
first thick drops authorize me to exclaim, “ Venit imber!” as old Plautus
did before me, I instantly follow it up with some harmonious sublimity ;
for example,
THE BENGAL RAINS.
“ I’ll rhyme you so eight years together ; dinners, and suppers, and sleeping hours
excepted.”— Shakspeake.
Air. — Yankee doodle.
The rain ! the rain !—how wet it is,
And how it plashes down, Sir;
And how it makes the ‘ sward ’ to fizz,
Which is not ‘ green,’ but brown, Sir!
’Tis brown, —for where the hot-winds pass,
The verdure fleets away, Sir ;
And what before was green as grass,
Is then as brown as hay, Sir!
Sing yankec doodle-doodle-doo, &c.
The rain ! the rain ! —it falls in drops,
All from the sky so arched;
And on the arid ground it hops,
At first, like peas when parched.
Anon, so well it plays its part,
It wins beneath the surface ;
As love will gain a maiden’s heart,
If once it redden her face.
Sing yankee- doodle-doodle-doo, &c.


The rain ! the rain !—our earth’s in such
A state, for lack of drinking,
She need not fear a “ drop too much,”
Though through her it be sinking.
She well may be a thirsty soul,
When furnace-winds have dried her;
And drain the sky’s capacious bowl,
And yet no ill betide her.
Sing yankee-doodle-doodle-doo, &c.
The rain ! the rain !—if cats and dogs
Come down, it’s no great wonder ;
They scarce can like to live mid fogs,
And lightning, hail, and thunder;
But should they, from the stun they get,
By tumbling down, recover;
They’ll find old Earth has “ heavy wet,”
As well as those above her.
Sing yankee doodle-doodle-doo, &c.
The rain ! the rain !—by those who’ve been,
Like scorch’d shoe leather, frizzling,
With joy it cannot damp is seen
The first delightful drizzling.
No longer then do they inhale,
Into each lung’s poor lobe, air
So red hot, even you might fail
To bear it, Monsieur Chaubert.*
Sing yankee doodle-doodle-doo, &c.
The rain ! the rain!—when pours the rain
(As if the drops were betting,
Which first shall give the drouthy plain
They’re tumbling to, a wetting) ;
Then comes a paradox, for though
The clouds are thus propitious,
They may, no doubt, be said to throw
Cold water on our wishes !
Sing yankee doodle-doodle-doo, &c.
The rain ! the rain !—Aquarius brings
His watering-pots to bear on
The desert monarch’s flaming wings,
Who rides the lurid air on :
* Who hath not heard of Monsieur Chaubert, of asbestine and bane-antidotary en-
dowment ?—who could sit in an oven, while a piece of beef was well baked in it, and
swallow prussic acid with the same impunity as mother’s milk, to the conviction and
astonishment of the most pensive public (that of London, to wit) in the civilised
world. But, lord! what were all his ovens, compared to a blast, or so, of hot winds
in the interior of Hindoostan ? Let him- but seat himself on a twelve-pounder, un-
shaded, about two o’clock, p. m., in the month of May, and in the fortress of Agra,
and remain there for five minutes, (having no go-betweens,) and if he bear that with-
out grinning,—why he must be—no man, but a salamander.


In vain the calcined king contends,
And throws his fire with pith in ;
For lambs shall find in eagles friends,
E’er he shall conquer Swithin.
Sing yankee doodle-doodle-doo, &c.
The rain! the rain !—in three months more,
Will start up blue-nail’d Tertian ;
And fever make the land deplore
Its now profuse immersion.
Gamboge shall revel in many a phiz,
And bile fret many a liver ;
And many a limb get rheumatiz,
And many a corpse the river.*
Sing yankee doodle-doodle-doo, &c.
The rain ! the rain ! —with floodful force,
Comes toppling down the rain, O !
And spoils each handsome road, of course,
But beautifies the plain, 0 !f
And hydrophobia takes to flight,
And toads commence their croaking,
And “ keep it up ” the livelong night,
Which makes it so provoking.
Sing yankee doodle-doodle-doo, &c.
The rain ! the rain ! —mosquitos now
Begin their feasts so gory,
And many a Griff’s;}; ingenuous brow,
Attests their reckless foray :
* The breaking up of the rainy season is as insalubrious as its commencement is
reviving; and the natives, especially, die off in great numbers, and Hindoo corpses
abound in the Ganges a fact which may account for the fish getting into such good
condition about the period in question ; —anthropophagi, that they are !
*f* It beautifies the plain ,* by which, I mean, that it renders all green, where before
there was not “ one green spot” to be beheld. But I should very humbly hope, that
the apparent opposition of the words of the text may not be taken, by the imaginative
peruser, for that despicable thing—a pun. If there be one quality by which, more than
another, I should be ambitious of seeing my unpretending compositions characterized
it is that grave matter-of-factness which runs, like a vein of gold, through the solemn
versions of Hudibras and Swift; meanders very prettily, at times, through the elabo-
rate studies of .Moore and Byron ; and assumes an almost palpable form in the sober-
sided delinquencies of Hook and Hood. I entertain no doubt, that the man who can
bring himself (mark me well, oh ! editor of the Literary Gazette !) to murder any lan-
guage, by perpetrating a pun, could, with little encouragement, wind himself up to the
commission of a felony ; and such being my declared opinion, can any thing be more
natural than my anxiety to disclaim an intention, the admission of which would bear so
dread an inference ? The man who puns should not have confided to him the duties of
any responsible—not to say res-pun-sible—office; for he is neither as the thick man
whom Caesar trusted, nor as the thin man whom he did not j but one of your thick-
people, reckless of consequences, and so conceited, withal, as to think he has
just twice as much sense as more sober personages, because all his words, forsooth, are
fraught with double meaning. No, my delicious reader! write me down ass, if you
like, and I shall not up -brayd you for it; but if you persist in deeming me capable of a
pun, the affront may lead to a witty-schism between us, which, on my side at least,
may chance to be productive of much bad humour.
+ Griff, or Griffin, a new comer.


Ami lo ! ere long, from marsh, or tank,
Ami fen, and dell, and chasm, a
Thick vapour rises, foul and dank,
And—there you have miasma!
Sing yankee-doodle doodle-doo, &c
The rain ! the rain !—it pours down, down,
Because it can’t pour up, up !
And many’s the fish, no doubt, ’twill drown,
And many the kitten and pup, pup :
And many a field ’twill render green,
For there’s many a one now brown, brown ;
And the same shall again next year be seen,
So let the rain pour down, down !
Sing yankee-doodle doodle-doo, &c.
SONNET.
THE SUBALTERN S HILL-PICQUET, PROME, IN AVA.
MAJOR CALDER CAMPBELL.
Oh ! for one drop of pure Parnassian dew,
That I might dip therein my artless pen,
To paint in radiant colours, bright as true,
The scenes of beauty round me ! hill and glen,
And conic steep, and—flushed with morning's tears—■
Or thousand graceful shrubs—while there appears,
Winding below, that noble stream* which loves
To loiter near this paradise; and down,
Stretched at my feet, engroved, the populous town, —
And all around me woods, and gilded fanes,
Held sacred erst, round which now slowly moves
The martial guard!—l love to wander here,
And glean from the surrounding view linked chains
Of pensive thought, that prompts the tender tear !
ON THE DEATH OF MURADI.
ROBOKI. FROM THE PERSIAN.
Muradi’s dead ! yet, no! he ne’er can die,
Death never triumphed o’er one so adored ;
His noble soul his father sought on high,
His body to his mother he restored.
* The Irrawaddi.


SYUD KURRUM ALLY.
ROBERT NEAVE, ESQ., B. C. S.
(Continued from page 345.)
It will be perhaps a difficult, and certainly, at this distant period, an
useless task, to attempt unravelling the various emotions which the course
adopted by my father had aroused within my bosom. Vexation and an-
ger were certainly those which predominated, and neither of these were in
any way likely to lead me to a compliance with his directions in respect
to proceeding homewards. Had such, indeed, been the case, it w'ould
have been more than probable that the bare and simple thought, that I might,
by any possibility, communicate with Zebun, would have at once banished
from my mind all notions of filial obedience; as matters stood, that idea,
and the inflamed state of my passions, positively prohibited it. I once
more turned my face towards the fair, intending to try, if I could, at least
for a short space, find shelter in the abode which had lately been the
scene of my exploits. On second thoughts, however, this course did not
appear advisable, and I rejected it. On a sudden it occurred to me, that
my friend, Roostum Khan, whom I had seen, had a small bungalow, or
house, not far from the spot where the fair was held, and that he was, in
all probability, there resident at the present time. The house in question
was not a regular abode for dwelling, nor usually inhabited ; it served
merely as an occasional place of retirement for pleasure and pastime, and
was more particularly calculated for the enjoyment of the festivities of the
fair. On further consideration, the circumstance seemed to me peculiarly
fortunate. Roostum Khan and myself had, in early years, been com
panions, and a more intimate friendship existed between us than usually
occurs between youths of our age. He had been partly aware of the little
love affair which had fallen out between me and the object of my affec-
tions, though I had not confided to him the whole of the story; and
knowing him to be thoroughly devoted to me, I could feel no hesitation in
trusting him with a knowledge of the intentions which had already begun
to rise fast in my mind. I thought, indeed, that he might be of assistance
to me in the execution of part of my plans ; but whether he would con-
sent to become a participator in affairs in which he had no personal inte-
rest, and which nevertheless involved a considerable risk, remained to be
seen. An obstacle, however, presented itself on the threshold. Perhaps
Roostum’s family had come with him to the fair, and had located themselves
in the bungalow ? If so, it could be no place for me, or the intrigue which
I proposed setting on foot. Still no better chance of a convenient abode
presented itself, and the objection might not exist; so at all events it was
worth while trying the issue, I then proceeded towards my friend’s resi-
dence, which was at the other end of the booths and temporary huts, so
that the centre of gaiety and attraction was situated intermediately be-
tween us and the hills.
Roostum Khan was at home, and he gave me a hearty welcome. We
Oriental Herald.— Vol. 4.—No. XIX. d


talked over the affair of the late fight, and he congratulated me on my
escape, as well as the victory which had crowned my efforts. It did not
take long to give him an account of the harsh treatment which I had re-
ceived at home; on this subject, he sympathised with me sincerely, and
added much, as youths usually do, on the severity of parental controul. Ho
himself, as he informed me, had come to the fair against the wishes of his
family, though not in opposition to any positive prohibition ; and he fur-
ther set my mind at rest by saying, that as his father had occasion to go
on a short journey, he himself had come alone, and unattended, save by
one servant, in whom he had confidence. This conjunction of favourable
circumstances led me to think that my star had a benign aspect, and deter-
mined me at once to throw myself on my friend’s generosity, to whom,
under the seal of secrecy, I imparted my half-formed determination to ob-
tain, if possible, an interview with Zebun. Roostum himself was not want-
ing in boldness, and loved a piece of daring as well as any youth of his
age; but the apparent rashness of my enterprise fairly astonished him.
“ Oh, my friend,” said he, “ what idea is this which you have got into
your head ?—do I hear aright ? Are my senses or yours gone ? What ?
make your way into the Zenana, the private apartments of a Syud of
rank, and seek an interview with his daughter! Surely you must be mad,
to attempt this.” I sat in silence, and uttered not a word ; for dissuasion
was not only useless, but indeed further stimulated me to the execution of
my project. “ Now listen to me for a short time only,” continued Roos-
tum Khan. I nodded my head in acquiescence, and stubborn reso-
lution. “ How do you think it possible to effect what you propose, when
a thousand obstacles stare you in the face ? You well know, that should
you overcome these, and succeed in seeing your fair one, you could never
carry her away, even were she willing to come; while, on the other hand,
if you are discovered, you have but little chance of escaping with your life.
If, indeed, the indignant relatives do not instantly make you pay the for-
feit of your life, some equally sure, though perhaps more remote means,
will be used to ensure a similar end.” I well knew the truth which was
spoken to me, but I had now fully made up my mind to run every risk in
the prosecution of my design, and I expressed myself to this effect to Roos-
tum Khan. “ Well,” said he, in reply, “ I will have nothing to do with
a business of this sort. As for you, you seem as if an evil eye had fallen
on you, chushm bud door—may all such eyes be averted from us ! You
appear bent on your own destruction. You are no sooner out of one scrape
than you are into another, worse than the first. lam your sincere friend,
Kurmoo, and wish you well. Were the present a case of fighting, in
which my hand or club could assist you, I would not hesitate; but the
case of a woman, and one of family too, is far too difficult to engage in.
I therefore decline aiding or accompanying you in any of your fool-hardy
expeditions. Nevertheless, as long as you may wish to find shelter under
this roof, you will find a hearty welcome ; and here, come what may, you
shall have all the protection which it is in my power to afford.” I thanked
my friend for his proffered hospitality, nor could I much blame him for
having declined a more active part in my love affair. The use and pro-
tection of his bungalow was a great thing; and as for the rest, ‘I must
trust to my own ingenuity, strength, and activity.
When once settled in my new abode, my first effort was to reconnoitre
as closely as possible the field of action about to be; and to that end I set


out about twilight, having first changed the form of my pugree or turban,
and made other small alterations in'my dress, so as to prevent any one re-
cognising me except on a minute inspection, which I was resolved not to
permit. The tents, towards which I had seen the bullock-hackeries and
their fair charges in progress, were, as I have said, pitched close under the
hills at the side of the fair, opposite to where my residence was, and to-
wards them I slowly walked as if refreshing myself with the cool evening
air. As I approached towards the opposite end of the inhabited part of
the fair, I perceived that Ibraheem Ally had caused his tents to he so placed
as to be completely isolated from the neighbouring habitations of canvass,
mud, or whatever material the respective owners might boast of. This
manifestly increased the difficulty of any attempt at going near the tents,
since all approach thereto could be instantly detected, and thus no one,
whose business was not known, would be allowed to prowl or wander
about the precincts. I noticed at the same time that guards and servants
of all descriptions had accompanied Ibraheem, for the number of cooking
fires which were burning indicated this. The tents which contained the
family were surrounded by an external wall of canvass, in which there
was but one doorway or opening looking towards the fair, while the back
extended towards a sterile track of jungle bush or underwood. Thus
much I perceived at a distance, and nearer I dared not go for fear of ex-
citing attention and causing suspicion. The result of my examination
was not at all satisfactory to me, for it led me to apprehend a greater
degree of difficulty than I had anticipated. Had these tents been pitched
in a place of ordinary intercourse of mankind one with another, I might
have mingled with others and caused no surprise; as it was, it could not
be so. Such were my thoughts as I wandered back to my friend's house,
where I laid myself down, not to sleep, but to meditate on what was the
next step to be taken. Here again difficulties innumerable offered them-
selves to each successive plan which occrirred. I first thought that I
might open a communication with Zebun by means of one of the female
attendants; but that was to put myself in the power of others ; and how,
besides, could I find means to interest any of them in my favour without
a personal interview, which could scarcely fail to betray me. Had I been
in my own home, or with my own party, I could perhaps have induced
one of our domestics to feel the way with those of Ibraheem ; but here I
was interdicted from communication with my own family, and supposed
to be absent from the place altogether. Should I try at once, if such a
scheme were possible, to scale the frail walls of the inclosure, and attempt
an interview ? No, this would not do. Were I to succeed in accom-
plishing this, the chances were that I should come across some other person
than Zebun herself, and discovery would be inevitable. Were my good
stars still to favour me, and were I in such a case to meet with her instead
of another, would not the surprize be too great for her, —and could she re-
frain from a tell-tale shriek? No—if a personal interview was to take
place between us, (and to effect this I had vowed mentally to stir heaven
and earth) she must be first made aware of and prepared for it. After
much tumultuous and conflicting thought, an idea of the brightest de-
scription flashed through my brain. lat once saw the plan of operations
which was most likely to succeed, and resolved on its adoption. There
could be no doubt that success would crown rny efforts ; my mind became


calm; and waiting for morning alone to commence the execution of my
plans, I fell asleep and dreamed of her I loved.
Morning saw me, despite of my previous vigils, an early riser; for I
had too much at heart to give way to unnecessary indulgence. In the
course of my residence at the fair, I had observed an old man of singular
appearance, who possessed a monkey, whose singular feats of activity and
intelligence collected large crowds of admiring auditors. The monkey
appeared nothing more than monkeys usually are ; yet, often as I had
viewed his tricks, I could not help thinking that he was endowed with
more than animal instinct; but I soon threw aside the absurd idea, at the
same time remarking in my own mind, that the beast was next to a
miracle. It occurred to me that an animal which possessed such powers
of attraction for the common herd of those who frequented fairs, might
perhaps excite some small interest in the minds of the graver and more
respectable part of the community, who are sometimes wont, as well as
their fellow-mortals, to relax their pretensions and rigid austerity of de-
meanour. At all events, were I to assume, as I projected doing, the dis-
guise of a monkey-leader, if I could not succeed to the full extent of my
desires in obtaining access to the interior of Ibraheem’s harem, I might at
least have a good opportunity of examining the place without suspicion,
and seeing how the land lay. I sought the owner of the half-reasoning
animal, and he was pointed out to me snoring under a large tree, sleeping
off the effects of the usual evening debauch, with which people of his class
usually wind up tho day. I awoke him, and requested his presence at a
small party, which were, as I told him, assembled at a neighbouring cot-
tage. The old fellow rubbed his eyes, grumbled at being awoke thus early,
and marvelled what sort of a party that must be which commenced their
revels thus early. A piece of silver soon silenced all his grumbles, if they
did not overcome his doubts ; he gave his sleeping travelling companion’s
chain a pull, which made him jump up nimbly, and packing up his clothes
and apparatus, followed me.
As soon as I arrived at my domicile, I told the monkey-leader that I
wanted at present no exhibition of his animal’s wondrous feats, but that I
had entered into a frolic with some of my companions, in which I was to
assume the character that he himself bore, to which end it was necessary
that he should not only lend me the monkey, but teach me how to manage
him. The request excited surprise ; and I am no judge of men’s counte-
nances, if I did not trace in his a lurking doubt of the truth of my story.
Whatever might be the case, he did not express his doubt, but acting on
his own impression, that some very singular cause had produced so extra-
ordinary a demand, he stated his acquiescence in my request, but asked
an enormous sum as the price of his compliance. I endeavoured in vain
to reduce the demand to something reasonable—my remonstrances were
unavailing. Forced to pay it or to forego my plan of operations, I had
little option, and I gave the money. After the bargain was concluded, all
the heat and animosity of argument ceased ; the old man set readily and
heartily to work to perform his part of the contract.- He first sat down,
placing me by his side. He then shewed me all the tricks which the
monkey performed, and the words of command which preceded their per-
formance ; words which the animal comprehended as well as a human
being. The cause of this symptom of assimilation to humanity was mani-


fest in tlie shape of a large stick, which my preceptor in the art of mon-
key-leading held in his right hand, and which the poor beast regarded with
a significant eye. The scene ended by the old man rewarding the monkey
with a dish of rice and other things, which he devoured with avidity.
It was now time to try my hand at this new occupation, and I hope I
shall escape the charge of a want of modesty, when I say that I succeeded
admirably. At first the monkey seemed to eye me suspiciously, and felt
inclined to resist one whose authority he did not recognise as legitimate;
but the case was soon altered, when his master delivered to me the stick
above-mentioned, and directed me to apply it once or twice. The allegi-
ance and the stick seemed to bear a close affinity, and went together hand
in hand. Satisfied with my proficiency and my capability as to performance,
I rested from my labours. But all was not yet accomplished ; concealment
was necessary, and I must get an efficient disguise. I mentioned the subject
to the monkey-leader. He replied, “ You need not go much further than me
for that. No; trust old Mean Jaun for that. Why, in the twinkling
of an eye I will so transform your person, that the mother who bore you
would not know you again. It is true, that this is not strictly within the
articles of our agreement, and I ought, rightly speaking, to have some-
thing more for this; but, to say the truth, as you have already paid
me more than very well for what I have already done for you, and I am
not quite so poor either, as my appearance would lead you to suppose, I
do not care if I do lend you a helping hand.”
Here the old gentleman began to get garrulous, and as I could not
possibly commence my operations before the evening, I did not think I
could employ my time better than in listening to him if he was inclined to
talk. “ Besides that,” continued he, “ I have a sort of inherent love of
fun and adventure; and I cannot help thinking that you have something
of that sort in view, only I say nothing. I have been witness to much of
that in my time. What! have you never heard of the famous Bara 1
Roopa Mean Jaun ? I am he. In my day, I have introduced myself
into every place in Hindoostan, where to be found was death, and yet
have I never been discovered. In war, I have served as a spy botli to the
Hindoostany and to the Feringhee; I have passed, unknown, through the
army of both parties, but I stuck at last to the Feringhees, for they got
the upper hand, and they give the best pay. I have been in the muhul 2
of the Emperor of Delhi, and I have served as a mehter 3 in the chamber
of the hurra beebee 4 in Calcutta; and I have seen such sights in my day,
ha! ha! ha! ” here he laid himself back, and fairly laughed until tears
came from his eyes at the thoughts of his past feats. “Oh ! ” continued
he, after a short pause, “ I could tell you such things that I have done !
Why I can be anything in twenty minutes, if you give me but a few
clothes, and a little false hair. Brahman, or Moollah, Shaik, Synd, Mogul,
‘ Bara Roopa. Spy ; one skilled in making and wearing disguises.
2 Muhul. Female apartments.
3 Mehter. Sweeper ; his office is to clean out rooms, and carry away all filth from
the bed-rooms of gentlemen, and sometimes of ladies too, be it said with regret. Others,
more properly fastidious, permit the females of the class only (called mehteranees) to do
these offices.
4 Burra beebee. The great lady, par excellence ; signifying the greatest lady in the
town or station, as the case may be. Thus, the burra beebee of Calcutta will be the
lady of the Govei'nor-General for the time being. This assertion of Meun Jaun’s is
tobe taken, we trust, for a mere boast.


Pytlian, all is one to me. Why, if you like it, I can make a monkey 5 of
myself; let me sit down in Bengal, under a large Banian tree, and not a
soul will know the difference.—Ah ! I have played some tricks that way
too, only I must not tell about them. But stay one moment; I will tell you
what I did last year, and it will make you laugh a little; only don’t you
say a word about it. W ell, you see, I was last year in the district of
Paugulpoor; I was not then, as I am now, wandering about with a
monkey, which is my present whim; I was then a travelling Brahmin,
commonly called a theekadar, 6 professing to inoculate for the small-pox,
and curing several other diseases; for, to say the truth, I profess a little of
medicine, and work many wonderful cures. Well, I sojourned in the
house of a Cayt,? who received the benefit of my services, and then refused
to pay me for them. When I demanded my fees he put me off with
abuse, and threatened to dishonour me with a shoe. B Aha! thought I,
what’s in the wind now? ‘ I will complain to the court of the Judge
Saheb,’ said I. ‘ Go,’ said he, ‘ and try what you can do there ; I have
a brother who is high in office, he is the roobakaree novees 9 of the court,
and he will take care that you get justice. Come back again from court,
and then I’ll give you some more shoes on your head.’ So saying, he ran at
me with a slipper, which he had picked up from the floor. The vagabond !
I could have stabbed him to the heart, for I have always my little friend
in need ” —here he showed a small, but highly-polished, and sharpened
steel cottar 10 —'“ or have felled him to the ground; but I knew a trick
that was worth two of that, and so I refrained. Well, you see, the magis-
trates’ court was, luckily for me, within one day’s journey instead of three,
as it often is, and which, therefore, prevents those really aggrieved from
bringing forward their complaints; and there I went. What do you think
I did ? ° I went to a house belonging to one of our fraternity, and there
prepared what I wanted. I killed a kid, and from the intestines made
something resembling a human hand, which I saturated with blood, and
put into a thalee 11 half filled with the same. I then made another piece
resembling the stump of an arm, which had been severed at the wrist; an
appearance which the raw flesh of the kid gave admirably. I doubled
back my left arm, covered it with bandages, and appended by the same
to the elbow the false stump of kid’s flesh. I had practised these arts before,
and few could have told, without a very near examination, that my hand
had not been in reality severed from my wrist.
“ I went along the streets of the town with my arm covered, and a
little boy carried the thalee, containing the false hand, over which a cloth
5 Yhis is scarcely exaggeration. The excellence of these men s imitations is beyond
all belief, and require ocular demonstration to be credited.
6 Theekadar. The Brahmins of this profession perambulate the country periodically,
propagating disease instead of alleviating it by vaccination. The latter process has as
yet obtained but little among the natives of India, and the mortality from small-pox in
a hot climate, and in sorry huts and dirty houses, is immense. A wide field for improve-
ment remains open here, and it has not been seized on as it ought to have been.
7 Cayt, or cayst. The writer caste, with whom the public offices are replete.
8 Shoe. A rap on the head with a slipper is considered as the depth of degradation
and insult by any one having the slightest pretence to respectability.
9 Roobakaree novees. Writer of final proceedings, whose business it is to draw up
in form and engross the decree or order of court.
10 A species of dagger, worn in the waist, and easily concealed in the folds of the
cloth.
11 Thalee. A broad but shallow brass bason.


was spread. I watched my time carefully, and waited until the evening
when the business of the magistrates’ office was just about to be closed.
I well knew that the functionary would then be very tired, and was less
likely to make a minute investigation into my story than earlier in the
day; for when a man has to busy himself in official matters from the
rising of the sun to the going down of the same, his acuteness must be
considerably impaired, and his patience diminished, towards the approach
of the latter period. About this time it was, then, that I entered the
office; the magistrate had just signed the last papers, his books were
packed up, and he was giving a final order to one of his surrounding
officers, when my cries burst upon his ears— ‘ Dwye, dwye saheb, dwye
buna saheb, dwye Company Angrez Behadar, justice, justice, Sir!
justice, great Sir ! justice, my Lord English Company.’ He turned round,
half petulantly, to see what new claimant for his attention had so inoppor-
tunely arrived, when his eye fell on my stump and severed hand, from
which the cloth had been purposely withdrawn. He shuddered at the
sight, and sat down again in the chair from which he had lately risen.
‘ This,’ said he, ‘is a very bad case, how did this happen ? ’ I briefly told
a story which did not contain a word of truth, but which bore an appear-
ance too plausible to be easily discovered. An order was given to take a
brief deposition, on oath, as to the facts, and the name and abode of the
accused. This was done. The roobakaree novees, who was standing by
with a bundle of papers in his hand, started when he heard his brother’s
name mentioned by me as the aggressor, and from that moment com-
menced taking an interest in a business in which it was otherwise no part
of his office to interfere. After the deposition had been made out and
read over, the magistrate directed a warrant to be forthwith issued for the
apprehension of the offender. While the warrant was being drawn up,
and before it was signed, I saw the roobakaree novees very busy in speak-
ing to the other court officers, as if begging them to address the magistrate
on some subject, to which, however, they turned a deaf ear. Finding no
one to back him in behalf of his relation, he put up his hands in a respect-
ful attitude towards the magistrate, and in the softest tone imaginable
gently insinuated a supposition, that in such a case bail might be taken
for the prisoner’s appearance. The magistrate would not, however, hear
of such a thing, in a case so desperate, and calling for the warrant, not
only signed it, but dispatched it for execution by a special messenger ;
thus frustrating all hopes of modification or evasion of his orders. In the
mean time, the worthy magistrate desired that I should be taken to the
doctor of the station, to have my terrible wound dressed, and a report of
the injuries to be made, as was customary. This order, however kind and
considerate, was by no means relished by me, as, had it been fulfilled, my
fraud would have been detected, and I should have been severely punished.
I hit, however, upon an expedient, which freed me from the peril which
threatened me. I was going along in charge of a chupprassy, l2 I urgently
represented to him my painful case, as well as the lateness of the hour, and
begged him, with promises to call at his house the next morning, and
appear at the doctor’s house before office opened, to let me go for the night
to the place where I lodged. To this he at last assented, and I got free.
After such a trick as this, Paugulpoor was no place of abode for me. I
12 A police officer.


speedily flew to my friend’s house, burnt and destroyed all traces of my
fraud, and travelled by long journeys to another district. I heard after-
wards, however, how my plan had operated, and bitterly did the unfor-
tunate cayt rue the day when he made me his foe. As soon as the
warrant reached the house of the police daroga, the cayt was dragged from
his house without ceremony, and hurried to the town of Paugulpoor.
Here, as the taking of all bail had been prohibited, he was lodged in the jail,
where he remained nearly ten days, before the multiplicity of business pend-
ing before the magistrate permitted him to take up the case. When the
case was brought before the court, a proclamation was made for the plain-
tiff, but no one came forward. All inquiry and search were equally futile.
It was in vain that the unhappy defendant asserted his innocence—the
magistrate had seen the wound, it had been too severe, as it seemed, to be
the cause of a false accusation, and he did not doubt, in his own mind, the
guilt of the accused. As, however, there was neither plaintiff nor evi-
dence, the officer of justice was reduced to a nonplus ; he had no course
but that of releasing the defendant on bail, which he did ; at the same time
he expressed his decided conviction, that the charge had been hushed up
by the payment of a large sum of money, and added, that he feared the
intervention of some people about his person in the affair. At hearing
this, the ill-starred roobakaree novees became greatly terrified, but said
nothing; and at last the matter passed over. Well, there is a tale for you
now; and what do you think of that ? Do not you think I served him
right ? ”
Here the old fellow again chuckled heartily at the recollection of his
frolic. With this and many other wonderful stories did he amuse me,
until it began to draw on towards evening, when I was to sally forth on
my adventure. He then set to work to metamorphose my appearance, so
that it would be impossible for any one to know me. I was compelled
to doff' my suit of ordinary clothes, which were by far too respectable for
the disguise which I was about to assume; their place was supplied by a
pair of very dirty trowsers, bound round my waist with a leathern band.
A cotton quilted jerkin replaced that of fine linen, and my head was
adorned with a scull-cap, around which was a border of faded tinsel. A
more disreputable set of habiliments could not well be found. My face
was also destined to undergo a change. The old man washed it with a
composition, which changed its hue from a very light to a darkish brown;
but he assured me that the application of water would remove the stain
altogether. He then proceeded to place on my upper lip and eyelids a
thick layer of gum, which served as a ground wherein to plant a crop of
white hair, so as to disguise the natural colour of that which grew there.
A false white beard and whiskers completed the transformation ; and then,
indeed, it was, as he had said, of such a nature, that the mother who bore
me would not have known her son. I arranged with my instructor, the
owner of the monkey, to deliver him his animal after dusk under the
tree where I had seen him in the morning, and he departed.
The time which I had selected for my enterprise was towards the
cool of the evening, when the descending sun permits the rich and wealthy
classes to come out of their tents and enjoy themselves, some in a stroll,
and others in sitting before their abodes under ample awnings termed sha
meana. I quitted my friend’s house with something of that trepidation
which the assumption of a new character, and a false one too, could not


fail to create within me. As 1 proceeded onwards, however, my fears of
success, greatly, decreased, for I plainly perceived, that no one of the thou-
sands by whom I was surrounded were in the slightest degree aware of
my real character, or doubted that I was a veritable monkey-leader. It
was my office to have proclaimed in loud tones the virtues and quali-
fications of the inimitable animal whose skill I professed to exhibit, but
as I had other game in hand, I did not do so in the present instance. I
really cannot say what was the cause of the fact, but it was so, that
a real monkey-mania seemed to rage through the fair. I can only explain
it, by supposing, that the fame of this beast when in other hands, had gone
abroad, and raised the expectation that all similar beasts (for they never
suspected my companion to be the identical animal which had before
amused them,) were equally clever and interesting. Whatever might be
the cause, I found as I proceeded up the fair, that I was followed by a
crowd all anxious to see what was to be seen, and calling on me to exhibit.
It was comical enough truly; but I durst not disobey, for I began to hear
a few curses, and some muttered abuse at my impudence in not doing
what I was bid. To delay longer was to risk detection, for rough hand-
ling would have disordered my disguise. I therefore called on the people
to make a ring, and sat down in the middle, when I made the monkey go
through all his tricks, much to their satisfaction. At the conclusion, when
the animal, as was his wont, went round the circle to beg for fees, holding-
in bis paws a small tin cup, the harvest was by no means inconsiderable.
Many times during the performance I could with difficulty refrain from
laughter, and the more especially, when I overheard an animated discussion
between two of the bystanders, as to the merits of my monkey, and that
which had been exhibited the day previously, and which had created such
a wide-spread sensation ; nor was the task less arduous, when an old and
respected servant of my father, who had lived in the house ever since my
childhood, tapped me on my shoulder and handed me two pice as a
reward of my exertions, or rather those of my four-footed companion. I
was much tempted to thank him by name, but the joke was rather too
hazardous, and I suppressed the desire. At last the crowd broke up, and
left me at liberty to proceed to my destination, the tents of Ibraheem Ally.
I walked along the fair, and, encouraged by the success of what had
just passed, at last reached the place where my real attempt was to be
made. Fate was again propitious. I have before described the position
of Ibraheem’s tents, and need only say that my joy was great when
I saw him and three friends sitting under the shameana, inhaling the
fragrant smoke of their hookahs. Two domestics with folded arms were
standing respectfully at a distance, for the purpose of anticipating or
answering their wants, while several others round about and in the tents
pursued their several avocations. As I emerged from the crowd and the
body of the fair, I saw that one of Ibraheem’s companions was a Moollah
or doctor of laws and religion, which with us are one and the same study ;
from which one consequence might as naturally be expected as desired,
i. e. that the learned in the first should be the most strict adherents to the
other; a fact of great unfrequency. The presence of so holy a man was
partially against me, for these gentry, however much they enjoy them-
selves within the precincts of their own houses, maintain a severe and reli-
gious appearance elsewhere. Nevertheless, when I observed that the
venerable doctor did not refuse to partake of the enjoyment of the pipe,
Oriental Herald.— Vol. 4.—No. XIX. e


Ino longer despaired of mollifying the rigidity of his muscles. No sooner
had I approached somewhat near to the tent and began to play on my
tabor and pipe, than one of the servants who were in attendance hallooed
out in a loud voice, “ Hut jao kinare—he off, away with you,” and wav-
ing their hands over their heads, intimated the same by signs not to be
mistaken. This, however, had no effect on me : I still proceeded nearer
the spot where Ibraheem and his friends were sitting. At this presump-
tion, both the attendants rose for the purpose of intercepting me, and
compelling my retirement by force. I, however, anticipated their move-
ment by a sudden rush in advance, which brought me opposite the party
and within a few feet of the sha meana.
I knew Ibraheem Ally, though not a bigot, to be a syud of high blood,
and also a Soonnee 13 , who held in derision the profane observances of the
Sheeas, and who, while he relieved every distressed member of his religion,
whatever might be his sect or class, would willingly have burnt or de-
stroyed every image offered during the Mohurrum, 14 at the shrine of Shah
Arzan. 15 On this ground, then, I knew I was pretty safe, and with this
cue I addressed him before his servant had time to lay hands on me; nor
let me omit, that the monkey, intuitively guessing that his feats were here
required, made a profound, but ludicrous reverence. “Oh Svud of illus-
trious birth, and descended from the blessed prophet, Ullahu—Salam ! (here
the monkey, on hearing this sacred name, bowed his head, as he had been
taught) on whom be peace, vouchsafe to turn a gracious eye on this poor
slave of humble birth, who, with this faithful companion, has travelled a
long way to have the honour of exhibiting before your worship. He has
heard in a far country, the fame of the liberality of Syud Ibraheem Ally,
Khoodawund-a-neamut, the lord and dispenser of benevolence, and he
hopes to partake of the sunshine of his favour.” This was not a bad hit;
it, however, elicited no mark of approval from the Syud, who perhaps
did not care to shew that he actually did feel pleasure at the flattery thus
administered to him in no moderate dose. If there was no approval, the
want of the decided negative was a sufficient encouragement. The servants,
too, who had in their hearts no manner of objection to see the fun, and had
acted only because they thought that their master would sanction them,
finding their proceedings not encouraged, refrained from further mo-
lestation.
I now drew forth a little plate of clay, and laid it on the ground. {< Now,
most excellent Sir,’ said I, “ your slave will shew you something - extra-
ordinary. Heaven forbid that we Mussulmans should ever degenerate into
infidelity. Only look here at a monkey, who can shew a Sheea his duty,
and can set all Sheeas a good example after their ridiculous fashion.—Down,
my lad, down, and let us see how the Sheeas do at Kerbela and Nujf
13 Soonnee. It is no place here to touch on the religious principles of the Mussul-
mans, or the various sects into which they are divided. The Sheeas and Soonnees,
nearly resembling the Papists and Protestants, hate each other with an irreconcileable
enmity, and their families rarely, if ever, intermarry.
14 The anniversary of the death of Hassan and Hossein are celebrated with great
pomp and ceremony during this month, by the Mussulmans of the Sheea sect.
15 Shah Arzan, a celebrated saint, whose tomb and mosque at Patna are held in great
veneration. Near this is the place where all the Tazees, or ornamental representa-
tions of sorrow, which are both beautiful and numerous, are deposited on the last day,
or the Ustra. J


Ushruf,” 16 The monkey obeyed, and gravely sitting himself on the ground,
knocked his forehead several successive times on the plate. I watched the
effect. Ibraheem and his friends smiled, and the grave Moollah nodded
his head, as if in approbation, but he said nothing. I was progressing in
favour, though slowly. “ Now then,” I cried, “we shall see what my
little friend can do. He is capable of doing any thing. I think, if I was
to set him about it, he would sing as well as Tansein l7 himself, or even
Bijoo Bawara; he could dance as well as Chooya lB or Bunnoo at Azeem-
abad, but we will leave that alone now. Come, Sir, you have shewn us how
those fellows the Sheeas (here I spit on the ground as if in detestation of
them, which made me rise ten degrees in the estimation of the Moollah) make
fools of themselves and commit idolatry; now let us see you; shew us how all
true believers say their prayers.” I here threw the beast a small set of
beads, which he took within his paws, and commenced counting with a
ludicrous expression of face. The servants had by this time assembled
round me to witness the scene, and, on beholding the feat, they could not
contain their laughter. Ibraheem and his guests laughed too, except the
Moollah, who now thought it necessary to look very grave. He could not,
I presume, be supposed capable of looking on such a sight, without mak-
ing some observation; and it is possible, that had he not been previously
well assured of my orthodoxy, by my abuse of the Sheeas, he would have
ordered me away at once, and perhaps with some mark of his displeasure.
He took a long pull at his hookah, from which issued a gurgling noise, as if
it never would have ended, and emitted from his mouth an almost inter-
minable line of smoke ; after which came his words in a species of nasal
drawl. “ This thing certainly savours of something of a miracle, and also
of impiety. It looks like a moojusa, a miracle, that a beast like this
should handle the tusbee (the beads) like a living and true believer; but
still, as he is but a beast, and cannot really believe, I cannot but think that
the act resembles a mockery of the truth.” He forgot that he did not ob-
ject to this mockery, when it was applied to the Sheeas, and not to the
Soonnees, even supposing that the imitation was meant for mockery. I
could not, however, in the present case, afford to lose ground, and so I
thus addressed him.
“ If this reverend and most sanctified light of Islam, this second Avicenna,
the Uflatoon, the Plato of the times, will but condescend to consider that
few persons only are so learned in the blessed book, the Koran shurelf,
and all its commentaries, as to comprehend them fully in their true sense,
he will perceive that the majority of mankind but do as they are bid by
others wiser than themselves. In this respect then my poor beast but
follows the example of others as to outward observances; and were, indeed,
the picture reversed, and others were to follow his example, it would be
16 Kerbela and Nujf Ushruf. Places to which the Sheeas journey on pilgrimage,
and where they pray to the deceased. At the former place, Hassan is buried. The
pilgrims consider the earth of these places as very precious, and bring plates and beads
made thereof to their homes, and esteem them much. The Sheeas, in performing their
worship, bow the head, and touch these plates with their foreheads.
17 Tansein and Bijoo Bawara were celebrated singers in days of yore, and are almost
worshipped by those of modern days, who follow the same profession. To swear by
the first, is considered an oath, as sacred as that taken on the sacred book, or the
Ganges water.
18 Well known dancers, whose several prices for performance are enumerated in the
well-known couplet at Patna, “ Chooya ke puchees, Mehrtab ki bees our pundra
Bunnoo.”


well, for this creature runs over his beads and makes his genuflections fifty
instead of five times per day, when I can get people to pay me for it.”
This speech upset the gravity of the whole party; they laughed with
one accord, and the Moollah joined likewise. In respect to him, I cannot
help observing that my last words were not one whit less culpable, if
aught of blame at all attached to them, than the acts which the monkey
had done; but the fact was, that the holy man was well pleased with the
compliments which I had bestowed on him, and did not feel at all in-
clined to interfere further in my matters, since he had vindicated his own
consequence by fulminating an opinion. It was from an unexpected
quarter that a rebuke came—from Ibraheem himself. He observed to
one of his friends in a mild tone, and gently shaking his head, “It
would not be quite right to deprive a poor fellow like this of his livelihood,
by prohibiting his shewing off” such tricks as these, which may be very
innocent for any thing I know to the contrary ; but I cannot help thinking
that, considering to whom they relate, and to what they refer, such things
are by far better left alone.” Here he muttered to himself some words
from the Koran, which did not reach my ear distinctly ; but which I knew
to be such, from the guttural intonation of the Arabic. He then turned
to me, and with an encouraging voice said, “ Well, let this rest for the
present. I dare to say, that your animal has many more tricks than what
you have shewn us, let us see some a little more gay. If he can fight as
well as he can pray, he must be a rare fellow.” 1 took the hint, and im-
mediately commenced playing off the monkey to the best advantage, and
put him through all his best tricks. He danced on the tight rope with
surpassing agility, took up his sword and shield, fought, died, and came to
life again with a drollery quite inimitable. The gentlemen laughed until
tears came in their eyes, and the Moollah, having now nothing connected
with law or religion on which to comment, did the same.
All this while I regretted to perceive, that although I acted the part of
a monkey-leader with admirable tact, yet as far as the object for which I
had so transformed myself, I had not gained one single point. I had, it is
true, seen the tents and establishments of Ibraheem Ally much closer than
I had before viewed them; but what was that to me who felt concerned
only for what was inside. I had hoped that my skill and my mon-
key’s fame might perhaps have induced the gentlemen to order me inside
the tent to amuse the ladies, but no symptom of any such intention was
exhibited. What was to be done ? My stock of tricks was already quite
exhausted, and the spectators began to yawn, so that I saw r the hour of
withdrawing fast approaching. In this total absence of all prospect of
success, I consoled myself in the hope, that perhaps after I had retired
from the presence of the masters, the servants might be inclined to have a
private exhibition, which I was quite prepared to give them for nothing
at all. Whether all this would have happened or no, and whether I
should have succeeded in seeing my beloved, is not for me to say, since its
possibility never occurred. When all seemed hopeless, I received aid from
a quarter most unexpected and unprecedented, and by these means ac-
complished that which I so earnestly desired. The narrative, however,
of my penetration into the mahal of Ibraheem must be reserved for here-
after.
(To he continued .)


NARRATIVE OF A DETENTION AT RANGOON.
On the 3rd of September, 1832, the ship “ Carnatic,” of Calcutta, owned
by Messrs. Cruttenden and Co. of that place, and fully loaded with a cargo
of rice, dropped down the river Hooghly, in prosecution of her voyage to
China, where provisions were at that time in demand, in consequence of
the failure of the crops. The vessel quitted the pilot on the 1 Oth October
at the outer floating light, and proceeded to sea; but the S.W. Monsoon
blowing strongly up the Bay, and much had weather having been experi-
enced at the entrance to the Straits of Malacca, together with calms and
light winds at various parts of the route, she did not reach Sincapore until
the 15th of October. At this port the ship was detained for twelve days,
taking in a new bowsprit, the old one having been sprung in a gale on the
3rd of October. At the end of that time, the necessary repairs having
been effected, every thing was in readiness for sea, when, on the evening
preceding that which had been appointed’ for departure, the information
was communicated to us, that the entire lading had been purchased by the
Resident, to be delivered at the settlement of Malacca, where rice was also
in requisition, for the use of the native force stationed there. We ac-
cordingly sailed for the latter place, where we arrived on the 31st, with-
out any other accident than that of one of the lascars having both his
legs broken, by the snapping of the messenger, while heaving at the capstan
to disengage the anchor from the fast hold it had taken of the ground, when
bringing to the previous night off the Water Islands.
On making the roads, the wounded man, whose fractured limbs had been
set with bamboo splints in the best manner that our judgment suggested,
there being no medical person on board, was sent to the hospital, where
we found him a few days afterwards, in a fair way towards recovery.
What became of the unfortunate sufferer is not known, as he was left be-
hind at Malacca, the captain having provided for his comforts; but from
the remarkable facility with which the natives of India recover from the
effects of wounds, which would he fatal to Europeans, there is little doubt
that his life was preserved, although rendered a cripple for the rest of his
days.
The “ Carnatic” having delivered her cargo, and taken in a sufficient quan-
tity of ballast to steady her, the commander cast about for some means of
profitably employing the vessel, now that the original intention of going on
to China was abandoned. At this time there was a body of troops at Ma-
lacca supernumerary to the established strength of the settlement, who had
been employed on a campaign against one of the petty chiefs in the inte-
rior, but the refractory personage having been brought to his bearings,
the services of the additional force were no longer needed, and they were
waiting a favourable opportunity of transport to Madras, from which pre-
sidency the regiments on duty in the Straits are usually drafted. While
remaining at this place, we had an opportunity of examining many objects
of interest, among which are the Company’s gardens, in a state of compa-
rative neglect, and the ancient Catholic church on the fine green hill to the
south side of the town, roofless, but otherwise not much dilapidated, being
built of rough stone, like some of the old Saxon edifices in England. It


will be recollected, that at an early period of the history of modem India,
Malacca constituted one of the chief seats of the Portuguese power in the
East, and subsequently of the Dutch, who, in their turn, made way for its
present possessors; illustrative of which fact, the pavement of the church
in question is principally composed of tomb-stones, containing Latin in-
scriptions, in excellent preservation, on bishops and other high function-
aries, who flourished two hundred years ago, at a period when the British
name was scarcely known in that quarter. Side by side with the Catholic
hierarchy, repose also a number, as the epitaphs inform us, of “ right well
born” Dutch burghers, who doubtless, in their time, were men of note, but
whose names have, for generations, been engulphed in the oblivion of the
days that were. The view from the flag-staff, which is only a few yards
from the church abovementioned, is one of the most magnificent that can be
imagined. In the foreground is the ever placid expanse of the Straits, the
sea seldom breaking in more than a ripple on the shingly beach, with the
light skiffs of the fishermen in the distance, and a passing sail making her
number in the offing, bound up or down, as the case may be; beneath, to
the right, lies the little compact town, with its small but well-built houses,
covered with red tiles, and close together, as in Europe; while passing
over the straggling lines of dtap , or thatched huts, which comprise the
suburbs, and many a mile of verdant rice fields, the vision is bounded by
the distant wooded mountains of Malaga, among which Mount Ophir
towers pre-eminent.
It being understood that tonnage was needed for the conveyance of the
Madras force, the “ Carnatic” was tendered for the purpose, but in conse-
quence of the number of men and officers to be accommodated considerably
exceeding the capacity of a single ship, it was considered more advisable
to wait till a sufficient number of transports were available, when the
whole of the details could be shipped together, which was afterwards done.
The vessel was therefore obliged to leave Malacca in ballast, after taking
on board as passenger an infantry officer, with his horses and followers,
who were to be landed at Penang, which island was made on the 18th of
November. Here four days were consumed in fruitless endeavours to
freight the ship ; at the end of which time, the captain resolved on pro-
ceeding to Rangoon, there to fill up, with teak timber, for the Calcutta
market. The North East monsoon had by this time set in, which ren-
dered the passage up the coast very tedious, so that it was the 9th of
December, before the ship cast anchor before the town of Rangoon, which
is about a good day’s sail up one of the main branches of the Irra-
waddy river. A British merchant settled at this place, having agreed to
freight the vessel with a full lading of teak, no time was lost in taking it
on board, and in three days more every thing would have been ready for
sea, when a circumstance occurred which quite altered the arrangements
which had been made, and threatened to involve all parties in serious
trouble, if not loss of property and liberty.
It must be premised, that just at this period, the last instalment of the
tribute money which had been exacted from the Burmese in part-compen-
sation for the expenses incurred during the last war in that country, had
become due, and was only waiting the arrival of a steamer from Calcutta,
to be conveyed to its destination. Relieved from this heavy and galling
impost, which had been the cause of much oppression on the people, both
the latter and their rulers began to relapse into their former habit of show-


ing their hatred of the English by every device short of open violence, being
restrained from the latter by the presence of the British agent, Captain
R , and his escort, consisting of a subaltern’s guard of native infantry
from Bengal. These, however, it was known, were on the point of being-
withdrawn, the maintenance of a resident being considered unnecessary as
soon as the final dividend had been realized. Affairs were in this condi-
tion, when one day, about noon, two large boats filled with men drew up
alongside of the Carnatic, which was moored in mid-stream off the town.
The crew of the vessel consisted of about sixty men, chiefly Bengalees,
who ran forward and concealed themselves, as soon as it became apparent
that something unusual was in contemplation; but the first officer, the
captain, being on shore, aided by the boatswain, who was a Lisbon
Portuguese, and some Manilla sea-cunnies, or quarter-masters, turned out
the marine guard, six in number, armed with cutlasses, with orders to let
no one come on board, the ports having been let down, and the accommo-
dation ropes drawn in over the gangways. A little reflection soon showed
the impolicy of offering any resistance, and a parley having been entered
into, the Burmese officer explained that he had instructions from the Vice-
roy to seize the vessel, in consequence of some contraband proceedings,
which it was alleged had taken place; and that if he met with any opposi-
tion, those on board must answer for the consequences. This conversation
was carried on by means of an interpreter, and an assurance having been
given, that no proceedings should be taken until the captain, who was
momentarily expected, returned from the shore; two or three officials, with
twenty or thirty men unarmed, were allowed to come on deck, and the
ship was virtually taken possession of.
The Burmese are naturally an inquisitive race, an instance of which
propensity was exhibited on this occasion. Under the quarter-deck ladder,
leading to the poop, was a filtering machine of large dimensions, and the
steward of the vessel having occasion to draw a glass of water from this
source, the curiosity of the intruders was excited, by observing the facility
with which this was effected by the mere turning of a cock. As the people
who had followed in the train of the Burmese authorities almost filled the
waist of the ship, the guard had been removed to the poop, with injunc-
tions to forbid any one from coming up ; and also to be careful that
nothing was injured or displaced below. The men had been sepoys in the
Company’s service, who had been disbanded, in consequence of the reduc-
tions which took place in the strength of the army a few years ago, and
the fidelity with which these men fulfil the directions of their superiors, is
well known to those who have resided in India. The jemadar, observing a
crowd gathered round the filterer, looked over the poop-rail to see what
was the cause of the assembly, which originated in one of the Burmese,
more bold than his fellows, having turned the cock, and set the water
flowing, to the no small astonishment and delight of his comrades. At
first, the sepoy made signs to the people to go away, and cease to meddle ;
but these, being either misunderstood, or made light of, he proceeded to
enforce his admonition, by striking the chief delinquent a blow on the head,
with the blunt side of the cutlass, with which he was mounting guard.
In an instant, an indescribable scene of confusion ensued. The Burmese
attempted to rush up the poop ladders in a body, but were driven down
by the jemadar and his party, who, with the flats of their sabres, kept them
at bay for some minutes, till some of the latter having swung themselves


up by the ends of the deck boards, they were taken in flank, and most of
them pitched down, head foremost, by their exasperated assailants. The
jemadar, in particular, was severely handled, having in his desperation
laid hold of the brass rail which runs in front of the poop, his thumbs were
bent back, until the intense pain forced him from his grasp, and he was on
the point of being thrown bodily on to the quarter-deck, when the first
officer of the vessel, who was a very powerful and determined man, a pas-
senger, and one or two of the native officials, hearing the scuffle that was
going on overhead, came out of the cuddy,*and with some difficulty
succeeded in restoring order. An inquiry was immediately held on the
transaction; the inquisitive Burmese, who had been the cause of the mis-
chief, exhibited his broken head ; the sepoys their swollen hands, and
tattered garments, which had been torn to pieces in the affray, when it was
ultimately agreed that the marine guard should be removed forward, and
the poop be placed in charge of a native civil functionary, the Burmese
rabble unarmed, being restricted to their original quarters behind the
mainmast.
In the mean time, a scene had occurred on shore, which shews the neces-
sity of the Government having a consul at Rangoon, to prevent similar
outrages on British subjects ; though, to do the local resident on the part
of the Company the justice which he deserves for his prompt attention on
every occasion, where his assistance was required, this instance of oppres-
sion would not have been perpetrated, had he been apprised that it was in
contemplation. Simultaneously with the despatch of the party to seize
his ship, the captain had been arrested, and taken to the hall of audience.
Here he was asked whether he was aware that treasure, which is an unlaw-
ful export, as well as precious stones, mares, and females,* was concealed
on board of the “ Carnatic.” The reply being in the negative, and per-
sisted in, orders were given for applying the torture, by means of a hor-
rible apparatus, on the principle of the stocks, through which the sufferer’s
legs were thrust, and wedges being placed in a notch directly over the
shin-bones, a slight knock with a mallet on the heads of-the wedges pro-
duced the most excruciating pain. On the first intimation of this barba-
rous proceeding, an Armenian had run off', with all speed, to the Residency,
which was not far distant, to give information, and in a few minutes the
local agent, Capt. R , was on the spot. During the interim, however,
the Captain, who had stood the first blow unflinchingly, w 7 as taken out of
the stocks, and his servant, a chulia, or half-caste, substituted in his stead.
This man, on being interrogated, professed entire ignorance of the matter ;
but at the second touch with the mallet cried out for mercy, and confessed
in what part of the vessel the bullion was hidden. On the arrival of the
agent, that officer remonstrated with the Burmese authorities on their con-
duct, but was met by the remark, that the offence was one cognizable by
the laws of the country, and had been treated accordingly. It is under-
stood that the matter was not allowed to rest here, but was referred to the
Resident at Ava, and, in the sequel, the native functionaries concerned in
* On inquiring of an intelligent native of Ava the reason of this prohibition, he
answered, very seriously, that if foreigners were allowed to take away their women and
she-quadrupeds, the qualities in which the Burmese consider they excel, would be
transferred to other nations. A more amusing but just Idea of the innate vanity and
egotism of this people, with that of the cognate race, the Chinese, could scarcely be
adduced.


the transaction were degraded; nominally, in fact, since every official,
being a personal slave of the king, can scarcely bo said to be lowered by
removal to an inferior situation.
After this treatment, the captain returned on board of his ship, over
which he no longer possessed any authority; and it being intimated to the
agents of the vessel, that if they did not forthwith employ persons to un-
stow the cargo, the timbers would be taken out and sent floating down the
river, people were engaged to unload. This was effected in about twelve
days, at the end of which time, the treasure, amounting to about thirty
thousand rupees in bullion, having been found, packed in gunny bags, and
concealed low down in the hold, was removed to the shore, and leave given
to reload, a native custom-house officer remaining constantly on board, to
prevent any recurrence of smuggling. Notwithstanding the vigilance ex-
ercised on this occasion, it was afterwards stated, that a packet of gold
dust, of considerable value, had escaped seizure, being placed in a secret
recess between the inner and outer planking.
After their object had been attained, the Burmese offered no obstruction
to the reloading of the vessel; and during the time that the guard remained
on board, it conducted itself peaceably ; so that, after a delay of six weeks,
the “ Carnatic got her port clearance, and sailed for Calcutta, where she
arrived on the 18th of February, 1833.
Truth compels a record of the cause which led to this unfortunate affair.
Bome disagreement having occurred between the captain and one of the
mates of the vessel, th e latter left the ship at Rangoon, and was suspected
of having given information of the treasure being on board. Be this as it
may, the merchants to whom the property belonged, having sent a memo-
rial to the Burmese monarch, he was pleased not only to order the restora-
tion of the money to its owner, but, as before stated, removed the officials,
who had been instrumental in its seizure. The British interests could, at
that time, enforce respect in Ava, under the able management of Colonel
Burney ; since that period, as is well known, a revolution has occurred—
the old king has gone to his account, the young one has been murdered, and
the perpetrator of the atrocity, fortified by the habitual use of ardent
spirits, dares to oppress his subjects, and to insult our power. But the
day of retribution is near at hand—another year will witness a close block-
ade of the Irrawaddy, and the debouche of an English army through the
passes of the N.E. frontier into the plains of Ava, direct on its present
capital, having for its object the expulsion of the usurper, and the adjust-
ment of our relations with that country, on a firm and honourable basis.
FROM THE PERSIAN OF MEER ABDOOL HUK.
A stranger came amongst us, and wandered to and fro;
He asked to be a Cazy, but the Wuzeer answered, No.
He bribed him with a donkey,—the thing has come to pass ;
But there had not been a Cazy, if there had not been an ass.
Oriental Herald.—Vol. 4.—JVo. XIX.


IMPROVEMENTS IN LONDON.
There is nothing that more strongly denotes the cultivation of taste in
the present day, than the style of the houses now springing up in a westerly
direction, in the immediate neighbourhood of London. The new suburb
which has arisen upon the Bayswater road, and which will extend to the
distance of several miles, will form, without any exception, the most mag-
nificent approach which the metropolis can boast. Already has the
ground opposite to Hyde Park been occupied by a scries of splendid
buildings, presenting a succession of palaces; and when, as it has been
contemplated, the dead-wall of Kensington Gardens, shall be exchanged
for an iron railing, scarcely any thing will be wanting to complete the
beauty of the scene. Having passed the almost regal residences of this
aristocratic quarter, we come to the pleasant villas, and the modest terraces
of Netting Hill, while onward, the large piece of ground known by the
name of the Norland estate, is now laying out in squares and crescents,
which, though adapted to the residence of persons of moderate fortunes,
will equal in appearance, the grandeur of the Hyde Park quarter. Nor is
it only in a pictorial point of view, that these houses excel their numerous
brethren of other suburbs; for there is nothing perhaps, that has pro-
gressed so much, as the improvements in the interiors of dwelling-houses.
The most is now made of every inch of space, every portion is planned
with an eye to convenience and comfort, and though upon a smaller scale,
the same accommodations are afforded, from the attic to the cellar, which
formerly could only be met with in the abodes of persons of high rank, or
large fortune. Nothing can be more admirably situated than Norland,
for the residence of persons engaged in business in London, and who are
anxious to procure for their families, the advantages of pure air and country
walks. Nothing can be prettier than the landscape, and it is within an
easy distance of the most agreeable kinds of amusement, the fetes-cham-
petres, and flower shows of the rival institutions of Chiswick, and the
races at the Hippodrome.
Notwithstanding the outcry which has been raised against the establish-
ment of a race-course in the neighbourhood of London, the inhabitants of
Notting Hill, and the adjacent places, do not find it objectionable; on the
contrary, the concourse of persons who are attracted by the novel spectacle
exhibited there, afford an agreeable variety to the scene. The buildings at
Norland, are placed at a sufficient distance from the road to prevent any
annoyance from the dust, while the great advantage of escaping the incon-
venience arising from the narrowness of the lower part of Kensington, is an
inducement to all who inhabit the northern part of the metropolis, to choose
the Bayswater road, when travelling in a westerly direction, in preference
to that at Hyde Park corner. Norland is well supplied with water; the
ground in front of the crescent, and the interior of the squares will be laid
out as pleasure-gardens, a luxury not often enjoyed by buildings of the
same description. These pleasure-grounds arc admirable substitutes for the
cockneyfied diminutive parterres in front of the houses usually found in
our suburbs, and which are only endurable to the eye during the brief


period of summer, when the flush of flowers is so gratifying, as to incline
us to overlook the tastelessness of their arrangements. To invalids, and to
children, a large enclosed space, beautifully laid out, where freedom from
all interruption and annoyance can be enjoyed, is one of the most invalu-
able comforts that any residence can afford.
It is somewhat remarkable, that the discovery has not been previously
made, that the ground portioned out in small parcels, and subject to the
neglect or distortions of the owners, would be much better laid out as a
whole, and placed under the superintendence of a competent person, thus
affording all the inhabitants of the row an agreeable promenade, instead of
confining each party to their respective pieces of ground. In the smaller
description of tenements with which the suburbs of London abound, this
improvement could not perhaps be accomplished; but to an infinite num-
ber it would be a great advantage, especially when a long narrow slip of
ground intervenes between the carriage-road and the house, and where there
can be no shelter from rain or snow in any weather. Nor has this absence
of plan in the laying out of gardens been the only mistake made by those
who have speculated on buildings in the suburbs. The strange jumble of
houses of every sort and description crowded together, and proving deformi-
ties, instead of ornaments to the scene, render the greater portion of the out-
lets of London intolerable to the eye. It would have been just as easy for
jthe proprietors of land, in letting it out upon building-leases, to have pur-
sued the method adopted by the tasteful and spirited owner of the Norland
estate, arid by laying down a suitable plan, have rendered it incumbent
upon all who were inclined to invest their capital in the erection of houses,
to follow the designs marked out by some able architect. Queen Eliza-
beth and King James would have earned the gratitude of posterity, if, in-
stead of vain enactments to prevent the increase of London, and to deter
country gentlemen and gentlewomen from visiting the metropolis, they had
passed an Act of Parliament for the purpose of preserving some degree of
uniformity in the erection of new houses. It is to George IY, of blessed me-
mory, that we owe the commencement of those improvements, which have
given to the new buildings of London the grand pictorial air possessed by
its ancient portions ; though his taste might not have been the most cor-
rect in the world, he possessed the next best thing to it, namely fancy, and
the experiments to which this fancy led, have most assuredly occasioned the
enormous advances which we are now making towards perfection in our
domestic residences.
Of public buildings little can be said ; and while the philanthropic, as
well as magnificent plans of Smirke for the improvement of London, are
neglected, it is mortifying to see the strange vagaries which have been
permitted to deform the metropolis; but in every thing regarding comfort
in private establishments, a few years seem to have performed the work of
ages.
FROM THE PERSIAN OF MEER RUSTEE.
Until my soul shall from my body glide,
Ne’er shall the love I feel for thee subside.
Thou toll's! me from my heart thy love to tear,
But while I breathe it still must linger there.


LAMENT FROM THE MORISCO.
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL GEORGE POULETT CAMERON, K.T.S. &C.
Glory fades from Granada’s towers,
The Yivarambla’s* echoes mute,
No more, alas ! her fragrant bowers
Resound to mandoline, and lute.
No more the trumpet’s stirring call
Its notes to tilt, and tourney breathe
No more within the festive hall,
Shall victor’s brow the maiden wreathe.
No more the nobles of the land
Shall marshal in their bright array,
Alas ! stretch’d on a foreign strand
Low lie thy choicest chivalry.t
The Zambra’s graceful dance no more
Is heard to lively castanet,
’Tis Alla, only can restore
Th’ Alhambra lorn, and desolate.
The orange, and the myrtle still
Their perfumes waft within its halls.
And fresh from fount, and limpid rill,
Soft murmurs issue from its falls, —
But where are they who wont to ride
The foremost to the battle rife ?
The Zegri fam’d for martial pride,
And prompt to join the mortal strife ?
Where the Abencerrage plume, J
The first in Yemen’s§ memory ?
In color like the rose’s bloom,
It rose the star of victory !
All, —all have gone, and passed away
The gallant, noble, and the brave,
Thy star of evil destiny,
Boabdil, was thy country’s grave !
* The grand Court of the Alhambra, and scene of those gallant feats of arms so cele-
brated both in Moorish Castilian history.
1" I n allusion to those of the Paynim nobility, who, refusing to submit to the
sway of Ferdinand on the fall of Grenada, passed over into Africa in the train of their
unfortunate sovereign, and the greater part of whom met the same unhappy end in the
plains of Tunis, in the sanguinary action fought there only a short time after his abdi-
cation ; thus meeting in another land that fate which was refused to him in defence of
his own.
+ The rose-coloured plume was the distinguishing badge of this powerful, and illus-
trious, but ill-fated race.
§ Arabia Felix.


THE ZOOLOGICAL GARDENS, REGENT’S PARK.
Tue Society for the prevention of Cruelty to Animals will not perform its
duty, if it should pass over the doings perpetrated at the Zoological Gar-
dens in the Regent’s Park.
This institution was, according to the general supposition, established by
a society composed of men of science, for the express purpose of increas-
ing our acquaintance with a very interesting branch of natural history. It
was supposed that the persons entrusted with the management would be
men either already well versed in the best means of preserving the health
and promoting the comfort of the animals under their care, or desirous of
studying their habits and manners. It was also expected, that although
necessarily subject to a strict confinement, some attention would be paid
to the best modes of rendering their confinement less irksome by adapting
it as much as possible to the mode of living most congenial to the dispo-
sition of the animal. It seems scarcely possible to charge a learned body
with gross ignorance, and yet there appears to be no alternative, excepting
by an accusation of wilful and wanton cruelty.
When, in the streets of London, we see an unfortunate bird exposed in its
cage to the fierce rage of the mid-day sun, while pitying the poor creature,
we excuse its owner under the supposition that, being a thorough-bred
cockney, he can know nothing whatever concerning the habits of birds.
But what apology can be made for a similar exposure of the wretched fea-
thered inhabitants of the Zoological Gardens ? In passing the cages, and
they are numerous, in which the imprisoned bird has no retreat from the
mid-day sun, it is melancholy to see it drooping its wings, turning its back and
hiding its head in the vain endeavour to procure some alleviation to its
sufferings. In speaking to the keepers, these men will tell you that the
birds like and enjoy this exposure. The underlings of the Zoological
Gardens have very much the airs of gamekeepers, and if they have been
chosen from that capacity, they must be aware that nearly all birds retire
under cover during the middle of the day; many species are never seen after
the sun has even got fairly up, and it is only a few 7 amid the various tribes
which appear either in the search of food or in compliance with their
habits, while the sun is in the full exercise of its power. Some of the
most pleasing sights in all countries is afforded by the wakening up of
all nature at the early dawn, when we are made aware of the close vicinity
of animals which we have no opportunity of seeing during the day. If
left to themselves, the parrots which arc exposed in the Zoological Gar-
dens in an open wire aviary, without a leaf to screen them from the sun,
would retreat to some shady place, coming out only towards the evening;
'and it would be so very easy to allow these birds the option, that it seems
unaccountable that not a bit of awning should be placed over any portion
of the new dwellings that have been lately prepared for them. A few
years ago the Society possessed some ten or twelves hares, which were do-
miciled in an open space of ground without a shed or cover of any kind : the
consequence was that they very speedily died. It is notorious that hares
always shun, as much as possible, the broad - glare of day; their habits are


so inveterate, that when confined in cages or an apartment perfectly in the
shade, they will cover themselves up with grass, or hide under any piece of
cloth that they can get hold of. Benevolent persons are prevented from
visiting many parts of the gardens in consequence of their feelings being
shocked by the sight of the miseries endured by animals capable of experi-
encing a high state of enjoyment, even while in captivity. Domestic cats
were, and perhaps arc, confined in cages so small, that the poor creatures
could scarcely turn in them. When the highly social nature of this animal
is considered, its tendency to attach itself to any thing, and the easy man-
ner in which its ferocity may be subdued, there can be no excuse for sub-
jecting it to the miseries of so strict an incarceration. Cats might have
been domiciled with some large animal, proper precautions being taken to
prevent their escape. It appears that some of the keepers have furnished
their dwellings with the progeny of a beautiful species of cat, whose real
enjoyment, as they are to be seen stealing through the shrubberies, contrast
strongly with the deplorable condition of their imprisoned brethren.
The managing portion of this society would do well to take a lesson from
the humble person who exhibits a cage full of various animals at the Surrey
side of Waterloo Bridge, all living in amity together, and apparently find-
ing, in the social happiness which they enjoy, an equivalent for the loss of
liberty. In the Zoological Gardens, on the contrary, we see the dog, the
friend of man, treated like the most savage beast —some wretch supposed to
be wholly irreclaimable, and goaded to ferocity by the miseries of his con-
dition. Surely it would be practicable to distribute these animals amongst
the keepers, where they might suffer no greater restraint than that imposed
upon the yard-dogs of gentlemen’s houses, and where they would become
attached to their owners and their families, and enjoy a life of comparative
happiness, growing tame and gentle under the influence of kind treatment,
and the expansion of the social affections, for which they are so greatly dis-
tinguished.
The elephant forms one of the greatest attractions of the Zoological Gar-
dens ; and here again we have an instance either of ignorance or wilful neglect
of the methods pursued in oriental countries, in the domestication of this
animal. In outward appearance, the elephant looks exactly as it may be
supposed to do in its wildest state, no attention being paid to the groom-
ing, After the animal has been bathed and washed, it is customary in
India to rub it well over with oil. The coat then assumes a sleek and
glossy appearance, and the whole aspect of the creature is much improved.
There would have been no difficulty in engaging the services of a Mahout ,
who, well acquainted with the nature and habits of the elephant, could
have taught him a thousand amusing tricks, which would have drawn mul-
titudes to the gardens, eager to witness the obedience of this noble animal
to the slightest behest of his keeper. Sufficient care does not appear to be
taken to furnish the elephant with its natural repast of twigs and leaves.
In India, in addition to other food, there are always bundles composed of
the smaller boughs of trees, provided for the elephant, and the satisfaction
witli which he munches this species of fodder, shews how much his enjoy-
ment is increased by it.
These remarks, suggested by the unhappy condition in which many of
the animals, located in the gardens of the Regent’s Park, are permitted to
remain, are written in no unfriendly spirit, but solely with a view to create
an interest upon the part of the public in favour of the sufferers, and to in-


dace those parties, who have the cave and management of the gardens, to
consider the responsibility which they have incurred, and the duty incum-
bent upon them, to devote time and study to a subject which is worthy of
the attention of the philanthropist and man of science.
LITERARY NOTICES.
Memoirs of Sarah , Duchess of Marlborough, and of the Court of Queen
Anne. By Mrs. A. T. Thomson, Author of the “ Memoirs of Henry
the Eighth.” Colburn, 2 vols.
Notwithstanding the striking and extraordinary part acted by the
Duchess of Marlborough during the reign of Queen Anne, the ideas
usually entertained of that celebrated woman were extremely vague and
erroneous. Mrs. Thomson has in two admirably written volumes sup-
plied the deficiency occasioned by the total absence of any comprehensive
biography, and placed the reader in full possession of the character, dispo-
sition, and conduct of one of the most remarkable persons of her age.
Few works of the same description are so entirely free from prejudice,
while the accurate acquaintance with human nature which has enabled
Mrs. Thomson to produce so much effect in the dramatis personse of her
novels, is shewn in tracing out the circumstances which influenced and
developed the faculties of a mind formed entirely by intercourse with the
world, and totally unindebted to previous cultivation. Taken as a whole,
this work is one of the most valuable additions to our national biography
which has appeared for many years.
’Tis an Old Tale and Often Told. One Yol. London. Jennings.
Notwithstanding the apparently hackneyed nature of the subject, how
seldom do we meet with a genuine tale of love, a faithful portraiture of
those finer affections, which, while they constitute the greatest charm,
are but too commonly the cause of the wretchedness of woman. Frequently
as the tale has been told, the history of the human heart, the depth,
strength, and enduring nature of feminine tenderness, have not often been
so ably and so touchingly pourtrayed. Nor must our praise of this
charming volume end here ; its remarks and its views of society are ori-
ginal and just, and the sparkling vivacity of its lighter scenes afford the
happiest relief to the details of blight and disappointment, almost insepa-
ablc from the chronicle, giving a record of woman’s love.
Thirty Years in India; from 1808 to 1838. By Major Be van, late 27th
Regiment Madras Native Infantry. 2 vols., Maps and Plates. Rich-
ardson.
We cannot regret the accidental circumstances which delayed a notice of
this work in our last review, where it should have by rights appeared,


since it has enabled us to give it a more than cursory perusal, and to record
a more deliberate opinion of its decided merit. It possesses peculiar value,
as giving us an account of a Presidency, which has sent forth comparatively
few authors, and offers information as to men and matters, with which the
public are less familiar than with events in the other parts of India. Let
us hope, that as Major Bevan has set the example, others may follow his
steps, and succeed in removing from the Madras Presidency, the name
which has been facetiously, and with some show of justice applied to it—
the Benighted. We feel sure that the state of things which has afforded
the wits a handle to apply this name, does not originate in want of talent
—why should it not be remedied ?
Among the multitude of topics on which Major Bevan has touched, it
would be difficult to select any one as a subject of particular notice :
suffice it to say, that readers of all classes, will find matter to interest them
deeply. The lovers of wild and hazardous exploits will find details of
spirit-stirring adventure, with hogs, tigers, and elephants. The youth,
whose destiny leads him to a military career, would do well to read these
volumes attentively, and to keep them by his side—they would tend to
correct, in the outset of his course, many erroneous notions, which expe-
rience (often dearly bought) only can otherwise rectify. The reflections
in vol. i, page 89, are especially worthy of attention. A further notice of
a work whose merit is already so well established, is uncalled for; and we
say farewell to the Major, sincerely congratulating him, that how T ever
severe the misfortunes of his latter years in India may have been, he will
find some comfort in the sympathy of his numerous readers, and the esteem
which must follow the records of a life so well and honourably spent as
his has been.
Travels in Circassia and Krim Tartary; including a Steam Voyage
dozen the Danube, and round the Black Sea. By Edmund Spencer,
Esq., author of Travels in the Western Caucasus, &c. Third Edition ;
2 volumes. London; Colburn.
The adventurous spirit and fondness for travel, manifested by the author
of these highly interesting volumes, have brought us acquainted with a
country, which, though strongly attracting public attention at this moment,
is very little known. We are induced to notice the third edition, in con-
sequence of the quantity of new matter which it contains, and which the
narrowness of our limits will only permit us to mention, as affording much
information relative to the manners and feelings of the Circassians; and
also on account of the details given concerning the military cordon, estab-
lished by the Austrian government on the frontiers of Turkey and Russia.
A similar boundary in Canada on the side of the United States, would do
much to secure tranquillity in that quarter, by preventing those incursions
and aggressions, which if continued, threaten to involve Great Britain
and America in war; and we hope that Government may be induced to
pay some attention to the subject.


SYNOPSIS OF INDIAN INTELLIGENCE.
Calortta*
Lord Auckland. —By a letter from the Governor-General’s camp, we learn that
his Lordship and suite marched from Kurnaul on the 4th, reached Umballa on the 9th,
and was to be at Bhar (at the foot of the hills) on the 14th instant. From the excessive
heat experienced in camp, his Lordship had given up all idea of visiting Sirhind, which
it was his intention to have done. Lord Auckland, the Misses Eden and suite will
remain a few days, probably, at Subathoo, previous to their journeying on to Simla.—
Delhi Gazette, March 13.
Conversion of a Hindoo youth. —We are informed that a pupil of the General
Assembly’s school, of the name of Beysack, about sixteen years of age, has relinquished
the religion of his forefathers with a view to embrace Christianity. The youth is of a
respectable family and connexions, and has been in the institution for some years. His
father went to take him from the school the other day, but he refused to go.— lndia
Gazette, 13 th March.
Runjeet Sing. —Amongst the latest of the Rajah’s demonstrations of fidelity towards
his trusty allies, the Company, was his refusal, in open Court, to receive a communica-
tion from the Nepal Rajah, on the ground that the Company’s enemies were his enemies,
and their friends his friends. It is not said, if the communication was received after-
wards by the “ back stairs.”— Agra Ukhhar.
Captain Stewart.— lt is rumoured that Captain Stewart, the worthy Fort-adjutant
of Chunar, has been offered the settlement of the Benares Rajahs’ estates, —a duty for-
merly performed by Mr. Yalpy of the Civil Service ; we shall be glad to hear that the
rumour is well founded. — Gyeh, 2nd March.
Calcutta lottery. —We are informed that Lieutenant-Colonel Crichton, of the
64th Regiment Native Infantry, was the fortunate holder of the number that drew the
lakh in the Calcutta Lottery ; and the ticket No. 679, which brought up a prize of
50,000, was purchased in the name of Mr. W. J. Gray, the great Projector of Minor
Lotteries.— Calcutta Courier, March 1.
The Mail.— The present mail has been fifty-two days on the passage. There was a
detention of four days at Malta, and we hear, but can scarcely credit it, of eleven days
in Egypt, owing to the sluggish movements of certain passengers whom it was ne-
cessary to bring out. We much fear that matters do not mend on the other side, and
that the management throughout requires yet a great deal to be done to perfect it. On
this side the passage appears to have been well and quickly done, the steamer having
left Suez on the 27th at 5 p. m., Mocha the 4th at 8 a. m., and Aden the sth at 11
p. m., thus doing her entire work in about seventeen days.— Courier, Feb. 16.
General Allard. —The death of General Allard, which took place at Peshawar
on the 27th ultimo, must be regarded as an event of no ordinary importance at the
present moment. To the counsels of this man, and the efficient state to which he
brought the army of the Rajah, may be ascribed, in no small degree, the peace and
comparative prosperity, as well as importance, that Lahore has enjoyed for so long a
time over every other native power. The Rajah owes to him the reputation he enjoys
in Europe, and in many particulars, the interest that is felt in the country and people
he rules over. The General’s reception on his recent visit to Europe, at tbe Tuilleries,
in all the distinguished coteries of Paris, and wherever he went, evinced the high sense
entertained of his merits, nor were the literary bodies neglectful to testify their respect
and gratitude for the many valuable contributions they owed to him. Friendly to En-
glish interests, a lover of peace, sincerely attached to the family of his master, and be-
loved by the troops, his death will be felt as a severe blow by the old Rajah, boding ill
to the future tranquillity of his reign, and aged and infirm as he has become, and unfit
for anything demanding activity or enterprise, it is probable it may incline him more
than ever, to lean upon the Indian Government as his strongest and most stedfast
friend. The circumstance of a powerful Indian array being opportunely on his frontier,
and likely to continue there for some time, will act as a check upon any spirit of dis-
Oriental Herald. — Vol. 4. — No. XIX. g


affection existing among his chiefs ; and if the old Rajah himself should drop, as at no
distant day he must, will guarantee the quiet succession of the heir, and continued
peace to the country, which Allard’s death might otherwise have left open to scenes of
strife and civil contention.
Counsel.— We mentioned some months ago, that an Act was in contemplation,
allowing prisoners the benefit of counsel’s address, as well in cases of felony as in mis-
demeanors ; an alteration in practice, suggested, we believe, by the trial of Mr. Ogilvy
in the Supreme Court. The draft act is now published. The first section gives the
prisoner the right of being heard by counsel, or by attorney “ in Her Majesty’s Courts
of Justice, where attornies practice as counsel.” (What Courts are alluded to ?) The
second section allows the prisoner the benefit of “ counsel, attorney, or vakeel” “ in
all cases of conviction by a magistrate or justice of the peace.” This is not very clear
or intelligible. Is it intended too, that this privilege is to be extended to the Mofussil
as well as to the Presidency ? The third and fourth sections of the Act relate to the
right of prisoners, under certain limitations, to demand, and be furnished with copies
of all the depositions, upon which they may have been held to bail or committed to
prison— Hurkaru.
THE ARMY.
Our latest letters from Sir Willoughby Cotton’s camp state that a scarcity of water
had been experienced at Roghan, a place upwards of three marches from Shikar-
pore ; and our cavalry had been sent on by regiments in consequence. This occurred
on the 26th ultimo, up to which date only one well had been found there, but subse-
quently two more wells, of good water, had been discovered ; and the troops, which
had been halted, were to move on again, without delay.
At Janeedera and Roghan, the grass was both scarce and indifferent; and, strange
to say, no kirbee, or any kind of fodder, had been laid in at either place ; and no kind
of supplies for the army, at the latter !
The leading brigade of the Bengal column expected to reach Dadur on the 7th instant.
The 16th Lancers had already passed through the forest, twenty-six miles in extent,
between Roghan and Barshoree ; they started at midnight, and accomplished this un-
usually long march with great ease.
Sir John Keane expected to reach Lurkanu on the 3d or 4th instant.
The Shah’s troops were to move on through the Gundava pass, instead of following
the Bengal column.
Rumour had it that the 31st regiment Bengal Native Infantry would, to a certainty,
be cantoned, for a time, at Shikarpore; and that both the 35th and 42d regiments
(Bengal) would probably be left in Upper Scinde, until the return of our troops
(through the Punjaub) from Cabul, in September next.
The Hydrabad folks are, we understand, to pay six lakhs yearly, and to maintain
5,000 men in Scinde.
When the immediate return of the force from Lower Scinde was thought doubtful,
Mr. McNaghten proposed advancing into Candahar with the 4th brigade and the con-
tingent ; I judge by this, that no very serious opposition can be expected. It is quite
true that the Candahar chiefs have bowed in submission to the Shah ; and I believe it
is equally true that Dost Mahommed will not show his face as an enemy. Our trip
towards Lower Scinde, was not a particularly pleasant one ; the weather being hot in
the extreme. I have never felt any thing like it in any part of India at this season.
The thermometer not unfrequently stood at 90°, and even 95° in the tent; but what
made the heat of the day still more apparent was, the cold of the nights and mornings ;
a difference of 45° often occurred between sunrise and two p.m. Our camp is about
three miles from Sukur, but close to the river, which takes a few eccentric twists here-
about. The jungle all around, and the road to the bridge, is almost impassable, from
the stench arising from putrid camels, which are lying about in all directions.
The views from the different elevated spots on both sides of the river, near Bukkur,
are truly beautiful; I have never seen any thing in India to be compared to them.
I do not know what number of troops Sir John Keane is going to send up here ; but
the on dit is, that some will come. Should no unforeseen event occur, we shall be
back in the Provinces again by the end of October, or beginning of November next;
this is next to a certainty.


The 2d of April is spoken of as the probable date of our arrival at Candahar, and our
summer residence is to be Ghiznee, —will not that be delightful ? The climate is equal
to that of Simla, and the scenery is not to be surpassed. Besides all this, what pleas-
ing sensation must arise from a visit to Baber’s tomb, and other interesting monuments
of former greatness, I only wish that we were there now, that we might have lots of
spare time to look about and see the sights. The government have sanctioned the ap-
pointment of another European officer to each of the Shah's regiments ; but I believe
none of this force are to get a share, as it might interfere with the efficiency of the re-
giments from which they might be drawn. The certainty of gratuitous grub, did not
elicit a single audible symptom of delight from the Jacks, as they crossed the bridge.
I wonder if we shall be any the better of our travels ?—they say twelve months’ batta
is to be the reward of all our toil; lam sure I hope so, for many of us will much need
it. Marching at all times is expensive, but particularly so when every article is increased
in price ten fold ; a man cannot keep a donkey under thirty rupees ; I wonder how our
Dhobees manage ? The number of deceased Edwards by the way answers this query.
Grain is only obtainable from the Commissariat, and then only in small quantities, and
very dear (eight seers per rupee.) Jowar is eleven seers in the village ; no other grain
is procurable : nearly all the messes are out of wine and brandy—we shall have to take
to the Mei Shiraz before long.
Ferozbpore, M arch \st. — lt is said General Duncan leaves this in a few days, and
that the Buffs and Skinner’s horse return to their respective stations. — D. G. March 13.
A NOTE ON DARJEELING,
(From the Englishman.)
Although a mountainous country, Darjeeling has none of the picturesque effects
produced by piles of bare rocks, in fantastic forms, so much the theme of poets,
painters, and novelists. With few exceptions, of a detached stone here and there,
all are covered with vegetation. As the land is cleared, however, the scene will im-
prove in this way 5 and, indeed, there may now be seen, upon the distant mountains,
bare rocks, and marks of extensive land-slips; but too far oft to come readily into
the picture.
Climate, the most important of all things at Darjeeling, I can speak of for only a
few months ; but these are, I believe, the worst months of the year. Still it has more
than come up to all my, not very moderate, expectations. In the portion of rainy
season remaining after my arrival in September, the temperatuie was cold, but not
unpleasantly so, while actually raining, and the sunshine agreeable during the intervals:
the quantity of rain that fell, and the frequency of the showers, being pretty much the
same as in the drier parts of Bengal, as at Midnapore, for instance. During sixteen
days in October it rained, but generally with only slight showers the thermometer
ranged from 43° to 67°. In November it rained only twice ; hoar frost commenced on
the 18th, and continued nearly every morning afterwards; the thermometer from 36° to
60°. In December 'it gradually grew colder, but owing to an accidental cause, my
register is imperfect; the first ice I saw was on the 18th; hoar frost almost every
morning, and rain on the 24th and 25th. In January there was generally hoar frost
and ice in the morning ; the ice half an inch thick ; on the 7th and 8 th, water thrown on
the ground at eight o’clock, a. m., froze in half-an-hour, and the ground itself was
generally frozen hard. On the 10th, a little hail fell. At twelve o’clock, on the night
of the 14th, it began to rain, and the rain turned to snow before morning. It snowed
the whole of the 15th, and till about half-past two or three, on the morning of the 16th,
on which day the snow lay upon the ground to a depth of eight or ten inches. On the
16th, 17th, and 18th, it thawed rapidly, and on the evening of the 18th, there were two
very light showers ; so that, although a good deal of snow still remained on the 19th,
it lay in patches only on the open ground. In the jungles there was some till the 25th
or 26th of the month ; the tops of the neighbouring hills were covered several days after-
wards, and for a long time it lay a foot deep at Senah Dah. During January, the ther-
mometer ranged from 23° to 56°. But it did not feel cold, notwithstanding we were
miserably housed.


There is an elasticity of the air in these mountains, and a freshness, which impart a
feeling of positive enjoyment. In the morning this is especially experienced. You
are then cold, but not chilly; and exercise gives all the pleasant glow of an English
walk on a frosty morning. In the day you are warm, but not hot; the sunshine is
pleasant, and a chatta not needed: while the evening is grateful and mild, free from
damp and heavy dew. The only unpleasant time is, when a cloud passes over the sta-
tion, and then it is uncomfortable enough ; pretty much as in a thick fog below. These
passing clouds, incident to all mountainous places, constitute our fogs ; and in bad wea-
ther they are more or less frequent, and sometimes continue all day ; however, it is not
often the case, especially in the more cleared parts of the station.
Upon so short a trial, I cannot be expected to say much on the climate of Darjeeling
with relation to health ; but, from what I have seen, I think the most sanguine expecta-
tions on this head will be fulfilled. Notwithstanding we are all poorly fed, badly
housed, the natives indifferently clad, and that the season was one in which the rains
were of unusual duration, there have been but few serious cases of sickness, except
among the old and infirm. They all get ill, chiefly w T ith bowel complaints, and gene-
rally die, so that it is a cruel thing to bring up old and infirm natives just now, what-
ever it may be hereafter, when good accommodation and food can he supplied to them.
Except among these, there have been, as above said, very few cases of serious disease,
even in the natives ; and those were generally found to have been contracted in the
norning, on the plains. Colds, coughs, and slight attacks of fever, have formed the
bulk of the complaints.
_ With regard to visceral diseases, I have had only two cases of spleen, and they readily
yielded to the usual remedies. Some doubt of the perfect adaptability of this climate
to diseases of the abdominal viscera has been expressed ; but, perhaps, on the face of
the earth there is no such climate. The whole question appears to me, not whether
this climate be a perfect one for the treatment of visceral disease, but whether it be not
superior to that of the plains, and places where patients have contracted them ; and
where they must remain, unless they are sent here : and surely there can be no doubt
of the answer.
For the rest, those who come up here healthy, and in good case, and who have not
contracted sickness by exposure to malaria in the plains, generally remain well, and
get fat, Europeans soon lose their dyspeptic symptoms, regain their appetite, and
feel an aptitude and desire for corporeal exertion, they never experience below. All
notion of constitutional walks is soon at an end ; for it is a positive enjoyment to be
out in the open air, and consequently exercise is taken at all times. When the weather
is hot, it is pleasant to ramble in the woods, and when cold to walk about in the sun-
shine.
Sunrise at Darjeeling is magnificent beyond description. At earliest dawn, the faces
of the snowy mountains present in front an aspect of pure white ; while a shadowy
outline is all that is seen of their less prominent features. At length you behold a
small speck of coppery brightness capping the topmost peak; it rapidly increases, and
spreads downwards peak after peak assuming the same deep metallic glow. This
gradually becomes lighter, till the whole mountain is of burnished gold ; in turn this
fades away, though the metallic splendour remains changed to a silvery brightness, and
then to the pure white of unsullied snow ; meanwhile the summits of the lower ranges
are spread over with a purple haze. And at length the sun rises, and the shadows
shorten ; a cheerfulness is thrown over the scene; and in the language of scripture,
“ the time of the singing of birds is come.”
As in the dominions of the Spanish monarch, the sun never sets at Darjeeling. I
have said, there is a high range of hills to the West; they intercept the view of the
setting sun; yet lam not sure we lose any thing by the loss. The snowy peaks are
adorned as at his rising, though in the opposite direction ; and his glories are seen in
the heavens, though we do not behold himself. At times too, a bridge of clouds ex-
tends from one hill to another, and the sun gently smiles beneath it. Besides, from the
shadow of the earth being thrown over the place some half an hour before he sets, a
subdued light is left, exactly resembling the twilight of an English summer day.
One thing there is worth relating, though I have only once seen it, a bow in the
clouds, but not a rainbow. I stood on Darjeeling soon after sunrise, and saw a cloud
pass between two hills below me, when the slanting rays fell upon it, and the prismatic
colours were displayed ; not, it is true, with the regularity of the rainbow, but distinct
enough to mark the phenomenon: they were also arranged in a circular form, the
cloud being extensive enough to allow the round to be completed. Another appear-
ance is also curious ; that of a cloud hanging on the side of a hill, and the shadow


cast by it, being further from you than it, almost on the same level. And again the
valley of the Ringeit is often filled with clouds, which lie many hundred.feet below
the spectator, calm, and looking solid enough to w r alk upon, and in the rising sun they
are tinged of various colours. Of course such things are common in all mountainous
countries ; but, by those who have never seen them, they are well worth noting.
Something must now be said of what is doing here, and first, of the locations.
These Colonel Lloyd has fixed at eighty yards square. I think this not enough, and
so do many others ; he thinks differently ; and to own the truth there is, as Sir Roger
de Coverley has it, “ much to be said on both sides.” No doubt most of us would
like to have a larger compound ; but the land fit for locations is limited, and there is
likely to be a great demand for it; however, eighty yards square is the quantity
granted.
As Mr. Wilson says, “the hotel is rapidly progressing towards completion ; and a
great part of it will be ready by the Ist of April. It will be a noble building, for Mr.
Hepper, instead of running it up in the temporary mat and mud style, as at first intended,
is building it of wooden pillars, with the walls between them made of split timber
plastered over ; and with a flat roof. It will last for years, if it is not burnt down ;
the usual fate of such buildings. There are two splendid rooms in the centre thirty
feet by twenty-four feet, each private room is eighteen feet by sixteen feet, large
enough and to spare in this climate, and has a fire-place. Some of the end rooms
will communicate wnth each other for the convenience of families, and there are two noble
verandahs, several hundred feet long, and from eight and a half to ten feet wide. No
public buildings are yet erected ; the executive officer not having been able to procure
workmen ; and his attention chiefly occupied by the still more important object the
road. Several private houses are planned and contracted for. Mr. Perry of Kissen-
gunge has established a moodie, who has opened a shop for grain, and other articles of
native consumption ; but the prices are frightfully dear, and such will be the case till
the road is opened, for great as they are, I believe those prices but just clear the
expenses.
The road, our present great anxiety, has been made by Colonel Lloyd, passable for
palankeens and loaded bullocks some ten or eleven miles from the station towards the
plains ; and carried on by Lieutenant Gibson for three or four miles more. And the
latter officer, as I am informed, has made a hackery road to Punkabarree ; and marked
out much of the portion still unmade ; which cannot be more than ten or twelve miles,
and will probably be in tolerable order in six weeks or two months. The improvement
on the old road is immense. In the upper portion there are no declivities or preci-
pices, such as are described at Simla and Mussoorie ; here and there, there is a short
ascent, in some places rather steep ; but for the most part you may canter along with
ease, and every where ride with perfect safety. At Titalya a most excellent staging
bungalow has been built; and another at Punkabarree ; that at Mahalderum is getting
on ; but the one at Senah Dah has been done but little to, and, perhaps is not abso-
lutely needed ; though no doubt it wall be useful to a sick person, who can make only
short stages, and in wet weather it will be a convenient resting place.
As the road runs through a thick forest, its aspect is at present rather gloomy, but
when the trees on each side are cut down, it will be cheerful and pleasant. Even now
it is enlivened by occasional peeps of the snowy mountains and of the plains. At
Punkabaree the view is very beautiful, and at Mahalderum magnificent, the whole
plains, wdth the Mahanunda and Bolasun, and their tributary streams, a well watered
country is before you ; hills clothed with forests rise on every side ; and to the north
and east are the mountains of perpetual ssow.
By this time you are probably somewhat weary of my talk of these same mountains ;
but the fact is they are ever in your view. Like the Nile in the land of Egypt, they
are the constant object of attention, not quite so useful, perhaps, as the river, but in-
finitely more beautiful;
“ The earth’s great pillar in the farthest east,”
of which you never tire.
In proceeding to Darjeeling, the traveller may take any of the ordinary routes to
Maida, Dinagepore, or Purneah, according to his starting place. Malda is the best
for all from the upper and central provinces, who come down by water, Purneah
for dawk travellers, and Dinagepore for dawk travellers from Calcutta, and all the
stations below the delta of the Ganges : while Bungpore is the place to go to for the
residents of the eastern parts of Bengal. But this is thrown out as a hint rather than
instruction, all my knowledge being hearsay and conjecture. From these places the


traveller must go to Titalya ; and I recommend him to make the journey back at all
seasons, except the height of the rains; for boating on the Mahanunda is tedious, even
in a small vessel. On his arrival at Titalya he cannot do better than apply to Mr.
Wilson to convey his baggage up the hills ; and by that time, it is expected a line of
bearers will be established, so as to enable him to proceed on by dawk to Darjeeling.
In all this there is no great difficulty to be encountered ; no long land journey to ex-
haust the sick ; nothing, in fact, beyond what must be undergone by every invalid tra-
velling from almost every station in India, even to Calcutta, to embark on board ship
for the benefit of his health, whether to England or to the Cape ; and in this, Dar-
jeeling has a great advantage over the other hill stations.
I have made light of the Morung ; the bugbear of people not acquainted with the
place. It is not more than seven or eight miles across ; and if passed by day-light,
there is no fear of malaria at any season. Indeed, I passed it early in the morning,
long before sunrise, when malaria is supposed to be powerful; and I have known
people sleep in it, and remain there several days, during the rains, with impunity ; a
course, however, I recommend no one to follow. However, it may be passed in three
hours at any season ; and in all without danger.
Of all things, we must not omit, what it is the fashion to call the “ capabilities” of
the place, or in other words, what will give the hope of a speedy return to money laid
out; without which now-a-days we should certainly emigrate from the garden of Eden
itself, unless searching the sands of the river Pison for the gold of Havilah, should
turn out a profitable speculation. The “ capabilities” then of Darjeeling are many, as
must strike the mind of every one aware of the number of indispensable articles which
can be manufactured in a temperate climate only; and who, therefore, sees the im-
portance of such a climate easy of access in the midst of the torrid zone, where raw
materials are produced so largely.
First, of the timber. The Darjeeling oak is of an enormous size, very hard, and
beautifully grained : equalling in all respects, as far as one can judge from mere in-
spection, the best of English growth. The walnut is a very large, and a very hand-
some wood, and well fitted for furniture. The birch is an enormous tree sometimes ;
and one variety has a red wood, in appearance very like pencil cedar ; and pines grow
a little distance towards the valleys. Besides these, there are many kinds of timber
which I do not know ; one in particular, a sort of oak I think, is exceedingly tough,
perhaps more so than English ash; splitting in long fibres, and being also a hard
wood; I conceive it would be useful for gun carriages, tool handles, and other purposes
of a like description.
Cattle and sheep farming has been proposed, and, when the hills are cleared of forest,
and grass can be raised for winter fodder, will probably become a profitable specula-
tion ; especially in the finer sorts of wool.
Tanning, I myself have suggested to several persons, one of whom has taken some
steps to carry it into execution. In the plains tanning fails from the great heat, which
will not allow the hides to be long enough in the tan. Unless put into the pits directly
they are taken off the animal, the hair is removed by putrefaction; or at all events, if
dried on the skin, it loosens on being wetted, and the grain of the leather must be more
or less injured. As from six to fourteen or fifteen months, according to its kind, is the
time taken to tan good leather, in the plains the hides become rotten before they are
tanned ; but it will not be so in this climate. At Darjeeling there may be some doubt
about all but the finer sort, and what is called cropped leather; but no doubt bend
could be made perfectly in the colder climate of Senah Dah; which is also eleven or
twelve miles nearer the plains ; and there, in my opinion, the tannery should be esta-
blished. The process could be as perfect as’in England ; hides may be procured from
the Morung and the upper provinces in abundance, and as cheap as in Calcutta ; and
oak-bark is inexhaustible. In short, a tannery, joined to an establishment for curry-
ing, and manufacturing the leather into harness, shoes, &c. would be able to supply
the whole country with all leather articles, as good as those now sent out from Europe,
and at not above half the cost; there would then be little or no loss from damage by
climate, for they could be got fresh and fresh, as wanted, besides the interest of money
saved ; and I need not dwell upon the profit it would bring to the conductor, nor the
advantage to the state.
Brewing is another thing which would succeed at Darjeeling. Many attempts have
been made in the plains to brew, but I never heard of any very great success attending
them: and this, for the same reason as tanning fails; the heat being such as to prevent
malting and brewing. In both processes, fermentation runs on too rapidly, and cannot
be checked, but by means that destroy the flavour of the beer: the malt has not sugar


enough, and the beer is vinegar. But at Darjeeling the whole process may be carried
on as successfully as in England, provided the same care be taken in doing it.
Some have thought Calcutta may be supplied with ice from these mountains; should
a railway ever be made, it may, but not otherwise, I fear.
Of the other capabilities of Darjeeling, no doubt time will show many, at present
not thought of. In my opinion the place cannot be rated too highly; whether with
regard to climate, beauty of scenery, or natural resources. Mines are known to exist
not far off. A road may be made down to the Teestah, and unless lam greatly mis-
taken, a route much nearer and easier than the present one will be discovered, running
from Silligoree, along the same side of the Mahanunda up the mountains, so as to leave
to the left, as you ascend, Punkabarree, Mahalderum, and Senah Dab, joining the pre-
sent road, within a few miles of Darjeeling, and shortening the route by nearly one-
third. When these roads are made, fit for the transmission of produce and goods to
the Teestah, which runs into the great navigable river on the east of Bengal; and the
Mahanunda, which joins that on the west, it is impossible to estimate sufficiently the
advantages of Darjeeling, even in this point of view. Its political advantages need not
be dwelt upon in this place.
But beyond these things, so far as individual happiness is concerned, there is one
advantage in the establishment of this settlement, inestimable beyond all others; that
children may be able to remain in the country for many years later than heretofore ;
and altogether no less for the purpose of finishing their education in England, and
parents so escape the pain and anxiety of a separation little less than those of death
and which but too often only cease with the death of their object in a distant land.
The first years of education may be passed here ; and parents take their children with
them, on their own return to their country, instead of following and finding them
strangers ; while in the meantime, they are within their reach. Those who have none
to confide them to, will duly appreciate this, for miserable is the life of the poor child
whose holidays are no holidays to him, but passed at school. lam glad a boy’s school
will soon be established here; and, I hope, one for girls also, and I trust not many
years will be suffered to elapse before the children of the orphan schools will be removed
here; and a race of healthy girls and hardy boys brought up for something better than
they are at present put to.
I must not conclude without expressing my obligations to Col. Lloyd, to whom I
owe the greater part of any information I possess concerning this place, and to whose
energy and perseverance in discovering its advantages are mainly owing the settlement
of Darjeeling.
Such is Darjeeling, according to my impression of it on a residence of but a few
months. But this memorandum has been drawn up under circumstances of great
difficulty, and with a mind harassed by a variety of professional and other duties, and
these circumstances, together with the consideration that it is only intended to be a
mere sketch of the place, will, I hope, be a sufficient excuse for its errors and omis-
sions.
Darjeeling, Feb. 10, 1839. J. T. Pearson.
Smites*
Rajah of Sattara. — We learn that the Yukeels or ambassadors of His Highness
the Rajah of Sattara took their departure a few days ago for the Red Sea, and eventually
to England. The party, we hear, consisted of eleven persons, Marathas and Purbhoos.
They are said to have carried provisions for four months. —Bombay Durpun, March 22.
Education. —We have learned with much pleasure from a correspondent of the Times
that the government has directed a union to take place between the National Education
Society and the Elphinstone College, and required that the secretaryships of the two
institutions should be held by the same individual.— lbid.
Aden.—A letter from Aden states that the shells sent there by the Ann Crichton
for the purpose of being thrown into the town, when about to be used, were found to be
empty, and are, therefore, quite useless.
The Turks were a short way off attacking some place belonging to Aden; and it
is said that there was a sufficiency of force present to take the place, but not to
retain it. . *


New Pilot Vessel.—A new pilot brig has been launched from the docks, and will
shortly be sent round to Calcutta.
Native Vessels. —We regret to learn from the Sumachar that Buttela Rooparell,
Govun Tandell, was sunk down oft’ Vesavah, having been filled with water, which was
admitted through a leak. It was proceeding to Bhowanuggur, with ready cash amount-
ing to (>O,OOO Rs., and about eighty passengers, a marriage party, of whom only twenty
were saved. Another boat, Khoodabuksh, Hosun, Tundell, proceeding to Surat, was
robbed, off Bhunswara, of a part of its cargo, and the baggage of passengers, amounting
to 1850 Rs., on the 14th instant.— Times, March 25.
Extensive Depredations. —lt appears that the band of Pindarries, or Ramosees,
mentioned before, have committed the most extensive depredations in robbing mer-
chants, exacting contributions, &c. throughout the villages in the district of Khaid,
Pabul, Jooner, and others. Forty have been apprehended, who are now undergoing an
examination before the magistrate at Poonah. The Puttwurdhun Sirdars have sent a
contingent of 150 horse to the aid of the authorities in Poonah.
Map of Bombay. —The Chamber of Commerce has been presented by government
with a coloured lithographic map of “ The territories of the Bombay Presidency and of
the States dependent on, or in alliance with, that Government.” It has been just com-
piled from the latest surveys-by Captain Jopp, the Deputy Surveyor-General; is upwards
of six feet in length, by four and a half in breadth ; and constructed upon a scale of ten
British miles to the inch. We do not presume to offer any opinion as to its accuracy;
but, in the minuteness of details, the clearness of colouring, and general beauty of ex-
ecution, we have not seen any thing surpassing it from the lithographic presses of
Europe.
Poisonous Fish. —There has been much and very fatal sickness on board the
“ Ganges ” ow'ing to a singular circumstance. Shortly after leaving the Mauritius, she
hove to oft’ a fish bank, and let down the boats to fish ; the men were successful, and ate
plentifully of what they caught; and within a very few days fifteen died in a most extra-
ordinary state, being swmllen like porpoises.
Military Movements. —The 20th Native Infantry reached Adjunta on the 12th
instant, and its wings proceeded to relieve those of the 3d Bombay Native Infantry at
Aseerghur and Dhoolia. The 11th and 42d regiments were under orders to proceed to
Jubbulpore and Hussingabad respectively on the 2Gth February. A wing of H. M.
57th foot are to move from Cannauore to Trichinopoly immediately, to relieve the wing
of the 54th, which then comes on to Madras.— U. S. G., March 5.
Hyderabad. —Our Hyderabad correspondent states that the Persian nobleman, to
whom we alluded some time since, has not only been acquitted on the charge of murder
preferred against him, there being no evidence to prove that he fired the fatal shot
which caused the death of the unfortunate Native, but that the Nizam’s Government
have also consented to make him pecuniary compensation for all the expense and
trouble that he has sustained by his detention on the above unfounded accusation.—
U. S. G., March.
The Military Board. —What has occurred to prevent the long talked-of Military
Board arrangements taking effect ?—is a question continually put to us by our Mofussil
correspondents, without our having hitherto been able to afford them any information
on the subject. We believe, however, that the great delay that has taken place, has
arisen in part, if not entirely through the inability of government to re-organize the
board, and place it entirely on the plan and principles of the office in Calcutta; and we
are confirmed in that belief, by a fact now gathered from the Commercial Advertiser—
namely, that Mr. Patrick Sutherland, Register and principal Accountant in the Military
Board Office at Calcutta, is to be temporarily transferred to this Presidency, on a per-
sonal allowance of 200 Rupees a month, in addition to his present salary, for the pur-
pose of superintending the re-organization of our Military Board, and placing it pre-
cisely on the Calcutta footing.
Madras Agri-Horticultural Society.— The show at the Horticultural Gardens


on Saturday, went off remarkably well. Notwithstanding the lateness of the season,
the specimens of vegetables from private gardens were fully equal to any former exhi-
bitions of the Society. The most gratifying feature of the display, however, was the
marked improvement in the productions of the native market gardeners, who attended
to the number of twenty or thirty on the occasion, and presented well filled baskets of
very good specimens, both of European and country vegetables, to contend for the
prizes. The evidence of this improvement ought to rally support around the Society,
for through its instrumentality alone has it been gained. At the earliest exhibition, a
few years ago, one or two market gardeners alone attended, and their productions were
wretched ; since then they have gradually increased in number, and their vegetables in
quality, till the present time, when we find the spirit of competition among them in
full play, and only requiring a proper direction to be steadily given to it to realize all its
natural fruits. Several kinds of vegetables produced by this class on Saturday,
rivalled the contribution from private gardens. Prizes were distributed to the best
specimens of each kind, and a small present was then made as an encouragement to
each market gardener, according to the general show in his basket.
Mr. M‘Taggart bore away the palm for vegetables among the private trays—Mrs.
General Waugh had a brilliant nosegay, for which the Society’s silver medal was
awarded (where was the usual Guindy contribution ?) —and some very fine specimens
of Mauritius sugar cane were exhibited out of the Society’s gardens.
The attendance of the Society of the Presidency at the show, we are happy to say,
was very numerous, more so almost than on any previous occasion ; and the general
satisfaction that appeared to be felt, we hope augurs well for the future support, and
consequent success of this very useful and important institution.— Feb. 22.
Philanthropic Association. —The annual Report of the Committee of the Phi-
lanthropic Association has been before us for several days, but want of space prevented
our noticing it sooner. We heartily congratulate the supporters of this valuable In-
stitution on the revival of their original anticipations, and rejoice to learn that the
cloud which seemed to overshadow their affairs has been but temporary. The exertions
of the Committee during the past year are most praiseworthy; and they have evidently
entered into the spirit of their duties with every energy alive. We shall here take oc-
casion to observe, that the Philanthropic Association has for its object the improve-
ment of the state and condition of the descendants of Europeans, as w’ell immediately
as prospectively. The indigent are furnished with such employment as they are com-
petent to undertake, and apprentices are instructed in weaving cloths and stockings,
beyond which manufactures, the Committee is at present restricted by the limited
amount of the Society’s Funds, but six boys have already been received as apprentices
for the purpose of initiation in the above branches. The principal and it would seem
favourite object contemplated by the Association is, we observe, the instruction of
youths in practical agriculture, with which view they tendered a sum of 5,000 rupees
to the Chamber of Commerce, for the purpose of assisting in the establishment of a
then contemplated experimental farm, the design whereof has been however aban-
doned ; but a valuable landed property, known as Popham’s Farm, situated at Vulloor,
containing about fifty-four cawnies of land, with extensive accommodations, having
fallen into the hands of the Association, they propose converting it into a nursery for
training youths to the general purposes contemplated, where, by the aid of competent
instructors they hope to raise a body of practical farmers, brought up from early youth
to the pursuit of agriculture, and to the several trades, by which the* may be enabled
to find future employment under such encouragement and assistance hem the Associa-
tion as their previous good conduct may appear to deserve.
So evident are the benefits which the East Indian Community may expect to derive
from the successful working of the plans of this valuable Association, that it is indeed
surprising, and no less surprising than lamentable, that it should have experienced
difficulties which had in fact so impaired its prosperity as to threaten its very existence,
had it not been for the meritorious and unremitting exertions of a few zealous indivi-
duals. The Committee are now thoroughly impressed with the conviction that with the
renewed prospect which the affairs of the Society at present afford, the accomplishment
of every object contemplated may be reasonably looked for : the completion of such
objects must however be progressive and the work of time, and can only be expected
through the zealous attention of those entrusted with the management of the affairs of
the Society, as well as the careful and judicious application of the resources placed at
their disposal.
In fine, the Committee anticipate that the means in progress will be productive of
the most beneficial results, by dispensing a steady .and cheering influence over the con-
Oriental Herald.—Vol. A.—No. XIX. h


dition and prospects of thousands, who under the fostering care of the Madras Pbilan-
thropic Association will be furnished wdth suitable means of employment and adequate
sources of support.
French Presents to Runjeet Sing. —We observe by a late announcement in
our contemporary the Times, that the last steamer from the Red Sea brought out a
whole cargo of presents to the Chief of the Punjaub, and that a further supply of
European rarieties is to be immediately forwarded by the same route to the same
august potentate. The two lots will amount to one hundred and sixty packages, and
truly the French monarch seems determined to evince as substantially as possible, the
respect he has for his Eastern brother. There is no saying how far this presentation
system may be carried, and very probably, the zeal of the French merchants may even
outstrip that of their Sovereign. We would therefore recommend the Custom House
authorities to look after what may arrive in this way, and how it is disposed of, as
otherwise the great and flourishing commerce carried on between this country and
“ the Great Nation,” may be entirely absorbed in presents to Runjeet Sing, which may
find their way by mistake into the bazaar, and thereby deprive our revenue of those
sweet little items of duty, which in ordinary cases Government delights to call its
own.— Gazette, Feb. 15.
Atrocious Murder. —Recently a most foul and atrocious murder was committed
in the city of Poonah. The unfortunate being, who became the victim of this bloody
felony, was a banian merchant, a native of another country, who had come to Poonah
on some business, and was residing in a part of the city called Veytal Peit. Having
disposed of some goods and merchandize, and realized the objects of his visit, he was
preparing to return to his native country, and had in his possession cash and gold to
the amount of several thousand rupees. Three or four of his neighbours, who had
watched all his motions, and somewhat insinuated themselves into his intimacy, and
who were aware that he had a large sum of money in his possession, watched for a
convenient opportunity to ensnare and murder him, and after many schemes had failed,
they began to invite him to their several houses a few days before his intended depar-
ture. No suspicion of their design seems to have entered the mind of their trusting
and unthinking victim, and the murder was perpetrated. The corpse was butchered
into small pieces, and, to hide it from all observation, a part of the house wall was torn
down, and the pieces built in. The wall was not, however, thick or solid enough to
suppress the putrifying stench which arose, and led to the detection of the perpetrators.
Disturbances in the Joonere District. During the disturbances in the
Joonere district, last month, an armed gang, taking advantage of the unsettled state of
the country, attacked the Government garden premises at Hewra on the night of
January Bth, while Dr. Gibson, the Superintendent, was absent on his annual tour to
Kandeish. The gang was, in number, about twenty-five. They succeeded in carrying off
and destroying property to the amount of about five hundred and fifty rupees, but
further loss was prevented by the gallantry of two of Dr. Gibson’s servants, Guzerat
Puggies. These men wounded two of the robbers, one severely, and finally obliged
the gang to decamp. The wounded man has since been tracked and secured. He has
confessed his course and given the names of most of his accomplices. One of the
Puggies had his turban cut quite through by a stroke of a sword from one of the rob-
bers. The brave Mahrattas hid themselves in the sugar-cane fields. As the garden
is in a very lonely situation, remote from the surrounding villages, the robbers hoped
to have accomplished their purpose undisturbed.
These villains trust, and often with too much reason, to the mistaken lenity of our
courts of justice. Were death, or transportation for life, the fixed and only punish-
ments for such offences, they would not have increased as they have of late years done
in the Deckan,
Guzerat. —We have been favoured with the perusal of a few notes from the journal
of a gentleman who has recently been travelling in Guzerat, which has been forwarded
to the Chamber of Commerce, and have great pleasure in communicating to our
readers a digest of the interesting and valuable information contained in them.
The deficiency of the cotton crops is fully confirmed. To the northward and west-
ward of Broach and Jumboseer they are even worse than in those districts, and, in the
Verumgaon district, it was said that they had not averaged one-fourth of those of last
year. In good years some of the best cotton of Guzerat is grown in the Jumboseer vil-
lages on the south bank of the Myhee River ; little is grown in the Kaira Zillah, and
that of inferior quality ; and from the town of Boorsud eight miles north of the above
river to Nurreead the country is nearly covered with tobacco, which, in the words of
the natives, may be called the Ma Bap of the district. All this passes under the name


of Nurreead tobacco, the greater part of which, it is stated, finds its way to the Malwa
market, the Rajpoot giving a better price for it than we do ; even in Guzerat Nurreead
tobacco is a rupee and a half per maund dearer than that of the other districts. From
the largeness of the leaf it would probably answer well for the manufacture of cigars ;
considering the demand for which all over the world, and the immense quantity of the
plant grown in our districts, it appears extraordinary why a cigar manufactory has
not been established in this Presidency.— Times, 16th March.
Persearo
Persian Gulf. —The accounts by the two latest arrivals from the Persian Gulf,
by way of Bagdad and Constantinople, are important. On the 16th March our cor-
respondendent states, that Mahomed Ali Pasha’s general, Kourshid Pasha, had pos-
sessed himself of the whole of Nejd, the Arabian province on the southern coast of the
Gulf, and that he had demanded the submission of the island of Bahrein near it, the
inhabitants of which had applied to Persia for protection. The Shah of Persia was
reported at that period to hold very warlike language, and to be collecting troops and
treasure with the avowed intention of some important movement after the festival of
the Now Roz.
On the 15th of April our correspondent details an occurrence which appeared likely
to produce serious results. The admiral, Sir Frederick Maitland, on the Wellesley,
74, had gone from Bombay to the Persian Gulf, to visit the recently-acquired station
on the Island of Karack, opposite Bushire ; the Persian Governor of which last-named
place had, it would appear, visited the admiral.
On the 24th of March Sir Frederick Maitland went, attended by Commodore Brucks
and the other officers of the Indian navy, to return the visit, the cordiality of which
was not interrupted until some discussion arose regarding the detention of supplies
which were that morning being brought to the Wellesley, and some other points of
etiquette, which the admiral did not feel himself justified in conceding to the Governor,
especially as to his embarkation from the pier at the British residency, which the
Governor expressly forbade. The meeting terminated without the ordinary interchange
of friendly salutation, and the admiral distinctly requested to know if it was the
Governor’s intention to prevent his embarking from the pier in question. Receiving
no reply, he declared his intention to secure himself against any impediment that might
be offered. A party of Persian infantry was now marched into the town, and a sentinel
placed at the pier in order to prevent any intercourse with the Wellesley from that
point. On the following morning, the boats of the Wellesley, Algerine, and East India
Company’s sloops-of-war, Clive and Elphinstone, came off the residency to protect the
admiral’s embarkation ; Captain Maitland being a mile in advance of the other boats,
on preparing to land, tbe sentinel attempted to shoot him, but was prevented and dis-
armed by the admiral and other officers, who were immediately severely assailed by the
mob with sticks and stones. The boats now coming close to the pier, a fire was opened
on them by the Persian infantry, from a breastwork that had been thrown up during
the night; this was at first returned from the boats, but the admiral immediately stop-
ped it, and sent a message to the governor, who ordered the Persian infantry also to
cease. The admiral now embarked, and the British resident. Captain Hennell, also
withdrew entirely from Bushire.
Intelligence of these events having reached the viceroy of Fars, he despatched a
messenger to express his regret at their occurrence, requesting that the British resident
would re-land, for the purpose of conferring with an officer of high rank, Jehankir
Khan, who arrived on the 14th of April. The result of this interview had not trans-
pired when the courier left Bushire for Constantinople, on the 16th of April. Our
troops on the island of Karack were singularly healthy.


C®MWU
Papers from Canton direct have come to hand to the 13th of February. Another
edict had been issued by Tang, the Governor, in conformity with the Hoppo, for block-
ing up the back-doors of the foreign factories, under the pretext of more effectually
preventing smuggling. Two former edicts to the same effect had, it appears, been
evaded, and the Hong, to whom the factories it seems belong, had been induced to re-
present that in case of fire the closing up the back-doors might increase the risk of
damage and loss of life; upon which the governor remarks, that there has been only
one fire in twenty years, and as it was therefore an “ event which very seldom occurs,”
it was nothing but a worthless excuse. In conclusion, the Hong merchants are held
resjjonsible for the strict enforcement of the order. Trading matters were not very
prosperous. Cotton yarns and piece-goods were dull of sale, and prices on the decline.
In woollen some rather extensive sales had been effected, but at low prices.
Penan®*
On Saturday last we were all on the qui vive upon the report of two American ships
of war the Columbia, with his Excellency Commodore Reid, and the John Adams,
Captain Wyman, making for this port. Our expectations, however, were disappointed;
the two vessels passed the Island, having falling in with calms, and being in want of
provisions already stored for them at Singapore, it was considered more prudent to
proceed than to put in here.
Our readers will remember that some time ago an American ship, called the Eclipse,
was plundered by the Malays on the West Coast, and his Excellency having received
information of that atrocity at Ceylon, through the consul here, he immediately pro-
ceeded to the ports of Tampat Tuan and Muckay, on the West Coast, where the plun-
der had taken place, and demanded restitution of the property, giving the authorities
three days to restore the property and surrender the people who committed the deed,
or to abide the consequences of a refusal. This requisition, it would appear, was
neglected, and the sequel was the demolition of these places as retribution. After so
salutary an example, we are informed that the different rajahs of those ports, and of the
places in the vicinity, met, and solicited his Excellency the Commodore to leave the
coast, previously signing a treaty that they would protect all American ships coming
hereafter to trade at their ports.—This is the second occasion our American friends
have taken summary proceedings against the plundering propensities of the Malays,
perpetrated upon their merchantmen ; and although at first sight such means of redress
may appear unjust and tyrannical, from the circumstance of the innocent suffering for
the guilty, yet, dealing with savages, perhaps the shortest maybe the best way to attain
reparation for the crimes of murder and piracy, the more easily committed from the too
great confidence, though imprudent, generally reposed in the native character by
European commanders.
That the destruction of these villages, however, with a large amount of property, was
a severe revenge is unquestionable ; but the mental and moral qualities and dispositions
of savages do not admit, it is to be feared, their understanding the justice of any mea-
sure so easily as that of the law of retaliation—any slower process, such as honest John
Bull generally would pursue, and which from its very sluggishness is very often abandoned,
is but little feared by the Malays, the natural result of which must ultimately be that
the more energetic conduct of the American government will make the English to ap-
pear in the eyes of the natives of those parts a weaker and inferior power ; and may
also be the means of Americans obtaining the monopoly of the pepper trade on the
West Coast. —Penang Gazette, Feb, 2.


flWUralffl^tau
NEW SOUTH WALES.
We have files of Australian papers so late as January. Sir G. Gipps has directed the
salaries of some of the government officials to be stopped, till they had discharged the
arrears of business in their offices. The influenza had been most fatal; and in Sydney
alone 10,000 persons were at one time labouring under this malady. The Bishop of
Australia has sailed in H. M. S. Pelorus for New Zealand. In the neighbourhood of
the Big River, the Aborigines had murdered two men, and destroyed a vast number of
sheep. Parties of mounted Bushrangers had committed two murders near Lachlan.
On the 18th Deer., Kilmaister, Oates, Foley, Russell, Parry, Hawkins, and Johnstone,
convicted of the murder, in cold blood, of some thirty natives, including men, women,
and children, suffered the utmost penalty of the law at Sydney. This execution had
created an unusual sensation; and the government appears to have contemplated an
attempt at rescue. A portion of the colonial press openly espouses the cause of these
wretched murderers ; appearing to regard the life of a “ Black,” as of no account: and
some of the jury who convicted them, were openly threatened. The following is an
extract from the address of the judge, in passing sentence of death. “ This is not the
case of the murder of one individual, but of many—men, women, and children, old
men, and babes hanging at their mothers’ breasts, to the number in all, according to
the evidence, probably of thirty individuals, whose bodies on one occasion were mur-
dered—poor defenceless human beings. A party of Blacks were seated round their
fires, which they had just made up for the night—they were resting secure under the
protection of one of you—they were totally unsuspecting—when they were suddenly
surrounded by a band of armed men, of whom you, the prisoners at the bar, were half,
and all of whom were equally guilty. The Blacks fled to the hut of one of you for
safety, but that hut proved the mesh of their destruction. In that hut, into which they
had fled, depending for security—in that hut, amid the tears, the sighs, the sobs, and
the groans of the unhappy victims, you bound them, one by one, with cords—the father,
the mother, and the child—you led them away a small distance from the hut, where,
one and all, with the exception of one woman, met one common destruction. You
burnt the bodies for the purpose of concealment; but it pleased God to send a witness
to the spot before they were entirely consumed. Afterwards some one removed even
the remains that were left. The place was swept, varnished, so that no vestige might
remain ; but the crime had been witnessed in Heaven, and could not be concealed.
The hundreds of birds of prey that were floating about, were witnesses enough to the
whole neighbourhood that a carcass was lying there, which would attract even the least
interested to the spot, to see whether his own ox or his ass were lying there. But,
notwithstanding all the efforts that were made, the rib-bone, and jaw-bone of a child,
and some teeth, were found on the spot. But there is a yet more striking proof of
your guilt; for it pleased God, in his Providence, the day before this crime was com-
mitted, to send rain on the earth, through which your tracks from Newton’s to Dan-
gar’s, and from Dangar’s to the fatal spot, were easily traced. From the hut to the
spot where the deed was committed, there were the traces of horsemen on each side,
and the naked feet of the Blacks in the middle; while from the spot there were no
traces of the Blacks returning.”
SYDNEY.
Arrivals. —Dec. 2. Dryade, from London. 5. Coromandel, do. Fairlie, from
Plymouth. 11. City of Edinburgh, from London. Medusa from do. James Pat-
tison, from Plymouth. 18. Portsea, from Portsmouth. Portland, from Greenock.
23. Susannah Ann, from Portsmouth. 27. Laura, from Liverpool. 29. Elphinstone,
from Dublin. 30. Sovereign, from Greenock. Francis Spaight, from London. Glen-
bervie, from Deal. Jan. 16. Alfred, from London.
Departures. —Jan. 11. City of Edinburgh, Thompson, to load with wool for
London.


BIRTHS, MARRIAGES, AND DEATHS.
BIRTHS.
Dec. 3. —The wife of Mr. H. A. Graves,
of a dau.
6. Mrs. J. 11. Lister, of a dau.
12. The lady of Kerrisoa James, esq., of
a dau.
17. At the Glebe, the lady of Edward
Dent Betts, esq., of a son.
23. AtTeiranna, Goulborn Plains, Mrs.
Gibson, of a son.
25. The lady of George Bennett, esq.,
F. L. S., surg. of a dau,
28. The lady of John M'Cutcheon, esq.,
Commander of the British barque Jean, of a
dau.
29. At Orton Park, Mrs. Lane, of a dau.
Jan. 15.—At Austenham, Mrs. Perry, of
a still-born child.'
MARRrAGES.
Dec. I.—Mr. J. F. Josephson, eldest son
of Jacob Josephson, esq., to Miss L. J.
Davies, eldest dau. of J. J. Davies, esq.,
Sydney.
22. Mr. David Brown, of Paterson River,
to Miss M. Hodgson, Hunter-street, Sydney.
Jan, B.—Captain Davies of the Currency
Lass, to Miss Catherine Dailey, of Sydney.
12. John Henry Sullivan, esq., of the
M‘Leay River, to Miss Caroline Falconer,
of Newtown.
10. At Oswald, C. F. H. Smith, esq.,
Captain of the 28th regiment, to Elizabeth,
eldest daughter of the late William Harper,
esq,, of Oswald, Hunter’s River.
DEATHS.
Oct. I.—At his residence at Maitland,
Grayson Hartley, esq., son of the late Thos.
Hartley, esq., Gillfoot, near Whitehaven,
England.
Nov. s. —Harriet, the infant daughter of
Mr. J. H. Polfs, of the Bank of New South
Wales, aged one year and eight months.
29. At lake Macquarie, Euphemia Janet,
daughter of William Brooks, esq., Lochend,
aged eleven years pnd a half.
30. At his residence, Albion Farm,
Paterson’s River, in the 44th year of his age,
Mr. John Tucker, one of the oldest settlers
on that river.
Dec, I.—Albert Chambers, fourth son of
W. a’Becket, esq., aged eleven months, of
influenza.
2. At Newland’s, Paramatta, Mary Ann,
the wife of Alexander Kenneth Mackenzie,
esq., in the sixtieth year of her age.
5. Andrew Charles, the second son of
Mr. Andrew Oliver, of Pitt-street, aged two
years and eight months.
11. Mr. Jonah Clark, of the Albion
Mills.
9. At lllawarra, Mr. Edward Elliott,
aged sixty eight years.
14. Harriet, the wife of Mr. Charles
Rhodius, of Elizabeth-slreet, aged seventeen
years.
14. Emma, the wife of Mr. Edmund
Leffler, aged twenty-five.
17. At Allowaybank, Mr. James Sheers,
at the advanced age of 103 years and five
months.
24. Fiances Mary, second daughter of
Frederic Wright Unwin, esq., aged two
years.
25. Daniel, son of Mr. M'lnnis, Pitt-
street, Sydney, aged six years.
26. At Wollongong, Sarah, wife of
Charles Throsby Smith, esq.
Jan. 6. At Greenwich Park, Argyle, after
a short illness, Sophia, the wife of John
Jamieson, esq., aged thirty years.
9. Joseph Rookin, esq., of George street.
VAN DIEMAN’S LAND.
In this Island the inhabitants had suffered much from influenza, which appears to
have been unnsually fatal.
Captain Maconnochie’s Report continued a subject of much interest and discussion.
The necessity of a representative legislation was insisted upon.
Preparations were making for the immediate embarkation of the 21st Reg. W. F. for
India.
SHIPPING INTELLIGENCE.
Arrivals. —Dec. 5. Sovereign, from Greenock. 7. Susannah Ann, from London.
14. Hebe, from London. 15. North Briton, from Leith. 16. Derwent, from London.
21. Emu, from do. Jan. 3. Arabia, from do. 9. Union, from do. 16. Isabella, from
Newcastle. 21. Majestic, from the Downs. Louisa Campbell, from London. 22.
Potentate, from Greenock. 23. Gilmore, from London. 28. Caroline, from do.
Statesman, from Liverpool.
Departures. —Dec. 3. Thomas Lowrie, for London, via Port Philip. 11. Brougham,
for do.


MARRIAGES AND DEATHS.
MARRIED.
Nov. 15.—Malcolm M’Gregor, esq., of
the 21st Fusileers, to Miss Connelly, ward
of David Lord, esq.
16. Mr. Daniel Bunce, of the Denmark
Hill Nursery, New Town Road, to Sarah,
eldest daughter of Mr. Thomas Macro, of
Illford, Essex.
Dec. 27.—John Coverdale, M. D., only
son of the late John Coverdale, esq., of
Kedegree, in Bengal, to Anne, youngest
daughter of the late Edward Harbrol, esq.,
of Ripley, in the county of Surrey.
Jan. 19.—C. G. Casey, esq., Assistant-
surgeon at New Norfolk, to Letitra, youngest
daughter of Arthur Gardiner, esq., P.M.,
Avoca.
DEATHS.
Nov. 13.—At New Town, Mr. George
Gatehouse, aged sixty.
Dec. 30. —Of influenza, Margaret Re-
becca, the infant daughter of Mr. P. H.
M'Ardell, Kangaroo Point, aged nine days.
Jan. 15.—Mrs. Hone, the beloved wife of
Joseph Hone, esq.
27. Mr. Henry Paley, aged twenty-six,
of a decline.


HOME INTELLIGENCE.
Lord W. Bentinck. —His Lordship expired after a long and severe illness at
Paris, on the 17th of June.
Prince of Oude. —This Prince has been elected a Member of the Royal Asiatic
Society.
Indian Mission. —On the 10th of May, after Dr. Duff had concluded at Edin-
burgh his last lecture on behalf of the Indian missions, an anonymous note was handed
to him, which contained 5007., to be applied in furthering the object of the lecturer in
bringing the heathen within the pale of Christianity.
Presentations. —The following were presented at the Levee on the 22nd : —Lieut.
Otley, 6th Bengal N. 1., Sir H. Compton, Rev. R. W. Whitford, Madras; Mr.
Beecher, Bengal Engineers ; Mr. Annesly, President of the Medical Board, Madras ;
Mr. H. Walters, Bengal Civil Service; Captain J. S. Hodgson, 12th Bengal N. I. ;
Captain L. Fawcett, 55th regiment; Lieutenant J. T. Daniell, Bengal Army; Lieu-
tenant G. Fisher, Ist Bengal N. I. ; Lieutenant-Colonel Pashe, Madras Army;
Colonel W. Miles, Bombay Army ; Captain M. Hughes, 18th Bombay N. I.; Major
Bayly, E. I. C. S. ; Major-Generals Frederick, C. 8., and Sandwich, C. 8., on pro-
motion, and their being appointed Companions of the Bath ; Captains L. Maclean ;
M. White on his return to India; G. A. Smith, H. Jacob, A. Younghusband, J.
Cooper; Lieutenants W. Master, H. Woodward, H. P. Voules, and C. E. Good;
Captain E Stanley, Mr. F. J. Morris, Ensign E. Walker, Madras Army; Lieutenant-
Colonel Cox, Madras Army; Mr. G. H. Bainbridge, Bombay N. I.; Lieutenant J,
Ewart, 55th N. I. ; Mr. J. Scott, E. I. C. M. S.; Lieutenant A. Tod, 42nd Madras
N. I.
The following were presented at the Levee on the sth of June:—Captain Strau-
benzee, 39th regiment; Mr. Thomas Holroyd ; the Honourable R. Cavendish ; Mr. J.
G. Lawson, B. C.; Ensign Longcroft; Colonel Waters; Colonel Hawes; Colonel
Burney ; Major C. Christie; Captain Eames ; Captain C. Denton ; Mr. R. O'Connor,
17th regiment; Lieutenant Brooke ; Major-General J. Dowton ; Lieutenant Martin.
Communication with India. —The efforts of the East India and China Associa-
tion to obtain, through the Government, an arrangement with France for the speedy
and safe conveyance of the India mails between Alexandria and Calais, have proved
successful. Annexed are the outlines of a convention which has been concluded be-
tween the two Governments for that purpose :
The convention concluded with the French Government stipulates :
That the correspondence between England and the East Indies shall be conveyed
through France in plate-iron or tin cases (hermetically closed) as regards letters
from India, or in sealed hags from England, under charge of a special messenger, and
to be forwarded from Marseilles to Alexandria, and vice versa, in steam vessels of 160
horse power.
To leave Marseilles on the Ist, 11th and 21st of each month and Alexandria on the
7th, 17th, and 27th of each month.
The time to be occupied between Calais and Marseilles, four days six hours.
And passage from Marseilles to Alexandria, twelve days twelve hours.
Ditto from Alexandria to Marseilles, fourteen days nine hours, making the time re-
quired for the outward mail between London and Alexandria, eighteen days, and for
the homeward about twenty and a half days.
The French Post-office are to be paid in satisfaction of all charges of conveyance be-
tween Calais and Alexandria, six francs per ounce British, for letters (net weight), and
ten cents for newspapers or printed price currents per sheet.
Certain abatements are to be made to the English Post-office, if the mails are con-
veyed between Marseilles and Malta, or Malta and Alexandria, in British packets ;
but this, it is presumed, will not affect the rate of postage chargeable to the sender or
receiver of letters for the whole distance between London and Alexandria. The
postage, therefore, of letters from London to India may be calculated at—


Per single letter from London to Calais
0
10
Ditto, from Calais to Alexandria, if not exceeding a quarter of an ounce
in weight (one ounce being six francs or five shillings)
1
3
1
0
Together
3
1
(The previous rate 3s. 8 %d.)
The new arrangement to come into operation in two months from this time, or sooner,
if it can be effected.
We understand that the East India and China Association have agreed to request
that the mail through France shall be dispatched on the 4th of each month.
British India Society. —A meeting preparatory to the establishment of the
British India Society, was held in London, on the Ist of June, which was attended by
Sir C. E. Smith, M.P., Sir C. Forbes, Bart., F. C. Brown, Esq., Joseph Pease, Esq.,
Joseph Sturge, Esq., John Crawford, Esq., Dx\ Bowring, George Thompson, Esq.,
Major-Gen. Briggs, and others.
The grounds upon which these gentlemen rest their claims to public sympathy and
support, are the frequency with which famines in India recur, and the necessity of
adopting some vigorous means for their prevention.
George Thompson, Esq., delivered an address replete with eloquence, and upwards
of two hours in length. He first called the attention of the meeting to the vast extent
of our Indian territories—to its soil, its language, its agricultural and commercial
capabilities, and its claims upon the philanthropy and Christian zeal of the inhabitants
of this country. They had succeeded in emancipating 600,000 slaves in the West
Indies ; and if they would now redeem Africa, they must come forward and regenerate
India. From Africa, 150,000 human beings were annually transported to America;
and, in this country, they were actually consuming the produce of American slave-
labour, for which they were paying at the rate of eighteen-pence a-day, when in India,
the same articles might be produced at one penny a-day. The people in India were
grievously oppressed, and wretchedly poor. This was to be traced to the enormous
taxation of the East India Company. When the Hindoos had the taxation in their
own hands, they only took one-sixth; when the Mahomedans had that control, they
took one-fourth; but when the British had come into the possession of that country,
they had taken all, —and they wanted to take more than all, but had not yet discovered
the way. Famines, they knew, were frequent in that country. Those which had
occurred prior to 1818, might be partially attributed to the ravages of war ; but it was
a startling fact, that since that period,—a period of profound peace, —they had been
increasing in their frequency, and in the destructiveness of their influence. Last year,
500,000 had died under the walls of Agra ; but how many had perished in the jungles,
and in the woods, they must gather their dust, and number their skeletons to tell.
These famines were to be attributed partly to the want of communication between the
different parts of the country, and partly to the odious monopolies. In India, such was
the state of the roads, that twelve miles was considered a good day’s journey. The
people, therefore, might be starving in one district, and in another they might have a
superabundance ; and yet, from the wretched state of the roads, they were unable, even
if the money were not wanting, to furnish the necessary supply. The monopolists, too,
had a most destructive influence. Salt was a monopoly. Opium was grown when
corn should be produced; and this was sent to demoralise the inhabitants of China,
contrary to the prohibition of the Emperor of that country. Britain was not yet free
from the curse of slavery. Notwithstanding the clause introduced by Mr. Buxton, and
afterwards changed by the Duke of Wellington, at the renewal of the charter in 1833,
not a single slave in British India had in consequence received his freedom. This
society proposed to effect the regeneration of India, by bringing out its latent commer-
cial capabilities ; and to do this, as a means of preventing a recurrence of those desola-
ting and destructive famines, he called upon all who heard him to unite.
Mr. F. Brown; Dr. Bowring; John Crawford, Esq.; Major-General Briggs ; and
other gentlemen, addressed the meeting in support of Mr. Thompson’s statements.
Oriental Herald. — Vol. 4.— No. XIX.


MILITARY INTELLIGENCE.
CAVALRY.
13th Dragoons—Dr, Clark has arrived from India.
15th Hussars—The head quarters, with Colonel Badcock, Majors Phillips and
Wathers, and the greater portion of the regiment, have sailed for Bombay in the Here-
fordshire. The second division, under Lieut.-Col. Sir Walter Scott, Bart., proceed in
in the Malabar. Lord Viscount Jocelyn has taken his departure for India, overland,
making a tour of the Continent. His lordship was entertained by his friends on the
3rd of June.
INFANTRY.
4th Regiment—Major Irving and Lieut. Buxton have arrived from Madras.
9th—Lieut. Farrant and Ensign Palmer sail for Bengal, in the Plantagenet.
12th—The head quarters of the depot at Newport.
13th—Capt. Meredith has arrived from India. Detachments sail for Bengal, in the
Plantagenet and Seringapatam.
Kith Lieut. G. Stoney has joined the depot. Lieut. W. A. Kirk has arrived from
India.
21st —Capt. Bunbury has leave to the 12th of July.
26th Capt. Pateson has embarked for Madras, in command of the troops, in the
Owen Glendower. Lieuts. Thompson and Sibley have arrived from India.
31st—Lieut. Stock has arrived from India. Lieut. White sails for India in a few
days.
39th Ensigns Curry and Harvey, with drafts, have sailed in the Owen Glendower,
for Madras. Lieut. Griffiths has leave to the Ist of August; and Capt. Straubenzee,
to the 29th inst.
44th—Brev.-Major Johnstone proceeds to Bengal, with a detachment, in the Sering-
apatam. ®
49th—This regiment will probably be relieved by the 50th, from Australia. Cant
Sparks has left the Military College. P
54th—The depot has returned to Chatham. Capt. Clark and Ensign Paget are on
leave. °
61st—On the 20th of May, for a wager of 300/., Lieut. Stephens began his herculean
task of moving on foot 75 miles in twelve hours. The place appointed was Kilcommon
on the Anglesey-road, a mountainous district of Tipperary, over a marked course of
two miles and a half, rather up and down hill. When he had traversed 40 miles odds
were made but not taken, that he would accomplish the feat within time ; but unfortu
nately, after the 47th mile, he was obliged to give in, with a swelling in the right ancle
which it appears he had strained six months before. Lieut. S. got over the 47 miles
in 6 hours, 55 minutes ; and, until the last half-hour, looked an easy winner He is a
capital pedestrian ; height, five-feet, eight inches, and weight, ten stone, eight pounds
He wore a light flannel dress, and cloth ancle-boots, laced. He took 22 minutes to
breakfast, and made only one rest more, which was four minutes.
62nd—A detachment for this regiment has sailed in the Owen Glendower, for Madras
63rd—The Owen Glendower takes out a detachment for this regiment,
8/th A detachment of two officers and 41 men is ordered to the Mauritius.
90th— Ensign Ewatt is on leave.
Major.-Gen. Elphinstone proceeds to India, in the Maidstone.
There is a report, that the Court of Directors have determined upon augmenting the
number of their officers in the Indian army. 5
We believe that the grievance of soldiers in India being paid in rupees issued at
2s. 6d., though the real value is only about 25., is likely to receive attention/
The Adjutancy of Chatham Garrison is vacant by the death of Lieut. R F. Harnett
of the 41st. Dr. Piper is appointed Surgeon, and Lieut. Hamilton, 2d Foot, Acting
Quarter-master to the garrison.
MILITARY PROMOTIONS.
May 24. 21st Foot. Serjeant-Majohn Yale to be Quartermaster vice Fairgreave
deceased. 6 ’
39th Foot. Lieutenant Y illiam Munro to be Adjutant, vice Nixen, promoted.
41st Foot.—Lieutenant Bertie J. Gray, from half-pay of the Royal African Corps, to
be Lieutenant, vice Nepean, appointed to the 77th Regiment of Foot.


May 31.—4th Regiment of Light Dragoons.—Lieutenant George Garrick Shaw, to
be Captain, without purchase, vice Gillespie, appointed to the 15th Light Dragoons ;
Cornet William Wellington Waterloo Humbly to be Lieutenant, without purchase,
vice Fyers, deceased ; Cornet John Foster Fitzgerald to be Lieutenant, vice Shaw.
15th Regiment of Light Dragoons.—Major Sir Walter Scott, Bart., to be Lieutenant-
Colonel, without purchase ; Captain Augustus Wathen to be Major, without purchase,
vice Scott. To be Captains, without purchase : Captain Robert Rollo Gillespie, from
the 4th Light Dragoons; Captain William Penn, from the 13th Light Dragoons ;
Lieutenant Thomas Coventry Brander, from the Ist Dragoon Guards; Lieutenant
Charles Higginson Teush Hecker, vice Wathen. To be Assistant Surgeon, Henry
Cooper Reade, Gent.
3rd Regiment of Foot.—Ensign Richard Herbert Gall to be Lieutenant, without
purchase, vice Desborough, appointed Adjutant; Ensign Kenneth M'Kenzie to be
Lieutenant, by purchase, vice Gall, whose promotion, by purchase, has been cancelled ;
James Hope, Gent., to be Ensign without purchase, vice M'Kenzie ; Lieut. Lawrence
Desborough to be adjutant, vice White, deceased.
sth Foot.—Major William Sadlier, from the 58th Foot to be Major, vice Irving, who
exchanges.
9th Foot.— Captain John Charles Campbell, from the 45th Foot, to be Captain, vice
Hind, who exchanges.
21st Foot. —Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel John Luard, from half-pay Unattached, to be
Major, vice Roche Meade who exchanges.
54th Foot.—Ensign Henry Hyacinth Warren to be Lieutenant, by purchase, vice
Harris, whose promotion has been cancelled ; Ensign Timothy Crowe, from the Royal
Newfoundland Veteran Companies, to be Ensign, vice Harris, deceased.
55th Foot.—Major Henry Houghton Irving, from the 4th Regiment of Foot, to be
Major, vice Sadlier, who exchanges.
June 7. —15th Regiment of Light Dragoons—To be Lieuts., without purchase ; Lieut.
G. B. Hall, from the half-pay of the 19th Light Dragoons ; Lieut. G. A. Robertson,
from the 55th Foot; Lieut. O. G. Perrott, from the 26th Foot; Lieut. H. Routh, from
the 49th Foot; Lieut. P. D’Ormieux Von Streng, from the 13th Foot; Lieut. C. A.
Sinclair, from the 49th Foot; Lieut. J. Macartney, from the 13th Light Dragoons ;
Lieut. T. B. Jackson, from the 13th Light Dragoons ; Lieut. J. H. Gray, from the
13th Light Dragoons,
To be Cornets, without purchase—Cornet V. Beatty, from the half-pay 24th Light
Dragoons ; Cornet Hon. J. Coventry, from the half-pay 10th Light Dragoons.
40th Foot.—Ensign A. J. Magnay to be Lieut., without purchase, vice Morris, de-
ceased, May 25 ; Gent. Cadet J. W. Thomas, from the Royal Military College, to be
Ensign, without purchase, vice Magnay.
41st Foot.—Ensign J. de Blacquiere, to be Lieut., without purchase, vice Harnet,
deceased, May 7 ; Gentleman Cadet, T. M. L. Farmer, from the Royal Military Col-
lege, to be Ensign, without purchase, vice de Blacquiere.
55th Foot.—Capt. A. H, S. Young, from the half-pay Unattached, to be Capt., vice
J. Forbes, who exchanges, receiving the difference.
June 14. 4th Regiment Dragoons.—Cornet J. A. Todd, to be Lieut., by purchase,
vice Humbly, whose promotion has been cancelled ; Cornet D. Hollingworth, from
half-pay 2d Dragoons, to be Cornet, vice Fitzgerald, promoted ; Cornet R. Newman,
from half-pay 4th Dragoons, to be Cornet, vice Todd; T. J. Francis, gent., to be
Cornet, by purchase, vice Hollingworth, who retires; F. Pipon, gent, to be Cornet, by
purchase, vice Newman, who retires.
15th Regiment Dragoons.—Cornet W. G. Cherry, from half-pay 4th Dragoons, to
be Cornet, without purchase ; Cornet R. Harvey, from half-pay Ist Dragoon, to be
Cornet, without purchase ; Reg. Serj.-Major J. Cocks, to be Adjutant (with rank of
Cornet), vice Hecker, promoted.
6th Regiment of Foot.—Ensign E. Montagu, to be Lieut., by purchase, vice Schnell;
F. L. Loinsworth, to be Ensign, by purchase, vice Montagu; Cadet E. F. Crowder,
from Royal Military College, to be Ensign, vice Patterson, cashiered.
13th.—Ensign G. Mein, to be Lieut., without purchase, vice Von Streng. appointed
to the 15th Light Dragoons; Cadet G. G. C. Stapylton, from Royal Military College,
to be Ensign, vice Mein.
26th Foot.—Ensign W. Le Poer Trench, from 55th Foot, to be Lieut., by purchase,
vice Evans; Ensign W. B. Park, to be Lieut., without purchase, vice Perrot, appointed
to the 15th Light Dragoons; Gent. Cadet Maurice Cave, from the Royal Military
College, to be Ensign, vice Park.


35th Foot.—Capt. William Drummond Stewart, from the 2d Dragoons, to be Capt.,
vice Griffiths, who exchanges.
44th Foot.—Capt. Alured William Gray, from half-pay unattached, to be Capt.,
vice Edward L’Estrange, who exchanges.
49th Foot.—Ensign H, Seymour Michell, to be Lieut., without purchase, vice Routh,
appointed to the 15th Light Dragoon ; Ensign Thomas Ponsonby Gibbons, to be
Lieut., without purchase, vice Sinclair, appointed to the 15th Light Dragoons.
55th Foot.—Lieut. W. C. Finder, from the Ist West India Regiment, to be Lieut.,
vice Robertson, appointed to 15th Light Dragoons; J. G. Schaw, gent., to be Ensign,
by purchase, vice Trench, promoted in the 26th Foot.
SHIPPING INTELLIGENCE.
ARRIVALS FROM INDIA.
May 30. Atlas, Mauritius. Kite, do. 31. Patriot Queen, China Euphrates,
do. June 1. Meg Merrilies, Mauritius. 5. William Metcalf, Manilla—Frances Ann,
Bengal. 6. Robert Small, do.—Mary, China. —Isabella, Bengal.—St. Lawrence, Ba-
tavia. 7. Scotia, Bengal.—Elizabeth, Mauritius.—Duchess of Northumberland, Ma-
nilla.—Duke of Argyll, Madras.—Emma, Singapore.—Persian, do.—Susan Crisp,
Mauritius.—Westminster, China.—Enmore, Bengal.—Bengal, China. —Strabane, Ben-
gal. 8. Nile, Manilla.—Esperance, Bengal.—Canton, Java. —John King, Mauritius.
—Calypso, do.—Orestes, China.—City of London, Java.—Blorenge, Bengal.—Diana,
do.—Holland, Batavia.—Mary and Hillegonda, do.—Antoinette Maria, Batavia.—
Prince of Orange, do. 10. Sophia, Singapore.—Nautilus, do.—Lady Feversham,
Bombay.—John Bull, China.—Duke of Lancaster, do.— Ambassador, Mauritius.—
Abbotsford, Ceylon.—lndus, China.—Neptunus Batavia.—Cecilia, do.—Maria, do. —
Bencoolen, Singapore.—Chelydra, China.—Ruby, Bengal.—Sir John Tobin, Mauritius.
—Fatima, Bengal.—Jupiter, Bombay.—Drummore, Bengal.—Cornubia, Bombay.—
Dryad, Singapore.—Helen Jane, Mauritius.—Margaret, do.—Bencoolen, Java.—Au-
rora, Bombay.—Adelaide, Bengal.—Bleng, Madras. —Hortensia, Manilla.—Ariel,
Mauritius. —Westmoreland, Java.—Arab, Mauritius.—Magistrate, Java.—Vasco de
Gama, do.—King of the Netherlands, do. 11. Eagle, Mauritius.—Eleanor Russell,
do.—Cleveland, Manilla.—Mary Ann, Madras. —Richmond, Bengal.—Countess of
Durham, Java.—Allerton, Bengal.—Mary Gray, Mauritius.—Sir Edward Paget,
Bombay.—Duchess of Clarence, do.—Perthshire, Java. 12. Mary Eliza, Bengal.—
John, do.—lmogen, China.—Eliza Stuart, do.—Captain Cook, Ceylon.—Runnymede,
Manilla.—Venerable, Singapore.—Adrastus, Mauritius. —Oriental, China.—Wilmot,
Java.—Neptune, Manilla. 13. Penang, China.—Jane Brown, do. 15. British Mo-
narch, Mauritius. 17. Windsor, Bengal.—Moffatt, China. —Britannia, Bengal. 19.
Friends, Singapore. 22. Decima, Batavia. 24. Apollo (H. M. troop ship) from Ceylon
to Portsmouth. La Belle Alliance, from China in the Downs.
DEPARTURES.
June 13. Plantagenet, Bengal. 10. Lyra, Batavia. 7. Hero, Bombay. May 29.
Janet Boyd, Topping, Bengal, Greenock. June 4. Regular, Budd, Bombay, Liver-
pool.—6. Luconia, Gore, China, Liverpool; Heywood, Jones, Bombay, Liverpool.
—Herefordshire, Chapman, Bombay, Downs. May 28. Richard, Blakely, Bengal,
Liverpool. 31. William Lockerby, Parker, Bengal, do. June 3. Queen Mab, Aiuley,
China, Liverpool. May 30. Vanguard, Walker, Penang and Singapore, Downs. 28.
Peru, Huyles, Batavia, Singapore, Liverpool. 25. Isabella Cooper, Salmon, Bengal,
Clyde. June 12. Apprentice, Cadenhead, Mauritius, Downs. May 29. Childe Ha-
rold, Willis, Bombay, Portsmouth.
PASSENGERS TO INDIA.
Per Minerva for Madras.—Col. Bird; Mrs. Bird ; Capt. A. Grant; Hon. Mrs.
Grant; Miss Grant; Miss Davidson; Mrs. Rowlandson ; Mr. Laire ; Lieut. Taylor;
Lieut. Pratt, H. M. 63d reg.; Mrs. Pratt; Brevet-Major Jackson, H. M. 57th reg.;


Lieut. Stewart, H. M. 21st Fusileers ; Second Lieut. Brabazon, H. M. 21st Fusileers ;
Ensign Cassidy, H. M. 57th reg.; Messrs. Cherry, Ellis, Fane, civil service; C. J.
Bradley, cadet; W. S. Bruere, cadet; West, Esq.
Per Owen Glendower. —Col. Hay ; Capt. and Mrs. Paterson ; Mr. Layard; Messrs.
Gilmore and Iggleden ; Mrs. Parbury; Mr. Gribble and family ; Mr. and Mrs. Bazett;
Mr. H. Scott; Capt. and Mrs. Lumley ; Lieut. Hore ; Mr. Ravenshaw ; Messrs. Nesbit,
Germon, Graydon, Giffard, &c. ; officers and troops.
Per Seringapatam. —Mr. and Mrs. Wood ; Major and Mrs. Johnson ; Capt. and
Mrs. Ross; Mr. Foskett; Rev. Mr. and Mrs. Rogers ; Miss Young; Miss Humphreys;
Rev. Mr. Garbitt; Rev. Mr. Fisher; Capt. Hopkins ; Messrs. Cowie, Greenlaw,
Wright, Beecher, Alexander, Knox, Macquier, Lowder, Hobbs, Lance, Phillips,
Wallace.
Per Childe Harold. —Mr. and Mrs. Giberne ; Miss Dickens ; Mrs. Blower and family;
two Miss Morrises ; Mr. Levine; Mr. Hunt; Mr. Barker ; Mr. Lodwick ; Mr. Knot;
Mr. Reynolds ; Mr. Fraser; Mr. Crane; Mr. Durham and family.
Per Achilles. —Mr. Ford ; Capt. Mac Alpine; Mr. Franchelles ; Dr. Beetson ; Mr.
Templer; Mr. Allen.
Per Plantagenet. -Hon. E. Hastings, Rev. Mr. Chadwick, and four students ; Capt.
Platt and lady, Mr. and Mrs. Morris, Rev. Mr. Pearce, and nine gentlemen ; Mr. Core,
Miss Morris and servant; Mr. and Mrs. Innes ; Rev. Messrs. Lapp and Krosman;
Lieut. Farrant and Ensign Palmer in charge of troops, and sixty-five H. M. regiments.
PASSENGERS FROM INDIA.
Per Windsor, from Bengal.—Major and Mrs. Hutchinson, B. Engineers ; Mr. and
Mrs. Thomason, C. S.; Mrs. Colonel Fane and children; Miss Fane; Captain Yea,
H. M. 4th; Lieutenant Sawyer, 3d Buffs ; Ensign Dickenson, 24th N. I.; Miss
Webster; Mr. and Mrs. Henderson ; Mr. Pehmoller; two Masters Grant.
Per Scotia, from Bengal.—Mrs. Shaw ; Mrs. Mytton; Mrs. Bruce; Mrs. Frier
Smith; J. Shaw, Esq. ; E. Benthall, Esq.; R. H. Mytton, Esq.; F. Bruce, Esq. ;
Adam Frier Smith, Esq.; Major Johnson, H. M. 13th Foot; A. Harton, Esq.; D.
Inglis ; Captain Johnson; W. Higgins, Esq. ; three Misses Shaw ; Master Shaw;
Miss Mytton ; two Masters Mytton ; Miss Bruce; two Masters Bruce; two Misses
Smith; two Masters Smith; Miss Eliza White; Surgeon D. Woodhouse ; W. Hen-
derson, Esq. ; Mrs. A. F. Smith, [died at sea sth April] ; Major Johnson, H.M. 13th
[died at sea 20th April.]
Per Enmore, from Bengal.—Captain H. W. Leacock, 17th N. I. ; Mr. A. White.
Per Lady Feversham, from Bombay.—Mrs. Colonel Stevenson and two children ;
Mrs. Major Forbes and three children ; Mrs. Cochlan and three children ; Mrs. Ram-
say ; Mrs. Stiles ; Major Forbes ; Captain Lumley, H. M. 6th ; Lieut. Rees, M.
Eur. regt.; three European and two native servants.
From Cannanore. —Mrs. Street and two children ; Major Lowe and two children.
From Cape.—Captain and Mrs. Campbell; Mrs. Hoets.
Per Aurora, from Bengal.—Mrs. Masters and two children ; Mrs. Poore and child;
Mrs. Unwin ; Mrs. Craigie and child; Mrs. Gahan ; Mrs. Postans; Mrs. Hunter and
four children ; Mrs. Cox and child ; Lieut. Poole, H. M. 11th Dragoons, in charge of
invalids; Lieut. Harvey, H.M. 17th regt.; Lieut. Gahan, H. M.’s 57th; sixty-six
invalids, H. M. S.; ten women and twenty-four children.
Per Esperance, from Bengal.—Mr. and Mrs. C. Corfield and family.
Per Richmond, from Bengal.—Mrs. Scott; Mrs. Croxton; Mrs. Jackson; Mrs.
Colonel Herring ; Mrs. Captain A. C. Spottiswoode; Mrs. Hulse; Mrs. T. W. Burt;
R. H. Scott, Esq.; Major Croxton, artillery; Dr. Jackson, Bth L. C.; Dr. M‘Cosh;
Dr. Bousfield; Lieut. J. W. Forbes, H. M. 13th Foot [died at sea 28th January] ;
Master Templar; two Masters Scott; Master Raikes; Master Spottiswoode [died at
sea] ; Misses Croxton, Burt, Raikes, Spottiswoode, and Herring. Born at sea—
Master and Miss Herring.
From the Cape.—Major and Mrs. F. Stratton and family, Bth M. L. Cavalry.
Per Argyll, from Bombay.—Capt. and Mrs. Robison, Nizam’s Army; Mr. Cahill,
late Bombay Eur. regt.
Per Urania, from Bombay.—Mrs. Webb and family ; Rev. Mr. and Mrs. Boyes;
Lieut. J. M.M. Johnstone, 4th M.N. I.; Messrs. Rawlins and Menzies; Mr. Stracher;
Master Malcomson.
Per Duke of Argyll, from Madras.—Mrs. Ashton; Mrs. Meikle; Mrs. Peppercorn ;
Mrs. Buchanan; Major Stanley Bullock; Rev. R. A. Denton ; S. J. Popham, Esq.;


Capt. Buchanan; Lieut. H. Edwards, H. M. 55th regt.; Lieut. Kennedy, H. M. 4th
regt.; Lieut. White; Capt. H. T. Hitchins, 52nd N. I.; Rev. Mr. Stephens ; the
Misses Baynes, Blundell, Wahab, and Lambert; two Misses Meikle ; two servants :
sixty-six invalids, H. M. S. ; seven women ; and sixteen children.
To the Cape.—Mr. Elliott, R. N.; Mr. W. Ashton, C. S.
From the Cape.—Dr. Moyle, late Member Bombay Medical Board, and Mr. Moyle ;
Mr. and Mrs. Revelly.
Per William Jardine, from China.—Rev. Mr. Lay ;R. Lewis, Esq-, R. N.; Mr. and
Mrs. W. F. Markes and family ; Lieut. D. Birley, 27th M. N. I.
BIRTHS, MARRIAGES, AND DEATHS.
BIRTHS.
May 13.—At his house in Upper Glouces-
ter-place, the lady of Captain Mignon, of
the Bombay Array of a son.
At Maidstone, the wife of Cornet
Gladstone, 3d Light Dragoons, of a son.
June 10.—At 29 Upper Montague-street,
Montague-square, the lady of Thos. Goulds-
worthy, esq., of a son.
17. At Merton, Surrey, the wife of Geo.
Adams, esq., Bengal Civil Service, of a son.
MARRIAGES.
May 28.—At Sholden, by the Rev. Geo.
Rainier, James Symington Shortt, esq.,
Lieut. 4th or King’s Own, son of the late
Lieut.-Col. Shortt, of H. M. 41st regt, to
Mary, daughter of Vice-Admiral Sir Thos.
Harvey, K.C.8., of Sholden-lodge, Kent.
21. At St. Stephen’s Church, St. Alban’s,
by the Rev. Marcus Southwell, Major, R. O.
Mereton, late of the Hon. East India Com-
pany’s Military service, to Alexina, young-
est daughter of Alexander Lamb, esq., of
Marford, Herts.
29. At St. Margaret’s Church, West-
minster, by the Rev. H. H. Milman, Mat-
thew Wood, esq., Madras Army, to Sarah
Maria, youngest daughter of the late Jere-
miah Glanvill, esq., of North Cray, Kent.
6. At St. George’s Southwark, by the
Rev. Montague Hawtrey, M.A., James
Calder Stewart, esq., of York-terrace, Re-
gent’s-park, to Rosina, eldest daughter of
Alexander Campbell, esq., of West-square,
Lambeth.
8. At Norwich, by the Rev. Armine Her-
ring, M.A., Edward Baker, esq., of the 32d
regt. of Madras N. 1., fifth son of Sir Robt.
Baker of Montagu-place, llussell-square, to
Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Samuel Baker,
esq., of Knapton, in the county of Norfolk.
13. At Christ Church, Marylebone, by
the Rev, Robert Walpole, 8.D., James
Scott, esq., of Madras, to Margaret, third
daughter of Alexander Duncan, esq., of
Glendevon, Linlithgowshire, North Britain.
June 11.—At St. Mary’s, Colchester, by
the Rev. Philip Bayles, Robert Lungley,
esq., late of Bombay, to Amelia, youngest
daughter of Bartholomew Brown, esq., of
Lexden, Essex.
At Dieppe, H. C. Clarke, esq., 3d
Buffs, eldest son of Colonel Clarke, late of
Scots Greys, to Eliza, third daughter of
W. Harrison, esq., Upper Bedford-place.
At St. James’s Church, by the Rev.
R. T. Forester, Captain Flower, of the
Bengal Army, to Julia, eldest daughter of
Major Forester, and granddaughter of the
Duke of Cleveland.
19. At St. Mary's Church, Marylebone,
by the Rev. Dr. Stoddard, rector, William
Shute Wint, esq., 13th Light Dragoons, son
of John Pusey Wint, esq., late of the Island
of Jamaica, to Maria Roe, only child of
John Roe, esq., late proprietor of Caen-
wood estate, of the same island.
At the parish church of Tidenham,
near Chepstow, by the Rev. Alfred Bazett,
Captain Brownlow E. Layard, of Her
Majesty’s Ceylon Rifles, to Emily, youngest
daughter of the late John Pooley Kensing-
ton, esq., of Putney.
6. At Milliken House, Renfrewshire,
Robert Speir, esq., late of Calcutta, son of
Robert Spier, esq., of Burnbrae, to Mary
Milliken Napier, eldest daughter of Sir Wil-
liam Milliken Napier, of Milliken and Na-
pier, Bart.
DEATHS.
June 3.—ln her 81st year, Anna Sabina,
wife of William Smith, esq., of Stockwell,
Surrey, and formerly of Calcutta.
At sea, on his passage from India,
Lieut.-Colonel Johnston, late 13th light
infantry.
At Gravesend, the lady of Assistant-
surgeon R. Hughes, Bengal Medical Estab-
lishment.
17. At his residence, Rue Chauss£e
d’Antin, Paris, Lord William Bentinck, in
his 66th year.


POSTSCRIPT.
London, June 27, 1839.
The overland mail from India, which was due on the 17th instant, reached town this
morning, bringing accounts from Calcutta, to the 27th of April; and Bombay Bth May.
The delay which has taken place is accounted for by the fact, that the Hugh Lindsay,
which left Bombay on the 16th of April, was obliged to put back after having proceeded
800 miles. The mails were brought forward by the Berenice, which vessel would take
on the India London letters of the 16th of May. The Atalantawas to leave Bombay
for Suez on the 20th of May.
Upon the present occasion there is only time for a brief notice of such items of
intelligence as appear to be of leading interest.
The division of the army of the Indus, under Sir W. Cotton had traversed the
Bolan Pass without opposition. The following from the Bombay Times, May 4.
“ Letters from the army, on which we can depend, state that Sir Willoughby Cot-
ton’s division got safely through the Bolan Pass on the 21st of March, the Chief of
Khelat rendering materal assistance. They intended to halt in the valley of Shawl,
until joined by Sir John Keane.
“ There had been a fall of snow, which was found very trying to the natives.
“ Sir A. Burnes was at Kival, in Shawl, on the 21st of March.”
It appears that the Bolan Pass was taken, the Gundabee and Maula Passes having
been declared impracticable. Shah Soojah’s force had halted to allow the Chief to go
a-head of the columns.
Captain Stockley while en route from Shikarpore to the advance with 500 camels
and a month’s provision was attacked bya Beloochee force, from which he escaped with
great difficulty, but with the loss of camels and provisions.
It appears that the army in general had been compelled to halt upon several occasions
from a great scarcity of water.
On the 29th March, the Bombay division commenced its march upon Dadur, Sir
John Keane having preceded it with the Ist Cavalry and a wing of the 19th N.I.
By the overflow of the Indus on the night of the 29th March, the bridge of boats was
carried away, and a considerable quantity of grain and flour destroyed.
Accounts from Loodiana state that the Affghan chieftain, Rooboollah Khan, had
joined Dost Mahomed with 10,000 horse. It is, however, stated that Mahomed has
been deserted by many of his Oomraos, and by some he is described as helpless before
the British forces.
The Bombay division of the army had performed a march of twenty-seven miles from
the edge of the Marshy Desert, which they were required to take at once, there
being no water through the whole distance, and on the 16th of March, were at the
Hala Mountain, in the territories of Khelat. The brigade, under Colonel Gordon, was
left in Upper Scind, the Grenadiers at Bukkur, and the sth and 23rd N.I. at Sukkur.
Of the state of our relations with Burmah, the Englishman speaks thus :—The
return of Colonel Benson from Burmah has, of course, put all our quid nuncs on the
qui vive. Those whose “ voice is still for war” will hear of nothing but immediate
equipments, “ mounting in hot haste”—bombardments, battles, and booty. Why
should our Envoy leave if he has not been insulted ? Why should Dr. Bayfield also
come, but that the Rangoon agency is at an end ? The thing is as clear as mud—
“ Bambardinian has received a blow, and Chrononhotonthologos must die.”
Thus says the belligerous—and very much is it to be regretted by some that their
conclusions and conjectures should all prove erroneous. As usual we have made par-
ticular inquiries into the state of affairs, and without setting ourselves up as oracles, ven-
ture to assure our readers that we are as far from a war with Burmah as we were
when we requested a contemporary, nearly two years ago, to pay us a gold mohur a-day
during peace, in consideration of our offer of two thousand rupees down. Colonel
Benson has returned, because his health is unfortunately very indifferent. Dr. Bayfield
has also returned, because he is desirous of communicating with the Bengal Govern-


ment. Captain M‘Leod, in the meanwhile, remains in charge of the Ava Residency,
and provision is made for conducting the agency bu sines at Rangoon.
The force at Moulmein is, we hear, in a state of high efficiency, and Siam is ready to
aid the British Government against the Burmese, should they at any time declare
themselves our foes, or commit any overt act of hostility, of which, however, as we
have already said, there is no present prospect.— Englishman, April 10.
Calcutta. —Major-General Stephenson, one of the eldest officers in the Bengal
army, is obliged to return to England on account of his health.
The Indigo prospects are not favourable ; rain was much wanted, and the plant was
sickly.
The Governor-General reached Simla on the 18th of March. Miss Eden continued
unwell, though somewhat better than she had been before her arrival at Simla. Rain
was falling by the last accounts, though Mount Jacko still exhibited a snowy cap.
Captain Halpin, of Her Majesty’s 49th regiment, was unfortunately drowned by the
upsetting of a boat near Dinapore.
We regret to announce the demise of Mr. G. A. Prinsep, who has fallen a victim to
that fatal disease, the cholera. Mr. Prinsep was the second son of the late Alderman
Prinsep, and consequently a member of a family well known in India, all of whom are
distinguished for talent, and all esteemed in society for their amiable qualities.
THE ARMY OF THE INDUS
GENERAL STAFF.
Major-General Sir Willoughby Cotton, K. C. B. and K. C. H., Commanding the
Force.
Captain Willoughpy Cotton, Her Majesty’s 44th Foot, Aide-de-Camp.
Captain H. Havelock, Her Majesty’s 13th foot, Aide-de-Camp.
Major Patrick Cragie, 38th Regiment Native Infantry, Deputy-Adjutant-General.
Major W. Garden, 36th Regiment Native Infantry, Deputy-Quarter-Master-Ge-
neral.
Captain G. Thomson, Engineers, Chief Engineer.
Major J. D. Parsons, 50th Native Infantry, Deputy-Commissary-General.
Captain B. Bygrave, sth Native Infantry, Pay-Master to the Force.
Surgeon J. Atkinson, 70th Native Infantry, Superintending Surgeon.
Surgeon R. M. M. Thomson, 14th Native Infantry, Field Surgeon.
Assistant-Surgeon, M. J. M. Rose, Her Majesty’s 16th Lancers, Medical Store
Keeper.
Brevet-Major W. Hough, 48th Native Infantry, Deputy J. A. General.
Brevet Captain C. Troup, 38th Native Infantry, Baggage-Master.
Brevet-Major W. Sage, 48th Native Infantry, Deputy-Post-Master.
DIVISIONAL STAFF.
Major-General Thackwell, C. B. and K. H., Her Majesty’s 3d Light Dragoons,
Commanding.
Cornet E. Roche, Her Majesty’s 3d Light Dragoons, Aide-de-Camp.
Major C. R. Cureton, Her Majesty’s 16th Lancers, Assistant-Adjutant-General.
Lieutenant G. C. Crispin, 2d Light Cavalry, Aide-de-Camp.
ls< Division of Infantry .
Major-General W. Nott, 42nd Native Infantry, Commanding.
Ensign W. F. Hammersley, 41st Native Infantry, Aide-de-camp,
Lieutenant A. H. Duncan, 43rd Native Infantry, Aide-de-Camp.
Captain J. D. Douglas, 53rd Native Infantry, Assistant Adjutant-General.
Captain J. Paton, 58th Native Intantry, Assistant Quarter-Master General.
Lieutenant J. Laughton, Engineers, Field Engineer.
Captain A. Watt, 27th Regiment, Native Infantry, Deputy Assistant Commissary-
General.
The Rev. A. Hammond, Chaplain.


BRIGADE STAFF.
Cavalry Brigade .
Brigadier R. Arnold, Her Majesty’s 16th Lancers, Commanding.
Lieutenant R. Pattison, Her Majesty’s 16th Lancers, Aide-de-Camp.
Brevet Capt. C. F. Havelock, Her Majesty’s 16th Lancers, Major of Brigade.
Lieutenant G. B. Reddie, 29th Native Infantry, Sub-Assistant Commissary General.
Brevet Major H. Hay, 2d Light Cavalry, Acting Deputy Assistant Quarter-Master
General.
Corps. —2d Regiment Light Cavalry; her Majesty’s 16 th Lancers ; 3rd Regiment
Light Cavalry ; 4th Regiment Local Horse ; A Ressallah of the Ist Local Horse.
Artillery.
Brigadier C. Graham, C. 8., Horse Artillery, Commanding (at Ferozepore).
Brevet Captain J. B. Backhouse, Horse Artillery, Major of Brigade.
Captain N. F. Day, sth Battalion Artillery Commissary of Ordnance.
Lieutenant G. Newbolt, 31st Native Infantry, Sub-Assistant Commissary-General.
Corps. —2d Troop 2d Brigade Horse Artillery ; 4th Company 2d Battalion ; 2d Com-
pany 6th Battalion.
Isf Brigade.
Brigadier R. H. Sale, C. 8., Her Majesty’s 13th Light Infantry, Commanding.
Lieutenant J. S. Wood, Her Majesty’s 13th Light Infantry, Aide-de-Camp.
Brevet Major T. C. Squire, Her Majesty’s 13th Light Infantry, Major of Brigade.
Lieutenant R. Simpson, 27th Regiment Native Infantry, Sub-Assistant Commissary-
General.
Corps.— l6th Regiment Native Infantry, Her Majesty’s 13th Light Infantry, 40th
Regiment Native Infantry.
2nd Brigade.
Major General W. Nott, 42d N. 1., in Command of the Ist Division of Infantry.
Lieutenant-Colonel W. H. Dennie, C. 8., Her Majesty’s 13th Foot, in Command.
Ensign G. Wade, Her Majesty’s 13th Foot, Acting Aide-de-Camp.
Captain T. Polwhele, 42d Native Infantry, Major of Brigade.
Corps.—42d, 31st, and 43d Regiments Native Infantry.
4th Brigade.
Brigadier A. Roberts, European Regiment, Commanding.
Lieutenant J. G. Gerrard, European Regiment, Aide-de-Camp.
Captain A. W. Taylor, European Regiment, Major of Brigade.
Corps. —European Regiment, 37th Regiment Native Infantry at Bukkur, 35th
Regiment Native Infantry.
2d and 3d Companies Sappers and Miners.
The following lately formed a portion of the Army of the Indus, and now appertains
to the
SIRHIND DIVISION.
DIVISIONAL STAFF.
2nd Division of Infantry.
Ferozepore.
Major-General A. Duncan, sth Native Infantry, Commanding.
Lieutenant A. H. Duncan, 43rd Native Infantry, Aide-de-Camp with his Regiment.
Captain C. W. Haig, sth Regiment Native Infantry, Aide-de-Camp.
Ensign J. A. Duncan, Her Majesty’s 13th Foot, Aide-de-Camp.
Captain W. G. Cooper, 71st Native Infantry, Deputy-Assistant-Adjutant-General
of the Sirhind Division.
Lieutenant A. Sanders, 44th Native Infantry, Officiating Deputy-Assistant-Quarter-
Master-General, 2d class.
Oriental Herald.~Vol. 4 .—No. XIX. K


Lieutenant H. H. Duncan, Engineers, Field Engineers.
Lieutenant J. Skinner, 61st Native Infantry, Deputy-Assistant-Commissary-Ge-
neral.
The Rev. R. Eteson, Chaplain.
BRIGADE STAFF.
3d Brigade, Ferozepore.
Brigadier G. P. Wymer, 27th Native Infantry, Commanding.
Lieutenant T. Young, 2d Native Infantry, Officiating-Major of Brigade.
Corps. —s Ressallahs, Ist Regiment Local Horse, 3d Company, 2d Battalion Foot
Artillery.
27th, 2d, and sth Regiments Native Infantry.
The Head Quarters Ist Local Horse, at Hansi.
Her Majesty’s 3d Buffs, marched for Meerut, 7th March, 1839.
AT LOODEBANA.
3d Troop 2d Brigade Horse Artillery.
20th and 53d Regiments Native Infantry.
2 Ressallahs Ist Local Horse.
AT SHIKARPORE, WITH SHAH SOOJAH’S FORCE.
4th Troop 3d Brigade Horse Artillery.
J. R. LUMLEY, Major-General,
Adjutant-General of the Army.
MARRIAGES, DEATHS, &c.
MARRIAGES.
March 11.—At Jubbulpore, Major M. Nicholson, 30th Bengal Native Infantry, to
Caroline, fourth daughter of Major-General Yates, of the Madras Establishment.
14.—At Hazareebaugh, Major A. B. Taylor, K.H., Her Majesty’s 9th regiment, to
Eliza M., only daughter of Major F. G. Lister, 52nd Native Infantry.
26.—At Chuprah, Archibald Spiers, Esq., C.S., to Mary Anne, eldest daughter of
W. A. Pringle, Esq., Civil Service.
30.—At Sylhet, at the residence of W. Erskine, Esq., Adjutant 73rd regiment, R.
C. Lawrence, 73rd regiment, to Ellen, youngest daughter of the late Lieutenant-Co-
lonel W. Youngson, of Booscar, Cumberland, and late of the Madras Army.
April 2.—At Cawnpore, Lieutenant S. C. Starkey, 7th Bengal Native Infantry, to
Henrietta, eldest daughter of Major Manson, Commissioner at Bithoor.
3.—At Calcutta, Captain A. L. Campbell, Ist Light Cavalry, to Charlotte Susan,
daughter of Abercrombie Dick, Esq., Civil Service.
3.—At Hatourie, Tirhoot, W. E. Harding, Esq., to Louisa, daughter of A. Ander-
son, Esq.
10.—At Akyab, by Captain A. Bogle, Commissioner of Arracan, James Anderson
Haig, Esq., Assistant Surgeon, to Mary Elizabeth, eldest daughter of the late James
Nicholson, Esq.
At Madras, Captain H. W. Cotton, 67th regiment Bengal Native Infantry, to
Sophia, widow of the late Lieutenant-Colonel Colebrooke, C. 8., of ,the Madras Army.
22.—At Dacca, Lieutenant I. F. Middleton, 32nd Bengal Native Infantry, to Mary,
only daughter of Robert Doucett, Esq.
DEATHS.
At Dinapore, on the 21st instant, by drowning from the accidental upsetting of a boat,
Captain Richard Halpin, Her Majesty’s 49th regiment, deeply regretted by his brother
officers, to whom he had justly endeared himself by his high and sterling qualities as a
an accomplished gentleman, an officer, and a friend.
March 22.—Charlotte Jane, daughter of F. J. Halliday, Esq., Civil Service.
Mr. J. B. Albert of Juggemouthpore Factory, aged 38 years.
At Neemuch, Lieutenant, and Interpreter and Quarter-Master Cirjat Michael Bris-
tow, 71st regiment Native Infantry, third son of the late Major Bristow, sincerely re-
gretted by his friends.
23.—At Calcutta, George Edward Hudson, Esq., Attorney-at-Law, aged 37 years,
9 months, and 9 days.


24,—At Dinapore, of hooping cough, Margaret Isabella, third daughter of William
Stevenson, Senior, Esq., Surgeon, 40th Native Infantry.
David Cunningham, Esq., confidential assistant to Messrs. Cmttenden, Mackillop,
and Co.
Louise Marshall, third daughter of James Ogilvie, Esq., aged 4 years and 10 months.
26.—0 f cholera, George Alexander Prinsep, Esq., aged 48 years.
31-—At Roodepoor Factory, Caroline Forlong, daughter of G. R. J. Meares, Esq.,
aged 11 months and 10 days.
April I.—At Dacca, C. J. Davidson, Esq., of the Civil Service.
3.—Mrs. W. H. Paul.
3*—AtNoacolly, Becca, daughter of R. Garrett, Esq., Civil Service, aged 1 vear and
3 months.
14.—A short distance from Burhampore, Brevet-Major Bacon, of the 65th Native
Infantry.
17.—Mr. Abraham Pratt, Bailiff of the Supreme Court, aged 51 years.
19.—At Calcutta, H. D. Donaldson, Esq., of the Bengal Medical Service, aged 35
years.
At Calcutta, Major G. D. Stoddart, Bth Light Cavalry, Presidency Paymaster.
MILITARY.
March 9th. —The undermentioned officers are permitted to proceed to Europe on
furlough, on medical certificate :
Major L. Bruce, of the 12th Native Infantry.
Lieutenant J. D. Wilson, of the 10th Native Infantry.
The leave of absence granted to Lieutenant H. J. C. Shakespear, of the 25th Native
Infantry, to proceed to the Cape, is cancelled.
Appointments —7th Native Infantry.—Lieutenant H. J. McGeorge, acting interpre-
ter and quarter-master to the 4th Light Cavalry, to be interpreter and quarter-master.
10th Native Infantry.—Lieutenant S. C. Starkey, of the 7th Native Infantry, to act
as interpreter and quarter-master.
Leave of absence —General Staff.—Captain R. Wyllie, officiating assistant and adju-
tant-general of the army, from 15th March to 30th November, to visit Simla, on medi-
cal certificate.
13th Native Infantry.—Captain R. B. Brittridge, from 15th January to 18th Febru-
ary, preparatory to retiring from the service.
The Cawnpore station order of the 28th ultimo, appointing Lieutenant and Brevet
Captain S. R. Bagshawe, of the 7th Native infantry, to officiate as Major of Brigade,
from the 2d March, is confirmed as a temporary arrangement.
Captain H. Troup, of the 66th Native Infantry, is appointed to officiate as Major of
Brigade at Cawnpore, during the absence of Captain R. Wyllie, or until further orders,
in the room of Captain H. Templer, of the 7th regiment, who has obtained leave, on
medical certificate.
Assistant-surgeon T. W. Wilson, M.D., is removed from the 62d to the 9th Native
Infantry, and directed to join without delay.
Leave of Absence —Division Staff.—Captain F. Angelo, deputy-judge-advocate-gene-
ral, Sirhind division, from 16th March to 16th of March, 1840, to visit Mussoorie, on
medical certificate.
sth Battalion Artillery.—Lieutenant A. M. Seppiugs, from 10th March to 16th De-
cember, to visit Landour, on medical certificate.
7th Light Cavalry.—Lieutenant-colonel G. J. Shadwell, from 18th March to 18th
March, 1840, to visit the hill provinces, north-west of Devrah, on medical certificate.
Colonel M. E. Bagnold, 7th Bombay Native Infantry, has been appointed com-
mandant of the Aurungabad division of the Nizam’s service, vice Colonel H. T.
Roberts.
Captain T. E. A. Napleton, of the 60th Native Infantry, to officiate as an assistant-
adjutant-general of the army, during the absence of the deputy-adjutant-general on
field service, or until further orders, in the room of Captain Wyllie, who has obtained
leave of absence, on medical certificate.
60th Native Infantry.—Captain G. Cox, from 16th March to 15th December, to visit
Simla, on medical certificate.
Lieutenant-colonel J. Cheape, C. 8., to be superintending-engineer, North Western
Provinces, vice Captain T. Warlow, deceased.


Captain E. Swetenham is appointed executive-engineer of the 11th or Meerut
Division.
Captain 11.I 1 . S. Bart, to be executive-engineer of the 12th or Kurnaul Division.
Captain B. Y. Reilly, of the corps of Engineeers, to officiate as garrison and execu-
tive-engineer at Delhi, and superintending the building of the Hindun Bridge, during
the absence of G. Thomson. Pending the arrival of Captain Reilly at Delhi, 2d-lieute-
nant and adjutant E. J. Brown, of engineers, is directed to officiate for that officer.
The Governor-general is pleased to appoint Capt. and Brevet-major William M ,
of the 4th Light Cavalry, to be a deputy-judge-advocate-general on the establishment,
vice Weston, promoted to a regimental majority.
Appointment. —Major-general M. Boyd, to the divisional staff of the army, in suc-
cession to Major-general A. Duncan, whose tour on the staff will expire on the 3d of
May next.
Major-general J. A. Briggs, of the Artillery, is permitted to proceed to the Straits of
Malacca, China, and New South Wales, on medical certificate, for eighteen months.
Captain D. Downing, of the 3rd Native Infantry, permitted to proceed to the Cape
of Good Hope, on medical certificate, for two years, embarking for such purpose at
Bombay.
The destination of the 46th Native Infantry is altered from Agra to Delhi.
52d Native Infantry.—Lieutenant W. Martin to be adjutant, vice Jamieson, who is
permitted to resign his situation.
4th Light Cavalry.—Lieutenant-colonel C. P. King, from Ist of May to 30th De-
cember, to visit Mussoorie, on medical certificate.
Colonel Roberts, C. 8., of the 7th Regiment Bengal Light Cavalry, is allowed a fur-
lough to Europe for the benefit of his health.
Bth Light Cavalry, Captain R. D. H. Macdonald, to be Major, Lieutenant Moore, to
be Captain of a Troop, and Cornet T. T. Tucker, to be Lieutenant, from the 21st
January, 1839, in succession to Major G. D. Stoddart, deceased.
65th Native Infantry.—Lieutenant and Brevet Captain J. Whiteford, to be Captain
of a Company, and Ensign C. M. Rees, to be Lieutenant, from the 14th of April, 1839,
in succession to Captain and Brevet-Major W. Bacon, deceased.
To be Captain by Brevet:—
38th Native Infantry.—Lieutenant G. Turner, 16th April, 1839.
Lieutenant J. Gifford, of the 2d Native Infantry, is permitted to proceed to Europe
on furlough, on medical certificate.
Major-General Sir Robert Stephenson, K.C.8., Colonel of the Ist regiment Native
Infantry, is permitted to proceed to Europe on furlough, on account of his health.
The undermentioned officers of cavalry and infantry are promoted to the rank of
captain, by brevet:
Lieutenant W. W. Apperly, of the 4th Light Cavalry.
Lieutenant R. Wyllie, of the 6th Native Infantry, Lieutenant S. Price, of the Bth
Native Infantry, Lieutenant E. T. Tierney, of the 28th Native Infantry, and Lieutenant
C. Prior, of the 64th Native Infantry.
71st Native Infantry—Ensign J. L. Walker, to be Lieutenant, from the 22d March
1839, vice Lieutenant C. Bristow, deceased.
The Honourable, the President in Council, is pleased, under instructions from the
Honourable the Court of Directors, as published in the General Orders of the 21st
January 1839, to restore to the service Mr. M. Kittoe, from that date, with his former
rank and standing in the army, and he will accordingly stand as 3d Lieutenant in the
6th Native Infantry, between Lieutenants Wyllie and Rice, drawing his pay and allow-
ances from the above date.
During the absence of His Excellency the Commander-in-chief, or until further
orders, all reports and returns of the troops under this Presidency are to be transmitted,
as at present, according to established usage, to the senior general officer serving on
the staff of the Bengal Army.
Promotion—4Bth Native Infantry, Ensign F. H. Thomas to be Lieutenant, from the
Ist August, 1838, vice Lieutenant and Brevet-Captain F. C. Smith, resigned.
The permission granted by the Government of Bombay to Lieutenant W. K. Warner,
of the Bengal horse artillery, to proceed to Europe on furlough, on medical certificate,
is confirmed by the Supreme Government.
Brevet-Captain W. Gibb, of the 34th Native Infantry, is permitted to proceed to
Europe on furlough, on account of his health.
Lieutenant H. T, Tucker, of the Bth Native Infantry, is permitted to proceed to
Europe on furlough, on medical certificate.


Surgeon J. Taylor is permitted to proceed to the Mauritius and the Cape of .Good
Hope, for the recovery of his health, and to be absent from Bengal on that account for
eighteen months.
MADRAS.
Lord Elphinstone left Madras for the Pulicat hills on the 25th March, but returned
after a short visit.
The demise of Lieut. A. Douglas, Madras Engineers, is announced.
Major Haig, of the 34th Light Infantry, Officiating Adjutant-General of the
Army, died at Madras on the Ist of April. We beg to offer such information as we
have been enabled to gather, although unable to speak with certainty as to its correct-
ness. Major Brown, we are told, cannot officiate as Adjutant-General for the time
being ; because his army rank, under a regulation of the Court of Directors, dated 1829,
is a bar to such arrangement. If the report before us be correct—viz., that Colonel
Steel, C. 8., Military Secretary to Government, will be induced to accept the Adjutant-
Generalship eventually, we may indeed congratulate the Madras army on the prospect
of having, on the right hand of its chief, an officer whose talents, experience, eminent
professional qualities, and stern undeviating justice as an official, place him in the
highest rank amongst the servants of Government. —Madras United Service Gazette ,
April 16.
BIRTHS.
March 6th, the lady of Lieutenant Lockhart, 45th Native Infantry, of a daughter.
9th, the lady of T. I. P. Harris, Esq., C. S., of a daughter.
11th, the lady of Captain Gosling, 7th Native Infantry, of a son.
12th, the lady of Captain Bockford, 27th Native Infantry, of a son.
14th, the lady of Captain Pooley, 30th Native Infantry, of a daughter.
24th, the lady of A. Allardice, Medical Service, of a daughter.
31st, the lady of W. H. Bayley, C. S, of a daughter.
20th, the lady of Captain Logan, 41st Native Infantry, of a son.
30th, the lady of T. Moore Lane, Esq. of a daughter.
At Waltair, on the 23d March, the lady of Lieutenant Wilkinson, 44th regiment
Native Infantry, of a son.
At Mangalore, on the 24th March, the lady of Lieutenant Mackenzie, 46th regiment
Native Infantry, of a son.
At Bellary, on the 25th March, the lady of Captain F. Eades, 39th regiment Native
Infantry, of a son.
MARRIAGES.
March 12th, W. C. Ogilvie, Civil Service, to Louisa Frances, daughter of W. R.
Taylor, Esq. Civil Service.
March 11th, Lieutenant Vaughan, Her Majesty’s 41st regiment, to Jane Bird, niece
to Major-General Wilson.
March 6, Assistant-Surgeon MacGregor, Her Majesty’s 39th regiment, to Miss
Humphreys.
April 10, Captain H, W. Cotton, 67th regiment Bengal Native Infantry, to Sophia,
widow of the late Lieutenant-Colonel Colebrooke, C.B. of the Madras Army.
DEATHS.
March 1, Agnes, the wife of Lieutenant Junor, 2d Native Infantry.
April Ist, Major James Russell Haig, of the 34th Light Infantry, and Acting Ad-
jutant-General of the Army.
At Salem, on the 25th March, Ist Lieutenant Archibald Douglas of the Engineers.
BOMBAY.
On the sth of April, His Excellency, Sir Henry Fane, embarked from the Apollo
Bunder, for Mahableshwar, under a salute of 17 guns from the Saluting Battery.
Great excitement prevailed at Bombay, in consequence of some Parsee youths having
embraced Christianity.
On the night of the 22nd of March, the treasury at Malwan was attacked by 200
men, who were defeated by a small party of the 18th Malwan Madras Native Infantry.


By the retirement of Surgeon Barra, Senior Assistant Surgeon Taylor is promoted
to the rank of Surgeon.
Accounts from Cutch state that the Cholera had broken out with great violence at
Curachie. Colonel Powell, K. H., of the 40th, had died, and Mr. Magnay, of the same
Regiment was not expected to survive. Captain Hand, of the 2nd Grenadier Regi-
ment, in taking his morning ride, four miles from Camp, was cut to pieces by some
Beloochies, Lieutenant Clarke, of the same Corps, escaped by the fleetness of his
horse.
By the death of Captain Hand of the 2nd Grenadiers, Lieutenant and Quarter-
master Hart is promoted to the rank of Captain, and Ensign Falconer to that of
Lieutenant.
BIRTH'S.
March 15. The Lady of Lieutenant Wormald, H. A., of a daughter.
29. The Lady'of Major Carruthers, Queen’s Royals, of a son.
April 10. The Lady of G. W. Anderson, of a daughter.
5. The Lady of Dr. Burnes, K. H., of a son.
28. The Lady of Dr. of a daughter.
May 1. The Lady of W. Carstairs, Esq., of a daughter.
MARRIAGES.
April 11. Major Bruce Seton, to Emma, daughter of J. Orton, Esq., President of
the Medical Board.
23. Lieutenant Cruickshank, Bomb. Engineers, to Helen, daughter of J. H.
Crawford, Esq., Bomb. C. S.
DEATH,
April 13. H. A. Walker, son of Captain Walker, SN. I.
111 ii mu ii in
1508 01822527 1
PRINTED BV STEWART AND MURRAY, OLD BAILEY.


additional proofs
■Lm-oI the astonishing effects of that
most excellent remedy “ BLAIR’S
GOUT and RHEUMATIC PILLS,”
■which stand without a parallel in the
annals of Medicine for the cure of
the Gout, Rheumatic Gout, Rheuma-
tism, Lumbago, Sciatica, pains in the
Head or Face, and all Gouty and,
Rheumatic affections. 1
NOTICE.
As no statement of cure stiall ever
be published in favour of this medi-
cine but what is strictly true, andean
be attested by the respectable agent
to whom it is addressed, the Public
are earnestly invited scrupulously to
examine any of the undermentioned
cases that happen to lie in their neigh-
bourhood, tne result of which will
prove highly satisfactory.
Cure of Old Standing Rheumatism at Derby.
Derby, Oct. 28, 1837.
Sir, —I feel it a duty I owe to myself, to you, and
the Public in general, in giving my testimony of the
efficacy of Blair’s Gout and Rheumatic Pills. I have
been in the capacity of coachman for the last thirty
years, and in such a situation exposed to all kinds of
weather: I have suffered acutely (I should think no
one more so) from Rheumatic pains in my legs, arms,
wrists, and various parts of my body, at times not
being able to move. In this manner I was troubled
for twenty years, trying every thing which imagina-
tion could suggest as being likely to afford relief to
my torturing complaint, all was to no purpose, until
solicited by a friend to try the P ills above alluded to;
.1 purchased a box at the shop of Mr. Drewry, of this
place, Medicine-vender, which afforded me relief; 1
then got another, and then a third—and now, Sir, let
me say, what to some may appear strange, I am en-
tirely cured, enabled to follow my occupation with
ease and pleasure ; aud in one word, I may say, I am
a different man.
I am, Sir, your’s obediently,
JOSEPH BORRINGTON.
To Mr. Prout, 229, Strand, London.
Copy of a Communication from LINCOLN, forwarded
ly Mr. E. B. Drury, of the Gazette Office near the
Stonebow.
Mr. John Elkington, Farmer of Methringham, near
Lincoln, is desirous that Mr. E. B. Drury, of the
Newspaper Office, Lincoln, should take down an ac-
count of the very great benefit he has derived from
Blair’s Gout and Rheumatic Pills, which medicine
has done him more good for Gout and Rheumatism
than all the preparations he has tried; for when the
Rheumatic or Gouty Pains have come on, the taking
a dose or two has removed the attack, of which he
usually had to suffer for a month or more, He has
had about half a dozen boxes of the Pills from E. B.
Drury’s, near the Stonebow, Lincoln, and as the
medicine is really so good, he will be glad to answer
any enquiries respecting it, which may tend to the
comfort of others.
The foregoing statement was taken down by Mr.
Elkington’s particular desire, on Monday, March 13,
1837, at Mr. E. B. Drury’s Shop, Gazette Office, Lin-
Lincoln, March 13,1837. GEORGE BOOT.
Mr. Prout,
Sir,— The above is one of many other similar in-
stances ; I have never heard of a medicine which
seemed to give such complete satisfaction as this.
Bend me twelve dozen boxes as early as possible.
I am, your’s, respectfully,
March 15, 1837. R. B. DRURY.
The Testimony of the Rev. Dr. BLOMBERG, of Mis-
perton Hall, Yorkshire, is referred to with consider-
able satisfaction.
Among the many high and distinguished person-
ages who have been relieved from those most tor-
menting maladies by this celebrated medicine, is the
Rev Dr Blomberg, of Misperton Hall, near Malton.
Yorkshire, Chaplain to the late King, and Rector of
Cripplegate, London who having derived the most
essential benefit himself, and witnessed the same of
several cases in his neighbourhood, has signified his
intention of strongly recommending them among his
numerous friends, and has given the Proprietor per-
mission to refer any of the Nobility or Gentry to him,
should they be suffering from these disorders, and in
any doubt as to the efficacy of this Medicine.
Another extraordinary Cure of Rheumatic Gout from
Lincolnshire.
Boston, April 26th, 1837.
Sir, —Among the numerous instances which have
come to my knowledge of the beneficial effects pro-
duced by the use of BLAIR’S invaluable GOUT and
RHEUMATIC PILLS, the following is so striking
and so well authenticated, that (with permission of
the parties) I send it to you for publication in any
way you may think proper.
“ Alary Barton, of Bolingbroke, in this county, aged
67, had been for twenty months afflicted in a violent
degree with Rheumatic Gout. Her joints were to
swollen, and her fingers contracted and stiffened to
such an extent, that she was unable to get into or out
of bed, or even to dress and undress herself, without
assistance; and so excruciating was the pain and
agony she endured, that sleep was to herself and hus-
band almost a stranger. She despaired of relief and
much more of a cure, deeming her case hopeless. A
benevolent gentleman residing in the village, hearing
of her afflicted condition, visited her, and presented
to her a box of BLAIR’S PILLS, by taking half of
which she was greatly relieved, and two boxes com-
pletely restored her; so that from being an afflicted
helpless cripple, she is now blithe and hearty, being
able to perform all her household work in a manner
that surprises her neighbours.”
For the truth of these statements I have permission
to refer (if by letter, post paid) to W. E. Emmitt,
Esq., and Mr. Thomas Brackenbury, Draper and
Grocer (Sub-Agent for the sale of the Pills), both of
Bolingbroke. Wishing health and long life to your-
self, 1 remain, Sir your obedient Servant,
J. NOBLE, Agent at Boston.
From Barton on Humber, Lincolnshire, a case of every
day occurrence.
To Mr Prout, 229, Strand London.
Sir— lt is about twenty-two years since I was
afflicted with that most painful disease. Rheumatic
Gout, and every succeeding year 1 have once or
oftener been attacked more orless violently, lhavs
been attended by the best medical skill to little or no
purpose; for on one occasion I was laid up twenty-
three weeks ; and when not afflicted I lived in con-
tinual apprehension of a fresh attack, until I tried the
efficacy of Blair’s Gout and Rheumatic Pills, which
I purchased of Mr. Hattersley, your Agent here, by
taking a few doses of which, 1 found immediate
relief, and a short perseverance restored me to health
and strength, such as I have not had for more than
twenty years. You are at liberty to publish this for
the benefit of others, in any way you may think proper.
I am. Sir, Your obedient humble servant,
THOS. MARRIS.
Barton, Humber, Dec. 23rd. 1837.
These Pills are taken without the least care or attention, by either sex, young or old, and have the peculiar
property of entirely removing the disease, without debilitating the frame, which is universally left in a
stronger and better slate than before the malady commenced. And there is another most important effect
tn this Medicine—that it prevents the disease flying to the brain, stomach, or other vital part.
Stronger aim neiu*r umu '''■•vie uu. .
belonging to this Medicine—that it prevents the disease flying to the brain
SOLD WHOLESALE AND RETAIL BY
THOMAS PROUT, 229, STRAND, LONDON,
And to be had of all Medicine Venders throughout the Kingdom, price 2s. 9d. per box.
BOT- Ask for Blair’s Gout and Rheumatic Pills, and see that the words '‘Thomas Front, 229. Strand.
I nndon,” are engraved on the Government Stamp, without which none can possibly be depended upon.


The Wellington
For MADRAS.
.. 600 tons. Capt. Liddell.
To sail Aug. 1 Oth.
The Mary Ann
. . 500.... Capt. Tarbutt.
To sail Aug. 15th.
The Duke of Argyll . .,
. . 750 .... Capt. Bristow.
To sail Aug. 25th.
The True Briton
, . 800 .... Capt. Beach.
To sail Aug. 29th.
The London
For CALCUTTA.
. . 650 .... Capt. Shuttleworth.
To sail July 5th.
The Maidstone
.. 1000 .... Capt. Wimble.
To sail July 15th.
The Lord Hungerford, .
.. 750 ..., Capt. Saunders.
To sail July 15th.
The Adelaide
.. 700 . . Capt. Guthrie.
To sail July 25th.
The Kobert Small
. 750 .... Capt, Fulcher.
To sail July 30th.
The W indsor ...........
.. 750 .... Capt. Nisbet.
To sail Aug. 15th.
INDIA.
FOR PASSAGES TO INDIA AND THE COLONIES,
AND ALL INFORMATION CONNECTED THEREWITH, AND WITH
finfci'a flatten? m General,
APPLY TO
GRINDLAY, CHRISTIAN, AND MA r ITHEWS,
EAST-INDIA ARMY AGENTS. AND AGENTS FOR PASSENGERS,
No. 16, Cornhill, and at the East-India Rooms, No. 8, St. Martin’s
Place, Charing Cross.
Parties proceeding to India. —From the extent of business transacted in this branch
of the Agency, arising from an intimate knowledge of the most eligible Ships and Com-
manders, Passages are negociated on the most advantageous Terms, combining both
economy and comfort, without any charge to the parties. Plans and Prices of all Ships
may be had, or sent, on application. Baggage collected, shipped, and insured.
Overland Route to India. Information on the various Routes, and Letters
of Credit on the principal Continental Cities, as well as on Malta, Turkey, Greece,
Egypt, and India, may be obtained; together with reference to various estimates of expense,
and extracts of letters from officers who have recently travelled by the various Overland
Routes to and from India.
Plans and Particulars of the undermentioned Ships may be had on application at either
Office.
For MADRAS AND CALCUTTA.
The La Beli e Alliance .. 676.... Capt. Arkcott.
The Edinburgh 1400 ....
The Marion 800 .... Capt. Pope.
For BOMBAY.
The Lady Faversham .... 500 .... Capt. Webster.
The Sir Edward Paget .. 550.... Capt, Campbell.
To sail Aug. 6th.
To sail Aug. 20th.
To sail Sept. 15lh.
To sail July 20th.
To sail Aug. Ist.
GRINDLAY, CHRISTIAN, and MATTHEWS,
East-India Army Agency,
16, Cornhill, and 8, St, Martin’s Place, Charing Cross.
BENGAL CIVIL SERVICE.
Messrs. Dodwell and Mu es’s New Book on the above Service (Dedicated by per-
mission to the Honourable Court of Directors of the East India Company), is now ready
for delivery, being an entire Alphabetical List of this branch of the Company’s Service,
distinguishing from the appointment as Writer, the high and important offices held by each
Servant, with the Resignation, Retirement or Death, from the year 1780 to 1838, shewing
the History and Character of 1200 Civil Servants.
Longman, Orme and Co., Paternoster Row; Allen and Co., Leadenhall Street;
Richardson and Co., Cornhill, and all other Booksellers.
Sold also by Dodwell and Miles at their Office of East India Agency, and Agency for
Passages to India, 69, Cornhill, London.
Price £2 2s. or 24 Rupees in India, Imperial Octavo, handsomely bound.
“ This Work, though addressed exclusively to the Servants of the East India Company,
will be found a very useful book of reference by all; and when the design has been fully
carried out, and made applicable to all the Presidencies, a desideratum long wanted will be
fully supplied. The Work is got up with great care, and cannot but prove highly service-
able. ” Morning Herald,
