





*l4 -
NOTORIOUS
BUSHRANGERS
TASMANIA
BIT CABBY.
fW A r o. >'' ■ *•• * y *
TASMANIA !
PRINTED AT "THE DAILY TELEGRAPH ” OFFICE, LAUNCESTON.
18 9 1.




NOTORIOUS BUSHRANGERS.
INTRODUCTION.
This work is not intended as a sort of Newgate
calendar it is a record of deeds of villainy, of injustice,
corruption, and immorality, and the brutality of the
officials in charge, which, to some extent was the main
cause of bushranging, though it must be admitted that
there were many desperados sent to the colony. To
make it intelligible to my readers, I will give a running
description of the early days.
1 he British Government took possession in August,
1803. Three days after the landing at Risdon by Lieut.
Bowden, a cold and brutal act was committed by the
officer who was left in charge of the encampment. The
aborigines were seen approaching the encampment,
carrying wattle boughs in blossom, and reciting a melan-
choly chant; the men were in the front, the children in
the centre, and the women in the rear. When the officer
in charge (Lieut. Moore) ordered his troops to fire on
them, the result of that fire was the death of five or six,
and the wounding of several others. It was a monstrous
act, showing that the reign of terror and brutality had
commenced on the gem of the Southern Ocean. The
subordinates were supposed to partake of the license of
their superior. One commandant (Colonel Geills) fixed
a spiked collar on the neck of a free woman ; he also
flogged a female in the streets of Hobart Town ; tied up
free men on the spot for p'acarding a grievance when
there was no press available for the purpose. According
to the Derwent Star, February 6th, 1820, a free man
formerly belonging to Port Dalrymple was brought before
the bench, and found guilty of stealing a watch from
George Guest, jun. He was sentenced to five years
»•) 3i ss 'roau a
fs-sr*


imprisonment, and to receive five hundred lashes.
Punishment was not always unmerited, but the magistrates
were capricious. One magistrate had a carter tied to a
wheel of his wagon, and sentenced him to receive three
hundred lashes for cruelty to his bullocks ; and Dr.
Montgarret ordered a blacksmith to be flogged for pre-
senting his bill for payment.
I think I have recited sufficient cases to show the
moral state of the colony at this very early period. It is
no pleasing task to review the crimes of the dead, or to
rebuke the improprieties of the leaders of a people ; but
it is truly sad to notice the disgraceful immoralities of the
officers in charge of the new settlement. Their unholy
practices excited the ribald jests of the most degraded.
The absurd and criminal negligence of the British Go-
vernment, in not providing some approximate equaliza-
tion of the sexes, was one cause of this laxity of morals.
An illustration of the times is given by Mr John Pascoe
Fawkner.* That gentleman, when a boy at Hobart
Town, saw the whole colony drunk for several weeks,
from the Governor downwards. The Colonel had pro-
claimed a fortnight’s holiday on account of the men’s
good behaviour during the time of the famine, and revelry
reigned for six weeks. A number of violent deaths was
the consequence of this shameless dissipation.
Although there was a chaplain on the settlement,
yet his social qualities were more in harmony with con-
vivial mirth than the routine of pious duties. The
amount and character of religious instruction communi-
cated to the prisoners even in more recent times is well
* Mr Fawkner had every reason to have a lively recollection of
those times. When a youth of eighteen years, he was working as a
sawyer on the banks of the Derwent ; he agreed to saw some
planking for five convicts, for a boat which they were building
to enable them to escape from the colony. One of five betrayed
his mates, and Mr Fawkner, the other four were severely punished
and sent to the road parties, and Fawkner was sentenced to re-
ceive one hundred lashes ; but the most brutal part of the sentence
was that it was to be inflicted in front of his parent’s residence,
in Macquarie-street, Hobart Town. And the betrayer was made a
constable.


described by a condemned man to a Judge :—“What
is done, your Honor, to make us better ? Once a week
we are drawn up in a square opposite the military
barracks, and all the military are drawn up in front of us
with loaded muskets and fixed bayonets, and a young
officer then comes forward to the fence and reads part of
the prayers, and that takes may be about a quarter-of-an-
hour, and that is all the religion we see.”
Before free emigration set in the system of govern-
ment was sufficiently simple, and the authority of the chief
officer unrestrained except by the veto of the Governor-
General at Sydney, In 1823 we find a colonial enact-
ment authorising the Governor or Acting-Governor to
proclaim or enforce any law which he may deem neces-
sary to check or prevent rebellion, though every member
of his Executive Council dissent from such procedure.
Any port could be closed against merchant trading
vessels at the will of the chief ruler. And yet for many
years the internal government of the country was puerile
and contemptible. No efficient staff of constabulary
existed before the days of Colonel Arthur. Governors
Collins and Davey were injudicious in their acts, and in-
consistent in their discipline. The accumulation of
disorders, and the consequences of lengthened misrule,
nearly overwhelmed the more prudent and energetic
Colonel Sorell, and formed for a series of years a most
perplexing difficulty to the mind of Governor Arthur.
' Governor Arthur was an able administrator. He
was a strict and severe disciplinarian, and he knew not
mercy. During his long administration there is not one
instance where he forgave an offender. On his first
arrival he gagged the press, bringing action against Bent,
and causing him to be fined and imprisoned ; in fact he
ruined him and also Mr Melville, editor of the Colonial
Times. I quote one instance of his arbitrary nature :
Two unfortunate aboriginals, ‘Jack’ and ‘Dick’ w r ere
executed —this being the second execution of aboriginals
—and to complete the farce the sacrament was ad-
ministered to them. The elder, named Dick, who had
never, since his confinement, been able to walk, suffering


under a loathsome cutaneous disease, which almost
covered his body, screamed out most bitterly, apparently
fully sensible of hisimpending fate, and would not climb
the ladder to the platform, and was carried up by the
executioner. Being placed on the platform he would not
stand up, and was seated upon a stool, which dropped
with him when the moment arrived, which plunged
him into eternity. His partner in crime, an interesting
youth, seemed quite unmoved at this awful situation,
until just before the execution The poor lad then became
sensible of his destiny, and prayed most fervently for the
forgiveness of his sins. If example had been required,
how much more advisable would it have been to have
commenced by the trial and execution of some of the
wholesale murderers of the aborigines —the first perpetra-
tors of crime; but not one single individual was ever
brought to a court of justice for offences committed
against these harmless creatures. An aboriginal named
“ Eumarrah ” was taken prisoner. Mr. Gilbert Robertson
recommended the Governor to show some marks of re-
spect to Eumarrah with a view to conciliate him, and
make use of him in bringing in other tribes. His Excel-
lency replied, “ I would not attempt to conciliate that
man.”
Mr Robertson—“ What will you do with him ?”
Governor —“If you can find evidence to prove all
those outrages you speak of, I would have him tried, and
executed if he is found guilty.”
Mr Robertson—“ Consider, Sir, that this man was
defending his country against cruel intruders. He is now
a prisoner of war, and your Excellency, by executing him,
would be guilty of a worse murder than ever he com-
mitted.”
Here the Chief Justice looked up, and said sharply
—“ Mr Robertson, do you consider that those men who
were tried and executed here were murdered ?”
Mr Robertson—“ I do, indeed, your Honor.”
Here the members of the Council looked at one
another, and the Governor said—“ Mr Robertson, you
may withdraw, but do not leave the House.”


Mr Robertson then retired, and Eumarrah was
ushered in.
After some time Mr Robertson was re-called.
The Governor said —“ The Council has resolved not
to try your friend Eumarrah, and you can take him with
you, under your own immediate protection, with power
to confine him in gaol for safe keeping.”
Eumarrah afterwards went out with Mr Robertson
as a guide, and proved alike faithful and useful.
“ Eumarrah ” is not a native name, but was borrowed
by the chief from Mr Hugh Murray, of the Macquarie,
and pronounced as above.
The Governor was rather injudicious in selecting his
subordinates, choosing men from the military to act as
Police Magistrates, and some of these men possessed a
kind of fiendish disposition, and delighted in torturing
Two of the most prominent of these arbitrary men ordered
3,200 lashes to be administered one morning at Sergeant
Carroll’s paddock at Cocked Hat. The result of that
brutal exhibition roused the vigorous pen of the kind
hearted Theodore Bartley, who addressed the liberal
members of the House of Commons, which was in some
measure the means of recalling Governor Arthur and
stopping the brutal system of flogging men to make
them good. , . , , .
The powerful Governor Macquarie, in 1814, had to
compromise with the numerous bushrangers. He pro-
claimed amnesty for past offences : this extraordinary
document was legally drawn up by the Judge-Advocate
of 'the colony. The home authorities were, doubtless,
to be blamed for the want of necessary appliances for
the enforcement of prison discipline. No adequate
buildings were erected for the accommodation of the men,
and no suitable employment was provided to fill up their
time. It was during that first reign of terror that bush-
rangers flourished, and “ the most horrid murders were of
common occurrence.” One serious impediment to the
operations of justice was the practice of sending all per-
sons guilty of serious offences for trial to Sydney. It is
true that there was a Judge-Advocate, who was, by the


way, a military officer, but such gentlemen were not held
responsible for the punishment of capital crimes. In
Sorell’s reign a Judge-Advocate’s court was established
for civil cases under £SO, and no appeal to that decision
was permitted. To show the fitness of the individual
for the office, we read that once, when told about a cer-
tain course being the legal one, the judge exclaimed, “ I
am no lawyer, and won’t be troubled with law.” It was,
therefore, essential that matters affecting life or death
should be brought before a true functionary. But the
expense, the delay, the difficulty in bringing offenders to
justice were such that nine times out of ten the law, or
the insufficiency of evidence, allowed the guilty to escape,
and in many cases the innocent to suffer.
As free settlers arrived in the colony, and men
emerging from bondage were settled upon their grants
of land, means were afforded the Government of relieving
themselves of the support and trouble of many convicts,
by the practice of the Assignment System, which was first
introduced into New South Wales by Governor King, in
1804. Persons were allowed to hire men and women
from Government for a certain amount of clothing and
rations, the same being of the most limited extent ; and
on no account were they to receive any money. Dis-
obedience of orders, or any misconduct, subjected the
person to be punished at the accusation of the employer.
It was no uncommon thing for the masters to arrange
with the magistrate the amount and description of chas-
tisement. Letters have been despatched by the hands
of the unsuspecting victim, requesting that the bearer
have 50 lashes, etc. Friends of the officials received every
convenience, and those who were obnoxious could not
obtain redress for their disorderly servants, or were
needlessly and tyrannically deprived of their labours.
There was one clause in the convict regulations which
often operated prejudicially to the master as well as to
the servant. No assigned servant was supposed to be
unable to perform any labour he was placed to do, and
the master was not allowed to return any man into Govern-
ment and say that he did not suit him. He was compelled


to bring a, charge against hirn. Then the question was
put— “Do you request this man to return to your service/’
He could then say yes or no : if the latter, he could get
an order to replace the man. This was often the fruitful
source of many acts of injustice, and made many masters
harsh and brutal. Much, very much, depended upon
the treatment individuals received in service. A high
spirited man, perhaps of education and former respectable
connections, would not brook the coarse and brutal
behaviour of an ignorant employer.* This was the
fruitful source of bushranging.
*Mr Fenton in his history gives two instances which show the
result of ignorant and unprincipled employers. (Many more
could be mentioned) :—A young man who was respectably con-
nected, but who had committed a robbery, was transported, and
was assigned to an employer whom he served in the capacity ot
cook. The lady of the house where this man was employed
observed that he smiled at some orders she had given him. His
fate was sealed. The master took him to the police office, charged
him with insolent behaviour, and stood by while he received fifty
lashes. The convict returned home, and was put to hard worK.
« I shall have you flogged three times a week ’ said the master,
“ until your bones are bare and your spirit is broken, and then
shall put you in chains for the rest of your life/' He kept his
promise as far as lay in his power. The convict was mercilessly
flogged with increased stripes on each occasion on frivolous and
false [charges, until he did commit the offence of insolence and
abusive language, when he was sentenced to a chain gang. Jhis
man possessed a power of endurance under trouble which many
lacked. He was next assigned to a kind master, gained a. gooc
character, and afterwards became a respected member ot the
community. Another master had a man who offended him tie
was sent with a letter to the police magistrate stating the offence ;
the letter was all the evidence required by convict law. He
received thirty-six lashes, and was sent home with lacerated
back. This settler had a quantity of posts and rails split tor
fencing. Timber was plentiful, and posts were heavy in those
days. Next morning the man was ordered to bore forty posts with
a common augur—eight holes in each —preparatory to morticing
for a four rail fence. “ That will keep your back raw, said the
master. The poor fellow failed to perform the whole of his task.
On the following day he wasagain taken before the magistrate on
this occasion the master accompanying him. He was charged
with the non-performance of his work, and received an increased
number of lashes, the master standing by and urging the ttagella-
tor to use extra force. The man was driven to the chain gangs


The amiable Mrs Meredith adds her testimonyj:—
“ Bad masters, and severe, dishonest magistrates, have
devoted more men to live as bushrangers, and 10 die on
the scaffold, than any inherent depravity of their
victims.”
In 1804 there were in the island 400 convicts to 80
free people; in 1825 there were 6,800 bond to 6,800
free ; in 1835, 13,000 to 10,000 ; in 1838, 22,000 to
17,000. At the beginning of 1833 there were 11,062
male prisoners to 1,644 female In that year arrived
2,643 males and 150 females ; in 1827, 841 males and
222 females; in 1825,687 males and 188 females. In
October, 1882, out of 11,000 prisoners, there were 6,400
in private, and 1,645 m public services ; 1,160 had
tickets of leave, 543 were in chain gangs, 182 at Mac-
quarie Harbour, and 240 at Port Arthur.
The country suffered materially by the Government
not being able to employ free men as constables. Con-
vict constables may be supposed to have exerted them-
selves with diligence to obtain indulgences ; but their
deficiency of moral principle induced such recklessness
of oath-taking as to peril the liberty and life of any man.
As an illustration of the evil we give the following story :
—A man was hung for sheep-stealing, on a charge sup-
ported only by two convict constables. One of these
worthies was the sole survivor of a notorious band of
bushrangers, his comrades being all executed, chiefly
through his traitorous information. The other one had
been heard to say that he would hang twenty men to save
his punishment in the chain gang, or anything like it.
Further on there will be a complete history of the per-
nicious influence and power of convict constables.
The foregoing description of the state of society in
Van Diemen’s Land, during the early period of its ex-
istence, will serve as an introduction to the “Lives of
Notorious Bushrangers,” The gratification of revenegful
passions and acquisitive impulses, as well as the natural
by continued oppression, and it is not at all unlikely that he was
one of the many victims who, goaded on by persecution, ended
their career on the gallows.


aspiration after freedom, though in the midst of danger
and wretchedness, were the prompting motives of escape
from restraint, and flight to the hills and woods. Taking
them as a class, they were not more repulsive than others;
indeed, they often exhibited a fearlessness, generosity,
and courtesy as to justify the author in saying that
bushrangers were not unfrequently the best conducted
men. When we remember that they were expatriated
for their violence and guilt, and were surrounded in the
felon isle with the most debasing and brutalising as-
sociations, we are the more disposed to admire their
forbearance when they roved as armed outlaws in the
bush. While eschewing the mawkish sentimentality that
would make a hero of a vulgar footpad, and adorn the
every day meanness or atrocities of his career with the
charm of a romantic picture, we cannot be insensible to
traits of manly intrepidity, courageous endurance, of great
physical suffering, self-restraint in the hour of triumph,
and propriety of demeanour to defenceless women. In
these exhibitions of character they are seen sometimes to
decided advantage beside the vaunted brigands of the
Pyrenees and Appenines, round whose high peaked hats
the pathetic novelist and enchanted poet have thrown so
glorious a halo.


BUSHRANGER.
This denomination was given to the band of desperate
runaway convicts who, in the early days of the colony, and
for a considerable period infested the various settlements
of the island so far back as the month of February, in
the year 1808, only five years after the first establishment.
The daring outrages of these lawless bandits had spread
a universal terror among the settlers. One of the
most notorious leaders was Mark Lemon. Lemon’s
Lagoon and Lemon’s Springs, which lie half way between
Jericho and Oatlands, bear his name to this day
In the autumn of 1815, Michael Mansfield, a prisoner
holding a ticket of leave, and residing near the Black
Brush, went forth one afternoon to look for some cattle
of his own, and some he had in charge belonging to others.
These were grazing at a distance from his hut, and he
proceeded briskly onward, following a cattle track through
a dense forest, which he knew led to where the herd was
pasturing. Suddenly his progress was arrested by two
savage-looking fellows, one emerging from either side of
the path. They were dressed in kangaroo skins, mocas-
sins of the same on their feet, and knapsacks on their
backs ; each carried a musket, and one had a brace of
pistols stuck in his girdle. Mansfield immediately re-
cognized one as Lemon, the robber and bushranger.
Mike, however, being a true son of Hibernia, and an old
man-of-war’s man, was a stranger to fear, and resolved to
make the best of a bad bargain. Lemon asked who and
what he was, to which Mike answered truly, and in his
native naivete. The bushrangers then cast off their
knapsacks (which seemed well filled), and commanded
Mansfield to carry them, warning him at the same time


that if he attempted to escape they would shoot him on
the spot. Poor Mansfield jogged on under his weary load,
venturing now and then a few remarks on the treatment
poor prisoners met with in this cursed country; and
“ troth and sure ” he was but a poor prisoner himself, and
never hurt nor meddled with no one, far less a bushranger j
and he was after hoping they were not going to illuse him
or take him away from his poor dumb bastes ; for sure
they’d all be astray, master would have him catted, , and
poor Mick would be a ruined man for ever and a day. At
this pathetic appeal the bushrangers seemed to soften,
and after consulting together they proposed, on certain
conditions, to allow him to depart. They stipulated that
he should meet them on an appointed day at a particular
spot, and bring them flour, tea, sugar, and spirits, if he
could procure any; they would be on the lookout, and his
signal to them was to be the smoke of a fire which he was
to light.
Mike promised to comply, and was allowed to go
his way without further molestation. On the day ap-
pointed, he selected one of his men on whom he could
depend, and taking his musket and dogs, gave out he
was going to shoot kangaroo. When he had gone a short
distance he asked Phelim “Would he like to see ould
Dublin ?” “By the Piper of Leinster ! that I would,
master,” was the reply. “And won’t I, sure,” said Phelim,
u only make me certain of setting my feet in ould Dublin
agin, and I’ll stand by you, master of mine, until every
bone in this skin is bate to shivereens.” “Well, I in-
tend to take Lemon, and if you’ll stand by me, we’ll
both of us just get pardoned, and you’ll be sent to ould
Ireland again as free as the babe just born.” “ Then I
am the boy that will lend you a hand.” Mansfield
handed Phelim a trooper’s pistol, and desired him to
conceal it ; and setting briskly forward, consulted how
they should accomplish their enterprise. A good deal of
rain had fallen, and it was nearly dark when they reached
the place of rendezvous.
Phelim, with the aid of his tinder-box, proceeded to
kindle a fire, and Mike, with flour he had provided for the


purpose, daubed his own and his man’s clothes to make
it appear they had been carrying a load. When the fire
began to burn they cast themselves on the ground, pre-
tending to be very much exhausted, anxiously waiting the
arrival of the bushrangers In about half-an-hour they
made their appearance, both well armed. Mike spun a
long yarn about losing his way, being overcome with
fatigue and obliged to leave the prog about four miles off,
in the hollow of a burned tree, declaring he was unable
to retrace his steps that night, but if the bushrangers
would give him rest and food, he would go with them
early in the morning, and bring them all he had pro-
mised ; as he concluded he produced a bottle of spirits,
of which they all partook, and agreed to adjourn to the
bushranger’s hut, about two miles off. The hut was con-
structed of turf, low and uncomfortable in the extreme,
covered with sheets of bark stripped from the large forest
trees. The fireplace also of turf, lined with stones at the
bottom, was at one end of the hut, and within it a huge
fire soon laid Some excellent beef was broiled, which
Mike strongly suspected to be part of his own kine. They
had neither bread nor potatoes to eat with their meat, but
the two bushrangers, long accustomed to suchfare, made
a hasty meal. The others swallowed a few morsels, and
after finishing the bottle of spirits they all laid down on
kangaroo skins spread on the floor ; first Lemon, then
Mansfield, then the other bushranger, last Phelim,
Mike and Phelim snored away, t ut slept none. In the
morning Mansfield began to toss and tumble about, to try
if Lemon would easily awake, but finding that both the
bushrangers slept soundly, he cautiously withdrew the
pistol from Lemon’s belt, rose warily, gave one pistol to
Phelim (who was still on the floor), and concealed the
other. He then went to a corner where the muskets
stood, took all but his own, and put them in a pool of
water before the hut ; returning, he examined the flint
and priming of his own piece. Finding all right he gave
the bushranger a push with his foot, calling out at the
same time, “ Lemon, you are my prisoner.” Lemon felt
on one side and then on the other for his pistols Finding


them gone he started to his feet, and drawing a long
knife was about to make a lunge, when Mansfield pulled
the trigger. The ball went through the robber’s head and
he fell a lifeless corpse.
The report of Mansfield’s musket awoke the other
outlaw, who seeing his companion’s corpse, dropped on
his knees and implored mercy. Mansfield only said,
“ Now my tight fellow, be after taking that there knife,
cut your master’s head off, put it into that bag (pointing
to it), throw it over your shoulder, and trudge along with
'us.'’ The man shuddered at the command, and it re-
quired threats, and promises of intercession with the
Governor to prevail on him to do the deed. “By St.
Patrick !” ejaculated Phelim, “its a clane job, anyhow,
barrin’ the bloody head. Not a minnitago it was the shy
of a copper whose throats were cut. Be off on yer ten
toes, ye thaef of the world, and bless the saints ye don’t
carry yer own ugly mug in the bag with yer masters.”
They had thirty-six miles to walk, and it was night
when they reached Hobart Town. Mansfield, however,
went directly to Government House, and was most
graciously received. The news spread quickly, and all
considered Mike ar.d Phelim deserved public rewards.
The Governor accordingly gave each a free pardon, and
to Mike a grant of land on the Derwent, and to Phelim
a free passage to “ Quid Ireland.” The prisoner’s life
was spared, but he was banished to a penal settlement.
The following extracts are from the Sydney
Gazette of the year 1817. That journal of the 25 th of
January of the above year contains the following notices :
“ The accounts of robberies by the banditti or bushrangers
on Van Die’ Land present a melancholy picture of the
distresses to which the most respectable classes of the in-
habitants are constantly exposed, from the daring acts of
those infamous marauders, who are divided into small
parties, and are designated by the name of the principal
ruffian at their head, of whom one Michael Howe appears
to be the most alert in depredation. The accounts re-
ceived by the Kangaroo, which commence from the
beginning of November (tßi6), state that on the 7th of


that month the house and premises of Mr. David Rose,
at Port Dalrymple, were attacked and plundered of con-
siderable property by Peter Sefton and his gang. Here
they met with a Tartar. The old soldier would not submit
being robbed without an effort to save his property. In
the severe encounter he was struck with a butcher’s
cleaver, which stripped the jvhole of the flesh from the
right side of the face. Suffering fromthe loss of blood he
was overcome. To the credit of his assigned servant (who
was faithful to his master) he bound up the wound and
brought him into Launceston for medical treatment.
The delinquents were pursued by the commandant, at
the head of a strong detachment of the 46th regiment,
but which returned, after a hunt of five days through the
woods, without being able to discover the villains, among
whom is stated to have been a free man, named Dennis
M'Caig, who went from hence to Port Dalyrmple in the
Brothers. On the night of 17th November the premises
of Mr. Thomas Hayes, at Bagdad, were attacked, at a time
when Mr Stocker and his wife, and Mr. Andrew Whitehead
(the former being on their route from Hobart Town to
Port Dalyrmple, with a cart containing a large and valu-
able property), had unfortunately put up at the house for
the night. Michael Howe was the chief of this banditti,
which consisted of eight others. The property of which
they plundered Mr. and Mrs. Stocker on this occasion,
among which were two kegs of spirits, was of the value of
upwards of three hundred pounds. The contents of one
of the kegs, which contained eleven gallons, a member of
the gang wantonly wasted, by firing a pistol ball through its
head. They set their watches by Mr. Whitehead’s, which
they afterwards returned; but took away Mr. Stocker’s
with their other plunder. Mr Wade, chief constable of
Hobart Town, had stopped the others at Mr. Hayes’, but
hearing a noise, which he considered to denote the ap-
proach of bushrangers, he prudently attended to the
admonition and escaped their fury, which it was concluded
would have fallen heavily on him, as they are at variance
with all conditions of life that are inimical to their crimes.
On the morning of the 2nd inst, Mr. W. Maum, of Hobart


Town, sustainedthe loss of three stacks of wheat by fire,
at his farm at Clarence Plains, owing to an act of an in-
cendiary. On the 14th November a large body, consisting
of fourteen men and two women, were unwelcomely fallen
in with by a single man on horsebackat Scantling’s Plains.
Of these Howe and Geary were the most conspicuous.
They compelled him to bear testimony to the swearing in
of their whole party to abide by some resolutions dictated
in a written paper, which one of them finished writing in
the traveller’s presence. After a detention of about three-
quarters of an hour, he was suffered to proceed, under
strong injunctions to declare what he had been an eye
witness of and to desire Mr. Humphrey, the magistrate,
and Mr. Wade, the chief constable, to take care of them-
selves, as they were lent on taking their lives, as well as
to prevent them from growing grain, or keeping goods of
any kind. And, by the information of a person upon oath,
it appears they had about the same period forced away
two Government servants from their ha itations, to adis-
ant place on which the crimes of these wretches have
stamped the appellation of ‘ Murderer’s Plains,’ but by
them facetiously cal ed ‘ the tallow-chandlers shop,’ where
they kept them to work three days in rendering down beef
fat. How they afterwards appropriate so great a quantity
of rendered fat and suet is truly a question worthy of
being demanded ; but it is far more likely that it was
taken off their hands by persons in and near the settle-
ments, who are leagued with them in the way of bartering
one commodity for another, than that the bushrangers
should have either kept it for their own use, or have
bestowed so much trouble on the preparation of an article
which would so soon spoil in their hands. The cattle that
were in this instance so devoted were the property of
Messrs. Stones and Tray, who declare that out of 300 head
140 have lately disappeared.” The outrages above
enumerated, it has been seen, were all perpetrated within
the short space of a few days ; and these settlements con-
tinued to be the scene of similar enormities until the July
following, an interval of nearly eight months.


Fortunately, at length, the cause of public justice
triumphed. The measures which led to their discomfiture
and apprehension are detailed in the following extracts
from the Sydney Gazette , dated October 4th, 1817 :
“ A meeting of public officers and principal inhabitants
and settlers was convened at Hobart Town by sanction of
His Honor Lieut. Gov. Sorell, the successor of Colonel
Davey, on the sth July, for the purpose of considering
the most effectual measures of suppressing the banditti;
when the utmost alacrity manifested itself to support the
views of Government in promoting that desirable object,
and a liberal subscription was immediately entered into
for that purpose.”
The following proclamation was immediately after-
wards issued by the Lieutenant-Governor; —“ Whereas the
armed banditti who have for a considerable time infested
the interior of this island, did on the xoth ultimo, make
an attack upon the store at George Town, which, being
left unprotected, they plundered, taking away two boats,
which they afterwards cast ashore at the entrance of Port
Dalyrmple ; and, whereas, the principal leader in the
outrages which have been committed by this band of
robbers is Peter Geary, a deserter from His Majesty’s 73rd
regiment, charged also with mnrder and various other
offences ; and, whereas, the undermentioned offenders
have been concerned with the said Peter Geary in most
of these enormities. The following rewards will be paid
to any person or persons who shall apprehend these
offenders, or any of them : —For Peter Geary, one hun
dred guineas ; for Peter Septon, John Jones, and Richard
Collier, eighty guineas each ; and for Thomas Coine and
Prune (a Frenchman), fifty guineas each. And, whereas
George Watts, a prisoner, who absented himself from the
Coal River previously to the expiration of his sentence,
and who stands charged with various robberies and
crimes, is now at large : it is hereby declared that a reward
of eighty guineas will be paid to any person or persons
who shall apprehend the said George Watts, And all
magistrates and commanders of military stations and


parties, and all constables and others of His Majesty’s
subjects are enjoined to use their utmost efforts to appre-
hend the criminals above named.”
The gang of bushrangers appeared in the vicinity of
Black Brush on Saturday, and were tracked on the
following morning by Sergeant M'Carthy, of the 46th,
who, with his party, came up. The bushrangers ran out
of the house into the woods, and being eleven in number,
and well covered by timber and ground, the eight soldiers
could not close with them. After a good deal of firing
Geary, the leader, was wounded, and fell; two others
were also wounded. The knapsacks of the whole, and
their dogs, were taken. Geary died the same night, and
his body was brought into town on Tuesday, as were the
two wounded men. The remaining eight bushrangers
were seen in the neighbourhood of the Coal River on
the following day. Dennis Currie and Matthew Riegan,
two cf the original bushrangers, surrendered on the Mon-
day following ; and in the beginning of August Jones, a
principal of the banditti, was shot in the neighbourhood of
Swan Port, on the eastern shore. For some days they
had not been heard of, but, by the extraordinary exertions
of Sergeant M'Carthy and party, they were tracked and
overtaken at the above place. On the Sunday evening
after the above affair, some of the villains effected a
robbery at Clarence Plains, but became so excessively
intemperate, from intoxication, as to quarrel among
themselves, the consequence of which was that another
of the gang, of the name of Rollards, having been most
severely bruised and beaten by his associates, fell into the
hands or a settler, and was by him taken a prisoner into
Hobart Town. White and Johnson, two others of the
gang, were apprehended by Sergeant M‘Carthy’s party on
Thursday, 14th August, they having been conducted to
their haunts by a native woman, distinguished by the
name of Black Mary, and another female.
After the above successes in reducing the number of
these persons, it appears that several of the old bush-
rangers were still out on the 16th of August. These were


Septon, Collier, Coine, and Brune, together with Watts,
who had before delivered himself up, and after remaining
some weeks in Hobart Town took again to the woods,
from a dread, as was imagined, of ultimately being called
to answer for his former offences. At this period also
there were two absentees fiom George Town, Port
Dalrymple, a number of the working hands having gone
from that settlement shortly before, all of whom, with the
exception of these two, had returned to their duty. By
the 6th of September, in consequence of the prompt and
efficacious arrangements which had been made, nearly the
whole of the absentees, of whatever description, had
either surrendered or been apprehended.
The desperado Howe was the only one about whom
any serious apprehensions were entertained. This Michael
Howe was born at Pontefract, in Yorkshire, in the year
1787, and was apprenticed to the owners of a merchant
vessel at Hull. His indentures, however, were soon
spurned by Howe, who ran away and entered on board
a hian-of-war, but remained in that station only till he
had an opportunity of escaping from it. In 1811, when
he was about twenty-four years old, he was tried at York
for a high-way robbery, and sentenced to seven years
transportation. In the following year this pest of the
colony arrived at Van Diemen’s Land, and was assigned
to Mr Ingle, merchant and stockholder. Here he showed
as little symptom of submissiveness as before. Though a
convict he would be no man’s slave, “for,” said he, “I
have served the King.” Separated from his mates, but
accompanied by the faithful Black Mary, Howe was hotly
pursued. The soldiers were gaining upon them, as the
strength of the native girl diminished. From caprice,
vexation or fear, the bushranger turned upon his lagging
fellow-fugitive, raised his musket, fired, and severely
wounded her ; she was immediately seized. Howe, cast-
ing aside his gun, and flinging off his knapsack, rushed
into the scrub and was quickly out of sight.
The ransacking of that knapsack revealed the super-
stition of the owner. It contained a primitive-looking book


of kangaroo skin, upon which were recorded in letters of
blood, his most important dreams, which strongly evinced
the wretched state of his mind, and a considerable portion
of superstition. He frequently dreamt of being murdered
by natives, sometimes of seeing his old confederates in
crime, sometimes of being nearly taken by a soldier, and
in one instance the feelings of human nature operated in
this horribly callous breast, and he dreamt of his sister.
The book also contained lists of such seeds he wished
to procure of vegetables, fruits, and even flowers, for he
contemplated a season of repose, and had indulged visions
of some fairy spot, in whose safe seclusion he might
enjoy his plunder, and pass his days in the culture of a
garden, the adornment of a home.
Black Mary was highly incensed at the treatment
she had experienced from her paramour, whom she had
loved so well and served so long. The instinctive
feeling of the savage arose within her breast—she would
be revenged. Healed of her wounds, she led the blood-
hounds from haunt to haunt, from the cave in the moun-
tains to the hollow tree of the lonely gully. As a scout,
her natural subtlety, her experience with the banditti, and
er lust for vengeance made her a most formidable foe.
ho pertinacious was the persecution, so determined the
Sursuit, so successful the harassment, that the chased
pon was compelled to come to terms. Powerful in the
lirowess of his arm and the terror of his name, he proposed
p conditional surrender. He wrote the articles of this
remarkable document, and sent them by one upon whom
he could confide. The letter was addressed to the
“Governor of the Town,” and subscribed by himseif as
“ Governor of the Rangers.”
Strange to say, the “ Governor of the Town” enter-
tained the proposals, and actually sent Captain Nairne
officially to treat with a proscribed bushranger. This
might have been believed of some well organised Black
Band and a feeble Italian state ; but future historians
would be sceptical of the story of a British officer of rank,
controlling a whole colony, holding such a conference with


a single ruffian. Well might Mr West exclaim, “Society
must have been on the verge of dissolution, when letters
and messages passed between the Government and an
outlaw.”
An assurance of his safety being guaranteed, Howe
relied upon safe conduct, and repaired to the rendezvous.
The preliminaries being settled, he walked to town.
There he was nominally in confinement while giving in-
formation that should lead to the capture of the others.
But the intelligence was not satisfactory, the gang increased
in force, and Howe was mistrustful and fores* sick. He
heard, too, of repeated conflicts between the soldiers and
his men, and he could not bear the inactivity of his life,
and the shame of his submisson. Permitted, under plea
of ill health, to wander under surveillance of a constable,
he was not slow in placing himself once more at the head
of a party. A conspiracy brought the gun stock over the
head of one, and a knife across the throat of another.
One hundred guineas reward were now offered for Howe,
one hundred for Watts (his lieutenant), and eighty and
fifty for seven or eight of the club.
One after the other was captured, till only Howe,
Watts, and Browne remained. Browne surrendered, and
Watts plotted against his leader to save his own life.
Leaguing himself with Drewe, a stock-keeper, the artful
traitor prepared his plans. Returning after a brief absence
Howe suspected his fidelity. Before coming to an expla-
nation, they agreed each to knock out the priming of his
gun. Drewe, most probably an old confederate, advanced
with Watts, and a reconciliation took place. A fire was
lighted at which their meal was to be prepared. While
Michael stooped down to apply the bush bellows, his
mate leaped upon him, and with the other’s help secured
his hands. They took from him his pistols and knife,
and told him to prepare for the gallows. In marching
order they advanced towards town ; Watts first with a
gun, the bound victim in the centre, and the stock-keeper
behind. Watching his opportunity, Howe gave the Sam-
son snap to his cords, drew forth a concealed dirk.


stabbed Watts in the back, seized the falling man’s gun,
and shot Drewe in the head ; but while preparing another
and finishing charge the wounded man managed to
escape, and after great difficulty reached Hobart Town
with the news. He was sent to Sydney out of the way of
vengeance, and shortly died of his wounds.
Again at large, with an additional hundred upon his
head, and no confidence in comrades, Michael henceforth
led a solitary life, worried and chased as a wild beast.
Clad in raw kangaroo skins, and with a long, shaggy,
black beard, badgered on all sides, he chose a retreat
among the mountain fastnesses of the Upper Shannon, a
dreary solitude of cloud-land, the rocky home of hermit
eagles. On this elevated plateau—contiguous to
the almost bottomless lakes, from whose crater
in ancient days torrents of liquid fire poured forth
upon the plains of Tasmania, or rose uplifted in basaltic
masses like frowning Wellington ; within sight of lofty
hills of snow, having the Peak of Teneriffe to the south,
Frenchman’s Cap and Byron to the West, Miller’s Bluff
to the east, and the serrated crest of the Western Tier to
the north ; entrenched in dense woods, with surrounding
forests of dead poles, through whose leafless passages the
wind harshly whistled in a storm. Thus situated, amidst
some of the sublimest scenes of nature, away from suf-
fering and degraded humanity, the lonely bushranger was
confronted with his God and his own conscience. Yet it
is possible for one to dwell near the glittering Needles of
the Alps, and have no appreciation of majestic beauty ;
to witness the rushing waters of Niagara, and hear no
voice of Deity in their roar ; to bask in the sunlit loveli-
ness of rosy Cashmere, and bend the knee to the blood-
spattered of the Thug. When busy memory, in
the repose of evening twilight, or midst the wild moun-
tain dance of tempest fires, would revert to deeds of
horror, or call up the softer shades of guiltless childhood,
did no sigh expand that powerful chest, or tear bedew
that passion-furrowed countenance?


Dr. Ross, more than twenty years ago, wrote his re-
flections upon a visit to that locality : —“ With remorse of
the most horrible robberies and murders upon his con-
science, he was here left to himself to contrast the native
innocence and serenity of God’s works with his own
wicked heart, added to the hourly dread of apprehension.
The tumultuous laugh, the heated exhi.aration of com-
panions in sin to drown reflections, were wanting to him.
The silent language of nature must have incessantly read
him a lesson that would harrow up the soul.”
But his days were numbered. He had constructed
a hut in a secluded little mountain valley. The floor was
neatly laid with bark, a huge honeysuckle sheltered it in
the rear, and a sweet stream trickled below the grassy
slope in front. A visitor in 1823 compared the place to
the Valley of Rasselas, and was charmed with its scenery.
He found the hut tenanted by the wife of one of Mr.
Lord’s stockmen. Interrogating her as to the loneliness
of the situation, he received for reply these words of
mystic import—“ Nothing troubles me except when I
awake at night, and my cotv comes to haunt me.” The
traveller wondered at her fears about the ghost of her
cow. But the poor woman meant the spirit of Michael
Howe, or Mike Howe as he was popularly called ;
deeming the “ H ” superfluous she pronounced the name
of this terror of settlers as My Cotv.
Worrall was one of the lucky captors. He was then
a transported mutineer, and Warburtonwas a companion
of the kangaroo hunter and stolen goods receiver. The
conflict here narrated took place on October 21st, 1818.
“ I was noiv,” said Worrall, “determined to make a push
for the capture of this villain, Mike Howe, for which I
was promised a passage to England in the next ship that
sailed, and the amount of the reward laid upon his head.
I found out a man of the name of Warburton, who was in
the habit of hunting kangaroos for their skins, and who
had frequently met Howe during his excursions, and
sometimes furnished him with ammunition. He gave
me such an account of Howe’s habits that I felt con-


vinced we could take him with a little assistance. I,
therefore, spoke to a man named Pugh, belonging to the
48th Regiment, one who I knew was a most cool and
resolute fellow. He immediately entered into my views,
and having applied to Maior Bell, his commanding
officer, he was recommended by him to the Governor,
by whom I was permitted to act, and allowed to join us ;
so he and I went directly to Warburton, who heartily
entered into the scheme, and all things were arranged for
putting it into execution. The plan was thus : —Pugh
and I were to remain in Warburton's hut, while Warbur-
ton himself was to fall into Howe’s way. The hut was
on the River Shannon standing so completely by itself,
and so out of the track of anj body who might be feared
by Howe, that there was every probability of accomplish-
ing our wishes, and “ scotch the snake” as they say, if not
kill it. Pugh and I accordingly proceeded to the ap-
pointed hut. We arrived there before daybreak, and
having made a hearty breakfast Warburton set out to seek
for Howe. He took no arms with him, in order to still
more effectually carry his point, but Pugh and I were
provided with muskets and pistols. The sun had been
just an hour up, when we saw Warburton and Howe upon
the top of a hill coming towards the hut. We expected
they would be with us in a quarter-of-an-hour, and so we
sat down upon the trunk of a tree inside the hut calmly
waiting their arrival. An hour passed, but they did not
come, so I crept to the door cautiously and peeped out.
There I saw them, standing within a hundred yards of us,
in earnest conversation. As I learned afterwards the
delay arose from Howe’s suspecting all was not right. I
drew back from the doer to my station, and in about ten
minutes after this ,we plainly heard footsteps and the
voice of Warburton. Another moment, and Howe slowly
entered the hut —his gun presented and cocked. The
instant he espied us he cried out, “Is that your game?”
and immediately fired, but Pugh’s activity prevented the
shot from taking effect, for he knocked the gun aside.
Howe ran off like a wolf. I fired, but missed. I im-


mediately flung away the gun and ran after Howe ; Pugh
also pursued ; Warburton was a considerable distance
away. I ran very fast; so did Howe, and if he had not
fallen down an unexpected bank I should not have been
fleet enough for him. This fall, however, brought me up
with him. He was on his legs and preparing to climb a
broken bank, which would have given him a free run into
the wood, when I presented my pistol at him, and desired
him to stand ; he drew forth another, but did not level it
at me. We were then about fifteen yards from each
other. He stared at me with astonishment, and to tell
the truth, I was a little astonished at him, for he was
covered with patches of kangaroo skins, and wore a black
beard —a haversack and powder-horn slung across his
shoulders. I wore my beard also, as I do now, and a
curious pair we looked. After a moment’s pause he cried
out, “ Black beard against greybeard for a million !” and
fired. I slapped at him and, I believe, hit him, for he
staggered, but rallied again, and was clearing the bank
between him and me when Pugh ran up, and with the
butt-end of his firelock knocked him down, jumped after
him, and battered his brains out, just as he was opening
a clasp knife to defend himself. Thus was finished
Michael Howe.*
The site where this conflict took place was granted
to Mrs. Paterson and family, and when visited by the
writer in the year ’3O, was a flourishing farm.
* A portion of his dream was actually realized, as his capture
was mainly due to Pugh, the soldier.


BRADY AND HIS COMRADES IN CRIME.
Macquarie Harbour was established as a place of
secondary punishment in December, 1823, the first Com-
mandant being Lieut. Cuthbertson. His discipline was
severe, but of brief duration. A small vessel which was
built at the harbour was in danger, and the Commandant
ordered his boat out to its relief. This he effected, but
on his return the boat was upset. One of the crew tried
to save the Commandant; finding his strength unequal
he said to the man “ Save yourself; never mind me,” and
he was drowned after being at the station a little over
two years. On the death of the Commandant the Chief
Authority devolved on a Non-commissioned Officer. The
prisoners were disposed to question his right to obedience,
and the result was his government was more severe and
strict, and he flogged with double frequency. Accord-
ing to official documents from the year 1822 to the latter
end of 1823, out of 182 prisoners 169 were sentenced,
and 7000 lashes were administered; that is to say, all were
punished except thirteen, and each received an average
of 400 lashes. Such severity was unknown elsewhere.
The first persons who attempted to abscond were John
Green and Joseph Sanders, and they were never heard of
again. A few days after six others followed, and they
encountered a similar fate. They were pursued by two
soldiers and three prisoners, who took with them a
fortnight’s provisions' and hunting dogs. Rain continued
for seven weeks after their departure, and it was presumed
they perished from exhaustion. Another party formed a
catamaran, but it parted and they were rescued five days
after from their perilous position by some soldiers. Eight
Others left in the early part of 1824, of whom Pearce was
one. Early in the year 1824 Lieut. Wright arrived and


took charge of the settlement, but the evil which was
fostered by former severities caused insubordination to
break out, and several absconded. Three prisoners
seized a soldier’s boat, provisions, and arms ; they pro-
ceeded about 12 miles when they made the boat fast to
the stump of a tree and wrote on the stern with chalk,
J ‘To be sold.” This party was never heard of. Five
days after, Brady and six accomplices made an attempt to
seize Commandant Wright’s barge when he and Dr John
Spence were fishing. The Commandant expecting their
intentions vigorously pulled off from the shore, leaving
the doctor behind This gentleman they threatened to
flog, and had prepared an instrument of punishment when
Brady interposed, and thus began his fatal career by an
act of gratitude. He had experienced some kindness
from the doctor when a patient. Another medical
gentleman who was afterwards taken a prisoner by Brady
and his gang, was also treated with great respect though
robbed of his money. From June loth, 1824, to July
loth, 1825, 102 prisoners absconded, and more or less
perished in the bush. After Brady’s ineffectual attempt
to seize the barge, M‘Cabe at night swam off and took a
boat belonging to the soldiers, which was moored off the
shore. The surprise is that no effort was made to secure
these prisoners knowing they had absconded from tfie
settlement.
On the 9th June Brady was pursued by Lucas, the
pilot, and soldiers without success, and they were next
heard of at the residence of Mr Mason on the Derwent
(not Mr. Thos. Mason); they beat him with great violence
and robbed him. The next day they robbed a servant of
Lieut. Gunn of fire-arms, but Lieut. Gunn then pursued
them and captured five. At their trial they tried to
extenuate their crimes by the hardships they had suffered,
but in vain, and those unfortunate men suffered at the
same time as Alex. Pearce, who was one of the second
party that absconded from Macquarie Harbour in 1822.
The details of his career were the most revolting ever
experienced by a human being. But as lam treating


upon Brady I must forego a description of this horrible
career.
I must first, however, dwell a little upon assignment
and conviction. Transportation at a distance seemed a
trifling penalty, but when viewed near it was found to be
inhuman. The servant was assigned to a master without
his consent; his employment was alien to his habits ; he
laboured without wages ; he was met with suspicion, and
was ruled with insult or contempt. The servant became
sullen, the master vindictive, and slight offences were
visited with severe punishment of excessive cruelty. The
offences were often but ebullition of wounded feelings
and tokens of utter wretchedness. The victims were|un-
compensated, and a great majority unreformed, and thus
employers preferred new hands to those passing through
such severe suffering. Such as rose in society were
seldom respectable ; they neither regretted their crime
nor offered atonement. But if the prisoner was injured
the colonist was no less so. Social virtues were dis-
couraged, and all classes were contentious and overbear-
ing. The police were for ever prying into the business
of life.
When the then state of society is taken into con-
sideration Matthew Brady must be judged with clemency,
though he committed crimes, and was a desperado, but
if the first step had been turned into a different channel,
his career would have been different. He was a man of
intelligence and of good address; he was quite young
when transported, only 22 years old. He was a gentle-
man’s servant, and his offence was trivial; if it had been
committed in the present day he would probably have
received one month’s imprisonment, for it was merely
losing or purloining a portion of his employer’s wardrobe.
Brady was of middle height, and had remarkable blue
eyes, which were very expressive, and he was capable of
enduring great physical exertion. His companion, J.
M'Cabe, 22 years old, was a boatman ; was tried in
Dublin in June, 1817, and was sentenced for seven yearSr
He was of a sullen disposition, and his sentence was for


a drunken brawl, in which a man was killed. He was re-
sentenced in Sydney to this colony, and arrived in the
Woodlark in the latter end of 1823, and escaped from
Macquarie Harbour in 1824. The day he absconded he
would have been free by servitude had he conducted
himself properly.
From July, 1824, to December of the same year,
through the indefatigable exertions of Lieutenant W.
Gunn, forty-three bushrangers and absconders were ap-
prehended and eighteen suffered capital punishment, but
Brady and his associates seemed to elude and defy all
Mr. Gunn’s diligence to capture them. Brady would be
heard of on the Clyde at Mr. Clarke’s, and in a few days
he would appear at Pittwater (Mr. Meredith’s), and then
again on the main road near Ross. On the Ist January,
1825, he issued a sort of proclamation from his mountain
home, which ran as follows : —“ Given under my hand,
1825. Ido hereby declare I will cause to be punished
all settlers who do not treat their consigned servants with
consideration, and who do not provide them with com-
mon necessaries. Given under my hand, at my mountain
home, this day, January Ist, 1825.” This was written in
a fairly good hand, and copies were posted in several
public places at Jericho, Sorell, Bothwell, and other
places. On January 20th Brady put his threat in force,
for he appeared at Captain Allison’s residence, Sandy
Bay, and having secured all the assigned servants, com-
pelling one of them to do it, the band then approached
the dwelling, when they met the captain, who offered a
stern resistance. Mrs. Allison interceded, but it was of
no avail. A servant (a free-man, who came out with
the captain), of the name of Fletcher, rushed in from the
garden but was immediately knocked down and severely
beaten. A Government woman, named Hannah Bell,
interceded for him, saying, “Come men, don’t kill him
quite out.”
Two soldiers belonging to the 40th Regiment, named
Foster and Wilson, having received information that
Brady and his companions were on Mount Wellington,


went in pursuit. When half-way up the mountain they
were challenged by Brady, and commanded to stand.
About 20 yards to the left was stationed M ! Cabe, who
immediately fired and shot Foster dead. Wilson made
an effort to pursue them, but lost his way in the moun-
tain, but the following morning succeeded reaching where
the Orphan School now stands. Foster’s body was found
next day, and a coroner’s inquest was held, and a verdict
of wilful murder returned against M‘Cabe and Brady. I
might mention that this year bushranging was raging,
there being several parties under the leadership of
Pollock, Godliman, H. M'Connell, Shepherd, Everett,
Broadland, Pawley, and others.
On February 4th Brady appeared at Mr. J. Weed-
ing’s, at Jericho, where there were Mr. Weeding, his
brother, two men servants, and one Launceston con-
stable, who was passing the night there. The bush-
rangers carried away considerable booty, including fire-
arms. The report says that Mr. Weeding, the servants,
and constable were so frightened that they did not ven-
ture outside the door until six o’clock next morning.
When this visit became known the magistrate, Mr.
Anstey, with soldiers and constables, went in pursuit, and
travelled to Michael Howe’s Marsh, which is about six
miles from Jericho ; but the bushrangers were away,
though they destroyed their camp. The bushrangers
were joined at this time by a man named John Plum,
whose career was of short duration. He was stock-
keeper to a Mr. Franks. Brady after leaving his camp
proceeded towards the Table Mountains, when the party
overtook five men in the employment of Captain P.
Wood and Mr. Lord, three on horseback and two well-
armed ; but wherever Brady and his party went they
seemed to be submitted to without the slightest resistance,
'ihey then went to Mr. Kemp’s hut, near Wood's Lake,
taking a quantity of stores. Depredations continued to
be committed upon Mr. Stanfield, Mr. Heywood, and
others.


On March 13th, 1825, W. Allen, of the 3rd Regi-
ment, in company with Dutton and Kennard, were scour-
ing the woods in various directions, and had reached the
Shannon, and at 11 a.m., two miles this side of Joe
Johnson’s hut, they fell in with three armed men. They
were seen at about forty yards distance, when they were
challenged and asked who they were, when Constable
Dutton said they were police officers, and demanded the
strangers should lay down their arms. The others
answered by saying, “We think you are bushrangers, so
lay down your arms.” Both parties retreated behind
trees, and commenced firing. Dutton, who had recognised
Plum, said, “ Come over, Plum ; you are a very foolish
man, and assist us in capturing the others, and I am sure
you will get your release.” But Dutton was unheeded,
and Plum continued firing. Both parties kept it up until
five o’clock without intermission, and then Dutton shifted
his position slightly and shot Plum, who immediately fell.
The other two then retreated, leaving behind them several
firearms and their knapsacks, in which several plundered
things were found. Plum was shot in the chin, the
bullet passing through his throat. The constables were
forced to camp on the spot, doing their best for the
wounded man, tying the wound up with a yellow silk
handkerchief marked “ Clarke ” Constable Dutton said,
“ It would have been better to have listened to me, Jack,
and come over.” The poor fellow answered, “ I wish I
had; but all this happens because I was a good man. I
washed a shirt for Brady, after which he and M'Cabe
came backwards and forwards with provisions for me. I
had been six or seven weeks without meat, and very often
without flour I, and my fellow servant Wade, had none
but what we conveyed from the Green-water Holes upon
our backs. Our masters kept us for a long time without
any meat, and then sent us pigs in such a poor condition
we could not eat them. Mr. John Franks said we must
feed the pigs on kangaroo or go without. Our hut was
in Michael Howe’s Marsh, 26 miles from Green-water
Holes, and all that way were we obliged, by our master,


to carry on our backs what was given us ; so that after
Brady had frequently pressed me to join him, when his
visits to our hut were discovered I consented, because I
thought at any rate 1 should be called as bad as him.”
Mr. Anstey, to some extent, confirmed the above
statement, saying that Plum had applied to him for a pass
to go to Mr. Franks’ station, and the men had then been
without rations for several weeks. He told Plum to tell
his employers that if he heard of the like again he would
take his assigned servants from him, but Plum never
delivered the message, knowing how fruitless it would be.
Of course Mr. Franks denied - the accusation, and long
letters upon the subject appeared in the Hobart Gazette.
Plum was tried, and suffered the extreme penalty of the
law
In the eyes of the prisoners and assigned servants
Brady was looked upon as a kind of Robin Hood, who
plundered the rich for the benefit of the poor. It was
invariably his custom to supply the outside station stock-
keepers with tobacco, tea, sugar, and, in some cases, grog ;
and from persons whom he robbed he distributed tobacco
amongst their assigned servants, and in two instances he
gave large sums of money to them, which was invariably
returned to their masters. Such liberality acted as a pre-
ventive against the police getting any information, and
was also the means of Brady gaining a knowledge of the
movements of the constables and military. There were
at this time four parties out in search of Brady under the
respective leaderships of Messrs. Humphries, Gunn,
Anstey, and Kimberley. Up to this period only
as a reward for the apprehension of any of the band, had
been offered, but a strong representation was made to
Governor Arthur, which was the means of the following
proclamation being issued :
“ Government House,
“ April 14th, 1825.
“ It has occasioned the Lieutenant-Governor much concern
that the continued outrages of the two prisoners, M‘Cabe and
Brady, have led to the death of another settler. His Honor
directed that a reward of £25 shall be given for the apprehension.


of either of these men ; and that any prisoner giving such infor-
mation as may directly lead to their apprehension shall receive a
ticket of leave, and that any prisoner apprehending and securing
either of them, in addition to the above reward, shall receive a
conditional pardon. The magistrates are very pressingly desired
to circulate this order and to direct the constables to visit all huts
of stock-keepers, shepherds, and others, in their respective dis-
tricts, notifying the rewards oifered, and cautioning such persons
against receiving, harbouring, or supporting these men, who are
charged with the commission of murder. Fifty acres of land, free
from restrictions, will be given to the Chief Constable in whose
district either M‘Cabe or Brady is taken, provided it shall be
certified by the magistrate of the district that he has zealously
exerted himself in the promulgation of this order, and to the
adoption of measures for giving it effect.
“ The magistrates will see the importance of conveying timely
information of the movements of M‘Cabe and Brady ; and they
will consider themselves fully authorised to incur any responsi-
ble expense in so doing. By command of his Honor, the Lieu-
tenant-Governor. John Montagu, Secretary.”
About three days after this notice, Brady answered
it by posting on the door of the Royal Oak Inn, at Cross-
marsh, the following :
“ Mountain Home,
“ April 20th, 1825.
“ It has caused Matthew Brady much concern that such a
person known as Sir George Arthur is at large. Twenty gallons
of rum will be given to any person that will deliver his person
unto me. I also caution John Priest that I will hang him for his
ill-treatment of Mrs. Blackwell at New Town.—M. Beady.”
On the 24th May, Brady’s gang robbed Mr Barr’s
house, on the Clyde, of everything valuable it contained.
On June 3rd 700 sheep, belonging to Messrs. Sherwin
and Cawthorne, were stolen, and 200 of them were found
with their throats cut and set fire to. This malicious act
was laid at the door of Brady, but he repudiated it,
saying he would give the 200 sovereigns which he took
from a gentleman on the Port Dalrymple road to any
person who would furnish information lor the detection
of the persons who killed the sheep. On June 17th Mr.
Stocker and Mr. Whitfield were returning from Ross
Bridge to Hobart Town, and when within a mile of Cross-


marsh a cart was seen standing in the road. Two men
jumped from it, compelling Messrs. Stocker and Whit-
field to dismount, and walk into the bush, where they
found a Mr. Bryant, with one of his servants, lying on
the ground bound. When their money, gold watch, and
other valuables were taken from them, Mr. Bryant and
his servant were allowed to depart, having been detained
from eight o’clock in the morning until five in the even-
ing. From Mr. Bryant they took i. A few minutes
afterwards Mr. Stocker and Mr. Whitfield were also
allowed to depart, but the bushrangers detained their
horses, with a promise that they would send them on to
Mr. Whitfield by his servant, whom they detained.
On July ist, at Mr. Minnett’s, a new settler at Pitt
Water, the gang, whose party now appeared to comprise
eight men, robbed him of plate and jewelry to the value
of On July 15th, at Crossmarsh, they stopped a
Mr. Hooper, a new arrival, and they compelled him to go
with them to Mr. Kemp’s hut, telling him to knock at the
door, by which they gained admittance. There were
nine Government men, beside a free overseer, and a free
man, and a carpenter in the hut. The gang took away
eight pounds of tobacco, tea, sugar and Mr. G. Kemp’s
gun. Two days after this they were at Mr. Bisdee’s,
between Jericho and Crossmarsh, which they also
plundered. On July 22nd they appeared at Mr. Hay-
wood’s, at Macquarie Plains, where they secured five men
in the hut and then entered the dwelling house. Mr.
Baywoodwas writing, and on his rising and attempting to
take a gun which was near him one of the gang fired, but
fortunately missed, and a struggle ensued and they bound
him in a chair, plundering the house of everything
valuable, and taking two Government men with them to
•carry the swag. On August sth they stopped Mr. C.
Thompson and Mr J. Wresnell, taking them into the
bush, and robbed them of money and such articles of
wearing apparel as they required. M'Cabe changed hats
with Mr. Thompson. The bushrangers appeared in high
spirits, talked of their farm in the mountains, and said


they would decorate their hut with a pair of pistols which
they took from Mr. T. They also seemed to know all
that was going on. Two days after they stopped a Mr.
Blair and a Mr. Russell who were going to Captain P.
Wood’s residence, and robbed them of their money and
watches. On August 12th Mr. G. C. Clarke, of Waterloo
Mills, was stopped near Jericho, and of course he was
relieved of all he possessed. A few days after they
stopped a Mr. Cleve, near Ross Bridge, and compelled
him to drink a pint of raw rum, which almost suffocated
him, taking from him £lOO. A Mrs. Kennedy, and
her companion, a Mr. Dillon, were robbed near Ross
Bridge while proceeding on their way to Port Dalrymple
of all their wearing apparel and £lO in notes by the
bushranger Priest. The victims were shortly afterwards
met by Brady, when the poor woman told him their
troubles, and Brady pursued Priest and fired at him when
escaping into the bush. On October 7th Brady and his
party visited Mr. Dry’s huts on the Western Mountains,
but a party of soldiers came up at the time, when a kind
of duel took place, the bushrangers retreating, leaving
behind them a quantity of plate supposed to have been
stolen from Mr. Butcher and Mr. Minnett, and a bag of
sovereigns containing between and ,£4OO. Four
days afterwards the gang were at Mr. Meredith’s residence
at Oyster Bay, robbing that gentleman of hams, flour,
spirits, tobacco, ball cartridge and gunpowder. There
were three whale boats on the beach, and one of Mr.
Meredith’s men scuttled them, but there was one not
much injured which the bushrangers compelled the car-
penter to repair, taking him with them, saying if the boat
leaked they would throw him into the sea. On October
25th they appeared at Mr Stanfield’s, sen., at Green
Point, Austin’s Ferry. There was no one at home but
Mrs. Stanfield and a female servant. Mr. Stanfield and
his son returned shortly, and offering resistance both were
wounded, one in the arm the other in the side, but not
dangerously. The bushrangers remained in the house
regaling themselves until n o’clock at night, taking


in cash, a quantity of flour, tea, sugar, two casks of meat,
and wearing apparel, removing their booty in a boat
belonging to Mr. Stanfield, which was afterwards found
scuttled. A few days afterwards they appeared at a Mr.
Farquharson’s. There was a young lady staying at this
gentleman’s residence, and when M'Cabe was searching
one of the rooms he attempted to take liberties with her ;
when Brady hearing her cries rushed to her assistance,
fired at M'Cabe, and shot him through the hand. He
then severely beat M‘Cabe, taking away his arms, and
tnrning him away from the gang, and threatening him if
he ever crossed his path he was a dead man. M‘Cabe
next appeared at a hut where a man named Macguire
lived in rather destitute condition On November sth
he stopped a servant of Mr. Russell, near Mr. Scott’s hut
on the Clyde, making him a prisoner; but the man
extricated himself, and darting into the bush was able to
give the alarm to a party of soldiers under the command
of Mr. Kimberley, who immediately went in pursuit and
overtook M‘Cabe. A Mr. Russell, who had also joined
in the hue and cry, was the first to come up to him, and
M'Cabe fired but missed. Mr. R.’s servant instantly
rushed upon M ‘Cabe and threw him, and ten days after-
wards this unfortunate man ended his career upon the
scaffold.
Through the information received from M'Cabe that
Brady was the leader of the most desperate gang in the
Island, consisting of Bird, Dunn, Murphy, Lamb, Cor-
nelius, Welsh, and Vine, and from further information
received, Lieut. William Gunn with ten soldiers and two
stock-keepers belonging to Mr. E. Lord, traversed Bashan
Plains, which are on the western bank of the River Ouse,
and extend for 15 miles to Lake Echo, a large sheet of
water about 20 miles in circumference. In this lake are
two or three small islands. It received its name from a
remarkable echo which is heard when a gun is fired at a
particular spot near the northern end, resembling three
continuous peals of thunder. Stopping at Mr. Ransom’s
stock runs on the Shannon, they received information


that Brady and his party had crossed the country towards
Oatlands, having stuck up Mr. Harrison’s inn at Jericho.
Lieutenant Gunn pursued with all diligence, and crossed
the country to Pittwater, arriving at the Sorell township
on December 2nd. Brady’s party appeared the same day
at Mr, R. Bethune’s residence at 8 p.m. They made Mr.
Bethune prisoner, also his overseer and servants. The
bushrangers stayed there that night and the next day, in.
the evening of which Mr. W. Bethune and Mr. Bunster
arrived on horseback. The weather was extremely wet,
and on arriving at the door a man presented himself, who
called out as if to a servant “ Take Mr. Bethune’s horse.”
This man turned out to be Brady. The gentlemen were,
however, treated with the utmost civility; dinner was
provided for them, and every attention paid them.
About ten o’clock at night Brady announced to them
his intention of proceeding to liberate the prisoners in the
gaol at Sorell Town, and accordingly tying the two
Messrs. Bethune together, and all the other captives, 18
in number, two-by-two, they were forced to accompany
the bushrangers to that town, where they arrived just as
Lieut. Gunn’s party of soldiers were cleaning their fire-
locks, having been out the whole day in pursuit of the
very men who now taking them by surprise, seized all
their arms, and locked them into a cell of the gaol. At
this moment Mr. Laing, the gaoler, escaped from his
residence immediately adjoining, and ran to Lieut. Gunn,
who was staying at Dr. Garrett’s, to communicate the
intelligence. Lieut. Gunn immediately took up his
double-barrelled gun, and was proceeding towards the
gaol, when he was met by two of the banditti ; he raised
his gun, but Murphy (who was a native of Norfolk Island,
and 20 years of age, and considered a dead shot) ad-
dressing Brady, said —“ Shall I pot him ?” Brady
answered, “ No ! he has shown plenty of pluck ; wing
him.” Mr. Gunn immediately received in his right arm
the contents of Murphy’s gun, which tore it to pieces
above the elbow. Several shots were at this moment
fired, one of which grazed Dr. Garrett, and another


slightly wounded Mr. Gunn in the breast. Mr Glover
had a little before gone to the gaol, armed with a double-
barrelled gun, and was captured, his gun taken from him
and broken to pieces, and himself confined with the
other gentlemen who had fallen into the bushrangers’
hands. The prisoners in the gaol did not quit it, but
remained quietly. On the bushrangers departing they
put up a stick with a great coat and hat upon it to
imitate a sentinel, at the gaol door, in order to gain as
much time as possible. They were perfectly open and
unreserved in their communications. In answer to
enquiries from Mr. Bethune as to how they crossed the
river, they stated they had a boat of their own with six
oars, with which they could cross at any time. They
stated they had a farm in the mountains, where they had
quantities of sheep, cattle, and horses, to which they
could retreat when necessary. No possible blame can
attach to the military, who had just arrived after a
fatiguing day, in very rainy weather, and who were in the
act of cleaning their arms when the banditti captured
them.
The inhabitants of the colony highly appreciated the
indefatigable exertions of Lieut. Gunn, and in ten days
the sum of three hundred guineas was raised to buy him
a piece of plate or whatever he liked. Mr. Gunn had
been a little over two years in the colony, and twenty
months of that he had spent in the bush The Colonial
Government appreciated his services by giving him a
pension of per year and also a civil appointment,
and he was for many years chief police magistrate in
Launceston. He was a man of amiable disposition, and
a fond and indulgent parent. He was a patron of horti-
cultural and agricultural societies, being a great lover of
flowers. He had a strict sense of right and justice, and
two instances of this came under the writer’s notice. One
was during the time the 96th Regiment was quartered in
Launceston. A portion of the troops were given to
rioting, ill-using elderly people, smashing windows, etc.,
but one night they met a Tartar, and two of the soldiers


got a severe thrashing. The man who gave the chastise-
ment was summoned to the police court, before Mr.
Gunn. The soldiers appeared with their beads bandaged
up, and Adjutant Rooney conducted their case. Mr.
Gunn, in his peculiar manner, lectured the defendant,
saying he must protect the military as well as the civilians,
and fined him and costs, but during the day the
defendant received a cheque from Mr. Gunn for the
amount. The other was a person who was anxious to
get a passage in the s.s Shamrock to Melbourne, and in
those days it was necessary to give 24 hours’ notice
before anyone could leave the colony. On applying to
Mr. J. Thom son for bis passage he was told he must
get two persons to prove he was a fit and proper person
to leave the colony, and he answered there was only one
man in Launceston who knew him, and that was Mr.
Gunn. Mr. Thompson drove with him to Mr. Gunn’s
residence, and he was immediately recognised by Mr.
Gunn (it was a peculiar feature of Mr. Gunn that whoso-
ever had once passed under his notice he immediately
recognised him again, and also remembered his name,
which was extraordinary, as several thousand passed
through his hands), who at once gave him his clearance.
The man was so grateful to Mr. Gunn for his kindness
that he drew from his finger a ring worth 100 guineas,
and offered it to M r. Gunn, who refused it, saying he had
only done his duty. He was a most charitable man, and
in no case have I known him to refuse giving in cases of
distress or trouble ; in fact his heart was as large as his
person, and his height was 6ft. 4m.
I am indebted for the description of the state of
Hobart, when the news of the Sorell outrage reached
there, to a deceased relation. He says ;—“ I was staying
at George Hopwood’s hotel, the Green Gate, Collins-
street, on Sunday, December 4th, 1825, talking to-Mr.
Ballantyne, close to Government House, when an unusual
occurrence took place, three men galloping up the street.
That part of Hobart was like a Quaker street, or a
Presbyterian Sabbath in Scotland, very quiet. The


sound of the horses’ hoofs directed our attention to three
men who galloped up to the lodge; the subaltern jumped
from his horse, was saluted by the guard, and passed in.
It was quite evident something unusual had occurred, as
the Governor’s orderlies were rapidly moving about in all
directions. Shortly afterwards Mr. Humphries, superin-
tendent of police, and Major R. Turton appeared at
Government House, but rumor had travelled almost as
fast as the horsemen. The report was that Brady had
captured the town of Sorell, had shot Mr. Gunn and Dr,
Garrett, and hung the gaoler ; had released the prisoners
in the gaol, and the road party at Pittwater ; had taken
with him all assigned servants en route , and was in full
march on Hobart Town. The excitement can be better
imagined than described. On Monday morning a
Government Gazette was issued, reporting the correct
state of affairs. An Executive Council was held that
day, and it was decided to strengthen the various outside
military stations and establish additional ones.”
There was also a call on the inhabitants to assist the
Government, which was loyally responded to, and a large
number of special constables—from leading merchants to
humble labourers -were sworn in to relieve the military.
Fifty new constables were enrolled, and alterations were
made in the various district constables. Mr. T. Capurn
replaced Mr. R. Pitt, at Hobart Town; and Mr. T. Monds
replaced Mr R. G. Lawson, at Port Dalrymple. Two
other important appointments were made —that of Mr.
Anthony Cottereli to Ben Lomond district, and Mr. H.
Bonney to Westbury, this being the first time that
Westbury was occupied, having previously been open
bush. The settlers were also called on to assist, and
heartily responded, several gentlemen taking to the bush
with their servants, in pursuit of the bushrangers. Two
of the most prominent were Messrs. Thomas and Joseph
Archer, who, with their armed servants, were successful
in capturing several desperadoes.
The military stations were as follow:—Brighton,
Lieut. R. Travers, 10 men ; Oatlands, Lieut. M. Vicary,


37 men ; Eastern Marshes, Ensign Lockyer, 14 men;
Ross, Lieut. R. Fry, Ensign D. M. C. Stubbeman, 45
men ; Auburn, Capt. Hughes, 30 men; St. Paul’s Plains,
Lieut. T. Shadforth, 31 men ; Launceston, Col. Balfour,
Captain V. Donaldson, 49 men; George Town, Captain
J* D Arcy, 21 men; Westbury, Lieut. H. Dexter, 29
men ; New Norfolk, one sergeant, 14 men ; Clyde, Lieut.
W. Williams, 76 men; Pittwater, Lieut. J. B Oliver, 41
men. Besides these outposts there were squads of
soldiers of from three to four with an officer of peace,
whose instructions were to scour the country m all
directions and challenge every person they met. With
all this precaution and diligence, Brady and his gang
eluded the soldiers. It was soon evident he had slipped
his friends and had found fresh fields.
On sth January, 1826, Henry Bonney made a cap-
ture of a bushranger and kangaroo-hunter named
Pawley, who stated to Lieut. Dexter that he was in
communication the previous day with Brady and his
party. He offered his services to go in search of Brady
and gang, and the offer being accepted he started with
two soldiers and a constable, Shingleton. He escorted
them to his bark hut on the Liffey in the immediate
neighbourhood of where the township of Bracknell now
stands, about five miles from the Western Tiers. He
said that Brady required from him some kangaroo dogs
which he had promised to obtain. He was to leave a
note for Brady in a hollow tree at the end of a small
plain where he had met Brady (these notes were
scratched on a cutting-grass leaf with a penknife or
some other sharp instrument). The note was left as
directed, but meanwhile Brady appeared. He advanced
to the bark hut to obtain the dog as promised. Not
suspecting treachery he, accompanied by Cornelius,
armed only with pistols, entered the hut ; the soldiers
and constables being hidden by some sheets of bark
, u P r *ght against the wall were not visible.
While in that position conversation was carried on
between Brady and Pawley, the latter observing that


there was neither God nor devil. At a given signal
the soldiers and constables rushed from their hiding-
place, and fired at the bushrangers. Brady was shot in
the thick part of the thigh, and Cornelius knocked
down with the butt end of a musket. Though Brady
was wounded a most desperate encounter took place,
three men rushing on him ; he was at last secured
and bound. One soldier and Shingleton took Cor-
nelius to Westbury, leaving one soldier and his betrayer
in charge of Brady. While in the hut the soldiers
attended to Brady’s wounds as best they could, and in-
tended to bring a conveyance, in which he was to be
taken to Westbury. While he was lying on the bed
he complained of being cold, and asked if they would
throw a kangaroo-skin rug which was lying in the hut
over him. This was done, and he, under cover of the
rug, disentangled his arms and asked for water. The
guard laid aside his gun and went to procure the water,'
Brady immediately sprang up and seized his firelock, and
became master of the position. Turning on his be-
trayer, the man who, a few minutes before declared
there was neither God nor devil, fell on his knees and
prayed that his life might be spared. Brady said, “It
does not answer my purpose to discharge this gun now,
but if I am pursued by you and the soldier, the con-
tents of this gun you shall receive, and beware —the
next time we meet I will carry out the just punishment
you deserve.” I may add that two months later this
unfortunate man fell into Brady’s hands, and was shot
by him. Brady tore down a sheet of bark from the
back of the hut and took to the bush once more, being
pursued by the soldier. Having a commanding
position Brady turned round and said to the soldier —
“ Have a care, my man ; advance not another step or
you are a dead man.” The soldier hesitated, and Brady
plunging into the bush was lost to sight.
Brady’s prompt and resolute action in escaping
when captured near Bracknell put his opponents to th&
non-plus. Although the day was far spent, the soldier


and Brady’s betrayer decided to proceed to Westbury,
and though the journey was through a dense forest of
fourteen nhles they succeeded in reaching the camp
before the constable and soldier arrived with their pri-
soner. There was much disappointment when the
facts became known, and the next morning Lieut.
Dexter decided upon starting three parties in search,
one led by himself, another by the Sergeant and Con-
stable Shillington, the third by District Constable
Bonney. Cornelius was forwarded to Launceston
under escort lashed to a horse. On the despatches
arriving in Launceston, Colonel Balfour forwarded a
strong detachment of police and military.
Bonney’s party travelled as far as the Lake district,
and he there discovered a marshy plain of from 7000 to
8000 acres. This plain is about three miles south of
the Great Lake, and Bonney named the place St.
Patrick’s, after Corporal Patrick Sheehan, who accom-
panied him. They here discovered a hut, which at a
distance resembled a gigantic fallen tree. In the centre
was a door, and from each end the whole plain could
be surveyed and a surprise prevented. As the hut pre-
sented no appearance of being recently occupied they
came to the conclusion that it was one of the retreats
of Michael Howe, being about thirty miles from the
towship of Bothwell.
The Government then descended to a degrading and
mean position. They induced prisoners of long sen-
tence to unite with the bushrangers to betray them,
and arranged that men in irons should join the bush-
rangers, and give intelligence to the police. Some of
the men selected and thus set free began business on
their own account, and some were lost and perished in
the bush ; others, who joined the gang and were sus-
pected, were “ tried by court-martial” and shot by the
bushrangers.
Mr. West, in his “History of Tasmania,” says that
the bushrangers compelled a man to drink a quantity
of laudanum, but I believe this to be an error. Brady


was in the habit of compelling parties to drink a large
quantity of raw spirits, so that they would become
stupefied, and unable to give any information of his
party’s movements. There is one peculiar circumstance
connected with one of these men. He was compelled
to drink a large quantity of liquor, and the bushrangers
then left him, but his stomach rejected the drug, and
after a sound sleep he recovered. He again met Brady
and his gang, and two pistols were discharged at him.
He fell, and was left for dead, but the wound was not
mortal, and reviving, he determined to give himself up.
He was, however, again unfortunate, for he met Brady
and his companions once more, who again fired, but the
bullet, instead of entering the skull, glanced round it.
He fell senseless to the ground, and was thrown into a
dry creek. He, however, recovered, and long survived
these adventures. This fact was also corroborated by
Brady when examined by the gentlemen from whom I
got the account, and, strange as it may appear, it is
perfectly correct.
A proclamation was issued, offering a reward of
for the capture of Brady, and a grant of 300
acres and for any of the party, with a free pardon
for any prisoner, with a passage to England. Five
hundred copies of this proclamation were distributed
throughout the colony, and Governor Arthur removed
his quarters to Jericho, so as to be more in the centre
of operations, and while there he heard of a black who
had been brought up by Mrs. Birch, and had shown
much dexterity in discovering stray cattle, and had
rescued several persons who were lost in the bush. The
Governor sent for this aboriginal, and the following
dialogue took place—“ Good morning, Mata Guberna.”
Governor —“ Good morning, Tom. I want ;you to go
with a party of soldiers and capture Brady and his
gang.” Tom looked surprised, and shook his head.
“ Mata Brady good to blackfellow —give him bacca ;
kind to blackfellow’s gin, kind to picaninny ; give
sugar picaninny. That no do at all.” Governor —“I


will pay you well.” To ti —“ You, Mata Guberna, send
your soldiers, constables ; they get shot, plenty more ;
Tom he get shot, that foolishness.” This aborigi-
nal was afterwards employed in trapping and capturing
his own countrymen.
It is well-known that Brady was on very friendly
terms with the aborigines. Some writers state that
the natives were unable to appreciate kindness, but
there are several intances on record to the contrary.
Whenever the women took to a European their affec-
tions were strong and lasting. The most extraordinary
circumstance was how Brady made his retreat after
being wounded with a pistol ball in his thigh. It has
never been explained. Some think he fell in with his
gang, but if that had been the case they would certainy
have returned and murdered the soldier and Rawley.
I have had long conversations with the late Mr. H.
Bonney on this subject, and he was fully under the
impression that Brady was met by a party of natives,
who were very strong in that locality, and was carried
by them to his mountain fastness. Mr. Bonney found
when pursuing any bushrangers that the natives in-
variably deceived him. That fastness was afterwards
known as “Brady’s Look-out.” It is nearly 5000 feet
above the level of the sea, is 700 feet higher than the
Great Lake, and can be plainly seen by the westward
traveller as he proceeds on his way to Deloraine. It
was probably through the natives that his gang was
communicated with. One feature in reference to
Brady was, he would never allow the natives or their
women to be ill-used by his gang. It was never ascer-
tained how the ball was extracted from his thigh.
The gang appeared on January 20, 1826, at Mr.
Gatenby's, whom they robbed and cruelly ill-used.
The next day they appeared at Epping Forest, at a
settler’s named Diprose. Here they met a most practi-
cal women, who gave them a severe scolding and
rounding ; but it had very little effect on the gang, as
they carried away a heavy booty. Anyone who can


remember the late Mrs. Diprose will know she was just
the woman to do it. They were on February 6
between the punt and Mr. Gibson’s stock-yard, but did
no harm. They sent a message to Sergeant Massey
that they would hang him, and burn his wheat at Ben
Lomond. They very nearly, on February 20, fell into
the hands of Messrs. Archer and the military. The
bushrangers were misdirected either accidentally or
intentionally by Mr. Kenton, the puntman. (The
Colonial Times of that date reports it as Mr. Kenton,
but “ West’s History ” says a Mr. Preston ; I presume
the Colonial Times is most likely to be correct.)
The gang stopped one of Mr. Archer’s grooms, who
was in the habit of riding over to meet the mailman to
get his master’s letters, and also those for the benefit
of the neighbours, and from him they gathered infor-
mation different from what they received from the
puntman. Believing that Mr. Kenton purposely
misled them they returned and shot him at his own
door. Brady said when in gaol, had they acted upon
the information of the puntman they would have fallen
into the hands of Messrs. Archer and the military,
which was the reason they shot him. I might mention
that this was the first time Brady had been seen since
being wounded, and he and Dunn were on horseback.
The following letters were sent by Brady :
No. I.—“ Captain Brady presents his respectful compliments
to Lieutenant Gunn, the officer commanding his Majesty s troops
at Sorell, and will most assuredly do himself the great pleasure
of personally expressing his gratitude and regard for him during
the course of the evening.”
No. 2.—ls a slip of paper with “ For Lingan ” written on one
side. I think it perhaps more interesting to my readers to give an
exact copy :—“ Go in a Direction from the new Plains to you Come
to a Creek, Grose the Creek And Go on for the white mash (Marsh)
to you come to a large Suggar lofe. Go up it to you Come Neer
to the top, look in a ling (fallen) Tree, and There you will find
Some of your Guns, a little from there you will find a riffle and
a Bubble Bari Gun. I cant say anything more conserning Them.—
Yours Truly, M. Brady.”


No. 3.—“ I have Sent Directions to you Befor. Go from the
New Plains in a Direction for the White' Mash To you Come to a
Creek Crose The Creek and look for a large Suggar Lofe Go neer
the Top of it And look under a ling Tree and there you will find
the Guns and Closd to these You will find a riffle and also a
Duhle Bari Gun.— Mathew Brady.”
The following morning they called at the Widow
Von Bibra’s, stating they were constables and had been
marching all night, and would trouble her for some
refreshments. This lady was the wife of Lieut. Von
Bibra, of George the Third’s German Legion. He
arrived in the colony with eight children, and shortly
after one more was added to the number. He came in
the ship Morley, and brought a letter of strong recom-
mendation written by her Royal Highness the'Duchess
of Kent, and also one from his Majesty’s General
Consul at Hamburg, C. Mellish, Esq. He received a
liberal grant of land, and was made chief district con-
stable of that district. He made great improvements
on his land in the shape of building and clearing ; and
was esteemed for his courtesy and frankness by all who
knew him, but was accidentally drowned in the Mac-
quarie River ; and owing to the deep sympathy
entertained for his widow and children, a substantial
collection was made.
During the repast the conversation naturally
turned upon Brady and his doings, and the widow said
that she hoped Brady would not trouble her, as she
had had enough trouble lately, having lost her husband
and also a large number of cattle which had strayed
away and could not be found. Brady told her there
was no need for alarm ; that the bushrangers would
not hurt her. Her eldest son, a lad of some 14 summers,
got his father’s sword, and said he “ would show Brady
what the Vons were made of if he came here.” I knew
this stripling well, and few men could handle his-
“ bunch of fives ” so well as Charlie Von Bibra.
In the evening a party of real soldiers and police-
men arrived at Mrs. Von Bibra’s, and she could hardly
credit that her morning visitors were Brady and party,


as he was so courteous and respectful. During the
time the servants were preparing the breakfast, Brady
took her youngest child on his knee, and sang a simple
ditty, and on leaving he thanked her, regretting they
had made a mistake, as they thought it was Mr.
Corney’s, and said he would see that Brady gave her
no annoyance. She thought there was a nervous
excitement about them, as two kept watch while the
others had their meal.
The military and police were again at fault, for
while they were scouring the Macquarie, Epping
Forest, and the Lake River districts, Brady had crossed
the country. Having travelled almost from the west
to the east in a bird line, this trip shows what an
expert bushman Brady was, as he appeared on the
second morning on Mr. Den’s farm, Swanpoit. They
took Mr. Den with them, and kept him prisoner
several days and nights, though it is but justice
to them to say that they treated him with civility.
In the course of conversation Brady said he was well
furnished with Hobart Town newspapers. They
were next seen at Bagdad, committing robberies and
plundering wherever they went. To the astonish-
ment of the authorities, Brady next appeared on the
Tamar, and'the first day of their arrival he went up a
high hill (that hill is a little south of Mr. Rosevear’s)
to look for the brig Glory, belonging to Messrs.
Griffiths, but did not return until the morning of the
third day. One of the party guarded by the bush-
rangers escaped, named Guilders, and carried informa-
tion to Colonel Balfour. Godwin, who was on sentry,
was brought to court-martial by Brady for allowing
the man to escape, and was shot and thrown into the
Tamar. Brady, who seemed to have a fascination for
writing, forwarded a communication to Colonel Balfour,
stating that he would shortly visit Launceston, take
Jefferies out of gaol, torture him, and then shoot him.
(Jefferies had lately been captured by Rucheridge and
party, and was known as the “child murderer and man
eater.”) d ,


When the bushrangers were going down the
Tamar they captured Captain White, of the Duke of
York, in his boat, and Captain Smith, late of the
Brutus, who was with him, and who being well dressed,
and wearing a cap with a gold band, was mistaken for
Colonel Balfour. They knocked Captain Smith down,
but discovered their error, and then apologised. They
made Captain White go upon his knees for some
offence he had committed, and were going to shoot
him, but Captain Smith interposed, representing what
misery it would inflict on his wife and children.
During the night Captains Smith and White were
allowed to depart and gave necessary information, and
Colonel Balfour forwarded a strong party of military
in charge of John Thomas, the pilot. After the
execution of Godwin, Brady’s party entered a fine boat
they had stolen, and sailed three times round the Glory.
A discussion then followed as to the propriety of an
immediate capture. Brady was in favor of the scheme,
but he said to the others —“ Decide among yourselves
—let not my voice avail you anything.” Some argued
that, being so near Launceston, they were liable to
pursuit and capture, without chance of doubling their
foes in the intricacy of the bush. The wind was foul,
and so the chances of clearance were diminished. They
ultimately decided upon a forest campaign, and landed
again.
The gang then came up to the vicinity of Laun-
ceston, and at 10 o’clock one night visited Mr. Dry’s
Elphin Farm, and while some patrolled the premises
and guarded their prisoners, others were busy making
a useful collection in the house
The following account of the sticking up of the
Elphin Farm is given by the Rev. W. Dry, who was
present :
“ My father, hearing a gun discharged at the back
of the house, went out to see what it meant, not sus-
pecting bushrangers, when he was immediately seized
by armed men from each side of the back porch, one of


whom, annoyed at resistance, gave him a bayonet
thrust, but the weapon getting entangled in his neck-
tie, the man gave him a blow on the head with it, and
when he was taken back into the house the blood was
seen running over his face. The wound was dressed by
his son-in-law, Dr. Landale, Brady assisting and ex-
pressing his sorrow for what was done, and threatened
summary punishment on any man who offered further
violence.
“ There was not a large party of friends collected,
the only visitors being Dr. Landale and his wife. The
family consisted of my facher and mother, myself, then
a boy nearly eight years old, and my younger sister,
too young a child to retain any distinct memory of
what took place. My brother and my other sisters
were from home at school.
“ The story of Brady requesting one of the ladies
to seat herself at the piano, and singing to the music,
is probably founded on the fact that, while the bush-
rangers were surrounding the house, my sister, Mrs.
Landale, was playing on that instrument the ominous
air, 1 The Campbells are Coming.’
“ The servant alluded to having been thrust into a
room and the door locked, escaped by a second door,
eluded Brady’s sentry within a few yards of him, and
made straight for Mr. Mulgrave’s, the P.M., who
despatched a message to the barracks, and at once
armed himself and hurried to Elphin accompanied by
one soldier, one constable, and, I think, the messenger.
In the meantime, Brady having been signalled by one
of his sentries that men were on the move towards the
house, collected his men with a whistle, gave the order,
‘ Now my lads, we must go,’ and retired to an out-
house, whence they intended to give the soldiers a
warm reception. Mr. Mulgrave rushed into the house
at the front, double-barrelled gun in hand, enquiring
in excited tones, ‘ Where are the scoundrels ?’ and was
answered by a volley from the outhouse, one bullet
taking a piece out of the soldier’s coat, one leaving a


round hole in an upper window, and several leaving
their track along the shingles of the porch, where it
could be seen for many years. Brady and his men
then removed to a field bounded by the Patterson’s
Plains and Elphin road. Then arrived Dr. Priest, who
would not dismount, but insisted on reconnoitring, and
rode round the field where the bushrangers were. As
he passed they fired a volley, nine bullets hitting the
horse, and two piercing his knee. I saw the dead horse
riddled with bullets. The doctor was taken, not to
Launceston, but to Elphin, where he was well-known,
and where he died after a fortnight’s suffering. When
he at length consented to have the limb amputated, his
medical brethren agreed that it was too late to perform
the operation. Dr. Priest’s white trousers accounted
for the line in which the bullets took effect.
“ A good deal of plunder was collected, and bound
in bundles, and a horse and cart was got in readiness
for carrying it away, but, thanks to Mr. Mulgrave’s
prompt action, these bundles were left behind, and so
was the horse and cart.
“ Colonel Balfour was riding past some men whom
he mistook for his own. Hearing the click of firelocks
he called out, I My men, what are you doing ? I’m
the colonel,’ and was replied to by shots, which blew
off his cap and pierced it. Some ten soldiers were sent
to Elphin under a lieutenant, but did not arrive till
the bushrangers had disappeared. The officer said that
he had made a detour with a view of cutting off their
retreat. He had to endure much “chaff’’ on this
account, but I presume he did what he judged to be
the right thing.
“ Brady, when captured, was wearing Colonel
Balfour’s cap. He was brought along the Elphin road
well guarded, and on horseback, his leg being wounded.
My father met him, and had a conversation with him r
and took me with him. I observed that the prisoner
spoke calmly, and occasionally smiled and joked. He
was certainly a different man from the) run of bush-


rangers, and, perhaps, had he lived under milder laws
in the first instance, would have exhibited a very
different course of life.”
The following morning, after the visit of Brady
and his associates to Elphin Farm, Colonel Balfour,
with a strong detachment of military and police scoured
the country in all directions without success. On the
sth April, 1826, Brady appeared at Mr. Abraham
Walker’s place, Vermont, at Bishopsbourne, setting
fire to his stock-yard, outbuildings, and wheat stack.
They then passed on to Commissary Walker’s place,
Rhodes, near Longford, destroying property there, and
moving rapidly on to Formosa, on Brumby’s Creek,
the property of Mr. R. Lawrence, where they set fire to
the woolshed, destroying three years’ clip of wool.
Subsequently, while Brady was in the Launceston gaol,
he was visited by Mr. Lawrence, who asked him why
he was guilty of such malicious acts which did him no
good. His object was, Brady said, to draw the atten-
tion of the military more to the centre of the Island, as
Colonel Balfour was so vigorous in his pursuits that he
was sure, sooner or later, he (Brady) would be either
captured or shot down, and also the party. They made
up their minds to return to Launceston, seize a vessel,
and escape from the colony.
How their gang became dispersed. —The late
Thos. Johnson’s statement. He says : —“ I was stock-
riding at this time for the late Mr. David Gibson, senr.
(at Snake Banks), in company with Bill in
search of young cattle which had gone astray. When
near the locality where Major M‘Leod was erecting a
flour mill—we were on the south side of the South Esk
—we heard some heavy firing. We made our horses
fast and crept through the scrub and ti-tree to the
margin of the river, where we were able to see there
were about 30 military and police pursuing the bush-
rangers. The bushrangers seemed divided into three
parties, five going up the hill straight, three bearing
towards the right, and two keeping on the track along-


side of the river. It seemed a kind of running fighting,
the bushrangers stopping at every advantage and firing.
The bulk of the military appeared to follow the two
men, who stood about 100 yards away from the mill,
and discharged both barrels of their guns. They after-
wards took to the river. The soldiers made a run and
fired at the men in the water, and continued firing as
they swam across the river. There was a very strong
fresh in the river at the time, and the current set
towards where we were lying. The men got out of the
water within a few yards of us, one assisting the
other. We then saw that one was Brady, as he wore
the colonel’s cap, and he was wounded. He was leaning
upon the shoulder of the other man, who was Dunne.
Our moving through the scrub attracted their atten-
tion, and they hailed us, demanding to know who we
were. We informed them we were Mr. Gibson’s
stockriders. Dunne asked us to assist him to remove
Brady, but we objected, telling them that they well
knew any man, whether free or convict, if known to
assist them would be flogged and sent to Macquarie
Harbour. Brady spoke to us, and offered handsome
presents. He offered me a gold watch, and appealed
to my sympathies, and my companion, Bill, sympathised
strongly, and said he would run the risk and lend his
horse. Dunne asked us if we knew any of his countrymen
in that locality. We told him there was an old Irish
shepherd living with Mr. Nolan, and he desired us to
convey them to his hut, which we did, Brady riding
my horse and Bill scouting ahead. Brady was
wounded in two places in the knee and ankle, the latter
being the most severe.” (This statement I have
never published or spoken of, but as both parties
are now dead I feel at liberty to give it publicity. I
might mention that Bill reared a family most respecta-
bly, and one of his sons occupies a public and promi-
nent position in our community, I suppress the name.)
On Saturday night, the 6th April, five men being
starved out approached Roger Taylor’s Wheat-sheaf


Inn at the Springs, near the Cocked Hat. These men
were immediately arrested, there being a dozen muskets
levelled at them. They were Brown, Code, M‘Andrew,
Legan, and Watson, On the following Sunday night
two more were arrested at Mary Townsend’s Bird-in-
Hand Inn, Long Meadow (now King’s Meadow). Their
names were Sullivan and Fagan. The three men who
were seen travelling to the right made their appear-
ance at what is now called Breadalbane, knocking at
the old public house called the Opossum. They de-
manded food and drink here, but imbibed a little too
freely, and on Sunday morning, staggering to what
was known at that period as the Cherry Tree Avenue,
they laid down and fell asleep. A settler in the im-
mediate neighbourhood named Duggan discovered
them, and immediately rode into Launceston and gave
information. Colonel Balfour and his officers being
absent three gentlemen formed parties, namely
Messrs John Sinclair, T. B. Bartley, and Lieut. Ken-
worthy—and went out to Breadalbane, each taking
separate routes. Sinclair’s party came upon the
sleeping men, and being six strong, three of the party
crept softly up and then fired, while the other three
poured in a second volley on the unfortunate bush-
rangers. One of the men was Murphy, who spoke,
saying, “ Mother, mother, pray for me.” Sinclair was
in the act of placing his pistol to the youth’s head,
when one of the party said, “ Spare him the few
moments he has to live, so he can make his peace with
his God.” That man still lives. Murphy only lived
a few seconds. The other men were riddled with
bullets, and after the inquest held at the Opossum Inn,
were buried close by. I might mention that the
Governor rewarded the act of shooting sleeping men,
by a presentation to Mr. Sinclair of a fine tract of land
now known as Clairville, the property of Mrs. R.
Cameron.
I omitted to mention how the boy Murphy came
to join Brady’s gang. At that period there was a small


settler and kangaroo-hunter named Clarke, residing at
Peter’s Pass, which was at that time an outlying
locality. Murphy was staying there, and he recognised
Brady as an old acquaintance, when he lived at Mr.
Ransom’s hotel, some twenty miles below. Gently
calling his name at the fence a conference ensued. The
boy told Brady it was well he had come no further, for
that in the neighbouring hut there were several soldiers
who had come in search of them. “ But never mind,”
said he, “ we’ll best ’em. Wait a bit—they are tired
and hungry ; I am getting their supper, so when they
are feeding you rush them.” “But the guns I” ex-
claimed the leader. “Oh! they.are all right, in the
corner of the hut,” replied the young fellow. “ All you
have to do is to come softly along when they are at
supper, lay hold of the pieces, and then the work is
done.” It was dusk when the traitorous cook carried
in the chops and tea. As soon as the military were
busy in the first onslaught upon the dish, a rustling
was heard at the door. They turned their heads, and
the next moment every man was covered with a loaded
musket. Resistance was vain. The men were tied, the
house was robbed, and the bushrangers departed.
Brady offered the lad a handsome present —the only
favour he sought was admission into the gang. Mur-
phy was not twenty years old when he met his death,
the other two men were Bird and Lamb.
BRADY’S SURRENDER.
I forgot to mention how Brady’s party, prior to
its dispersion, was surprised during the erection of the
Perth mill for Major M‘Leod. A Mr. Ferguson, mill-
wright, was employed in erecting the mill, and he
lodged with Mr. Edward Dryden at the Plough Inn,
Perth. When coming to his work on the Friday
morning in descending the hill he noticed a man
carrying a firelock pacing up and down. He, there-


fore, came to the conclusion that he was one of the
bushrangers, and he immediately returned and gave
information to the authorities, who raised all their
force and volunteers, to the number of 30 men. The
bushrangers had been drinking and carousing during
the night, and were having their breakfast when they
were surrounded, with the result already mentioned.
• We now return to the fortunes of Brady and
Dunne. The young stockdriver, Bill, after a consider-
able time, discovered “ Old Mick,” the shepherd, and
told him his errand, but the old man said he would
have nothing to do with the murdering scoundrels.
He, however, followed Bill to where Brady and Dunne
had sought shelter in the scrub, and addressed the
bushrangers in the Irish tongue, which Dunne under-
stood, being a native of Ireland. Dunne then turned
to the two stockdrivers saying they were very much
obliged to them for their assistance, and hoped they
would not communicate to anyone that they had any
intercourse with them The stockdrivers gave the
desired promise, which was faithfully kept, for they
well knew Macquarie Harbour awaited them if they
committed themselves. Nor need my readers be sur-
prised at the favourable opinion cherished for the
wounded bushranger by his fellow felons. The bush-
ranger was generally looked upon as a kind of martyr
to convictism ; it was he who experienced the shame,
the lash, the brutal taunt, from which they had suffered;
it was he who rose against the prison despot and
dreaded the consequence of the criminal law ; it was he
who was the bold Robin Hood in the songs of the hut,
and it was he who was now the unfortunate victim of
legal oppression and military chase. Without denying
the atrocities of his career, they would discover many
extenuations for his crimes. His reckless daring would
be their admiration, and the jovial freedom of his
manner, the frank generosity, his jests and his sayings,
were treasured up and roused and stirred up their
sympathy. Even persons in better positions than these


men strongly sympathised with Brady. Governor
Arthur being well aware what a talisman Brady’s name
was amongst the prison class was extremely anxious to
secure the man to whom all fingers pointed as the right
person to send in pursuit. That was John Batman,
who was born in New South Wales, and came to this
colony when quite a youth. He was a man of remark-
ably fine physique, standing over 6ft. in height, and
capable of enduring any amount of bodily fatigue. He
had often travelled between 70 and 80 miles a day
through the bush, carrying a heavy knapsack, had
captured several bushrangers, and had pursued the
blacks when they had been guilty of depradations,
gone into the midst of them and captured the desper-
adoes ; and he afterwards became the renowned founder
of Port Philip colony. _ In reply to Arthur’s solicita-
tions he declined all military and police assistance. In
the second week in April, in the year 1826, he left his
Ben Lomond farm, in company with his black boy Joe,
and explored the gullies of the Western Tiers, the
supposed retreat of Brady.
Rising abruptly from the plain, the greenstone
Dry’s Bluff towers 4000 feet, and is the first of a series
of elevations in one of the roughest districts in the
world for a hundred miles. The hills are covered with
enormous gum and stringy bark forests, and very unlike
the open land of Victoria ; the ground is hidden by
thickets of the prickly ti-tree, the mimosa, the rigid
hakea, the sweet-scented musk, etc. The valleys are
shaded with the pyramidal botanical beauty, the
sassafras, the leafless she-oak, the cherry-tree, and the
graceful acacia. The mountain sides are adorned with
the rice-like flowers of the richea, or the more gorgeous
and princely scarlet of the waratah. Occasionally the
traveller thrusts aside the heartless scrub, and looks
down upon a scene of such loveliness and sheltered
beauty that he would fain believe he had been rubbing
the magic lamp of Alladin. There, free from tangled
brush, a long narrow vale, watered by a sparkling


spring brook is studded with graceful fern trees, and
looks like a vast enchanted temple, with festooned
columns. Then, again, the adventurous rambler, after
scrambling over basaltic boulders, along the ravine of a
mountain torrent, reaches the summit of a huge preci-
pice, over which the mad torrent leaps two hundred
feet into the dark and boiling basin below. There,
too, among these glooomy ranges, are limestone caves
of wondrous extent and magnificence, with lofty halls
and stalactite ornaments ; a fitting home for outlaws.
It was amidst such scenes Batman sought for Brady.
One day he spied a man limping along through the
bush, with the aid of a cut sapling. He was evidently
in great pain and bore a dejected careworn aspect. His
restless and penetrating eye suddenly lighted upon his
pursuer. In a moment all anguish was forgotten, as in
a loud and decided tone the word “stand” was uttered,
the faltering step was firm, and the old lion spirit was
aroused. The gun was at his shoulder and his finger
on the trigger. Before he could fire, however, he
called out, “ Are you a soldier officer ?” Mr. Batman’s
frock coat and foraging cap gave him a military appear-
ance, and Brady had an inextinguishable hatred to the
red-coated enemy of bushrangers. “ I’m no soldier,
Brady,” was the reply, “ I am John Batman ; surrender
for there is no chance for you.” The bushranger
thought for a while and then said, “You are right,
Batman, my time is come. I will yield to you because
you are a brave man. To no other man would I have
surrendered.” Mr. West in his “History ofTasmania”
says Brady was run down by the military ; how he
could commit such an error I am at a loss to know, as
at the period of his writing there were many of both
Batman’s and Brady’s contemporaries alive. Mr,
Batman sent his boy Joe to the nearest cattle station
requesting the loan of horses, which was immediately
complied with. Brady was conducted to the Launces-
ton Gaol by Anthony Cottrell, C.D. The news spread
and a kind of triumphal procession was formed. Most


of the people pitied Brady’s misfortunes while they
rejoiced in his capture. For twenty-two months he
had lived in the bush, and only one of his numerous
companions now remained at large. When being re-
moved from Launceston Gaol to be tried in Hobart
Town in the brig “ Prince Leopold ” Brady saw in the
hold of the vessel that wretch Jefferies. He turned to
Mr. Theodore Bartley, who was Sheriff at the time,
saying, “ Spare me this great humiliation, for I, even
Brady, cannot go to the gallows with that wretch, for
if you put me down that hold I will certainly kill him.”
Mr. Bartley with his usual goodness of heart fully
sympathised with Brady, and ordered him a bulk head
to be built in the fore part of the ship. On arrival at
Hobart Town, Brady was placed on his trial and he
pleaded guilty to all his indictments. The court was
crowded with sympathising ladies who wept at his
recitals of his sufferings, and palliated the enormities
of his crimes. His chivalrous behaviour to females
won their esteem; gentleness to the weak, and
the brilliant feats of his career, had excited their
imagination with pleasure. He was pronounced guilty
of being at large with arms. This was death by the law,
but so strong an interest was produced by his story,
that a reprieve would have doubtless followed convic-
tion. But he was also proved guilty of murder. The
only murder he actually did commit was the shooting
of Pauley, his betrayer. It was Dunne who shot the
puntman, Kenton, against the remonstrance of Brady.
Petition followed petition for his deliverance from the
halter. Settlers told of his forbearance, and ladies of
his kindness. His cell was besieged with visitors, and
his table was loaded with presents. .Baskets of fruit,
bouquets of flowers, and dishes of confectionery pre-
pared by his fair admirers, were tendered in abundance
to the gaoler for his distinguished captive. The last
moment came. The dramatic scene was maintained
to its close. Pinioned he stood on the scaffold before a
dense crowd of spectators, who cheered him for his


courage or grieved bitterly for his fate. He bid a
familiar adieu to the gentlemen about him, and he died
more like a patient martyr than a felon murderer.
I could give many instances of Brady’s generosity
(if I can use such a term) for if ever solicited for any
articles his companions had packed up he invariably
returned them He never plundered but left that to
his companions. There is one incident I must record.
There was an old lady named C residing in the
neighbourhood of Bothwell, and was known to possess
a large bag of dollars, as she was afraid to trust a bank
with her deposits. Brady on one or two occasions had
visited her, trying to spring her plant, and ultimately
the treachery of one of her servants betrayed her
mistress’s secret. Brady came a third time, and the
good lady assailed him in the passage, giving him
plenty of abuse for annoying her so often. “And
sure,” she said, “ you wouldn’t be after injuring your
own countrywoman.” (Herein she made a mistake, for
Brady was no Irishman.) “ Countrywoman or no
countrywoman,” said Brady, “just come off that little
trap-door.” The lady from the Green Isle of Beauty
had artfully covered the entrance to her treasure
chamber with her voluminous garments, but Brady
soon unearthed the treasure. Brady was sent to
Macquarie Harbour when he was living with Mr.
Ransom, at the Royal Oak, at the Cross Marsh, for
interfering with some constables when apprehending
an absconder. He being an exceedingly powerful man
knocked one of the constables down with his fist. Mrs.
Ransom spoke of him with much esteem, and said he
was a quiet, sober, industrious servant, and always
anxious to please. His countenance was open, good
tempered, but determined ; he was tall, robust, and
handsome ; he was capable of the most withering sneer,
or the most winning smile, and was formed by nature
for the control of man and the conquest of women.
It now only remains to record the closing career
of the last member of the once dreaded band, Dunne


whom we have lost sight of since he was succoured by
Mr. David Gibson’s shepherd at Snake Banks.
All that was diabolical, atrocious, hideous, and
malignant in this Irish fiend soon developed itself when
he lost the controlling and commanding authority of
the master mind of Brady. The first robbery he com-
mitted after leaving Brady was from an old couple
named Drummond, who kept the White Horse public-
house, near Avoca. After cruelly ill-using them, he
tied them and their man-servant, and then attempted
to set fire to the premises. Fortunately for them
there was a rescuer near at hand in Jno. Batman, who
with his blacks was scouring the country in search of
some aborigines who had been guilty of depredations.
Dunne’s career for some months was of the same
dastardly character, robbing isolated persons, accom-
panied with violence, so much so that it roused the
indignation of the bushmen and stock riders. Many
narrow escapes from the rifle did Dunne experience, and
feeling that his life hung upon a straw, he made for the
interior and took up his Quarters with the aborigines.
There dwelt a tribe in the heart of the island,
sheltered by the Frenchman’s Cap, near Lakes Crescent
and Sorell. The valleys were watered by the rivers
Shannon and Ouse, and their hunting grounds were
extensive. Its ravines and dells were as they were left
by the Almighty. Here dwelt the primitive man, and
they were known to the whites as “The Big Tribe,”
on account of their stature, the males being mostly
above 6ft. Among this tribe entered the white savage.
His amorous disposition sought the favours of a good-
looking gin, but all his advances were rejected by the
black man’s wife. He soon found means to remove
the obstacle ; that means was the musket, for he shot
her husband. The poor woman wept bitterly at the
death of him whom she only knew, and refused to go
away from the mutilated body. Dunne cut off his
victim’s head, drilled a hole through the nape of the
neck, and suspended it by a cord round the neck of the


outraged wife. Then, drawing his knife, he drove her
onward to his bush retreat, or more properly speaking
to the den of a tiger. That woman, after making her
escape from his clutches (her name was Walloa),
became the “ Joan of Arc ” of her people, leading her
warriors on to war. By her appeals and her courageous
conduct in the field that peaceful tribe became the
terror of that neighborhood and its surroundings.
Even Mr. G. A. Robinson had a narrow escape of his
life. For five days this woman pursued him, showing
that she made war against the white race. Mr. Duterreau,
an artist, residing in Hobart at this period, has
left a portrait of her brother Manalogana, and anyone
viewing that portrait would be struck with the manly
proportions —but as I am not writing the life of the
aborigines, I must refer my readers who wish for a
more explicit account to “ Bonwick’s History of the
Lost Race.” Dunne, being pursued by both white and
black, was rarely seen in the haunts of white men, but
being driven from his ambush by hunger, he appeared
on the Macquarie Plains, near the present township of
Hamilton. He was closely pursued by civilians and
constables, and attempted to conceal himself in a hay
rick, but was discovered and taken to Hobart Town,
where he was tried and found guilty. He appeared on
the scaffold in a singular costume —a long white muslin
robe, with a huge black cross marked thereon, before
and behind ; his cap was of a similar character, and
he walked with a rosary in his hand. The assumption
of a devotional demeanour, the theatrical striking of
his breast in mock humility, and his well-intoned
ejaculations of “ Lord deliver us,” greatly moved the
ignorant crowd of fellow felons before him. It is
difficult to understand the morbid taste of some people.
About one hundred of his co-religionists followed him
to the grave, having previously presented him with an
elegant cedar coffin.
Dunne was a native of County Clare and was
what would now be termed a kind of huckster, attend-


ing fairs and dealing in cattle. He was of a gigantic
size and enormous strength, and had the neck of a
bullock. Mr. Dogherty, the “Jack Ketch” of the
island, said it was the largest neck he had ever encircled
with hemp. He had hardly arrived in the colony
before he was sentenced to Notman’s chain gang, and
here he met his co-equal in strength and ferocity in
the shape of Mr. Notman.
HENRY HUNT.
On account of his good conduct during the voyage,
he was assigned to John Helder Wedge, of the survey
party. His character stood so high that his master
treated him with the utmost confidence. With a
smiling face and quiet manner, there was nothing to
indicate the blackguard, or predicate the bushranger.
According to the testimony of his overseer, Connell, he
was “ the whitest man on the farm.” Due for the
indulgence of his ticket-of-leave, there was every in-
centive to good behaviour and expectation of honesty.
But it is not very easy to overcome evil habits. Petty
thievish propensities were his besetment. At different
times, on surveying expeditions, some articles were sure
to be lost. Persons at whose stations Mr. Wedge was
surveying, occasionally complained of the departure of
certain property. A basket of linen disappeared from
one place, and a gun from another. The men’s hut
was searched, but in vain. A half-caste girl one day
came into the kitchen for some grease. Being asked
why she wanted it, she replied that it was for Holland’s
gun. Suspicion was aroused, as it was known that the
man had no gun previously. The weapon was seized,


and proved to be the stolen one. Holland ultimately
confessed he had bought it of Hunt. Both were tried
in Launceston, and Hunt was sentenced to fourteen
years’ imprisonment. He was forwarded to Notman’s
road party, which was working on the road at Cocked
Hat. It was not long before he made his escape to the
bush. He determined to go the whole hog and become
a bushranger. There was nothing daring or dashing in
his character as an outlaw. It was his habit to rob out-
of way places, such as stock-keepers huts and isolated
homesteads.
In June, 1836, he approached the dwelling of a small
settler on the Nile named James Kerr. It was at the
close of the day, and Kerr was returning from his work.
Kerr recognised him, and at once grappled with him.
They rolled over and over in the mud, when the wife
come to the rescue, but unable to distinguish her hus-
band she called out, “ which is you Jim.” Satisfied
with the identity she raised a musket with which she
was armed, and brought down the butt end of it so
heavily on the skull of the bushranger as to shiver the
stock of the gun, and fracture the bushranger’s skull.
Kerr received for the capture. Hunt was borne
to the hospital at Launceston gaol, where he lived long
enough to confess to the murder of Captain Ser eant-
son, on the 10th November, 1835. He said the captain
recognised him when on the road to Campbell Town,
and called out for him to surrender. Hunt told the
captain to retire, and threatened him instant death if
he did not leave, and on that gentleman advancing to
ride the bushranger down, Hunt fired, and the brave
old soldier fell dead. Captain Serjeantson served with
Wellington in Portugal as an ensign in the 40th. He
passed through all the engagements in the Peninsular
war. He was at Waterloo in Picton’s division, where
he was wounded. It does seem a melancholy event
that the brave old soldier should fall at the hands of a
felon and miscreant like Hunt. The Imperial Govern-
ment granted a full pension to Mrs. Serjeantson during


her lifetime. She arrived with her husband on the 3rd
September, 1833, from the Cape of Good Hope.
CONVICT CONSTABLES.
The following is taken from the Colonial Tunes of
December 22nd, 1835, to show the villainy practised
by felon constabulary :
“ Confession of Reardon. —Wednesday morning,
December 2nd, Constable Drinkwater (a convict
constable) came to me, Daniel Reardon (also a convict
constable), as I was standing at the police office door.
He asked me if I would go with him. I said ‘ Where ?’
He answered, “To bring Lanky Taylor down on a
charge of murder.” I asked him what murder he had
committed. He told me for shooting Captain Serjeant-
son, and added 1 We shall get our free pardons for it.’
I told him I was ordered to go to Ross by Mr. Gray.
He said, ‘ I can get you off going there.’ Accordingly
he went to Mr. Gray and asked him if I (Reardon)
could go with him, which Mr. Gray consented to.
Drinkwater afterwards came to me, and said he had a
scheme in his head by which we should get our liberty.
I said ‘ What is that ?’ He said he would tell me as he
went along the road, as he should have a better op-
portunity for talking. As we were going towards Mr.
Willis’ he said, ‘ Dan, if you will stick up for me, I will
do the same for you, and we shall be sure to get our
pardon.’ He said, ‘ I was the first person that dis-
covered a shot in Captain Serjeantson ; I lifted up the
corner of his waistcoat and picked a piece of flesh off
and squeezed it between my fingers, and a shot came
from it. I was up at Mr. Willis’ house this morning.
I was talking to young Mr. Willis in his bedroom. I
told him I was the first person who discovered a shot
in Captain Serjeantson. Mr. Willis said that the shot
found in him should be saved, and now our main point
is, after we take Lanky Taylor in charge and bring him


to Campbell Town, I will get some small shot which
will correspond with the shot that I have taken out of
Captain Serjeantson. I know the sized shot I want as
I took particular notice of what I had taken out of the
body.’ I (Reardon) made answer, 1 Let us see Lanky
1 aylor first, then we shall see what we can do.’ Before
we reached Lanky Taylor’s hut he was in charge of
two constables, Duxberry and Edmonds. He (Drink-
water) stepped on one side and said he had the main
point —the shot was the main point, and using a vulgar
oath, said he would stick to him. We then went to
Lanky Taylor’s hut, which was locked, and therefore
did not go in ; we went into another hut (Inness’)
about forty yards distant, and had a drink of water, and
from there we returned to Campbell Town. All the
way we went along, Drinkwater was very pressing in
getting me (Reardon) to back his evidence ; but of
course, I made no promise, feeling at the same time
much hurt at his supposing for a moment that I should
be guilty of such fiendish intentions. After arriving in
Campbell Town, Drinkwater said, ‘Are you willing to
back my evidence ? If we get some small shot and
swear we found it in Lanky Taylor’s hut, it is sure to
hang him, and we shall get our liberty.’ I (Reardon)
told him it was a foolish thing altogether, as any per-
son could see we had never been in the hut. He re-
marked it was no d d odds, as Mr. Whitefoord
would take his word for anything he said.’ With that
he wanted me to go into the constable’s hut and get a
shot belt which was hanging on a nail ; there was
some small shot in it, which would answer our purpose.
I told him I did not like it, as there were so many
constables in the hut ; he then went himself, and
when I found he could not be persuaded off, I went and
told Mr. Hughes, the gaoler of this place, the whole
circumstances, as the chief constable was away from
home. Mr. Hughes immediately recommended me to
keep in with him, as that would be the most likely way
of finding out his real intentions, so as they might be


brought to a bearing. A few minutes afterwards I saw
Drinkwater return from the constables hut ; he told
me he could not get the shot bolt without being seen,
at the same time giving me a shining to go to Mr. Em-
mett’s store, to get two pounds of the smallest shot he
had. I accordingly went ; while I was there he stood
on the outside of the shop, and before I came out he
had gone away with Mr. Emmett’s female servant. I
then went and took the shot to Mr. Hughes, and told
him these are the shot I have just bought, and at the
same time gave him a part of them ; the remainder I
gave to Drinkwater, which he said were very much
like the shot he had picked out of the body. Opposite
the Caledonian Inn I assisted in putting the shot into
a small bag. He said, ‘ D nmy eyes if we have
not got our liberty now ; he can’t get over us if you-
stick up for me.’ With that he said ‘ Come along with
me to Mr. Whitefoord, the Police Magistrate.’ I did
so. He sent the cook into Mr. Whitefoord to say
Constable Drinkwater and Reardon wished to speak to-
him. Mr. Whitefoord came out. Drinkwater told
him ‘We had been after Lanky Taylor, and as two
constables had previously taken him in charge, we did
not think it necessary for us to come with him, so we
thought it advisable to search his hut, and in searching
his hut myself and Reardon found this bag of shot
planted on the top of the wall plate, which corresponds
with the shot I found in Captain Serjeantson’s body/
He also said Lanky Taylor (the man’s name was John
Taylor) was sure to deny the shot, and of course it will
tend to confirm the suspicion.”
I give another instance of the rascality and risky
conduct of convict constables: —“It became known
that a disagreement or quarrel had taken place between
Mr. W. Bryant and Governor Arthur and his satellites.
Three convict constables, Gough and two others, con-
cocted a most villainous scheme to swear away the life
of Mr. R. Bryant, nephew of Mr. W. Bryant, who was
a settler on the north side of the Island. These three


worthies, in passing his establishment, saw he had
recently killed a beast. At night they stole the skin of
the beast he had killed and replaced it with another
hide. Although it was shown at the trial that the hide
produced belonged to a heifer, and the beef that was
seized was that of a steer, it went for nothing, he was
found guilty and sentenced to death. A most influen-
tial and almost universal petition was presented to
Governor Arthur, praying for his liberty and life, and
the sentence of death was commuted to transportation
for life. On the arrival of Sir John Franklin a further
petition was got up and presented, giving the full par-
ticulars of the case. Franklin gave him a free pardon-
But what was the result ? The young man’s life had
been blasted by the perjury of convict constables, and
those trebly-dyed felons were allowed to go un.
-scathed.
BEAVEN, BRITTON, JEFKINS, and BROWN-
Beaven was a native of New South Wales. His
Sarents were industrious, small settlers residing on The
[unter, where he was apprehended and transported
for life for horse-stealing, and sent to Van Diemen’s
Land. He absconded when working in what they
called the Cataract Hill gang, quarrying the stones that
built the wall around the Launceston gaol, and it was
whilst so engaged that he made the acquaintance of
Britton.
Britton was transported for life, with his companion
Smith, for attempting to run a cargo of contraband goods
at Lewes, in Sussex. During the affray with the coasi
guards at their capture one of the revenue officers got
knocked overboard into the sea, and would have been
drowned if it had not been for Britton, who, at the risk
of his own life, saved the officer. lor that act he got
the sentence of death reprieved to penal servitude for
life. I might mention that Smith, his companion, joined


the police, and was the man who was shot by Jefkins,
Britton’s first assignment was to Mr. Walker, of Vron (now
Bishopsbourne), whom he threatened to shoot. His next
assignment was to Mr. W. Barnes, brewer, Launceston.
Britton was employed in bringing water from the
Cataract, there being no water laid on at that time. After
being at the brewery for a short time he was transferred
to the farm at Trevallyn, occupied by Mr. Barnes. He
was employed as a dairyman, but having no knowledge
of cows gave great dissatisfaction to Mrs. Barnes. It
was from here that he absconded. Beaven, after
absconding, doubtless hid in the bush near Barnes’,
awaiting Britton, who, having escaped, joined Beaven,
and they took to the bush.
Mr. Bartlett and his man at the Supply Mill were
murdered by them. When Mr. Cathcart discovered the
murdered men, he pulled across the river to Mr. Neale’s
farm. At that time there was a Mr. W. Wilson staying
at the house ; he was a clerk in the Commissariat depart-
ment, and Mr. Neale was the Government storekeeper at
George Town, but occasionally resided at his farm at
Mount Direction. Mr. Wilson and two assigned servants
proffered to go to the mill and bring Mrs. Bartlett and
her adopted child, named Brown, away, while Mr. Cath-
cart reported the matter to the police. Mrs. Bartlett’s
face was dreadfully bruised and battered, through a
blow from the butt of a musket, but she survived. In
re-crossing the river they saw a big mastiff dog, and one
of the men recognising it as Beaven’s, the animal was
shot by Mr. Wilson. For that act Beaven swore he
would have Wilson’s life, and he had the audacity to post
his threat in public places. Britton being a most expert
swimmer, one of the means of misleading the police
was for him to swim across the river and unmoor boats,
and bring his companions across, and replace the boats
in the same position again. The police would then hear
of a robbery on one side of the river one day, and
another on the other side the next ; they being com-
pletely mystified.


Beaven and his party then crossed the Tamar, and
were for days watching Mount Direction. The Govern-
ment cutter, Harriett, in which Mr. Wilson was in the
habit of going from George Town to Launceston to
receive the pay for the officials and military, was then
making its usual trip, and it was known to the gang that he
would have a large sum of money in his possession. Either
way Mr. Wilson and party were In the habit of calling
at Mr. Neale’s farm, but for some reason on this occa-
sion Mr. Wilson left the cutter and walked back to Mr,
Neale’s farm, recollecting that he had left some papers
there. He left his gun in charge of the overseer,
Osbourne, with strict injunctions for him to be careful
and take care of it, as it was a valuable double-barrelled
gun, and the gift of an esteemed friend. The bush-
rangers, who either watched or had communication with
some parties, followed Mr. Wilson to George Town,
where they robbed Mr. Thomas’ public house, tying up
the inmates. They then proceeded to the female factory,
which took its name, factory, from the women at that
period making coarse cloth and serge for the prisoners.
There was no female house of correction in Launceston
at that time, it being built in the year 1835. Here they
shot the gatekeeper, who was an aged man, being over
60 years old, and had lost one eye in the service of his
country. The most peculiar thing was that the ball,
which killed him, entered his other eye. From here they
took a Woman j and hearing that the Harriett had sailed
that morning, they made their way back to Mr Neale’s
farm, fully expecting Mr. Wilson to be there. Osbourne
intending to go to Launceston by the Harriett, had tied
up his best clothes ; he went to look if the Harriett was
coming through the reach, and in turning round to enter
the house again he found himself in front of three gun
barrels. The bushrangers demanded to know where
Wilson was. Osbourne denied all knowledge of Mr.
Wilson, and said he had not been there for days ; but in
searching the house, between the blankets was found this
identical double-barrelled gun. This so exasperated


Beaven that he gave the overseer ten minutes in which
to say his prayers and make his peace with his Maker.
They kept the unfortunate man two hours on his knees,
while they had breakfast and regaled themselves
Osbourne, however, being a very considerate overseer
with the Government men, they begged him off, the
woman, who was in their company, also interceding. The
bushrangers, therefore, took Osbourne’s clothes and
dressed the woman (Martha Slater) in them ; they fitted
her admirably, he being rather a small man. Osbourne
was then liberated.
Their depredations on both sides of the Tamar were
of frequent occurrence, so much so that the following
notice appeared in the Government Gazette , May,
1832
“ Two hundred and fifty pounds reward and five hundred
acres of land for the apprehension of Beaven, dead or alive. Two
hundred pounds and five hundred acres of land for Britton. One
hunefred and fifty pounds and two hundred and fifty acres of
land for Jefkins, or to any prisoner of the Crown free pardon, his
passage paid to England, and two hundred pounds.”
The result of that notice caused a prisoner named
Chas Hall, who was in the chain gang at Constitutional
Hill, to volunteer his services to secure or kill the gang,
which was accepted. He joined the bushrangers on the
15th October, 1832. They then contemplated robbing
Marr’s public-house on the top of the Sandhill, and
Britton and one of his mates went to reconnoitre, leaving
Beaven and Hall on the road to watch the Westbury
road. Standing close together Hall placed his piece close
to Beaven’s head and fired. The gun was placed in such
a manner, and being so close to Beaven that Hall nearly
blew the back part of his skull off, and Beaven in falling
fell on his gun. The wadding from Hall’s gun set fire to
Beaven’s clothes, which burnt a large hole in the stock of
the gun. That gun was Mr. Wilson’s, and is still in the
possession of his son at Circular Head.
Beaven was a tall, powerful man, upwards of six feet,
from 23 to 24 years old when shot.


One of the attempted robberies by Beaven on the
Tamar was that of Danbury Park, then occupied by Mr.
Jonathan Griffiths. He was on that occasion assisted by
Chas. Williams. The pair smeared themselves over with
black mud from the river, and thus disguised attacked
the house, which was defended, with much courage, by
a Mrs. Jane Hooper, from upstairs. Beaven was shot in
the leg. *Mrs. Hooper afterwards recognised Williams
in Launceston, and he was apprehended, convicted, and
hanged for his share in the transaction.
A story is told of a very smart and intelligent mem-
ber of the force, an ex-Bow-street runner, named Inks-
man, who was stationed at Launceston. Mr. I. boasted
he could smell a thief a mile off, and would rather open
the colonist’s eyes. One day in taking a ride to Franklin
Village he was met by Beaven, who commanded him to
stand and deliver ; he took the poor man’s boots, watch,
and money, and then asked who he was. “Oh ! I’m
Captain Thomas, manager of the Cressy Company,”
said Inksman. “ Well, in that case ” said Beaven, “You
have plenty more horses, so I’ll trouble you for this one,”
and our poor friend had to foot it bootless back to town.
BRITTON, JEFKINS, and BROWN.
If ever there was railway speed put into a pair of
human legs it was done by Chas. Hall on the evening of
October xsth, 1832. He entered the watchhouse ex-
hausted, to communicate the fact to the Chief District
Constable, Mr. P. W. Walsh. I give the initials of the
C.D.C., as the Port Officer and Harbour Master at that
period was Mr. John Welsh. This gentleman was a ship-
mate and companion of Lieut. Flinders in the man-of-
war Bridgewater (the particulars of shipwreck of that
vessel will not require a recital from me.) The C.D.C.
proceeded at once to the Sandhill with a staff of con-
stables, and removed the body of Beaven to Marr’s public
* Mrs. Jane Hooper was drowned in River Tamar, April, 1831.


house, and to make that act of Hall legal an inquest was
held before Mr. W. Lyttleton, when seven true men were
sworn in as jurymen, and returned a verdict of
justifiable homicide. The fact being known that Beaven
was shot did not require the use of any telephone to
circulate the news. It reached Trevallyn that night,
when G. Kyle, district constable, and a staff of constables,
arrived there. The next morning the assigned servant,
Brown, was not to be found. . Hall having given infor-
mation to the police that Brown was the party who sup-
plied the bushrangers with information and material.
Brown evidently joined Britton and Jefkins. The un-
fortunate woman that Beaven took from the factory at
George Town was discovered in one of the ravines on
Barnes’ back run. Hall being acquainted with their
haunts it became necessary for them to find fresh
fields. Hall was a man of wiry, and exceedingly
active frame ; he had a quick and nervous kind
of movement, with a restless, suspicious sort of eye.
He seemed always to be on the watch, expecting an
attack. He was about sft. high, and was all
muscle and sinew, never putting on any flesh. He re-
ceived the reward promised by Government for the death
of Beaven, and also an appointment as messenger or
porter in the sheriff’s office, which position he occupied
to the year 1853, when he left the colony, taking with
him a substantial draft. The gang were not heard of for
several weeks, and it was generally believed they had
succeeded in escaping from the colony. Their first
appearance after the death of Beaven was on April 18th,
1833, according to the police report, when they were
at Lucas’ public-house at the Cocked Hat, on the main
road, where they drank liquor but paid for it with money
they took from a sheriff’s officer named Harris, having
wounded him with a bayonet, It is my intention to cull
the police report, as there is an impression that the bush-
rangers robbed Mr. Lamont, but there is no record of
such having taken place; —“May 16th, 1833 —Britton,
Jefkins, and Brown visited some sawyers’huts at the back


of Kerry Lodge; they merely stayed and had something
to eat, but did not rob them. October 3rd —They robbed
Mr. Thorn, on the Tamar, of and wearing apparel,
taking with them tea, flour, and sugar ” On the following
Friday they robbed Mr, Waddingham’s public-house,
which was situated a mile from the late Mr. Pitcher’s,
taking nearly every movable article and upwards of £4O
in money.
The following comment appeared in the Launceston
Advertiser , of October xoth, 1833: —“When —when will
schemes be devised to catch hold of Britton and his com-
rades ? It is perfectly disreputable that ithis notorious
fellow should have so long evaded the grasp of justice.
If the means used to arrest him have hitherto been in-
sufficient, they should be increased, and increased till
they become sufficient ; never mind that he is but one
man, send five hundred after him if four hundred and
ninety-nine cannot secure him.”
The police reports continue :—“On October 18th,
they visited the residence of Lieutenant Vaughan, tied
the men servants up in the hut, and went to the front of
the house, thrusting two guns through the window where
the family were sitting at tea ; they demanded admittance
which demand was complied with to save bloodshed.
They were supplied with a meal • they searched the
house and discovered some valuable moveables, includ*
ing watches and jewelry, taking with them also a large
portion of provisions. They offered no insults towards
the females of the house. On the 24th they robbed the
residence of Mr. Thomas Henty, of Landfall, the resi-
dence being left in charge of an old and trusty servant
recently arrived from England. They gained admittance
by asking the way to Lieutenant Friend’s, who resided
where Mrs. Grubb now lives; the old man answering the
door, they forced their passage into the house. They
regaled themselves with some of Mr. Henty’s wine,
taking away two guns and ammunition, and £5 in money
belonging to the old servant. On November 28th the
public-house of Mr. Waddingham was again visited by


them about 7 o’clock in the evening. They secured the
inmates and rifled the place. They remained until n
o’clock, carrying away half a chest of tea, some sugar,
rum, and brandy, and a few pounds in cash. Britton
told Mr. W. that they would not have visited him a
second time had he not made so much of it in the
newspapers. Immediately on leaving Mr. W.’s house a
report of a gun was heard, when one of the party returned
and informed Mr. W, that he had shot a constable named
Lawrence, and desired that he, Mr. W., should report
their visit to Mr. Lyttleton in the morning, and to say
that Jefkins had done it, as he was the person who fired
the shot. The constable was returning from the west-
ward in company with another man, and finding them-
selves benighted, were making their way to Wadding-
ham’s public-house. Approaching it they met the three
bushrangers, two of them carrying goods and Jefkins
preceding them. Jefkins immediately advanced towards
them, and recognising Lawrence, called on him to give
up his musket, and kneel and say his prayers, as he had
very few moments to live. In spite of all the poor
fellow’s entreaties the villain placed a pistol to his head
and fired. The ball, fortunately, did not take a fatal
direction, It entered on one side of the face, just above
the upper lip, passed through the nose and along the
jaw-bone, and lodged under the ear. The ball was ex-
tracted by Dr. Garrett, and the constable ultimately re-
covered.”
Great complaints were made by the various stock-
holders in the Westbury district of the depredations sup-
posed to have been committed by Britton, and another
daring outrage was committed on December 15th, at
George Town, when these bushrangers knocked at the
door of Mr. Thomas’ public house, the George Inn, and
represented themselves as constables in search of them-
selves. Mr. Thomas had no suspicion, as they had
forage caps and knapsacks on their backs, and Brown
was the spokesman. However, they soon revealed their
true characters, and bound the hands of Mr. Thomas, his


man servant, and also the woman servant, they then
ordered supper, and had several pots of beer. On
searching the house they found £\\ in a drawer, £6 of
which they returned to Mrs. Thomas on her solicitation,
also Mr. T.’s watch and sextant, on his saying that he
would be going to sea again. They took with them six
bottles of rum, 4olbs. of sugar, and a telescope. They
behaved with forbearance and civility, but told Mr.
Thomas if he made much of it they would again visit him.
They carried away about two hundredweight of goods.
On January ist, 1834, they visited the house of Mr.
Coulson, on the River Tamar. They gained admittance
by calling Mr. C. and demanding refreshments. Ignorant
of the nature of their visit and character, he opened his
bedroom window, and they said if they were not ad-
mitted immediately, they would murder him and burn
his house down. Mr. C. thought it best to acquiese.
They then plundered him of several valuable articles.
Mr. 0. reasoned with the desperadoes, and begged of
them to give up their unlawful practices. They replied
that they had stepped too deep into the matter. They
compelled Mr. C. to drink with them, and shaking hands
they returned him his watch and other valuable articles,
which he set great store by, and saying when parting that
they would never trouble him again, as they intended
leaving the country at the first opportunity. On January
20th, 1834, they were again at George Town, robbing the
private residence of Mr. Neale of a considerable amount
of property. On January 23rd they visited the hut of an
industrious man named Thomas Phillips, who was em-
ployed by Mr. Theodore Bartley. They made the man
give them tea, bread and butter, which they partook of
freely, and carried with them one pound of tea, six of
sugar, 20 of flour, a pair of duelling pistols, and a single-
barrel gun.
On January 30th, 1834, the following notice ap-
peared in the Government Gazette : —
“ Two hundred pounds for the capture of Britton, two hun-
dred for Jefkins, and one hundred for Brown, and, if by a


prisoner of the Crown, a free pardon in addition, and thirty
pounds to carry him home if he wished.”
On February 27th, a further notice appeared in the
Gazette as follows :
“ One thousand acres of land will be given for the capture of
Britton and his accomplices, in addition to the rewards already
offered.”
On March 6th these bushrangers were at Mr.
Field’s run on the Liffey. There were about ten
men in the hut, which they secured by sending one out
at a time and tying them. They then satisfied their
appetite, and remained until 12 o’clock at night. Britton
told the overseer he would not have visited them had not
the overseer, Stevens, made so much about their previous
visit. They took Stevens’ watch ; Brown taking also a
hat from Mr. Stevens, and Jefkins a pair of boots from
one of the men, giving in return a pair worn out. They
also took a quantity of beef. On June nth they visited
Mr. Beckford at Pleasant Hills, on the Tamar. They
used no violence, but took tea, sugar, and flour, and left
about 2 o’clock in the morning. On July 17th it was
currently reported in Launceston that the bushrangers
had made their escape in a cutter called the Fox, from
Sandy Bay, Hobart. True, the Fox had been seized and
taken away, but not by Britton and party, for they again
made their appearance on September 3rd, at Mr.
M'Gowan’s residence, Distillery, Killifaddy, where they
tied up all the inmates except Mr. and Mrs. M‘Gowan.
After regaling themselves and rifling the house of pro-
perty of considerable value, they left about 11 o’clock. A
few days after a boat was taken from Mr. Wilmore, who
lived on the west bank of the Tamar. It was evident
the gang had been sorely pressed by the police and
military, as the boat was discovered by Mr. Coulson
hauled up in a small creek ; some bedding, two guns,
and some provisions had been left in the boat by Britton
and his party.
On October 9th, Britton and his party made their
appearance at Mr. Leache’s farm at West Tamar, and


made a considerable stay at one of the huts, partaking of
a hearty meal, after which they leisurely walked away.
On this day a very heavy snowstorm fell in Launceston
and its neighbourhood, and in some places to the west it
was three to four feet deep. On October 16th they
visited Mr. Thom, on the Tamar, about six p.m., and
stayed until midnight, taking jewelry, etc., of considera-
ble value, and also stores. On November 27th they were
at Mr. Manley’s, on Patterson’s Plains road ; they took
property of considerable value, also wearing apparel, and
one cwt. flour.
I might mention that Chief District Constable
Cottrell during the years 1833 and 1834, was exceedingly
active, having arrested Buchanan and party. These
were the men who robbed Archdeacon Browne, of
Bifrons, also Dr. De Dassel, whoresided in George-street,
Launceston, where Mr. Walter Westbrook now lives. At
the latter end of 1834 he arrested Radcliffe and party in
the immediate neighbourhood of Corra Linn, after
robbing Mr. Rose.
BRITTON and PARTY and THE GEORGE-
TOWN POLICE.
Respecting the engagement between the bushrangers
and the police at Georgetown, I will give, as far as I
am able, the words of worthy pilot Cordell : —“ It
was New Year’s morning, 1835, a little after 4 a.m;
there was a slight haze on the river, but the sun
soon rose in all its brilliancy and dispelled the mist,
and the ocean shone like a mirror ; there was not a
ripple on the water, and all was calm and serene in
the softness of the early year. The air was sweet with
the aroma of heather and wild flowers, the sky shedding
a balmy repose ; such a morning as is only to be found
in Tasmania. There was something so delicious about
it that my thoughts were softened and charmed as I
raised my glass and scanned the horizon. On the western


beach there stood a solitary figure of a man who seemed
to be contemplating the delights of this peaceful morn-
ing In a few minutes he was joined by two other men,
when they all three stood and seemed to be watching or
looking for seme craft to be coming down the river.
After standing for some fifteen minutes, or so, they re-
tired into the scrub, and I put it down in my mind that
they were some excursionists or hunting party. At 10
a.m., being in company with my brother pilot, Ward, the
same three figures were on the beach, still standing and
gazing, when I thought they seemed to have fowling
pieces in their hands, by the way they handled them. I
handed my glass to Ward, and he also came to the con-
clusion that they were muskets. We discussed the
matter over, and decided that they were either constables
or bushrangers, and as Ward was going to George Town
we should report the matter to the police.”
The following is the statement of Constable William
Creig: —“ From the information we received from Pilot
Cordell, myself, Berbrage, and Smith, and Chief District
Constable Freestone proceeded to Kelso Bay, calling in
at Manifold’s, to enquire if they had seen any bushrangers
or hunting party, but we received no information, so we
proceeded to the western beach, where we found the
remains of a fire, and evidently a party had camped two
or three days. We proceeded on, and in crossing Bad-
ger Head we fell in with Manifold’s shepherd, Tom Cox.
He reported that at midday he had seen three men with
heavy knapsacks and with firearms, crossing the Badger.
Mr. Freestone thought it was as well for us to camp
where we were and start at early morn if we could pick
up their tracks, which we did. On the beach I found
the footprints of the three men. I returned to the camp
and reported that 1 thought they could not be far away
from us. As soon as we finished our breakfast we
divided our party into two —Smith and I taking the
beach—Mr. Freestone and Berbrage going inland. Pro-
ceeding along the beach we found the footprints turned a
little in towards the boobyallas. We were just on the


point of entering when we were challenged by Britton,
who stepped out about 60 yards from us, saying to Smith
(who was a shipmate ot Britton), ‘You • dog, it is
you and me for it,’ and commenced firing. It was a
kind of duel. We had fired several rounds when we
were joined by Freestone and Berbrage, when Britton
seemed to drop on one leg, or kneel, as though to protect
himself with a small shrub. Smith proposed to advance,
but Mr. Freestone objected, as he thought it was an un-
necessary exposure of his life. In passing through the
scrub r. Freestone knocked the flint out ot his fowling-
piece, and Berbrage had fallen coming through the scrub,
and had either sprained or broken his wrist, and Mr.
Freestone thought it better to get a reinforcement and
pursue them the next day. The following constables
were told off early next morning for that duty ; —James
Smith, James Buckley, John Harris, Frederick Carmen,
Henry Chalker, William Bermingham, Richard Berbrage,
and Thomas Walker.”
The sworn evidence of Thomas Rodgers, before P.
A. Mulgrave, Esq., coroner, on February sth, 1835
Thomas Rodgers, being sworn, said : —“ Brown and
Jefkins came to the hut at Port Sorell, where I was em-
ployed as lime-burner, on Sunday, February Ist, in a
very bad state as to clothing. Ihey had no shoes, but
had pieces of blanket and leather tied about their feet.
Brown had a grey jacket drawn on instead of trousers,
and Jefkins had blankets sewn up around him. They
had each a ragged shirt, and no other clothing. They
appeared weak and scarcely able to stand. They were
both armed with double-barrel guns. They tied me
with another man. An old man who was in the hut they
did not tie. They ordered him to get them something
to eat. They said they had had nothing to eat for five
days but a parrot and a cockatoo, and were three days
without water. They remained all night, and kept us
tied. One kept watch while the other slept. They ate
a great deal during the night j their stomachs would not
retain the food j they were so weak that they frequent y
F


went out to vomit. Next morning they got up before
daybreak, and ordered the old man to bake a damper.
They told us they were going to the bark chopper’s hut,
about a mile from our hut. They marched us up to the
place where the barkers lived. Brown went up, Jefkins
followed. Brown asked the man at the hut where his
comrades were, and as we were turning round we saw
three constables coming over the hill at a short distance.
Brown ran towards them, immediately levelled his piece,
and fired. I saw a man fall. He then fired the other
barrel. Directly afterwards I saw a gun fired by one of
the constables, and Brown fell. Jefkins ran up, and said
‘ Get up, you cowardly , and come on.’ Brown
said he could not. Jefkins rested his gun against a tree
and fired. He cried to the party to ‘ Come on, there is
enough of you to eat me.’ He presented his gun and
fired a second time. I saw him soon after fall. After
hearing a gun fired from the constables, I did not hear
anj'thing pass between the constables and Brown. Before
the firing I heard something said by the constables when
Jefkins was behind the tree, but I did not know what it
was. After the firing I went up to the constables and
found the one who was shot, named Smith, still living,
but he died soon afterwards. Jefkins died after the. con-
stable ; they were both shot through the head. Brown
was wounded in the body, and his left arm crushed with
a shot. I called out to the constables when Jefkins fell
that there were no more bushrangers, I knew two of the
constables ; there were nine altogether in the party; six
came up after the skirmish. Brown and Jefkins took
clothes from us on Sunday; they did not say anything
but took the clothes from a box in the hut.”
The next witness examined was a comrade of
Rodgers, living in the same hut, but his evidence was
only confirmatory of that of the preceding witness.
William Seccombe, colonial surgeon, proved that they
came to their death by gun wounds.
The jury returned a verdict of murder against Brown
and Jefkins, and justifiable homicide in the case of their


death. This affray took place where the township of
Moriarity is laid out. The two dead bodies and Brown
were then brought to George Town.
Brown’s dying statement, taken before Dr. Smith,
Freestone, the district constable, and Mr. W. Wilson, who
was then acting in the capacity of schoolmaster at George
Town, was as follows : —“ In crossing the harbour of Port
Sorell we constructed a catamaran, two weeks since.
We lost our knapsacks, firearms, and provisions.
Britton became very ill in consequence of a wound he
received in the first affray with the constables. The fever
seemed to settle in his leg, which swelled to an immense
size. He was unable to walk ;we removed him to the
bush, and he begged of us to go in search of some food,
which was the cause of us leaving him. Our intention in
going to Port Sorell was to seize a small craft called the
William and Anne, which was employed in conveying lime
from Port Sorell to George Town, and not wishing to
attract the attention of the bark-strippers and lime-
burners was the reason of our attempting to cross at the
head of Port Sorell. We were towing the catamaran
when she sank with all our clothes and food, and it was
with great difficulty we saved our guns and a little
powder, which was done by Jefkins diving. Ido not
believe Britton can be alive from the low state we left
him in,”
The following advertisement appeared in the Corn*
wall Chronicle, of February sth, 1835 :
<! The funeral of the deceased constable, Thomas Smith, who
fell at the capture of the bushrangers, Jenkins and Brown, taking
place this day, at two o’clock p.m.; such of the inhabitants of the
town as'feel desirous of marking their regret for the death of an
active and zealous member of the police, in so meritorious a
service, are requested to give their attendance. The funeral will
start from the watchhouse. J. Fairweatheb, Commandant.”
This was responded to by all the principal inhabi-
tants. The police magistrate, Colonel Anderson, the
commandant, and Rev. Dr. Brown, preceded the hearse,
which was followed by the civil and military officers and


all the principal inhabitants of the town, the whole of the
police force and military garrison. The editor of the
Chronicle winds up his article with these comments—
“ The attention paid by our townspeople in the exercise
of these last sad duties is commendable.” Dr. Smith,
who organised a party to go in search of Britton, reported
that the track of a naked foot had been traced down the
eastern bank of the river Mersey, the left foot having the
appearance of being bandaged up in some covering, the
right foot being perfect.
Ihe following is an extract from the Launceston
Advertiser , of February 26th, 1835 :
“We have, with much regret, to report the suicide
of a constable named Shaw, which occurred last Sunday
afternoon. Deceased was a very active constable, and
had been long employed in the bush in quest of the
bushrangers. After the capture of Jefkins snd Brown,
at which he was not present, he was sent after Britton,
and coming into town on Saturday when the rewards
which Government had given to the captors were first
made known in the Gazette , he took it so much to heart
at not sharing in them that he shot himself in the
stomach and died instantly. Shaw was a prisoner, and
had ever displayed great zeal for the capture of the bush-
rangers under the influence of the handsome rewards and
the pardons held out by Government.”
It was generally believed that the bones of Britton
wfere discovered on the Leven beach, but I am fully
under the impression that that cannot be, considering the
weak and exhausted state of the man when left by Brown.
Some years after a pannikin was found in a small clear
spot surrounded by boobyallas, now known as the Pardoe
beach, just such a place as his companions would have
left him in. He would have had three rivers to cross,
and some 20 miles to travel to get to the Leven, and
from the account given by Brown, erysipelas had evi-
dently set in the leg, and I believe that the unfortunate
man must have perished soon after he was left.


JEFFRIES THE MONSTER.
This inhuman wretch was a sailor, and was notorious
for his vile blackguardism. He was committed to prison
at Edinburgh, but received a commutation of his sentence
by proffering his service as “Jack Ketch.” The first
man on whom he made his experimental trial was John-
son, a kind of Dick Turpin of the north. The rope
broke, and Johnson coming to consciousness, cooly
asked for a drink of water, saying, “ Surely, as I have
been hung I will not be hung again.” The mob of
modern Athens rushed the gaol and carried the victim
away, but the police succeeded in arresting the highway-
man, and gave h'm another interview with Jeffries and
the rope Not long after this the hangman appeared in
Van Diemen’s Land, where he proffered his services as a
flogger and hangman. His services were accepted, and
he was forwarded to Launceston, where he was quartered
at the watch-house, which stood where St. Andrew’s
Church now stands. At that period there was a poor
eccentric character in Launceston known as “Cranky
Cooper.” One day he was taken to the watch-house for
bemg drunk, and Jeffries, to gratify his fiendish disposi-
tion, wrapped the poor fellows feet and legs in rags
soaked in fat, and then placed the insensible man in
some hot ashes, until his toes were consumed. The
discovery of this barbarous act caused his retreat to the
bush, and he became a terror to the settlers in the north.
His atrocities were fearfully horrible. He confessed to
five murders, and acknowledged he had no object, either
fear, revenge, or avarice, to prompt the horrible deeds.
One of his victims was his companion, whom he slew and
then devoured. The crime he suffered for was the
murder of an infant. He came upon a lonely hut in the
bush when the husband was absent. He outraged the


wife and the child cried. He told the woman to follow
him, her tears being of no avail with so hardened a being.
With her infant at her breast she followed him with
faltering steps, and in an agony of grief. Jeffries told
her to move quicker or he would throttle her. She
thought to appease him by stating she was a young
mother, and pleaded her weak state and the weight of
the child. The demon turned round with an awful curse,
snatched the baby from her breast, and dashed its brains
out against a tree. To the credit of the town of Laun-
ceston te it said, when this monstrous act was made
known, there was almost a universal exodus to go in
search of the desperado.
The Government offered to prisoners of the Crown
freedom and a reward for his capture. One of the
search parties consisted of Puckridge, Pyles, and
Stephens. I will give it as nearly as possible in the
words of that good old man, Puckridge—“We had been
out three weeks, walking through scrub, over mountain
and dale, when we came to a small patch of open land one
Sunday morning. Just as the sun rose at the extreme
end I saw a ending smoke rising out of the scrub. I
said to my mates ‘you may depend upon it that is
Jeffries’ fire, stay where you are and I will work my w r ay
snake-like on my stomach to the fire.’ When I arrived
there I saw my gentlemen on his knees blowing the
embers. I made a spring and seized him (I was not stout
then as now). Here my tactics as a member of ex-P.R.
was of valuable service to me. I gave what is called a
cross-buttock —I threw him, sitting on his chest —I called
for my mates. He made desperate strugg l es to get his
knife, but we bound him with ropes and brought him to
town. He was obliged to be guarded by soldiers when
a young woman amongst the crowd caught sight of those
hated features, but too well-known, she uttered a yelling
scream, ‘My child,my child,’ and sprang upon the man,
and would have torn him to pieces, if it had not been for
the soldiers. She was the mother of the murdered
infant.”


I cannot close this account without paying a just
tribute to the old man Puckridge tie lived for many
years in Charles-street, where Mr. Stearnes’ premises now
are, following his business as watchmaker, highly respected
by his neighbours. One of his peculiar features and
traits of kindness was to purchase a certain amount of
lolly-pops gr sweets on the Saturday, doing them up in
small parcels, and distributing them to the children
that arrived early at Sunday school No old hand who
became sick or met with an accident but were relieved
by Puckridge and nursed. He gave his two mates
the credit of the capture, as they were lifers.
WARD, NEWMAN, BUCHAN, and DAWSON.
These men absconded from Mr. Notman’s road party,
under circumstances well-known to the community. That
circumstance was the brutal exhibition of flogging, which
took place at the Cocked Hat, when 3,300 lashes were
administered one morning by the order of Stewart and
Kenworthy.
On December 20th, 1833 a robbery was committed
npon a small storekeeper at the corner of Frankland-street
and Wellington Road It took place at 6o’ clock in xhe
evening, being bold and daring. They took away goods
to the amount of £lO. They tied the storekeeper and
his wife, also a customer that came in ; they did no bodily
injury
The same evening, about 9 o’clock, the premises of
the Rev. Dr. Browne were visited by armed bushrangers.
Dr. Browne was sitting with Mrs. Browne, who had been
confined only a few hours before, when a gentle tap was
heard at the front door of the house, which was immedi-


ately opened by a younger brother of the doctor. The
man presented firearms to his breast, and he was subse-
quently marched into a room and tied. Dr. B. hearing
his name mentioned by a strange voice, and supposing he
was required, left the bedside of Mrs. Browne, intending
to proceed to the hall, but was met in the doorway by
two men who presented their muskets, and required him
to stand. The doctor, with great presence of mind, in-
formed them of the illness of Mrs. B , and begged them
to be quiet in their plundering. This they promised,
and during the whole time of their stay conducted them-
selves with much greater propriety than we should have
given the villians credit for. They were so quiet, indeed,
that a lady, sister of Mrs, Browne, who had retired to
rest, unwell, was not aware of the robbery until next
morning, though the robbers, accompanied by Dr,
Browne passed and re-passed her chamber door. Indeed,
to prevent unnecessary noise they walked tip-toe. They
obliged the doctor to go through the house with them ;
and, upon his assurance that he would open all the places
they wished to search with keys, did not attempt to break
a lock, and in many instances took his word as to the
absence of valuables, of which alone they seemed desirous
to possess themselves, refusing tea, sugar, flour, and the
like, and removing only two bottles of wine and one of
spirits, though they had access to a great quantity of
both. They expressed themselves much disappointed in
the amount of moveable property found in the house,
and frequently apologised for having come so soon
after Mrs. Browne’s confinement, and assured the doctor
had they known they would have deferred their visit
until a future evening. The amount of property taken
amounted to about the value of besides which
twenty or thirty shillings in money were taken off.
The Rev. Dr. Browne took the opportunity of
reasoning with them on the dangerous course they were
pursuing, and advised them to leave their illegal prac-
tices, assuring them of his willingness to assist them
in so desirable a reformation. To this end the rev.


gentleman advised them )they having expressed a desire
to come in from the bush—but doubted the success
of an application to the local government for forgiveness
on giving themselves up), to communicate with the
Lieutenant-Governor by letter, and offered to become the
medium of such communication if they would put con-
fidence in him, which was necessary. They promised to
deliver such a letter at his house within a certa in time ;
but this never came to the doctor’s hand, and he naturally
enough concluded they had determined not to place
confidence in him.
It appears, however, they did write, and that Buchan
was the bearer of their communication to town. This
man entered Launceston unarmed, with the intention of
leaving the letter at the premises of Dr. 8., as agreed;
but on passing up Brisbane-street, seeing a party of con-
stables before him, he left the letter near the Assistant-
Treasurer’s, and returned to his comrades.
By appointment made in that letter they waited for
Dr. B. several nights ; the letter having never been seen
by the rev. gentlemen the men were disappointed.
Another letter was forwarded, but never reached Dr.
Browne, and for two hours, on an appointed night, these
men waited at the foot of the new bridge over the North
Esk, and were again disappointed.
January 19th, 1834, six men, well armed, visited the
house of Dr. de Dassel (where Mr. W. H. Westbrook
now resides), and after ransacking throughout, carried off
property to the amount of about Their conduct
to the inmates was brutal in the extreme. One of the
villi"ns twice attempted to discharge a pistol at the
doctor, and another threatened to strangle his lady,
placing a handkerchief round her neck for that purpose,
during an hysterical fit into which she had fallen. In
proceeding up the hill, after leaving the house, they were
seen by a constable who lived a short distance from the
doctor, who recognised them, and sent a woman to the
police office for assistance. He fellowed them and
entered into conversation, hoping thereby to detain them,


but they soon ordered him to desist, threatening his life
if he refused to comply. Several parties were soon in
pursuit, but they did not succeed in gaining any traces of
them. There is little doubt they deposited their booty
with some persons in the town, who were in the habit of
harbouring them.
Two of the same party, the next morning called at
the “Rob Roy” public-house, at the Springs, kept by a
man named Gurney. They represented themselves as
settlers from Ben Lomond, ordered breakfast, of which
they partook ; on leaving said they would return in the
evening on their way home. Accordingly they returned,
and ordered beds. During the evening a knock at the
door was answered by the landlord, when two men from
without presented firearms, and ordered him to stand.
On looking round he found one of the strangers who
were with him in the morning standing behind him with
a pistol presented at his (Guerney’s) head. The four
men, supposed to be Ward, Newman, Lindsay, and
Buchan, then proceeded to tie the inmates of the house ;
and, after remaining about two hours, decamped, taking
with them tea, sugar, tobacco, flour, bread, and some
money, amounting to The robbery was soon after
they left reported to District-constable Murray, who went
in pursuit of the thieves, but without success.
The depredators W. Ward, S. Newman, John
Buchan, and Thomas Dawson were captured on Wednes-
day, June 29th, 1834, at the “Wool Pack,” kept by Mr.
John Connell, at Jacob’s Sugar Loaf, near the township
of Auburn. After the robbery at Dr. de Dassel’s, they
found the parties who went in pursuit from the town so
close upon them that they resolved to go further into the
interior, and by a circuitous route gained the Wool
Pack Inn on the afternoon of January 22nd. They
there represented themselves to be a party of
constables from Hobart Town, having taken the
precaution to conceal a great part of their arms before
arriving at the house, and obtained refreshments ac-
cordingly. During the evening, an old man, employed


by Connell as a labourer, during conversation, made
some enquiries respecting the Chief Constable of Hobart
Town, whom he knew, and found they knew nothing
about him. This roused his suspicions, and Connell
gave notice to Dixon, a constable in the neighbourhood,
who, with a small party of volunteers, rushed upon them
in the room. A desperate struggle ensued, but they were
captured and conveyed to the Police Magistrate at Camp-
bell Town.
When the party first absconded they made for the
East Coast, and the privations they underwent in
passing through the unlocated country was immense.
They had two kangaroo dogs when they left, but for three
weeks saw not a single head of game of any description.
The poor dogs they managed to keep alive for a time by
feeding them upon the skins of which their knapsacks
were made, but were at last under the necessity of killing
them to appease the cravings of their own hunger, and
upon these animals they lived some days. The last three
days before reaching the coast they lived upon one pint
of roasted corn, the remainder of the provision they took
with them on setting out. They were no better off on
reaching the sea shore ; not a shell fish of any descrip-
was to be found, and they must have perished but for
meeting a party of sealers, who gave them a meal, and
took them round in their boats to near the Heads, at
George Town.
From this they commenced their depredations, suc-
cessfully robbing Mr. Thomas, at George Town,
Mr. Weavers, a shopkeeper at entrance of Launceston,
from the Hobart Town road, Dr. Browne, Mr. Britton
Jones, of Franklin Village, and Dr. de Dassell, besides
various huts.
On March loth the last awful sentence was executed
upon these men, at the gaol in Launceston. Buchan
received a respite on Sunday night in consequence of
the warrant sent over on Thursday, being in the name of
James Buchanan Buchan, his name being John Buchanan
Buchan.


Owing to the drop giving way they were not exe-
cuted until an hour later, which time they spent in
devotion. Newman knelt in front of the scaffold and
offered up as fervent and heart-breaking a prayer as could
ever have been uttered.
JEFFS AND CONWAY.
It is extremely painful and sad to trace the career of
these two misguided youths. Conway was in his 23rd
year, and Jeffs in his 21st, when they were executed.
Conway’s father was a master-tailor in the city of West-
minster ; his son was taught the same trade, but he was
in the habit of attending dancing saloons and low concert
rooms, where he fell into evil ways.
Jeffs case is more melancholy still. His father was
a Baptist pastor in Sutton, Berkshire, and his mother was
granddaughter of Carey, the first missionary to India.
(The perusal of Carey’s life and labours will well repay
any reader.) Jeffs was sent to the Grammar School of
Reading, from which he absconded and obtained em-
ployment as groom or stable-boy at a roadside Inn in the
suburbs of London, on the north side. There he ac-
quired the habit of drinking and gambling, which
eventually led him to be sent to this colony. They both
absconded from a road party, and committed several
minor depredations prior to shooting William Ward, the
District-constable of Avoca.
On the 2nd May they appeared at Clifton Lodge,
the residence of Mr. Gifiighan. (I might mention that
Mr. G. was a passenger on board the Porpoise, from
Norfolk Island, when the vessel struck upon a rock in
Whirlpool Reach, which incident gave the rock that
name.) Mr. Ward, District-constable, was taking tea
with the old couple. The version given by Sarah Versoll
is as follows : —“ I heard a knock at the kitchen door;
upon opening it Jeffs presented a gun at me, asking how
many there were in the kitchen, I told him only me and
my fellow servant. Conway at the same moment marched


four men into the kitchen with their hands bound. I
told Jeffs my master, mistress, and a gentleman were at
tea. He ordered me to proceed to the parlor. On
entering Jeffs presented his piece, and said he would
shoot the first that attempted to move. Mr. Ward im-
mediately rose, being nearest to the door, and grappled
with Jeffs. They struggled with one another from the
parlor to the kitchen. My master went to Ward’s
assistance, but I prevented him, as the old gentleman was
aged and infirm I heard a shot fired, and I went into
the kitchen immediately.
Conway was standing beside the bench ; he lifted up
Ward and knocked the fire off his coat, but made no
remark. My master came running into the kitchen,
going to Ward’s assistance, when Conway bid him stand
back, or he would shoot him. I heard Mr. Gillighansay
it was a great pity, as Ward had a large family. Jeffs was
very angry ; he stamped his foot and said if he had
£ 1000 he would sooner give it than the sad event should
have happened.” This evidence is confirmed by other
witnesses.
John Phillips said : —“When Jeffs and Ward were
struggling on the floor Jeffs called out to Ward to loose
his hold of him and let him go, when Conway stepped
forward and shot the latter Before firing he called out
to Jeffs, ‘Where are you?’ but no reply was given.
Upon hearing the report Mrs. Gillighan came into the
kitchen in great agitation, and exclaimed, ‘ Oh! my God;
what a family the poor man has left behind him.’ Jeffs
seemed very angry; said he would not have had it happen
for any consideration, and said to Conway, ‘ There was no
occasion to have fired, as I could have secured him.’ ”
Two days afterwards they robbed Mr. Massey’s,
compelling the housekeeper to go through the house with
them whilst they plundered.
There is rather an amusing circumstance connected
with this robbery. The old gentlemen hearing of the
bushrangers, and having in notes on his person,
thought he would place them inside some newspapers on


the sideboard, and taking a seat while awaiting their
interview. As the bushrangers were departing Conway
said “We may as well take those newspapers, it will be
something for us to read,” and so the old gentleman lost
his £3O.
They robbed the premises of Mr. Holdman, at
Plaxton, on the 6th, and Mr. Williams, at Lagoon Farm,
on the 17th May. On leaving Mr. Williams’ farm, Jeffs
met with an accident, when climbing over a log fence
with his heavy knapsack he slipped and fell; his pistol
went off, discharging the slug shot in the fleshy part of
the thigh. Conway carried him to a retired part of one
of Mr. Youl’s sheep runs, where they found shelter in an
old hut.
Conway was in the habit of going into Campbell-
town to get lint and medicine for his companion, and
formed an acquaintance with a Mrs. S. She betrayed
him to Connelly, a District-constable. Conway was
tracked to the hut by Connelly and a party of police.
The police surrounded the hut, calling to Jeffs and Con-
way to surrender.
Jeffs laid down his piece, but immediately resumed
it again; but seeing themselves covered by six rifles, Con-
way said to Jeffs, “ I will not leave you, but share your
fate,” and then surrendered.*
The sympathy of Launceston was greatly moved on
account of these two young men. The late Rev. Henry
Dowling was assiduous in his attention to them during
their confinement, and was present at their execution. In
fact the two young men went to the gallows singing a
hymn —
“ Jesus, the Lamb of God, hath bled ;
He bore our sins upon the tree ;
Beneath our curse he hath bowed his head ;
It is finished. He hath died for me.”
The Launceston Examiner , on July 15th, contained
a leading article on the subject, and on the following
* The hutkeeper and another free man were found in the
hut, and were arrested for harbouring them.


Sunday, after their execution, the Rev. Mr. Dowling
preached a most impressive sermon, which sermon I have
to the present day a strong recollection of, as it made a
deep impression upon me. I might mention that Jeffs’
mother died before hearing the fatal termination of her
son.
A subscription was opened for the benefit ot Mrs.
Ward and her seven children, and jQ BOO were raised,
five hundred of which I am pleased to say was raised on
the northern side of the island, which was invested in
trust for the benefit of herself and children, and the
Government subsidized it by a pension of per
annum.
CASH, KAVANAGH, and JONES.
From the years ’36 to ’43 there were several parties
apprehended for being in the bush under arms ; many
were executed, others were sent to Norfolk Island, among
whom was William Westwood, afterwards known as
Jacky Jacky. He was eventually executed tor murders
committed at Norfolk Island. The men who caused the
greatest excitement, and gave most trouble to the officials
were Martin Cash, Kavanagh, and Jones. To give the
details of their depredations would make the narrative too
long.
These men escaped from Port Arthur in December,
’42, and it was accomplished with great difficulty. They
arrived on the main land with hardly any clothing, being
tired and weary they halted to have a rest, food being
cut of the question. The sun was high on the horizon
before they awoke. The question was debated by the
trio what was to be done. Jones suggested they should
take up arms and stand no repairs, to which the others
consented, At Sorell Creek they robbed a farm house,
and replenished their clothing. I will pass on to their
attack upon the Woolpack Inn.
The Woolpack is in the Hamilton district, about ten
miles from New Norfolk. Being aware that soldiers were


stationed at the Woolpack Inn did not deter them from
paying it a visit.
The following I quote from the book upon the life
of Cash, which was partly confirmed in the report of the
Hobart Town Advertiser at that period :
“ Having perfect confidence in each other, we did
not dread an encounter with an equal number of the
police or military. About 8 o’clock at night we divested
ourselves of all unnecessary encumbrances, planting our
swags about a quarter of a mile from the scene of our
intended action. We bailed up those in the house, Mrs.
Stoddart and her two sons, who were grown-up young
men, together with three others who happened to be
drinking there at the time ; Mrs. ‘"toddart, like all
women, evincing the utmost alarm. I assured her that
any person not offering resistance would be perfectly
safe. One of her sons here sarcastically exclaimed, ‘Oh
mother, never mind, it will be all right by and by.’
Thinking this observation conveyed a double meaning,
which to his mother implied that this party of five con-
stables whom they knew were stationed outside would be
shortly upon us, I felt rather piqued, and asked him
sharply if he were master of the premises. He replied
in a very concilatory tone that his father was absent.
Jones by this time had possession of the bar, but there
was little danger of him abusing his prerogative, as he
was strictly temperate. Kavanagh was standing at the
bush road door leading into the bai, while I took up a
position which enabled me to keep an eye upon my
prisoners, and see what was going on outside. Observing a
sinister smi'e upon the face of Mr. Stoddart, junr., the idea
at once flashed upon me that the constables were not far
off. I next enquired of Mrs. Stoddart if the hut, which
I saw about fifty yards in front of the premises, belonged
to her, or who resided there. She hesitatingly replied
that ‘she had no men there,’ on which I directed Jones
and Kavanagh to go over at once and secure any person
they might find in the hut. I had no sooner given the
order when I perceived some people moving up to the


house, and, calling upon my mates to prepare, I imme-
diately advanced to the front, where I was challenged
and told to stand I obeyed the order until I could dis-
cern the person who gave it, and who still continued to
advance, accompanied by four or five others, when
pointing my gun I fired, in self-defence, and a moment
after one of the party lay stretched on the ground. At
this time, I was between two fires, as my mates, who had
happened to be about six paces in the rear, had dis-
charged their pieces, the constables in front keeping up
a rambling discharge Whilst re-loadmg I addressed a
few words to my mates, but received no answer. I con-
cluded they had returned to the house, and moving up
to the verandah found they were not inside. The smoke
having cleared away, the thought occurred to me they
might be either dead or disabled. Hastily retracing my
steps to the scene of action, I could not find the slight-
est trace of them I returned to the house, appropriated
a keg containing about three gallons of brandy, and
returned to the spot where we had planted our knap-
sacks. Before reaching this, I heard a noise as of some
person whispering, and immediately challenged, was
answered directly by my mates, but as prudence is the
better part of valor, I ordered them up one at a time.
After each drinking a glass of brandy, we held a
council of war as to our next campaign. We judged it
advisable to get clear of the locality with the utmost dis-
patch, as we were not sure if we had killed or wounded
any of the constables. Kavanagh took charge of the pro-
vender, and we retraced our steps in the direction of
Dromedary. On travelling all night we were joined the
next morning by a shepherd, who was perfectly ac-
quainted with the particulars of our last engagement, and
while taking some refreshment he informed us that the
constable who headed the party had been wounded by
the first shot, and was now lying in a very precarious
state ; and also that another of them received a ball in
the fleshy part of the thigh, but none were killed, a cir-
cumstance which gave us great relief. He drank freely


of the brandy, and being certain he would not be able to
give information respecting us for the next few hours, we
left him alone in his glory. Pursuing our journey for the
next three days we arrived at Mr. Cawthorn’s, at the foot
of the Dromedary, and finding that our larder required
replenishing, we resolved to apply to that gentleman for
assistance. We saw a party of seven or eight constables
making their exit from the premises: whether they saw us
or not I cannot attempt to say, but as they still continued
their journey we did not interfere with them. In any
case they were no more than one hundred yards from
the premises when we took possession. Kavanagh and
Jones entered the house, while I took up a position at
the door, in order to watch proceedings. They had
little difficulty in securing the inmates. We gave them as
little trouble as possible, merely taking what was abso-
lutely necessary for present contingencies, at the same
time observing that we were resolved on leading a free
and easy life as a recompense for the restraints the law
has hitherto imposed upon us, and notwithstanding the
cruelties which had been practised on us while at Port
Arthur, our actions would be always guided by reason
and discretion, wishing it to be clearly understood that
we never waged war with the defenceless, although at all
times ready to fight for our liberty. We resolved to give
the district of Hamilton an opportunity of contributing
to our support, and upon arriving at Dunrobin we
resolved upon attacking the residence of Mr. Charles Kerr.
“After visiting Mr. Kimberley we made our way to a
hut occupied by an old acquaintance of mine, Samuel
Smith, with the object of having some refreshments.
Before entering the hpt, we left our knapsacks outside,
near the door. We found him in company with two
others. Wishing to give him a glass of liquor I took a
bottle from the knapsack and returned to the hut, where
at this time Kavanagh and Jones were engaged in dis-
cussing some pancakes which had been in course of
preparation previous to our entering. My mates here
reminded me I was losing time, and while in the act of


pouring some liquor from the bottle I heard a voice out-
side the door exclaim, “ Surround the hut ; we have them,
here’s their swag.” This happened to be a party of seven
soldiers, and three constables, who were sent in pursuit
of us. Finding there was no time for deliberation, I laid
hold of my gun, and, opening the door, discharged both
barrels to right and left, at same time exclaiming, ‘Come
on my hearties, you have got it.’ On hearing the ex-
clamation Jones blew out the light, and I returned to the
door and reloaded my piece. During this time I heard
nothing from my mates, but on capping my gun again
Jones enquired what was to be done. I merely replied
‘We would have to shoot two or three of them,’ and
stepping outside I loudly enquired if they were all dead,
at the same time reminding them of the large reward
they would get for apprehending us, if they could only
muster up courage to do so. I found that they had
taken our knapsacks, and requesting them again to show
themselves, observed that they were a cowardly set of
rascals. Jones again enquired what we had best do. I
here called out at the top of my voice that if they did not
return and share the brandy with my mates and me, I
should report them to John Price, adding they were a
shabby set of scoundrels to plunder us while we were at
tea. Our company now advanced about fifty yards in
front of the hut, not, as yet, seeing anything of our
assailants; but on hearing them at the door of the hut
calling upon me to surrender, Smith loudly answered we
had left the premises, adding they were quite aware of
the fact. On hearing this we commanded Smith to
leave the hut. I exclaimed, ‘ Here is a light,’at the
same time giving them a volley, which was instantly re-
turned- I felt something strike my ear, and put up my
hand to find if I were wounded, but it was merely the con-
cussion of the ball, as it grazed my head so close that I
could feel its touch. The party now called upon us to
stand, but this order was unnecessary, as we were
standing and reloading our pieces. One of our adver-
saries now called out, ‘ Where are you ?’ upon which we


told them they were taking the wrong direction, at the
same time giving them another volley, which they soon
after returned. We invited our assailants to come away
from the hut and fight like men, our object being to save
Smith and his mates, whom we imagined might be hurt
by some of our bullets ; but my fears were without
foundation, as I afterwards learnt they esconced them-
selves behind some wool mattrasses, which they had in
the hut. We now heard another party coming from an
opposite direction, one of whom (on hearing the firing
which had been kept up during the whole time) ex-
claimed, ‘Come on cowards,’ but on our side giving
them a volley, they all rushed into the cabin. I again
challenged the party to come out and take us ; they then
fired a volley from the rear of the hut, but on receiving
our fire in return they retreated and joined the party
within. Finding we could not induce them to leave the
fortress, we bade them good night, telling them our
ammunition was nearly expended. I subsequently heard
that the party which attacked us that night numbered
fifteen, including volunteers, who, on their return from
the scene of the conflict, called at Mr. Harrison’s, who
was a Justice of the Peace aad resided within a mile of
Smith’s place. This gentleman, on hearing the firing,
imagined the party were shooting us down while in the
hut; seeing them return without bringing us dead or
alive, he called them a cowardly set of rascals, ordering
them immediately to leave the premises, remarking that
they should be ashamed to confess that fifteen, all well-
armed, were not able to capture three careworn bush-
rangers !
The above was corroborated by Samuel Smith, in a
letter published in the Review , June 30th, 1843 :
“ Leaving a shepherd’s hut belonging to Mr. Clark,
of Ellenthrope Hall, we travelled over a piece of land
that baffles description, being a complete mass of lime-
stone rock, and so uneven that it required great circum-
spection in crossing it. Here, my poor friend Kavanagh
met with a serious accident, which brought his career in


the bush to a close, and also deprived us of his company
and assistance. It appears that in getting over the rocks
he had a fall, and his piece, by concussion against the
rocks, exploded, the ball entering his arm at the elbow,
and running along the bone went out at the wrist, ren-
dering the limb perfectly useless during the rest of his
days. I suggested a plan for obtaining a doctor, but
Kavanagh would not hear of it, having resolved to give
himself up to Mr. Clark, at Cluny. We used every
argument and entreaty in trying to alter his determina-
tion, but finding it useless, accompanied him the next
morning within a short distance of Cluny, where we
parted. Jones, while on the road to Mr. Clark’s,
privately hinted the necessity of shooting Kavanagh,
being under the impression he might reveal our haunts.
I rebuked him for making such a heartless proposition,
observing that had I been in Kavanagh’s situation, he
would treat me in like manner, regretting very much to
hear him suggest anything so unmanly. For the first
time I became disgusted with my calling, being of
opinion, after what had lately transpired that there could
be no confidence or friendship between men in our
position. But the die was cast, and I was obliged to
follow it up to the end.”
Kavanagh was conveyed to Hobart Town Gaol
Hospital, and when his fractured bone was healed he
stood his trial for stopping the Hobart Town and Laun-
ceston coach, and robbing Mrs. Cox, Mrs. Taylor (now
Mrs. McKenzie), Mr. Jacobs, and Hewitt, the coachman.
He was found guilty, and received a sentence of trans-
portation for life to Norfolk Island. He was one that
was subsequently connected with Westwood’s outbreak
(but some parties say he was not present during the outrage)
and was found guilty and executed with thirteen others.
To make it clear to my readers it will be necessary
to introduce them to Mrs. Cash. According to Cash’s
statement her name was Clifford, and her father
officer in the 16th Lancers, stationed in India She had
been sent to England to be educated. On her retffrn to


India she was introduced to Mr. Clifford, who was cornet
in the same regiment, and afterwards married him. He,
Clifford, did not like the climate or the army, and sold
out. He came home to his native place, Wexford, in
Ireland. Living at a high rate, and forming extravagant
habits, he very soon dissipated his means, and had to fly
to his friends for assistance. They advised him to come
out to the colonies, and furnished him with some means,
and a letter of introduction to the Governor of Sydney.
On his arrival there he got an appointment upcountry,
His intemperate habits increased, and he lost his ap-
pointment and became an idle loafer. It was here Mrs,
Clifford formed the acquaintance of Cash. He rendered
her some personal service (at this time he had become
free). Cash said she proffered to join him and share his
fate through thick and thin. At this time Cash was a
good-looking man, well proportioned, six feet and half-
inch in height, with plenty of pluck, and a daring rider.
They had lived two years together, and Cash says happily
loving one another. At that period he went to a
neighbour to assist in branding some cattle, and it
turned out that they did not belong to this neighbour.
As it was likely to get them into trouble they decided to
leave the colony, and they came to Van Diemen’s Land.
They settled at Campbell Town, and, unfortunately they
made acquaintance with some persons of not very good
repute. The house where they lodged was in the occu-
pation of parties named Smith, and here they were
suspected of a robbery of a watch, which watch was
found in Cash’s apartment. He, and the other parties
were arrested and tried at the Quarter Sessions in
Launceston, before Mr. Peter Mulgrave. Though Cash
protested his innocence it was no avail, he was sentenced
to seven years’ imprisonment, He was sent to join the
road party at Constitution Hill, from which he absconded.
He was captured and sent to Port Arthur for two years,
after which he made his escape and became a bush-
ranger, Mrs. Cash was arrested for having property in
her possession belonging to Mrs. Shone.


The two following letters were written by Cash and
party :
Me. Shone.
Sir, —In consequence of my observing in the public journals
that Mrs. Cash is in custody, charged with having property in her
possession belonging to you, I hereby caution you not to prose-
cute her ; if you do, we will visit you, and burn you and all that
belongs to you. Cash.
Kavanagh.
Jones.
The other was addressed to the Lieutenant-governor,
Sir John Franklin :
Messrs. Cash and Co. beg to notify to His Excellency, Sir
John Franklin, and his satellites, that if a very respectable person,
named Mrs. Cash, is not released forthwith, and properly re-
munerated, we will, in the first instance, visit Government House,
and, beginning with Sir John, administer a wholesome lesson in
the shape of a sound flogging ; after which we will pay the same
currency to all his followers.
Given under our hands, this day, at the residence of Mr
Charles Kerr, at Dunrobin. Cash.
Kavanagh.
Jones.
His Excellency the Governor.
Mrs. Cash was remanded several times at the Police
Office, but was ultimately discharged upon her own
recognisance to appear when called upon, as John Price,
the Police Magistrate suggested to the Crown officers that
her freedom would be the means of capturing Cash.*
The house that Cash and party used to frequent was
situated at Cobb’s Hill, on the Jordan side, and the
who was employed by them to go to Hobart
Town to make purchases and gain information, on one
occasion informed Cash that Mrs. Cash was cohabiting
with a man named Pratt. This so fired his indignation
that he resolved to go and shoot Pratt, and bring the
woman to his hiding place. This led to Cash’s capture.
The following is an extract from Murray’s Review,
September rst, ’43, giving particulars of the capture : —t
* Two policemen, named R. Agar and Thomas Thomas were
told off to shepherd Mrs. Cash.
fAt this time the constables were allowed to wear such
clothes as they liked, so they were dressed in plain clothes.


About half-past 8 o’clock Agar and Thomas were
accosted by two men, one tall and stout, dressed in
sailor’s clothes, the other of low stature. The latter man
enquired of the constables as to the whereabouts of the
house, and a little man went in that direction, whilst the
tall man walked on the footpath at a slow pace. This
was in Harrington-street, about a hundred yards from the
watchhouse. The circumstance excited the constables’
suspicions, and they walked quietly after the tall man,
who increased his speed on hearing footsteps in his rear,
and turned the corner into Murray-street, still increasing
his speed. Agar and Thomas still dogged him, when
the man suddenly turned round and discharged a large
pistol which he pulled from his belt. Thomas instantly
returned the fire, but neither shot took effect. This
occurred nearly opposite to the residence of the Rev. Mr.
Miller, and at a short distance above the Birmingham
Arms, and close by the door of Mr. Charles Cunliffe,
house carpenter. On the first discharge of pistols Cun-
liffe rushed from his dwelling and saw a man running,
whom he pursued, the two constables also running and
shouting “ Stop thief.” Cash, for such the man pursued
proved to be, drew a second pistol from his belt and
presented it at Cunliffe, who, having no firearms, drew
back for the instant. Cash, a noted fast runner, turned
the corner into Brisbane-street, followed by Cunliffe and
the constables, others joining in the hue and cry as the
chase proceeded. In this way they ran dcwn Brisbane-
street, and on passing Roxborough House, near the
crossing to Elizabeth-street, the pursuers were joined by
Mr. Alfred Oldfield, a tutor at Mr. Canaway’s Grammar
School, in Murray-street, but residing with his brother,
who kept an academy at Roxborough House. Cash
gained ground on his pursuers, and crossing Elizabeth-
street, kept the route down Brisbane-street, evidently
making for the Government paddock, had he reached
which he might have had a chance of escape, but he was
not so doomed. After crossing Argyle-street, he turned
to the left, mistaking, as it is conjectured, the entrance to


the rear of private premises for a back street, which
might give him a nearer cut to the paddock. He
speedily discovered his mistake and turned back. By
this time Cunliffe still first in the chase, was within eight
or ten yards of him, and Oldfield and McDonald close up
with Cunliffe. Continuing his flight, Cash passed the
York Tavern, and about this time the hue and cry
brought Mrs. Smith, the landlady of the Old Commodore
Inn, into the street. In the bar was Constable Win-
stanley, who had but a few hours before arrived from
Ross, where he had been in pursuit of Cash and his
mates, for the last eight or ten days. Hearing the shout
of “ Stop thief,” Winstanley came to the door just in time
to seize Cash, who instantly fired a pistol, and the ball
entering the constable’s body, he fell, exclaiming “ I’m a
dead man.” This was the work of an instant, but it
enabled Cunliffe to come up, who immediately grappled
with Cash, and threw him down. While struggling on
the ground John M‘Donald (a tailor) rendered effective
assistance to Cunliffe, while Mr. Oldfield held his legs to
prevent him from injuring Cunliffe and M'Donald by
kicking. M‘Donald, on observing that Cash had grasped
another pistol and was preparing to discharge it, tem-
porarily let go his hold, when Mr. Oldfield abandoned
the legs of Cash in order to catch hold of his hands. The
pistol, at this time, was discharged, the ball wounding
Cunliffe slightly in the hand, and as Mr. Oldfield was
leaning over Cash, it struck the left side of his nose,
entering the right cheek, and lodging under the right eye.
The two constables, Agar and Thomas, who first gave
the alarm, now came up, and by their assistance, and
with the aid of others around (of whom we may mention
Mr. Thomas Moss), Cash, after a most determined re-
sistance, was secured. The constables cowardly kicked
him about the head ; he beaten to such an extent
he could not be recognised when taken before Mr.
Gunn. On his person was found two watches, and
a pair of pocket pistols.”


On September 15th, Cash was arraigned before the
court and indicted for the wilful murder of Peter Win-
stanley, before His Honor Justice Montague. The in-
formation was long and elaborate, and to that informa-
tion he pleaded in a firm voice, “ Not Guilty.” Mr.
M‘Dougall rose and said he would defend the prisoner.
During the evidence of Constable Agar, Cash was seen
to laugh most contemptuously. His counsel, Mr.
M‘Dougall raised a series of objections, and quoted
several legal points, and pleaded jurisdiction He was
found guilty and sentenced to death.
At that period a series of able, logical, and philo-
sophical articles appeared in Murray’s Reviewemi-
nating from Robert Lathrop Murray, with refer-
ence to the jurisdiction, and through this powerful
and unanswerable appeal to the cause of mercy and
justice, the case was submitted to the English judges,
and through them Her Majesty granted Cash a respite.
He was banished to Norfolk Island for life. He, with
difficulty, escaped the tyrannical and brutal disposition of
John Price.
When the establishment of Norfolk Island was
broken up, he received an appointment upon his return
to Van Diemen’s Land, to take charge of Government
gardens. Some months previous to this he was married
to a respectable woman.
To use Cash’s own words, “ While here my wife
brought me a sen, who is now growing into a young man,
and who, I earnestly trust, may be more fortunate in his
way through life than his father.” Cash resigned his
situation and went to New Zealand, where he remained
four years, after which he returned to Tasmania, and,
having saved a little money purchased a farm at
Glenorchy, where he passed the .remainder of his days in
calm and tranquil enjoyment of rural retirement.
Jones’ career was of short duration after the capture
of Cash. He was joined by two absconders named
Moore and Platt. They committed various depradations.
The principal one was at Mr. Campbell’s, Broadmarsh,


where they behaved in an atrocious manner to a poor
old woman named Harriet Devereaux. She was acting
in the capacity of housekeeper to Mrs. Campbell, and
was supposed to have money. They were arrested
through the instrumentality of Mrs, B , who used
to harbour the former trio. Mrs. B , at the time
of the capture, was in their company, dressed in a
blue serge skirt and black hat, but left the hut some
short time before the attack was made, and on her
return the hut was immediately surrounded by the
police, headed by Mr. William Morton, of Westbury, who
set it on fire, at the same tiijie calling upon Jones and his
party to surrender. Moore, one of the gang, crepi out
side the hut on his hands and knees, but was shot by
one of the constables. Jones came out next, and received
a heavy charge of shot in the face, which deprived him of
sight, but they did not fire at Platt as they considered
him harmless. They were conveyed to Richmond,
where Moore deposed before Major Schaw, that they had
been harboured by Mrs. B ,at the Dromedary. The
police were at once despatched to Cobb’s Hill, where
they found watches and other property concealed in the
thatch of the house. B was at once apprehended,
but he and his wife were subsequently released. A man
named Alder, who occupied the hut where Jones and his
mates were captured, was sentenced to fourteen years’,
transportation, but he was also set at liberty soon after-
wards. It was supposed that Jones was totally blind
when executed, but such was not the case, as the sight of
one of his eyes was partially restored.
JACKY JACKY AND OTHERS.
In the years ’44 and ’45 there was a large influx of
criminals. At the various probation stations and road
parties there were congregated as many as 400 prisoners
at each of the various stations. The result was, a number
of men took the bush, there being as many as twenty


distinct parties roaming the country and plundering the
settlers, many of whom were soon captured. The parties
of most notoriety were, Jacky Jacky’s (William Westwood)
and Daniel Priest’s. The fatal termination of Westwood
I have previously mentioned. He was the leader of
the outbreak at Norfolk Island, and committed several
murders. Priest and party were longer in the field.
July 16th, 1844, Priest and party arrived at Mr. John
Connell’s, at Jacob’s Sugar Loaf. Having secured Mr.
Connell and the servants, Smith went upstairs to Mrs.
Connell; she opened the door to admit him ;he entered,
and she immediately fastened the hasp and ran down-
stairs. The man who was standing guard over them was
a little nonplussed; she availed herself of his momentary
confusion and grasped him round his body, and called
upon the men to assist her, which was promptly done.
Smith escaped out of the window : he then fired into the
room, and made off. Priest, being outside, followed.
Fortunately the shot took no effect. This was the second
time Mrs. Connell was the means of capturing bush-
rangers.
The following month, two armed bushrangers (one
being the man Smith who escaped from Mrs Connell’s)
visited Mr. Joseph Johnson, near Green Ponds. They
bailed up the inmates, and also Mr G. Beaumont, who
happened to be on a visit, and placed them in the kitchen.
They plundered from Mr Johnson nearly in cash,
and 18s from Beaumont, with his double-barrelled gun,
and a rifle belonging to the house ; they also stole a
quantity of tea, pork, linen, etc., pressing into their
service, to carry the t- swag,” Mr John’s shepherd, who
returned in about twenty minutes. To enumerate the
numerous places where they committed depredations
would only weary my readers.
The latter part of July, 1845, Priest and party
attempted to commit a robbery in the neighbourhood of
Cressy. They were met by a party of constables. In
running away, Priest was shot in the sole of the foot, the
ball smashing the bones, and he was arrested. On the


9th October, at the Supreme Court, Priest was charged
with robbing Mr. G. Lucas, on the 25th June, being at
the time armed with a gun. He pleaded guilty. His
Honor, the Judge, reminded him that it was a capital
offence he was charged with.
The Rev. Chas, Price, feeling deeply interested in the
unfortunate culprit, got up a petition, it was signed by
every minister of various denominations. Mr. Theodore
Bartley, with his humane and large heartedness, actively
interested himself in their behalf, taking the petition into
the country and obtained the signatures of influential
settlers. The prayer of the petition was gracefully
granted and the man was reprieved.
DALTON and KELLY.
From the years ’45 to ’53 very little bushranging
was heard of, only minor affairs. The peaceful slumbers
of the colonists were disturbed by Dalton and Kelly.
Dalton was an old offender, who had been arrested for
bushranging in the year ’4O, and was transported for life
to Norfolk Island. And when that Ocean Bastille was
broken up he was forwarded to Port Arthur. A short
time afterwards he was allowed to go to Hobart I own,
where he committed some misdemeanor, and was sent to
the Jerusalem road party. Here he induced Kelly, who
was a short sentenced Irish probationist, to take to the
bush. They committed various depredations prior to
visiting Mr. Lord, Bona Vista. The Avoca constables
were informed of them being there, and on Daiton seeing
Buckmaster leading his force up, he immediately raised
his piece and said, “There is that old dog Buckmaster
that beat me in Avoca watchhouse.” He then fired and
shot the man dead; using the other barrel of his piece
he fired at another constable, and wounded him in his
leg. From the disirict constable the bushrangers took a
gold watch and over £2O in money. There were at Mr.
Lord’s at the same time several young ladies, who were


all summoned together. The house was ransacked, and
the robbers took possession of between £ too and £2OO
in money, several watches, and articles of jewellery. They
then ordered Mr Frank Lord to provide for them two of
the best horses in the stable, and mounting these they
proceeded to the Inn kept by Mr. Duxberry, at Stony
Creek, where they bailed up about twelve men, including
two unarmed constables. They compelled Mr. Dux-
berry to hand over £ 5O. a gold watch and chain, and
other valuable articles.
After leaving Duxberry’s they met a Mr. Sykes, a
person from Melbourne, and made him deliver up
giving him six shillings to carry him on his journey.
They told Mr. Sykes that their names were Dalton and
Kelly, and that they meant to leave the colony. Mr.
Sykes recognised Dalton.
On the evening of Thursday, the bushrangers visited
Vaucluse, the residence of Mr R. Bayles, during the
absence of Mr. and Mrs. Bayles, and carried off some
articles of value. They said they intended to visit other
settlers on the Esk. Five days after they appeared on
the banks of the Mersey.
Jack Stafford’s statement, taken by Thomas Hains-
worth; —“ I was at work for Zeph. Williams, at Tarle-
ton, when Dalton stuck me up. I was frying some meat
for supper, and old George Atkinson, and young George,
and Davie Tweedle were in the hut with me when some-
one called out, “Come outside or I’ll blow your head
off.” The answer I made is not fit to print. The man
outside again called, “Come out or I’ll blow your head
off.” I then looked round and saw a double-barrelled
gun aimed at me and resting on the window sill. Dalton
was aiming, and I saw he had pistols in his belt. When
I said I would have my supper first, he told me to come
out and he would give me a supper. I then put on my
clothes and we all came out together. Dalton brought
us down to old Johnson’s, at Johnson’s hut. Kelly was
acting guard over a lot they had bailed up. Among them
was Cranky Kelly, David Cocker, Jack Johnson. Some-


how the old schoolmaster had given Kelly the slip, and
had gone away to Port Sorell to inform the police.
Dalton tore up silk handkerchiefs to bind our hands.
They now took us to Zeph Williams’ stores, but Zeph
was not at home. Higgins was there, and they made
him throw his money out on to the ground. They then
picked out me (Jack Stafford), Jim Schofield, Jim Flynn,
and Bill Wood, and he took old Geo. Atkinson, who was
in the police, to pilot us to old Tommy Drews, at the Don,
but they stuck up Kelsey on the way. Dalton called
Drew out, but he wanted to know who was at the door.
Dalton said, “ George Atkinson.” Drew said, “Go to
the back-door George, I want to speak to you there.”
But when Dalton jobbed his gun through the window
and told him who he was, Drew said he would have let
him in if he had known him. Dalton then demanded
Drew’s money, but he said he had none about him, as he
had just sent all away to Launceston. Dalton then said
he wanted Drew’s boat, but Drew replied he had better
go on to the Forth, where he would get a good whale
boat, as his would not go ten miles out to sea. We then
made for the Forth, and found John Williams in his craft
riding in the river. (But I forgot to tell you Drew had
a gun loaded and cocked behind the door when Dalton
got in, and this Dalton took and smasked the stock from
the barrel, and he also took a pistol from off the mantel-
shelf.) There was a boat near the jetty, and we were
made go into this, and Dalton made a target of us ; and
then hailed Williams and told him to come on shore.
Williams said he would not, and Tom Clarkson, D.
Constable could be seen on Williams’ craft dodging
round the mast and trying to aim at Dalton. He could
not spot him, however, without shooting some of us.
When Williams would not come ashore Dalton threatened
to burn down his house. Williams said, “ Don’t burn
the house ; there’s the boat and the oars and some kegs ;
take them, but spare the house, as I have a large family
of little children.” Meantime Dalton had taken us out
of the boat and put us alongside Mrs. Williams, at the


garden fence, and there made a target of the lot of us.
Kelly had nothing to say, all he did was to obey Dalton.
They then picked out me, Jim Flynn, Bill Wood, and
Jim Schofield, and we rowed to Penquin Island, off the
Leven. We landed here and made a' sail out of two
sheets, which had been taken from a bed at Williams’.
We started about six o’clock in the evening from the
island, and next morning we sighted land, which Dalton
said was Port Phillip. I said it was the same land we
left the night before, and we had a bit of a surge, because
Dalton did not like to be contradicted. It was the same
place, however, and we landed and stayed ashore all day.
In the afternoon we saw Tom Clarkson making his way
towards Emu Bay. Dalton gave chase, but could not
catch him ; however, he gave him a fright. He (Clark-
son) threw away his swag and planted under a log. We
started that evening for Melbourne, and at about three
o’clock next day we saw land, but I cannot tell where. It
was ninety miles from Port Phillip. This would be the
20th January, 1853. We were stuck up on the 17th.
We landed near Kilcunda Cattle Station. We left the
boat there. Dalton and Kelly left us and started for
Melbourne, and we bid them good-bye for ever —at least
I hope so Seven miles from Kilcunda we pulled up at
a station and were told that two men said we were coming,
and if they put us up lor the night they would be liable
to be fined £SO for each man sheltered. Then the
Victorian police arrested us as part of a gang ot bush-
rangers. We had been lying in some reeds all night
near some inlet. We would have crossed the inlet, but
the boat was on the other side and the man away.
During the night someone made off with the boat, and
when we turned out of the reeds in the morning, two
mounted police came upon us. They were mixing us up
with sticking-up job, when the overseer of a station near
said we could not be connected with the robbers, for he
had seen me away from the job ; he knew me by my
limp he said —I had a bad knee. They then took us to
the station, fed us, and gave us a gun a-piece, and told us


if we met either Dalton or Kelly to shoot them. In this
way we were taken to Melbourne ; about five miles from
Melbourne we cried out for food. The police sent Jim
Flynn to a pub, for tucker, but he could not get any. He,
however, brought us a glass of brandy each, and when
taking back the tray and glasses he bolted. He never
was caught again as far as I know. From Melbourne
they sent us to Launceston, and there we were kept on a
charge of helping Dalton and Kelly to escape. Old
Wingy (Lieutenant Gunn, P.M.) would have it we could
have taken them if we had tried, and kept putting off our
trial for six months. At last we were turned up and told
we must appear again at the Queen’s pleasure. Well, so
far, she has never wanted me yet.”
On the 4th February, between n and 12 p.m.,
Dalton entered a coffee shop in Bourke-street, Melbourne,
in company with a man who had engaged to put him on
board the Northumberland, at daylight the next morning,
from Sandridge, for which he was to pay £4. Dalton
asked the proprietors of the shop if they could change
him some Van Diemen’s Land notes for gold, as he was
about to embark for England.
They could not do it, but a gentleman named Brice,
formerly a cadet in the police force, suspecting all was
not right, said that he could, as he was a gold broker, if
Dalton would only accompany him to his office. To
this Dalton consented, and placed three £2O and one
notes, of the Launceston Bank, in his hand. The
night was extremely dark; the stranger led the way,
Dalton and the boatman following close behind. After
proceeding some little way they turned into the yard of
the police court. Their guide then showed them the
door of his alleged office, which was no other than the
clerk’s room of the Swanston-street watchhouse. Once
in, Mr. Brice stated that he had brought these men on
suspicion of having come by the notes wrongfully. Dal-
ton made no observation beyond affirming that they were
his, and making some remarks relative to his being
brought there on so paltry an accusation.


The watchhouse-keeper, finding that Mr. Brice had
no charge to prefer against him, returned the notes to
Dalton, who was about to leave the office, when Detec-
tives Williams, Murray, and Eason pounced upon him,
and fixed him in a corner. Dalton endeavoured to draw
a pistol from his belt, but was prevented, and over-
powered. Finding himself mastered, he said, “You
have got the reward of ;my name is Dalton.” He
then said that if he had only seen the bars of the station-
house window as he was entering he would have sent a
ball through his conductor. He was then handcuffed
and searched,
The articles found were as follows; —Two large
horse-pistols and one small one, all heavily loaded; two
gold watches and guards, one of which was a lady’s watch
of most chaste workmanship, and to one of the guards a
gold locket was attached; a silver watch and guard, two
gold chains of a massive description, three gold rings, a
nugget of gold, eighty-nine sovereigns, and two half-
sovereigns, three notes and one jf, 10 note, of the
Commercial Hank of Van Diemen’s Land; 15s. in silver,
two leather bags, a purse with clasp, a steel stock buckle,
a specimen, a gold pencil case with yellow topaz at top, a
ring in a case set with diamonds, pearls, and torquoises;
a gold seal with profile engraved thereon, a short gold
chain with seal and key attached, in the shape of a dog’s
head; and two locks of hair, evidently to use as
mustachois
Dalton was brought before Dr. Greeves, J.P., at
the district court, charged with the murder of Joseph
Buckmaster, in Van Dieman’s Land. The officer
examined the prisoner and found him to correspond with
the description given in the warrant. One of the leather
bags was identified by a Mr. Sykes, who was rob v ed by
Dalton and Kelly, in Van Diemen’s Land. He was
ordered to be forwarded to Van Diemen’s Land for
examination. Dalton intended to work his passage to
England by the Northumberland, and in two or three
more hours, would have been on board. On the sth


instant, Andrew Kelly, the companion of Dalton, was
apprehended by Chief Constable Pierce, and ( onstable
Price. Notwithstanding Dalton’s assertion to the con-
trary, Mr. Pierce received private information that Kelly
was still in Melbourne, and might be found lurking about
the wharves, as he was endeavoring to procure an en-
gagement on board some homeward bound vessel, in
which he could work his passage to England. Accord-
ingly a sharp look out was kept for him. At length, a
person answering his description was seen walking with
another man along the bank of the river. The police
officers, upon coming up to the parties, formally arrested
them, on the pretence that they were runaway sailors.
Kelly was marched to one of the lock-ups, where he was
charged with wilful murder of Buckmaster, a constable
in Van Diemen’s Land. This he denied in the strongest
terms, declaring that he had never seen Van Diemen’s
Land, having just come from Adelaide. Mr. Sykes, the
party who was robbed by Dalton and Kelly, had an inter-
view with him, which Kelly did not, by any means, relish,
though he persisted in protestations of innocence. Mr
Sykes at once identified him. Kelly was also identified
by one of the boatmen who was pressed by these men
into their service, to bring them over to Victoria.
On April 7th, ’53, the prisoners were arraigned at the
Supreme Court, before Mr. Justice Horne, for wilful
murder of Buckmaster, at Avoca. There is no occasion
to go through the evidence produced ; they were both
found gui'ty. The judge asked, before sentence was
passed, if they had anything to say I was present at this
solemn occasion, and I was much surprised at the firm
and manly expression of Dalton. He said he had
nothing to say on behalf of himself, merely that it was
oppression and injustice that drove him to violence. He
wished to draw His Honor’s attention to this fact, that
Kelly was subservient to his will, it was he who persuaded
him to abscond, saying he would give him freedom, it
was he who shot Buckmaster, it was he who wounded
Collins, the constable. If His Honor would read his notes


he would see that the evidence of the various witnesses
proved it was Dalton who demanded the money or pro-
perty, and that it was he who was the principle in all the
various robberies. He would ask His Honor to have a
merciful consideration on his unfortunate companion, to'
consider his youth, and the evil consequences of associa-
ting with older offenders, and not classifying prisoners.
He could assure His Honor that Kelly was perfectly ignor-
ant of the law of being found under arms in Van
Diemen’s Land. Such an address forcibly struck me at
the time, .that Dalton was not all bad, and had circum-
stances arisen in his unfortunate career, his life may have
been a different one.


THE ESCAPE
OF THE
IRISH EXILES.
JOHN MITCHEL.
A very different class of prisoners were seen in Van
Diemen’s Land in 1850-51, when the Irish Patriots, John
Mitchel, Smith O’Brien, Meagher, McManus, Martin, and
O’Doherty—the principals of the Young Ireland Rebel-
lion of ’48 —were landed. Almost universal sympathy
was expressed for the exiles, and that sympathy alone
aided Mitchel, McManus, and O’Meagher in making
their escape from the Island.
Mitchell was not a bushranger, nor a dangerous colonist,
but one who lived solely for the cause of his birthplace—
Ireland, and his antagonism to English rule caused his
treatment as a convict. He was a journalist in Dublin,
and his paper was used as a vehicle for seditious writings,
which caused his arrest, and on the 23rd May, 1848, a
jury found him guilty of treason-felony, and he was sen-
tenced to 14 years transportation. He was removed
from Dublin to Spike Island, in Cork Harbor, on the
27th May, and thence to Bermuda, which was reached
on the 20th June. There he was held a close prisoner
at the hulks for ten months, and his health giving way he
petitioned to be removed from the Island. The oppor-
tunity occurred on April 22nd, 1849, when he sailed in
the convict ship Neptune, bound for Cape of Good Hope
with over 400 convicts on board. The Neptune had a
protracted voyage, and was forced to put into Pernam-
buco, in Brazil, South America, for provisions, and it was


not until the 14th September that the ship dropped
anchor in St. Simon’s Bay. There an unexpected diffi-
culty had to be faced by the authorites. The residents
of the colony in genera) and Cape Town in particular
objected strongly to receive convicts in their colony, and
to that effect petitioned the Governor, who refused to
allow the convicts to land pending a reply to dispatches
sent to London. To make the demonstration more
effective the colonists formed an Anti-Convict Association,
and boycotted the convict ship, the men-of-war in the
harbor, and eventually the Government officials, and
refused to supply them with provisions. For four months
the Neptune was at anchor in St. Simon’s Bay, and during
that period business in Simonstown was at a standstill,
the military having to resort to force to obtain the neces-
saries of life.
The long-looked-for dispatches at length arrived, and
on the 19th February, 1850, the Neptune sailed for Van
Diemen’s Land, there to deposit its living freight. Hobart
Town was reached on the 7th April, and on the 12th of
the same month John Mitchel left the ship, after having
walked its decks for over eleven months. He gave his
parole of honor, and was allowed to reside at Bothwell as
a ticket-of-leave man. He was joined by his wife and
family in August of the following year, and he lived com-
fortably at Nant Cottage, Bothwell, where he occupied a
farm of 200 acres. Mitchel, at that period, was a stature
of average height, of sft. gin. or roin., showing good
muscular development, though evidently suffering from
long confinement, and appeared in a delicate state of
health. The chin was square, and the mouth showing
much detemination and resolution. Physiognimists
would perhaps say approaching obstinancy. The grey
eye was piercing, and at once seeming to say, who are
you ? and what are you ?
The real excitement connected with his sojourn in the
colony commenced two years later, when he resigned his
parole and effected his escape, and from the first evidence
to that end we take up his Journal:


13th January , 1833 . —A new personage has appeared
amongst us —dropped from the sky, or from New York.
When I arrived in Hobart Town, two or three days ago,
I went first, of course, to St. Mary’s Hospital, where I
found St. Kevin in his laboratory. He opened his eyes
wide when he saw me. drew me into his private room,
and bid me guess who had come to Van Diemen’s Land.
Guessing was out of the question, so I waited his revela-
tion. “ Pat Smyth I”
“ Transported ?” “ No, my boy : commissioned by
the Irish Directory in New York to procure the escape
of one or more of us, O’Brien especially, —and with
abundant means to secure a ship for San Francisco, and
to provide for rescuing us, if necessary, out of the hands
of the police magistrate, after withdrawing the parole in
due form. He travels this day by the day coach from
Launceston, and is to meet O’ Brien and me this evening
at Bridgewater (ten miles off), instead of coming into
Hobart Town direct You will go with me. O’Brien is
to ride from New Norfolk, and we can consult on the
affair. There cannot be a doubt of success,” added St.
Kevin, “ for at least one of us.”
I shook my head at first, which the saint was going to
resent as a personal insult. So we agreed to say nothing
about it till we should meet our friends in the evening.
Smyth’s mission certainly looks serious ; for he is a cool-
headed rebel, by no means likely to come so far without
a plan, or to play at any child’s game.
St. Kevin borrowed a horse from a priest. I rode my
own ; and ai the hour appointed we met O’Brien, almost
at the door of the hotel, mounted on old Squirrel. The
coach had not yet arrived. Seven o’clock came, and no
coach, though it was fully due. Eight o’clock, half-past
eight, and still no coach. All this time we spent saunter-
ing in the garden, talking of the matter in hand. The
difficulty, and almost impossibility of the whole four of
us availing ourselves of the chance, occurs at once.
O’Brien is clearly of opinion that the only mode of dis-
charging ourselves of our parole will be to withdraw it


formally, each in the police office of his own allotted dis-
trict, giving the authorities full opportunity to take him
into custody if they are able (if not able, it will be their
misfortune) —that this must be done within proper busi-
ness hours, from ten till three —that any previous bribery
will be quite legitimate —even to buying the police magis-
trates, if there be money enough—that any force or
violence (O’Brien says, short of killing) will then be
allowable if the rascals attempt to secure us within their
offices, —but that, in any event, we are bound to present
ourselves in proper person, and make the magistrate
clearly understand (within his own office, and with his
constables about him) that our parole is at an end, that
our ticket-of-leave is resigned, and that we are going
away.
That we should all four do this simultaneously, in pur
respective police offices, appears, on full consideration,
impossible : and O’Brien insists that I shall take this
turn. I propose another plan, by which we should get
ourselves placed under arrest in one spot, and in
circumstances that would make a rescue easy; but
O’Brien and O’Doherty hold to the mode of procedure I
have already described.
Some mischance had delayed the coach, and the
hour came when O’Brien and St. Kevin must return to
their respective “registered lodgings.” They left me, and
I engaged a bed at the hotel for the night. Half an-hour
after they had gone the coach drove up ; it was dark ; I
stood in the hall, which was brightly lighted by a lamp.
All the passengers left the coach, and walked into the
hotel. Amongst others a young man stepped down from
the coach, and entered. He looked me full in the face,
and I him. It was Smyth : but neither of us, after four
years, knew the other. I listened, as he went to the
office and engaged a bed ; yet I did not know his voice.
He came out to get his portmanteau, and we passed each
other again in the hall —“ It must be Smyth,” I said;
“ nobody else would be stopping here, within ten miles
of Hobart Town.” So I followed him out, and went


round after him to the outer side of the coach, where
all was dark. “Is your name Smyth ?” He turned upon
me suddenly; clearly he thought it was detective —
thought that he had been traced all the way to the very
spot where he was to meet us—that he was a prisoner,
and all was over. I hastened to undeceive him, for he
looked strongly tempted to shoot me and bolt. “All
right, Smyth ; silence; follow me into the parlour.” So
I strolled carelessly in. Presently he joined me, and the
coach drove off. We spent the evening together in a
private room; and each had much to ask ; but we
deferred speaking particularly of his plans till we should
meet the rest.
The next evening at O’Brien’s lodging in New Norfolk,
Smyth explained his instructions—to secure the escape
of O’Brien and of me, or either of us, if both could not
go —Smyth himself being ready and willing to take the
principal share in all the risk of rescuing us by force, if
force were needed. O’Brien’s “sentence ” being for life,
we both earnestly pressed on him that he should first
avail himse.f of Smyth’s services. He entered fully into
his reasons for declining—he had already had his chance,
had made the attempt to escape from Maria Island —it
had failed, and the expenses incurred thereby had been
defrayed by public money. This , he said, vs,your chance.
Besides, you have stronger motives to betake yourself to
America than I have: and you will be more at home
there. It may be, he continued, that the British Govern-
ment may find it, some time or other, their best policy to
set me free, without making submission to them ; in that
case I return to Ireland; if I break away against their
will Ireland is barred against me for ever.
O’Brien, as his friends know, is immovable; therefore,
we soon desisted from the vain attempt to shake his
resolution ; and I then declared I would make the
attempt, in the way he prescribed.
Yesterday Smyth and I set out for Bothwell, I on
horseback, he in a sort of public conveyance; /or there
is a rough road up the valley of the Derwent as far as


Hamilton, where the Clyde falls into it. Hamilton is a
pretty straggling village, with a good hotel, a police office,
and jail of course, a church, a public pound, and about
thirty grog-shops. Hence to Bothwell, the way lies
through mere forest and wild hills. A saddle-horse was
not to be had, so Smyth was obliged to hire a small
spring-cart, with a man to drive it, and I rode alongside.
A pleasant journey of twenty miles through summer
woods, and here we are at Nant Cottage.
As we passed through the township of Bothwell I
turned aside from our direct course to ask for letters at
the post office. Smyth, having discharged his convey-
ance, came with me on foot. “ Where is this formidable
police office?” he said. “Come and see; it ic in the
same building as the post office.” As we approached he
narrowly reconnoitered the premises ; and while I asked
for letters at the window, he walked coolly into the
police office, and into the magistrate’s room, surveyed
that gentleman a moment, and his police clerk sitting at
his desk —then crossed the hall, strolled into the chief-
constable’s office ; made reconnaissance of its exact situ-
ation, of the muskets ranged in their rack, of the hand-
cuffs and other instruments of convict coercion hanging
on the wall —then came out; observed the watch-house
opposite; the constables lazily walking about (one of
them civilly holding my horse); the police-barrack on a
little hill facing us, and the other features in the scene of
future operations.
“I think,” he said, “three or four men, or at most
half-a-dozen, with Colt’s revolvers, might sack the town-
ship, and carry off the police magistrate. A great man
is Mr. Colt —one ot the greatest minds in our country.”
The cottage is in a stir to-day. Smyth had been
intimately acquainted with us in Dublin, and also with
*John Knox. Since then he had been roving over Ireland,
trying, like the rest, to kindle an insurrection that would
not burn—then escaping by a Galway emigrant ship, in
* John Martin.


the guise of a friese-coated peasant, to America, —making
off life by precarious methods in New York—editing a
newspaper in Pittsburg,—agitating, in the New York Sun,
the Nicaragua railroad question, and striving to rile up
the American mind against England thereupon ; in short,
discharging like Rielly, all the duties and functions of a
true rebel and refugee. He is also, from of old, a close
friend of Meagher, and gives us a pleasant account of all
the actings and sayings of that ex-prisoner, formerly of
the Dog’s Head, Lake Sorel, but now of the Metropolitan
Hotel, Broadway; how the gobemouches worried him;
how the old confederates shed tears of joy over him ;
how the priests scowled upon him: how the ladies
smiled upon him ; all which one can very well imagine.
Smyth is to stay with us two or three days, then proceed
to other parts of the island, to consult our friends and
make needful arrangements.
Already I begin to snuff the air of the upper world,
and to see daylight through the opening gates of Hades.
Bothwell, January 16th, 1853. —Smyth (or, as we
prefer to call him, Nicaragua , from his Central American
labours) has gone to Melbourne to negotiate about a ship,
Hobart Town being considered more dangerous, as well
as offering fewer facilities. I brought him up by Lake
Sorel, thence down the mountains to the great northern
road. We expect to hear how the mission speeds there
within a month or six weeks.
John Knox agrees to avail himself of this chance also,
seeing that he and I both live in the same district, and
have one common police office to deal with.
If the thing succeed, I must leave my family at Nant
Cottage, to follow under Nicaragua’s escort as best they
may, to San Francisco. Yet my wife does not shrink
from all this risk and inconvenience She sees all the
terrible evils and disadvantages of rearing up a family in
such a country as this, and under such circumstances as
ours ; and instead of dissuading, urges me strongly on
the enterprise. Of course we say nothing about our in-
tention to any of our acquaintances here, as success must


depend entirely upon utter secrecy, until the moment of
making our formal communication to the authorities.
Feb. 12th. —No intelligence yet from Melbourne. A
good horse being essential to our business, in addition to
our present stock, I have been on the look-out for one.
Mr. Davis, even the police magistrate himself, had one
of the best in this district —a white horse, half Arab, full
of game, and of great endurance. I knew Mr. Davis had
offered him for sale ; and the idea pleased me, of buying
my enemy’s horse to ride off upon; which would have
the double advantage of strengthening me, and of weak-
ening the enemy. Accordingly I secured the horse.
Mr. Davis, on delivering him, very conscientiously thought
it his duty to give me a warning. “ I must tell you, Mr.
Mitchel,” he said, “ that if you attempt to put this horse
in harness he will smash everything—he never was in
harness but once, and it would be dangerous to try it
again.” I said I was aware of that peculiarity in the
horse. “It is right,” he continued, “to mention the
fact to you, as I do not know the precise work you want
him to do.” “ Merely to carry me on his back wherever
I want to go—some time or other probably on a long
journey.” “ Well,” said Mr. Davis, “ I know you ride a
good deal, and you may depend upon Donald for that.”
So I have my new horse out at Nant, and intend to
give him regular work and feed him well, that he may
be ready when called upon for his long journey.
March ißth. —At length a letter from the indefatigable
Nicaragua. He says “he has made up his party for the
diggings, and that all goes well with him ” —by which I
understand that he has succeeded in procuring a ship.
Farther he says, “ that he is to meet the rest of his party
of diggers at the Bendigo Creek ” (which is at present
the favourite gold region) “ three days hence ; ” which is
nothing more or less than a notice that he will meet John
Knox and me at Lake on the day specified.
25th . —We rode up to the lakes on the appointed day,
met Nicaragua, accompanied by John Connell, of the
excellent family of the Sugar Loaf. All is right. The


brigantine Waterlily, owned by John Macnamara, of
Sydney, is to come into Hobart Town, clear thence for
New Zealand, then coast round to Spring Bay, on the
eastern side of the island, about seventy miles from Both-
well, and lie there for two days, under pretence of taking
in timber. At Spring Bay there is, of course, a police
station ; but it never has more than three or four con-
stables, and we are to count on disposing of them by
bribery or otherwise. Mr. Macnamara, the owner, comes
himself with the ship, and will go round in her to Spring
Bay to see us safely off. Nicaragua takes Fleur-de-lis,
and rides down to Hobart Town to-morrow.
April gth. —All is ready. The Waterlily sails from
Hobart Town to-morrow, and will be in Spring Bay on
Sunday night, at anchor, with Mr. Macnamara’s flag (a
red cross with the letter Min one corner). Knox and I,
who are entirely passive, and do what Smyth bid us, are
to present ourselves on Monday, in the police office,
withdraw our parole, and offer ourselves to be taken into
custody. Nicaragua brings with him five friends, all
armed, as good lookers-on. If we escape the clutches of
the Bothwell police we are to ride straight to Spring Bay,
a relay of horses being provided for us at half the distance,
arrive there during the night, and be ready to embark at
dawn. Then, up anchor, and away for the Golden Gate.
If the police boat at Spring Bay attempt to board the
captain engages to run her down, or sink her if needful.
Monday Evening , Bothwell , —At Bothwell still. Our
plot blown to the moon ! Yesterday we were informed
through a friendly resident at Bothwell, that Nicaragua’s
whole plan has been intimately known to the Governor
for a fortnight—that the ship we were to embark in was
known —the place where we were to embark—the signal
we were to use —the friends who were to accompany us,
—that the Waterlily was purposely allowed to clear out
at Hobart Town without examination, for New Zealand;
and finally, that a reinforcement of constables had been
sent up from Hobart Town to Bothwell, together with
two additional chiefs of police, to be in readiness for any


move on our part. This morning I discovered that two
armed costables had kept watch all night on the hill
behind the cottage.
Council of war at Nant to day. We had not, of course,
calculated on having to deal with more than the ordinary
force of constabulary stationed in Bothwell district; the
attempt had always been regarded as contingent on our
intention remaining a profound secret till the last moment.
And certainly the police magistrate having charge of the
district, and having at his command a force purporting to
be sufficient for all police purposes in that district, for
the coercion, if needful, of all the prisoners in it, —had
no right to such odds against us. If we should go in, and
attempt to do our business in the mode intended, there
would be, in the first place, a conflict in Bothwell Street;
and if we succeed at Bothwell, against all odds, there
would, doubtless, be another force at Spring Bay, where
the vessel itself might be already in the hands of the
police.
If we thought proper, indeed, to dispense with the
formal business before the magistrate, there was nothing
to prevent our riding away from Nant this day (or any
other day), notwithstanding the vigilance of the constable
patrol; and the government, in that case, would ceitainly
never hear of us again ; for, with good horses, and all
the population at our side, we might remain a year in the
island in their despite, until another ship could take us
up at the same point. But neither Martin nor I admitted
this idea for one moment.
Council of war, therefore, decided that the enterprise
could not be attempted this day, or by the help of the
Waterlily. Our friends dispersed ; O’K northward,
R and C—— south, Smyth and Connell have
started lor Spring Bay to send the ship off, and all is
over for the present.
But Nicaragua and I are determined to have another
trial for it.
April 12th. —Note from John Connell. Nicaragua
has been arrested. He found a large force of constables


waiting for him at Spring Bay ; they surrounded the hotel
the moment he had dismounted, and took him into
custody as John Mitchel. Connell had parted from him
before reaching Spring Bay, and had, fortunately, carried
off his papers. In vain Nicaragua protested he was not
John Mitchel: he was thrust into the watch-house, and
kept there all night. From the windows he saw the little
Waterlily in the bay with the signal at her mast-head;
she was waiting for us still. He was thence carried in
custody, through the forest, to Hobart Town, and lodged
in the police offices on his journey. The chief constable
of Richmond knew me by sight; he volunteered his evi-
dence that they had the wrong man ; but the magistrate
of Richmond would not hear his testimony, would not
interfere in any manner with the execution of the warrant,
and so, poor Nicaragua was passed on. One night he
travelled all night, in an open spring waggon, and the
weather is becoming very cold; so that by the time he
arrived in Hobart Town, as well as from excitement and
disappointment as from hardship, he was in a high fever.
After being kept some hours in custody at Hobart Town,
he was discharged without a word of apology or explana-
tion, save that it was all a mistake. He now lies ex-
tremely ill in the house of a worthy friend of ours.
Ijth—Hobart Town. —I rode down, yesterday, to see
how it fared with Nicaragua; found him ill enough, but
convalescent. I went straight to the police office; saw
the gentlemen who officiates as police clerk ; told him I
understood there was a warrant against me —if so, here
I was ; that I understood a gentlemen had been arrested
in my name ; that I wanted to know who had issued this
warrant, and for what reason ; that I requested him to go
and inform the police magistrate I was here. He said it
was all a mistake, and treated it as a good joke. How-
ever, I told him I could not see the jocoseness of it —and
neither could Mr. Smyth—that I conceived the arrest of
Mr. Smyth for me , at Spring Bay, was not only an out-
rage upon him, but upon me still more; that they were
all aware I had promised not to leave the island without


first giving the proper authorities the opportunity of
arresting me; but this proceeding assumed that I was
making my escape clandestinely, and therefore disgrace-
fully. Mr. Midwood said, if I would be good enough to
sit down he would go and tell the police magistrate I was
here, and what I had said. In a few minutes he came
back, accompanied by two other well-dressed men, whom
he introduced to me by names which I forget. I asked
who they were—“ Chief Constables of Hobart Town.”—
“ And you have come to take a look at me ?” Chief
Constables bowed.
I came back to Nicaragua’s bedside almost exasperated.
He agrees with me, that the setting a watch upon my
house, and the issuing of a warrant to apprehend me in
the act of “ absconding,” are most insulting proceedings,
especially as the rascals must know that neither these pre-
cautions, nor any other precautions could have retained
me on the island for the last three years, nor for one
week if I had thought fit to abscond. He also is griev-
ously outraged on his own account; and we have there-
fore resolved, so soon as he is sufficiently recovered, that
we two alone shall pay out formal visit to Mr. Davis’s
office (with revolvers in our pockets)—and, if necessary,
take our chance of a ship afterwards.
June 6th. —Nearly two months have gone by since the
arrest of Nicaragua. He recovered his health and
strength slowly. He is at present with us in Nant Cottage,
and the day after to morrow we shall probably proceed to
business. A ship bound for Sydney is to sail that night
from Hobart Town ; and if we can reach Hobart Town
after dark, the agents of the ship, who are friendly to me,
will place me on board at the mouth of the river, after all
clearances by police and custom house authorities. Nic-
aragua has been judiciously bribing so far as was prudent;
but with all he can do in this way the odds against us
will be heavy at all times in the police office. John
Knox has decided on keeping out of the affair this time;
because if we miss the vessel at Hobart Town, we might
hen have to spend several weeks on the island, and be


subjected to much hardship (for it is now the depth of
winter), and assume various disguises—for which he is
not adapted.
Bth. —The town is full of police to-day; we put the
business off till to-morrow. In the meantime I send
James down to Hobart Town to ask the agents if they
could delay the ship for a few hours longer. Whatever
be the answer, however, we mean to see the affair out
to-morrow. By the prudent employment of some money,
Nicaragua has made sure that there will not be more
than the ordinary guard of constables present. We would
bribe them all if we dared trust the rascals. As matters
stand we are certain to meet not only the police magis-
trate himself, but also the police clerk, a respectable man,
not purchasable by money, and at least two constables,
neither of whom has been bribed, and both of whom will
probably, nnder the eye of the magistrate, attempt to do
their “ duty.”
12th. — In Westbury District , full seventy miles from
Bothwell. On the 9th, as we had resolved before, Nica-
ragua and I mounted at Nant Cottage—he on Donald, I
on Fleur-de-lis. The eldest of the boys walked through
the fields into Bothwell,- that he might be ready at the
police office door to hold our horses. Before we had
ridden a quarter of a mile from the house we met James
(boy number two), coming at a gallop from Hobart Town.
He handed me a note from the shipping agent. Ship
gone ; it was impossible to detain her any longer without
exciting suspicion; and the shipping agent conjured me
to give the thing up or defer it.
As we now stood, therefore, their was no arrangement
for escaping out of the island at all; and if we got clear
out of the police office it was a matter of indifference to
me whether I should ride north, south, or east. West-
ward lay impassable wilderness.
We overtook Mr. Russell, of Dennistoun, on our way
into Bothwell. He asked me, with some interest, what
prices I had got for certain grass-fed wethers, which I
had sold a few days before ; also whether I meant to put


any of my land in crop for the ensuing season ; to all
of which I replied with much agricultural sagacity and
pastoral experience. All the while I saw John Knox
and the boy number one hurrying along near the river
bank, that they might be in the township as soon as I.
At the entrance of the village Mr. Russell parted com-
pany with us, and called at a house. Nicaragua and I
rode leisurely down the main street. At the police-
barrack, on the little hill, we saw eight or nine constables,
all armed, and undergoing a sort of drill. At the police
office door there was, as usual, a constable on guard.
Mr. Barr, a worthy Scotch gentleman, and magistrate of
the district, was standing within a few yards of the gate.
We dismounted. I walked in first, through the little
gate leading into the court, through the door, which
opened into a hall or passage, and thence into the court-
room, where I found his worship sitting as usual. Near
him sat Mr. Robinson, the police clerk. “Mr Davis,” I
said, “ here is a copy of a note which 1 have just des-
patched to the Governor j I have thought it necessary to
give you a copy.” The note was as follows .
“ Bothwell, Bth June, 1853.
“ To the Lieut.-Gov., &c.—
u gi r- —X hereby resign, the ‘ ticket-of-leave, and withdraw my
« I shall forthwith present myself before the police magistrate
of Bothwell, at his office, and show him a copy of this note, and
offer myself to be taken into custody.
“ Your obedient servant,
John Mitchel.”
Mr. Davis took the note ; it was open. “Do you wish
me,” he said, “to read it? ” “ Certainly, it was for that
I brought it.” He glanced over the note, and then
looked at me. That instant Nicaragua came in and
planted himself at my side. His worship and his clerk
both seemed somewhat discomposed at this ; for they
knew the “ Correspondent of the New York Tribune
very well, as also his errand from New York. I have no
doubt that Mr Davis thought I had a crowd outside.
There is no other way of accounting for his irresolution.


Then I said, “You see the purport of that note, sir; it is
short and plain. It resigns the thing called ‘ ticket-of-
leaye and revokes my promise, which bound me so long
as I held that thing.” °
Still he made no move, and gave no order. So I re-
peated my explanation: “You observe, sir, that my
parole is at an end from this moment; and I came here
to be taken into custody pursuant to that note.” All this
while there was a constable in the adjoining room, besides
the police clerk, and the guard at the door; yet ’still his
worship made no move. “ Now, good morning, sir ” I
said, putting on my hat. The hand of Nicaragua was
playing with the handle of the revolver in his coat. I had
a ponderous riding-whip in my hand, besides pistols in
my breast pocket. The moment I said “Good morning ”
Mr. Davis shouted, “No-no ! stay here ! Rainsford !
Constables ! ” The police clerk sat at his desk looking
into vacancy. We walked out together through the hall;
the constable in the district constable’s office, who gene-
rally acts as his clerk, now ran out, and on being desired
to stop us, followed us through the court, and out into the
street, but without coming very near. At the little gate
leading out into the street we expected to find the man
on guard on the alert between us and our horses. But
this poor constable, though he heard the magistrate’s
orders, and the commotion, did not move. He was
holding two horses, one with each hand, and looked on
in amazement, while we passed him and jumped into our
saddles.
We concluded that we had done enough, and that
there was no reason to wait any longer; therefore
We gave the bridle-rein a shake ,
Said adieu for evermore, my dear,
And adieu for evermore !
Mr, Davis and two contables rushing against one
another—grinning residents of Bothwell on the pathway,
who knew the meaning of the performance in a moment,
and who, being commanded to stop us in the Queen’s
name, aggravated the grin into a laugh; some small boys


at a corner, staring at our horses as they galloped by, and
offering “ three to one on the white un —this is my last
impression of Bothwell on the banks of the Tasmanian
Clyde.
We crossed the river just below the town, and held on
at full speed for a mile to the south-westward ; then,
finding ourselves fairly in the forest, we pulled up, ex-
changed horses and coats, and parted. Nicaragua, on
Fleur-de-lis, rode due north for Nant Cottage, intending
to call there a moment, and then go to Oatlands, to take
the coach for Launceston. I rode on about half-a-mile
farther into the woods, and found, according to appoint-
ment, my good friend, J H , son of a worthy
English settler of those parts, an experienced bushman,,
who knows every nook in the island, and “ every bosky
bourne from side to side,” and who had undertaken to
guide me by the shortest and obscurest paths to any
point I desired. Brief was our consultation; the Hobart
Town ship having sailed, all parts of the island were alike
to me, and in all I was sure to find friends. We deter-
mined to strike northwards, and over the mountains to
this district of Westbury, which is chiefly inhabited by
Irish immigrants, and where we should be within a day’s
ride of Bass’s Straits. Where we stood then we were a
hundred and thirty miles from the sea in that direction j
but our horses were fresh. H laughed at the idea of
pursuit; and I, with the load of that foul ticket-of-leave
fairly shaken off, and my engagement discharged, felt my
pulse begin to beat with something like life. To be sure
I must yet be some weeks in the country before Nicaragua
could get a ship, and bring it round for me. Nicaragua
himself might be arrested; and, at any rate, he does not
yet know what direction I have taken. Also the govern-
ment would be sure to send special dispatches all round
the coast, to put their police on the alert, to guard every
landing place, and watch every boat; yet I was quite
secure. Having once shaken the Bothwell dust off my
feet, and resolved not to be re-taken alive, I felt myself
already a free man.


It was almost mid-winter. The weather was bright and
clear ; no snow on the ground, but keen frosts at night;
on the whole favourable for hard riding. H—— imme-
diately took me out of all ordinary tracks, and we plunged
into the wilderness of rocky wooded hills westward of
Bothwell to the Shannon river—crossed this track after
reconnoitering the road a moment, and then pierced once
more into still wilder and more desolate hills. For about
two miles we rode along the ridge that bounds the Shan-
non valley, and, for the last time, I saw the gleam and
heard the dashing of that bright river; then turned north-
east, continually ascending in the direction of Lake Sorel.
High among the mountains we had to plunge for three
miles through the dreary “Soldier’s Marsh ” (so named
from two soldiers killed there of old by bushrangers).
The marsh was frozen over, so that our horses’ feet did
not always break the ice, but occasionally slipped over it,
—a progress both perilous and slow; and after thirty-five
miles travelling we found the night darkening around us,
and Lake Sorel not yet gained. At last we heard the
barking of the stock-keeper’s dogs at “Kemp’s Hut,” —
avoided it by keeping to the left; and held on our way
for six miles further along the shore of the Lake.
It was as dark as Erebus 3 and we had still to go through
the most difficult part of the journey to the lake-river,
where we proposed to spend the night ac the hut of Mr.
Russell’s shepherd. There was a high, steep, and rocky
mountain to descend, where even in daylight the track is
not easy to find ; and H thought it prudent to call
at a hut on the shore, to procure a guide. There were
three men in the hut, the first human beings we had seen
since leaving Bothwell. They told H it would be
dangerous to attempt the descent on so dark a night; and
with the customary shepherd hospitality of these Arcadian
swains, invited us to share their fire and opossum rugs.
But we were too near Bothwell yet for this. So we got one
of them out to show us the best way to the “ saddle ” —that
is, the watershed between Lake Sorel and the lake-river,
from whence we thought we could make our own way.


The guide lost himself, and of course lost us. Told us-
that, after all, we had better come back, and that, at any
rate, he would go back himself. We thanked and paid
him for his services, and then tried to feel our way over
the edge of the mountain. We found ourselves evidently
descending, yet certainly off the track, and on very rough
ground, where to dismount and lead the horses was an
absolute necessity. Presently we came amongst preci-
pices and fields of loose rock, a mere wilderness of shat-
tered stone, but still thickly wooded ; for this gum-tree
seems to live by breathing through its leaves instead of
drawing nourishment from the soil. The horses began
to stumble against us in the darkness, striking us now
with their forefeet, and again knocking us down with
their heads. It was midnight; the frost was intense;,
we had no overcoats or other muffling; neither ourselves
nor our horses had eaten anything since breakfast; there
was no herbage, and the horses were starving; no water
near us, and we were devoured by thirst. Yet we heard
far below us, through the still night, the rush of the lake-
river, and now and then the barking of old Job’s dogs.
Neither backwards or forwards could we move one
yard ; and there, within three miles of our proposed
shelter for the night, we were forced tomake our dismal
bivouac. We lighted a fire with some dead branches (for
no true bushman goes without matches); tied our poor
horses to a honeysuckle tree ; looked to our pistols ;
picked the least polygonal stones to sit down upon ;
lighted our pipes, and prepared to spend eight hours as
jovially as possible. Soon sleep overtook us, from utter
exhaustion, and we would lie a few moments on the sharp
stones by the fire until awakened by the scorching of our
knees, while our spinal marrow was frozen into a solid
icicle. Then we would turn our backs to the fire and
sleep again ; but in five minutes our knees and toes were
frozen, our moustaches stiff with ice, our spinal marrow
dissolving away in the heat. Then up again another
smoke, another talk. .
The dawn reddened at last, and the mountains beyond


Arthur’s lakes to the west glowed purple. We expected
to find the horses stiffened and half dead, tor they were
both accustomed to be stabled and bedded at night; and
this was the most savage night I had ever experienced in
the country. But well-bred Van Diemen’s Land horses
have great life and unconquerable pluck ; they were fresh
as the dawn. We soon found the track, and in half an
hour rode up to old Job’s door. It happens that Job’s
house was the first place Meagher had stopped at for rest
and refreshment, a year and a-half ago, on his ride from
Lake Sorel; and the moment Job saw me, he knew what
business was in hand. He received us joyfully, bade his
wife prepare breakfast, and we went with him into the
stable, to get our horses fed. Then breakfast before a
roaring fire. Meagher, it seems, had shaved off his
moustache here for the better disguise; so, after breakfast,
Job presented me with a razor, looking glass, basin, and
soap, wherewith I made a complete transfiguration of
myself. I wrote a short note to my wife, to tell her which
way I had taken, and without the least hesitation entrusted
it to Job Sims, who was to go over to Bothwell the next
day with some cattle for Mr. Russell, and who undertook
to deliver the note personally at Nant. This man is an
Englishman, and has been an old prisoner ; yet I know
he would not sell that note to the enemy for a thousand
pounds. Mounted after three quarters of an hour’s delay :
and Job rode with us two miles, to show us the ford of
the Lake River. After that H and I held on over a
rough mountain, but with a pretty well defined track.
We intended to make first for the house of a Mr. Grover,*
whose son, a well-affected Tasmanian native, was known
to be ready to aid me in any such affair. Neither of us
had ever seen this young Grover ; his father is a magis-
trate of the colony ; but we had no hesitation about
going straight up to the house.
As we slowly descended the narrow track, at a sudden
turn among the trees, we encountered two gentlemen,
* Grover is not the gentleman’s real name.


riding up the mountain. We exchanged salutations
and passed, when H said to me, “ I never saw
Charles Grover, but I am almost sure the elder of those
two is he.” The “ natives ”of this island generally know
one another by some sort of freemasonry—a circumstance
which I had not at that moment taken time to investi-
gate and trace philosophically. “We must not let him
pass,” said H . “ Then coo-ee to him.” H
sung out the coo-ee loud and clear; and in a minute the
two gentlemen were seen riding back to meet us. “You
are Mr. Charles Grover,” said H . “Yes.” “This
is Mr. Mitchel.” He asked two or three eager questions ;
found out in a moment how the case stood ; asked if our
horses were fresh, and where we intended to stop that
night. The horses were tired ; we were making for Mr.
Wood’s - f place in Westbury. Our new friend instantly
turned /with me; gave up the business, whatever it was,
that urged him to his journey ; told H he might go
back to Bothwell, and leave me with him; made his com-
panion give up his horse to me, and mount Donald, with
directions to take him to his (Grover’s) father’s house, to
be cared for after the journey; and then started off with
me, to bring me by the most secret road to Mr. Wood’s
“I am glad I met you,” he said, “ because it will save you
the necessity of calling at my father’s house ; the gover-
nor, you know, is a masistrate; and it is as well not to
run risks.”
Most gratefully and affectionately I parted from H ,
who turned intending to go back for that night to Job’s ;
and next day by a circuitous route, to Bothwell. For me,
I committed myself, without a moment’s thought to the
care of my new acquaintance. We rode on merrily, got
out of the montain region, and skirted along the base of
the great “ Western Tier,” at its northern side. Before
dusk we rode into the yard of a large and handsome house,
where a tall gentleman came to meet us. It was Mr.
Wood, “ Here is our friend,” said Grover (I had never
j- Wood is also a fictitious name.


seen Wood before), “Mr. Mitchel.” Ah!” he said,
quietly, “ I have been expecting you here these two
months.” Last night I spent with this gentleman and his
amiable family. But as there is a police station within a
hundred yards of his gate, and as the police of Westbury
were certain to be on the watch all over the district, from
this day, or to-morrow, it was thought best to remove me
this morning to the farm-house of a fine young Irishman,
named B , six miles from Mr. Wood’s, and here I am
this day, awaiting news of the movements of Nicargua
and Sir William Denison.
June 13th. —Mr B. and his wife are very kind to me;
keep me in great privacy ; seem almost proud to have the
charge of so illustrious a patriot (as myself); and assure
me lam safe enough here, for a month to come. How-
ever, I do not go out, even into the woods, except at
night, and never without loaded arms. No news yet of
Nicaragua.
16th. —News at last of Nicaragua. On the day he and
I parted in the woods near Bothwell, he arrived safely at
Oatlands, but was hotly pursued ; left Fleur-de-lis, a well-
known mare of mine, in the stable of the inn, reeking with
sweat; made urgent inquiries whether he could have a
horse to travel eastward to Spring Bay ; —then, at night,
left the hotel, through the garden ; climbed over several
walls at the back of the houses ; came round to the road
outside the village ; waited for the coach, and travelled
northward to Launceston, where he is now, duly shaved
and disguised.
At Bothwell there was violent excitement. Seven
mounted police were instantly despatched thence, to
scour the country on all sides, in pursuit. They traced
Nicaragua to Oatlands ; found my Fleur-de-lis in the
stable; learned that the gentleman had asked for a horse
to carry him to Spring Bay; and, accordingly, all that
region is diligently scoured, and vedettes, on the promon-
tories on the coast, are exchanging anxious signals.
I find also, that Mr. Davis, at Bothwell, charged one
of the constables, who was present (an Englshman), with


failing in his duty, by not securing me when ordered y
and further, charged him with having been bribed. He
therefore dismissed him, whereupon the man got drunk
on the spot, and spent the evening invoking three cheers
for me. It is not true that this poor fellow was bribed,,
but I wish he had been ; for it is now clear that he was
open to a bribe, wanted* a bribe, and deserved a bribe.
The Westbury police are patrolling night and day for
my sake ; but this is no more than the constables of all
other districts are doing. Evidently all trace of me is
lost, and the Government folk have no reason for sup-
posing me to be in this district rather than any other.
At any rate, in any case, whatever may befal me, I feel
myself absolutely out of the enemy’s power. The end of
the enterprise now must be America or a grave.
Westbury , V. D. L.,June 20th, 1853.—\ have been
now a week at Burke’s farmhouse, and in the closest pri-
vacy. Even the few friends in this district, who know of
my whereabouts, do not dare to come to the house in
daylight; but the staunch O’K ,on whose own house
a strict watch is kept by the police, contrived last night
to evade their vigilance, leaving home in the afternoon,
riding first in some other direction, and then making a
circuit, so as to come down upon Hurke’s after midnight.
With him came a Launceston friend, who had brought
me a note from Nicaragua Smith. Nicaragua is now in
Hobart Town, and has not been molested, although it is
well-known that he was with me at the Bothwell police
office ; but as no violence was actually done, nor even
arms exhibited, there is nothing to endanger him How-
ever, all his movements also are under strict surveilliance.
He assures me, in his note, that the enemy have not
the slightest suspicion of my having come to this part of
the island; and the impression is general that I am
already at sea. Bets are pending in Hobart as to the
direction I took —as to my having sailed, or not —and if
so, by what ship. In the meantime he is negotiating
about a brigantine, the “Don Juan,” one of Mr. Mac-
namara’s ships. She is to sail shortly from Hobart Town,.


bound for Melbourne ; and he hopes to arrange it so
that she will call on the north side of the island, in some
lonely bay, to take me up —I to make my way to the
rendezvous as best I may.
22nd. —Special messenger from Nicaragua. The
“ Don Juan ” is to call at Emu Bay five days from hence;
the distance is about eighty miles from my retreat; but
there are four rivers to cross, no road, no bridges. And
now fate has apparently declared against me, for within
the last two days Emu Bay has become totally inaccessi-
ble by land. The winter floods have begun. It has
rained furiously in the mountains ; and the Forth, Mersey,
and Don, all fordable in the summer, are rushing down
now, in raging torrents that would sweep us into the sea
if we were mounted on elephants. Then, if we go down
to the sea-shore, and attempt to pass westward by cross-
ing the mouths of the rivers in boats, a difficulty arises—■
there are generally no boats to be found there, except the
police boats ; and every river mouth is watched by con-
stables, who have all received a special warning to be on
the look out for a man thirty-five years of age or so, with
dark hair, stature five feet ten inches, etc., etc.
What is to be done ? The “ Don Juan ” will certainly
call in at Emu Bay, and wait there two days. My
Launceston friend advises a plan. He has hurried off to
Launceston'to employ the captain of a small coasting
smack as a messenger to Emu Bay, with directions for
the “ Don Juan ” to come eastward again, if the weather
permit, and to lie off and on at a solitary beach, between
West-head and Badger-head, a little to the west of the
Tamar mouth. To that place I can go without crossing
any river except the Meander. The plan does not look
feasible, because the weather has grown wild, and the
“ Don Juan,” if she can even leave Emu Bay, and coast
eastward, may find it impossible to lie to off that dan-
gerous coast. It is determined, however, that I am to
try the chance.
The country between this place and Port Sorel is wild,
marshy, rocky, and desolate —all the better for our pur-


pose, if we can only cross the Westbury road, and get
through the settled country south of the Meander, with-
out exciting suspicion. Our course is to be due north —
the distance nearly seventy miles. We are to set forth
about ten o’clock at night, and if possible, to reach the
sea next day.
Latest accounts from Bothwell tell me that all is well
at Nant Cottage; all our good neighbours of Bothwell
are delighted at my escape (which they think is an
accomplished fact already), and kindly attentive to my
family. My wife, however, knows that lam still on the
island, and every morning expects to hear either of em-
barkation, capture, or death. If I should even have the
good fortune to get on board the “ Don Juan,” my adven-
tures will have only begun; for she goes to Melbourne.
At Melbourne their is doubtless a warrant against me,
long since in the hands of the police, with description of
eyes, hair, and stature; and since the discovery of gold
mines there, careful note is taken by the authorities of
every passenger and every sailor coming from Van Die-
men’s Land. Many captures are made every week. To
get into Melbourne, and to get out of it again, will be
about equally perilous ; but the “ work of the hour ” is to
get out of Van Diemen’s Land.
24th. —We start to-night. It is gloomy winter weather;
the country having been first thoroughly drenched is
now frozen ; but the moon is out and on duty. lam to
have a considerable cavalcade and body-guard : the two
Burkes, Mr. Wood and his brother, O’K , O’Mara,
brother-in-law to my host, and Foley, a powerful
Tipperary man, somewhere between six and seven feet
high. If we meet a patrol of constables either on the
journey or at the coast, the meeting will not serve the
cause of “ law and order.”
I had written two letters, one to my wife at Bothwell,
one to my mother at New York —a kind of provisional
adieu, indeed —for I scarcely hope to meet with this
“ Don Juan;” and, failing her, I shall have to disperse
my party, and retire from the coast again with all speed


and secrecy. Mr. Wood in that case proposes to send
me to a very remote “ station ” of his among the
mountains of the North-west, to spend the winter there,
and let all thought of pursuit die out. Meanwhile, my
kind hostess, Mrs. Burke, is busied in preparations for
our departure, and in providing what is needful for our
journey. Amongst other things, the good creature gets
some lead and casts bullets. Her husband comes with
us, as well as his brother; and their father lends me a
good horse.
2 6th.—Port Sorel, Bass's Straits. —We are here, but
the “ Don Juan ”is not. The night before last, as had
been arranged, about ten o’clock, after taking farewell of
Mrs. Burke and her little boy (whose principal nurse I
have been for a fortnight), I rode away accompanied by
the two Burkes, O’K , O’Mara, and Foley. We
were to meet the Woods on the Westbury-road at a given
point. It was cold but clear, and the moon shone
brightly on the hoar frost. Having been joined by the
Woods, we rode nearly due north, and sometimes after
midnight descended through some dark and winding
gullies to the valley of the Meander. Just on the farther
bank, and in a very solitary place, stood the house of our
friend O’K . He is a respectable farmer, an intelli-^
gent, well-informed man, who emigrated hither alter Lord
Hawarden’s great extirmination of tenantry in Tipperary.
O’K was one of the tenants turned out upon that
occasion; and saw his house pulled down, while all the
neighbours in the adjoining townlands were warned not
to shelter him or any member of his family. Some
natural tears he shed, and uttered some natural impreca-
tions ; but shot neither landlord, nor agent, nor sheriff’s
officer-—which would have been natural too. With the
help of some good friends he found means to imigrate
hither, and has a good farm—far from Lord Harwarden
—but still hates with a holy hatred (as in reason he
ought) the British aristocracy and British government.
Of course he takes an interest in Irish rebels, and was
Meagher’s faithful companion and guide in his last


Tasmanian excursion. The river was high and rapid,
the banks were steep and rough, but O’K knew the
ground and led the way; the flood dashed up to our
horses’ shoulders, but in a few minutes we had scaled the
opposite bank and galloped up to O’K ’s door.
Here we halted to sup and feed our horses. The
family were asleep, but ere long a roaring fire blazed,
beef stakes hissed, and at the head of his rough but
kindly board O’K welcomed me (he hoped for the
last time) to the hospitalities of the Tasmanian bush.
One of the peculiarities of the Westbury district is that
you find Irish families, and whole Irish neighbourhoods,
associating together and seldom meeting foreigners : for
even the assigned convict servants whom these people
select are all Irish. Thus they preserve, even in the
second generation, Irish ways and strong Irish accent;
and but a few weeks have gone by since, in this very
house, on the death of O’K ’s old mother, a regular
wake was held, and experienced crones raised a true
caoine over the corpse, startling the cockatoos with their
wild and unwonted uluhi.
The two Woods are native Tasmanians, of English
stock, and do not fully understand the Tipperary enthu-
siasm and Munster demonstativeness of O’K and
Ms wife. They are men of very large property, bold
horsemen, indefatigable bushmen, and seem to have come
into our present enterprise as much for the sake of the
excitement as for a sincere regard for Irish rebels. They
sat smoking and looking on in silence, while O’K
narrated the black story of the clearing of his village in
Tipperary
At last it was time to mount once more. The moon
had gone down and the night was dark. Seven miles
further on we found ourselves near a hut, which Mr.
Wood recognised as the stock-hut of his nephew, young
Lily. He said the owner was in it, and insisted that we
should all dismount, knock him up, and demand some tea.
I objected, supposing that there might be other strangers
in the house, and it was not expedient (seeing I was


almost certain we should miss the “Don Juan”) that
my journey in this direction should come to be known.
In vain I objected. Wood only laughed, and said it
was all right, and thundered with his hunting-whip on the
hut-door. After some grumbling on the inside, the door
was cautiously opened by a man with a gun. Four men
were within, including Lily, the proprietor,who had come
that way to give directions to his stock-keepers. He
quickly tumbled out of his opossum-rug, recognised my
friends, but did not know me, and invited us all to par-
take the usual bush-fare.
Though displeased at the delay and risk of blabbing, I
went in; and we remained an hour ; so that dawn was
breaking before we resumed our journey. Young Lilly
was informed, before I left, of the nature of the excursion,
and undertook to keep his shepherds, and also a strange
shepherd who was there, closely employed about the place
for some days, lest they should spread abroad the intelli-
gence that such a party of horsemen had been riding coast-
ward upon such a night.
When the morning reddened in the sky, we found our-
selves in as wild and impervious a country as I have yet
seen in Van Diemen’s Land —no mountains, but countless
hills, divided almost uniformly by dangerous marshes,
rocks, dead trees, deep ‘ creeks ’ with rotten banks j such,
without intermission for forty miles, was the scene of our
tedious travel. The only comfort was, that no constable
would venture into those wildernesses in winter.
Once O’K , who was mounted on a powerful black
mare, sunk unexpectedly deep into a morass, covered
with treacherous herbage. He flung himself off the saddle;
and, by dint of some desperate plunges, the mare was
extricated. We came into a narrow gorge, very rocky and
entangled with almost impassable “scrub.” Down the
gorge flowed, or rather oozed, through the slimy soil and
prostrate decayed trees, a kind of creek, which we must
cross; but never in all ray bush-riding had I seen so
hideous and perilous-looking a task for a horseman. Last
winter, the floods had been peculiarly heavy hereabouts;


and the channel had been much deepened and widened.
Immense dead trees lay along and athwart it in all direc-
tions ; the banks were high and composed of soft red soil;
and in the bottom, wherever the bottom could be seen,
there seemed to be nothing but unfathomable red mud.
We struggled a full hour along the bank, looking for a
point where it was possible to cross; and every moment
going farther out of our way, as was too apparent by the
sun.
O’Mara, who was mounted on a fine young bay horse,
once dashed at the creek, shouting, follow me ! He went
down the slope safely ; and in a moment we saw the noble
horse springing up against the opposite bank, O’Mara
leaning over his neck and urging him with spur and voice.
He gave two or three tremendous bounds, but the soft
earth always gave way under his feet; and, at length, with
his fore-feet pawing wildly in the air, down he went back-
wards to the bottom; but O’Mara, grasping a branch of a
dead tree, swung himself from the saddle, and thus saved
himself from interment in red slime under his horse. We
spent an hour in extricating the poor animal, which, by
dint of main force, we accomplished ; but it was too clear
that was not a place for crossing.
Over the creek, however, we made our way, and late last
evening, came out from the hills upon the broad tide-water
of the Tamar, near a small settlement called York.
Avoiding the houses, which might have contained dis-
affected persons, —to wit, constables, —we proceeded about
a couple of miles into the woods beyond, but were still
five miles from the sea-coast of Badger-head.
Darkness came on; and the country before us was
almost impassable even in daylight; so we bivouacked in
the wood. Fortunately it was a grassy place, and the
horses could pick up something to eat. We lighted a
good fire, roasted upon forked sticks certain pieces of
mutton we had carried with us from O’K ’s, finished
the supply of brandy, and having duly smoked our pipes,
fixed saddles under our heads for pillows, and slept.
At daybreak this morning we were astir ; for we all


thought it quite possible that the “ Don Juan,” if her cap-
tain had received the message recalling him, might have
been off the designated beach yesterday evening ; and if
so, the wind of last night, blowing in towards the shore,
would have obliged her to work as far to seaward as
possible ; otherwise, the rocks of Badger-head would be
fringed with her shivered ribs this morning. It was calm
and mild weather as we started from our lair; and, after
four miles' difficult journeying, through marshes, we heard
the roar of the sea, and saw Badger-head towering to our
left. Still, the water was invisible, for the shore was bor-
dered by a line of high sand-hills, clothed with honey-suckle
trees and hoobyalla. We scaled the sand-hills ; and there
was the blessed sea —but as far as the eye could sweep
it, not a sail!
We gazed blankly into one another’s faces Determined
however, to wait there all day, and look out for a sail!
The coast here makes a fine sweeping curve between the
two rocky promontories; and there is a broad smooth
beach of sand.
A vessel suddenly hove in sight, round the point of
Badger-head. A brigantine ! She was four miles off, and
we had no doubt, from her apparent tonnage and rig, that
she was the “Don Juan.” She stood out to sea, and
seemed to be coming out the Tamar mouth, where she
had probably taken shelter last night.
Now we eagerly watched her movements, expecting every
instant that she would tack. From the distance, we were
unable to see whether she had Macnamara’s signal-flag at
her mast head : but we gathered some dried branches,
and set fire to them, and to the long grass that covered a
sand-hill. Soon a pillar of smoke rose into the air that
might have been visible thirty miles. The insensible
brigantine made no sign, nor swerved from her steady
course, steering direct for Melbourne. In an hour she
was out of sight, and we took counsel what we should do
next. There we could stay no longer, if only for want of
food ; and it was necessary that the party should seperate.
Mr, Wood renewed his proposal of sending me to his
stock-station among the north-western mountains, where


I might stay all winter as a stock-keeper. In the mean-
time we agreed to ride in the evening to the house of a
gentleman named Miller, about nine miles to the west of
us, on the shore of Port Sorel inlet; stay with him all
night, and consult with him in the morning.
The coast all along is totally uninhabited, and we did
not see a human creature all day. Half a mile from
Miller’s we halted, and Wood rode on to make sure that
no strangers were about the place. Miller himself re-
turned with Wood. He had never seen me before, but
seemed delighted that we had come to him. He assured
us that as he had no servants at that time, and his house
was quite off all tracks and roads, I might, if necessary,
remain three months there unsuspected. On the other
side of Port Sorel inlet, which is not half a mile wide at
the mouth, stands a township, with police office, magis-
trate, and the rest of the apparatus; and Miller says the
last stranger who appeared at his house was a constable
from Launceston, bearing the despatch a fortnight ago to
all the stations along that coast, announcing my departure
from Bothwell.
“ All special messengers,” said he, “ bearing despatches
from Launceston, must come to me, and request me to
put them across the water in my boat, which is the only
boat on this side. So, you see, it is all right; you can
stay here in perfect safety.
O’K declared he could not see how this made all
right; for, said he, “if our journey in this direction
comes to be known, as it must be in a few days, your
next visitor will be another constable ”
“ The very thing,” said Miller, “ that we want. The
fellow can’t go over without my help ; I can make him
drunk here, and take the despatch from him, or bribe
him to return and say he delivered it; or drown him, if
you like, in the passage.”
This did not appear a very satisfactory prospect; yet,
as we must seperate, and as the “ Don Juan” may still
appear to-morrow or next day, I have resolved to stay
with Mr. Miller, and keep a look-out for her. All my
escort are to go to their several homes to-morrow, and


Burke is to communicate with Nicaragua Smyth.
Miller is an Englishman, long resident in London;
but, like all other honest people in this country, he cor-
dially abhors Sir William Denison and his government,
and will go any length in my service : not, perhaps, that
he loves me more, but that he loves Sir William less.
27th. —Before sunrise this morning I went with
O’K , took an excellent telescope of Miller’s, and
went over the sand-hills to get a view of the sea. Not a
sail in sight. Wind steady from the north-west, and
likely to remain so. This is a fair wind for the “ Don
Juan,” coming from Emu Bay towards Port Sorel; but I
begin now to despair of her.
After breakfast all my friends went off—all promising
to return if required. They leave me Burke’s horse, the
same that I rode from Westbury. They had gone about
four hours, and Miller and I were sitting on the sand-
hills smoking, when a sail came in sight from the west-
ward ; we watched her eagerly, but she turned out to be
a barque. Here, then, I remain, within a mile of a
police barrack. Miller’s land forms a point, which runs
out far to meet the opposite shore of the inlet. The point
is well wooded, and immediately on the shore the hills
of sand are thickly fringed with a dense shrubbery of
boobyalla a small, beautiful tree, rising to a height of
seven or eight feet, and forming a close screen with its
dark green leaves, which greatly resemble the leaves of
the arbutus. From behind this shelter I can see the
sleepy-looking village, which seems to be peopled mostly
by constables, sauntering about with their belts and
jingling handcuffs.
July Ist. —Four days at Miller’s. No “Don Juan”;
no news from Launceston, or from Nicaragua Smyth.
Though my host is well-informed and agreeable, I begin
to execrate this lurking life. The suspense and terror at
Nant Cottage must be grievous. I despise myself as I
sit here behind my boobyalla fence, and am very much
inclined to cut short the business by some coup. Mr.
Miller proposes a plan. He says there is a vessel in the


mouth of one of the rivers, fourteen miles west, taking a
cargo of sawn timber on board for Melbourne. “She
will be cleared,” continued Miller, “by our friend over
the way, the chief constable. Now, I have a brother in
Melbourne, lately arrived from England. I have been
expecting him here to visit me, and Mr. Nichols, the
police magistrate, and the chief constable, are aware of it.
If you choose I will bring you over to the village the day
before the ship is to sail ; introduce you as my brother
to the worthy magistrate ; he will ask us to dine ; he will
give you a certificate. In the evening you and I
will go along with the clearing-officer himself, across the
country to the river Forth. You will be put on board in
due form of law, as Henry Miller, and proceed upon your
travels respectably. Does the magistrate, or any of the
constables, know your appearance ? ”
“ How can I tell ? You know they are always chang-
ing the constables from one district to another. However,
I think my disguise is complete.” Miller ran to his boat,
sculled across, and within an hour returned, laughing—
“ I have told Mr. Nichols that you are here; and I think
he will feel that it is only civility to come over and visit you.
I also mentioned you to the chief of police, telling him
that, although you had been so short a time here, you are
tired of the country (which is true), and want to go to
Melbourne. I told him you did not much like the idea
of travelling back to Launceston, to take passage in one
of the steamers, and asked him if there were not a good
vessel shortly to sail from some of these rivers. ‘ There
is the “Wave,” said he —‘the very thing for your brother.”
“ Well,” I asked, “what more.” “Why,” said Miller,
“he is going over to the Forth to-morrow, will go on
board the ship, and will bring us back full particulars as
to the accommodation, fare, &c. Then you and I are
to dine with the police-magistrate on our way; and the
clearing officer will have an interview with you in the
police office, and will make all smooth for my brother.
This thing will do. You must come.”
“I agree to everything but the dinner party at the
police magistrate’s. I will not sit down at any man’s table


under a feigned name ; but Jet us impose on him other-
wise, if you like.” “You agree, then, to go as my
brother?” “Certainly; lam tired of skulking about;
though your society and conversation, my dear fellow,
are “Hurrah!” said Miller, running to tell his
wife ot our plan. He seems rejoiced beyond measure
that he is to have the whole credit of taking me off, when
all my Irish friends had failed, and swears he will go with
me to Melbourne. To-morrow he goes across to the
village again, to learn all the particulars about the cabin
of the “Wave,” for we must pretend to be very fastidious
about our accommodations.”
2nd. —To-day he pushed his boat over again. “It is
all right,” he said, when he returned “ everything
arranged. We sail on the Bth. The police magistrate
will come over in the meantime to visit you.” So the
matter stands, then. If I do not hear ol some better
arrangements made by Nicaragua Smyth, or my friends in
Launceston, before the “Wave” lifts anchor, I shall sail as
Henry Miller. Miller has two magnificent kangaroo
dogs. His son George and I rode but to-day up to
Badger-head, taking the dogs with us ; and in the scrubby
hollows of the promontory, we raised two kangaroos, but
I grieve to say, lost them both. The “ scrub ” was too
close for the dogs to run. We saw, on our return, three
superb eagles, poising themselves on moveless wings, high
in the air. The lambing season has commenced, and
these three murderers have come down from the moun-
tains to keep an eye upon Miller’s lambs.
yth July. —About eleven o’clock to-day two horsemen
were seen approaching through the trees, from the direct-
ion of Badger-head. An unusual sight; for the last eight
days no human being has appeared on this side of Port
Sorel, and when it had happened that the foot-prints of
one solitary man had been seen on the sand, the very day
we came here, the phenomenon kept Miller’s family
speculating and wondering ever since. So there was
commotion in the house, when one of the boys ran in to
tell us of the approaching horsemen. Miller locked me
up in my own room, having first warned me to look to


my pistols. He walked out to meet the strangers. Pre-
sently I heard well-known voices, and came out the two
Burkes have come to bring me to Launceston. My in-
defatigable friend, Dease, a merchant in that town, has
bargained, it seems, with Capt. ,of the steamer ,
to bring me from Launceston to Melbourne ; and my
passage has been secured on board the steamer in the
name of Father Macnamara. I must be in Launceston
to-morrow evening, go aboard at once, and remain there
all night. Next morning the steamer sails. They tell
me no time is to be lost, for it begins to be rumored that
I am still on the island, and the police have a nose keen
in the scent of gain. ,
Launceston is fifty-five or sixty miles on; and the
country is, in this season, altogether execrable. They
have only ridden to-day from the Tamar mouth (about
fifteen miles), and propose that I start at and go so
far this evening as to a certain hut they know. To-morrow
to Launceston. Farewell, then, my kind English host
and hostess, and once more in the saddle. Miller says I
had better go by the “ Wave,” and be his brother Henry.
Bth On the 6th we slept (the two Burkes and I) at a
hut in the woods. On the 7th, a wet and stormy day, we
made good our way, though with great labour and fatigue,
to Launceston. Went to the house of , uud got
rigged up as a Catholic priest —shaved from the eyes to
the throat, dressed in a long black coat, with upright
collar, the narrow white band round the neck, and a
broad black hat, I waited for Mr, Dease to come, and
bring me on board. Dease came, accompanied by Con-
nellan of Hobart Town.
This plot also miscarries ; and they all fear the case is
almost desperate. Capt says positively that he
dare not take me on board at Launceston, nor even any
where along the river on his way down, at least until after
his ship has been cleared at George Town, forty-five miles
below Launceston —says the rigour of searching has been
greatly increased since I left Bothwell, and that the police
magistrate at George Town has got very special orders ;
so that he (the captain) cannot take me, even concealed


in his own cabin—that retreat, which used to be a sanc-
tuary, being now subject to the narrowest scrutiny. In
short, he said, I must go down the river in an open boat
this night, so as to find myself below George Town, be-
tween the very capes of the river’s mouth, to-morrow
about three o’clock. There he will take me up.
Dease had come to tell me that a boat was ready for
me, and that I must start at once. It was a dreadful night,
wet and stormy. I had ridden fifty miles, mostly through
rain, rivers, and morasses, and was thoroughly tired. I
declared I would go on board in the morning openly at
the quay, as Father Macnamara and run all the risk; but
my friends overruled this, and almost carried me down to
the river. It was profoundly dark Two boatmen were
waiting for us at the river side. Dease and Connellan
came with me. I threw myself along the bottom of the
boat, and in ten minutes was fast asleep ; and so we
started on our nocturnal expedition of about fifty miles.
Launceston , V. D. L., July Qth. —We have comeback
here. Baffled a^ain.
To resume the story of our almost desperate attempt to
get out of the river Tamar in an open boat : —We were
rowed nearly all night after leaving Launceston, and a
little before dawn arrived at a point of the river (or rather
estuary) where it is about two miles in width. On the
right bank, just here, lives a worthy colonist named Bar-
rett, to me unknown, but for whom my com anions
vouched as well affected. We put the boat ashore, and
walking up to the house, in the dark, thundered at the
door without ceremony. Barrett came down. We asked
him for his boat (a good gig), and people to pull it, in-
tending to leave the little skiff that had brought us down
at this place, until my friends should be returning up the
river, after depositing me on board the steamer at the
river mouth. The boat, the men, everything was at our
service. We stayed an hour or two, breakfasted, and
then Mr Barrett volunteered to go with us himself, and
to see me fairly at sea. There was good daylight when
we started, and we had only sixteen or seventeen miles to
go to George Town. So we dropped down the river at


our liesure. It is a most winding and dangerous estuary,
varying in breadth from a quarter of a mile to three miles,
bordered by hills, all covered with unbroken forest,
except where a small farm has been cleared.here and
there.
Before coming quite opposite to George Town Mr.
Barrett put me and Connellan ashore for awhile in the
woods on the western bank, and went himself over to the
village, in order that he might see the chief of police, and
give him some account (a false account of course) of his
errand down there with his boat. Unless this precaution
was taken, he said, the police would assuredly take notice
of the strange boat, and send an armed police boat to
question us.
Wo remained an hour in the woods ; Barrett was to
return to our side at a point two miles lower down the
river than the place we landed, to take us up there when-
ever the steamer should appear. He had scarcely pushed
across to George Town before the black funnel and its
streamer of smoke came round a wooded promontory
within three miles. The usual custom is to delay these
steamers about an hour at George Town, while they
undergo a thorough and final search, so that we calculated
on having abundance of time. The Captain had directed
us to be in the middle of the river in the boat, after he
should have got rid of the searchers, and he would lie to
and take me on board. I had my priestly garments and
broad-brimmed hat along with me, so as to enable me to
act the character of Father Macnamara with proper dig-
nity and sanctity.
But while Connellan and I were making our way to
the point at which Barrett was to take us up again, and
just after we had seen the police boat come out to over-
haul the ship, we saw, to our utter dismay, that the boat
left her again instantly, and she, without stopping,
steamed away down towards the Heads. Barrett’s boat
had not yet left George Town to come over for us ; half
an hour passed, and the boat did not come. The
steamer was now four miles down the river, and there,
close by the lighthouse, we saw her stop.


Now, we thought, all was right. Barrett’s boat at last
approached, pulled with desperate energy by four men.
We jumped in, and put off, still keeping our eyes on the
steamer, when, at that moment, up went the steam again.
The captain evidently had come to the conclusion that
something must have happened to prevent me from
keeping my appointment; and he had waited full fifteen
minutes We were too far off to be visible from the ship,
close under the shore as we were ; and just as our rowers
were stretching to their oars with all their force, the
steamer moved slowly off before our eyes, swept round
the light-house, and away on her straight course for Mel-
bourne
The chance was lost. The sun set in a red and angry
sky; it was certainly to be a stormy night; and there we
were, far from shelter, opposite one of the strongest and
most vigilant police stations of the island. Back to
Launceston we must absolutely make our way, and that
before morning. Moreover, as Mr. Dease, one of our
companions, had been left in George Town, Barrett must
call for him I objected to go in the boat to George
Town, but said I would go on shore again with Connel-
lan, on the west bank, and let Barrett come for me after
taking up Dease.
We accordingly went into the woods again, and
watched the boat going across. Half an hour at the
utmost would suffice to bring her back. Half an honr
passed, but no boat came. It was now dark. An hour
went by—two hours, still no boat came. We knew that
something was wrong, and conjectured that some of the
boatmen had got drunk and let out the secret. “In that
case,” said Connellan, “ the first boat that comes over
will be a police boat.” Another hour elapsed, and we
had made up our mind to spend the night in some very
secret part of the forest, and walk next day by West
Head and Badger Head back to my friend Miller, when
we heard in the darkness the sound of oars working in
the rowlocks. Presently the prow of a boat ran up
against the gravelly beach, but it was impossible to see
' . /


anything at one yard’s distance. I told Connellan to go
down towards the place where he heard the sound, and
if all was right to sing out coo-ee ; but if it was a police
boat, then to make no sound but try to rejoin me
instantly. In the meantime I put caps on my pistols.
Coo-ee I It was Barrett’s boat. The delay was caused
only by two of the boatmen getting drunk; but there
had been no blabbing so far as Barrett knew. lo my
surprise I found also Dan Burke, of Westbury, in the boat.
He had taken his passage in the steamer, and was to
have gone with Father Macnamara to Melbourne. Says
that the steamer did not delay an hour, as usual, only
because the chief of police at George Town, called the
“ clearing officer,” had happened to be at Launceston,
had come down on board the steamer, and had made
his researches on his way ; so when the police boat came
alongside he had nothing to do but drop into it and go
ashore. Burke says that the captain had then no pretext
for delay—that if he had stopped anywhere nearer to
George Town he would be sure to be visited again by the
police—that when he did stop, down at the Heads, he
had anxiously kept looking out with a glass to see
whether our boat appeared, and at last had given us up.
The failure, therefore, was not the captain’s fault, but is
due to the fates and destinies, the Sisters Three, and
such branches of learning. Burke himself had left the
steamer at the Heads and had come back in the pilot-
boat. . .
We had a weary pull up the river again. The night
came down in a horrible storm, and we were twice on
reefs. Reached Barrett’s about one o’clock, took our
Launceston boat and boatmen again ; bade adieu to poor
Barrett, who is very desponding about my fate these
repeated failures being, as he thinks, a pronouncement
of heaven against me —and then we set out for Launces-
ton. I was now fully resolved to stay no longer on the
north side of the island, but to make my way to Hobart
Town, and put myself in the hands of some shipowner to
be smuggled away like contraband goods as he in his
wisdom should think best. The storm roared and raged


more furiously every moment. In the windings of the
channel we were several times driven ashore, yet, as
the wind was with us, we kept the sails set, hoping to get
up to the town before morning. The rain came down in
torrents, the woods groaned and even shrieked, and
through the blackness of the night we could see nothing
but the glimmer out of the white foam. When we were
yet sixteen miles from Launceston a dreadful squall
came down upon us, and before the men could drop the
lug-sail we were driven violently ashore. The boatmen
declared that they would not go to Launceston till the
storm was over . We were in a perfectly trackless wood;
the earth was soaked, the trees were dripping, but we
did not care for that, having been drenched to the
marrow of the bones some hours before. Five or six
hours we spent in those dismal circumstances, deriving
an imperfect consolation from smoking; but so
thoroughly exhausted were we that every one of us lay
down and slept under the pouring rain.
Embarked again this morning, and of course reached
Launceston in broad day. I was put ashore a mile from
the town, and was to walk up accompanied by Dan
Burke, and proceed openly to the house of Father Butler,
behind the Catholic Chapel, where the others were to
meet me. There is nothing like coolness. We walked
quietly into and through the town; and the man of five
feet ten, dark hair and so forth, passed quite unchallenged
through the streets —probably because there are so many
men whom that description fits. In truth, if my wife
had met me in that walk she could not have suspected
me. So I reached the worthy priest’s house safely.
When Connellan, Dease, and his brother came, they
all agreed with me that the north side of the island has
grown too hot to hold me. The two Launceston boat-
men, who have just brought us up, though my name was
never mentioned before them, must at least suspect.
Barrett’s men knew me well enough. Besides, the long
journeys of the Burkes to and fro must have been noticed,
and I, therefore, tell my friends that I am resolved to go
straight to Hobart Town, and by the public coach. The


distance is 120 miles, the coach-road passes through
seven or eight townships, and by a dozen police offices.
Yet, still relying on my clerical character, I think this
safer than any other mode of travelling.
Connellan has gone to take two places in the night
mail for the night after next, one for himself and one for
the Rev. Mr. Blake. In the meantime the good Father
Butler proposes to conceal me in the belfry of his
church. How can I ever acknowledge the great services
rendered to me by all these kind people ?
1 2th July—Hobart Town. —The Rev. Mr. Blake has
accomp ished his perilous journey. The night coach
started from Launceston at half-past ‘five p.m., when
there is still daylight; and Father Butler would by no
means hear of my going to the coach office in the most
public part of the town He therefore lent me a horse
and rode with me out of town to wait for the coach at
Franklin village. As we rode on we approached a
turnpike gate. “Here,” said Mr. Butler, “you can test
your disguise. Clergymen of all denominations are
privileged to pass the toll gates free in Van Diemen’s
Land. If the man has no doubt about your being a
priest, he will politely touch his hat to us both. But if
he does not believe in your holy orders, it will cost you
threepence.” I saved the threepence, and my dignified
nod was as good as a blessing to the gatekeeper.
When I bade adieu to Father Butler and got into the
coach, I found besides Connellen two other passengers
inside. One of them, a man whom I had met and talked
with at least once before, and who certainly would have
known me had I been less effectually disguised. He is
T. MacDowell, late Attorney-General for the colony—a
dangerous neighbor. Not that I believe it would have
been running any risk to confide the matter to him , but
there was another stranger. Mr. MacDowell tried to
draw us into conversation, asked me about “my bishop,”
but I was shy, unsatisfactory, Jesuitical.
Towards morning we passed the point of the mail road
nearest to Bothwell (within sixteen miles), and I gazed
wistfully at the gloomy ridge of the Den Hill. Beyond


that hill, embowered among the boscages of Bothwell,
lies my little quasi- home, which my eyes will never see
again, with all its sleeping inmates lulled by the murmur-
ing Clyde.
The coach changed horses at Green Ponds as usual:
and everybody at Greenponds knows me by sight.
Several men were about the coach; they looked into it
and all over it as if expecting to see some traveller. I
took no note of all this till Mr. MacDowell said to one
of them, “ Ah, you are up early. ” (it was about four
o’clock in a winter’s morning). “Yes, sir,” was the
answer, “on special duty.” I now looked more sharply
at the man : it was the chief constable of Green Ponds
with some of his force. If it was for my sake, however
they had risen so early it was in vain, for not one of them
recognised me. I looked as calm and as mild as if
Deus vobiscum were on my lips ; but I was preparing to
open the coach door furthest from the hotel, at a
moment’s notice, with one hand, and with the other took
hold of a pistol in the pocket of my clerical soutane. We
passed on. It was clear day this morning before we
reached Bridgewater, and it would have been madness to
proceed with the coach to the door of the Ship Inn at
Hobart Town, where there is always a crowd of detectives.
So I left the coach and went into the hotel to remain
there all day, and take the evening coach into town.
Connellan remained in his place, and bade farewell very
respectfully to Mr. Blake. He says Mr. MacDowell
looked somewhat keenly after me and observed, “Your
reverend friend Connellan does not carry any luggage.”
I spent the day walking along the Derwent and
amongst the woods, dined at the solitary inn, and in the
evening took a place outside on the coach which was to
reach Hobart Town at eight o’clock. Six miles short ot
Hobart Town we stopped a moment at a hotel. St.
Kevin O’Doherty climbed the coach and sat down
directly in front of me, looking straight in my face. He
had come out expressly to meet me, he knew I was to be
dressed as a priest, yet I was a total stranger to him.
Before going down into the centre of the town, I made


the coachman pull up, left the coach and walked through
the dark streets (for the city is not lighted) to Connellan’s
house in Collins-street. I knocked at the door; it was
opened by Nicaragua “Is Mr. Connellan at home, sir ?”
“ No, sir ;he has gone out to take a drive.” “ Will he
soon return ?” Nicaragua all this time was looking at me.
curiously and anxiously. Connellan in fact had gone to
Bridgewater in a gig for me. It was now full time for
him to return, and when a stranger came instead poor
Nicaragua thought all was over, that I had been taken,
and that his visitor was a detective come to search for
papers —such an atmosphere of “ preternatural suspicion
do men breathe in this Tartarean island.”
I saw now thac my disguise might carry me through a
birthday ball at Government House. I walked into the
hall, shut the door, went into the parlour where the lights
were burning, took off my broad-brimmed hat, looked at
Nicaragua and laughed. Then he knew me. It was
the first time we had met since we exchanged horses and
coats in the wood behind Bothwell, just five weeks ago,
and he had since had almost as much travelling and
hardship as myself.
He has much to tell me; was up two or three days ago
at Nant Cottage. All well there ; everyone in Bothwell,
and all over the island, laughing at Mr. Davis, the police
magistrate. A song is sum? now in those parts, celebrat-
ing his worship’s horse, Donald, that he lent his prisoner
to escape upon. There are grave suspicions over him;
and many still continue to believe that I bought not the
horse, but the owner. This makes his worship nearly
frantic; and he has since converted his police office into
a kind of a fortress, with two armed constables instead of
one, always keeping guard at the doors, who have the
strictest orders never to hold any gentleman's horse .
They have really been too careless at these offices, and I
take some credit for reforming the discipline of this one.
Mr. Davis declares he will exculpate himself before all
Europe ; he will appeal to the human species. In the
meantime he sternly awaits an attack from John Knox.
Nicaragua himself goes everywhere without molestation,


having been a mere spectator in the Bothwell affair, and
not an actor; but his motions are watched closely ; and
on Connellan’s coming into the house, it was decided
that I could not stay in that house, even for one night,
in safety. Nicaragua and I, therefore, left the door at
different times, walked different ways, and met at Mr,
Manning’s door. Mr. Manning is agent in Hobart Town
for Macnamara’s ships, and I knew him to be well-
affected to me, although a frequenter of Government
House, and birthday-balls, and the like.
In half-an-hour we had our plan arranged. The
“Emma,” regular passenger-brig, sails hence for Sydney
within a week. Nicaragua sets out to-morrow for Both-
well, to hasten and assist the winding up of all affairs at
Nant Cottage, sale of stock, etc., so as to enable my wife
and family to sail by the same vessel —they to go on
board at the wharf, and be regularly “ cleared ”by the
authorities, —I, being contraband, to be taken down the
bay by Manning himself, in his own boat; the “ Emma”
to time her lifting anchor so as to drop down the stream
at dusk, 1 to be put on board in the dark three or four
miles below, but to preserve my incognito strictly while
on board, even to my own children. There might be
some disaffected passenger in the “ Emmaand if any
of them should know me and betray my presence in
Sydney, I would as certainly be arrested there as in
Hobart Town itself. Meantime, Mr. Manning has
brought me out to-night to the house of his father, two
miles down the Sandy Bay road, in a quiet country place,
where 1 am to remain concealed till the ship sails.
This is a bold move ; but, unless some untoward acci-
dent occurs it will be successful. Then away for San
Francisco.
Jtdy igth—At Sea. —The “Emma,” with all sails set,
is gliding northwards. Maria Island, O’Brien’s old dun-
geon, is straight opposite, and the long stretching moun-
tainous coast of Van Diemen’s Land extending for wind-
ward as far as the eye can reach.
Yesterday evening I was pla"ed on board in the bay
by moonlight. Capt. Brown received me as a passenger


he had been expecting, merely observing: “You were
almost too late, Mr. Wright,” then brought me down to
the cabin, and introduced Mr. Wright to the passengers,
including Nicaragua. My wife was sitting on the poop
with the children in the moonlight, eagerly watching my
embarkation, but did not say a word to me ; and Mr.
Wright walked about as a stranger. The ship is full of
passengers, but not one of them knows me.
July 20th. —This evening we are fast shutting down
the coast of Van Dieman’s Land below the red horizon,
and about to cross the stormy Bass’s Straits The last of
my island prison visible to me is a broken line of blue
peaks over the Bay of Fires. Adieu, then, beauteous
island, full of sorrow and gnashing of teeth —island of
fragrant forests, and bright rivers, and fair women !
Island of chains and scourges, and blind, brutal rage and
passion ! Behind those far blue peaks, in many a green
valley known to me dwell some of the best and warmest-
hearted of all God’s creatures ; and the cheerful talk of
their genial firesides will blend forever in my memory
with the eloquent song of the dashing Derwent and deep-
eddying Shannon.
Van Dieman’s Land is no longer a penal colony. That
is to say, the British Government, yielding with a very ill
grace to the imperious remonstrances of five potent
colonies, has announced that no more prisoners shall be
sent thither. In a generation or two, then, the convict
taint will be well-nigh worn out of the population ; and
those most lovely vales will be peopled by beings almost
human. May it be so! Tasmania will then be the
brightest of the five Australian Stars that have already
dawned on their blue Southern banner.
Vanish the peaks of the Bay of Fires ; a storm is
gathering, and the Straits are going to show us this night
the utmost they can do. Igo below, and having already
formed some casual acquaintance, with Nicaragua and
other passengers, Mr. Wright sits down to smoke and
chat.
July 23rd — Sunrise. —We are off the entrance of
Sydney Flarbour. Narrow entrance ; perpendicular cliffs


on both sides. Lighthouse perched on one of them.
After getting through the entrance a spacious bay appears,
running into many coves stretching in all directions, in
every one of which a fleet might lie at anchor. Low
wooded hills all around. The city crowns the head of the
bay, and who needs to be informed that there is plenty of
shipping.
Here Mr. Wright must run the gauntlet again ; for the
“ Emma,” as usual, is to be searched by police authorities,
and they possess undoubtedly a description, (probably a
too flattering portrait) of the man of five feet ten, with
dark hair. But Captain Brown, who is familiar with the
chief officer, takes him at once down to the cabin, pro-
duces brandy and water, tells the official person some new
anecdote of a jocose description, and so gets rid of him.
Then he makes ready his own boat, and tells Mr. Wright
he is going to bring him ashore first. Mr. Wright nods
a slight farewell to Nicaragua and his other acquaintances
among the passengers; but does not presume to address
Mrs. Mitchel (not having been introduced to that lady),
and drops into the boat.
Twelve o'clock. —Mr. Wright was conducted by the
captain straight to Macnamara’s house in the best part of
the city. Was kindly received by Mr. James Macnamara
(his father is now in Melbourne), is domiciled in the
house for the present, and, instead of Wright has become
“ Warren.”
July 25th. —My wife came to Mr. Macnamara’s to visit
Mr. Warren; brought me a letter she had received,
before leaving Bothwell, from Smith O’Brien, very warmly
congratulating her on my escape ; also a letter from John
Knox. She had the kindest assistance from our neigh-
bours of Bothwell in all her business arrangements, —
selling horses, and sheep, and so forth. Nant Cottage
and farm are already occupied by an English gentleman
recently arrived from England ; and he took the furniture
at a valued price. Fleur-de-lis , our old favourite, is sold
to a young lady. May her rack long abound with hay,
and the oats never fail in her manger. Tricolor goes to
Connellan ; Donald to Dan Burke ; Dabple , the boy’s


little brown mare, has been sold, and Mr. A. Reid pro-
mises to take care of her colt. I was very fond of all
the horses, and hope to hear sometimes how it fares with
them, as well as with my human friends.
November 2gth. —John Mitchel and his wife arrived
safely in New York. Was met and welcomed by his
brother and Meagher, when he was safely conducted to
his mother’s residence at Brooklyn.
TERENCE McMANUS.
McManus was sentenced to death for seditious speeches,
but was reprieved and transported for life.
When he arrived in the colony he received a ticket-of-
leave, and the district to which he was appointed was the
town of Launceston ; where he shortly after arrival began
business as a merchant and commission agent.
It was necessary in his business transactions that he
should visit Hobart Town, and he applied to the authori-
ties for what was' termed a pass. This was refused him,
but he took French leave, and proceeded to Hobart
Town, transacted his business quickly, and returned to
Launceston. For this breach of prison discipline he was
arraigned before Francis Evans, Esq., J.P., at the Police
Court, Launceston, 20th January, 1851 ; reprimanded,
and discharged. Mr. F. Evans, being of a kindly disposi-
tion, talked to him in a fatherly manner, saying it would
be far better at any time, should he desire to cross the
country again, to present a petition, when he and his
brother magistrates would endorse same, and thus insure
the granting of the requisite leave.
The then Governor, or head gaoler of the island, not
satisfied with the Launceston magistrate’s verdict, had
McManus arrested and sent to the settlement at Port
Arthur, which settlement was for the reception of pri-
soners who had been sentenced for the second or third
time, and was only second to Macquarie Harbour in the
severity of its discipline. He there had to work with


men in chains in a most degraded and severe manner, the
most cruel position for a gentleman of his rank to be
placed in. He lingered in this hell for a time, when his
Launceston friends rallied up, the Messrs. Dease being
most prominent in their actions, and they waited upon
Mr. Adye Douglas, who was known for his deep sympathy
with the accused. By a writ of “ Habeas Corpus ” he
was brought before the Judges of the Supreme Court,
and, after full arguments being heard, Mr. McManus was
discharged. He quietly returned to Launceston, wounded
in spirit, prostrated in body by physical privation and
suffering, and he was laid upon a sick bed. By repose
and care it was hoped he would be restored; but his
sick chamber was invaded by Sir William Denison’s
satellites. The penal officers of the colony invaded his
chamber, without warrant, to seize the unfortunate gentle-
man, and drag him back to the scene of punishment and
degredation. The Government doctor and one of the
medical gentlemen of Launceston interposed, and dis-
patched a certificate to the effect that a removal at that
time would endanger his life. Three days respite was
thus obtained. On the evening of the third day Mr. W.
Gunn, Superintendent of Convicts, received instructions
to remove McManus back to Port Arthur. But Mc-
Manus’s friends, during this respite, had made up their
minds that they would remove him out of the clutches of
Sir William Denison. The barque “Elizabeth Thompson,”
chartered by Mr. W. B. Dean to proceed with produce to
California, was then about leaving Launceston Over-
tures were made to secure the passage of the unfortunate
gentlemen out of the clutches of tyranny and oppression.
It was agreed to take him away, if it was possible, and
to place him on board of the vessel outside of the Tamar
Heads. That difficulty was overcome in the following
manner. Fortunately at this time the barque “Spartan ”
called at Tamar Heads, waiting orders whether to load
at Launceston, or proceed to Melbourne for a cargo.
The commander, Payne, an off-hand, dashing fellow,
entered heartily into the scheme of aiding the escape of
McManus. Fearing that the Doctor might make a visit


at night to the patient, a young man, a resident of Laun-
ceston, J. G. , who resembled McManus in features
and stature, volunteered to go to bed in the sick chamber
in his place. That evening the Doctor did not make his
appearance, a large meeting on the Anti-Transportation
Question being held in Launceston, all the residents
attending, the Doctor amongst the number. It was
arranged McManus should obtain the use of the fast-
trotting pony, the property of Mr. Douglas, and Mr.
Barrett, of Whirlpool Reach, was to meet him at the
bridge, and guide him to his residence, and from thence
to place him on board the “ Spartan.” But the best laid
schemes are sometimes frustrated by a simple incident.
A faithful guardian in the shape of a Newfoundland dog
stood guard over the pony; and when it was attempted
to saddle the pony the dog [laced his paws on the
shoulders of McManus, and entered his protest against
the proceeding b> uttering his deep-toned “ bow-wows.”
It was in vain to attempt to bribe or coax the faithful
guardian by speaking to him the sweetest and softest
words with true Irish accent, and McManus was com-
pelled to retreat from the stable. Mr. Douglas being at
the public meeting there was nothing to be done but to
proceed to his private residence, and obtain the assistance
of one of his sons ;an hour was thus lost. Mr. Barrett
[eft his station and came into town to ascertain what was
the matter.
Being informed that he had gone at the break of day
Barrett was on the road, and at thirty miles down found
the pony fastened to a sapling ; but where was McManus ?
On reaching his home he discovered the fugitive had not
arrived there. Mr. Barrett and a couple of his faithful ser-
vants beat the bush, when poor McManus was found about
five miles below Whirlpool Reach, in a hollow gum tree,
shivering with cold. It was found necessary that he should
have rest and refreshment, and in the small hours of the
next morning, with muffled oars, a boat put forth and
safely conveyed McManus on board the “ Spartan.”
The officials were quickly on the alert. The sema-
phore on the Windmill Hill, at Launceston, had been


actively at work (when it was ascertained the bird had
flown) telegraphing the news to George Town. The
mist on the Tamar had not risen when Captain Friend,
who was magistrate and port officer at George Town, with
the police officers, boarded the “ Spartan,” the Captain
and crew being at breakfast. No alarm had been given
of their arrival, and McManus had barely time to conceal
himself behind the cabin door when they entered.
Strangely it was, and most fortunately for McManus, they
did not look behind the door. Two constables were left
on board. Payne served out the grog freely, and when
evening arrived the “ bobbies ” could see double. Dr.
Hampton had arrived in Launceston to stimulate the
officials to greater exertion. The “ Spartan ” was again
to be searched \ but this time there was better provision
made for the security of McManus—he was rolled up in
the main sheet. The constables never looked upwards.
On Tuesday morning 4th March, 1851, the “Elizabeth
Thompson ” was taken in tow by the steamer “ Gypsy,”
having on board the District Constable and two subor-
dinates, to see that no person boarded her. She was
towed out to sea. The “ Spartan ” raised her anchor,
and proceeded as was supposed on her voyage to Mel-
bourne. It was blowing a strong breeze from the north-
west, and, being in light trim, she soon overhauled the
“Elizabeth Ihompson,” and McManus was placed on
board of her out in mid-ocean, free from the official
tyranny of Sir William Denison.
Unfortunately for Payne, the master of the “Spartan,”
it came on to blow a gale, and he was driven out of his
course, and blown near to the New Zealand coast, and it
took considerable time to make the port for which he
sailed. Running out of provisions he put into Western
Port, and going on shore he shot a bullock. His troubles
did not end here, being taken up for cattle stealing.
When, however, the owner of the beast heard the parti-
culars of the cause of the proceeding he took no further
action. Payne was released. He lost his position as
master of the ship, but he shortly afterwards received an
appointment in Victoria.


F. O’MEAGHER.
O’Meagher was under the same sentence as McManus
and arrived in the colony at the same time.
On Ist May, 1851, he appeared before Mr. T. Mason,
at the Police Court, Campbell Town, having received a
letter from the Comptroller General of Convicts, Van
Diemen’s Land, requiring him to renew his parole.
I abridge the conversation which took place between
him and the police magistrate :
Mr. Mason—“ The Comptroller General desires me to
request you will now have the goodness to write a renewal
of your parole, and address the document to him.”
Mr. O’Meagher —“ Am I required to give the renewal
in writing ? ”
Mr. Mason. —“ Yes, so it has been directed.”
Mr. O’Meagher.—“ At the time I received the ticket-
of-leave the parole was not required in writing, nor do I
conceive that it becomes more binding by being placed
upon paper, I have no objection, however, to set it
down in writing, since you have been instructed to
require it.”
Mr. O’Meagher was then politely handed a sheet of
long blue paper by Mr. Truro, clerk of the court, and
he addressed a note to the Comptroller General of Con-
victs, informing him that he pledged his word of honor
not to attempt to escape from the colony so long as he
held the ticket-of-leave. Mr. O’Meagher, having com-
pleted this note, handed it to Mr. Mason, who read it
over, and quietly bowing to Mr. O’Meagher informed
him it would do, and that he would forward it to the
Comptroller General.
Mr. O’Meagher then said that he wished to take ad-
vantage of the opportunity presented to him by the
renewal of his engagement, to state distinctly that in
giving the parole required of him by the Government, he
Pledged his honor to the fulfilment of one condition
only , namely, that of not attempting to leave the colony.
“ To the fulfilment of no other condition whatsoever have
Ibledged myself or do I commit my word of honor .”


In the latter end of the year 1851 Mr. George Dease
received letters from America from various sympathisers,
also from McManus ; also enclosed was a letter for
O’Meagher, advising him to shake off the dust of Van
Diemen’s Land from his shoes, and leave the colony.
O’Meagher was sick and weary of his hermit life at Lake
Sorel, and there was a longing desire once more to be
able to mix with his co-equals in the busy hive of the
world. The preliminary arrangements were left to Mr.
Dease; and the same vessel, with the same captain, was
early in 1852 again in the port of Launceston, loading up
for San Francisco, The difficulty was, how was it possi-
ble to remove O’Meagher from Lake Sorel to Bass’s
Straits unobserved by the authorities; but the fertile
brain of Mr. G. Dease overcame that difficulty. The
Messrs. Field were interviewed, and they agreed to pro-
vide a guide, with relays of horses, for the purpose of
removing the hermit from Lake Sorel to Badger Head.
The following letter was then addressed to Mr. Thomas
Mason, police magistrate at Campbell Town :
“ Sir,
My written obligation that I furnished you I now revoke.
On and after I shall feel at liberty to dispose of myself
as I think proper.
Your obedient servant,
F. O’Meagher.”
On receipt of this letter the police magistrate, with the
district constable and two subordinates, proceeded to
Lake Sorel. On their arrival at the residence of Mr.
O’Meagher they found four mounted horses, with another
horse ready saddled and bridled. The police magistrate
was met at the garden gate by O’Meagher, who, raising
his hat, said, “ I presume, Sir, you have come for me.”
Before the police magistrate could reply one of the
mounted horsemen suddenly wheeled round, the horse
letting fly with both heels, dispersed the magistrate and
constables. O’Meagher immediately vaulted into the
vacant saddle, and, putting spurs to his horse, galloped
off, the four horsemen covering his retreat, thus rendering
the carbines of the constables of little or no use.


I regret I am not able to give a detailed account of the
cross-country ride of seventy miles ; but the pilot on the
occasion was a stockrider of Mr, Field’s, and known
under the cognomen of Sydney Bill. With the relay of
horses provided they proceeded over hill, over dale,
through streams, through bush and scrub, the guide con-
ducting them almost in a bee line to the residence of Mr.
George Barker at Port Sorel. There was no hitch.
True to the time, at four o’clock in the afternoon, from
the summit of the hill behind the house was heard the
signal coo-ee. In the offing was to be seen the “ Eliza-
beth Thompson,” within a mile of the shore, all her sails
aback. A peculiar occurrence then took place. There
happened a worthy Justice of the Peace to be passing at
the time; but Mr, Baker was not at a loss to divert atten-
tion from the mounted party, and invited the J.P. into
the house to take a glass of grog, to help him on the road
home. The visitor enquiring who it was who had coo-eed
the host replied, “ Oh ! some confounded stockriders who
were always humbugging about this place.” Requesting
to be excused for a moment, he retired, fastening the
door behind him. The five horsemen were soon galloping
down the hill, and into Mr. Baker’s yard. A boat was
laying a short way from the shore. The horsemen quickly
dismounted. One of the number rushed through the
surf, and leaping into the boat the sturdy arms of the
seamen pulled quickly to the ship, and as the hermit
gained the deck of the ship three hearty cheers were given
by those on shore, which were heartily returned from the
crew. The sails were trimmed and the “ Elizabeth
Thompson ” proceeded on her way, bearing Francis
O’Meagher, like his compatriot, McManus, to the land
of the “ Stars and Stripes,” the home of the free.
f \ .
iflHIS. “p




