

\' \f " '' Xi X
JVow Open ,
PATRONIZED BY THEIR ROYAL HIGHNESSES THE DUKES OF
AND BRUNSWICK
CUMBERLAND
THE LEVERIAN
MUSEUM
To see all things in God, has been accounted one of the peculiar privileges of a future state ; and in
this present life, “ to see God in all things,” in the mirror of the creation to behold and adore the reflected
glory of the Creator, is no mean attainment; and it possesses this advantage, that thus we sanctify our
pursuits, and instead of loving the creatures for themselves, are led, by the survey of them and their
Instincts, to the love of Him who made and endowed them. The more then we study the works of
Creation, the more will the wisdom and the goodness of the Creator be manifested : and while we admire
the order and harmony of the whole, or the beauty and variety of its parts, it will be impossible not to
adore “ Him who is wise in heart, and wonderful in workingand at the same time confess, with humility
of soul, that—“ THE HAND THAT MADE THEM IS DIVINE.”
MR. SEAMAN,
(As Manager for a Society of Gentlemen? to whom this
Collection belongs)
Begs to inform the Ladies and Gentlemen of this Town, that he has just arrived with
that extensive and valuable Museum, containing many Thousands of
NATURAL. CURIOSITIES,
Where may be seen the progress of-Art in the different Ages of the World, exemplified in the variety of
Utensils each Nation in each Century hath produced. Natural History may in this place be studied from
Nature herself, so great is the variety herein contained of the most curious productions of the Earth, Air,
and Water. Part of this Museum was formerly theproperty of SIR ASHTON LEVER, exhibited
for many years in London, and visited by the principal Nobility of England. The Manager takes the
liberty to mention, that the Museum contains the most rare
Quadrupeds
BIRDS , FISHES,
REPTILES, INSECTS,
Minerals, Shells, Fossils and Coins,
FROM EVERY PART OF THE WORLD.
ALSS, THE HEADS OF TWO
CHIEFTAIN WARRIORS
From the South Pacific Ocean, curiously Tattooed according to the custom of their country, and embalmed
with such admirable style, as to preserve the natural character of those Islanders. The first is the Head of
an Otaheitan Chief, where the benignity of the countenance peculiar to the Tribe is finely expressed; the
silky black hair and olive complexion, and the Tattooing of the whole face, presents one of the most
interesting objects ever beheld. The second is the Head of a New Zealand Chieftain; the ferocity of his
countenance, the short bristly hair on the front, contrasted with the long stiff curls on theback part of the
head, the high cheek bones, and thick lips of this Warrior, have an effect which no language can describe.
THE QUADRUPEDS
CONSIST OF AFRICAN AND AMERICAN
LIONS,
TIGERS, LEOPARDS,
GREENLAND AND RUSSIAN BEARS, 4c.
The BIR
OF WHICH THERE ARE SIXTEEN HUNDRED CASES!
Consist of the most rare and beautiful, from the Deserts of Asia and the Indian Islands, Botany Bav the
interior of Africa, North and South America, and the West Indies, whose varied Plumage and extraor
dm ary Form render them worthy the attention of the Admirers of the Works of Nature** from theKi„j
of the Vultures, to the various and splendid Tribes of the almost Insect Humming Bird * 5
The REFTIJLES,
Of which there are TWO CROCODILES, TWO ALLIGATORS TWFNTVPivr rm
SERPENTS, the RING BOA-SERPENT, thirty-eight feet in lemnh
GREAT BOA-CONSTRICTOR SERPENTS, GERRENDER SERPENTRATTLE
SPECTACLE SERPENT, WHIP SNAKE, GARTER SNAKE &c &c AkES ’
The EISH,
Consist of the Wonderful SWORD FISH, eleven feet in length, weighing iooHis it. „ 1
exhibited in this Kingdom; the Sturgeon; the voracious Shark, Blood Fish Balance Fiji* *
Wolf Fish. Porcupine Fish, Angel Fish, Lump Fish, Flying Fish, and many others ’ Flsh '
The INSE
For beauty and variety are not to be equalled in any other Collection in the kingdom • there are manv
thousands from all parts of the World. 5 lllan >
The MINERALS and SHELLS are truly interesting
and beautiful.
This Collection has been made at considerable expence, and with several years of unremitting and
arduous research To convey an adequate idea of it in the limits of a hand-bill would be imSSe
Manager Hat ers himself that nothing on his part shall be wanting to render the MuseZ worthv the
attention of those Ladies and Gentlemen who may honour him with their patronage and support which he
nimbly solicits. As no Room cou d be had of sufficient dimensions for this Collection, tTproprSors
have fitted up several commodious Caravans upon an entirely new principle, in which, by means of cons ant
fires, the beautiful Plumage of the Birds, and the various Colours of the Beasts, &c. are preserved h
their natural splendour, a desideratum in this department of Natural History preserved in
* * fdmittance —Lf ies and Gentlemen, U.~ Working People and Children 6d
• The Exhibition is Open from 10 in the Morning till 9in the Evening—Deseriptive Catafomms
(Sixpence each) may be had at the Place of Exhibition. P °
BIRDS, BEAST, INSECTS, &c. BOUGHT, SOLD, OR EXCHANGED.
TURN OVER.


TO the MUSEUM,
the REV. W. HARRISON.
Pymore, Oct. 30, 1824.
SEAMAN, a tributary lay
Thy beauteous scenes demand.
Which, ’midst the wonders of the day,
Without an equal stand.
Struck with emotions of delight,
At what therein I view’d,
I could have tarried through the night,
With pleasure still renew’d.
There meet what every soil bestows,
From India’s burning zone.
To where stern winter piles his snows,
Around his arctic throne ;
Affording all the traveller’s joy,
Without his toils and frights,
Which but too oft the bliss destroy
That novelty excites.
From the equator to the pole
Enraptur’d fancy runs,
Unfrozen at her Northern goal;
Unburnt with torrid suns.
There tame, the lordly lion dwells,
And thirsts for blood no more;
Nor fills the air with dying yells,
Or death-denouncing roar.
There harmless alligators lay,
As by their native Nile,
And round his vainly-struggling prey
The serpent twists his coil.
And there, with neither need or cause
Of fear or fortitude,
The rattle-snake distends his jaws,
With poison’d fangs endu’d.
With open mouth the pard appears,
In attitude to kill,
When from his coil the viper rears.
As meditating ill.
The sword fish there his station keeps,
Array’d in shining mail,
No more the tyrant of the deeps,
Or terror of the whale.
But surely such a tribe of birds
Ne’er in one group appear’d.
As this delightful scene affords,
Since Noah’s ark was clear’d -
From the wild ostrich swift and tall,
Down to the humming race ;
With thousands not so large or small,
To fill the middle space.
There too the flying fish, and bat,
With Nature’s plan accord,
This joins the fowl and fish, while that
Unites the beast and bird.
What insects too arrest our eyes,
Of every class and name,
Which for their beauty, form, and size,
Our admiration claim.
From these*,thatoncein countless swarms
Were messengers of wrath,
To those whose diminutive forint
Enliven every path.
In short, where’er our optics turn,
New wonders we explore;
And latent beauties still discern,
Which past unseen before.
But while this well connected plan
So gratifies the view,
Let us beware of giving man
What is his Maker’s due.
Though honour to the artist’s skill,
Is but his lawful meed,
Our praise ascending higher still,
Should up to God proceed.
If these so fair and perfect seem,
How unconceiv’d, unheard,
Must be the power of the Supreme
Who form'd them with a word .
They are thy works, Almighty Sire !
And teach us more and more,
The time we wonder and admire,
To wonder and adore !
W. HARRISON.
To Mr. Seaman,
Leverian Museum,
* Locusts.
D. Cartwright , Printer, 91, Bartholomew Close, London.
