

NUMBER ONE.
EDITED BY A PENDRAGON.
Price One Shilling.




NUMBER ONE.
EDITED BY A. PENDRAGON.
APRIL, 1851.
CONTENTS.
ARTICLE. PAGE.
1. INTRODUCTION ....... 3
2. THE TOOTH OF THE GOOD ST. AMBROSE . . 4
3. WHO WAS THE SIXTH . . . . ’ .12
4 LIFE IN DEATH ....... 18
5 WINE AND BEAUTY . . . . .23
6 THE OWL AND THE LARK .... 22
7 PASSAGES FROM AN INEDITED ROMANCE 24
I. Peter Plosman.
11. The Parricide Collar.
8 THE MYRTLE 31
9 DINNERS ........ 32
10 BESTIR YOURSELVES AUSTRALIANS . 35
11 HOW WE FARED WHEN HARD UP IN PARIS . . 37
12 UNPUBLISHED LINES . . . . . . 43
13 AFTER PROOF 45
[All comirmnications to be addressed A. Pendragon, Gawler.]




INTRODUCTION.
Number One. —We all reverence that number —-patriots, philanthro-
pists, preachers, philosophers, and poets ; ALL look to Number One .
Many of these, too, and most others, look only to number one—and
never beyond.
Number One is with some their Alpha and Omega their beginning
and end.
It may he that, in like manner, this venture may begin with Number One
and end there : that, however, rests with the public of South Australia-
I believe there is a vacant place in our colonial literature. It is my
aim to fill it, and in the form of a Monthly Magazine, to provide a vehicle
for imaginative writing.
The province of journalism would not be invaded by this, nor would it
run counter to the already existing periodicals having a special mission.
Politics and News as generally understood, would have no place in it.
Wit, Humour, Agreeable narrative, History, Travel, Poesy, the Arts and
Sciences, the movements of the Philosophical, and other literary associa-
tions —would.
If only small encouragement he given (and no more is anticipated)
to this outrider of a more comprehensive idea, in a short time, the Editor
will announce a monthly magazine, which will, doubtless, he more at-
tractive, inasmuch as he hopes to secure the aid of some whom he
acknowledges to he more able than he is to perfect the task, to which
he has dedicated his pen.
A. PENDRAGON.




NUMBER ONE.
THE TOOTH OF THE GOOD ST. AMBROSE.
A legend of the Basilica of St. Ambrose, at Milan. In Three Fyttes
commencing with a Prolegomena, and concluding with a Moral.
PROLEGOMENA.
I’ve been up the Rhine,
Down the Rhone,
To Ehrenhreitstein,
To Coblenz, to Cologne,
To Aix and to Arles,,
To Geneva, to Basle,
And to famed Avignon, —
But none
Of these cities so fair,
With Milan can compare.
It leaves far behind
All their beauties combined ;
For there lies enshrined,
In the Church Ambrosian,
A most marvellous man, —
Or, more truly a saint , of fame greatly delectable,
Who died, as he lived, in fair sanctity’s odour;
Without e’er a smile, but with visage dejectable;
As is always the case , with a saint that's respectable.
0 blessed St. Ambrose !
0, Blessed be his corpse from his head to his toes!
(Not forgetting so prominent part as his nose) —
0 blessed be a saint! that, unlike mortal meat.
Grows fresher with time, and more old grows more sweet;
0 blessed be his corpse from his head to his feet!
0 blessed be his corpse from his feet to his head;
May he never grow harder, or drier, or thinner, —■
And may he supply, every day, a good dinner
To those holy men who as not being dead,


Are not wholly competent grace to a sinner
To accord; —so say grace after dinner instead.
0 blessed St. Ambrose
May bis flesh,—that’s the little—that’s spared us by time,
(And good saints e’en alive are remarkably thin,
For in keeping off fatness they keep off the sin
Of the flesh; a devotion that’s truly sublime !)
May his flesh, and his bones, and his beautiful skin,
His teeth, and his skull, and his hair, and his nails,
Be the hope of the wretched, when other hope fails.
To work many a cure!
As they will, I am sure;
May their virtues endure
For ever, with this most veracious of tales !
fytte I.
In eight hundred years and odd,
So runs the written tale,
A Bishop by the grace of God,
A Bishop lean and pale!—
Arch- Bishop, I should rather say—
Plodded cautiously his way
Adown the columned aisle,
Where just a glimmering light had spread
A misty halo o’er the dead j
And every moment stilled awhile
The echo of his tread.
For guilty conscience pictured then
The ghosts of what were living men
Rise from their sculptured bed;
And then his knees with fear would quake,
And all their fellow-limbs partake
The overwhelming dread;
From the very sole
Of his foot it stole
Up to his mitred head.
And conscience, too, would give a voice
To epithets not over choice—
“ Apostate, sinner, renegade,
(( Blasphemer, sacrilegious blade,
“ Are vou dement, or not afraid


“ The sacred tombs to thus invade
“With pickaxe, crowbar, and with spade.”
For Angilbert, Archbishop pale,
For Angilbert Archbishop lean,
Had some disease that made him fail
To saintly precepts keep between ;
It migrht he tooth-ache or the spleen;
But be it as it might, f was seen
He wandered from his home at night
With thoughts that scare me as I write*
He had a notion he could stay
[Disease—and demons drive away,
By carrying in a ring of gold
The sacred tooth of Saint Ambrose ;
And so with this most impious, bold,
And monstrous notion forth he goes,
As once before, I think I said,
With pickaxe, crowbar, and with spade ;
And though his fears he could not quell,
Incited by the fiend of Hell,
In half the time I write this line.
Had shelled Saint Ambrose from his shrine!
0, Angilbert, have you no fear
A saint’s front tooth away to bear
Simply in a ring to wear ?
0, know ye not, despoiler rude,
That, though with patience great endued,
Yet willing theft to overlook
A saint cannot by cross or crook ;
For he would have in heaven on high,
Or either on the earth no peace,
If found compounding felony
By the agents of police.
And so that he, the good Ambrose,
With sandals hut to shield his toes,
Will have the earth to roam about
For that front tooth—Alack ’tis out.
The tooth was out, and strange to say
There was no earthquake, not a storm }
The good Saint Ambrose quiet lay


As if he’d taken chloroform;
And the bishop found his spirits rise
As he felt within his grasp the prize
For which he’d risked to damn his eyes,
And guilty soul, for aye.
So in rapturous glee,
Though no layman was he,
He struck up a popular lay.
fytte ii.
From the Church of Saint Lawrence.
The crowd poured in torrents,
Of high and low degree,
Loud swelled the chaunt
With joy to haunt
The breast of devotee.
The chaunt did swell
In voice and bell
A “pleasant minstrelsies”
And counts were there,
W T ith ladies fair,
And priests, as well might he;
And all yclad,
In the best they had,
A sight it was to see;
And high, and proud, the cross was led,
And rich, and rare, the incense shed,
Above each reverend bended head,
As passed the bright cortege :
And many a veyrial* there, I ween,
Enclosing relics rarely seen,
And houghs of emblematic green ,
And many a fair ymage.
And Angilhert was there, also,
With saintly look and solemn brow;
The boldest sceptic scarce would guess
That butter in his mouth would melt;
And how far less, 0 how far less,
* A reliquary glazed so as to permit the to be seen.
From “ veyre,” Norman French for glass.


B.
That he, a saint, could dispossess,
Without a pang of anguish felt
Of that bright tooth; —What wickedness !
And Angilhert was there, also,
Clad in his best from top to toe,
Clad in his best from toe to top,
In mitre, stole, —but here I stop j
That word recalls me to the tooth
He stole without a moments ruth.
And to that saint —By Jove he’s here!
Scattering the crowd with pious fear,
<l 0, give me back my tooth!” he cries,
“ 0, give back that dear tooth to me!
“ 0 are you not ashamed that eyes
u A saint in deshabille should see ?
%l One sandal’s gone, I’ve lost my crook,
“ My wig some villain bold hath taken,
“ And are you not ashamed to look
“ Upon a saint, with running, shaken
<l Into a mess of perspiration ?
“ 0 Angilhert, a saint’s damnation,
a Anathema and imprecation!
“ Rest on thy soul to age from youth
“ Until you give me back that tooth.
“ Look at my hair, look at my face,
“ Unkempt, unwashed, —that such disgrace
u Upon a saint should ever fall/
“My tooth come give,
“ Or, as long as I live
“In heaven or hell, I’ll haunt you alh’*
fytte in.
The tooth was in its resting place,
Without a speck, or chip, or flaw,
St. Ambrose had it in his jaw.
To beautify his withered face j
But Angilhert he had no rest
By night, by day, at food, or prayer,
For hideous demons would infest
His brain, and stiffen all his hair.
And summoned by the fiend, Remorse


Near ‘ cooked liis goose’ with hellish sauce.
In vain a beauteous wig he bought,
Its curls with golden threads ywrought.
In vain new sandals and a crook,
They would not suit the good saint’s hook,
“ No, no,” said he, “ a saint’s not troubled
“For nought,—nor to he easy bubbled
“ By simple deed of restitution,
“After enduring such confusion;
“ So if my anger you’d allay,
“ And taunting demons drive away,
“ By all the saints you’ll have to pay
“ The piper;
“ For Mother Church on other terms,
“Whate’er do opposition firms,
“Will never to her bosom take
“ Unless with gold its peace should make
“A viper.
“So go ye now and do not spare
“To gather gold, and jewels rare:
“ And cunning workmen, far, and wide,
“Assemble here to build a shrine,
“ Where precious metals shall preside,
“ And rich enamel intertwine
“ With choicest gems to glow and shine,
“ And costly chiselling combine, —
“ For costly chiselling'’s been thine, —
“ Such Church’s will, —and such is mine.”
So saying, Ambrose wiped his nose,
Not on a kerchief, but his cuff,
Which signified he’d said enough,
And wished to take a short repose;
So the Archbishop went his way
In penitence and bitter grief,
As was the fashion of that day
To fast and scourge himself, and pray,
And own himself a very thief;
Blessing the mercy of the saint
That took from him the worldly taint
Of riches, —which are only fit
For saints, and are not worth a nit.


And gold, and gems, he gathered then,
And from Byzantium cunning men:
And then at once to expiate,
His sin, and yet commemorate
Its vile commission, and his sorrow,
He built a famous pala dloro ,
On which bright gems and colours show
This history from the first to last,
So that the most untaught should know
From the sad record of the past
That if to steal’s a g-rievous sin,
Demanding punishment severe,
What villainy must there be, in
Hobbmg a saint WHILE IN HIS BIER.
MORAL.
There are some men who sacred things
To vilest uses, will pervert;
And such, will cover angels wings
With their dull venom, and their dirt;
Steal holy truths, and from them win
A seeming innocence. Oh, Sin!
What decent garments art thou often in.


WHO WAS THE SIXTH?
The Thermometer at 130, —A North wind blowing-,—a ride, first through
a sand scrub, and then for miles across a dusty plain, with the mono-
tonous posts and rails, stretching-, in straight lines, in every direction,
mapping- it out into the likeness of a gigantic chessboard, the fallow and
stubble representing the black and white squares, with the homesteads
like chessmen, scattered here and there, as if the end of the game were
approaching and the hoard nearly cleared; —Light, Heat, and Sameness
everywhere, till the eye ached, the brow burnt, and the mind grew weary.
A break in the road, —a few stepping stones, across a creek, and the
lazy flow of a tiny stream, threading the grey soil, and turning it black
for a few inches in width, —barred our way. Our horses panting from
the heat, and parched with thirst, dipped their noses to the stream, but
after sniffing for a moment, again raised their heads, and stepped wearily
on without drinking.
“ A salt creek, Doctor, I suppose ?” said I, addressing my companion.
“ Yes! salt as brine;” said he, “ but, by turning in at the next slip-
pannel, we can get a drink both for the horses and ourselves, and, as we
have a two hours ride yet before we reach the township, we had much
better do so.” ,
“ Agreed !” said I.
A few yards brought us to the slip-pannel, and we struck off for the
homestead, situate about half way up the section, following a track
which led us along the edge of the creek we had already passed; at
about half the distance, the creek widened out into a waterhole about
twenty feet in width, and perhaps slightly more in length, with a steep
bank on either side; a solitary shea oak, the only tree for at least a mile
in any direction, stood on the eastern bank, and, notwithstanding
the stubble over the whole of the remaining portion of the section,
gave evidence of the late abundant harvest, the course of the creek itself,
especially the immediate neighbourhood of the waterhole, had a bare and
barren appearance, and, even on that dry scorching day, seemed more
parched and desolate then the rest, —as if the earth about it, had been
fevered, by drinking in, the salt, and nauseous, stream.”
“ Mark well, that waterhole, and tree, we have just passed,” said my
companion, “ I have a yarn to tell you about them, as we ride on pre-
sently, which will help to pass the time till we get home.
I may here state, parenthetically, that I was staying, for a few days,
with the Doctor at his residence in ; and, had, that day, accompanied


him, on a distant visit, to a patient residing in the hills, whose house we
had reached, by a pleasant ride, in the morning,—returning by a different
route, —“ to give me a taste,” he said, “of all kinds of country.”
Our approach to the homestead was heralded by a watch dog-, which?
colonial fashion, ran out to meet us, barking furiously and forcing us
to keep our reins tight in hand, but the brute was soon whistled back by
a tall good humoured specimen of humanity from the Emerald Isle, be-
tween whom, and my friend the Doctor, a few hearty words of greeting
passed, and then he cordially invited us to dismount and refresh ourselves.
A bucket of water, and a bite of hay, for our horses, with a jug of
sugar beer, and bread and cheese, for ourselves, half an hours rest, and a
quiet smoke, sent us on our way refreshed, while the sun dipping down
towards the horizon, and a slight breeze from the west replacing the hot
blast from the north, began to make the ride a pleasure, rather than a
toil, as before.
“And now for the yarn,” said the Doctor pulling up from a sharp trot
and dropping leisurely into a walk, “ but first, look round, and tell me
what you see ?”
“ I see a broad expanse of plain, spreading for several miles in every
direction, up to the foot of the hills, which, with a gentle slope, bound our
horizon on all sides. I see many broad, dusty, lines crossing the plains,
and cutting each other mostly at right angles, marking the lines of traf-
fic, substantial homesteads, peeping up here and there, and a few bullock
teams creeping lazily along the dusty roads, whilst, on almost every
section, the plough is tearing up the ground, and chequering the
glaring yellow of the stubble, with streaks of rich brown, increasing
hourly in width, and giving fair promise of future plenty; in the distance
to the North, I see a cluster of houses I should take for a small township,
—-and one, which from its size and outbuildings I should take for a public-
house ; the solitary tree, beside the waterhole, you pointed out, is still a
well marked feature in the landscape, although we must have left it be-
hind us at least a mile; —and I see we shall shortly approach a rise
which I suspect will hide the whole from our view when we have crossed
its summit.”
“ Well described—and now for the same scene eight years ago; the same
flat expanse of country, the same hilly horizon, the same cluster of distant
houses, (though less numerous), the same public house, and lastly the
same solitary tree, but there the resemblance ceases; —not a fence over
the whole plain, and scarcely a track, although one might be seen wind-
ing like a serpent up the eastern hills, and one crossing it in an irregular
manner from north to south. Short herbage, and tufts of spiny grass
or flag, all the vegetation, with the salt creek, winding through all, and
marking its course by the greater sterility of its banks; —a solitary place,
more desolate with its wide unbroken expanse, than the rugged hill, or
the thick scrub, such was it at the time of which I speak, a fit scene for
a deed of darkness, a foul and cowardly murder.”


. “On the first Thursday in March, about seven or eight years ago, —-just
at the time our wet season commences, —I was summoned from the
breakfast-table by a Police-trooper, to accompany him to the Public
blouse you see yonder, to examine a body, which, on the previous after-
noon, had been taken out of the waterhole we so lately passed. The day
I speak of, as well as the preceding one, wms scorching hot, and follow-
ed several that were wet and dismal. Indeed, the changes had been very
sudden and severe : damp days succeeded by bitter, cold, raw nights hav-
ing been the general rule. We rode on as quickly as possible, and on
reaching the spot, I was immediately shown into a room where the body
had been placed. I will spare you, as much as possible, the disgusting
details of its apppearance : suffice it to say, that, it was the body of a man
of medium height, rather stout, head nearly bald, features coarse and
unpleasant, clad in a coarse striped shirt, and moleskin trousers. There
were marks of violence on the head, and chest; a cut upon the upper lip ?
the marks of a blow extending across the root of the nose, and right eye •
and, a severe bruise upon the breast. There had been considerable hoemorr-
hage from the wound on the lip, and that, on the eye, was quite sufficient to
stun him. I had no hesitation in pronouncing the whole of these inju-
ries to have been inflicted before death. There was also a mark of con-
striction round the neck; but I could not speak so certainly as to this
as decomposition had already commenced, and the mark might have
been caused hy the tightness of the shirt collar which was burst open,
and the button torn away. The body had evidently lain in the water for
several days, and decomposition was proceeding so rapidly, that identifi-
cation would be impossible in a few hours.
“A Jury had already been summoned, and the Coroner, a highly res-
pected Justice of Peace in the neighbourhood, only waited the result of
my examination to proceed with the inquest. The following facts were
elicited, though not perhaps in the order, in which, for the sake of brevity,
I shall relate them.—
“On the previous afternoon, (Wednesday), a fruiterer, driving gently
across the plain in a covered cart, heard repeated coo-eh’s behind him ;
on stopping his cart, a young man rode up in great excitement, begging
him to return and help him take a human body out of a waterhole, where
he had just discovered it. He, of course, complied, and on reaching the
spot, found the body of deceased partly exposed. After some little trou-
ble, they succeeded in getting it out of the water, and then went for fur-
ther assistance. The police were sent for, and the body given into
their charge, and eventually removed to the public-house. The young
man, a settler of long standing in the neighbouring hills, stated, that,
being out hunting for bullocks, he had ridden to the waterhole to get a
drink, when he saw something like a human body towards the centre
of the pool, he tried, in vain, to reach it by himself, and seeing a cart in
the distance, rode off for assistance, as already mentioned. Now, there
was one circumstance remarkable in this statement, and the only one that


could throw the slightest doubt upon it \ and it was this, that he, in com-
mon with every other settler, of any standing’, in the district, must have
known that the water of this creek, was totally unfit for drink, either for man
or horse, and that there was fresh water to he obtained, within a very short
distance of the spot. The body, when taken out, was exactly in the
state I saw it, without boots or hat, and clad only in a coarse striped
shirt, with moleskin trousers, the pockets of which were entirely empty.
These were all the facts connected with the finding of the body.
“Its identification was a matter of no difficulty, and it was at once recog-
nised by the young- man who discovered it, as that of a man, well known
in the neighbourhood, as a shepherd, and labourer, and who, indeed, had,
only a short time previously, been in the employ of Jhis own mother, to
whom the section, on which he resided, belonged.
“The previous habits of the unfortunate man were next inquired into.
He was ascertained to have been of a morose and solitary disposition -
he would work for months, saving’ up his wages most penuriously, and
then, (following’ a custom which I am happy to say is fast disappearing
from this district), would leave service suddenly, and lounge about
some public-house, until the whole of his earnings were expended, and
swallowed up, as “nobblers.” At the same time he was not of a con-
vivial disposition, and almost all he spent at these times was spent upon
himself, and not extravagantly thrown away in treating others.
“He had left the service of a settler a few days previously, and had
received five pounds, the balance of his wages; he was also known, on
the Sunday before this, to have been possessed of at least £l3 or £l4,
which he had then tied up, in the presence of a witness, in the corner of
his handkerchief. He had, after leaving service, according to his usual
custom, been at a public-house a few miles distant, had remained there
until the preceding Thursday, but had not during that time, spent his
money extravagantly. On the Thursday afternoon, (exactly one week
previous to the day of the inquest), he had called at the house of the
young' settler who found the body, and, as sworn to by him, then wore
a coarse striped shirt, moleskin trousers, a felt hat, and a pair of strong
new hoots with large round nails and steel tips with nails projecting from
them . He had likewise in his possession a curious German knife. He
left the house on Thursday afternoon, after engaging’ to thresh for a
neighbouring settler in two days time. This was the last time he was
seen alive.
“How then did he come by his death ? Was it a case of suicide, or mur-
der? The solitary, morose, drinking habits of the man, would render the
former con jecture probable j but in that case where were the missing por-
tions of his dress ? where the money he was known to have been pos-
sessed of?
“The neighbourhood of the waterhole was searched j near its banks
were found an old felt hat and a ragged canvas waistcoat \ the ashes of
a camp fire were close by, and near the solitary tree, the marks of


blood were distinctly visible, but in larger quantity, than the injuries
inflicted on the body would render probable. The bed of the creek
itself, showed traces of one set of footmarks proceeding down the stream,
towards the waterhole, in its soft mud, but so indistinctly, as to render it
impossible to distinguish, if the feet which made them, had boots on, or
not; with a single exception, and that was the first impression, which
gave a distinct cast of the heel , and sole , of a hoot without nails , on a
soft piece of clay, where the person wearing it, had first stepped down from
the bank, into the bed of the creek : this impression was very distinct, and
great care was taken not to disturb it at the time of discovery. Further
inquiry brought out the fact, that on that night, a shepherd, his wife, and
hutkeeper, with a flock of sheep, had camped immediately in the neigh-
bourhood of the waterhole, on their way to Adelaide, whither they had
afterwards proceeded. A Police-trooper was, therefore, despatched to
bring them back, and the inquest was adjourned for two days, the Coro-
ner giving an order for the burial of the body, a proceeding rendered
absolutely necessary by its advanced decomposition.
“On the day of the adjourned inquest, I rode up with the Sergeant-Ma-
jor of the Police force, and at his request, showed him the spot where the
body was found. The bottom of the pool was searched, but nothing
discovered, except that the injuries to the head and breast, could not
have been caused, by’anything in the waterhole, its whole bed being one
mass of soft slimy mud, with not the vestige of a stone, in or near, it.
The most remarkable circumstance, connected with our examination was,
that the impression of the boot sole I have before mentioned, had heen
carefully filled in with damp clay; but the person who had taken such
pains to do this,’ forgetting that his own boots must leave impressions,
had left two distinct footmarks, at right angles to the former one, and
apparently resembling it in every particular.
“The inquest was again resumed: the shepherd and his wife but lately
arrived from the Orkney Islands, could scarcely speak a word of English,
and were evidently in a state of complete bewilderment about the matter,
which could only be explained to them (and that imperfectly) through an in-
terpreter. Their evidence was entirely unimportant, with the exception
that the canvas waistcoat, found near the waterhole, was claimed by the
shepherd as one of his own, thrown by as useless : of the hat, he knew
nothing’.
“The hutkeeper was a young man of remarkably pleasing appearance,
and had. even in his rough garb, the manners of a gentleman. He came
forward willingly, and made a statement of all he knew respecting the
matter. He was well known, being the son of a minister, who had
unfortunately met with his death, by a melancholy, accident only a short
time previously, and there was no cause to doubt for an instant the
statements he made, which, it will be seen, exonerated the Gaelic shep-
herd, and his wife, from any complicity, or even knowledge, of the affair?
“He stated that, in company with the shepherd, and his wife, he had


dome down the country with a flock of sheep, that they had arrived
the day before the eventful Thursday, and camped near the waterhole
resting* the sheep, before driving them on to Adelaide for sale. On the
day in question, the shepherd had been out with his flock the whole day,
and returning at sundown, after a wet and drizzling afternoon, had taken
supper, and with his wife, retired at once to the cover of the tarpaulin
for the night. His (the hutkeeper’s) duty, was to take charge of the
sheep, and prevent their straying* during* the night; his work, therefore,
was only just commencing; he made up the fire, and shortly after, two
men came up and asked for food and leave to make a shake-down near
the fire, —a request at once complied with. He entered into conversation
with these men, and found that they were two sailors, who, having run
away from their ship, had been arrested and imprisoned, and on being
let out, were making their way, up the country, in search of employment.
They named the place they thought of proceeding* to, and after some
further chat, lay down and went to sleep. It was now late in tha
evening, and as everything was going on right, he was about to lie down
himself for a short time, when a sixth person made his appearance at the
camp , and requested leave to be near the fire. He did not at any time
see this man’s face; he seemed rather tallish; but it was a very uncer-
tain light, and he did not particularly notice his appearance at the time
He appeared very surly; his hat was slouched over his brows ; and when
he lay down, he placed a pair of hoots beneath his head for a pillow.
He gave no account of himself, and scarcely any conversation passed*
both lying down almost immediately. At day-break the two sailors
were still in the camp. The shepherd and his wife shortly after came
out from beneath the tarpaulin; but the solitary man , the sixth at the
camp , had disappeared. The shepherd took out his flock, and shortly
afterwards the two sailors went on their way. He found an old hat lying
on the ground afterwards, but threw it down again, and thought nothing
more about it. It was apparently the same as that produced at the
inquest. The blood on the ground was that of a sheep killed for the use
of the camp. The footmarks on the creek, he was quite sure, were not
made by any of his party. He heard no remarkable noise during
the night referred to, and had noticed nothing remarkable in the water-
hole, or on its banks, the next day. He had not thought the disappear-
ance of the sixth person strange,—such things often occurring at a camp-
fire, where strangers would come, and go, according to their own conve-
nience. He felt quite sure that neither the shepherd nor his wife had seen
this sixth person, and doubted even if they knew he had been there ; the
difference of language, rendering communication between himself, and
them, very restricted. He could not say if the person at the camp re-
sembled deceased, as he had never, to his knowledge, seen deceased when
living, and the body had been buried before he was brought back to at-
tend the inqnest.
c.


“This, was all the evidence of importance adduced on that day; and,
many of the Jurors being* wayfaring* men, in charge of teams on the
road, who had already been detained for two days,the Coroner here
closed the investigation, with the understanding, that a Magistrate’s
summons should be issued, for the arrest, and examination, of the two
sailors who had been at the camp. Before separating the Jury returned
a verdict, of, “ Wilful murder against some person, or persons, unknown.”
In a few days the sailors were brought before the Police Magistrate,
in Adelaide. All expected they would be found to be implicated in the
affair. The examination, however, failed completely in sustaining any
charge against them. They had remained, (as seen), at the camp, until
the day was sufficiently advanced for them to start on their way. Had
called at the public-house, and moderately refreshed themselves. Had
there stated where they wished to go, and inquired their way. Had pro-
ceeded according as directed, and procured employment, which they were
following quietly, and unconcernedly, when arrested. They had no pro-
perty, which could in the slightest degree, be supposed to have belonged
to the deceased; and when questioned, did not seem to have seen th e
sixth man at all: a statement born out by the hutkeeper’s evidence. They
were at once dismissed, and here the investigation ended.
“Opinion was much divided, at the time, respecting this occurrence :
some clung to the belief that the deceased, in a fit of horrors, had com-
mitted suicide; and his solitary, drinking, habits, and morose disposition
favoured this view; but others, and amongst them myself, held that he
had been brutally and foully murdered. How else account for the
absence of all property on his person ; even his pocket knife gone ; how
account for the absence of the boots he was known to have worn on the
day he disappeared; and, greater mystery than all— whose hoot sole
made the impression on the damp clay ? and why was this so carefully
covered, in on our second visit ?
One thought constantly recurs, when I ponder on this mystery!
Who was the sixth at the camp ? Was it the poor man himself? weary
of the monotonous solitary life he had led, trembling with that dire
fever of the brain, the effect of his periodical drunkeness and dissipation;
camping beside the solitary fire, on that dark, and dismal night, rising in
madness and horror, to seek oblivion, and cool his weary, fevered, brain, in
the dark, and solitary, waterhole ? Or, was it an other I who, after a deed
that all shudder at, drawing his hat over his brows, as if the mark of
Cain, that must ever burn into his soul, stood there, visibly revealed, —
dreading the darkness, and solitude, of night, sought the neighbourhood,
but, not the companionship, of man; and, fearful that the morning light
might reveal his horrid crime, —before its first rays fell upon the sleepers
round him, stole far away;— safe\ Yes, safe from the retributive Justice
of Man, but not from the avenging Power of God !”
G. N.


LIFE IN DEATH.
1.
lam not that I have been; none can know
That I have been or am. In the recess
Of my closed heart, the fire burns dim, and low,
And aspirations now are motionless.
How they once glowed and sparkled, those may guess,
Who read from ashes what such ashes were.
That I have been, I would not now confess,
That I am now, I may not tell—nor care
To wake to life the thoughts that slumber in despair!
2.
Enough! that I have loved as few can love,
(Far happier the many who love not,)
In dreams have wandered from the earth, above,
To bring back visions of some blissful lot;
Visions that blight—not bless—this unreal spot,
Where all most lovely blooms to fade or die,
With pain, to be remembered, or forg’ot,
Or linger on in anxious agony,
When hope is fled, yet wooing it, nor knowing why.
3.
Now—now I love not, nor can even hate,
But take my stand as on a mountain’s brow,
Gazing on all beneath dispassionate,
Enfolded in an atmosphere of snow
That checks the pulse—forbids the heart to glow,
I watch the tiny human things creep on,
In their dull avocations, and but know,
That millions like them have been, and are gone,
And smile to think that such have had my love, or scorn
4.
Yet as the closing waters bear away,
A thing of life, to heave it back again,
A foul and loathsome monument of clay
That even ocean’s monsters may disdain;
So feelings that no spark of life retain,


Feelings engulphed in the vast human tide,
Float, borne by memory’s waves upon the main.
Once more before me ; but I turn aside,
Such lifeless recollections wake in me no pride.
5.
The maid of my young love I see once more,
Once more behold each perfect, peerless, charm,
The radiant look of happiness she wore,
When love-confessing all with blushes warm,
The snowy breast, the swan-like neck; round arm,
The eyes of hope, of hope Ah ! how confiding,
I see them all but yet my heart is calm,
The stream of life in even tide is gliding,
Have I not said that love in me hath no abiding.
6.
And now this phantom fades and others come,
As life-like pictures that have yet no life,
But even seem to speak—l hear the hum
Of battle and again look on the strife,
Where glory hides the blood upon the knife.
Again the wheeling squadron’s charge I see,
Once more I hear the drum and shrilly fife,
With other voices of the war agree:
That such have been I know, nor care that such may be,
7,
And all is hushed, the pageantry is gone,
The martial clang, the groan, the victors cry;
Now with my enemy I am alone,
Yet look upon him with no eager eye,
X hardly seem to know that he is by.
And hath stern vengeance too this heart departed ?
Yengance —the which I swore should never die,
Yengance more hot than love, than hope strong-hearted,
Yes love —hope too, and with them vengence hath departed.
a.
Hope too—ah yes, and with all hope all dread,
All sympathy with life, and with my own—
Own self, that am in Life , and yet am dead ,
In all that makes life living—and alone
Gives the dumb instrument a voice aud tone.
Saw ye a lute neglected silent stand,
Muter than that am I—lts music flown
May still return, neath some caressing hand,
While mine has ceased for ever and knows no command.


WINE AND BEAUTY.
Stanzas for Music.
1.
Our daily toil is over.
Bring hither sparkling wine !
One cup well drain to beauty
And one to the clustering vine ;
Toil for the passing day!
‘Tis man’s first holy duty;
But the sweet hour of rest;
Well give to wine and beauty.
2.
The rays of the setting sun
Splendour the hills with light;
While the moon’s pale beams
Retard the coming night;
Thus man’s heart is lightened
By the cheering juice of wine,
And thus his dark soul brightened
By beauty’s beam divine.
IGNOTUS,


THE OWL AND THE LARK.
1.
In a caved tree, Minerva’s bird
Luxuriously tried to doze,
A Lark howe’er above he heard
Carolling’—breaking his repose.
2.
u How melancholy,” quoth the Owl
“ That Larks will ever be aspiring,
“ If she were a sagacious fowl,
“ She now to rest would be retiring.”
3.
Louder the morning’s songster sang,
On this the Owl grew still more bitter,
“ I wish” said he u that she would gang,
“ Or cease that inconvenient twitter.
4.
“ I never sing —l never soar,
“ I never wanton in the light,
“ That Lark’s a most infernal bore
u I question whether virtuous quite.”
5.
“ I, —Wisdom’s fav’rite bird,” he said
“ Think often more than I could say,
u Yet why the devil Larks where made
“ Has puzzled me before to day.”
6.
“ I’m staid, I’m solemn, reverend, grave,
“ The ancients held in honor high,
“ A bird that never sung a stave,
“ sc om to sing—ah! that would I.”
?.
“ Goo(i morning, Mr. Owl,” the Lark
Said in her mellifluous voice,
“ How sad to see you of the dark,
“ Thus make your pitiable choice.”


8.
ct Just come with me—refresh your youth
“ By looking 1 at the rising Sun,
“ See nature in its warmth and truth,
“ Come—Come thou miserable one.”
9.
The Owl replied u I am too wise,
To listen to such wretched stuff,”
u But Mr. Owl, just use your eyes”
The Owl his eyes d d in a huff.
10.
u My fathers and myself have won,
u Sufficient for us from the night,
“ I have no need to gaze upon
“ The rising sun, —the truth, —the light.”
MORAL.
So owlish men will turn away,
Reject the music of the soul,
What need of light or truth while they
May darkly in their chariots roll.


PASSAGES FROM AN INEDITED ROMANCE.
In •in the county of Norfolk there might be seen a little house
that had habits peculiarly its own Reprehensible they were, I fear,
since all its fellows round about it stood back as if disdainfully.
Thus, standing alone in the centre of the pathway, low-browed, dwarf-
ish, and knock-kneed, an irreverent drunken, air had this house;
but though rather defiant in appearance, it must be admitted there was
the semblance of a reckless jollity and impulsive gaiety about it, that dis-
posed one in its favour.
As some dissolute fellows in their cups, of invasive aspect, stagger
and tumble about, with their fist clenched in pugilistic pose, always finish
by depositing the fist in the first comers hand, accompanying the act by
hospitable invitation “to have another glass,” so did this house bear an
inviting and jovial character in its very threatening, and those who foretold
it would one day do murder, by falling on the innocent way-farer, passed
one by one to their graves false prophets.
Here resided Mr. Peter Plosman, of whom both physically and mo-
rally the house itself might be considered emblematic. For Peter
knock-kneed, low-browed, stunted, and angular, picturesque in
speech and manner, and savagely abrupt at a first introduction, would
invariably soften into an invitation to .“take a glass of old ale and a
crust.” He always gave the old ale precedence of the crust, as the re-
freshment of the more dignified and generous nature, and while on the
subject of old ale, I may state that Mr. Plosman’s profession was sign-
painting, but old ale was his pursuit.
During my sojourn at that pleasant old town in the south of France,
Montpellier, I made many piscatorial excursions, in one of which, I met
a brother of the Angle, with whom, as became the unpretending habits of
a student in the gentle art, I fell into conversation. In the reciprocation
of mutual confidences, he declared himself to be an artiste , and put my
education in French greatly to the blush, by replying, when I enquired
in what line u La dislocation Anglaise .” He was a tumbler in the
ground and lofty line, and I afterwards beheld him in a booth at the fair
with a red wig on, as “Jocrisse.” He entitled himself artiste , but then
he was a Frenchman; and all Frenchmen give to all things a little
lacker.


Peter Plosman, though of German extraction, was an Englishman •
one of the old sturdy sort, now fast dying out, and scorned to embellish
his calling with any superfine title. He called himself a sign-painter,
and so shall I. For Morland too was a sign-painter, and many have
been tied down by poverty, residence in a little unfrequented village, and
good old country ale, to sign-painting, whose genius, under more favor-
able auspices, might have risen to portraits of Alderman Prog in blue
coat and gilt buttons, with a back-ground of the Town Pump, and of Lady
Tinyswallow as Saint Cecilia.
This digression is not ill-timed if it has the effect I intended of convey -
ing that, although Peter Plosman never rose publicly beyond the dignity of
a sign-painter, he had within him the soul of a true artist } and would, in
the Intervals of brushing for his old ale, and drinking it, seek to give
expression to the beautiful thoughts which dwelt within him ; nor always
unsuccessfully : so that Charley Eton, amateur artist, would
often declare that he would like to exchange all his knowledge of the
different schools of art, and all the frigid rules of the studio, for the inborn
talent that gave to the unfinished productions of Plosman so sweet and
tender a grace. He essayed to learn from the old man, by what charm
his sketchy landscapes were always so full of poetry and beauty, re-
paying the sign-painter with studies of Dragons, Blue boars, Red Lions,
Bears with ragged staves, and other grosteque monsters after the manner
of the old masters. Indeed, one of Charley’s designs for a Red Lion of
heraldic and chivalrous bearing, with bristly main, tufted tail, and that
admixture of savage ferocity and jolly-good-fellowship (only to be seen
in lions of that rare colour), gave such satisfaction to the owner of the
Hostelrie for which it was created, that Plosman who was the nomi-
nal author of it, had, on that house, an umlimited draft for ale, and an
unlimited draught he made of it. Not that Peter would have taken
advantage of the landlord’s generosity had the ale been bad, —but it
was not.
To return, however, to the old house —the Plosman, in bricks and
mortar —as Plosman was the house in flesh and blood, the two being part
of each other, as the tortoise of its shell. We shall find the sign-painter
at home dandling on his knee, Charley Eton’s son, with one arm (the
hand of which supported a pipe) encircling its waist, while the other
arm and hand were employed in brushing in, on a sketch of Eton’s, the
poetical legend of a goat with a pair of compasses, placed spectacle-wise,
across its nose.
“ The tendency that human beings have to demoralise, and as one
may say, defile with the clay of earth the images of heaven,” said old
Peter, who inherited from his German origin the mystical reveries
of his race “is all pervading; we have it here in this sign. Who could
suppose that the legend of ‘ God encompasseth us ’ would ever be cor-
D.


rupted into so ridiculous a symbol as “The Goat and Compasses;” and
without waiting- for an answer, he re-applied himself to his brush.
In this characteristic of mortality,” pursued he, after awhile resuming
the thread of his meditation, “we have the history of most religions.
They dress themselves in beautiful allegory and figurative language and
ceremonies, which, their original sense, lost or corrupted, often
become in after use as absurd, and (if I may with reverence say it) as
blasphemous as this sign.”
After awhile the brush was again laid aside, and devotion paid to the
old ale; owing to which, perhaps, his fancy assumed a brighter colouring.
Those tenacious dingers to old tradition, the Jews,” he said, “because
they were told ag-es ago in the East, where swine’s flesh was unwhole-
some, to abstain from its use, do not eat it now and here, where it is
certainly not injurious. With a like fanaticism, there are dismal apos-
tles, who, because strong liquors are poison to the drunkard, would for-
bid a reasonable indulgence in them to the temperate, as if benificent
providence provided us with good things, without granting permission to
partake of them in moderation.”
This is capital ale, Charley; don’t you think so. Here, young- sha-
ver, give us your opinion of it.”
“I am afraid your practice,” said Eton, with a smile, “is not in accor-
dance with your preaching; to give a child like that ale, is certainly
not a reasonable use of it.”
Tush, tush,” replied Plosman, laughingly, “it will do him good.
I was built on it, and look at me.”
Was there any irony in this allusion to his own uncomely figure ? Was
the man of keen wit and dry humour enjoying a joke at his own expense,
as such will often do; or did the painter fail to see in his own distorted
form the image of the godhead, reflected as it w'ere, from a broken
mirror. The clear-sighted are not always awake to a sense of their per-
sonal defects : wisely ordained, perhaps, that it is so.
t “ I su PP ose y° u 11111 have your own way with him,” replied Eton.
Mt is oftener Daddy Plosman with him than aught else.”
“ And so it ought to be,” said old Peter; “am I not to be the founder of
his fortunes. And that, by the way reminds me,” added he, in a grave
tone, “ that I must be more prudent in my expenditure. As it is I
hardly know how I should have made both ends meet, had it not been
for my poor hard-working old father, Hans-Plosman; heaven rest his
soul.’ And the sign-painter put his handkerchief to his nose.
Psha, don t talk that way; the boy will want nothing from you but
a transfer of the affection you have borne for his father, should you sur-
vive me,” interrupted Eton, in a tone which, lively at first, merged into
one of deep feeling, as he shook his old friend by the hand; “besides


you have got this snug house, all your own, a few pounds stored by, and
unshaken credit at the ‘Red Lion;’ not to mention the ‘ Goat and Com-
passes/ and other ale-houses, at all of which, I believe, you are known.”
“Ah!” sighed Peter, rising from his seat to change his pipe for an-
other, (he was an epicure in pipes, of which he had a large collection from
the ancestral meerschaum, down to the less costly, but not the less prized,
short black clay), “Ah! that ale is my bane, I must forswear it,” and he
took a huge draught from the mug before him. “And yet it has been
a good friend tome, and my pen has flourished under its inspiration. You
remember the piece of Langley-dell/’ and the enthusiasm of the author
shone brightly out, “I finished it, and two gallons of ale at one sitting*. ’’
“I remember it well,” said Eton, Indeed he could hardly well forget
it, seeing that whenever the ale began to tell upon old Peter, the chef-
d’teuvre was referred to.
“ Shall we take it down,” enquired Plosman, “ and have another look
at it.”
“By no means,” cried Eton, hastily—“ That is to say, not now,”
a dded he, fearful of wounding the old man’s vanity. “ I must be off
home; but I will come to-morrow, and bring the wife to see it; you
know it is a great favourite with her.”
“ Ah! God bless her,” exclaimed the old man, nearly affected to tears
-—(He was always thus after the eighth mug)—“ do, and bring little
Jackanapes, and we will make a night of it. The ‘Red Lion ’ told me
he has a ham, one of the right sort, and it will serve to relish the two
year old barrel I am going to have from the ‘Goat /’ and old Jack the
smuggler has promised to send, from Yarmouth, something I know will
please your dear wife.”
And thus finished the generous Peter’s grand scheme of retrenchment.
* * * * *
* * * * *
“ I have a subject for a great historical picture” said Plosman. “ I
think of going to London after painting it, to place it in the Exhibition.”
“ My dear Peter,” said Eton smiling, “ You are talking of a thing not
easily accomplished—a subject such as you design requires mature study
before even a sketch of it can be made, much less a finished nicture—be-
sides, a place on the avails of the Royal Academy, is not at the service of
the first comer.”
“ Then it ought to be,” returned Plosman with warmth. “ But you
are always creating difficulties, for me, as for yourself.”
“Not so” replied Eton. “I only pointed out the difficulties in the way
of your object, that they may not open upon you unexpectedly, and s 0
worry you doubly—to be forewarned, is to be forearmed.”
“Forgive me my warmth Charley,” cried the painter. “ You do not know
how I have been put out to-day. Walker the cobbler has sent back his sign,
insists on my altering it again—and has detained the easy boots I


left with him to sole and heel until I return it as he wishes —this is the
fourth time he has sent that sign hack. Firstly, Saint Crispin must have
a pair of boots placed in his hand instead of the pointed shoon of the
same period as the rest of his costume. Secondly, the motto ‘ May the
manufactures of Saint Crispin be trod upon by all the world’ must be in-
troduced. Well this of course was done—then in spite of all expostulation
he would have painted on the boots, ‘John Walker, Cobbler and Shoe
Maker, prime double soled, 10s. Hurrah for Walker !’ Now because I
have inscribed this advertisment in the Gothic letters you drew for me in
accordance with uniformity of treatment here is the sign again with this
note.”
“ Mr. Walker’s compliments to Mr Plosman, and begging his pardon,
he is a fool as Josh Dobbins told me this morning, and he ought not to
write letters as no one can read but schollers and mathermertishens ;
the Sign is for all the world that boots and not for such as them.
Mr. Walker wants Mr. Plosman to write on the sign, plain John Walker
Cobbler and Shoemaker, prime double sold 10s. Hurrah for Walker.
That is what he wants and that is what I will have without new fangled
notions and letters as is cranky and crooked. Some as thinks them-
selves cleverer than their betters dont understand English, but dubble
Dutch and such like gibberish, but he is a straight forward man and no
dubble dealing, three pound is his price, and I have said it and will
stick to it with a new pair of boots double soles and with Iron heels
neatly made for unnecessary alterations but not for such as is necces-
sary. As for the motter that is done in crooked characters, he may
alter them or not according to your conscience; but the plain words
John Walker, cobbler and shoemaker, prime double soled, 10s. Hur-
rah for Walker, I will have it in plain capitals as every one may see,
mark and observe it, if I dont I’m damned, so oping you will attend to
this, I beg to describe myself your friend,
John Walker.”
u P.S.—Put a little more red on Crispins nose, he looks like a ghost.”
“ Now you have read that” said Plosman “ You can judge what my
feelings are. I have not tasted a drop of ale, or smoked one pipe to-
day. c More red on his nose ! dubble dutch ! a fool!’ Can you won-
der I wish to leave this scene of Walkers, to try my fortune in the great
City.”
“You will not avoid the Walkers there Peter; the Critics and Patrons
of London may be more choice in their language than the cobbler—but
the Walker clay will show beneath the glaze. If you are not called
a fool in plain words, that, or worse may be insinuated —if they do not
sneer at your knowledge of the German Tongue, —they will at your pic-
tures of the German School, and they will always discover that there is
too much paint or too little on the nose. Critics and Patrons are much


the same all the world over.” Eton had imperceptibly acquired his
friends manner, of expressing* familiar thoughts in quaint terms.
u Yes,” returned Plosman, “ hut there also will be found Patrons and
Critics of a more genial nature, willing to acknowledge and reward
merit, wherever found, —with such, one fault will not damn a work, —
works of a particular school will be tested by rival productions of that
same school, —for them, a little more, or a little less paint on the nose,
will not be everything.
u And are there none such here” retorted Eton. Does not the a Red
Lion” swing triumphantly in Bridewell-street, does not the u Goat” at-
tract admiring crowds in the High-street. Has not the u Three Bells”
resounded with praises of the sign that swings above its door —pooh,
pooh, London will only shew you in a magnified form the vice and
virtues of .”
“ Perhaps you are in the right Charley. I confess that letter of Walker’s
has indisposed me for argument —and perhaps I look at things through
the medium of a disturbed mind; nevertheless, I should like to go to
London, and I should like to paint the subject I have spoken of.”
“ And what may that be ?” enquired Eton.
“ The Parricide Collar,” replied Plosman gravely.
“ The what ?” demanded Eton.
“The Parricide Collar.”
I will tell you the tale. Many years ago —and yet not so very many,
for the fashion of standing shirt collars is of modern date, there was a
student at Goettingen of a melancholy and reserved disposition. Although
distinguished for his scholarly attainments, and of a mild and even temper
he was not beloved, for it was remarked that he never made the slightest
sign of friendship to any of his fellow students, and they got tired of
paying civilities to a man who merely acknowledged them with a distant
couitesy and then retired within himself. None, however, thought of
hating, or insulting him, for he, himself, never insulted any, and certainly
seemed too cold to hate. Thus, between Herman Geldstein, and his brother
Collegians, was preserved a polite but distant demeanour, the only breach
of which, was, on the part of the students, who in accordance with their
usual custom of conferring a soubriquet on each other, gave to Herman
Geldstein the nick-name of stiefhals (stiffneck), suggestive, at once
of his unyielding manners, and the collar of his shirt, which, as habitually
worn by him, was of mighty stiffness, its sides rising to the middle of
his face and terminating in two sharp bristling points.
It was said, that he wore a collar thus beyond the ordinary limits of
collars in general, in order to conceal some disgusting deformity, which
the more knowing pretended, had originated in severe treatment from
his father, on the occasion of an interference on behalf of his mother, in a
quarrel between the parents. This, however, might be mere gossip, for all


that could be proved to the contrary. Herman was never seen without
the collar, and never was the collar seen but in awful dignity of starch,
though five years had passed since the melancholy scholar received, by
general consent the title of steifhals. J
About this time, that is to say, after a period of five years, since Her-
man had arrived at Goettingen, the college was thrown into great ex-
citement, by the rumour, that Herman’s father was expected, and much
curiosity was entertained, as to what reception he would meet with, from
the son, who daily became more stern, and moody.
At length the anxiously awaited day came, and the astonished students
could hardly believe their ears, as they heard the reserved, and gloomy
Herman, give a shout of joy, as he rushed into the embrace ofhis father.
the cry of joy had hardly vibrated on the air, when it was met by a
snnek or pain—the two cries mingled.
Gehlstein™ 61, Starclled collar had entered the eye of the elder
He was removed howling with agony to the great Doctor Gudler,
never recovered; inflammation of the brain followed and the father
Many mysterious whispers succeeded this terrible event, and some folks
even went the length of saying that Herman had wounded his father
with design,—that he had kept count of the old injury, and had brooded
over i for years,-that they had always foreboded something strange, and
rnble, would happen, from his unsocial habits, and further that the
collar, like a good sword, always in readiness, was the premeditated
ueapon with which to avenge himself. Some few there were, who would
not think so evilly of him,—urging, that although not of a social nature,
he had never exhibited any token of a bad spirit, and that his melan-
cio y might very naturally be attributed to his sedentary habits, and the
infirmity he was supposed to suffer from—that the collar he wore was
required of the size, and form, to conceal the defect ofhis person, and in
fine, that the wound he caused his father was purely accidental. Be that
as it may, all agreed in calling the collar, the ‘Parricide Collar’, and to
this day, in many parts of Germany, high Collars, with acute points are
lamiiiarly known bj that title.”


THE MYRTLE.
Twine tender blossoms round his brow
i he blushing- rose and orang-e Hower,
To breath their fragrance o’er the vow
That thou hast sworn in this sweet hour.
But pluck the myrtle from its shade
For him who loving unrequited;
Wanders away from thee dear maid,
To solitude by love unlighted.
And when the fairer buds expire
Iheir perfume shed, their radiance gone,
I’ll hang the myrtle on my lyre
And still confess thee for my own.
My own—my own, relinquished never,
With warm devotion fondly cherished,
The myrtle sweet endures for ever
When brighter wreaths long long have perished.


DINNERS.
Dinners are an admirable institution. I believe the most controver-
sial reader—diowever be may be inclined to dispute what follows—-will
hardly have the temerity to deny this.
A steak at “ Dolly’s ” —hot, tender, juicy, succulent! Can any on e
who has ever dined there, forget it ?
Who, that has coquetted with the one hundred and one delicacies of
the cafe at “Vefrours,” in the “ Palais Royal,” but will nourish the fond-
est recollections of these unsurpassable pldts ?
Are there men who have feasted on whitebait at “ Lovegrove’s ” —who
have drowned Turbot and Lobsters, in punch, at “ Simpson’s ’’—who have
eaten Turtle, and inhaled its odour, at “Birch’s:” and can be obli-
vious of such things ?
Let poets talk, as they will, of the dreams of one’s youth; the dinners
of one’s middle age, are far beyond them.
Why should I, in discoursing of dinners, seek for illustrations in the
luxuries of Epicures or Emperors of Rome? What do we care, in these days,
about Lucullus, and Heliogabalus; about peacocks’ brains and tongues.
Are there not less ambitious dishes, richly odorous, and gently piquant;
within the reach of most men. Have I not been fiercely assailed by ap-
petite, and felonious instict, as I have sniffed the sage and onion dressing
of a “poor man’s goose,” on a London Sunday, and gazed upon the
brown, and crisp, potatoes on which that “goose” was cushioned?
Have I not regaled, with intense satisfaction, off a Boiled Leg of Mut-
ton and trimmings ? Is Tripe to be despised ? Calve’s-head to be sneer-
ed at?
Who is there could dine, and would not ? Shew me such a man, and I
will avoid him, as one ungrateful to providence, and unworthy to live in
peopled cities.
How many enjoyments are there, too, in good Dinners, irrespective of
the viands unconnected with the cook. The Ute-a-tete with an old
school-fellow, after long estrangement! The small party of bon-vivants
• —their delightful organization and digestion, their creamy jokes, smart
sallies, and genial humour! The family party without restraint, as I
emember such, in the old, old days ?


Bufc even dinners may be abused —they are abused —‘they become in the
hand of Societies, dismal horrors. Have I not been despoiled of many a
guinea at the “Freemason’s Tavern!” Have I not been made aye!
even in later times —-a martyr of, here, in South Australia ?
“ You must take a ticket for our annual dinner,” says the Secretary of
the “8.C.P.0. Lodge of Ancient Buffers;” “we have made it moderate.”
It is in vain I struggle: Hon. Sec. tells me, it is a benevolent body, and
meets but once a year to dine —I succumb.
“We are going to give a complimentary dinner to Keckles before he
leaves the colony, I must have your name down for it,” says Bangchaw.
Bangchaw is a friend and a patron : I have nothing to urge against Kec-
kles, as an alderman, or a man; —I surrender to the appeal.
Remotely connected with an agricultural trade, I am kidnapped into
becoming a member of a society, under the auspices of Geres Pomona and
Flora. The jolly farmers, who compose the bulk of this society, hold
“ Shows,” and, afterwards, dine. —I sit down to table; but can I dine ?
Is there no horror in underdone sucking' pig ? Are turkies never tough ?
are there not mahogany hams, and cold potatoes, and seas of gra\y, with
icebergs of fat in them? and dry jams, set in fossil crusts ? And are there
not compounds of fire and vinegar, called Sherry; and mixtures of black-
ing and verjuice, called Port; and acidulated water, called Champagne;
and extract of scrubbing brushes, labelled Hock ?
Bless those honest farmers with unsuspicious appetite, made keen by
country air; they feed! 1 shudder!—They drink—alas, I, also, drink:
how can I escape drinking ?
There is the Queen (of whom, I am a loyal subject) to be toasted!
there is the Prince Consort to be toasted! there is the Royal Family to
be toasted! there is Her Majesty’s representative to be toasted! Heaven
forbid that I should say aught disrespectful of my gracious mistress, who
is the first lady in England, and the noblest wife and mother, anywhere ;
but I could wish, on such occasions, the wines were furnished from the
Royal cellars.
Are there not, also, the army and navy! the agricultural ! hor-
ticultural ! pastoral! mining ! commercial! and other interests to toast,
besides the press, the chairman, and the cook ?
And, more dreadful than all—are there not dreary speeches, and unme-
lodious songs to listen to ?
Am I, for one instant, at any one of these public dinners, free from care
or anxiety? Am I allowed to repose for five minutes ? Am I not either
driven into yawns by discussion on fallows and manures; or started fran-
tically to my feet by a vivacious chairman, who bids me fill my glass, and
shout, “ Hip, hip, hurra;” and join the chorus of, “ he’s a jolly good
fellow”? Dare I whisper to my neighbour, or sneeze, or cough, or
laugh, during a speech ?
E.


Am I a free agent at any one moment from grace being said, to the
termination of the revel ?
Critic is here down upon me sharp. u lf public dinners,” he
“ are as you represent, why frequent them ?”
I reply, “ Can I avoid them ; am I to become an outcast.
can I, more than others in this world, consult, always, my own desires.
“ Am I never to sacrifice my ease, and comfort, at the call of my fellow
creatures ; and have I not the right to practice self-denial, if I thereby
purchase the right to grumble. I exercise the right of grumbling now.
I claim that right, doubly, as a victim to public dinners, and an English,
man.
“ Critic can, also, grumble, with a double right, if he please, as an En-
glishman,—and a critic.”


BESTIR YOURSELVES, AUSTRALIANS!
1.
Bestir yourselves, Australians!
There’s good work to be done—
There’s a Nation to be built up
Beneath the rising sun;
A Nation where no serf shall quail
Beneath a tyrant’s rod!
A Nation where no knee shall bow
Save only unto God !
Uprouse ye then Australians !
Men of the Southern Land,
To build a mighty Nation up
Needeth both head and hand;
For the head must plan the glorious work—
Work, for the willing hand!
2,
Bestir yourselves Australians!
You with the teaming brain!
Art, Science, Letters, call for you—
Let them not call in vain;
Let beauty breathe from the living stone,
With life the canvas glow,
Fire each heart with lofty strains,
Bid music’s rich streams flow.
Uprouse ye then, Australians !
Men of the Southern Land,
To build a mighty Nation up,
Needeth both head and hand;
For the head must plan the glorious work—
Work, for the willing hand.
3. -
Bestir yourselves, Australians!
You with the horny hand,
There’s good work for you everywhere
In this bright Southern land,


To bid corn wave o’er the fruitful plain,
To trim the clustering vine,
To tear the ore from its rocky bed—
Oh ! a glorious task is thine!
Uprouse ye then Australians!
Men of the Southern Land, —-
To build a mighty Nation up
Needeth both head and hand;
For the head must plan the glorious work—
Work for the willing hand!
4.
Bestir yourselves, Australians,
We want no idlers now,
Our praise alone for earnest toil,
Qur wreaths for the worker’s brow;
For—ever we’ll honor the holy rest
By age and hard toil won;
And —ever we’ll scorn the idle sloth
Of labour left undone.
Uprouse ye then, Australians!
Men of the Southern Land—
To build a mighty Nation up
Needeth both head and hand;
For the head must plan the glorious work—
Work, for the willing hand.
5.
Bestir yourselves, Australians!
Let each work with a will—
There’s a niche in the shrine of fame,
AUSTRALIA must fill.
Then the cross of the Southern World shall tluow
Her glittering beams far forth,
And match with her mild and truthful light
The glories of the North.
Uprouse ye then, Australians!
Men of the Southern Land—
To build a mighty Nation up
Needeth both head and hand;
For the head must plan the glorious work—
W ork, for*the willing hand.
IGNOTUS.


HOW WE EARED WHEN HARD UP IN PARIS.
For about six months of the year 1844, Harry R and myself lived
in Paris, Rue de Bussi No. 15, au cinquieme. For about a fortnight
we starved there : when I say starved, I mean that we went short of
food, had no certainty of a meal from day to day, and were obliged to
resort to strange devices to prolong existence.
Harry R was an artist: I had no profession; but shared with
him an enthusiasm for art, a great passion for antique remains, and some
taste for literature. We, also, had a taste for masquerades, dances at the
Barrieres, billiards, punch, and pastry lunches. We had, neither of us,
reached the age of twenty.
Harry’s income was a precarious one. He received from time to time a
five-pound note from England, and made some few francs a week, out of
commissions, from the book-sellers. I had more assured resources : about
£125 a year, from house property—and £lOO saved from the rents, of
two years previous.
We had, however, a common purse ; and resided together, in a suite
of rooms, as I have said before, in the Rue de Bussi, on the fifth floor.
With ordinary prudence, we could have very well managed, on our
united means, to avoid the embarrassments, lam about to relate. But
lovers of art and literature, of masquerades and pastry lunches, are not
always, prudent at the age of nineteen : We, certainly, were not.
When I left England, I took £6O with me—leaving £4O in the hands
of my father; who, also, undertook to collect my rents—and remit,
when advised. We both agreed, that, as a young man could live very
joyously in Paris —where amusements were cheap —on 250 Francs a
I should not require a remittance for six months : six weeks after that
calculation, I was without a sous.
The Pastry Lunches—the little suppers of four—the excursions (also,
of four) to Versailles, Montmartre, and other suburban shows—did not ?
alone, effect this result: no—it was my ungovernable passion for old
china, silver chasings, quaint enamels, ivory carvings, and illuminated
that finished me off: nearly £4O were absorbed in these treasures.
After borrowing 30 francs, from our landlady, I wrote home ,• but, not


feeling 1 inclined to reveal the exact state of my finances, I merely stated
that I had laid out a larg-e proportion of the cash, I had taken with me
in antiquities, and should require a remittance soon,as it might prove
inconvenient to be straightened in funds, in a foreig*n country. To this
letter, I received no reply—when the joint funds of Harry R— & Co.,
were three half-pence. Harry R— was a philosopher: u Where shall we
dine to-day,” he asked.
I, also, was a philosopher, and replied, u Wherever dinners are to be
obtained without money.”
“ Good,” returned Harry—“ they are to be so obtained to day.”
I did not object—l merely questioned, “ how.”
u I shall dine at the Restaurant, and forg’et my purse j you can dine at
the Cafe, and leave your purse at home,” was the reply.
Decidedly Harry had great administrative talents. We dined—he
the Restaurant, where, previously, we had both dined daily; lat the
Caffi, where, until then, we had both occasionally lunched.
We supped that night on bread and mulled vin ordinaire \ having a
stock of the latter in our cupboard, and a monthly account with the
baker.
The next morning, Harry announced, that we were out of coffee and
sugar —“ we must see about breakfast,” he said—“ what do you think of
bread and vin ordinaire ?”
I replied, “ I should prefer coffee, and had no partiality for dry bread.”
Harry shrugged his shoulders, and asked, ironically, “ Could you not
suggest a cream cheese, a few anchovies, or a slice of ham ?”
u Why not,” said I, with a sudden inspiration —“ here are three-
halfpence.”
u And then ?” asked Harry.
“ And then,” repeated I, seizing from the secretaire a bran new
four-penny piece (which Harry had imported specially, for a young lady,
who had a taste for numismatics) —“ here is what will pass for a half
franc :” and I hammered the four-penny into the semblance of that coin,
with the landlady’s bronze inkstand.
Harry was half inclined to be angry; but coffee, cream cheese, and
butter, mollified him.
The passing the battered four-penny, as a five-penny, was hardly legi-
timate, as a commercial transaction; but we were, as I have before stated,
philosophers, and argued that, if the grocer was content to receive the
coin, as a half-finite, he would pass it again as such ; and as it would;
therefore, obtain currency, it was, in point of fact, as good as a half-franc.
No dinner that day ; mulled wine and bread for supper.
Mulled wine and bread for breakfast next day : to the post office—no let-
ter : wrote home for a remittance, in more urgent terms, than hitherto—
mulled wine and bread for dinner and supper.


Next morning-, intensely hungry, and somewhat griped—Harry wist-
fully regarding my collection of rarities—“We can’t starve while we
nave these/’ he remarked, at length.
I pmnted out to him, that his observation was illogical. We could not
teed off them : and might, therefore, starve while we had them.
a We can sell them/’ he said.
Surprise, for a moment, struck me dumb : were the pangs of hunger
driving Harry mad, that he, an artist, and an antiquary, should suggest
such an outrage ? When I recovered speech, I briefly stated, I would
see him further first: “ things were not so desperate as that came to.”
a Am I a Chameleon, then,” enquired Harry, warmly, “that things are
not desperate ?■ Can I live on air ?—Have I a wooden interior, that sour
wine has no effect on ?—What am I—a beast, or a cask ?”
“ You were a philosopher,” I replied, reproachfully.
“ ( - )ne can a philosopher, on a full stomach,” he sadly returned;
m J philosophy will come back, after I shall have dined.”
“Then, we will dine” I cried; “ come to the pastry cook’s, and leave
the means with me.”
Ala honne Tieure ,” exclaimed Harry, once more radiant, “ you have
an idea, then.”
I had.—
Monsieur Legros, where we used, in happier times, to Innch on patties
and curacao, received us with bows and smiles ; he was afraid ( Milords’
had departed from Paris; he was enchanted it was not so; with what
could he do us pleasure; he had invented a new patty of an extreme
merit; would we honor him by tasting.
Harry looked a ravenous “yes,” hut I checked him, with a glance.
“You are an artiste , J/onsieur Legros.”
The fat pastrycook bowed, and smiled; he would permit himself to
say he had his small talents.
“ Great talents,” I cried, with energy; “ meme la genie ; undoubted
genius, Monsieur Legros.”
Monsieur Legros bowed and smiled again; he felt distinguished by
1 Milord’s’ approval.
Now for the coup de main.
“ I have determined,” I proceeded, “to entrust you with a commis-
sion, of the highest importance,” (more bows and smiles), “to-day is my
birth-day; we have friends to dine with us,” (bows, and smiles, still)
“we desire to fete them with a novelty, something magnifque, (fat
pdtissier radiant), at five o’clock you must have ready, an English
plumb-pudding.”
The pastry-cook turned pale; he murmured something faintly, and
leaned on the counter.
Of this, I took no notice, but continued, “ No one but a man of the


most profound skill could attempt so great an enterprise 1 No one but
Monsieur Legros, can accomplish it!”
The pastry-cook’s excitement, was, here, intense: he had never
made a “plom poudin;” with blushes, he confessed, he did not even
know of what it was composed. Comment J then. Is the plum-
poudin ” of necessity^—would anything* else do. Anything hut the “plomb-
poudin”—and Monsieur Legros waved his hands with dignity and—
‘‘detail tin affaire accompli .”
Harry looked at me enquiringly. I shook my head What to us, in our
dire necessity, were the elegant triHes—the light paste, and flimsy creams
of a French pdtissier?
“ Monsieur Legros,” I resumed, with solemnity, “ it must he done.
“ Monsieur Legros,” I cried, “you shall do it: I, myself, will give
you the secret of the combination, as I had it from the Duke of Welling*
ton.”
“ Allans ,” gasped the chief, with a sigh of relief, “ voyons let
us see?”
At 5 o’clock, that evening, the pastry-cook’s hoy, left, with our land-
lady, a plumb-pudding, weighing eight pounds; as we could not he dis-
turbed, he left it without payment.
For days we lived on that Pudding, and the thin Bordeaux wine :
plumb-pudding hot —plumb-pudding cold —plumb -pudding fried—plumb-
pudding devilled—until the very smell of it was hateful jto eat it, impossi-
ble. Starvation, with its haggard eyes, was staring us in the face. I had,
again, written home, but without avail. >.
I was sitting, gazing gloomily at the fire, (it was the winter season^
wondering what was to be the end of this, and whether I should, at
length, be forced to sacrifice my dearly cherished art-treasures, when
Harry, who had been dining on a sniff, at the restaurants, returned,
smiling.
“ The landlady has got potatoes,” he whispered.
« What then,” I muttered, cynically. “ The landlady has got potatoes !
well, the landlady will eat them!”
“We have pudding —we have wine—we have brandy,” said Harry.
I shuddered. “Do I not smell them ?” I asked, bitterly; “ wherever
I go do they not haunt me, and make me sick.”
“We will get rid of the pudding, and some of the brandy, and wine
to-night,” said Harry, mysteriously, “ and we will have potatoes.”
He revealed his design, and I smiled.
That night, the landlady, after tea, paid us a visit, by invitation.
She ate pudding —she drank wine—she did not disdain to empty tum-
blers of stiff grog ; which she pronounced to be a noble invention, doing
the English nation honor.
We borrowed sugar from her, as we had forgotten to get any from the
grocer, and made the grog hot, strong, and sweet.


The landlady, who was more than old enough, to he our mother, did
not affect coyness; she was not afraid of her reputation, suffering in our
society : so she stayed late; sang* sentimental song’s, in a cracked voice;
chatted of her youthful days; and ate more pudding, and drank more grog-
The hour had arrived, and Harry, artfully, led the conversation into a
discussion, on the relative merits of the French, and English, cookery,
apropos of the pudding.
u You may say what you please, Madam,” I exclaimed, u in favour of
your cuisine , hut the English is far in advance of it.”
Madam denied this, with emphasis, and Harry gallantly supported her.
u You talk nonsense,” he said, to me.
u Nonsense or not,” I cried, with simulated warmth, u give me the
plain, wholesome, sensible, food of English homes: why you cannot even
get a potatoe properly served, in France !”
Harry, indignantly, disputed this: he enumerated, at least, twenty
delicious dishes, made of potatoes, by French cooks.
“ Where,” I enquired, with a sardonic grin, u is the Frenchman, or
French woman, either, who can, correctly, roast a potatoe in the ashes ? 9
Harry admitted, that might be the case, hut Madam would not—no,
for the honor of France, she would roast potatoes, then, and there, at
our fire.
When the landlady, returning with an apron full of larg’e murphies/
proceeded to lay them on the embers, raked in front of our fire, joy lit up
the haggard faces of the two conspirators.
The landlady went to bed before the potatoes were cooked; she said
the pudding had not agreed with her, and she staggered somewhat. The
grog could not have made her ill ?—oh, no ! Harry and I ate the po-
tatoes.
They helped us on over the next day, on the evening of which, no re-
mittance having arrived, I submitted to part with a choice gold ring, set
with an antique gem.
“ Delavigne of the Palais Royal,” I said to Harry, “ has over, and over
again, offered a 100 francs for it. He is constantly worrying me for it:
If the worst comes to the worst, take his offer, hut endeavour to arrange
with him, to hold it for a fortnight, so I may re-purchase, for a 50 francs
profit: previously, however, see if you can pledge it at the Mont de Piete,
for 40 or 50 francs. While you g-o on this commission, to-morrow mor-
ning-, I will order breakfast at the Cafe de France*”
I remember that morning well. It was extremely cold; snow had
fallen during the nig’ht, and was then falling*; it was the bitterest day, of
the severest winter, that had been known in Paris, for many years. We
were, nevertheless, in high spirits. The prospect of a good breakfast,
made the weather—and the gem I was about to sacrifice—of little moment.
Harry went on his mission; I went on mine.
F


I ordered chocolate, coffee, a beef-steak, cold fowl, hot rolls, egg's,
and a bottle of Chateau-Lafitte. And I regaled on those generous provi-
sions. I should, perhaps, in courtesy, have waited for Harry’s
prior to breakfasting, but he was a long time gone. Would he have
waited for me, after what he had gone through ?—do famished men stand
on ceremonies ? When he should have returned, could he not, also,
order delicacies, and regale on them, unmolested ? So I reasoned, as I
luxuriously leaned hack on a velvet couch, and smoked a cigarette.
Harry, at length, arrived: snow was on his whiskers, in his ears, and
covered his apparel. He appeared as if wrapped in the fur of the white
polar hear; his pinched, and blue face, alone, of his person, being visible.
I shouted for chocolate, more coffee, more everything.
“Hold,” cried Harry, with a ghastly leer, “ I have no money.”
“No money,” I reiterated, turning pale; “have you, then, lost the
ring V*
No; he had not lost the ring; the superintendent, at the Mont de
Piet£, had taken it, and was about to advance the money required,
when a sudden suspicion seemed to seize him.
“ Your passport, if you please,” he said, to Harry.
“ La voila,” repeated my unfortunate friend.
The official glanced rapidly over it: “ You are under age,” he at
length said, “ you cannot, legally, dispose of this article.—Profound
regret, Monsieur, but you cannot reclaim it until you are accompanied by
a respectable house-holder, to vouch for your right to it.”
How I got out of that Cafe, leaving my cane and gloves on the marble
table, I cannot describe; what excuse I made to the waiter, I cannot re-
member ; I only know that my brain burned, and a sudden panic took
me, and that I did not breathe freely until I gained my domicile.
There, to my inexpressible pleasure, I found my father, who had just
arrived in Paris; —and Harry and I returned to the Cafe, with a full purse;
and a contented mind.
The next evening, w'e gave a party. Our guests were, my father, our
landlady, the grocer and his wife, the pastry-cook, accompanied by two
pretty daughters, and the wife of the cqffetiere (he himself could not come).
We had round games, romps, dances, songs, and supper; after which,
over a bowel of punch, I related, amidst much laughter, these adventure s
truthfully, as they are written here; saving, that out of courtesy to an
elderly lady, I did not mention how the pudding disagreed, with one of
those present.


UNPUBLISHED LINES,
ON A COLLECTION OF PORTRAITS OF THE ENGLISH POETS.
B J the Rev. W. Clark, (grandfather of Dr. E. Clark, the traveller.)
1.
See the Fathers of verse,
In their rough, uncouth, dress.
Old Chaucer, and Gower, arrayed;
And that fairy-led muse,
W hich in Spenser we lose,
By fashion’s false power betrayed.
2.
In Shakespeare we trace
All nature’s full grace,
Beyond it —its touches admire;
While in Fletcher we view
What fancy could do,
By Beaumont correcting its fire.
3.
There’s rare, surly Ben,
W hose more learned pen,
Gave laws to the stage and the pit;
There’s Milton can boast
His ‘ Paradise Lost,’
And Cowley, his Virtue and Wit.
4.
Next, Butler, who paints
The zeal-gifted saints;
And Waller’s politeness and ease;
And Dryden, whose lays
Deserve his own hays,
And laboured —or negligent please.


6.
There, sportively Prior,
Sweeps o’er the whole lyre,
With fingers of fancy divine;
While Addison’s muse
Doth each virtue infuse,
Clear, chaste, and correct, in each line,
6.
To close the whole scene,
Lo! Pope’s moral spleen,
Ye knaves, and ye dunces, beware;
Like lightning he darts
The keen shafts at your hearts,
Your heads are not worthy his cam


AFTER PROOF.
If any person owns the name of Floke, I Leg his pardon for using it
without his permission. But lam not aware of any person of that name
being’ in existence, and so I choose to take possession of it, in the urgent
necessity of having to refer to a friend whose true name I prefer to dis-
guise, and whom therefore I shall speak of as Mr. Floke. It is true I
might have concealed the identity of my friend under the not uncommon
patronymic of Jones, Smith, or Jackson—or I might have availed my-
self of many a name of more frequent occurrence than that of Floke, hut
experience has taught me that, if I use for literary purposes any name
which can by perverse ingenuity he tortured into a semblance of any
other, I suffer for it. The winks and blinks and whisperings of divers
sagacious critics make an enemy for me of some person or other of
whom at the time of writing I was utterly unconscious. Now I defy the
most astute CEdipus to find out whom I speak of under the title of Floke.
As a further precaution I shall studiously avoid giving the slightest
clue to the personal appearance of Flokes I shall not in the
remotest way allude to any singularity of Mr. Floke’s costume —finally I
shall give no further idea of the mutual relations subsisting between
Mr. Floke and myself than the honest purposes of Number One demand.
Few of us are so wrapped up in number one, as not at one time or ano-
ther to consult a friend. We invite his opinions on our ventures either
before embarking or afterwards. Mr. Floke is the friend I ordinarily
advise with when about to embark in any novel undertaking. But as
Mr. Floke is an eminently practical man who deals only in plain figures
and plain facts, and utterly ignores figures of fancy, and facts poetically
garbed I forbore to lay before him this my last enterprize. Imagine then
my consternation when whilst revising the last sheet of this work fresh
from the printer, Mr. Floke paid me an unexpected visit.
(( Ah! what have we here,” said Mr. Floke in his oft hand manner,
proceeding as practical men will do, to examine the papers on the table.
<( Ah ! hum—verses I see—ah !—so, “ Edited by A Pendragon”—“ vacant
places in our colonial literature”—hum, hum,so ah— “dedicates his pen!”
How much do you get for this eh ?”
Slightly discomposed I replied that I got nothing for it—that it was a
small speculation from which I did not anticipate much return certainly
not much of a pecuniary nature. “Perhaps hereafter” I stammered.


“ Bosh” replied the practical man abruptly. u Horrible bosh. Have
I not repeatedly told you that trading 1 in the hereafter is the most un-
profitable of human specs, ‘ small returns and quick profits/ that’s my
maxim—now I suppose this cost you some labour—eh! hum —for which
you expect to get paid by posterity eh !”
“Not much labour, composed in my leisure, they have afforded
amusement rather than labour.”
“ Amusement!” cried Floke with emphasis, “ amusement! now I’ll
tell; you what my amusement was when I was a young man —after the
labours of the day I did piece work at home —that was amusement and
profit too—profit ah profit,” and Mr. Floke repeating profit over and
over again as if the word had a certain pleasant flavour in the mouth,
jingled some loose cash in his pocket.
I hazarded the remark that the world was not entirely composed of
practical men, and that there were other than mere money profits—
that many wise and good men thought the reading 1 and writing of
light literature not altogether unprofitable.” I also was about to quote
some illustrious examples in favour of these views but
“ Can you write a cheque for £5,” asked Mr. Floke.
I replied that I could accomplish such a literary effort, but that for all
the value the cheque would have when written, I might just as well write
comic song’s.
Mr, Floke chuckled, and I could hear him filtering through his fingers
the loose money in his trowsers pocket, “ Can you tell me that any merch-
ant will let you have Five Hundred Pounds worth of goods, on youT
note of hand without security.”
“ I cannot tell you anything of the sort,” I answered “as I have never
required it; I should fancy, however, that a practical man would not.”
“ And I suppose,” pursued Mr. Floke, red in the face and rustling with
chuckles and change “ you would not be so sanguine as to expect any
friend—say myself for example—would endorse your note for £500.”
I admitted I should not be so sanguine.
“Just so,” said Floke. “ Just so: now see the difference. Here am I
plain John Floke, I not only never wrote verses but I never read them
—verses are Bosh, and novels are Bunkum. \et I can write my cheque
for £5OO and Bullion and Co., will cash it. Nickham, Filcher and Crook,
who ordinarily only do cash transactions will take my note without in-
dorsement for £5OOO. John Floke’s signature to a cheque or a bill is
money —money sir,” —and Mr. Floke’s trowsers’ pockets jingled like a
chorus. “Who is the best writer of the two, Pendragon eh—you or me.”
I made no reply to this, I could make none that would be satisfactory
to a gentleman of Mr. Floke’s bent of mind who balanced everything
on earth against a hard and cold though glittering metallic standard. 1
therefore let him leave me exulting in his victory.


Nevertheless Mr. Floke did not dishearten me, for after he had gone I
recalled to memory the many, many happy hours I had spent over the
literature that Mr. Floke called Bosh and Bunkum In the inmost
recesses of my heart I felt a reverential love for Scott, Burns, Dickens
and others too of smaller note, whose Bosh and Bunkum had beguiled
many a weary hour in sickness and solitude —had often brought sweet
oblivion of past and present sorrows. I ventured also to believe that
the notes of the mavis and sky lark though not recognisable at the bank
have got a value for kind and genial natures.
Mr. Floke’s utterances ring substantially on polished wood counters
in Offices and Banks. May those in the proceeding pages ring cheerfully
on sympathetic hearts in happy homes.
PRINTED AT THE NORTHERN STAR OFFICE, KAPUNDA,






