

“NUMBER
ONE
BOY”
Group of Missionaries and People of C.M.S. Groote Eyland.
The story of a "Walkabout" in Groote
Eylandt, and our responsibility
to the
AUSTRALIAN
ABORIGINES


NUMBER ONE BOY.
It was a great matter which Abraham enti listed In Flie/ei.
because Fliezei was Abraiiam s Numbei One Bo\
] lie eves erf three members erf the little ( mrote Eylandl
congregation slione with understanding and interest. Here was
a situation they could follow Willy. No walkabout was ever
undertaken without the acknowledged leadership of one trusted
member of the parte . 1 his store out of the Book of God must
belong to them. 1 hey sat up to listen more attentively.
It evas Sunday morning, lire sun evas shining brightly in
a glinting sky. A light breeze rustled in the tree-tops as if the
breath of God hovered over the little congregation. Now and
again a bird called to his mate, or, evith seveeping wings, cut
the clear air across the blue canopy above the worshippers.
Farther down the ripple and swirl of the quiet river formed an
undertone to the lovely sonata of bush sound and beauty, which
those in tune with nature, recognise as the theme of Heaven s
harmonies.
Here, under a rough shelter of slim poles thatched loosely
with branches and twigs of the eucalypt, was verily and indeed
the House of God. Sitting in orderly rows upon the ground,
men and boys on one side, women and girls on the other, about
eighty Aborigines listened in the dappled shadows to the story
of the search for a bride for Isaac. Faces of polished ebony
shining above khaki shirts or white athletic vests on the one
hand, and white and pink dresses on the other. Eyes like deep
pools of tarn water, fixed gravely and earnestly upon the mission-
ary whose hands held the Book of God, the message of the Great
Spirit of Whom they had heard from their earliest days. This
picture of Him was different. In times past, every thought of
Him had been a vague, and in times of crisis, a very real fear.
The God of this Book was love, and His Spirit was called hy
the beautiful Name of Comforter .
On the outskirts of the congregation were gathered the
“bush people in little groups. The men, with matted, unbrushed
hair, wearing only a naga (loincloth of beaten bark), squatted
on their heels, their eyes roving here and there in restless curiosity.
The women, unkempt, uncleanly, unloved sat in a sort of stolid
silence while babies crawled over them, and children, untamed
ran hither and thither as the whim and fancy called.
Under the leafy canopy the missionary’s voice arrested the
Mission Group. Nadjagala bent forward until the magnificent
muscles of his splendid body grew 7 taut and strained. Number
One Boy ! Coola and Namiangwa, his friends, and indeed,
many others who sat there with him, had seemed, though per-
haps wordlessly, to accept him as a leader. He might learn some
good way of leadership if he listened well. Though not clever,
his consistency and reliability marked him out, and his sterling
qualities were unmistakable,
Namiangwa, more powerfully built, sitting at his side, head
bent, was assisting his own somewhat slow'er mental processes


b\ ~ steady concentration expressed in seeming oblivion to all
about him.
Coola, perhaps not as consistent ,is Nadjagala, oi as stead\
in thought as Namiangwa, showed his more vivid personality
by a quick perception of the points ol the story. Ihe congregation
tame to life in the hearty singing of a h\ inn, and as they dis
persed, a swift prayer went up from the heart ol God s messenger
that His Word would not " return unto Him void.
Mission Superintendent’s House.
A FEW DAYS LATER.
1 he low hum of earnest conversation rose and fell on the clear
air. The three lads were working together not far from the little
hush tabernacle where, on the previous Sunday they had sat
together for the worship of God. The quick, throaty syllables
of their native tongue, following one upon another in swift suc-
cession, were punctuated by spontaneous bursts of laughter, as in
happy camaraderie, they discussed a proposed "walkabout.
They were to be the chosen comrades of the missionary who was
leaving the Mission in a few days time to survey the Bartoolumba
country in the far north-west of Groote. Timber Was needed
for further building, and it might be that at some future date,
this country would be suitable for the expansion of the work.
Suddenly the Sunday service became linked with their everyday
life.
"A "walkabout ", said Coola, the more ready with his
tongue, "a "walkabout" must have a leader. Nadjagala will
become who is that one of whom we heard in Church on
Sunday?”
"Number One Bey ”, said Namiangwa, yes, oh, yes, do
you not remember Nadjagala?
Nadjagala slowly shook his head. I remember the story,"
he replied, "but the name has gone. It was a strong and beauti-
ful story, he added naively, for he remembered his impressions
as he listened that golden morning a few days ago.
Shyly and haltingly they told the missionary who had come
up at that moment of their conversation.
Number One Boy ”, said Coola. Who was he?
Fdiezer , was the answer.


Radiant smiles accosted the missing word, and vigorous nods
ol assent brought the lesson more forcibly home, and then and
there with one consent \ndiagala was accepted as the "Fdie/rer”
ol tlie coming expedition.
From L. to R.; 1. Gublbia’s and VWudjari's House. 2. & 3 Small Girl’s House.
4. Unjuga’s House.
THE “WALKABOUT”.
The next two weeks were a bustle of preparation. The three
boys wholly unconcealed keenness was good to see. It was
great, too, to note their forethought and care as they placed their
wives and families together under the supervision of other Abor-
igines for the term of their absence.
On the day of departure they were up before dawn. At-
tached to the belts which held their khaki shorts, were a spear and
a mug quaint unison of the former and the present days
and they were ready.
The four set off just before sunrise. The air was fresh and
crisp, and as they swung along the existing road, the sun came
up over the gum trees, and the bird-world came alive. Cockatoos
with their vivid colouring flashed here and there, pigeons of
various species fluffed out their breasts to bill and coo their
good-morning greetings, and a bird-call like the sound of a tap-
tapping upon a pipe, tanged through the morning air. A heavy
dew drenched leaf and twig, and in each pearly drop was
reflected the crimson and golden glory of the sun-tipped clouds.
About nine o clock, inrushes of warmer air began to awaken
the sensation of thirst, so Coola and Namiangwa went off to
one of the waterholes which appear in this country quite sud-
denly like deep crevices or cracks in the earth’s surface. On one
side of this waterhole, a rock wall rises sheer and ruddy-brown
into the air; on the. other, steep banks covered with grass and
gum-trees (ghost-gums as the Aborigines call them), line the
approach.
Nadjagala and the missionary climbed the steep rock-face
to the look-out, the former with his unerring knowledge of bush-
ways leading along the only track possible for human foot. Here
and there rock-wallabies darted for a moment into sight, and then
bounded away to sit motionless and watchful on their familiar
points of vantage.


On reaching the peak, (wo hundred leet above, a glorious
view of the surrounding country lay before them. Similar out
croppings of rock rose here and there like great watchdogs
keeping vigil for the safety of smaller, tenderer things. In the
distance could be seen the peak of Mount Lllie, climbed by the
Rev. H. Warren ol the C.M.S. years ago, and named after his
wife, so the carving on its summit will tell any who care to
make the ascent.
Standing there on the top of the great rock look-out, a stiff
breeze blow'ing, the missionary' took out map and compass, spread
the map on the ground, and knelt to hold it in place. It w'as
one of those moments which come to all pioneers, and which
holds for the missionary pioneer an even deeper thrill, for he
knows that, not only' are there new lands to conquer and uplift,
but new' lives to save and bless by that Love Who is the God
and Father of us all.
Nadjagala , said the missionary, wishing to test his sense
of direction, can von show' me from here the way to Bartoolumba
Pt.?"
Nadagala stood erect on the rock pinnacle and surveyed the
landscape thoughtfully for a moment. Then with out-stretched
arm, he unerringly indie ated a line, which, by compass-bearing
and map, proved to be the right direction to a single degree.
Standing there on the summit of the rocky look-out, erect,
decisive, (he acknowledger! leader among his own comrades,
eager, yet display ing w ithal a child like simplicity and naivete,
Nadjagala, Number One Boy . symbolised the line, sterling
qualities ol his race.
OUR REASONABLE SERVICE.
flic lime lias come for ns, as Australians to pay in full the
dent we owe to our black fellow-countrymen. Longfellow’s beau-
tiful words take on a deeper meaning (or us to whom this call
comes:—
Ye whose hearts are fresh and simple ,
W ho have faith in God and Nature.
Who believe, that in all ages
Every human heart is human.
That in even savage bosoms
There are longings, yearnings, strivings
For the good they comprehend not.
That the feeble hands and helpless.
Groping blindly in the darkness.
Touch God’s right hand in that darkness
And are lifted up and strengthened;
Listen to this simple story’’ —
Yes, let us listen, and bear, and heed. The call comes for
lives given freely and wholly to the Lord for service. It may be
the service of ministry, of gifts, of prayer; whatever it be, let us
see that at our door, lies not the blood of those thousands of
Aborigines who have gone out into the great unknown, unloved,
untaught, unlifted.


OUR...
AUSTRALIAN ARORIGINES
Existing Mission Stations <
Roper River
Groote Eylandt
Oenpelli
Other Needy Areas
Rose River
Limmen River
Caledon Bay
Coburg Peninsular
Urgent Recruits Needed
2 Clergymen
2 Nurses
3 Teachers
3 Married Couples, who have
some knowledge of farming, stock-work, engin-
eering, carpentry, or building.
WHOM SHALL 1 SEND?
WHO WILL GO FOR US?
CHURCH MISSIONARY SOCIETY
95 Bathurst Street, Cathedral Bldgs., Worando Bldgs..
Sydney. Melbourne. Street.
Adelaide.
Church St, Wollongong. Moorahool Street, Geelong. 146 Collins Street,
Hobart.
Church House. Ann St., 55 Grant Street, 92 St. John Street.
Brisbane. Cottesloe, W.A. Launceston,
Edgar Bragg & Sons, Printers, 4 Barker Street, Sydney.
