

NUTRITION
POLICY IN THE
COLONIAL EMPIRE
Issued by the Colonial Office
DESPATCH
FROM THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE
COLONIES, DATED 18th APRIL, 1936
Crown Copyright Reserved
LONDON
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
To be purchased directly from H.M. STATIONERY OFFICE at the following addresses
Adastral House, Kings way, London, W.C.2; 120 George Street, Edinburgh 2;
26 York Street, Manchester 1; 1 St. Andrew’s Crescent, Cardiff;
80 Chichester Street, Belfast;
or through any bookseller
1936
Price 2d. net
COLONIAL No. 121




Circular Despatch from the Secretary of State for the Colonies to
the Officers Administering the Governments of the Colonies,
Protectorates and Mandated Territories.
Downing Street,
18th April, 1936.
Sm,
I have the honour to address you on the important subject of
nutrition, its relation to public health and especially the bearing
which it should have upon agricultural, veterinary, educational and
general policy in the Colonial Empire.
2. The subject of nutrition is one in which there has been a
great advance of technical knowledge in the last 30 years and one
to which much public attention is now directed. It is probably
true to say that it is now regarded as one of the most important
aspects of public health work in all countries.
3. Thirty years ago it was generally believed that the dietary
requirements of human beings are satisfied so long as they have
a large enough quantity of food to eat. It is now known that
the adequacy of a dietary depends on the presence of a number
of factors, and that with quantitative sufficiency there may be
qualitative defects producing the most serious physical conse-
quences. In many European conditions the deficiencies of diet
are normally not so much in the “ energy-giving ” foods as in
the “ protective ” foods containing vitamins and mineral salts.
While a man may continue to exist on a diet which is sufficient
in the energy-giving foods but deficient in the protective foods,
the absence of these latter may render him an easy prey to in-
fectious diseases or may impair all his capacities and his efficiency
for any form of activity. Their absence has especially deleterious
effects upon children and nursing and pregnant mothers.
4. While this much has been comparatively common knowledge
for some years, attention has recently been focused on the matter
by reports and enquiries carried out by various organs of the League
of Nations and particularly by a report of Drs. Burnett and
Aykroyd which was published in the Quarterly Bulletin of the
Health Organization of the League of Nations for June, 1935.
Copies of a reprint of this report have already been sent to a
number of Colonial Dependencies in a note of the 13th of December
last. In the case of those Dependencies to which copies were not
so sent, copies will be found enclosed* in this despatch. This
report is, I consider, a most useful survey of the state of present
knowledge of the subject, and will be found of interest to those
without special technical knowledge as well as to Medical Officers.
5. An aspect of the matter which is attracting much attention
at the moment is that of the application of the new knowledge
'Not reprinted here.


to the economic and agricultural problems of the present day.
The whole subject was considered in an interesting debate which
took place at the Assembly of the League of Nations in September
last. Mr. Bruce, on behalf of the Commonwealth of Australia,
spoke in the Assembly of the benefits which would come of “ a
marriage of health and agriculture.” Assuming an affirmative
answer to the preliminary question, ” Does the evidence show
that increased consumption of certain foodstuffs would improve
national health? ” there were, he said, three main aspects of the
problem :
(i) Were there any practical means of increasing consump-
tion?
(ii) Would such an increase in consumption contribute to
the improvement of the world’s agricultural position? and
(hi) What would be the effect of such improvement on the
general economic situation?
6. In the subsequent discussion there was general agreement
that there were considerable possibilities of increased consumption
of agricultural products as the result of expenditure and efforts by
Government directed towards improved nutrition; and it was
agreed that such expenditure and efforts constituted a direct and
practical means of attacking the problem of agricultural surpluses
and the low prices consequent upon them. At the conclusion of
the debate the Assembly adopted a Resolution in which, “ having
considered the subject of nutrition in relation to public health
and the effects of improved nutrition on the consumption of agri-
cultural products,” it ‘‘ urged the Governments to examine the
practical means of securing better nutrition ” ; it requested the
Council of the League to set in motion various further enquiries
and to arrange for a general report on the whole matter to be
submitted to the Session of the Assembly in September next.
7. As the first result of this Resolution a report has been pro-
duced by a commission of experts of great authority on the
Physiological Bases of Nutrition; copies of this report are en-
closed* in this despatch. It will be seen that the report sets out
an agreed estimate of the various constituents of an adequate diet
required for persons of European race living in temperate climates.
It thus provides not only an objective towards which to aim but
also an authoritative standard by which to measure the degree of
malnutrition at present existing in temperate countries. Such
a standard has in the past been lacking.
8. There is no doubt that the potentialities of improved nutrition
in affecting not only public! health but also the economic and
agricultural problems of the day are great. For instance if in
the United Kingdom alone the average consumption of milk a
head a week increased from its present low level of 2| pints to
4 pints (a figure still well below what medical opinion regards
*Not reprinted here. A revised edition has now been published (League of
Nations Publications 1936 11. 84.)


as adequate), not only would the health of the nation be very
greatly improved but also it has been estimated that it would
be necessary for 800,000 more cows to be kept —with results which
would be far-reaching to agriculture not only in this country but
in the Dominions and the Argentine and indeed throughout the
world (including, incidentally, certain parts of the Colonial Em-
pire). On the public health aspect, there can be little doubt that
every part of the Colonial Empire would benefit from an improved
nutrition of its peoples. On the economic and agricultural aspect,
while I doubt whether the Colonial Empire has at present any
substantial contribution to offer, by way of increased consump-
tion, to the solution of world problems (the monetary resources
both of its Governments and of its peoples being too slender to
enable them to increase more than slowly their purchases from
abroad), I do feel that within its own borders increased attention
to dietetic needs might well lead to an amelioration of some of its
own economic problems. Not only will greater consumption of
foodstuffs within each territory, small though it be in terms of
world consumption, increase the local market for local food pro-
ducts, but also expenditure on improved nutrition may well be
directly remunerative itself, leading as it should to a greater well-
being, greater efficiency in production and less waste of human
life and effort. I am therefore most anxious that the Colonial
Empire should not be behindhand in the attention devoted to this
subject. I would invite your co-operation to this end.
9. I am far from wishing to imply that the subject has been
neglected in the past in the Colonial Empire. Indeed, much
important work has been, and is being, carried out. Measures
for the control of beriberi in Malaya were an early example in
the dietetic field of the application of scientific knowledge to public
health questions on a large scale, and much useful work is being
carried out to-day in the Colonial Empire not only in research
but also in the application of scientific knowledge. I would
especially mention the valuable work that is being done in Nigeria,
the Straits Settlements, and Uganda. I feel, however, first that
there must be much knowledge on the subject which is unrecorded
or not easily accessible, and secondly that medical knowledge on
questions of nutrition may not in some Dependencies be fully re-
flected in agricultural, veterinary, educational and other aspects
of Government policy.
10. In these circumstances, I consider it most desirable that
there should be a comprehensive survey of the position in each
Dependency. In order that it may conform with suggestions
likely to be made as a result of the further studies to be under-
taken by the League Organizations, I think it is desirable that
the survey should cover :
(a) A review of the present knowledge of human nutrition
in each Dependency.


(b) A review of the further studies and researches on the
subject which appear desirable.
(c) A review of the practical measures which have been
taken in the past to apply scientific knowledge to the improve-
ment of nutrition.
id) A review of the further such measures which it appears
desirable to take in the future.
(e) A review of the consequences which improvements in
nutrition may have upon the economy of the Dependency.
I have to request that you will send me as soon as practicable,
a survey on the above lines, in a form suitable if need be for
publication.
11. Under heads (a) and (c) a list should be given of any litera-
ture which has been published on the subject.
As regards head (b), while the planning of further research
must be primarily for the Medical Department, it will not, of
course, be overlooked that much information of value has been
acquired from studies carried out by Agricultural and Veterinary
Departments on animal nutrition. Nor can a research programme
be drawn up without regard to id), the practical measures to be
taken in the future to apply scientific knowledge to the improve-
ment of nutrition. This is a matter which concerns many branches
of Government, notably the Secretariat, the Administration, and
the Education, Agricultural, Veterinary and Medical Departments;
and if -a proper plan of action is to be laid down and effectively
carried through, there must be close co-operation between them
all. In some Dependencies I believe that there already exists
a Standing Committee including representatives of these Depart-
ments, whose duty it is to co-ordinate and inspire the policy of
the Government on this important matter. I suggest that the
establishment of a similar Committee should be considered in
every Dependency as a first step towards the formulation of policy
which will be necessary before heads (b) and id) of the survey
can be completed.
12. Progress towards improved nutrition must, of course, be
slow, and the policy to be adopted in each Dependency must vary
according to the soil and climate and according to the habits and
resources of the population. There can be no question of any
sudden change of dietary habits and no doubt the populations of
the Colonial Empire will be more conservative than those of
European countries have proved to be. Nevertheless, the marked
change which has taken place in the diets of European nations in
the last 50 years shows that there is nothing immutable about
dietary habits and that they are determined less by choice and
instinct than by the variable factor of economic necessity.
13. Government has to its hand many agencies by which im-
provements in nutrition can be effected. First and foremost are


the activities of the Medical Department itself, and especially its
maternity and infant welfare services. It is to-day generally
recognized that from the nutritional point of view the pre-natal
and immediately post-natal periods are the most important in the
life-span, and that the diet of mother and child during these
months may affect fundamentally the child’s whole development.
The supervision of diet must therefore be one of the most im-
portant aspects of all maternity and infant welfare services. I
would urge upon all Colonial Governments the desirability of an
expansion of these services to the limit that funds permit. It
will no doubt be borne in mind that this is a branch of Govern-
ment activities for which it is often possible to enlist much most
valuable voluntary assistance.
14. Apart from the Medical Department, the most obvious
agency for effecting improvements in nutrition is the school. In
a variety of ways it is possible to instil into the younger generation
improved ideas on diet, for instance, by lessons in cooking, and
domestic science and by encouraging the development of school
gardens where crops may be grown for consumption by the pupils,
thereby not only improving their own health at the time but also
initiating them into habits which may be of benefit to them all
their lives. I have no doubt that many other means exist suited
to each Dependency. I have been particularly interested to hear
of proposals for giving milk to schoolchildren in Ceylon and Malta.
While action of this nature on any large scale may be imprac-
ticable in many Dependencies at present, there can be no doubt
of the immense benefit which children derive from an increased
supply of milk. Some interesting information on this point is
given on pages 82 to 94 of the Burnett-Aykroyd Eeport. lam
arranging for copies of this despatch to be laid before my Advisory
Committee on Education in the Colonies with a view to obtaining
their recommendations on the subject generally, and in particular
on such matters as training of education officers, preparation of
text books, &c.
15. The Agricultural and Veterinary Departments have also
an important part to play in the subject. In planning the pro-
duction of the territory the aim should be twofold; on the one
hand the provision to the entire population of a food supply of a
nature considered adequate by medical science and, on the other,
the growth of remunerative export crops. It is one of the main
purposes of this despatch to draw attention to the importance of
an adequate supply of locally grown foodstuffs and to urge that
it should be given first consideration in the formulation of agricul-
tural policy.
16. Much can, I feel, be done by the instruction of those who
are in a position themselves to instruct others, for instance all
members of Education Departments and all members of the


Administration, and of Agricultural, Veterinary and Medical De-
partments. I, therefore, suggest that it might prove useful to
issue to all such officers a brief circular explaining the importance
of the subject and what should be the aims of Government in
regard to it. I have recently seen one such circular issued in
Tanganyika and I have read with interest of instructional courses
for schoolteachers in Malaya.
17. The nature of the tariff can also have an important effect
upon nutrition. Many other considerations, of course, must be
given due weight in framing tariff policy, but I consider it of the
greatest importance that the tariffs of Colonial Dependencies
should be framed in such a way as to encourage as much as pos-
sible the consumption of foodstuffs of high nutritive value. This
is an aspect which has, I think, received little attention in the
past so that often it happens that those articles which are of high
nutritive value are among those contributing most highly to
customs revenue. It should, of course, always be the policy to
exempt from duty so far as practicable articles consumed only
by the poorer classes, but I consider it important that this policy
should be. extended to the greatest degree* possible to cover all food-
stuffs of high nutritive value by whatever class they are consumed.
18. There are no doubt many other agencies by which Govern-
ment can influence dietary habits. For instance in Dependencies
in which large scale enterprises exist, e.g. mines and large estates,
great opportunities occur (and indeed are already for the most
part taken) for the inculcation of improved dietary habits. The
individual is in such circumstances normally engaged in an occupa-
tion where some change of his habits is inevitable; it is the duty
of Government by the laying down of minimum scales of rations
and by proper inspection and supervision to ensure that that change
shall be in the right direction.
19. These and other possibilities will no doubt be considered
by the Committee which I have suggested earlier in this despatch
if you decide to adopt that suggestion.
20. In conclusion I would remind you that one of the objects
which may be assisted by the Colonial Development Fund is
“ the promotion of public health in the Colonial Empire.” Assist-
ance has already been granted from the Fund for the study of
nutrition problems in Malaya and Nigeria. While, of course, I
cannot foretell the attitude which the Colonial Development
Advisory Committee may take, I need hardly say that I shall
be very ready to consider favourably any further proposals that
may be put forward, for submission to them, for the grant of
assistance towards the improvement of nutrition.
I have, &c.,
J. H. THOMAS.
(38871—29) Wt. 2580-3731 750 10/36 T. St. tt. 373
S.O. Code No. 58 —9999
