

O.T.L.
Quality Metals
No. 1
ANTIFRICTION METALS
A. C . LANGWiLL.
LOCAL AGENT
127 SCOTT STREET
NEWCASTLE.
Phone New. 1C25.
O. T, LEMPRIERE & CO.
MELBOURNE SYDNEY LONDON
(COPYRIGHT)


O. T. LEMPRIERE & CO.
Smelters, Refiners , Alloy
Manufacturers and Metallurgists
Victoria:
Collins House,
Melbourne.
Tel. Cent. 888-889.
Queensland:
Herberton,
Nth. Q’ld.
New South Wales:
Sirius House,
Macquarie Place,
Sydney.
Tel. B 6287.
Tasmania;
51 St. John St.,
Launceston.
AND AT ZeEHAN.
Cablegrams } LEMPRIE.
(copyright)
London :
158 Fenchurch Street,
E.C.3.
Works and Laboratories ;
Cnr. Mandible and Bowden Streets,
Alexandria, N.S.W.
Tel. M 4074.


The issue of this first edition of our book
on Bearing Metals has become necessary
owing to the increasing demands from
our clients for service information which
has been supplied hitherto in leaflets.
We trust that the information given
herein will be of assistance to the user
of Bearing Metals not only in the actual
lining of bearings but also in the selec-
tion of metal for the particular purpose.
Technical advice and personal guidance
will be freely given when desired.
O. T. Lempriere & Co.


PORTION OF LABORATORY.
LABORATORY BALANCE ROOM.




O. T. LEMPRIERE & CO.
Smelters. Tin and Antimony.
Alloy Manufacturers. Bearing Metals, Type Metals, Sol-
ders, Resin Cored and Acid Cored
Solders, Refined Lead, Antimonial
Lead, Lead Seals, Fusible Metal
&c.
Reconditioners of Type metals to the trade.
Suppliers of Aluminium, Bismuth, Copper, Cad-
mium, Lead, Nickel, Phosphor-Cop-
per, Phosphor-Tin, Zinc & Ferro-
Alloys, &c.
Immediate deliveries from stock in
Melbourne and Sydney.
Purchasers of Tin, Copper, Gold, Bismuth, Silver,
Lead, Antimony and other ores,
Mattes and Metals, also Osmiridium,
Wolfram, Molybdenite, Tantalite,
Rutile, &c.
Prompt Cash Payments.


“O.T.L.” ANTIFRICTION METALS
STANDARD GRADES.
“ 0.T.L.” No. 1 :
“ 0.T.L.” Aero ;
“ 0.T.L.” Plastic :
Extremely tough alloy. Can be used for
almost any purpose where price per-
mits. Will not crack or spread if
correctly applied and anchored. Ideal
metal for big end bearings, particularly
for Diesel, Petrol, Oil, Gas, or High
Speed steam engines, turbines, etc.
The Metal for the highest speeds or
severest hammering.
For flat bearings without grooves or
anchorage for the metal and where
high pressures, high speed, or hammer-
ing is encountered.
; For very high pressures. Can be ap-
plied in a pasty condition and moulded
with a soldering iron, or a piece of
wood. Invaluable for patching damaged
bearings where conditions do not per-
mit of complete renewal. Strongly re-
commended for electric motors and
dynamos where small clearance has to
be accurately maintained.


“ 0.T.L.” No. 2 :
“ 0.T.L.” No. 3 :
“ 0.T.L.” No. 4 :
Tough Metal lower in price than No. i,
but can be substituted therefor, for
any except the severest work. Par-
ticularly recommended for steam en-
gines, and also for oil and gas engines,
and crusher bearings subjected to high
pressure and severe shocks.
A very complex alloy of considerable
hardness and high antifrictional pro-
perties. For medium and slow speed
steam engines, steamship stern tubes,
textile machinery, crusher bearings, etc.
A velvety smooth metal with a very low
co-efficient of friction, specially modified
to give it much improved wearing
qualities, compared with metals of
apparently similar composition. Re-
commended as a universal metal for
service where pressure or hammering
is not excessive.
Although a low priced metal, is made
with the same care as the more expensive
metals. Covers a wide range of uses.
“ 0.T.L.” No. 5 :


PROPERTIES OF BEARING METALS.
A good Bearing Metal should be capable of carrying the
load applied, whether by steady pressure, sudden application,
or hammering, without either spreading or cracking.
It should have sufficient plasticity to adjust itself to any
small irregularities, or lack of alignment in the shaft or the
surface of the bearing, without overheating or setting up
harmful stresses in either member.
It should not be hard enough to cut the shaft.
It should have a low and even rate of wear, a low co-efficient
of friction, and should hold an oil film well.
It should be easily poured, free from segregation, dross, and
blowholes, and should be easily machined to a smooth regular
surface.
To attain these properties certain points are essential.
The metal must be accurately made to a formula designed to
meet the conditions of service. These formulae vary for
different services, and different designs of bearings call for
different characteristics in the metal. In some cases a very
tough metal is called for, but in other cases it may be necessary
to sacrifice some toughness to obtain greater hardness. Again
it may be possible to fulfil all requirements with a lower
priced metal, in which instance some lead may be added to a
tin-base metal, or a lead-base metal may be used.
In every case the formula should be designed by a
metallurgist with a complete knowledge of the most
recent data on the constitution of the alloys in question.
STRUCTURE OF BEARING METALS.
The selection of a correct composition by no means ensures
the bearing value of the metal.
To have proper bearing qualities, the alloy should have a
complex structure in which harder portions are interspersed
with a softer constituent. With such a structure the harder
particles tend to resist wear on the bearing, but they them-
selves are protected from fracture by the cushioning effect
of the softer but tougher matrix in which they are embedded.
Under these conditions it is obvious that a fine regular
structure, which presents a very large number of wear-resisting


surfaces all held up to their work in the way described,
is superior to a coarse or irregular structure with large masses
of the harder particles which are liable to crack or crumble,
and areas of softer material that are apt to be distorted and
cause uneven wear.
At the same time the grain size must not be so fine that it
approaches homogeneity, losing the effect of the complex
structure.
A close regular grain, in addition to minimising wear and the
risk of fracture, reduces the frictional resistance, promotes
an even dissipation of generated heat, and helps to maintain
an even film of lubricant.
In some cases, as in “ 0.T.L.” No. 3 and No. 4 Bearing
Metals, the co-efficient of friction is further reduced by a
special modifying process.
PURITY OF BEARING METALS.
Allied with the question of composition is that of purity
and freedom from dross.
There should be the greatest possible elimination of all
deleterious impurities, as these interfere with the structure
of the metal and damage its mechanical properties. Dross is
particularly objectionable as its strength is very low, and the
mixing of this poor material with good metal is extremely
harmful.
It is not sufficient for a manufacturer to specify that he
uses only virgin metals. Many virgin metals are so impure
that they are totally unfit for the production of high grade
alloys.
Two of the features of “ 0.T.L.” Bearing Metals are the
careful selection of metal stocks to ensure that the impurities
are below our rigid limits, and the special treatment which
they are given to reduce dross to a minimum. This treat-
ment which is exclusive to “ 0.T.L.” metals, is the result
of several years of patient research into the nature of white
metal dross and the steps necessary for the removal of the cause
of dressing. During our investigations we searched all avail-
able literature and were unable to find any information com-
parable with the original work conducted in our own labor-
atory.


One very beneficial result of our process is that the metals
can be heated to a considerably higher temperature without
fear of damage, and we are now able to recommend higher
pouring temperatures than formerly. This is an obvious
benefit to the user, but at the same time if special circum-
stances, or predilection on the part of the operator demand it,
a much lower temperature may be used as the removal of
the dross gives increased fluidity at any heat right down to
the melting point.
TECHNICAL CONTROL OF MANUFACTURE.
The formulae of “ 0.T.L.” Antifriction Metals are designed
by our metallurgists who have made intensive research into
the properties of the alloys and have carefully investigated
the requirements for various types of bearing services.
All metals are manufactured under strict scientific super-
vision, and close temperature control is maintained through-
out.
Each batch of metal made is checked by analysis, and by
microscopic examination of polished and etched specimens
which reveal the structure of the alloy. In this manner we
are able to keep a uniformly high standard in every grade of
metal.
We have examined a large number of high class metals on
the market and definitely claim that not one of these, local
or imported, can match our regular, fine, well formed structure.
We do not publish figures of physical tests on our Anti-
friction metals, for such figures are apt to be misleading and
give little information as to the value of an alloy for bearing
purposes. It is relatively easy to make two metals of similar
hardness, compressive strength, or other physical properties,
one of which may be an excellent bearing metal while the other
is quite useless. To interested parties, however, we will
be very pleased to give particulars regarding our metals.
TECHNICAL SERVICE.
We are always pleased to place our technical experience
and service at the disposal of industry, and welcome inquiries
from engineers and others with problems to solve. Whether
the job be large or small we are ready to help.


VIRGIN METALS
Manufactured by us which are used in hearing metals.
Ingot of O. T. Lempriere & Co. Tin.
Cake of O. T. Lempriere & Co. Antimony.


Liquid at
.... 280° C
= 536° F.
Pour at about ....
.... 390° C
= 734° F.
Do not heat above
.... 460° C
b
0
0
VO
00
No. 1.
The wonderful toughness and durability of
this metal are unexcelled and make it particularly
suitable where bearings have shown a tendency
to crack. An ideal alloy for use under the highest
speeds or where the bearing is subjected to ham-
mering or severe shocks. Particularly suitable
for Diesel Engines, Aircraft, Automobile or Motor
Boat Engines, High-speed Steam Engines, Tur-
bines, High-speed Wood-working Machinery.


MICROPHOTOGRAPH
OF
“O.T.L.” No. 1 BEARING METAL x 50.
Note regular distribution of the hardening
throughout the tough matrix.
The hardening is a compound of copper and
tin, which appears as star shaped crystals, while
the matrix is tin carrying antimony in solid
solution.


MICROPHOTOGRAPH
OF
“O.T.L.” No. 1 BEARING METAL x 120.
Showing the perfect formation of the star shaped
crystals which ensures the best distribution of
the hardening and the greatest support for it
from the matrix, giving maximum toughness.
This illustrates one of the reasons for the superiority
of “0.T.L.” No. i over Competitive Metals.


MICROPHOTOGRAPH
OF
“O.T.L.” No. 1 BEARING METAL x 350.
Showing detail and interweaving of the star
shaped crystals.
Note the absence of large particles of the compara-
tively brittle hardening constituent which are a source
of danger as they may fracture under shock.


Liquid at ' ....
.... 290 0 C
b
0
11
Pour at about ....
u
0
8
©
0
II
Do not heat above
.... 460° c
II
00
as
0
0
AERO.
A stiff metal designed for use in bearings where
there are no grooves in the backing to help confine
the metal and where heavy pressures and con-
siderable pounding are encountered. Combines
hardness and toughness in a very high degree.
For Aero Engines, Motor Car and Motor
Waggons, Diesel Engines, etc.


MICROPHOTOGRAPH
OF
O.T.L. “AERO” BEARING
METAL x 50.
As the antimony is in excess of the amount
soluble in tin, portion of it occurs as a separate
constituent namely tin antimony cuboids, which
appear as white crystals in the photograph.
The tin copper crystals and the tin-antimony
matrix are also shown.


Liquid at
.... 340° C
= 644° F.
Pour at about ....
.... 400 ° C
= 752° F.
Do not heat above
u
0
0
= 842° F.
PLASTIC.
Combines great compressive strength and con-
siderable hardness with ability to conform to the
alignment of the shaft, preventing cutting of the
shaft or cracking of the bearing. Recommended
for very heavy pressures, or where severe abrasion
occurs. Very useful for repairing damaged bear-
ings as it can be applied with a soldering iron,
or moulded in a pasty condition. We do not re-
commend this metal where excessive hammering
is encountered unless it can be applied in a very
thin layer on a strong bronze backing. For Loco-
motives, Electric Motors and Dynamos, Thrust
Blocks, etc.


MICROPHOTOGRAPH
OF “ O.T.L.” PLASTIC METAL x 50.
A hard metal of high compressive strength which can,
if desired, he worked in a semi-molten or plastic state.
The antimony content in excess of the amount
soluble in solid solution in tin appears as tin-
antimony cuboids.
The star shaped crystals are tin-copper com-
pounds. These, in addition to their hardening
action, fulfil the very important function of pre-
venting the segregation of the cuboids.
Segregation is a factor which spoils many plastic
metals, but “ 0.T.L.” practice ensures a regular
structure.


Liquid at
.... 250° C
= 482° F.
Pour at about ....
■■■• 35°° c
II
OS
Os
w
0
No. 2 Copper Hardened
may be considered as an alternative to No. i. It
is a high grade tin-base alloy and is recommended
for Marine Engine Bearings, Internal Combustion
Engines, Motors and Dynamos, Steam Engines
of all kinds, and any service where the bearing
is subjected to severe shocks and pressures.


MICROPHOTOGRAPH
OF
“O.T.L.” No. 2 BEARING METAL x 50.
The white square shaped crystals are tin-anti-
mony cuboids, while the fine needle shaped
crystals indicate the tin-copper compound, which, in
addition to hardening the metal, holds the tin-
antimony in position, and preserves the regular
fine grained structure of the alloy.


Liquid at
.... 256° c
= 491 0 F.
Pour at about ...
u
0
0
0
= 752 F.
No. 3.
Specially designed for crushers and other heavy
work, particularly where severe abrasion occurs.
It is fine grained, hard, smooth running, wear
resisting, and possesses a low coefficient of friction.
Remarkably easy to cast and machine. Recom-
mended for Crushers, medium and slow speed
Steam Engines, Steamship Stern Tubes, Pumps,
Fans, Brickmaking Machinery, Textile Machinery,
etc.
(Note : At the correct pouring temperature the
surface of “ 0.T.L.” No. 3 clears and displays
an appearance as of flakes of graphite darting
about.)


MICROPHOTOGRAPH
OF
“O.T.L.” No. 3 BEARING METAL x 50.
The white crystals are tin-antimony compound
set in a tin-lead-antimony matrix. The dark spots
are a special hardening which stands up in relief
on the polished and etched specimen.


Liquid at
U
o
o
= 482° F.
Pour at about....
u
o
8
0
V-j
I"-
11
No. 4
is modified in such a way that its anti-
frictional properties are immensely superior to
those of other metals with apparently similar
compositions. A metal of silky smoothness, which
pours like water, machines perfectly, and has a
very low co-efficient of friction which ensures cool
running. Suitable for Crushers, Tube mills, Am-
monia Compressors, Sugar Mills, Cement Mills,
Fans, Blowers, Pumps, Conveyors, Concrete
Mixers, Lathes, Machine Tools, Steamship Stern
Tubes, and Tunnel Bearings, etc.


MICROPHOTOGRAPH
OF
“O.T.L.” No. 4 BEARING METAL x 350.
This Microphotograph discloses tin-antimony
crystals distributed in a tin-lead-antimony euctecti-
ferous matrix. The special modifying process ap-
plied to this alloy endows it with superior physical
properties, and a very low co-efficient of friction.


Liquid at
2 45° c =
473° F.
Pour at about ....
.... 360° c =
68o° F.
No. 5.
No. 5 stands alone in the low priced field. An
excellent fine grained alloy which can be used for a
wide range of general engineering work such as
Bearings in Line Shafting, Railway Carriages and
Trucks, Boring Machinery, Agricultural Machin-
ery, Steamship Tunnel Bearings, etc. Also for
Hydraulic Packing and Rope Capping.
No. 6.
Supplied where price is the main consideration.
A well proportioned alloy suitable for light work.


MICROPHOTOGRAPH
OF
No. 5 BEARING METAL x 350.
Antimony crystals in a tin-lead-antimony matrix.
Fine grained and smooth running.


USES.
Before putting in a bearing consult this table. The highest
efficiency will be obtained by accepting our suggestions.
For Service in
Aero Engines Use No. I or Aero
Agricultural Machinery .... „ No. 4 or No. 5
Air Compressors „ No. 1
Ammonia Compressors .... „ No. 3 or No. 4
Blowers „ No. 3 or No. 4
Brick Making Machinery .... „ No. 3 or No. 4
Briquetting Machinery „ No. 1
Cement Mills „ No. 3 or No. 4
Centrifugal Pumps „ No. 2, No. 3 or No. 4
Concrete Mixers „ No. 4
Conveyors „ No. 4
Cranes „ No. 3 or No. 4
Crushers „ No. 3 or No. 4
Diesel Engines „ No. 1
Dynamos „ Plastic or No. 2
Electric Motors „ Plastic or No. 2
Fans „ No. 3 or No. 4
Flour Mills „ No. 4
Gas Engines „ No. 1 or No. 2
Laundry Machinery „ No. 4
Laundry Hydro Extractors .... „ No. 2
Locomotives „ No. 1 Aero or Plastic
Lathes „ No. 3 or No. 4


Machine Tools Use No. 3 or No. 4
Mill Shafting „ No. 5
Mining Machinery (General).... „ No. 3 or No. 4
Marine Engines „ No. 1 or No. 2
Motor Boats „ No. 1 or No. 2
Motor Cars „ No. 1 or Aero
Motor Lorries „ No. 1 or Aero
Oil Engines „ No. 1 or No. 2
Pumps „ No. 4
Refrigerating Machinery .... „ No. 4
Railway Carriage Waggons and
Truck Axles „ No. 4 or No. 5
Rolling Mills „ No. 3 or No. 4
Rope Capping „ No. 5
Sawmills „ No. 3 or No. 4
Steam Engines
High Speed „ No. 1 or No. 2
Medium Speed „ No. 2 or No. 3
Slow Speed „ No. 3 or No. 4
Steamship Engines „ No. 1 or No. 2
Steamship Stern Tubes .... „ No. 3 or No. 4
Sugar Machinery .... „ No. 4
Textile Machinery „ No. 4
Tube Mills „ No. 4
Turbines „ No. 1 or Aero
Woodworking Machinery
High Speed „ No. 1 or No. 2
Others „ No. 3 or No. 4


TESTIMONIALS.
(Photograph by courtesy of N.S.W . Light Car Club.)
Sydney, 4th July, 1933
Messrs. O. T. Lempriere & Co.,
25 Macquarie Place,
Sydney, N.S.W.
Gentlemen,
During my record breaking trip between Sydney and Melbourne
last month, my “ Bugatti ” Car was driven at a speed of between 90
to too miles per hour, the engine reaching 5,000 revolutions per minute.
All the connecting rods had been relined with O.T.L. Bearing Metal
supplied by your firm, and several of these bearings had been in service
for over two years, during which time the car had broken several other
records.
I consider this a very strenuous test, but it only confirms my great
opinion of your white metal. I shall be pleased to recommend its
general use.
Yours faithfully,
fSgd.) J. Clements.


[Copy]
Chapman & Sherack,
Clare Street, Erskineville, N.S.W.
June, 22, 1933.
Messrs. O. T. Lempriere & Co.,
Metal Merchants,
25 Macquarie Place,
Sydney.
Gentlemen,
It gives us much pleasure in recommending your O.T.L. No. 1
Bearing Metal as an excellent product.
In the manufacture of our Diesel Engines, we are adopting this metal
throughout all bearings.
We have carried out extensive tests with other well known brands
of Copper Hardened Metal on a bearing running at 600 Revs, per minute,
carrying an intermittent load of over 2,000 lb. per square inch.
With the Copper Hardened Metal the bearing suffered a high rise
in temperature regardless of the quality and quantity of lubrication,
and wore down rapidly with a scoring action on the Journal.
O.T.L. No. 1 Metal was then used to replace the other metal, and the
result was astounding. It enabled us to cut down the quantity of
lubrication considerably, with a marked degree of temperature re-
duction, and in addition the Journal quickly recovered to a beautiful
mirror-like surface, and showing no visible signs of wear.
In conclusion, we thank you for your valuable help and suggestions
in overcoming the difficulties we experienced.
Yours faithfully,
Chapman & Sherack,
Per : G. Chapman (Sgd.)
P. J. Taylor & Coy.,
Motor Engineers,
c/r. Liverpool & Riley Streets,
Sydney.
Messrs. O. T. Lempriere & Co., 3rd August, 1931.
Sirius House,
Macquarie Place,
Sydney.
Dear Sirs,
We would like to express our appreciation of your No. 1 O.T.L.
Bearing Metal, which we have been using for several years. It has
proved thoroughly satisfactory in use, being clean and free flowing,
and machining to an excellent finish. It has at all times been
thoroughly reliable in use.
We would also like to thank you for the technical service which you
have rendered to us at various times.
Yours faithfully,
P. J. Taylor & Company,
per P. J. Taylor.


Jackson, Thompson Ltd.,
Motor Engineers,
Head Office & Service Station,
5) 7,9, it Pyrmont Bridge Road,
Camperdown.
3rd December, 1931.
Messrs. O. T. Lempriere & Co.,
Sirius House,
Macquarie Place,
Sydney.
Dear Sirs,
For some years we have used special Bearing Metal made by you to
our specification, exclusively for remetalling connecting rods, and have
had great satisfaction from it. It melts with a minimum of dross,
is easy to pour, and turns up to an excellent surface free from segre-
gation, blowholes, or inclusions. It adheres well to the shell, and
makes a thoroughly sound bearing. Its performance in service has
been uniformly excellent, and we have had no trouble from cracking or
spreading. The technical service rendered by you has been of
infinite assistance to us.
Yours faithfully,
Jackson, Thompson Ltd.,
per E. Campbell, Works Manager.
Harkness & Hillier Ltd.
Motor & Aeronautical Engineers,
Parramatta Road, Five Dock,
Sydney.
3/9/31-
Messrs. O. T. Lempriere & Co.,
Sirius House,
25 Macquarie Place,
Sydney,
Dear Sirs,
We wish to advise that after having experimented with many kinds
of white metal suitable for bearings we have now decided to use your
metal exclusively, as it has proved to be more satisfactory than any
other metal previously used by ourselves.
Our consumption of this metal, as you know, is about 1 cwt. per month,
and we have found this metal very uniform, and have no complaints
whatsoever.
Yours faithfully,
Harkness & Hillier Ltd.,
per D. G. Harkness,
Managing Director.


[Copy.]
Moffatt-Virtue Ltd.,
Engineers & Machinery Merchants,
11-25 Palmer Street,
Sydney.
12th December, 1931.
Messrs. O. T. Lempriere & Co.,
25 Macquarie Place,
Sydney.
Dear Sir,
Attention Mr. Hodgson.
Re O.T.L. Anti-friction metal. You will be glad to hear that after
trying no less than four other metals of various makes in Two-4 Cylinder
Diesel Engines, we have decided to use only your No. 1, as we find it
gives better results and is less liable to crack, after tests extending over
18 months.
Meanwhile, we are,
Yours faithfully.
Moffatt-Virtue Limited.


NOTES ON LINING BEARINGS WITH
WHITE METAL.
In lining a bearing properly there are several steps which
should be conscientiously carried out. At first sight these
may appear long and tedious, but it must be borne in mind
that a little extra time spent in the workshop may add months,
or years, to the life of the bearing, quite apart from any ques-
tion of inconvenience, loss, or danger occasioned by a failure
through inefficient or hurried workmanship.
CLEANING THE BEARING SHELL PREPARATORY
TO TINNING.
The first operation is to clean the shell. In the case of used
bearings, the white metal and the old tinning must be removed,
preferably by dipping in a bath of scrap bearing metal at
a temperature not far above its melting point. If this is not
possible the old metal may be melted olf with a blow-lamp.
In suitable cases portion of the white metal may be chipped
off before removing the balance by melting. The shell must
be thoroughly cleaned from all oil, grease, sand, grit, or other
foreign matter. To get rid of oil or grease, unless these have
been destroyed by immersion in a bath of molten metal, the
shell should be treated in a hot solution of 3-5% caustic
soda solution, followed by washing with several relays of hot
water to remove all traces of the caustic. The surface to
be tinned should then be scraped, filed, sand-blasted, or treated
in any other such way to give a complete surface of clean
metal for the tinning operation.
Before tinning, the shell should be suspended by a cord and
tested by ringing with a light blow from a hammer. The sound
resulting is to be compared with that obtained by similar
ringing after the lining is poured.


Zinc Chloride
59
Parts
Ammonium Chloride
40
Parts
Sodium Fluoride
1
Part
TINNING.
This operation is of utmost importance, for on its suc-
cessful accomplishment depends the adhesion of the white
metal to the shell. Incomplete adhesion permits the in-
trusion of oil between the lining and the backing, and by
lowering the rate of conduction of heat from the rubbing
surfaces causes overheating and is responsible for many fail-
ures of good metal.
To make the tin or tinning alloy adhere to the surface of
the shell it is first necessary to treat this surface with a flux.
For bronze shells zinc chloride, or “ killed spirits,” is usually
used. Cast iron or malleable iron shells are frequently diffi-
cult to tin, but a preliminary pickling will make them more
readily treatable. A suitable pickling bath consists of:
i Part Hydrofluoric Acid (30%)
1 Part Sulphuric Acid (Strong)
18 Parts Water.
(This should be made up be adding the acid to the water,
not the water to the acid, as the latter procedure is dangerous.)
The shell after being left in the bath for several minutes
should be washed well with clean water, and then put into
a bath of weak caustic soda to neutralize any remaining traces
of acid. Finally it must be washed thoroughly with plenty
of clean water. The surface to be tinned is wetted with
killed spirits of salts, the shell is then warmed and treated
with a special flux which is sprinkled on in powered form.
The special flux consists of:


The best results are obtained by the use of pure tin when
tinning cast iron.
The most satisfactory method of tinning is that of immersing
the whole bearing in a tinning bath, which may consist of
pure tin, a high grade solder, or a very high grade of bearing
metal, such as “ 0.T.L.” No. i. The bath should be kept
well stirred, and free from dross, and it is good practice to put
a little soldering flux on the surface just before use.
The portions of the shell which are not to be tinned are
protected by being painted over with a wash of whitening
or clay, and allowed to dry.
Preheating of the shell is carried out in a manner which
avoids oxidizing the surface to be tinned. The shell is im-
mersed in the tinning bath until it is hot enough for the tin
or solder to run freely from the surface. It is then removed
and any excess of tin solder or flux is rubbed off with a clean
cotton rag (one without any nap). It is then examined
carefully to see if there are any spots which are not properly
tinned, and if any such be found they are swabbed over with
more flux and re-tinned, excess of tin and all flux being sub-
sequently removed.
If it is not possible to immerse the shell, it may be tinned by
hand, using tin, solder or whitemetal sticks. The bearing
is fluxed and brought to such a temperature that the tin will
run freely on the surface. The tinning is applied by rubbing
the sticks over the face of the shell, the operation being assisted
with a soldering iron. Any refractory spots are swabbed
over with flux and re-tinned and the shell is finally wiped clean
as in the dipping process. In heating the shell, care must be
taken not to let the flame play on any of the surfaces which
are to be tinned.
The whole operation, particularly in the case of cast or
malleable iron bearings which are liable to rust, should be
carried out as expeditiously as possible. The tinned shell
is now ready to mount in a jig to receive the white metal
lining and the tinned surface should not be touched again.


TINNING ALUMINIUM ALLOY CONNECTING
RODS OR BEARING SHELLS.
Filej:he bearing surface clean and heat from the back with
a blow lamp until the aluminium solder melts freely on being
applied to the surface to be tinned. Use O.T.L. Aluminium
Solder and rub the stick on to the prepared surface. If
necessary a wire brush may be used to assist in rubbing in
the solder and removing excess. Do not use either flux or
a soldering iron.
ANCHORAGE HOLES.
On account of the difficulty of tinning, particularly in
cast iron shells, anchorage holes or grooves are frequently
provided in bearings to give an additional hold to the white
metal.
JIGS.
For repetition work special jigs should be designed to ex-
pedite the work, and these can be so fitted that the space for
the white metal fills freely, leakage is obviated and sufficient
head is provided to feed molten metal to overcome shrinkage
cavities. In many cases, however, bearings have to be poured
without such adjuncts, and care must be taken to avoid con-
ditions which militate against good work, particularly im-
perfect sealings for the mould, excessive dampness, overheating
of the shell or the mandrel, or the opportunity for dirt or
other foreign matter to enter the casting. Boiler lagging
or shredded asbestos pulped with water, or thick oil, and
squeezed as dry as possible, makes excellent sealing material.
Failing this putty or clay may be used.
A good jig for half bearings may be made with an angle
plate, the faces of which are machined to a correct right angle.
The plate is set up with one face horizontal, on which the
shell stands in a vertical position clamped to the vertical face.
A suitable mandrel can be made from a piece of sheet iron
as shown in the sketch. A half ring placed on top of the shell


provides a head of metal, and if necessary another half ring
is placed under the shell to allow the metal free access to the
lower portions of the shell (see Figure i). Where two half
bearings are to be poured together a plate should be set up
with a centering device for the mandrel, and clamps for the
two shells which should be divided by separating strips (Figs.
2 and 3).
It is preferable to pour bearings in a vertical position, but
in some cases it is necessary to cast them horizontally. In
such instances it is essential to see that the metal flows right
FIGURE 1.
up to and over the edge opposite the pouring side, a blow
lamp and a piece of clean wire being used to assist if necessary
(Fig- 4)-
Mandrels may be made from sheet metal or from hollow
tubes or rod. They should be slightly smaller than the shaft
the bearing is to accommodate in order that the metal may be
machined to size. The mandrel should be dressed with lamp-
black, whiting, or some similar material, to prevent the metal
from adhering to it. If only one bearing is to be poured, and


no other material is available, a dry wooden rod may be used
as a mandrel.
Both the shell and the mandrel should be heated before the
white metal is poured into the shell, so that the metal may
cast freely and also unite with the tinning on the shell. The
following temperatures are advised :
Bronze Shells = 120 0 C - 150° C = 248° Fahr. - 302° Fahr.
Iron Shells = 200° C - 220 0 C = 392° Fahr. - 428° Fahr.
Mandrels = 120° C - 150° C = 248° Fahr. - 302° Fahr.
FIGURE 2.


FIGURE 3.
FIGURE 4.


MELTING.
The metal should be melted in pots heated by gas
or electricity if possible, and provided with pyrometers,
thermometers or thermostatic control. The pots, working
bench, and jigs should be kept scrupulously clean and free from
dust. The metal should be heated quickly to the specified
temperature, mixed thoroughly, and skimmed before pouring.
(The mixing should be done from the bottom of the pot
upwards and not by swirling motion.) Any excess of molten
metal left after the work is completed should not be allowed to
cool slowly in the pot, but should be cast into chill moulds.
Care must be taken not to overheat the metal. If proper
temperature control is not available, a piece of paper or a
pine stick may be used, these charring to a dark brown for
“ 0.T.L.” No. i, Aero, and Plastic, and to a medium brown
for the other grades. At the best, however, these are not
very good substitutes and the small outlay necessary to pur-
chase a nitrogen filled mercury thermometer is strongly re-
commended.
POURING.
The molten metal should be poured in a steady stream,
at one point in such a way as to avoid splashing. Do
not pour from a higher position than is necessary. A clean
preheated ladle with a smooth lip should be used, and it is
advantageous to have a bridge across the top of the ladle near
the spout to hold back dross. The metal must be made to
set from the bottom upwards and with this end in view, the
bottom of the bearing should be cooled by a stream of cold
air, or by careful application of a damp rag, while the top
may be gently warmed with a flame until the lower portions
solidify. Sufficient head of metal must be kept supplied to
feed any shrinkage. In some cases it may be advisable to
prick the casting with a piece of clean steel wire or a thin
strip of wood in order to prevent blowholes, but care must
be taken to cease disturbing the metal before it begins to
set. Do not disturb the metal while it is cooling.
When cool, suspend the bearing by means of a cord, and test
it by giving it a light tap with a hammer, and compare this


with the sound of the hearing before lining. If the metal is
adhering completely, the bearing will ring true, but a different
note indicates that the metal is loose somewhere. Some bear-
ings, particularly those with cracked shells, or with many
holes or grooves, may never ring true.
MACHINING THE WHITE METAL LINING.
The machining of the white metal should be conducted in a
manner which will disturb the crystalline structure of the metal
as little as possible. All work, and particularly the finishing
off, should be done with the sharpest possible tool, with a
light cut and high speed. If scraping has to be adopted, a
sharp tool and light touch should be employed.


O. T. LEMPRIERE & CO. TIN.
O. T. Lempriere & Go. Tin is of very high standard,
and is suitable for the most exacting work, such as tin plating,
collapsible tube manufacture, etc.
In order to maintain a regularly high standard, all lots are
subjected to three separate physical tests, as well as chemical
analysis, before being passed for sale.
Typical Analysis.
CORRECTION.
Owing to a typographical error, the percentage of Tin
(By Difference) in the Typical Analysis has been listed
wrongly and should read
'%
!%
'%
>%
>%
I »'
1 /()
Tin (By Difference) ... ... ... 99.897%
This analysis is considerably better than that required by
the London Metal Exchange for Standard Tin.
“ 0.T.L.” ANTIMONY.
Antimony manufactured by the “ 0.T.L.” new process
is at least equal to the best English Antimony, and immensely
superior to other grades. Careful research has resulted in
the elimination of impurities which cause so much trouble
with many brands, and has produced a metal which alloys
with a maximum of ease and a minimum dross loss.
Typical Analysis.
Antimony (By Difference) 99.832%
Lead 0.083%
Tin Trace
Arsenic ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.055%
Bismuth ... ... ... ... ... ... Nil
Copper ... ... ... ... ... ■■■ 0.001%
Cadmium ... ... ... ... ... ... Nil
Iron Trace
Zinc ... ... ... ... ... ■■■ Nil
Nickel ... ... ... ■■■ ■■■ ••• ■■■ Nil
Cobalt ... ... ... ... ... ... Nil
Sulphur ... ... ... ... ... 0.029%


O.T.L. SOLDERS.
O.T.L. Solders are recognized as setting the
highest standard. Expert advice on the selection
of solders for various classes of work is freely
given.
Alloys to special specification made up.
Stocks of high temperature and aluminium
solder carried.
CORED SOLDERS.
Resin, Acid, and Special Flux Cored Solders
manufactured and carried in stock.
FLUXES.
Tinning, Soldering and other Fluxes carried in
stock.


“BRAZIT”
A New Welding and Brazing Material
Supplied in Thin Sticks.
“ Brazil ” is superseding brazing spelter in general use
owing to the ease with which the metal is worked and the
stronger and neater join or weld. Not only does its use save
time in operation, but it reduces also the finishing operations
because of the cleaner job which results. Its use is not con-
fined to Copper or Brass, but it can be applied to Steel Tubes
and other work where a brazing metal is necessary.
Welding with “ Brazil ” is simplicity itself. It is self-
fluxing when used on Copper, and, with the assistance of a
little powdered borax can be used for brazing Copper to Brass
or Steel, Brass to Brass or Steel, and Steel to Steel. The
competent workman will soon ascertain the excellent results
obtainable by the use of “ Brazil.”
The materials to be joined are cleaned as usual and are pre-
pared for socketing, flanging, lapping, etc. Heat to about
Boo° Centigrade (somewhat above blood red) is applied to
the joint, and the “ Brazil ” is used like solder, fusing readily
at the temperature and flowing freely, giving a perfectly
uniform connection. Moderate over-heating will not affect the
strength of the weld, but undue heating means unnecessary
waste of the brazing metal.
It is better to use a temperature higher than 800 ° Centigrade
than a lower, as it is necessary to have sufficient heat to get
the best results.
“ Brazil ” can be used with every confidence as it will reduce
costs and give a superior finish in all classes of work.


SIMMONS PRINT. SYDNEY
