

.tA*A*At*AAAi.AAAAA A. AAAAA A A A A. A. A iAAAAAAAAAAAAA AAAAAAAA AAA A A AAAAAA^
I _.• : . •
| . I , ' - ' | i ’3
3 . ■■■■■! :
J ; . j :
; i : ■; :•
i O AMARU i i
< C r . ■ ' .• 4 ' - ( ►
j ! ami
3 NEW XEAIkAID, :
: &c J
J i ■ ■ ■ 3„
J - < '
i (tj
i ■ . - \ ‘
:
t ;
j ; ;. I
< !
r- i*> •■ '■. ■>••'•: 1|»
;e';4 - ; Vi ■,>: |t||
3. i :


. r\ * k s f
v 5 - 1 <- , f, ' I |
.
tw aJ® ‘ Y $* ■
■ * , ' ■' - H,c ' j/** \i ,
*
•• •■ ’-" -•■■■••. , ,• . .' '•■ ■ ■ . .' r - • '
■
‘
k , r ■ 1 > :■-> ■■■ * .r-’ ' -v,' x - - ,
.
■
■
. • , f-K ; . . ■ '• . ' . ;
.• - ■
■
■ ! “■ V 4 v C "■ ' ■ ■■ • ■ • ’ ■ ; ■ x ‘ . -i '


OAMAEU STONE
QUARRYING AND EXPORT
COMPANY,
NEW ZEALAND.
Imports, |p«ss ©pinions, Ac.
Utellwiiriie :
WALKER, MAY & CO., PRINTERS, 9 MACKILLOP-ST.
(OFF 56 BOURKE STREET WEST).


*
.
/
,
■
V
, .
,
f
■'
■r


Carbonate of lime * ...
90*1
Alumina
I *55
Oxide of iron ...
•kk
Soluble silica ...
•j j
•4c
Insoluble matter
* 0
7' 1 5
Loss
•15
OAMARU STONE QUARRYING AND EXPORT CO,,
NEW ZEALAND,
FROM G. W. BLAIR, C.E., CHIEF ENGINEER, PUBLIC WORKS
DEPARTMENT, OTAGO.
Dunedin, i qt/i December, 1577.
OAMARU STONE.
The Oamaru Stone is a white granular limestone. According to
the Government Analyst, its chemical constituents are as follows:
roo'oo
This places it in the same class as the Oolites of England and
the Caen stone of France.
The Oamaru Stone has a remarkable uniformity of colour and
texture, and can be obtained in large blocks. Like all Limestones
of this kind, it is quite soft when quarried, but hardens rapidly
on exposure to a dry atmosphere. This enables it to be worked
into the most elaborate ornamentation at little cost.
The stone is rather porous for use in a damp situation, but it
answers well in ordinary walls and columns in a moderately dry
climate, and it is unexcelled for internal decorations.
The durability of the Oamaru Stone has not yet been thoroughly
tested, its resistance to the disintegrating action of sulphate of
soda is comparatively feeble, and some of the stones in the


Colonial Bank building, Dunedin, erected in 1865, are showing
symptoms, of decay. On the other hand, many older structures
in Oamaru are as fresh as when erected. The decay in the
Colonial Bank is attributed to the stones having been subjected
to the action of sea water during shipment at Oamaru and
Moeraki. It is not, however, known for a certainty that the
stones referred to were so subjected, and I am not clear as to
whether the water would have the effect of causing disintegration
after such a lapse of years. I am inclined to think that the
decay is caused through these particular stones having been of
an inferior quality to begin with, and that due care was not
exercised in laying them on their natural bed.
G. W. BLAIR, M. Inst. , C.E.
Dunedin, 9 th February, 1871.
To the Secretary for Land and Works.
In reply to a memorandum of His Honour the Superin-
tendent, dated sth ultimo, regarding the Oamaru and Kakanui
stone, we have the honour to report that it has been largely used
in this Province for the last ten years. The oldest structure
known to us which has been erected with this material is the
bridge at Oamaru, whose span is 24 feet, and width between
parapets 18 feet. The style of masonry is squared, dressed on
beds and joints, and scabbled on face, excepting cornices and
parapet, which are tool-dressed fair. This bridge was erected in
iB6O, and by recent inspection has been found to be in perfect
condition, the stone having indurated with the years of exposure.
Structures of much greater importance and extent have, since
that date, been erected of the same stone, from the several
quarries of the district, amongst which may be mentioned—
Ist. The building in Dunedin intended for the Otago Univer-
sity, of finely dressed masonry, ornamented with Corinthian and
composite columns, order on order, with highly ornamented
entablatures and parapets.
2nd. The Bank of New South Wales, a building of four stories,
of elaborate Italian style, masonry finely dressed.
3rd. The first Church of Otago, of Gothic or decorated English
style, to which is attached a lofty tower and spire, round which
are clustered pinnacles of bold and light design.


4th. The Otepopo Bridge, of four spans of 42 feet each.
Masonry squared, face rock work, with finely dressed cornices
and parapets.
Several other smaller, bridges have been erected, but which it
is needless to specify. Many buildings have also beeii erected
where the partial use of the Oamaru and Kakanui Stone has been
availed of, an example of which is the Provincial Government
Buildings—an extensive pile, the walls of pressed brick, and
parapets, cornices, and window and door facings, of the above.
The erection of these structures has extended over these last
eight years, and in none of them is there any disintegration of the
material to be detected. In the oldest, the arisses are yet sharp,
and the tool marks fresh; and even in the most exposed parts,
such as the copings and south-west walls, the stone has indurated
with time, presenting no appearance even of incipient decay.
Exceptionally to this (but only in two or three cases) must be
mentioned the detection of an inferior stone allowed to be put in
by insufficient inspection, a contingency in future easily guarded
against by persons of experience.
During the period of ten years, the stone has also been much
used in graveyards as headstones and monuments. Having
inspected all those in the Dunedin Cemetery, we have to report
that the oldest even of these show no signs of deterioration; but,
on the contrary, have been hardened by time and exposure, the
lettering and tool marks are as sharp and distinct as on the day
on which they were cut.
This stone has also been used largely in the construction of
public and private buildings in Oamaru and adjacent districts,
and in, the more remote portions of the Province it has been
used for sills, lintels, cornices, quoins, and parapets in buildings
erected with brick or bluestone.
As the stone is to be found abundantly over a district of
twenty-five miles in length, and eight in breadth, it is practically
inexhaustible; and though strata of inferior qualities exist, yet
the nature, colour, and characteristics of the approved stone
being now so well known to the professional men and practical
artificers, and quarrymen of the district, no danger in its use can
be run if selections be made under intelligent supervision.—We
have, &c.,
(Signed)
J. T. THOMSON,
Civil Engineer.
(Signed)
G. M. BARR,
Engineer of Roads and Works.


Duniedin, iqth December, 1877.
To Messrs. Proctor and Browm.
Gentlemen,
I beg to forward herewith cojpy of report upon the Oamaru
and Kakanui Stone made to the Provincial Government of
Otago in 1871, by Mr. J. T. Thomson and myself. You will
observe that it deals with that maternal as used in many architec-
tural and engineering works in this- Province, and that it speaks
to the favourable qualities of the sttone as shown in these. Mr.
Thomson is now on his way to Europe, so I have no opportunity
of asking him if he sees any reasom to change his opinion from
that therein stated; but I can say;, for myself, that I have no
desire to alter one word of it.
I am, yours truly,
GEORGE M. BARR, C.E.
Dtunedin, October 26th, 1877.
The Secretary Oamaru Stone: Quarrying and Export
Company.
I beg to state that I have used the Oamaru Stone in
numerous buildings erected under rmy supervision in the Province
of Otago, during the last ten years. From personal observation,
I have formed a high opinion of tine qualities of this stone. I
have never observed any evidemce of disintegration from
exposure to the weather, and ami of opinion that if large
horizontal surfaces are not exposed (to the absorption of rain, that
the stone can be used to great advaintage in any position in any
building, and will produce a better architectural effect than any
other building stone that I know of m New Zealand.
The cost of handling and carriage from Oamaru, and the
uncertainty of the supply, have, hitlherto, prevented its extensive
and general use, but I am convinced that if these difficulties are
overcome, and the stone delivered in the market at a price that
can compete with brick and cement, that this beautiful stone
will be extensively used in all the better classes of public and-
private buildings in the colony.
I have the honouir to be, Sir,
Your obedt. servant,
JOHN McGREGOR.


Dunedin, October 26 th, 1877.
I hereby certify that for the last twelve years I have freely
made use of the stone known as the Oamaru Stone, in several
important buildings throughout Otago, chiefly in churches and
banks, and similar class of work.
In all cases where it has been made use of by me, I have not
noticed up to this period any evidence of decay, and I consider
it to be the_ best stone for general purposes in connection with
external or internal finishing of buildings to be obtained in the
colonies.
Being obtainable in large blocks, it gives every facility for
carrying out massive works, and the ease with which it can be
worked into any form, permits of richness in detail and carving
being introduced, which would be impossible in harder material
unless at say three times the cost.
R. A. LAWSON, Architect.


OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
(From Saturday Advertiser.)
“ Sermons in stones, and good in everything.”—As You Like It.
Eor thirty years, the gray cliffs of Oamaru, covering many a
square mile with their protecting mantle, have been silently
proclaiming to the industrious and enterprising, “ Here is
abundant wealth for the carrying away. Here is an admirable
building stone of unrivalled colour, of texture so pure and free
from silicious particles that, while abundantly compact, it yet can
be cut with a common saw, or turned in a lathe and polished
with sand-paper; with the close grain of a stone, it yet can be
carved with the freedom of wood.” Now for the first time, a
proper response is to be made, and a Company has been formed
for the _ quarrying and export of this valuable material. The
stone is a pure limestone, capable of the most delicate
manipulation. We recollect seeing a piece of it which had been
carved by an ingenious Dunedin artisan into a small branch of a
tree. The veining on every leaf was distinct, and on one of the
leaves was a fly crawling, true to nature. We do not know any
other building stone capable of being chiselled into such delicate
tracing as this. It excels the far-famed Caen stone, from
Normandy, so extensively used by the church-building abbots
and bishops of the 15th and 16th centuries in England. Fine-
work was made in earlier days of selected specimens of sand-
stone. Witness the foliaged capitals of the columns in Melrose
Abbey, which exhibit “ the curly greens,” so exquisitely carved
that a straw put in at one corner comes out at another. A clever
workman will be able, with the Oamaru Stone, to out-rival all
these carvings, and even the garlanded pillar of Roslin Abbey,
which cost the precocious apprentice his life at the hand of a
jealous master. For indoor work it is unequalled—the rich,
warm, cream colour is refreshing to the eye ; and stone pulpits or
baptismal fonts may be easily cut to the most intricate pattern.
The skill of the designer is the only limit to its beauty and
adaptability. We have often thought that it would make an
admirable and unique lining for halls of houses, cut into slabs


and fixed to the walls with fine line. On the surface of the slab,
arabesque or diaper patterns might be cut, which would have a
pleasing effect ; or the hall might be pannelled with bold
mouldings, and enriched with wreaths of foliage, or fruit, or
flowers. To those who are fond of the mediseval style, it would
prove an unapproachable medium for decorating their mansion
houses with the shields of their armorial bearings. The facility
with which the material may be cut ; may lead to the revival of
the fine old custom prevalent in Edinburgh, of ornamenting the
doorways and walls with pious mottoes and texts. There is a
world of wisdom staring the householder in the face daily in his
outgoings and incomings, when he reads the stone letters : “He
that tholes overcomes.”
We have no doubt that a large export trade may be developed
in this material, and that if proper efforts be used, it will become
a favourite with London stone-cutters and architects. For out-
side work, also, it does well, as the surface hardens through
exposure, and it may be water-proofed to resist the wettest
climate by a mixture of quicklime and tallow, which may be
toned to the natural colour. We anticipate a lucrative result to
the undertaking, and cordially recommend it to public support.
(From Daily Times , September 29, 1877. J
The people of Oamaru are proverbially known as very progressive.
They have an immense belief in their own district and its
resources. Their land, both town and country, has of late
immensely advanced in at least nominal value, and the harbour
works are being vigorously pushed forward to a point which will
render the port of Oamaru a safe and expeditious shipping place
for vessels of considerable tonnage. It is but natural, therefore,
that at last one of the principal products of the district —the
Oamaru building stone —should have been looked on as destined
to be a future export of the place on a large scale. For years
past the stone has been sent in small quantities to Dunedin, but
the difficulties and expense of transport of such heavy blocks as
are required for buildings have prevented its being used so
largely as it would otherwise have been. This is still more the
case as regards Melbourne, to which place a few small shipments
have with difficulty been made, and where a very large market is
believed to exist for it. It is a stone specially adapted for a dry
climate, and at a reasonable cost it would be much used in
Victoria. The railways now completed have removed some of


the difficulties of transport from the quarries to the port, but in>
order to work the stone quarries economically, a considerable
amount of machinery and plant is required, and a systematic plan
of working. The Oamaru people have taken the bull by the
horns, and propose to start a Stone Export Company with a
capital of ,£25,000, to be raised partly in Oamaru and partly in
Melbourne; and we know few enterprises of a more promising
character. It is calculated that the stone can be laid down in
Dunedin at about a shilling a cubic foot, and in Melbourne at
two shillings, if received in large quantities directly from the
railway trucks into steamers or sailing vessels alongside the
wharf at Oamaru, and delivered at the wharves in Dunedin or
Melbourne. It is quite certain that a large trade can be done at
a cheaper rate than a small one; and if the efforts to establish a
trade with Melbourne are successful, it must cheapen the cost of
supplies to Dunedin as well. The scheme is one, therefore,
which claims something more than local interest, and its success,
would, of course, be a boon to the colony as well as to Oamaru
itself. There are, it is believed, hundreds of millions of tons
of the stone within the district, though not all of equally good
quality, and its working is entirely a matter of labour, machinery,
and carriage. We hope, therefore, that the .proposed Company
will get a fair start, as the industry to be developed is a very
important one, in which a large amount of labour and capita!
will hereafter be employed.
(From the Evening Mail , September 20, 1877.)
Thanks to the promoters of the proposed “ Oamaru Stone
Quarrying and Export Company,” we have had placed in our
hands the evidence collected by them, and at once and frankly
we desire to express our hearty thanks for such an accumulation
of valuable evidence from highly qualified witnesses respecting
our stone quarries as takes us altogether by surprise. Great as-
we regarded the resources of Oamaru, we did not dream that such
untold wealth was stored up in our stony ridges, and cropping up
in almost every field in our neighbourhood. To utilize such
gratuitous gifts of a beneficent nature is the mission of this Company;
and while gladly acknowledging our great obligations to the
committee, we earnestly recommend our readers to study the
evidence, and report carefully for themselves. This evidence
settles some, at least, of the questions referred to the committee
once and for ever, while in every point it is most clear, convincing,
and overwhelming. No one can now doubt the vast extent and


importance of our stone deposits, covering as they do, in the
words of one of the witnesses, “ the whole of the vast territory
extending from the Kakanui River to the Waitaki Plains, an area
of not less than one hundred square miles.” That such unbounded
wealth should remain so comparatively undeveloped may, at first
sight, excite surprise. The difficulties, however, are clearly shown
to have been, until quite recently, perfectly insuperable. We
observe in the evidence that a contract for 400,000 feet, at 4s.
per foot (representing delivered in Melbourne, was
abandoned simply because the Breakwater was not at the time
sufficiently advanced. What a loss to the district! And who
can estimate the sum total of such losses during the years that
are gone ? The same authority further states that the difficulties
then interposing are now wholly removed. The Breakwater, the
railways, and now the advent of a public company, with improved
appliances, and every contrivance which capital and skill can
introduce, cheapening and facilitating the operations at every
stage, will put the future prosperity of this great and important
enterprise beyond all doubt. We are pleased to observe, more-
over, that it is proposed to cheapen the price of the commodity in
Melbourne and elsewhere, and we are quite, convinced that “ a
large and profitable trade awaits the formation of the Company.”
In our own town, as well as in the neighbouring towns, the effect
of such a reduction will stimulate building enterprise; and in
Melbourne, which, from our own knowledge, is perfectly destitute
of building material, the prospect of an abundant supply so
eminently suited for such highly ornamental and elaborate designs
as they affect in the metropolis of the South, will be hailed as a
great boon. We cannot over-estimate, also, the immense import-
ance of such an increase to our population and currency as such
a Company will confer upon us, for, like the quality of mercy,
“ ’Tis twice blessed :
It blesseth him that gives and him that takes ! ”
AVe, therefore, once more express our hearty approval of the
project, and we have no fear of the future welfare of this promising
Company.
(From the Evening Star , October 10, 1877.,)
Our readers will observe, from the advertisement in the usual
column, that a Company has been formed for quarrying and
disposing of the beautiful stone that abounds between the
Kakanui river and the Waitaki —a distance of twenty miles.


This is one of the first fruits of the industrial policy of New
Zealand. Without facility of carriage, the valuable building
material now so accessible by means of the trunk and branch
lines of railway would have been used to ornament some
contiguous village church or hamlet only, instead of, as is most
probable, becoming widely sought after in all the neighbouring
colonies, because of its beauty, durability, and the ease with
which it can be worked. The Company that has been formed to
work those vast deposits appear to have proceeded with somewhat
more than the usual caution. Previous knowledge of thp value
of the building stones of districts north of Oamaru might have
sufficed for the people of Dunedin to have entered upon an
enterprise likely to be profitable to the Provincial district. It is
one of the main objects of the foregone policy of the past
General and Provincial Governments to render possible the
development of the rich mineral resources of Otago. This is the
result looked forward to to recoup with interest the cost of our
railways and harbour works. But others are not so well
acquainted with facts that are patent to us. The committee
have, therefore, taken the evidence of experts as to quantity,
quality, cost of mining, and the probable demand for the stone,
and this evidence is printed in a convenient form, so that all
seeking investment may satisfy themselves as to the prospects of
the company. We recommend a careful perusal of this evidence,
which, we think, justifies the conclusions at which the Provisional
Directorate have arrived. Thus far we permit ourselves to say.
We regard industries of this class in a different light from gold-
mining. They are, to a great extent, free from the speculative
character of the most promising gold claim. The value of the
material is ascertainable, the probable demand, the cost of
working, transit, and return. The work requires no vast amount
of skilled labour. A knowledge of the most useful adaptations of
mechanical appliances is all that is needed, but on that account
the risk of failure is reduced. The idea, therefore, of utilizing
raw material sufficiently abundant to rebuild the whole of the
capitals of Europe, obtainable under the most favourable circum-
stances for working, presents itself not merely as a local, but as
a national, benefit. As in all other mercantile investments,
success depends mainly upon good management; but that
secured, the working of the stone quarries near Oamaru promises
to afford permanent employment for future thousands, with their
families ; and no industry flourishes alone. We need hardly add
what is self-evident—that if this apparently well-founded hope is
realized, every class must share the benefit.


(From Otago Daily Times , October 18, 1877. )
We referred lately to the project which has been set on foot in
Oamaru for the establishment of a Stone Export Company, and
we to-day publish in our advertising columns the prospectus..
We understand the shares have been subscribed for liberally in
Oamaru, and that steps are now being taken to place a moiety in
Melbourne. Should this be successful, the Company will be at
once able to commence operations on a considerable scale, and
either acquire some of the chief quarries or enter into agreement:
with their owners and connect them with the shipping ports. We
refer to the matter again, because it is one of considerable
importance. It is quite possible the export of this beautiful
stone may become one of great magnitude, second only in
importance to the coal trade, which we all wish to see developed.
Every new export means so much additional wealth to the
colony, and brings with it many collateral benefits in the way of a
development of a shipping trade. We believe the demand for
this stone will largely increase in our own colony, and that at
every spot where it can be sent at moderate cost by rail it will be
largely used. The internal trade and the export trade being
developed together, should help each other, as it is a question of
quarrying and handling large quantities of heavy material at a
cheap rate, by means of suitable machinery. It is, therefore, of
importance that the matter should be well managed, and we
should like to see some of our leading men taking an interest in
the matter, as they generally do when an important industry
requires their attention. Many a good scheme is spoilt for want
of good management at the outset; and while we heartily wish
this new enterprise success, we hope the shrewd Oamaru men
whose names appear in the Provisional Directorate will be able
to associate with themselves some men of practical experience,
both in Dunedin and Melbourne, so that there may be no costly
experiments at the outset. As regards shipping facilities, the
railways and their branches will do much, to help, and we are
informed that the wharfage requisite for shipping under the
shelter of the breakwater at Oamaru is rapidly progressing
towards completion; and that there are some transhipping
facilities at Kakanui, though not as yet sufficient depth of water
there for large vessels. Of a kindred character is another
remarkably promising enterprise, which has been conducted
through its preliminary stages by a few progressive Dunedin men;
we refer to the slate quarries lately opened at Otepopo. _ We
have recently had personal demonstration of the great superiority
of the slate there produced. It exists, we are told, in immense
quantities, capable of supplying not only New Zealand require-
ments, but Australian also. This applies to the finer qualities of
slate used for various useful purposes, as well as to roofing slates.


The two industries to which we have thus referred are so closely-
allied, and the shipping facilities required so similar in each case
that we should imagine the two might be very advantageously
worked together. At all events they are both worthy of attention
as probable sources of large profits in years to come.
(From North Otago Times, September 24, 1877. J
The proposal to establish a powerful organization in the shape
of a Joint-Stock Company, with ample capital for carrying on
extensive operations for the purpose of turning to profitable
account the immense source of wealth which, in our limestone
deposits, lies at our very doors, is one which we regard as one of
the most hopeful signs of the times for this district. The
promoters of the Oamaru Stone Quarrying and Export Company
have entered upon their labours at the very nick of time, the
facilities afforded for transit to port, by the construction of rail-
ways, and the facilities for shipment presented by the breakwater
wharves, in their several ways inviting capital to profitable
employment in the establishment of a large export trade in what
is probably —we think we might write certainly'—the best
building stone in the Australias. There seem to be present all
the conditions necessary to ensure the most complete success;
the supply is inexhaustible, the demand almost unlimited, and it
would appear to be only necessary to turn the channels of trade
into their natural course, and an enormous and profitable
industry must be the result.
The evidence taken by the Sub-Committee appointed for that
purpose by the Provisional Committee of the Stone Company
conclusively establishes these points, and goes further to
demonstrate that the stone can be quarried, forwarded to port,
shipped, and landed in Melbourne or Newcastle at a price which
will be much below that which has now to be paid for an article
in many respects inferior; so that it appears absolutely certain
that an immense trade must spring up so soon as our stone is
known, and known to be obtainable at any time, in any quantity,
at a certain fixed price.
It was shown during the inquiries of the Committee that in
many instances, prior to our obtaining the railway and harbour
facilities which we now possess, large orders for stone were
offered, but had to be declined because of the impossibility,
under the unfavourable conditions, of executing them within a
reasonable time ; in one instance the order being for no less than
400,000 feet at 4s. per foot, delivered in Melbourne. Under the


present improved conditions, the stone could be delivered in
Melbourne at considerable less than this price, and still leave so
good a profit as to make the shares of the Company most
desirable property, while with improved appliances, as the Com-
pany proceeds with its operations, it appears certain that the
price of the stone can be still further reduced, yet leaving a good
margin of profit to the exporters. But the investigation went to
show that there is a difficulty facing the promoters at the very
outset, which must be met and grappled with, while, that difficulty
being removed, all that would be required to secure the most
signal success would be good business management of the Com-
pany’s operations. The difficulty we allude to is the existence of
a prejudice among Victorian architects and builders against the
Oamaru stone, arising from circumstances which were very
clearly traced. These were, that two or three shipments sent
over for, and used in a large building in Melbourne, were shipped
in leaky vessels (one of which was barely kept afloat by the
pumps till she reached port), and thoroughly saturated by salt
water, the result being, as is always the case with lime-stone of
this class, that the stone was ruined, and soon after the erection
of the building was seen to be giving way and becoming rotten,
thus apparently demonstrating that Oamaru stone is of a very
perishable nature. Worse than this, it would appear that the
contractor for the supply of the stone in question, to prevent its
being condemned and thrown on his hands as not delivered in
good order and condition, appears to have represented that the
saltness .detected was due to the fact that “ salt springs abound
in the neighbourhood of the quarries, all the water, in fact, being
so brackish, that the workmen can scarcely drink it.” This, all
of us who reside in the district know to be a pure fabrication, but
it served the contractor’s purpose—his stone was accepted as a
fair ordinary sample, and—for result, the Oamaru stone obtained
a bad name, which nothing but experience of its good qualities
under fair conditions will remove.
Scores, nay, hundreds of buildings in Oamaru, attest that the
stone, though so soft when it comes from the quarry as to reduce
the cost of working to the lowest possible minimum (50 per cent,
even below that of working Bath freestone), hardens rapidly on
exposure to the weather, and stands for years without showing
the smallest sign of deterioration; while the testimony of men
who have worked as quarrymen and masons, or practised as
architects for many years in England and Scotland, is unanimous
and conclusive in pronouncing the Oamaru stone to be without
exception the best building material known to them. In writing
thus we are not exaggerating in the smallest degree, the evidence
published with the committee’s report bearing us out in every
letter. It is the most easily worked of any building stone yet
discovered; stands better than any stone of its class; can be


supplied in blocks of any size required, no matter how large, in
any quantity, and cheaper than any other building material of
anything like equal recommendations. Under these circum-
stances, the Company should find no difficulty in floating its
shares ; and, having once established its market, will, we feel
persuaded, find itself in possession of an immense and profitable
trade of annually increasing dimensions.
Walker, May, Co., Printers, 9 Mackillop Street, Melbourne.


® , .'V ;
'
.
■ ij tv 3 ' & . ‘-A V ■*
. ■ ' ■
• '
f A, ■ k \ - ’ v
. • ■ '
*
■ ./A.-' , -•-
■
; V > ■ « " V ;
.
“ , -eji-\{ ■ ■'., -i.v:
■
■’ ‘/'v •
■
■ ‘ ■ .
jM fcV,‘
■
V ■ ■ - ; ■ ■ . v ■ ,


»
*' y
