

OBZIT: NOVEMBER 21st, 18S5,
A W EICHMOISTD, 3ST- S. W.
Bowman,
RELICT OF THE LATE WILLIAM BOWMAN.
[Extracted from the Windsor Australian of November 28th, 1885.]
Not only the district of the Hawkesbury, but the colony generally, has
sustained an irreparable loss in the death of Mrs. William Bowman, who
expired at her residence in Richmond on Saturday last. This well-known
lady was the widow of the late W. Bowman, formerly Member of Parlia-
ment for the Cumberland Boroughs, and for many years a Magistrate of
the Territory, and at the time of her decease she had reached the advanced
of 87. Mrs. Bowman was a woman of a benevolent and charitable
disposition, and her feeling was that “it is more blessed to give than to
receive.” Imbued with this sentiment, she gave freely to religious and
charitable societies, and was always ready to relieve cases of distress, irre-
spective of creed or nationality. It cannot be wondered at, therefore,
that in life she was respected and beloved by all classes, and that in death
her memory will be fondly cherished. In a brief notice, it would bo im-
possible to enumerate all the acts of benevolence which marked her course
durum a long life, whilst no one will know until the great day of account
how much she gave away in private. The Church of England of Richmond
(of which she was a pious and consistent member from the time of her ar-
rival in the colony), the Presbyterian Church of the same town, the
British aud Foreign Bible Society, the Hawkesbury Benevolent Asylum,
the Clergy Daughters’ School, and many other institutions, were indebted
to her for material aid, whilst by her last will and testament she has left
various sums for the promotion of objects which lay near her heart. In
private life Mrs. Bowman was hospitable to her friends, kind, and obliging
to all, and unwavering in her attachments. So long as she was able to do
so she not only managed her own establishment Avith judgment, but she
contributed in many ways to carry out plans for the public good ; but of
late years, owing to the loss of her sight and the increasing infirmities of
ao-e she could think only of doing good in a quiet and unostentatious Avay,
and of bearing with patience and resignation “ the pains and aches of
humanity.” The name of Bowman has been long associated with the town
of Richmond. It Avas as far back as 1798, that the father and mother of
the late W. Boavman settled on the banks of the Hawkesbury. Their sons
George and William carried on the Avork which they had commenced, and
were long identified Avith the interests of Richmond; and soon, in the
course of Providence (though many of their descendants still survive), the
name of Bowman seems likely to die out of the township, unless indeed
one of Mr. George Bowman s sons should at any time reside on his pro-
perty there. However that may be, the good deeds of the departed will
not be forgotten, and amongst them, the name of Mrs. William Bowman
will long be held in grateful remembrance.


vTa f o
F -i %)
