

Slo
; , ' E
OBITUARY.
Hiss Cecilia V. Itaffrcy




Miss Cecilia Yeronica I‘Caffrey.
-f—f-
BORN 1883. DIED 1909.
When the electric wires flashed the painfully
sad news to Kiama on Monday morning that
“Cissie” McCaffrey was dead, a gloomy look
prevailed on every face—rich and poor of every
creed alike. Brave, fearless men’s voices falter-
ed in the street when extending their usual
daily greeting : because the girl they all loved
was dead, hundreds of miles away from her
native district.
She had been suffering for some time from
occasional attacks of asthma and bronchitis, the
result of, probably, neglected influenza contract-
ed about two years ago, and took several inland
trips for the benefit of her health. From those
trips she received a certain degree of benefit,
and thus gave her parents and friends hopes for
her permanent recovery in the near future.
Recently, her father (Mr. John McCaffrey) was
taking a trip to Brisbane (Q), and decided to
take her with him.
She seemed to improve so rapidly on her ar-
rival in Brisbane that he decided to leave her
there, and returned to Kiama. But there was
further trouble in front of dear Cissie—she con-
tracted that dreadful disease, dengue fever, and
her sister Annie immediately rushed away to
her bedside. Notwithstanding, however, that
she was attended to by one of Brisbane’s best
doctors (Dr. Marks) and a specialist (Dr. Taylor),
and nursed by one of the bravest girls alive,
who loved her only as a sister could, she gradu-
ally, but only too surely, sank, until on Monday
morning (July 19th) at about 6 o’clock she was
seized with a mild form of convulsion, which


was but momentary—it being the straggling of
the soul to rid itself of the earthly casket and
her soul passed peacefully away, leaving the
sister (Annie) the only living occupant of the
room. Yes, the brave g-irl who had nursed her
and saw her spirit take its flight, was left alone
without a living soul to assist.
O God! It is a fearful thing
To see the human soul take wing
In any shape in any mood.
I’ve seen it rushing forth in blood,
I’ve seen it on the breaking ocean
Strive with a swol’n convulsive motion
—Byron.
Certainly, Annie had true and generous
friends in Brisbane, but it happened that they
were not near at the moment. The Hon. Peter
Murphy and his wife and family and relations
were the soul of kindness and generosity to the
unfortunate stranger in a strange land, which
helped to soothe Annie’s trials leaving for Kiama
with the last mortal remains of the sister whom
she had nursed with such tender, loving care,
Cissie was gone ! No longer shrinking from
the winter wind, or lifting her calm pure fore-
head to the summer’s kiss; no longer toiling
painfully along the path upward and upward to
the everlasting, on which ai’e based the walls of
the city of the Most High ! We merely looked
at her sweet happy face in the coffin and thought
of the words of Byron :
So coldly sweet, so dearly fair,
We start, for soul is wanting there.
And thou art dead, as young and fair
As ought of mortal birth ;
And form so soft, and charm so rare,
Too soon returned to earth.
Cissie had been fortified by all the rites of
Holy Church in Brisbane, and this to Catholics
is the most sacred and consoling of all rites on
this mundane sphere. The father had gone to
meet the corpse, and stationmasters and railway
guards did all that mortal power could do. On


the arrival in Kiama it was taken to the home
of the parents, and on ttie following morning
was removed to the Catholic Church, where it
remained with the face uncovered for the solemn
gaze of friends and relations, who had journeyed
from far and wide to pay their last respects to
the deceased and relations.
He who hafh bent him o’er the dead,
Ere the first day of death is fled.
Before decay’s effacing fingers
Have swept the lines where beauty lingers,
And marked the mild angelic air,
The rapture of repose that’s there:
The fix’d yet tender traits that streak
The languor of the palid cheek,
And, but for that sad shrouded eye
That fires not, wins not, weeps not no jv ;
And but for that still, changeless brow.
Appalls the gazing mourner’s heart
As if it could to him impart
The doom he dreads, yet dwells upon
Yes, but for these and these alone.
So fair, so calm, so softly sealed
The first, last look by death revealed.
—Byron.
Wreaths were sent in scores, and letters and
telegrams poured in by hundreds, expressing
regret and tendering sympathy. They all bore
the impress of those minds who believed that
one more saintly soul was added to God’s hosts
in heaven— one saintly soul less in Kiama. The
funeral, the largest seen in Kiama, was attended
by all sections, who followed the remains to the
graveside—yes, to the grave which covers every
error and defect, extinguishes every resentment.
From its peaceful bosom spring none but fond
regrets and tender recollections. Who can look
down upon the coffin containing the body of a
loving friend, ami not feel a compunctious
throb that he should have warred with the poor
casket of clay that is law to the moulder before
him P


On the body entering the Church, the “Dead
March” was played and a special Mass for the
dead was given by Rev Father Malone. The
Church Choir sang a solemn requiem for the
repose of her soul. Later in the day another
service was held and afterwards the cortege
moved to the North Kiama cemetery, where
Rev. Father Malone, assisted by Rev. Father
Power, of Albion Park, performed the beautiful
ceremony of the Catholic Church at the grave-
side —and finally the body was left to rest by
the sad sea’s ceaseless waves.
And not a breath crept through the rosy air,
And yet the forest leaves seem’d stirr’d with prayer.
Cissie was born at Jerrara, a few miles from
Kiama, and was educated at the Convent Schools
of West Maitland, Taree, and finally Kiama.
The teachings of those pure religious tutors
doubtless gave her that power by which she
could fashion style of dress to enter the halls of
the rich and be admired, and wait on the most
humble with an agility, ease, and grace of com-
portment that to be seen was also to admire.
She was a loving and affectionate girl to father,
mother, sister and brother—in fact, to all her
relations and neighbours. May she rest in
peace, is doubtless the humble prayer of
hundreds who kne y her in life and mourn her
in death. ’Tis hard to think that one so young,
cheerful and, when occasion offered, gay, bright
and full of fun, should be snatched away, es-
pecially as, whether she was at the church or
the ball-room, her one desire was to do good.
Truly the ways of God are inscrutable.
Farewell Cissie—
Chaste as thou were as the fanned snow;
Twice bolted o’er by the black northern blasts.
Yes ! Chaster than crystal on the scythian clifts,
The more the proud winds court it, still the purer.
“Peace to your ashes.”




