

mHE sudden death of Sir Julius von ment of New Zealand. Sir Julius, then
J. Haast, at an early hour on August 16, plain Dr Haast, was associated with him,
will be read of far and wide with deep became his colleague and trusted friend,
regret. His services towards this Colony while his subsequent journeys, his fecien-
were of the most valuable kind, and to us tific conclusions and opinions were ac-
his loss is of that description which men cepted by the Austrian savant as
are wont to term irreparable. In addition authoritative concerning the geology
to this he will be missed in many scientific of this Colony. There is little space
circles in many European countries, in here to enlarge upon that first eventful
which his reputation deservedly stood high, inroad of the scientist and explorer on the
and where he had earned high honours, wonderland of our Northern Island, and
and earned them well. the fastnesses of the King Country. They
The immediate cause of his most unex- may be followed in detail in the pages of
pected death was heart disease, from which that fascinating book, in which Hoch-
he had been a slight sufferer for some stetter gave the results of his explorations
years, but from which no present danger to the world at large. But, be it noted in
was apprehended. passing, that at least one white member of
Sir Julius was apparently in his usual the little expedition still survives, iin the
state of health on Monday, and attended Mr person of Mr Koch, still in the Survey
Tendall’s lecture in the rooms of the Department of the Colony, then the sur-
Y.M.C.A. in the evening. There he com- veyor and artist to the party,
plained of feeling somewhat unwell, but as Such was the beginning of a laborious
he had been suffering from a slight cold life, destined to be continued laboriously
for some days, but little attention was to its very close: a life in which the severe
paid to the matter. He remained physical toil and privation of the pioneer
to the end of the lecture, and ac- was eventually supplanted by the still
tually proposed the vote of thanks to more wearing mental worry oftheiever-
Mr Tendall at its close. After the short busied and successful man of science.)
speech which the motion necessitated, how- The North Island explorations finished,
ever, he said that he felt worse, and it was Hochstetter, after a short survey of the
with some difficulty that he walked the Nelson coalfields for the Government off that
short distance home to the lodgings, where Province, went Home again. The indepen-
he and his family were residing temporarily, dent Colonial career of Sir Julius dates
attacked him, and he went at once to Provincial Geologist of Nelson, and while
bed. Dr Prins was sent for, prescribed a in that service during the latter part of
slight sedative, and went away. There 1859, he undertook more explorations in
appeared to be no cause to apprehend any- the south-west; of the Province, then an
thing serious, and Sir Julius himself de- uninhabited wilderness. Coal andi gold
dared that he was sure he would be better were shown to exist in abundance, and the
after his night’s rest. But about half-past official “ Notes on the Geology and Geo-
one this morning. Lady von Haast, who graphy” of the country, published by him,
was watching in the room, was alarmed by were rich in interests of a widely Varied
hearing him breathe very heavily. Dr character. The next year proved another
Symes, who lives on the opposite side of turning point in his career,
the street, was immediately summoned. In Canterbury, towards the end of 11860,
but when he arrived the sufferer was dead, the fate of the great Moorhouse tunnel
He passed away without a word or sign of scheme was trembling in the balance,
suffering. Messrs Smith and Knight, the original
Sir Julius von Haast was born in contractors, had come and put down their
Bonn early in 1824, and was consequently experimental borings, and driven their
in his sixty-third year. He arrived in shafts. They had quickly met with rock
New Zealand in 1858, having come to of the most terrible hardness,) and
the Colony with the intention of reporting supposing the whole of the hill to be of the
its possibilities, as a field for German same adamantine nature, threw up the
emigration, to the Prussian Government, project as an impossibility at the price.
A strange chance turned his energies into The sanguine Superintendent was uncon-
widelydifferentchannels.andalteredtotally vinced. He sent for Dr Haast to Report
the whole tenor of his future life. By one on the geological formation of the hill,
of those singular coincidences that often The report was to the effect that Lyttelton
govern the lives of men, a frigate of the Harbour was an extinct crater; the fetrata
Austrian Imperial Navy was coasting down of the hill in question would be found to
to Auckland on the vary day his immigrant consist of a number of ancient lava streams
ship cast anchor. It was the Novara, then of varying hardness, whmh the tunnel
within a few months of completing her would cut obliquely ; and that, conse-
tour round the world with a company of quently, the rock would be of all cdnsist-
savants, whose researches were being made encies, from basaltic impenetrability idown
in the interests of their country. Sir to something little worse than consolidated
George Grey had seen them at the Cape, ashes. Armed with this scientific authority.
and it is needless to say that the geysers, Mr Moorhouse went to Melbourne, Messrs
the solfataras, the terraces, the glaciers. Holmes and Richardson took the contract;
and the fiords of New Zealand lost none of the tunnel became a possibility, a probable
their charms under his description. The success, a great accomplished fact.) The
geologist of the expedition, the late Dr commercial connection between the [plain
Ferdinand von Hochstetter was bent on down to the Waitangi with its only harbour
exploring such a rich and untouched was assured. It was a triumph of rdason-
scientific field, but saw little chance ing from scientific observation. No achieve-
of executing so very natural a wish, ment of the deceased gentleman has had
Luckily a geologist was just what the more lasting results on the fortunes of this
Government of the day required Province, none is less known to its in-
Judge Richmond was one, the late Mr habitants. Indirectly, in fact, it secured
H. J. Tancred was another. A short, the prosperity of the plains,
polite note from Governor Gore Brown From February, 1861, Dr Haast con-
to Commodore Baron Wiillerstorf -Ur- tinned with the Provincial Govern ment of
bair, the commander of the frigate ; Canterbury. The first years of his service
another equally polite and nearly as short as Provincial Geologist were almost wholly
from the complaisant commodore to the spent in exploration. The mineral re-
Governor settled the matter. Dr von sources of the Malvern Hills, the features
Hochstetter was given leave of absence of the Mount Tcrlesse Range, and the
from the frigate for six months to make wild “back country” adjacent to it
explorations at the charges of the Govern- were examined and reported on in
“Lyttelton Times’’ Office,
1861. The wonders of the Mount Cook
district were explored in 1862. The
sternness of those solitudes, until that
time untrodden, must have then been
doubly striking its glacier system
sketched and mapped, its botanical curiosi-
ties examined. Hochstetter Dome, Franz
Joseph, and Muller glaciers, and many
another German-sounding name, bear wit-
ness to the nationality of him who first
than to
, endurance, and skill. The
been very arduous. Mountains
to climb, provisions and instruments to
carry, pinching cold to be endured, icy
streams to ford or swim at the risk of life—
scientific pioneering is no child’s play. As
one who was with him in the times when
the Ocago and Canterbury boundary lino
was being fixed, and Haast Pass discovered
says —the expedition was out six months
that time, by the way—“ Twenty-seven
days on a pound of flour a piece, and what
you can catch didn’t serve to make
us fatter or happier men.” But the
late savant was the happy possessor of
great physical powers, and he survived it
all and more; and what was better, em-
bodied the enormous quantity of know-
ledge gained in useful reports to his em-
ployers, which reports can still be studied
with advantage. Lake Wanaka and the
unexplored ranges and head waters of ' hat
i- - c A-t _ a • :i. _ J : _
Ashburton and Rangitata searched for coal
in 1864, The goldfields of the West Coast
traced in 1865—the Provincial geologist
was greedy of work.
In 1866 the first of the great “finds”
of moa remains was made at Glenmark.
In that year the first seven skeletons
which formed the nucleus of the col-
lection unique and unequalled, and the
glory of the Christchurch Museum,
were set up by the then taxidermist,
Mr Fuller. The fossil remains of the
Glenmark moa-swamp proved the endow-
ment of the Museum, and a constant
source of enrichment through exchanges,
&c. A few years the geological survey
of the Province was fairly complete, and
the Director thereof was enabled to give it
his almost undivided attention. With him
it was a real labour of love, and his energy
and thoroughness soon made it swell into
such proportions that a larger house than
the modest apartments in the old Provin-
cial buildings became an absolute necessity.
The building in the Domain was opened In
September, 1870, and has gradually, or
rather rapidly, considering the normal
progress of museums, developed to its
present magnificent proportions under the
untiring attention of its late Director,
whose best and most fitting monument it
will ever be. One of its most pleasing
features in the eyes of men of science is
the impossibility of telling the Director’s
peculiar “ hobby,” so full and complete has
it been made in every department. It is
the outcome of the loyal, unceasing efforts
of a quarter of a century, and marks the
middle period of the life.
As Director of this Museum and a con-
stant helper in any educational or artistic
work that fell to his lot as a citizen.
Dr von Haast had been making his
name respected in the Colony. Mean-
time his fame had spread to Europe.
He was a corresponding member of
all sorts of Societies, and medals,
orders, and titles were his in abundance.
Among the most valuable of them all was
that medal of the Royal Geographical
Society, which is only given to discoverers
and explorers of the first rank, such as a
Murchison, a Livingstone, or a Stanley.
It was given especially for those arduous
Alpine explorations to which we have re-
ferred already. It was the first bestowed for
work in New Zealand, and therefore a more
peculiar honour even than of ordinary.
At length came the knighthood, which
is the token of British appreciation
of Colonial merit and hard work. In 1885
Sir Julius was chosen by the Government
as the Colony's representative and Com-
missioner at the Great Indian and Colonial
Ixhibition. How he went, and how well
he discharged the duties of that office is
matter of recent history, and needs no
repetition now. The great and rare distinc-
tion of Doctor of Science, so jealously
guarded, and so seldom bestowed, was
given him by the University of Cambridge
in August last. It was, perhaps, the
greatest event of his public life, and soon
followed in Paris by his appointment as
Ofjicier de Vlnstruction Publique des Beaux
Arts et des Cultes —a distinction also con-
ferred on very few men.
Sir Julius, with all his European
scientific work, was not forgetful of
Colonial Societies. He was one of the 12
original founders of our local Philosophical
Institute, and constantly read papers
before it; while his addresses as President
were b)th of interest and of real scientific
value. He was a thorough believer in the
future of the Colony, and his last words
the other night showed how stoutly he
always spoke up for it and for its people
while on his European journeyings.
By the arrangement of the Board of
Governors of Canterbury College, Sir
Julius, after the Exhibition, set out on an
extended tour of the great museums of
Europe. In spite of serious illness at Bonn
he carried out his proposed scheme, and
visited Paris, Brussels, Berlin, Dresden,
Vienna, Halle, and also Venice, Florence,
and other Italian centres early in this
year. A vast quantity of things were ob-
tained for the Museum, and Sir Julius had
the personal pleasure of meeting scientific
friends of j ears’ standing through corres-
pondence. The enormous labour gone
through in connection with his Exhibition
work, and the subsequent wear and tear of
travelling while in weak health, appear to
have overtaxed his strength. It is exactly
a month since he returned. He leaves one
daughter and four sons born in New Zea-
land, one of whom is studying painting at
Diisseldorf, and another son by a former
wife is an officer in the Prussian army.
Such is in outline the life of one of the
first scientific celebrities of this Colony. It
was as we have said, a laborious life. Pew
are likely to make a better record. Of all
the useful and toilsome careers of Colonists
who have borne the burden and heat of the
day, none have been more so. Few, in-
deed, have been so useful. It is an
example of persevering enthusiasm that all
may lay to heart. In some respects, too.
Sir Julius von Haast may be said to have
been fortunate in his death. It came sud-
denly, at the end of a completed life.
There was nothing to tell of failing mind,
and little to speak of the weakened body of
old age. He was at the plenitude of
his intellectuil powers. And best of all,
as some will think, his services and his
merits had been most widely recognised,
and perhaps more liberally rewarded, than
generally falls to the lot of the scientific
man. To him success rarely brings that
wealth which is the golden signboard of
the successful man, nor does he look for it.
Honours, medals, and titles fell to his
share, and Sir Julius had many of those
most coveted among his confreres. A
musician of no ordinary attainments, a
man well-read in many matters quite out-
side his own profession, an enthusiastic,
untiring worker, a man of genial, kindly
nature, full of sympathy, and of a ready
wit in every relation of life, whether as
husband, father, friend, equally admirable,
he will be sadly and widely missed. His
place will be hard indeed to fill.
P f
£vo r
seu
