

r p
Si o
IL^
/Quu- e-^
J&. 3
«-k/ ‘*-*V •
/$c«U / /j ry






r
I
■












3 1508 3


April 27, 1917.
The Late Dr. Brown.
By REV. C. J. PRESCOTT. M.A-
The following tribute was given in an ad-
dress at the home of the deceased on the day
of burial. “Here in his house, among
those who loved him best, I confine myself to
one thing. In his passing from us he carries
a wealth of love such as no Methodist minister
of our generation under the Southern Cross
has carried before, or is likely to again. Thou-
sands knew him, respected him, honored him ;
but the knowledge, the respect, and the honor
have been shot through and through with a
personal attachment. He stood in a peculiar
place in the affections of his brethren in the
ministry, a place all his own and shared in its
fulness by no one. It is no disparagement to
any eminent missionary to say that there was
i.o one to whom the men in the field looked
as they looked to him. To our laymen he has
been a beloved and trusted counsellor and
friend. And in the families of ministers and
laymen alike he has won almost an adoring
regard.
“He has been a man among men all his days,
l ie has touched life at many points with some-
thing of Shakespearean catholicity. Eew men
have been brought into touch with so many
sorts and conditions of men—-natives of count-
less islands and many languages, men, women,
and children, white men of every sort, rich and
poor, high and low. educated and untaught,
Avise and foolish, artisans, working men, sail-
ors, naval men, merchants, traders, planters,
discoverers, adventurers, clergymen of every
possible denomination, University men, scien-
tists, men of letters, politicians, statesmen,
peers, and governors. And he moved among
them all as a man of mark, one to whom they
Avere all drawn by some magnetic attraction.
“Can we place our finger upon the secret of
this strange fascination? I think we can. He
had made tAvo discoA'eries. DiscoA r eries I call
them, though they are open secrets. Yet so
strongly did he hold them that they were as
discoveries to him. The first was that every
man has a heart. And in every man he met
he saw the heart, and unconsciously made for
it, went out to meet it, and he rarely failed.
Beneath all the conventional trappings of dress
and title and office language —in a governor
or a bishop or a peer—he felt the man and the
man felt him.
“ ‘Write me as one that loved his fellow-
men’ might well be his epitaph. Sentimental
is the last word you Avould apply to him, and
yet he Avas brimful of sentiment. Beneath his
unconventional casual exterior there burned
the fire of a soul unusually tender, sympathetic,
understanding, and tremulously responsive.
“To take but one illustration. One of the
last public acts of his life Avas to give the prizes
at the last Newington College Speech Day. I
question wdiether he was personally acquainted
with a single boy, but he had not spoken for
fiv'-e minutes before you could see that there
Avas not one of them he did not love. They
saw it and responded to it. And you who
knew his life better than I do will know that
these swarms of dusky islanders, in the same
way, drew out all his sympathy. They knew
it and they responded to it.
“And the other central truth he held was the
conviction that every man was capable of
knowing God. capable of loving the unseen
Eather. and it Avas this that pre-eminently dis-
tinguished man from the brute. He had seen
it proved in so many instances that it gave
point and enthusiasm to his missionary work.
He taught it in his fifteen years in Samoa, he
taught it in his sermons and speeches as he
travelled far and Avide. In mission work he
Avas a great pioneer and founder, but he did
the pioneering and the founding with the
thought that others would proclaim the glad
message, and with the conviction that in thou-
sands of these simple people a response Avould
f *
fi id
AUSTRALIAN CHRISTIAN WORLD.
be found, for they could love man and they
could love God. And his confidence stands
justified to-day. Sitting with all of us in this
house one Sunday night around the fire, when
our work was done, and talking of many
things, lie told of his experiences, and said
quite simply: ‘The longer 1 live the more I am
convinced that the mightiest power in the
world is the power of loved
“We shall never talk of him as a saint, but
that is because we are so restricted and limited
in our interpretation of sanctity. But if to
live for one great object, to find the good in
men, and bring it to fruition be one of the sure
marks of the Christian life, then there is a very
sense in which he lived the saintly life and
manifested, in his own priginal way, some-
thing of the manifold, the variegated, the
manyeolored grace of God.
“As I think of him I think of Col. Newcome,
who, as he lay dying, thought he heard his
school name called, and replied, Adsum.' And,
says Thackeray, ‘And lo! he whose heart was
as that of a little child had answered to his
REV. J, BEUKERS,
Of the Congregational Church, Armadale, W.A., usually
known in the district as “Father John.”
name, and stood in the presence of the Master.’
Might not that lovely phrase, ‘He whose heart
Avas as that of a little child,’ have been written
expressly for George Brown?
“If he were Avith us to-day, I think he Avould
say to us something like what someone has ex-
pressed in these sweet terms —
When I am dead, my dearest,
Sing no sad songs for me;
Plant thou no roses at my head,
Nor shady cypress tree.
Be the green grass above me
With the showers and dew-drops Avet;
And if thou Avilt remember
And if thou Avilt forget.
He would not have spoken about the roses, but
I am sure he would have said, ‘Sing no sad
songs for me,’ and he would wish us to remem-
ber him. Remember him! We shall carry his
image in our hearts to our dying day. But for
him we sing no sad songs. He has gone to
meet the dear daughter he lost some years ago,
and the children of earlier days. My dear
bereaved ones, if our love of your lost one
means anything to you, if human sympathy is
of any avail in your sorrow, be sure you have
it in richest and fullest measure. May the
heavenly Father be your comforter!”


■ THE SUN, SUNDAY. t« «»«•«
LATE DR. BROWN ----
MISSIONARY AND EXPLORER
MARVELLOUS CURIOS
CALL OF THE PACIFIC
The Rev. George Brown, doctor of I
divinity, pioneer, missionary, explorer, I
naturalist, trader, and enthusiastic collector, I
who died recently at Gordon,was an English- I
man by birth. His father was a journal- I
ist and barrister, whose hobbies were botany, I
geology, and natural history. It can be I
guessed from whom Dr. Brown inherited his I
great love of and aptitude for the study of I
nature. The lad began his life work as as- I
sistant in a surgery, “but,” said the rev. |
gentleman, “often nearly blowing up the J
place in attempting to make hydrogen gas, 1
and afterwards, by preparing some phos- I
phorus fire-bottles, which created a sensation I
in the streets, it was considered that I had
no special gifts for the medical profession.”
A chemist’s, a bonded store, a drapery, an
amateur smuggler’s position, all were tried in
succession by young Brown, who confessed
that the last job was the most congenial—
which at least proves him to have a normal,
healthy-minded body. “I do not think,” said
Dr. Brown, many years afterwards, “that
it would be at all profitable for me to give
in detail the transactions in which I took
part in those days.” As another proof that
there was precious little of the hypocrite
about the Doctor, he said, “I may have been
good when I was young. . . . but I have no
recollection of being what may be called a
model boy as I grew up.”
HOW THE CALL CAME
It was the smuggling that did it. From I
that absorbing and exciting game to sea-
faring is but a step for any decent lad
Young Brown took the step, and in 1851 first
tasted the joys of a sailor’s life—it hasn’t
many now, and had still fewer in those days.
After four years of knocking about, chiefly
in the North American continent, young
Brown tried to settle down again in England,
but the wanderlust was in his blood, and so,
in his twentieth year, he took ship for New I
Zealand—“l think simply because it was the
The Late Eev. G. Brown
furthest place from England.” In New Zea-
land young Brown joined Bishop Patterson’s
Bible class, and also a class conducted by I
Bishop Selwyn for teaching Maori. In such |
company it is not to be wondered at that |
young- Brown “got religion.” At 20 most 1
of us feel “the throbbings of a new life, new |
thoughts, new desires, and new purpose in
life,” which possessed young George Brown.
Shakespeare calls it love—but it takes an-
other form sometimes. Everything depends
upon the environment. Anyway, the young
fellow had received ,his first call. He got
his second four or five years later, when he
was accepted as a missionary to Fiji. Not
wanting to go alone, he sought and secured
the company of a young lady—“whom I had ;
long thought to be best qualified for the j
position.” They married, and in October, j
1860, the young man and his wife arrived in 1
Tonga, the threshold of those exquisite archi- j
pelagoes, so many of which he was to see, 1
to explore, and to love. At this time it is |
possible that Dr. Brown (he was plain Mister I
then) did not realise that he had received his I
third call—the call of the Pacific. But he I
had. . . I
For 48 years he went about doing good
as often and as much as possible. Dr.
Brown’s was a record achieved among cut-
throats, cannibals, beachcombers, and half
the riffraff of the seven seas. It is no de-
traction of Dr. Brown—nay, it is quite the
other thing, and the more enduring thing—
to say that while he was a good missionary,
he was even a better man.
A PRIVATE MUSEUM
Dr. Brown spent the evening of his
days at Gordon, a few miles up the North
Shore line. Here he had a beautiful house
and garden—gardening was one of his pet
hobbies—and here, too, is probably the finest
private collection of South Sea curios and
relics in Australia —perhaps in the world.
Aided by his knowledge of geology, botany,
and zoology, and fired with the born collec-
tor’s acquisitive zeal. Dr. Brown put in his
almost half-century of exploring and mission
work to some purpose, apart altogether from
his philanthropic career. The result is a
collection of strange, beautiful, grotesque,
scientific, barbaric, grim, and exquisite ob-
jects—some priceless, many most rare, a few
unique. “Never again,” said Dr. Brown
to .-i rd'iirc.u "• line of “The Hun,” ■ •, ’ . r *, * •■' *|
vie ini "will H <!v v t\ - • >r . *' > * t '-I
any.iic , , -eti- ;n. I H
was 1 i ;n Taws; was, H '
titiik* r, la- . t lungs ■ * . ," t .‘ r I •- _". V I' '*■
Sul.-,,- Ifi; a a; Ty? Tay m.: t a-mi-
ine, nor anr-kni. n < nista a l. As in H
t’je i ■ aiiri- a a '
regular iraip. a imira ia ws has sprung m S’; , y V-y by VT yTky H
1. 11 o’, Parr Taiy- I *' ' - , •. ' ■ '
Tina- in 10 H
a ring-, on it hr set a see...-, ‘ ring: on that I ' . ‘ ; *
again a m I w.i the third had ch 1 ad -of I
a turtle on it, “Tb - 1 the tP to - “is I
' 1 i ' a 1.,,
hill dt-ioatwa ''A ? got .0. '1 a burn-H'’ . • - ,
-.ng- hos:e 1 1< a rv m cle oy one tribe
.against a ti.-tlvr. H , a-,,., tj )f . sitell ?l
of tin ■ , .... i H '
ial erlotisT with a piece of hard t s J
The; too” (takina - c $ . m w? it a first
eight d like stone lacev. .a a i -H' ~ . * t r \ r - 1 •
eoh i -a ; a •
;i face on w air little T'yh;',' \sVo}' ' L •*? .1
buna 1 ;:: nr,/:,- ; ~,, ,n g / put, H I
in T-.ini a sh , i j'skyiA , some B * .’ , ‘ ■ '
ch It is errw-tly like tb k . ’est carv- H
ings found an ■:o ~is in H *
Peru and hi /■/;.-■ \VTp - s the story? No H .‘ ' . '
one knows. But the pattern is always the
same.” He showed two or three smaller
pieces, and to satisfy the interviewer turned pre ?t n^ m f a n llu^e crocodile which had just
up a similar exhibit in the British Museum d (and was about to swallow) a pig
catalogue. “Here is a curious old fellow,” T th® hind-quarters. The pig s shriek seemed
said Dr. Brown, “a flesh-fork, used to eat in one s . ears as one_ looked, so won-
man. Many a feed has that old piece of expressive was the tace of the strug-
wood been used at!” It was a heavy hard- f* m§ p aairnal. The whole thing was about
wood fork, cut out of the solid, with three ee J~ lo m „ shape ot a staff, with
incurving prongs. A strange-looking group a
carved out of wood caught the interviewer’s ne
eye. “Ah, that,” said Dr. Brown, “is some
sacred symbol picturing a long-forgotten
story. I call it the story of Sinbad the Sailor "a
from the Pacific Islander’s point of view.”
The huge bird had a man’s figure in its n , a
talons; overhead flew a frigate bird, while Ik
two huge, many-toothed fish were attacking kf*”;'
the big bird and the man. yy *
WONDERFUL CARVING
“Here are what I consider one of gems
of my collection,” said the doctor, after a
hundred strange and curious articles had
been looked at (each worth description did
not space forbid). “What do you think of
that? Look at the crocodile—did you ever
see anything truer to nature? Even the
breathing place is correct, and look at the
pig’s expression!”
It was a marvellous piece of carving, re-
a broad and perfectly-curved fleur-de-lys at
one end, and the crocodile’s tail at the other.
The inlaid mother-of-pearl was perfectly
arranged in bold and harmonious curves,
and the finish was amazing. “Now, just
glance at this. What do you think of that?
Anatomically perfect, chipped—not carved—
out of teak. Look at the torso! The arms
were put on afterwards, but were done by
the same man with the same miserable in-
strument—this! ”
The object of the doctor’s explanation was
a wooden statue. It is about three feet high,
and made from a solid block of teak. “This”
—the instrument used by the sculptor—is a
piece of hoop-iron off a rum barrel. The
sculptor had put an edge on one edge of
the hoop-iron (which is about three
inches long and an inch wide), and had set
the other in a little piece of stick, and with
1 this the unlettered and untrained savage had i
produced an anatomical masterpiece.
h
