

Cancelled
• Hlit *■




J 2 C? < ( t
'«r: - NOV 1992
f w
NEW SOUTH%AkES!SV
MINING INSTITUTE.
|Utre»ifcent;
Mr. R. M. VAUGHN, M.L.A.
Mr. JOHN SHEPHERD, M.L.A. Mr. TRAVERS JONES, M.L.A.
Mr. PHILLIP DAVIES.
&9CVetavtJ ;
©recwmvev
Mr .JOHN COGHLAN.
Mm W.«#ALIiACtIIBR.
311 George Street, Sydney.
King Strnntj Sydney
IHemLevo of tlje CLomtctt :
Mr. S. H. COX, F.C.S., F.G.S.
Mr. GRESLEY LUKIN.
„ W. H. WESLEY, J.P. ~ s. SAMPER.
„ JOHN ROSSITER. „ G. 0. HYDE.
„ C. P. RICHARDS. Capt. LOUIS JOHNSON.
~ AMBROSE JOHNSON, J.P. ~ E. E. BRETT.
„ W. S. TARGETT, M.L.A.
Your attention is particularly drawn to the fact that the
sole object of the Institute is the welfare of the Mining Industry,
which is entirely neglected or abused, and it is the intention of
the Institute to see the following carried out :
Ist. Government Smelting Works to treat all ores, and on
a Scale similar to Swansea or Freiberg.
2nd. Water conservations.
3rd, Leasing System.
4th. Labour Conditions on Leases which would prevent
monoply.
sth, Prospecting vote.
6th Mining Inspector.
7th. Mining on Private Property.
Bth. New Mining Bill.
9th. Bonuses to be offered for best method for treating
minerals and metals.




Office of the New South Wales Mining Institute,
311 George Street, Sydney.
August, 1886.
Dear Sir,
We have much pleasure to acquaint you that a Mining
Institute has recently been established in this City, and from
the many members who have already joined, we cannot but come
to the conclusion that the movement has received much public
favour ; we, therefore, believe that the New South Wales
Mining Institute must soon become a most powerful and in-
fluential body, and will be the means of doing much valuable
work in the interest of the mining community as well as
improving the condition of the Trade and Commerce of this
Colony.
The Members of the Council for the current year, whose
names are given above, respectfully ask you and all desirable
persons to become members of the Institute in the manner and
under conditions hereinafter described in the Rules of the
Institute.
Objects.
The objects of the New South Wales Mining Institute are,
to promote and encourage Mining in all its branches, and the
sciences connected with the economic production of the useful
minerals and metals, and the welfare of those employed and
interested in these industries, by means of meetings for social
intercourse and the reading and discussion of professional and
other papers, and to circulate, by means of publication or other-
wise, among its members and associates the information thus
obtained.
The Members of the Council, in common with a great many
other thoughtful people, are of opinion that every branch of the
Mining Industry of this great Colony has been hitherto sadly
neglected.
The laws regulating the leasing of gold and mineral lands
require immediate attention. The rents paid for these holdings
are much in excess of what they should be, and the conditions
under which they are held are very arbitrary compared with other
leaseholders of Crown Lands.
The Mining Law regulating the use of water for mining
purposes is distressingly bad, and in fact a disgrace to the
community.
It is well known that this Colony is remarkably rich in a
great variety of minerals and metals of the most useful kind,
which, if energetically worked, would be a source of great wealth
to the community, but these magnificent minerals are allowed to
lie dormant for the want of energy on the part of those who are
directly interested in their development.


It is the intention of the Mining Institute to do its very
best to bring about a change for the better, and this can only be
done by united action. You are probably aware that the
originators of the Institute recently waited upon the honourable
the Minister for Mines for the purpose of trying to induce the
Government to erect metallurgical works of sufficient size to
treat the many refractory ores that are found in the Colony. If
such works were erected on a large scale they would be self-
supporting besides giving an impetus to all classes of metalliferous
mining. The Minister for Mines, we are sure, has every desire
to promote the mining interest, but his reply to the deputation
foreshadowed that it was the intention of the Department of
Mines to recommend complete metallurgical works, but only
large enough to treat what is called “ Bulk Assays,” that is,
trying or treating about a ton of ore, similar to what is now being
done at the Sydney Mint, in the reduction of quartz and iron
pyrites; but the Members of the Institute are of opinion that works
only capable of treating bulk trials would not give the requisite
impetus to mining. Dr. Leibius, M.A., F.G.S., recently read a most
interesting paper on the Mount Morgan Gold Deposit, before the
Royal Society of New South Wales. While referring to the
mineral wealth of this great continent and the metallurgical
works of Freiberg in Germany, he made use of the following
words“ While on this subject, I may be permitted to allude
to the want in this Colony of a Mining Laboratory, supplied with
all the appliances not only for examining ores, but for extracting,
by the most approved methods, their metalliferous treasures on a
large scale. Of course such an establishment would be both
extensive and expensive, but while giving valuable aid to mining
enterprise, it would be made not only self-supporting but
remunerative; all depends on its organisation and suitability for
our wants.”
It will be seen that Dr. Leibius, who is eminently qualified
to give an opinion on the subject, is precisely of the same views
as the members of the deputation as to the class of reduction
works that should be constructed by the Government — i.e., on a
large scale, but this can only be brought about by persistent
agitation. It is thought that the Mining Institute will be well
able to organise such agitation and to bring forward all the
telling arguments in favour of suitable works, but before they are
justified in moving in this important matter, they wish to have
all the support possible from the various Mining districts of the
Colony. This can only be obtained by those interested in mining
becoming members of the Institute; all grievances, in regard to
the mining industry, can then be freely communicated through
the up country members to the Council in Sydney.
There are many other important matters that require serious
consideration by the Members of the Institute, such as: The
conservation of water for the use of miners by Government; also,


endowments should be granted for boring and prospecting for
mineral deposits. Such endowments are freely given by both
the Queensland and Victorian Governments. It is also well
known that the New Zealand Government has laid out a large
amount of money in bringing water on to the various goldfields.
Victoria did precisely the same thing 20 years ago. Why is it,
then, that similar grants are not made in the interest of the
miners of this Colony I —especially when a large outlay of money
is granted annually by our Government in fostering other interests.
It shall be the duty of the Institute to closely look into the
reason why so much class legislation is tolerated by the
Legislature, where mining, one of the chief industries of the
Colony, is left out in the cold. It is time to be up and doing;
we, therefore, again ask you to join issue with us in this laudable
movement, not only by becoming a member, but an active
member of this Institute, and communicate with your fellow-
members freely by active correspondence in reference to all
matters concerning the welfare of the Mining Industry.
If you desire to become a member, the fees are 10s. 6d. on
entry, and 20s. per annum subscription; intending members
must enclose 10s. 6d. to the Treasurer and send name and address
to the Secretary, whereupon you will receive a copy of the Rules
of the Institute.
There are no paid officials connected with this Institute, but
it is probable that a paid secretary, at a nominal salary, will
have to be employed at the end of this year.
S. T. Leigh & Co., 28 O’Connell Street, Sydney.


tApf.
lauo
f I 35 S b
h) OOUj




