

*
i '
OBJECTIONS TO THE UNIONS
CHIEFLY FROM THE POINT OP VIEW OF THE
I
I
EASTERN AUSTRALIA,
BY THE
REV. WILLIAM McINTYRE, A,M.
SYDNEY:
H. MASON & CO., GENERAL MACHINE PRINTERS,
j^rZL&oo
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
queen’s place, opposite church hill.




07 ii ss/
t£ e rr
OBJECTIONS TO THE UNIONS
CHIEFLY FROM THE POINT OF VIEW OF THE
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OE EASTERN AUSTRALIA.
The terms of the then proposed Union between the Pres-
byterian Church of Eastern Australia, the Church under the
spiritual superintendence of the Synod of Australia in con-
nection with the Established Church of Scotland, and the
United Presbyterian Congregation under the pastoral care
of the Rev. Adam Thomson, with which the Synod of
Eastern Australia dealt at its meeting in November last,
are set forth in certain resolutions, and in a series of articles
called a “ basis of Union.” To some of those resolutions
and to the last article of the basis, as affecting the testimony
of the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia, I .am
desirous to direct attention. The resolutions to which I
refer are chiefly the following:
« That, previously to the consummation of the Union, the
Synod of Australia shall dissolve its connection with the
Established Church of Scotland, and omit from its designa-
tion the terms expressive of that connection.”
“ That the Synod of Eastern Australia shall, previously to
the consummation of the Union, emit a declaration to the
effect that they have no ecclesiastical connection with the
Free Church of Scotland.”
“ That no official application for the supply of ministers
be made from the United Church to any of the churches of
the United Kingdom.”
The last article of the basis is in the following terms;—


t ‘‘That this church shall receive ministers and probationers
from other Presbyterian Churches applying for admission,
on their affording satisfactory evidence of their qualitications
and eligibility, and subscribing the formula.”
As regards the first two of the preceding resolutions, the
history of them is this. The Presbyterian Church of Eastern
Australia holds that the Church under the spiritual superin-
tendence of the Synod of Australasia in connection with the
Established Church of Scotland is involved, by the designa-
tion of that Synod, its supreme court, in the erastianism of
the Established Church of Scotland. It was under the in-
fluence of this conviction that the office-bearers who founded
the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia, finding that
they could not otherwise conserve or, rather, the
anti-erastian character of their testimony, withdrew from
the Synod of Australia in connection with the Established
Church of Scotland in 1846. Proceeding on the views in
which the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia thus
originated, the committee on union of the Synod of Eastern
Australia required that the Synod of Australia in connection
with the Established Church of Scotland should dissolve its
connection, or, rather, that of the Church under its spiritual
superintendence, with the Established Church of Scotland)
and should expunge from its designation the clause in which
it is described as holding such connection. The committee
on union of the Synod of Australia in connection with the
Established Church of Scotland agreed to comply with this
requirement, on condition that the Synod of Eastern Aus-
tralia should simultaneously “ emit a declaration to the
effect that the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia has
no ecclesiastical connection with the Free Church of Scot-
land.” The object of the latter committee in insisting on
this condition was obvious, and was not concealed. It was
apprehensive that, if it complied unconditionally, without
requiring that the Synod of Eastern Australia should do.


anything- similar to what the committee of that Synod re--
quired of the Synod of Australia in connection with the
Established Church of Scotland, it might seem to be implied
that there was something peculiar and distinctive, unfavour-
ably so, in the character or position of the Established
Church of Scotland, that rendered it necessary that none
of the Churches that entered into the union should be in
“in connection ” with it. To guard against this implica-
tion, —to exclude even the appearance of any ground for it,
and to secure that the Established Church of Scotland and
the Free Church should be treated exactly alike, and placed
on precisely the same footing, the committee of the Synod
of Australia in connection with the Established Church of
Scotland required that, if that Synod should dissolve the
connection of the Church under its spiritual superintendence
with the Established Church of Scotland, the Presbyterian
Church of Eastern Australia, though, from its sustaining no
connection with the Free Church, it could not perform the
exactly similar act of dissolving its connection with it,
should make the closest approximation to that act of which
the circumstances admitted, by emitting a declaration that
it had no connection with it. Such was the the
committee of the Synod of Australia in connection with the
Established Church of Scotland in making this demand,
and, when the Synod of Eastern Australia complied with it,
it not only agreed that this object should be effected, but
even effected by its own act; it placed by its own act the
Established Church of Scotland and the Free Church on ex-
actly the same footing, as being equally entitled, —neither of
them more and neither of them less than the other, —to confi-
dence and approval.
It may, no doubt, be said that the Synod of Eastern
Australia would only declare a fact in declaring that the Pres-
byterian Church of Eastern Australia has no connection with
the Free Church of Scotland, and that there could be no harm,,


therefore, in its emitting such a declaration. It is very true
that the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia has no con-
nection with the Free Church; but, while it is a fact, it is a
well known fact, that it has no connection with it, a fact
which it is not necessary to declare for the purpose of making
it known. "Why, then declare it ? To serve the purpose I
have indicated, and that purpose alone, —the purpose of placing
the Free Church of Scotland on the same footing, on which
the dissolution by the Synod of Australia of the connection of
the Church under its spiritual superintendence with the
Established Church of Scotland would place the Established
Church of Scotland, and of thus contributing to place those
Scottish Churches, the Established and the Free, on the same
footing in every respect in relation to the proposed United
Colonial Church.
The following resolution provides that, in the matter of
procuring ministers, nothing should be done to frustrate the
design or disturb the effect of this levelling and equalising
process
“ That no official application for the supply of ministers
be made from the United Church to any of the Churches in
the United Kingdom.”
If the proposed United Church is not to honour the
Established Church of Scotland by applying to it for
ministers, neither is it to honour the Free Church with
such an application. It must on no account and in no respect
indicate the slightest preference for the one as compared
with the other. It must be scrupulously careful to treat
both exactly alike.
The resolutions that have now been reviewed are nega.
tive in their operation. What they provide is, in the first
place, that if one of the negotiating Churches must with-
draw from its connection with the Established Church of
Scotland, the other must at the same time proclaim that it
has no connection with the Free Church of Scotland; and,


in the second place, that no application shall be made for
ministers to the Free any more than to the Established
Church of Scotland. Of this negative compromise the last
article of the basis furnishes the positive complement.
“ This Church,” it says, referring to the proposed United
Church, “shall receive ministers and probationers from
other Presbyterian Churches applying for admission, on
their affording satisfactory evidence of their qualifications
and eligibility, and subscribing the formula.” Here it is,
first of all, laid down that the United Church “ shall re-
ceive ministers and probationers from other Presbyterian
Churches ” without distinction. It will receive them from
the Established Church as well as from the Free Church of
Scotland, and from the former as gladly as from the latter.
If, for example, some of the Strathbogie ministers, who, in
open rebellion against the authority of the Church, and
while under suspension, ordained and inducted Mr.
Edwards, were to come from the Established Church of
Scotland and “ apply for admission,” it would receive them,
without ever inquiring whether they still held the views of
the independence of the Church and the authority of Church
Courts on which they acted on the memorable occasion .to
which I have referred. It would, indeed, be necessary for
them to “ subscribe the formula.” But the doctrines of
the formula are simply those of jthe Confession of Faith;
and, having subscribed the latter, they would, of course,
without any scruple or difficulty, subscribe the former. I
do not forget that it is only “on their affording satisfactory
evidence of their qualifications and eligibility ” that they
would be received ; but by “ qualifications and eligibility ”
nothing more is intended than an irreproachable moral
character and sufficient literary and theological attainments.
To prove “their qualifications and eligibility,” no evidence
would be required,—it would be a violation of the Union
compact and compromise to require any, —that they dis-


approved of their own former grossly erastian and contu-
macious conduct, and that their present views would not
permit them to repeat it in similar or in any circumstances.
JSow, in the name of common sense and common honesty,
what sort of maintenance is this of the distinctive principles
of the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia, or, to
designate them in more general terms, of anti-erastian prin-
ciples ? Are those principles maintained under an arrange-
ment, which is clearly to the effect that the Church by which
it is adopted has no objection to receive its ministers, —all of
them, if it so happens, —from the Established Church of Scot-
land ? If they are, it is high time that the Pree Church of
Scotland should seek union with the Established Church.
The ministers of the Established Church of Scotland are as
good in Scotland as they arc here ; and if, on their coming
here, though they do not at all allege that they have changed
any of the views they professed in Scotland by being ministers
of the Established Church, but indeed allege the contrary, we
may unite with them in one Church, why may not the Free
Church unite with them in Scotland ? In the Established
Church of Scotland, it may be said, erastian principles are not
only held, but also acted on ; but, if there is nothing wrong
in their being held, there is nothing wrong in their being
acted on; and, if the fact of their being held is no obstacle
in the way of union, it cannot easily be shown that the fact
of their being acted on is any.
But, in addition to the resolutions and the article, by which
1 have now shewn the distinctive principles of the Presby-
terian Church of Eastern Australia are surrendered, there is
also the very ugly fact, that the ministers of the Church under
the spiritual superintendence of the Synod of Australia in
connection with the Established Church of Scotland profess
entire approval of the position, in relation to the State, assumed
by the Established Church of Scotland on the occasion of the
disruption in Scotland, in 1843, while the ministers of the


Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia, —both those who
were, and those who still are, ministers of it, —regard that
position as erastian; and that, therefore, while by subscrib-
ing a basis which, with the exception of the last article
of it, is anti-erastian, both parties profess to hold the same
views on the subject of erastianism, they seem really to
hold very different and efen opposite views on that sub-
ject. Subscription thus contradicted cannot be held to be
satisfactory. If men were ever guilty of erastianism, those
men were guilty of it whom the founders of the Free Church
left behind them in 1843 as the general assembly of the
Established Church of Scotland; and of what use can
it be that those who hold, on the one hand, that the
erastianism of those men was no erastianism, and those who
hold, on the other, that it was, —decided and thorough-going
ftrastianism, —join together in adopting a statement framed to
exclude erastianism? What is it they mean to exclude?
“ Hot, certainly,” say the one party, “anything with which
the post-disruption Scottish establishment could be charged,
for it was not chargeable with erastianism !” “Chargeable
with erastianism!” respond the other party, “yes, with gross
and calamitous erastianism, and it is exactly what it was thus
guilty of that we seek to exclude.” How, what is the value*
of such agreement as this ? It is no agreement; and to accept
or pass it for such is the most miserable illusion.
Ecclesiastical subscription s intended and should always
serve to declare the existence of agreement that actually
exists, but in this case, in accordance with the now not only
prevalent but justified perversion and abuse of it, it serves
to declare the existence of agreement which does not
exist.
It is alleged that we have nothing to do with the eras-
tianism of the Established Church of Scotland ; that it is
quite enough for us if those with whom we unite agree with
us in condemning erastianism in general. But of what


value is a condemnation of erastianism in general, that does
not apply to this particular erastianism. The erastianism
of the Established Church of Scotland is not an attenuated
or merely constructive erastianism ; it is erastianism ol
the most decided type, erastianism, indeed, under its
normal form ; and a rejection of erastianism from which it
is exempted is not a rejection of erastianism, certainly no
adequate and thorough rejection of it. And as to the Presby-
terian Church of Eastern Australia having nothing to do
with the erastianism of the Established Church of Scotland,
the very opposite is the fact. It was in a protest, not
against erastianism in general, but against the erastianism
of the Established Church of Scotland, as homologated and
made its own by the Synod of Australia in connection with
the Established Church of Scotland, that the Presbyterian
Church of Eastern Australia originated ; and this protest
it would, clearly, abandon by entering into union with any
who approved of the Established Church of Scotland as it
now and, therefore, of its erastianism, “No,” it is
replied, “ it would not abandon its protest by entering into
such a union, for we have nothing to do with men s private
opinions.” But the approval of the Established Church of
Scotland, erastianism and all, of which I speak, is not a
matter of private opinion. It is a publicly avowed approval*
and proclaimed in the very designation of the Synod of
Australia in connection with the Established Church of
Scotland. Besides—though for the purposes of my argu-
ment it is not necessary for me to take this ground—l
apprehend that we have to do with the private opinions of
those with whom we deal in such a matter. If we know
that those, who propose to join with us in emitting a certain
declaration, cannot, from the views we are aware they hold,
emit it in the sense which we attach to it, we should act
dishonestly if we became parties to the emission of it in
conjunction with them ; for such a joint emission of it would


jonvey that they are at one with us and we with them on
the subject to which the declaration applies, while they and
we are not thus at one.
The union to which I have hitherto referred has not, as
yet at least, been accomplished. The tacticians in the case
deemed it necessary or wise to arrange, with the view of
getting rid of certain difficulties and particularly of Dr,
Lano-’s opposition in Parliament, that another union
should first be effected as a means to it. This other union
they have effected. Certain members of the Synod of
Eastern Australia have united with the Synod of New
South Wales, —Dr. Lang’s Synod, —and the Rev. R. S.
Patterson. This union, having been effected on the basis
and resolutions, on which some of the objections already
urged are founded, is open to those objections. It is open
also to other very grave objections. Of these I now re-
quest the candid and earnest consideration.
In January, 1862, Dr. Lang raised an action against the
Presbytery of Irvine, in the Court of Session, the Supreme
Civil Court of Scotland. In that action he sought —(1.) “To
have a certain sentence or finding of the Presbytery of
Irvine, dated 9th September, 1851, whereby it is said that the
reverend pursuer, Dr. Lang of Sydney, was deposed from
his office or status as a minister of the Church of Scot-
land, reduced , rescinded , annulled , decerned and declared to
have been from the beginning, to be now, and in all time
coming, null and void, and the pursuer reported and restored
against the same in integrum , or, at least, in so far as the
same affects, prejudices or injures him in his civil rights
and interests. (2.) To have it declared that the pursuer is
still a minister of the Church of Scotland, and is still en-
titled to accept of a presentation to any parochial charge,
as well as to all the privileges and immunities appertaining
to ministers of the Church of Scotland.” He also claimed
“£3500, in name of reparation and solatium .” I presume it


will be admitted, even by the contrivers of the union with Dr.
Lang, that in applying thus to a civil court to “ reduce,
rescind, and annul” the sentence of a church court, and to “re-
store him to the spiritual office from which that sentence
deposed him, he was guilty of gross and flagrant erastianism.
The thoroughgoing erastianism which in this instance he
practically professed before the world, and which he deli-
berately acted on for months in raising and prosecuting
his action against the presbytery of Irvine, he has never
since in any way renounced. Accordingly, when a com-
mittee of the Synod of Eastern appointed to
confer with him with a view to union, —a committee from
which all were carefully and openly excluded who, it was
known, would refer to his antecedents,—met him in Novem-
ber last, he bore the character, as publickly earned and ex-
hibited by him, of a tried and proved out-and-out erastian.
Nor was it only by his doings in Scotland that he gained
for himself this character. He acquired it also, and at a
still earlier period, by his doings in the colony . On the
30th September, 1858, he addressed a petition to the Legis-
tive Assembly, in which, after alleging, among other things,
that “ certain ministers of the Synod of Australia, actuated,
as he believed, and was fully warranted to believe from
their own public acts and deeds, by the bitterest malice
towards himself individually, as well as by an inordinate
desire to become possessed, by whatever means, of certain
valuable property, which he had created for his congrega-
tion through the sacrifice of his own, wickedly conspired
together to ruin and degrade him in the estimation oi the
public, and to dispossess him of the property aforesaid under
the desecrated forms of ecclesiastical law ; and further,
as, of course, was to be expected such malice prepense
such a conspiracy, and such purposes of ecclesiastical robbery
being presupposed, —“that the forms and laws applicable to
the case, “ were systematically set aside and openly violated'


in order to achieve his degradation and ruin ; the majority
of the synod pretending-, as the result of their sancti-
monious mockery of a judicial investigation, to depose him
from the office of the Christian ministry and after
gravely informing the Assembly “ that the constitution of
the Presbyterian State Church of this colony admitting ...
of no appeal from the decision of the Synod of Australia ”
to a higher ecclesiastical tribunal, “he had to appeal in a
somewhat indirect manner to the colonial public gener-
ally, and that the result of that virtual appeal was his elec-
tion on four different occasions, as a member of the late
Legislative CouncjJ ; ” he proceeded to urge that the
Legislative Assembly, “as the grand inquest of the nation
was the only tribunal to which he could possibly appeal
for inquiry and redress ” and that “ as wrong was sustained
by him at the hands of men receiving salaries from the
state, while the Colonial public had, on four different
occasions, given the highest testimonial to him by
electing him as one of their representatives in the Colonial
Legislature he had some claim” on the Assembly “for
such inquiry and redress.” Apprehending apparently that
the Assembly would regard the matter in which he prayed
it to interfere as lying wholly beyond its province, he
sought to remove any objection that might be raised on
this ground to its granting the prayer of his petition, by
defining “ the question which he submitted for investig-a-
tion ” as “ simply a question of fact, as to whether certain
acts and deeds,” his deposition, namely, and the proceeding’s
connected with it, “ were or were not in accordance with
the [ecclesiastical] laws and forms of procedure in such
cases made and provided.”
Here we have two or, rather, five instances of appeal
from the decision of a church court with respect to a
spiritual matter to non-ecclesiastical tribunals. In one of
those instances, he appealed from the sentence of deposi-


tion pronounced upon him by the Synod of Australia to
the Legislative Assembly of the Colony for inquiry and
redress.” This, I presume, even his new ecclesiastical
associates will admit to have been a thoroughly erastian
proceeding. In the other four instances he appealed from
the same sentence, so at least he says in his petition, to cer -
tain electorates, carrying his case to the hustings and the
polling booths,—most competent tribunals, no doubt, to deal
with questions of ecclesiastical discipline. I am not at all clear
that the alleged appeals to the electorates were ever made ;
but any one who gravely and deliberately states that he made
such appeals is something worse than an erastian, and can
only be regarded as a sort of ecclesiastical quixote.
Such, in respect of erastianism, was one of the parties, with
whom the Committee of the Synod of Eastern Australia, to
which I have already adverted, was appointed to confer with
a view to union. And how did it deal with him 1 Did it
use proper means to ascertain that lie was no longer the rank
and outrageous erastian that he had been, deeming satisfac-
tion on this point an indispensable, condition of union with
him 1 It did nothing of the kind. It took him as he was, an
erastian of several years’ standing, declared to be such by his
public acts. He, no doubt, expressed his willingness to sign
a basis which, with the expection of the last article of it, is
anti-erastian. But he had before subscribed the Westminster
Confession of Faith, a thoroughly anti-erastian document, and
yet, while under the obligation thus incurred, he was guilty
of the gross and repeated acts of erastianism which I have
detailed. In the presence and under the contradiction of such
facts, of what value is the acceptance of an anti-erastian basis'?
Clearly, of none whatever..
I proceed now to another objection to the union with Dr.
Lang. The deliverance, in which the Synod of Australia in
connection with the Established Qhurch of Scotlhndkrevoked
the sentence which it pronounced on Dr. Lang on the 11th of


October, 1842, so far as it was a sentence of deposition, con*
tinning it in force so far as it deprived him of the status of a
minister of the Church wider the spiritual superintendence of
the Synod, contains the following statements (1.) “ That a libel
served on Dr. Lang, charging him with the grave offences of
schism, slander, and contumacy, was relevant to infer the
highest censure of the Church ; (2.) That the libel was fully
proven, and that the act of deposition, which followed thereon,
was strictly in accordance with the laws of the Church ; (3.)
That Dr. Lang’s letter of the Bth of December last (1862), now
before the court, contains no expression of regret for the
offences of which he was proven guilty, and that the Synod has
no evidence whatever that Dr. Lang has purged himself of
those offences.” Thus when the members of the Synod of
Eastern Australia, who have united with Dr. Lang, entered
into union with him, he was, as he is still, under Church cen-
sure, declared to have been guilty of offences which inferred
deposition, and to have in no way, by the expression of regret
or otherwise, “purged himself of those offences.” By entering
into union with him while he occupied such a position, with-
out ever inquiring into the matter, or in any way attempting
a disposal of it that might even seem to satisfy the claims of
■discipline and a due concern for the purity of the Church,
they practically declared that it mattered nothing to them what
a man’s antecedents were, of what offences he had been guilty,
or what ecclesiastical position he occupied, if he only accepted
their basis. Accept their basis ! One who subscribed the
Westminster Confession, and, yet, not only practised all the
arts of regular erastianism, but even gloried in the erastian
errantry of constituting colonial electorates ecclesiastical courts
of appeal, might, surely, quite as well, with any principles
accept any basis. If the court under whose censure Dr. Lang
lies were one whose authority they could consistently disre-
gard, there might be some excuse for their treating, as they
have done, its censure as a nullity ;. but they propose to unite
also with the Church under the spiritual superintendence of
that court, and should therefore respect its discipline. What
renders the whole affair the more extraordinary is, that it forms
a part of their plan to carry with them into union with the
Synod of Australia a person lying under the uncancelled cen-
sure of that Synod.
In addition to the matters to which I have now directed


attention, there were others sufficiently notorious which de-
manded from them, before they united with Dr. Lang, the
most earnest consideration, but received none.
I may be told that I was myself desirous that Dr. Lang
should be admitted to be a member of the conference on
union. It is true I was so, and my having been so is quite
consistent with all that I have now advanced. If Dr. Lang
had been admitted to the conference, and if the conference
succeeded in disposing of the church censure under which he
lies, and obtained sufficient evidence that he renounced and
condemned the erastianism of which he had been guilty, and
would adopt a new course in some other respects, I would
have rejoiced to see him comprehended in any satisfactory
union that might have been formed. If on the other hand
the conference, having used all legitimate means to dispose of
the said censure and to obtain such evidence, failed in the
attempt, Dr. Lang could no longer allege that no opportunity
had been given him to become a party to the proposed
union.
On the grounds which I have now, briefly but with suffi-
cient fulness, laid before the reader, I hold that the formation
of the recently formed union not only involved the surrender of
the distinctive principles of the Presbyterian Church of Eastern
Australia, but also exhibited a reckless disregard of the purity
of the Church and of its character before the world. Men
professing anti-erastian principles have entered into a union
on terms by which, I have shewn, those principles are com- •
promised, and they have entered into it with a notorious
habit-and-repute erastian, without inquiry or challenge ; and
men who profess to believe that whatsoever the church, in the
legitimate exercise of its discipline, u binds on earth shall be
bound in heaven,” join in the formation of a church with a
man under church censure, and thus, if that censure is of any
validity or force, incapable of taking part in such work. I
put it to all who recognise and value the great principles that
should regulate the formation and determine the character
of a Christian church, if these things ought so to be, —if
they are not, strictly speaking and without exaggeration,
outrageous.
