

ftEMoiouß PAHS
Y b G
Box L 2
OBJECTIONS
(Theatrical Anuscnifiih.
A LECTURE
THE LATE
KEY. THOMAS BINNEY, LONDON.
■yiTH j" 3 REFACE BY THE jJoHN y jj ATSON^
Incumbent of Trinity Church, Coburg;
J\. ND y^IPPENDIX:
THE THEATRE AS DESCRIBED BY ONE OF ITS FRIENDS.
The Drama's laws, the Drama's patrons give,
For those who hue to please, must please to live.
—Johnson.
Christianity, from its first or igin, was inimical to the institution of the theatre. The .Fathers
of the Church inveigh against the profaneness and immodesty of the theatre. In the treatise ot
Tertullian, “De Spectaculis,” he has written expressly upon the subject. The various authorities
on this head have been collected and quoted by the enemies of the stage, from Erynne down to
Collier.—Sm Walter Scott.
MELBOURNE;
M. L. HUTCHINSON, 15 COLLINS STREET WEST.
PRICE TWOPENCE.


PREFACE.
The lawfulness and expediency of aChristian man’s attending Theatrical
Amusements has been the subject of disputation in Great Britain,
at intervals, for upwards of three hundred years ; and, according to
historic testimony, in other countries from the very commencement of
the Christian era. So that men of grey heirs like myself have had the
controversy repeated dozens of times, without the elicitation of a
new fact or new argument, either pro or con. The only change has
been in the personality of the disputants. The lecture by the late Mr.
Binney, here republished, is the ablest and most compendious state-
ment of “ Objections to Theatrical Amusements” that I have perused.
It is carefully reprinted from The Pulpit, Yol. xxxn., p.p. 313-322,
London, 1838. Some of the italics are by the present Editor. Some
Scripture quotations are given more correctly, and the Scripture refer-
ences are editorially supplied.
The Appendix consists of extracts from an article, “The Theatre
Vestibules,” first published in the Melbourne Argus, July 1,1870, and
now included in the first series of “ The Vagabond Papers.” As the
father of a large family, after perusing these horrible details, I cannot
repress the exclamation now rising from the anguished hearts of many
God fearing parents in and around Melbourne, “ Are these the scenes
and associations to which our sons and daughters are to be allured V r
Have the following monitions and counsels of the old Bible been
repealed “Enter not into the path of the wicked ; and go not in
the way of evil men. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it and pass
away. (Prov. iv. 13, 14.) “Thou shalt not follow a multitude to d 0
evil.” (Exod. xxiii. 2.) “Abhor that which is evil.” (Rom. xii. 10.)
“ Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather
reprove them.” (Eph. v. 11.) “Abstain from all appearance of evil.”
(1 Thess. v. 22.) With the old churchmen lam content to sing—
“ How blest is he who ne’er consents
By ill advice to Walk ;
Nor'stands in sinners’ ways, nor sits
Where men profanely talk.”
JOHN WATSON.
Parsonage, Coburg, Nov. 29, 1877.


J3b J TO yHEATRICAL
y^L/VIUSEMENTS.
The subject of discussion as furnished to me by the Committee
managing this Course of Lectures, with a request particularly that I
would take it, is thus expressed : “On the Objections to Theatrical
Amusements.”
Since the public announcement of the Lecture, I have received
communications by the post, both with and without the
names of the writers, anticipating this discussion. These communica-
tions differ in this one respect—that they take opposite sides, some
advocating, and some opposing the theatre ; but they all agree in
another; they all agree in this respect—that they assume that I am
to oppose it. It is taken for granted—proceeded upon by these
writers as a settled matter—that by me the theatre is to be con-
demned. Now, why is this? Why is it thought to be so certain and
unquestionable that a Christian minister, the servant of that God who
hateth nothing that He hath made, and who wishes all His creatures
to be happy—why is it, that he, of all men, should be expected to
denounce the stage, a source, it is said, of harmless pleasui’e? The
terms in which the subject is announced do not express that I am to
do this ; they merely state that the lecture is to be on the objections
to theatrical amusements, but it is not stated whether the lecturer will
admit or repel these, whether he will show their insufficiency or their
force—whether he will undertake to prove that they are so futile as to
be unworthy regard, or so powerful and strong as to admit no religious
or rational reply. I repeat that it is not announced whether I intend
to condemn or to defend the theatre ; and yet, as I have said, there
are various writers sending their letters to me, both the advocates and
the opponents of the theatre, and they have all decided for themselves
what I am to do.
Now there is much meaning in this fact; it speaks eloquently of
the general impression on the public mind. Time was, indeed, when
some of the Christian clergy were themselves occasionally players—
when the people were indebted for the little they knew of Scripture
history to the clumsy clerical representations of its facts and
characters. Time has been, too, when some Protestant clergymen
have written for the theatre, and some have frequented it; and there
may be instances still where some may do both. Great changes have
occurred, and are occurring, in the sentiments of society in this city;
a certain Book, called the Bible, is abroad; and the fervent, earnest,
zealous —or, it you please, the methodistical and evangelical
expounder of the Bible is abroad too. The Book has not only been
liberated from the custody of the priest, and become what it was
intended to be, the property of the people; but the people are con-
nected, in some measure, with the actual contents and character of
the Book—have discovered that religion is not an empty parade of


pomp and processions— nor instruction in it the mere inlculcation of
the decencies ot life. The Bible —the text book of the Christian
teacher, is known to be the holiest book in the world; it demands a
character in its disciples, distinguished by purity of thought, speech,
and behaviour —by the regulation of the passions —by high, intense,
delicate moral feeling—by self-denial and self-control—by the govern-
ment of the animal by the man—by the man keeping the image of
God, cultivating his reason, perfecting his nature, living by faith in
unseen things—in private refreshing his spirit by meditation and
prayer, in public doing the duties of earth from the motives of heaven.
All these, which have now come to be well understood, the minister
of religion has to teach; it is known that this is his office—really to
make men wiser, and better, and happier ; and because he is known
to love to do this, he is not expected to support the theatre. It is
assumed —taken for granted—that he must necessarily regard it as an
obstacle and an enemy ; the defence of it from him would occasion in
the public —even in the play-going public itself—as much surprise
as if a player, continuing such, were to arrange a system of divinity,
or to publish a dissertation on the morals of the Gospel.
I do not hesitate, therefore, to confess, that those who wrote to me
—whoever they were—were right in their assumption respecting the
line of remark which I now purpose to pursue. 1 think that such an
assumption was extremely natural; and I further think that it involves
a compliment both to the Christian profession and to the Christian
minister. Whether the present lecturer is, as a Christian and as a
Christian teacher, what he ought to be, is, of course, a subject on
which my correspondents can know nothing; but this, it seems, they
do know, that because he is a Christian teacher at all, it may be
taken for granted he will condemn the playhouse. Now every
man, who knows what the playhouse is, knows that this is an in-
voluntary act of reverence and homage to the moral sublimity and
majesty of the Gospel.
In offering a few remarks —embodying our objections to theatrical
amusements —I shall principally coniine myself to their general aspect
—the influence of the theatre on moral propriety. I shall waive
almost entirely the specific objections which Christians feel, which men
of the world cannot feel; but those which men of the -world—if pure,
cultivated, and benevolent—might feel if they would reflect, appear
to me to be quite sufficient to condemn the theatre ; and that ought
to be sufficient for Christians, if it would be sufficient for them.
I think, in the first place, it may be of importance to have a clear
idea of what it really is that we have to object to.
Observe, then, that we do not mean to say there is anything wrong
in the mere form of dramatic writing. A poem may be written in
dialogue, with acts and scenes, gradually unfolding a story, depicting
a character, or teaching a truth, as innocently as it may be written in
any other way. Genius is one of God’s great gifts; it is given to be
cultivated, and by its cultivation, glorify the Giver. It may do this
in any way; among others by celebrating the great, embalming the
beautiful, or branding the base, in human character, in man or woman.
It may do this in poetry and song, and it may fashion this in the form
of dramatic dialogue. Milton might have realised his first idea, and


made his great poem dramatic instead of epic, without any disparage-
ment to the pureness of his genius, the clearness of his eye, or the
vigour of its wing ; and his genius might have been as holy, as great,
and as god-like as it is. We do not, therefore, condemn the form of
dramatic writing.
Again, we do not mean to say that there is anything absolutely
wrong, in the mere circumstance of a number of persons committing
to memory, entering into the spirit, and representing, with appro-
priate feeling, intonation, and gesture, what might be thus written.
Supposing there was nothing improper in the composition itself, there
could be nothing improper in the reading, nor, that I can see, in
reciting it. The employment might not be the most dignified in the
world for grown-up men and women, but I do not assert that, under
all circumstances it would necessarily partake of the character of sin.
Again, we do not see that there would be anything wrong in the
mere circumstance of attending such a representation, looking at and
listening to the acting and speaking of the performer. Supposing the
persons engaged in the representation to be persons of education,
sensibility, and genius, with a fine perception of the sense of the
author, an intimate knowledge of the heart, a mastery over the sources
of rapture and of tears, an acquaintance with the appropriate external
indications of thought and feeling—the exercise might certainly be
conceived to be so conducted as to gratify the intellect, as well as to
regale the imagination and the heart.
Now Ido not think it necessary for me to go further, and talk of
such engagements becoming aids to virtue ; it is quite enough to admit
that this kind of dialogue may be so purified from all that is wrong
as not necessary to involve in the spectator anything absolutely in-
consistent with propriety.
All this, then, we admit; but this is not the theatre. The theatre
involves, not merely this simple and primary idea, but the constant
realization —the necessary realization—of a vast number of others,
which cover and colour it. The existence of theatrical amusements,
as an amusement, imples, among others, the following things :—The
embarking large capital in buildings, scenery and dresses; the sup-
port of a number of persons devoted to acting as a profession, who, in
the language of Johnson, “ live to please, and must please to live ; ”
the possession, as stock, of such a number of pieces as will admit of
frequent change and variety, in order to fill the house and pay the
expenses of the establishment. Now these things are perfectly
obvious. A theatre cannot be commenced without capital and
without a company ; it cannot be continued without varied perfor-
mances and adequate receipts.
Now I mean to assert the following things. I assert, in the first
place, that there is not in existence, in any language, or in all
languages put together, a sufficient number of perfectly unexcep-
tionable stage plays to constitute such a stock for a company of
virtuous performers, as would enable them to exclude all pieces of a
questionable character, and maintain sufficient variety.
I assert, in the second place, that if any company were to become
so virtuous as to act nothing but what was intellectual and moral,
pure, lovely, and of good report—if they were merely to enforce


moral lessons and promote innocent amusement—if they were to
banish from the green-room the blush of impurity and the light
garnishing of buffoonery and folly—if they were to live to please
only man’s better nature, and by attempting thus to please expect to
live—they would presently find themselves wofully disappointed—
they would soon have to play to empty benches, and be condemned
to hunger and thirst in reality as their reward for, as players, hunger-
ing and thirsting after the people’s righteousness.
And, further, not only is it necessary to pander to the baser affec-
tions and passions by what is presented on the stage, in order to
attract an audience, and in such companies, and with such frequency,
as shall meet the expenses of the theatre ; but I further assert, that
it is also necessary to wink at the attendance, or even to favour and
facilitate the admission, of the frail and the fallen of one sex, to
gratify the depravity, or to intoxicate and seduce the innocence, of
the other. I assert these things, and whoever dare may deny them.
But these, it will be objected, are the abuses of the theatre. No
they are the theatre ; the theatre as it is, the theatre as it has been,
and the theatre as it will be while human nature is human nature—
while player’s and play goers are men merely living to please and to
be pleased. The idea of a perfectly pure stage is, in my opinion, as
Utopian as the philosopher’s stone; and, if it were not, that is
nothing to me—l have to do to-night with theatrical amusements as
they are —not as it is conceived by some they might be. I have to
do with the theatre as a fact—a real existing thing, living and act-
ing as a power in the midst of us—a power mighty for mischief. I
have to do with the theatre as such, and not with it merely as an
abstract and philosophical speculation. If all that we named were
to disappear, to be swept away as abuses, that the legitimate idea of
a pure, moral, instructive drama might come forth, according to the
dream of some theatrical advocates, I have no hesitation in asserting
that it would not, and could not, be sustained. A theatre must have
money ; it must have money from the mass; it must have money
often—or it cannot go on. The literary man who goes now and then
to witness the favourite effort of some distinguished performer, or the
first appearance of a friend’s piece, or the occasional representation
of the higher displays of Shakespeare’s genius—he, and such as he,
are not the persons who support the theatre, and by whom it lives.
He, and such as he, have other pursuits and other pleasures, far more
instructive and far more satisfactory; and if none were to frequent
it oftener than they do, or only at such times as they would care to
be present, it would soon cease to exist at all.
A theatre, we repeat, must have money from the mass, and must
have it often. The gods of the gallery would not gather to look down
on nothing but good men struggling with misfortune, and to listen to
lessons of purity and wisdom. Neither the gieat vulgar nor the
small would choose to be cheated into virtue, by submitting to be
taught where they expected to be entertained. And to many who
habitually attend the theatre, it would lose far more than a moiety of
its attraction, even as it is, if nothing were to be done, but merely
take their places, witness the performance, and walk home. The
company they meet, the associations they form, the conversation, the


intercourse, the corrupt and corrupting indulgences, both in the
theatre and out of it, between the pieces and after the conclusion—
all this has far more to do with securing their habitual attendance,
and by that the money which really supports the system, than even
the profligacy of players and play-writers themselves.
The countenance and encoui’agement which the theatre gives to
vice, the stimulus applied to the passions by the performers, the ex-
cited emotions, the language, the dress (or the want of dress) of the
performers themselves ; the nature of the audience—composed, for the
most part of the doubtful and the bad—the facilities afforded to
prostitutes to mingle with the company in evexy part of the house, or
almost every part, and the perfect understanding and recognised
arrangement by which from some parts of the house, the modest and
virtuous of the sex, the wives and sisters of gentlemen, are systemati-
cally excluded—these are the things which constitute our reasons for
condemning the theatre, even when we take no higher ground than
a becoming regard for the morals of the people. Excluding religion
altogether—leaving out of view the peculiar views and profession of
piety—reasoning as if there was no such book as the New Testament
in the world, with its spiritual functions and unearthly demands on
the habits and the heart—thinking and feeling, if you please, as mere
moral philanthropists, the friends and advocates of decency and de-
corum, the protectors of youth, the guardian's of men’s innocence and
woman’s imagination—on these grounds, independently of all others
of a higher character, it is our deep and solemn conviction that theatres
deserve nothing from the thoughtful and the pure but unmitigated
and unequivocal condemnation.
We press this point, and we intend to press little besides. We
pass over a number of objections which might be taken from the ten-
dency of theatrical amusements to interfere with domestic order—the
ridiculous romance which they infuse into immature minds—the in-
consistency of the notions they engender—the license they take with
the sober, every-day dirties of life—the prominence given by plays to
the bad, violent, and vindictive passions—the false impressions con-
veyed by the eternal exhibition of love and lovers, as if the indul-
gence and development of one single feeling were the great business of
existence, and the great secret of happiness—the false principles in-
culcated by the exhibition of some characters —the fascinations which
are thrown around profligacy and vice by the talents and attractions
which are imputed to the agents. These, and a number of other well-
founded and weighty objections, we do not dwell upon, because we
wish to confine our attention to that which involves, supposes, and
concentrates them all—the avowed and systematic encouragement to
open, barefaced, and unblushing pandering to vice, which preside over
the arrangements of a theatre.
I am not speaking without proof, and, therefore, I proceed to show
upon competent authority, that what I have asserted is anything but
fictitious. I have been favoured with some original observations, and
and some selected extracts from eminent writers, by a gentleman,
who, as I shall show by and by, has a right to be heard, and to have
an opinion on the present subject. I take a few passages from this com-
munication, as illustrative and confirmatory of what I have advanced.


With respect to the high seasoning of pieces with improper
language, to render them attractive and popular—in other swords, to
please them whom by pleasing the player lives—he gives me the
following fact. He himself is the speaker. “ Some years ago, upon
my calling on a gentleman with whom I was well acquainted, the
author of several successful dramatic pieces, he told me he had Just
returned from one of our three principal—or, as they are called,
regular metropolitan theatres, and that the following dialogue had
passed between him and the manager : —The manager said, “I have
sent for you to say that I intend to distribute the parts of your after-
piece to-morrow, and next week I hope to put it in rehearsal; but, in
the meantime, as we are all of opinion that it wants life, I wish you
to take back the manuscript, and spice it a little.’ ‘ Spice it ! I don’t
understand you.’ ‘ What! you an old theatrical writer, and not
understand what I mean by spicing? ‘lt is really so.’ ‘ Nonsense.’
‘ I assure you lam ignorant of what you mean.’ * Sprinkle it here
and there with a score or two damns, to give it a zest—that is all.’
‘ Excuse me, sir; lam not at all au fait at such kind of spicing,
and must, therefore, leave that to the taste of the performers.’ ” Now
this answer, you see, while it says something in favour of the author,
cuts deeply into the character of the performers, but not more so than
their opinion and wish, as indicated by the manager. These, then,
are the instructors in what is denominated by some a school of virtue
—that is a specimen of the nature of their lesson and of their aptness
to teach. I may add, that I believe it is not uncommon for the
performers to introduce, of their own accord, at the time of acting,
oaths and indecencies into pieces, which the authors have not
sufficiently seasoned.
With respect to the complexion and elements of a theatrical
audience, and the fact of its being the design of the proprietors of
theatres, to a certain extent, to make it bad, I have been favoured
with the following observations ;
The writer entitles it “ Before the Curtain.” He says, a view of
this department is exhibited in a number of the “ Antijacobin
Review,” of June, 1800. “The front boxes,” says the reviewer, “are
almost exclusively devoted to women of the town ; the lobbies swarm
with them ; they occupy every part of the house, with the sole excep-
tion of the side boxes and the dress circle. The rooms for the purpose
of refreshment are like the state rooms of an eastern grandee, and it
is next to impossible for a virtuous woman to walk from her box to
her carriage without having her eyes offended and her ears shocked
by the most indecent gestures and language; and in this most
profligate exhibition the young men are as bad, if not worse than the
women. We have seen the performance absolutely stopped by the
noise of these profligates in the front boxes.” So far the reviewer'.
Then the gentleman who sends me this, says, “ That this is a faithful
and unexaggerated description of the frightful outrages on common
decency in our theatres is too notorious to be denied ; but, what is
still more horrible, they are not permitted only, they are absolutely
sanctioned by the proprietors ; and the spacious and splendid saloons
are fitted up for the express accommodation of the vicious and
debauched alone.” No virtuous woman ever dare —it is never intended


that she should—plant her foot within them. No man, who goes to'
the theatre with his wife or his sister, would take them into the saloon;
everyone knows what all that means.
The gentleman proceeds : “ In corroboration of the assertion, that
these abominations are sanctioned by the proprietors and managers of
our theatres, I cite from the pages of the author of “ Fashionable
Amusements,” the following fact: ‘ The theatre, in every age of its
history, has been the resort of the licentious and the profane. Some
may attend for the purpose of intellectual gratification—to pronounce
on the mei’its of a performer, or to dispose of an idle hour; but the
majority are attracted by other less harmless motives. As one evi-
dence of the correctness of this statement, reference has been made
to the committee of one of the royal theatres, from which it appears,
that when a proposition was made to exclude females of a certain class
from the house, in compliance with the wish of many persons, who,
on account of such admission, were compelled to withdraw their
sanction, the motion was overruled, under a conviction that, if
adopted, the institution could not be supported.’” Here, then, is the
open, unblushing avowal of a committee of managers of one of our
boasted chief schools of morality, that, without the co-operation of
troops of harlots and their pai’amours, the establishment will fall to
ruin. But when we call to recollection .that, among the active
managers of this committee were included several senators of both
houses of Parliament, then does this avowal assume a deeper shade of
turpitude. ' l Shall I not visit for these things 1 saith the Lord :
shall not My soul be avenged on such a nation as this 1”
In a second communication from the writer of the above, he ex-
presses himself in the following manner : he gives me this statement.
I have used the names, in reading over this statement, of Smith
and Brown for the persons, and I call the theatre the Nonsuch,
because it would be improper to give the real designation of either
the men or the place. I just state the fact; that is all I want. “In
relation to this determination of the Drury Lane Committee, that
this, at first sight, startling decision, was directed by some theatrical
policy, I have no doubt whatever; and the following fact will show
they were right” (whatever may be thought of their morality) ; “ for
several years I was intimately acquainted,” he says, “ with the late
Mi'. Brown, who was a very amiable man, and both himself and Mrs.
B. were in their principles and habits strictly moral. Their family,
which was large, exhibited harmony and regularity. Mr. Bi’own was
the principal proprietor and manager of the Nonsuch Theatre. Now
this theatre, during many years under his management, was the only
one in which there was even an attempt made to preserve order and
decorum within its walls. Females of a certain class, if known, or
suspected to be such, were refused admission, and persons were placed
in the box office to prevent any violation of the rules of propriety.
Behind the scenes he was equally vigilant in enforcing on his com-
pany, as far as possible, order and propriety; and he more than once
said to me, ‘Mr. Smith, it is always my wish to consider my company
as part of my family.’ Well, what is the result of all this 1 why
that, with few exceptions, the theatre was every year a losing con-
cern, and at length brought this moral manager to ruin. Should I


be asked, whether his misfortune should not be rather attributed to
the inferiority of his pieces or performances, I reply no; for the
dramas at other theatres were popular, and the performers the same
as those who, at Covent Garden, invariably drew overflowing houses;
and the pieces were not only performed at other theatres, but it is
undeniable, the same actors that performed them at this theatre in
the early part of the evening afterwards went to Covent Garden, where
they were loudly greeted by thousands. In a w r ord, are you the
manager of a theatre 1 Then, to say nothing of religion, if you dare
to inscribe on your proscenium, ‘ Here morality is rigidly enforced,’
and act up to that motto, be assured your financial doom is sealed.”
I further observe, that I should think these opinions of my friend
receive confirmation from the popularity of many of the minor
theatres. Some of these are conducted by women notoriously in-
famous ; and pieces, I am told, are often played ostentatiously indeli-
cate. The admission of the immodest will not be expected to be
forbidden here, and the consequence is crowded houses, composed
paincipally of young men, of such classes whom such arrangements
would be expected to attract, and who are thus allured to ruin and
wretchedness.
Now all sweeping accusations against the entire members of any
profession must always be false. Of players, therefore, lam willing
to admit, that many may be estimable, and many chaste ; but it is a
fact that open, avowed, notorious profligacy, in either male or female
performers, does not injure their professional reputation : they are as
popular as ever in the school scale of virtue ; and in the school pre-
sided over by them may be even a favourite in its internal arrange-
ments (from familiarity with their practice) whatever they may
teach. This fact speaks volumes.
In addition to all that has been advanced and assumed —respecting
the immoral influence of the theatre, as indicated by what is
witnessed within it—thei’e remains to be noticed, that the vicinity of
a playhouse is invariably studded with dens of infamy. In the
immediate neighbourhood of those scenea of nocturnal amusement
are to be found the haunts and the harbours of the profligate and
the vicious. Taverns and supper-rooms remaining open all night, in
which the abandoned of one sex meet and mingle with the lost of the
other; places, appropriately denominated “finishes,” where the gay
and the dissipated congregate to conclude the night which the drama
began, few who frequent which ever escape irretrievable ruin ; whose
ways are the ways of hell, leading down to the chamber of death ;
these are the attendant satellites that surround and wait upon, and
are nourished by, the theatre. Appetite is stimulated within, and
opportunity is afforded without; the first summons the second, and
the second is sustained by the first; they respectively feed and sustain
each other, and contribute between them to sacrifice myriads in both
worlds. Upon this subject I am also indebted to the gentleman
referred to for the following statement: —
“ Sir John Hawkins, in his life of Dr, Johnson, writes thus:—
* Although it is said of players that they teach morality, and of the
stage that it is the mirror of human life, these assertions are merely
declamation, and have no [foundation in truth or experience ”


(except it is the mirror of all that is bad, or a very great deal of it) :
“on the contrary, the playhouse, and the regions about it, are the
very homes and abodes of vice. How else comes it to pass, that no
sooner is a playhouse opened in any part of England, than it becomes
surrounded by a halo of profligate abodes 1 One parish alone, adjacent
to Goodman’s Fields, has, in consequence of a theatre being built
there, to my knowledge, expended the sum of £I3OO in prosecutions,
for the purpose of removing chose inhabitants whom, for the instruc-
tion in the science of human life, the playhouse has drawn together.”
My friend remarks, “ That the observations of Sir John Hrwkins on
the baneful effects of the theatre on a neighbourhood in his time are
•equally applicable to the theatres of the present day is indisputable.
Wherever one of these deadly places has been reared, the consequence
has been the deluging the neighbourhood with a flood of profligacy.
Hence the alarm that little more than three years since seized on the
nobility, gentry, and respectable tradesmen, in and near St. James’s
Street, at the bare rumour that one of these pests was about to pollute
their vicinity; and hence their united and earnest petitions to the
King to withold the royal licence, urging, that should his Majesty be
prevailed upon to grant it, among numerous other evils, the inevitable
result would be, the attraction of whole colonies of thieves and harlots
to the purlieus of the royal residence.” It thus appears, that the
nobility and gentry, and respectable tradesmen, in and near St.
James’s Stx’eet, who, no doubt many of them, were in the habit of
occasionally attending theatres, had such a conviction of the tendency
of the stage to pollute and demoxalize its immediate vicinity, that,
however they might choose to have such schools to go to at a distance,
they deprecate the idea of having them bx-ought to their own door.
They would go from home, they would go a little way from home,
to receive the lessons of “ his Majesty’s servants,” but they warned
his Majesty against permitting them to approach their domestic
hearth or his royal habitation. They could ventux-e into the atmos-
phere of impurity, if permitted to retuxm to their uxxcontaminated
neighbourhood ; but they decidedly objected to the vapours of the
atmosphere itself, if they came reeking around them, swaraiing with
the polluted and poisonous thixxgs, which, wherever they settle, they
do both bring and breed.”
I conclude these quotations by the following statement of the quali-
fications and competency of my witxxess : the testimony of a man so
fui’nished must amply supply the deficiency of personal knowledge in
myself. “In concluding these vexy brief and imperfect remax-ks,” he
says, “ on the dreadful evils insepax-able from a theatxical establishment,
let me solemnly assure you, that all the enormities detailed by the
authorities I have quoted, and many others that have escaped their
notice, have fallen under my own pex'sonal observatioxx; for though
never officially connected with the stage in any capacity whatever, yet
peculiar circumstances gave me, for several years, free access, by day
and night, to both before axxd behind the curtain of our principal
winter and summer metx’opolitan theatres, and also drew me into
intimacy with many of their authors, and managers, and chief per-
formers ; and, consequently, there is no part of the theatrical
economy with which lam unacquainted: and it is my pex-sonal complete


knowledge of their economy which forces upon me the conviction
that were another Ezekiel to arise, and another angel to descend and.
exhibit to him the greater and greater abominations in this land, he
would reserve for the astonished and indignant prophet, the display of
the iniquities of a London theatre, as the last and most fearful
chamber of imagery.” In a note on the word “ Managars,” in this
extract, my informant observes, “ Justice requires me to say, that
several of the gentlemen here referred to were highly respectable for
their talents and acquirements, and, I believe, irreproachable in their
private conduct : they not only feel and admit the existence of
the evils on which I have animadverted, but sincerely lament them;
they, however, as theatrical men, felt, with the renowned committee
to which I have alluded, that these evils were irremediable.”
Now, my friends, such is our great and comprehensive objection to
theatrical amusements as they now exist. I may just throw out two
or three remarks by way of recapitulation. Theatrical amusements
cannot exist without a company ; capital can yield no return, and the
company cannot be supported without the house being frequently
filled ; the house cannot be filled, or filled frequently, without the
stage itself pandering to the passions, and the arrangements of the
establishment facilitating their indulgence. Therefore, to counten-
ance the theatre, is to countenance at once a college for vice, a
gymnasium for the exercise and proficiency in crime. These state-
ments rest on facts, and not on opinions. I have proved them by the
testimony of an eye-witness—by the failure of one manager, and the
acknowledgment of others. “He that hath ears to hear, let him hear :”
he that hath a head to reflect, let him reflect: he that hath a face or
a tongue to deny what we have read, let him by all means denounce
and deny it.
After what I have advanced, I deem myself under no necessity to
examine the arguments for the theatre. Nothing can defend what is
so demonstrably indefensible. To talk of teaching virtue by any of
their representations —a tragedy purifying the heart by its solemni-
ties and tears, or the idea of correcting folly by its ridicule—this may
be admitted when the Thugs of India become our models of morals,
and Egyptian jugglers our masters in science. To send the multitude
to the theatre to learn wisdom is something more than sending them
for this purpose to school. To uphold the stage as a standard of
language is to forget that whatever can be written can be read, and
does not need to be recited ; that greater and better writers compose
for the press than any who are exclusively employed for the theatre
and that our language owes more to its prose writers, and to poets
who have wholly or principally written for the closet, than to all the
dramas that were ever penned. Jeremy Taylor and John Milton,
Samuel Johnson and Robert Hall —the mighty dead who have gone
to their long and illustrious repose —the Wordsworths in song and
the Southeys and Le Bases in prose composition—these ai’e the men
who have perfected our language, and whose genius are now develop-
ing its strength and embodying its beauties. But, if it were other-
wise ; if we had to repair to the theatre for literary improvement, or
to witness its scenes for instruction in the past ; or, as has been
recently stated in the life and letters of a remarkable man, once


himself a successful dramatist—if we have to go to the theatre to find
the legitimate and proper influence of the drama in removing depres-
sion, and restoring to the heart its buoyancy and health—all would
have to be secured at a cost at which no good man ought to be willing
to purchase it—namely, the support of a system that could not he
carried on if it did not deliberately provide for corrupting the innocent
and gratifying the corrupt.
I think it unnecessary further to pursue the subject, by showing in
detail the peculiar and specific objections to the attendance of all
persons professing godliness on the amusements of the theatre. It
must suffice to say that (and here let me be considered as just whisper-
ing gently to the ear and the heart of members of churches,
communicants of the Lord’s supper, and persons who pass in society
for religious men and religious women : hark !) the theatre is utterly
inconsistent with their professed subjection to the Lord Christ—their
separation from the world—their daily prayer, if they pray daily, not
to be led into temptation; and their solemn duty to avoid being
partakers of other men’s sins. The language of the stage, and the
train of thought and emotion which it excites, are invariably such as
it is impossible to reconcile with the Christian's mental preferance for
God, or his moral warfare ivith theflesh and the devil. If the spirit
and precepts of the New Testament are by any one imbibed and
obeyed to the full, it will be as impossible for him to derive pleasure
from the stage as it would be for him to sacrifice in the temple of an
idol. “ Be ye therefore followers”—imitators—“ of God.”—Eph. v. 1.
“ Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus.”—Phil. ii.
5. “ Blessed are the pure ; the pure in heart.”—Matt. v. 8. “Let
no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which
is good to the use of edifying.”—Eph. iv. 29. “ Let the Word of
Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom.”—Col. iii. 16. “Mortify
therefore your members which are upon the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence.”—Col. iii. 5.
“ Put off all these, anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy communi-
cation out of your mouth.”—Col. iii. 8. “ But put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ.” —Rom. xiii. 11. “And every man that hath this hope
in him purifieth himself even as He is pure.”—l John iii. 3. “ What
manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and
godliness.” —2 Peter iii. 11. “Have no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness, but rather reprove them.”—Eph. v. 11. “I
beseech you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which
is your reasonable service, and be not conformed to this world; but
be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove”
or experience, “ what is that good and acceptable, and perfect,” thin"
“ the will of God.”—Rom. xii. 1, 2.
My brethren, these, and such as these, are the precepts of Scripture.
And however it may be attempted to give them a meaning peculiar
to apostolic times and to idolatrous communities, they are equally
applicable, in their principle and spirit, to every man and to all
times, and require a separation from a baptised world as well as a
heathen world. The love of the theatre and the practice of these
precepts cannot cordially coalesce in man or woman. It is impossible


to conceive a devout person going from communion with God to the
pleasures of the playhouse ; or from the pleasures of the playhouse to
communion with God. Let any one try the experiment of studying
the Bible, and relishing its lessons, while fresh from the scenes and
society of the theatre, “ Thy Word is very pure, therefore thy
servant loveth it” (Ps. cxix. 142), is the sentiment of the Psalmist,
and ought to be ours ; but it is one which will either expel from the
heart a love for the drama, or the drama will expel from the heart a
love for religion. “Be not deceived,” young man; “ God is not
mocked; ” if ye “ sow to the flesh,” ye “ shall of the flesh reap cor-
ruption.”—Gal. vi. 48. “ All that is in the world, the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father,
but is of the world ; and the world passeth away, and the lust thereof,
but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever'.”-—1 John
ii. 16, 17.
In conclusion, I have only to observe that it is not impossible that
some persons may complain, that, in the course of my remarks, I
have used words and phrases offensive to delicacy, and have made
allusions to things and persons, to vice and to the vicious, which
ought not to be made. To such persons I would say, Does this offend
you—this imperfect verbal description of the arcana of the theatre ?
What then must it be to see and hear and touch all, and far more,
than I have dared to repeat. But, perhaps, you can do this ; yes, it
is quite conceivable that you may be offended by the description of
the thing, when that description is intended to expose it, which thing
yoxi may wink at or witness without emotion, when it is employed as
an instrument to dazzle and delight. Many a woman sitting in a
theatre hears without a blush, and looks at without disapprobation,
things which, if aught approaching them were to occur in her
presence in private, would rise and leave the room with the air and
attitude of insulted virtue. Perhaps you who make such objections
to my phraseology are one of these I—if so, I think it better for your
sake 1 should not attempt any reply.
Finally, conscious as I am that I have left numberless points
untouched, in choosing to dwell only on one aspect of the subject—l
yet cannot but think I have said enough to convince any impartial
person that the stage is a perilous place and a questionable school. I
am entitled, I think, to accommodate the whole verse from which the
text is taken, and to apply it as a disuasive from attendance on the
theatre. The verse, you know, runs thus:—there was a great
tumult, and a number of persons in the theatre, the enemies
of the Gospel, and Paul wanted to go and quiet them—
“ And .certain of the chief of Asia, which were his friends, sent unto
him, desiring him that he would not adventure himself into the
theatre.” My friends, this would have been as good advice, and as
fi-iendly an act, had it been to keep him from its amusements, as it
was, when thus employed, to prevent his exposure to the malice of
the mob. And it is in this sense we employ it now to all who are
present, and we say, because of the infected atmosphere that pervades
the place, we beseech you—we beseech you as your friends—that you
would not adventure yourselves into the theatre.


In the centre of this city of Melbourne exists a disgraceful, flagrant, heinous
scandal, flaunting boldly and shamelessly in the face of decent society ! —an
outrageous insult to our wives and daughters ! —an infamy hardly equalled in
any civilized city in the world ! —a reproach which should cover with ignominy
those who instituted, and now profit by its continuance write of
an immorality open as the day and known to all, of the places where vice meets,
and chaffers, and makes its bargains under the very eyes of “respectability,”
of the chief marts of Melbourne prostitution—the Theatre Vestibules.
Let us first give a glance at the Theatre Royal. A stranger used to the
arrangement in London theatres will naturally, if he wishes to obtain a good
seat, ask his way to the stalls. At the gate of entrance there is a drinking bar ;
within a stone's throw there are scores of others. But, to his surprise, inside
the shabby, dirty Vestibule, he sees two other bars, running right and left,
almost the full length of the hall. There is also an entrance to the bar fronting
the street. The doors of these are all wide open, and attractive-looking bar-
maids are in attendance to minister to thirsty souls. The sights and sounds
they see and hear must conduce to a liberal view of the moral code, and I am
not surprised to have had pointed out to me two frail sisters who were formerly
barmaids in the Vestibules. Between the bar on the right and the entrance to
the stalls, the stranger will perceive two mysterious closed doors. Surprised,
no doubt, at the extremely liberal preparations for the supply of liquors, he will
pass on to his seat, leaving further investigations till the entr'actes
But, after the performance has commenced, considerable interruption will be
experienced by the noisy entry of a number of women. There is no
mistaking what class they belong to—no need that they should wear saffron,
as of old. Their startling dresses and painted faces, without reference to their
manner, stamp them as lorettes. They “make up” the part well. There is a
notable difference in this class of women in France. There you may take your
wife or daughter to any public place, and may sit next to the most notorious
member of the demi-monde without perceiving, by her dress or manner, that
she is different from the rest of the world. The fact is, that, in France, where
these women are under police supervision, they, when they mix with the
general world, take care not to be guilty, by their dress or manners, of any
“offence against public decency,” a charge which is very elastic, and is severely
punished. How different in Melbourne! Flaunting in their dress, bold and
vulgar in their manners, they flounce in and out of the stalls during the per-
formance, causing, in this alone, a positive nuisance and annoyance. And
whilst sitting down, their conduct is little better. They laugh and talk amongst
themselves, or with some of their male friends, Melbourne “cads,” who
(“dressed to kill,” with slouched hats, a la larrikin, and paget coats) crowd
and crush decent people in a manner which would not be tolerated in England or
America. The conduct of these women in the stalls is really so bad, that
audible cries of “shame” are sometimes raised by other occupants. They care
little about any play, but come here to be seen, and to scrutinize the occupants
of the dress circle, looking out everywhere for “friends,” whom they will
afterwards meet in “ the paddock. ” From twenty to thirty of these women
will often be present, and, in the course of the year, their contributions to the
treasury will amount to a good sum ; but that, for the sake of this, the lessees
should tolerate (if not encourage) the presence of these women, is a disgrace to
them and an insult to society, which should be resented by the decent portion
of the public To a married man, wishing to treat his family
to the play, the difference in the price will, if he pays many visits in the year,
mount up considerably. He would, perchance, go often to the stalls, but there
his wife and daughters are outraged by the presence of lorettes ; and, if he goes
to the dress-circle, the increased cost will lessen the number of his visits. But
admitted, as they are, to the most prominent parts of the house, the vagaries
of these women are seen by all I remember that, twenty years ago,
in Liverpool, the condition of the Amphitheatre (then leased by Mr. Copeland,
and the only decent Theatre open in the town), was, in this respect, alike shame-
ful. The members of the demi-monde were admitted to the side-boxes, and
their presence there and in the passages was considered so scandalous that
hardly any lady would attend the Theatre until they were banished.


I have done with the inside of the house. Every frequenter of the Royal
knows that I have mildly drawn the scenes witnessed there. Astonished at
these, the stranger, strolling out during an entr'acte, would be still more
surprised at Melbourne manners and customs, as witnessed in the Vestibule.
This is generally crowded with men and larrikins, smoking and chaffing the
loose women who pass in and out. The drinking bars are thronged, but only
by men. The stranger sees that the women, possibly picking up a male com-
panion, all enter the apartment which was prievously closed, and which is
now guarded by swing doors. Curiosity will doubtless prompt him to enter,
and he will find himself in the far-famed “saddling paddock” of the Royal. It
is a small bar, presided over by a man : the proceedings here are too unpleasant
for a barmaid to witness. Here the most notorious women of Melbourne nightly
throng, and run in the companions they have caught in the stalls or in the
Vestibules After the Theatre is over, it is high change in
the “paddocks.” The men are of all classes—“gentlemen,” betting men,
sharpers, clerks, junior officers of merchant vessels, and new chums. The
women are very anxious to be treated, and also bring a number of “lady friends”
to join in a drink One cannot literally describe the doings
and the language here. Everything is low, coarse, and vulgar —emphatically
“bad form;” and I cannot imagine how any one, with any pretension to the
title of gentleman, ” can frequent such a place. In London, at Cremorneor
the Argyle, and in Paris, at Mabille, there is a certain amount of enjoyment
to be obtained without actual vice ; but in Melbourne, rones merely delight in
visiting the “paddocks,” and having drinks and vulgar talk with these wretched
women We have, as yet, only seen the doings of the demi-
monde in the stalls, vestibules, and “paddock” of the Theatre Royal. There
vice is most prominent, as lately these women have been refused admission to
the stalls at the Opera-house. But the stranger crossing to that establish-
ment will see little difference in the Vestibule. There are bars here likewise,
and a private room partitioned off from these. Inside this the scenes are worse,
if anything, than at the Royal. Many of the women pass the evening between
the two Vestibules, but most of the frequenters at the Opera are of a very low
■class. The difference is only one of degree, when all are coarse and vulgar. Still
there is a difference. In both the Vestibules there are experienced police officers
nn duty ; but, as they are on private property, I presume their presence must
be paid for by the lessees. They do their duty, keep out young thieves, and
prevent any great disorder ; but they cannot interfere with the women in the
Vestibules or in the “paddocks.” These ladies know that they have, accordingto
the ideas of the proprietors, a right to be there. The management of the Opera-
house has done well to keep these women out of the stalls. Why do not the
proprietors, or lessee, insist upon closing the “paddock?” If we must meet
these women in the street, there is no reason that they should elbow our wives
and daughters in the entrance to a theatre, or make assignations under their
very eyes. We read in the papers that “the police are making great efforts to
grapple with the moral and social evils of Melbourne.” Why do they not sum-
mon the lessees of both the Theatres, and the proprietors of the bars, for keep-
ing disorderly houses ? To all intents and purposes, they commit this offence,
as they are “frequented, &c.,” according to the Act I have no
objection to the presence of the thief or outcast in the gallery, or even to Mag-
dalen in the stalls, if, like her French sister, she will, for the nonce, behave
herself. But the lorette of Melbourne frequents the Theatres and Vestibules—
not for amusement, but to ply her trade ; and even granting that it is hard to
shut the door in her face, the existence of the “saddling paddocks ” is a scandal
established with a forethought for the courtezan's benefit, which is an eternal
disgrace to their promoters. There are people who believe that good always
comes out of evil, and who may think that the scenes in the Vestibules act as a
warning to modest young women, and will deter them from entering on a
career of vice ; but tlib great philosopher, John Stuart Mill, from whose teach-
ings I have endeavoured to learn and profit, says ; —“ The tendency of good is
towards good, and of evil to further evil. One bad action leads to others, both
in the agent himself, and in the bystanders, and in the sufferers. All bad
qualities are strengthened by habit, and all vice and follies tend to spread. ”
ALEX. iffKINLET AND CO., PEIHTEEB, 61 QUEEN STREET, MELBOURNE.
