









OBSERVATIONS
ON THE COASTS OF
VAN DIEEN’s LAND,
ON
BASS’s STRAIT and its ISLANDS,
AND ON PART OF THE COASTS OF
NEW SOUTH WALES;
INTENDED TO ACCOMPANY THE
CHARTS OF THE LATE DISCOVERIES
IN THOSE COUNTRIES.
By Marthen Flinders,
SECOND EIEUTENAT OF HIS MAJESTY'S SHIP RELIANCE.
ILontJon:
PRINTED BY JOHN ,
Earl’s*Court, Little Newport-Strect, Soho*
1801.




TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
SIR JOSEPH BANKS, BART.
PREESIDENT of the ROYAL SOCIETY,
Y our zealous exertions to promote
geographical and nautical knowledge, your encourage-
ment of men employed in the cultivation of the fciences
that tend to their improvement, and the countenance you
have been pleafed to £how me in particular, embolden me
to lay the following obfervations before you.
/
However unworthy of being offered to Sir Jofeph
Banks, this humble attempt to increafe the utility of the
annexed charts may prove, I truft, that the intention with
which it is written will excufe the imperfe&ions it muft
\
contain. Utility was the only objeft in view; and if it
is fo executed as to anfwer that end, I am fare of its meet-
ing your approbation. With an anxious hope that you
will not he diffatisfied with it,
I am,
f
Sir Joseph,
Your grateful and obedient Servant,
MATTHEW FLINDERS.


PREFACE.
The following obfervations are extrafted from the journals of
fome expeditions from Port Jackfon, moftly undertaken by order of His
Excellency governor Hunter, for the purpofe of exploring the neighbour-
ing coafts. They are here put together under different heads, for the
convenience of thofe who may be amongft the firft to ufe this navigation;
and to ferve as an explanation to the charts of Van Diemen’s Land,
Bafs’s Strait, and thofe parts of New South Wales, which have lately been
I-*
examined by the officers of His Majefty’s Ihip Reliance.
The charts are not given as perfeft, but as containing the form and
fituation of what was really feen, as near as could be afcertained. When
it is confidered, that no time-keeper could be procured for thefe expedi-
tions, and that the veffel in which moft of the work was performed, was
not of twenty-five tons burthen, great accuracy in the longitude will not
be expedled; as a proof, however, that every effort was made to avert
errors; it is proper to remark, that from the north-eafl cape of Van Die-
men’s Land, named Cape Portland, by governor Hunter, round by the -
weft, to the South-weft Cape, the floop was kept clofe to the fhore, and
brought back every morning within fight of the fame point it had been
hauled off from on the precedeing evening. By which means the chain
of angles was never wholly broken; and the dead-reckoning from Port
Dalrymple, being corre6led by thefe bearings, placed the South-weft Cape
in the fame fituation as captain Cook, within 5' of longitude. This was
an unexpefiled agreement, and muft not be looked for in the relative fitua-
tions of the iflands in Bafs’s Strait; and more efpecially of thofe which
are not in fight from Van Diemen’s Land.
The rottennefs of the deep-fea line, with which the floop was fupplied,
will account for the very few foundings which are marked in the ftrait;
independently of the fmall number of the crew, and fize of the veffel.
The bearings in the following memoirs are always as given by the
compafs, unlefs it is otherwife particularly expreffed.
\- r *
If the information here brought forward fliould be thought little, or
imperfect; it ought to be remembered, that that little was gained, under
very difadvantageous circumftances, by the voluntary labours of a few
individuals ; whofe only ftimulus to fo hazardous an undertaking, was the
difinterefted fpirit of difcovery.
If feamen find themfelves affifted by thefe obfervations and the charts
to which they are attached, in conducing fhips along new coafts, and
into new harbours, it is hoped, that inaccuracies in language and in ftyle
will be allowed to pafs without fevere cenfure.
7^


VAN DIEMEN’s LAND.
A HE fouth-eaftern parts of this ifland, received the name of
Va Di emen’s Land, from Abel Janfon Tafman, who difcovered it more
than a century ago. Since that time, captain Furneaux and others have
enlarged our knowledge of the fouth and eaft coafts, at different periods;
but, though fufpe&ed of being feparated from New Holland, Van Die-
men’s Land was not known to be a diftinft ifland, until its circumnavi-
gation was lately accomplifhed in a fmall floop, called the Norfolk, by
the order of governor Hunter. It is now found to be thirty leagues
diftant from any known part of New South Wales. It contains fome-
thing more than 18,000 fquare miles of furface; and as far as could
be obferved, Van Diemen’s Land appears to be fuperior in fertility to the
fame fpace of ground in any known part of New South Wales.
A long fwell from r the fouth-weftward does moftly, if not always,
roll in from the fouthern Indian Ocean, upon the weftern fhores of Van
Diemen’s Land; and as there is no known place of flielter upon this
coaft, it becomes extremely dangerous to approach it. The fhore in
general, is rocky; and in many places there are reefs lying three or four
miles off it; but there are alfo patches of fandy beach; more efpecially
from the black cliffy head, in about 40° 5 4' fouth, to about 41° 36 : the
dangerous bight alfo, the center of which is in 42° 4, is moftly beach.
It is more of a low than a bold coaft, to the northward of Rocky Point,
but is not uniformly fo; for in the latitude of 41° 30, the inland moun-
tains approach within three leagues of the fhore; and for ten miles on
each fide of 42°, irregular high moutains come down almoft to the water
fide. From Rocky Point to the fouthward, both the coaft and country
put on a different appearance. For the country to the northward is co-
vered with wood, though generally thinly fcattered, but here the barren
B mountains
West
Coast.
Shore in
general.


mountains come ranging out of the inland to the fea; and from their
colour and nakedn’efs, have the appearance of being covered with fnow:
it is but in patches that vegetation is feen upon them.
Judging from appearances, the weft coaft of Van Diemens Land is as
dreary, and as inhofpitable a ftiore, as has yet been difcovered; and the
great fwell fufficiently announces, that the confequence of coming near
it, between the latitudes of 41° and 43°, with a fouth-wefterly gale, and
a dull-failing veffel, would be to be wrecked upon it.
A point of land on the fouthern part of this coaft, which has two
roundilh peaked rocks upon its extremity, is named Point Saint Vincent,
by governor Hunter, Its latitude is 43’ iff fouth. Its longitude may pro-
bably be a few miles to the weftward of what it is laid down in the chart,
which is 145° 58' eaft. It is not improbable, but that there may be an
opening round this point; for the mountains appeared to open back
fufficiently for one, and we found a fet of above twelve miles to the
fouthward, during anight of nine hours, when lying becalmed to the
fouth-weftward of the point.
The latitude of the South-weft Cape, by a meridional altitude of the
fun, meafured from the fouth, was 43° 29' ; but as captain Furneaux pla-
ces it in 43° 39', and captain Cook in 43° 37', I conjecture, that from hafte
to get the noon bearings before the floops pofition was materially altered,
a miftake of 10' muft have been made in reading off from the fextant;
the South-weft Cape is, therefore, placed in 43° 39' in the chart. Its
longitude there is 146° 10' eaft, according to the lunar obfervations taken
in Port Dalrymple, and the corrected dead reckoning from thence.
The South-weft Cape projects about a mile from the high land at its
back, as a fteep, narrow, point. When made from the weftward, it appears
to be jagged; but when feen from the eaftward, it is fuppofed to bear
fome refemblance to Rame Head, near Plymouth.
The want of ports on the weft coaft, and the bleak winds which feem
generally to beat upon it, appear to have prevented the human race from
inhabiting it, in the numbers that they do the other lliores of Van Die-
men’s Land. We law but one certain mark of its being inhabited along
the whole coaft, which was near Rocky Point.
The projecting points of the fouth coaft of Van Diemen’s Land, are
of the fame character with the neighbouring parts of the weftern coaft.
They are very high, fteep, and barren. The weftern moft of thefe confift of
a whitiffi ftone, fuppofed to be quartz; whence it is, that they appear
to a ftranger, when at fome diftance, to be covered with fnow. The
projections near Storm-Bay Paffage have a dark, bafaltic appearance.
Every
West
Coast.
Shore in
general.
Point St.
Vincent..
South-weft
Cape.
Inhabitants.
South
Coast.
bhore in
general.


Every navigator who has hitherto patted along this coaft, as far as
my knowledge extends, has kept without the Mewftone; and they have
ufually fuppofed, that there are feveral openings between the South-weft
and South Capes, where good Ihelter might be expected; but the fpaces
between the intermediate high heads are only (hallow bays, which are open
to foutherly winds; fo that there feems to be no inducement for a (hip
to pafs within De Witt’s Ides.
The De W T itt’s Ides are moderately high, and are moftly fronted with
black-looking deep (hores; but, except thofe that are mere rocks, have
fome vegetation upon them. In patting within them, we looked out un-
der the expectation of feeing feals ; but neither in the water, or on (hore,
was one feen. Men either refide upon, or vidt thefe ides from the main ;
foi the vegetation upon two of them had been lately burnt.
The South-weft and South Capes lie nearly eaft and weft, by com-
pass, and are eleven leagues afunder, by the log; but it is to be obferved,
that what is here called the (buth cape, is not what is fo termed by
captain Cook. If we may judge by its relative fituation to his Peaked
Hill and the Eddyftone, it is the next head to the eaftward that is
called the South Cape by him ; but this head opened round the South
Cape at eaft-by-north, the variation being 8° eafterly.
The rocks lying off Tafman’s Head, called the Friars, condft of
three deep, rocky idets, that have fome vegatation upon them ; and
two black rocks. They are frequented by many gannets; and people
alfo feem to have vidted the neared idet, for it had the burnt appearance
that was feen upon two of De Witt’s Ides.
From Tafman’s Head to Fluted Cape, the courfe is noth-by-eaft,
about ten miles; and from thence to Cape Frederick Henry, n. 6° or 8°
e., about the fame diftance. Thele capes are all more or left bafaltic *
and in that part of the fouth-eaft coaft, which has hitherto been termed
Maria’s Idands, we dnd not only the capes, butthe coaft between them,
to be of the fame fubftance. The cliffs of Cape Pillar, Cape Bafaltes’
and of the idand lying off the former, are furmounted by nmnberleft
columns ; fometimes fmgle, and fometimes clinging together, like (lacks
of chimnies.
The two capes lie nearly true eaft and weft from each other, and
are diftant ten or eleven miles. Of the bight between them, I cannot
fay, whether it affords dielter or not.
Round Cape Pdlar, the coaft opens at true north; and prefents the
lame bold, fteep diore, that fronts the fouth-eaft coaft.
Ihe idand, in which Oyfter Bay is (ituated, appeared to be two
® 2 idands,
South
Coast.
~ i i ■«—
bhore in
general.
De Witt’s
ides.
South Cape.
Friars.
Tafman’s
Head.
Maria’slfles.
Oyfler Bay
ifland.


iflancls, of moderate height. The north-eall point, which is the Miftaken
Cape of Mr. Cox, is fteep, and is indented like a cock’s comb. The iflet,
which is marked in the chart as lying off it, was not feen.
It does not feem to be well determined which is the Frederick Henry or
Hendrick’s Bay of Tafman. In the chart, I affix that name to the fpace
which lies to the northward of, and between Cape Frederick Henry and
Cape Bafaltcs; and I have extended it to thofe large pieces of water, on
each fide of Green Head, calling them the upper bay.*
The obfervations, for afcertaining the latitude of the upper and lower-
bays, were two in each. In longitude, they are placed according to the
fituation of Penguin Ifland, afcertained by captain Bligh, in 1788.
In entering this bay, there are no dangers to be feared that are not
fufficiently confpicuous.
Around Betfey’s Ifland, the fea-weed grows up to the furface of the
water; but in paffing between the ifland and the two flat rocks that lie to
the northward of it, there is from five to nine fathoms amongft the weeds.
Befides various anchorages in different parts of Frederick Henry Bay,
the eaftern part of the upper bay contains more than eight fquare miles
of anchorage, upon a bottom of mud or fand, in from fix to nine
fathoms water ; this part of the bay only is, therefore, capable of affor-
%
ding Ihelter to a large fleet.
The opening left at the back of Woody Ifland, had the appearance
of being either the mouth of a river, or a paffage going out to the fea.
Circumftances did not permit us to afcertain this important point. The
w'eftern part of the upper bay muff alfo be looked upon as unexplored;
it may probably have a ftream falling into its north-weft corner. The
fhore here is low and fandy; but from thence eaftward, rocky heads and
alternate fandy beaches become the northern boundary of the upper bay.
The fouthern llrores of the eaftern bay are moftly rocky, but not high.
The fides of the entrance, from the lower to the bay, are gener-
ally fteep, rocky, and moderately high ; but thefe rocky flrores are divi-
ded into diftindt heads or points, by intermediate fandy beaches: this is
more frequently the cafe on the weft fide of the entrance.
No run of tide was obferved in Frederick Henry Bay; but there is
feme rife and fall, perhaps two or three feet.
• It appears that this upper bay had been previoufly vifited by the French admiral
D’Entrecafteaux.
The
South
Coast.
Frede-
rick
Henry
Bay.
Name.
Situation.
Entrance.
Anchorage.
Upper Bayj
imperfe&ly
examined.
Its ftiores.
i
Tide.


The wood does not appear to be much calculated for other ufes to a
drip than fire wood. It can be procured in every part of the bay.
A fmall ftream of frefir water runs over the rocks, into the arm near
Gull Ifiand; but the flrallownefs of the arm towards its head, makes it
difficult of accefs. This is the only frelh water, for fiiips, that was feen in
Frederick Henry Bay : but the heads of the greater number of the coves
remain yet to be examined.
The country on the eaftern fide of the bay, is ftony; and, wherever
we landed, is wretchedly barren. The ifiands have a better appearance.
Smooth Ifiand, contains about one hundred acres of ground, that might
anfwer for a garden : its foil is Aral low and fandy. Sloping Ifiand has a
pretty appearance. Betfey’s Ifiand is really a fine fpot; although fo
high and fteep, that it is fcarcely acceflible, except at the north end.
Its top is well covered with timber, and fine grafs; and it feems to
have a moderate depth of excellent foil. The length of this ifiand is
about one mile, and the view from its high land is extenfive.*
f
The River Derwent appears to have been the difcovery of Mr. Hayes,
commander of the fliip Duke, about 1793. With the exception of Herdf-
man’s Cove, the names that are applied in this river and its immediate
neighbourhood, where taken from his chart; but in fuch parts as the
Hoop vifited, it was found neceffary to make fome alterations in the terms :
coves having been called ports and bays, and creeks, rivers. The river
itfelf, is denominated Fletcher Hayes’s Gulph, in the [lower part, and
Derwent towards its head; but, as it is certainly nothing more than a
common river, I have dropped the. name of gulph, and affixed Der-
went River as the name of the whole.
Herdfman’s Cove being unnoticed in Mr. Hayes’s chart, has received
a name defcriptive of the country that furrounds it; and it is the only
name given by me in this part of Van Diemen’s Land ; fave thofe in the
upper part of Frederick Henry Bay, and Cape Bafaltes, which are alfo
defcriptive.
Three obfervations were taken for the latitude in different parts of this
river. Mount Direction is in 42* 48' fouth. The mean variation of the
azimuth,compafs and theodolite, obferved on the fouth fide of Rifdon
Cove, in December, 1798, was 8° 52' eaft.
/
* Some account of the inhabitants, &c. is included in that of the Derwent River.
C ■ The
F. H. B.
Wood.
Water.
Iflands.
Derwent
River.
Name.
Situation*


Derwent
River.
Entrance.
Sailing up.
Anchorage.
The Derwent being almoft as free from any, but very apparent, dan-
gers, as Frederick Henry Bay, it is thought unneceffary to engrave the
particular chart of thefe parts: the original plan is upon a Icale of half
an inch to a mile.
The entrance of this river, is in depth ten or twelve fathoms, and in
width, two miles and a half; but a fmall part of this fpace is occupied
by fome rocks, that lie off the point on the eaft fide of the entrance.
When the river is entered, Shoal Point feems to be the only place of
danger. It is neceffary to give it a wide berth, by keeping clofe over
to the echoing cliffs on the oppofite fide. The width of the river
is here contracted to half a mile.
In failing up thus far, Mount Direction will be a very confpicious
objeCt a-head : a gap at its top, divides it into two roundiih heads. Below,
this mount, is Rifdon Cove, which is the higheft part to which a fhip can
fafely go. We could fcarely find fo much as two fathoms water abreaft of
Mount Direction; but when round the point, there is a channel by the
flarboard fliore, with not lefs than four fathoms in it. Below the next
point, on the fame fide, are fome dry mud-banks; and except flriking
into the mid-channel to pafs round thefe, the deep water continues on
the fame fide paft Herdfman’s Cove. The channel then becomes exceed-
ingly narrow,- in proportion to the width of the river; and .keeps clofer
to the flarboard fhore, until the fouth-fouth-wefl reach opens: it then
rounds over to the oppofite fide. The depth of water is from two to three
fathoms above Herdfman’s Cove, and continues to be fo as far up as our
examination went.
No veffcl that draws more than nine feet -water fhould attempt to get
above Rifdon Cove. It is for the ufe of fmaller veffels, and of fiiips
long boats, that the channels fo high up are fpoken of. A long boat
may alfo get up the creek that falls into the north corner of Herdfman’s
Cove. The greater part of this cove is a dry mud-bank at low water; but
there is a narrow channel, leading round by the ftarboard fliore into the
creek, in which there is nine feet water.
A fhip may lie in Rifdon Cove, out of the ftream of the river, in from
fix to three fathoms, muddy bottom; and from thence downwards to
Relph’s Bay, both fides of the river afford anchorage in various depths
of water, between three and twelve fathoms, on the fame ground.
Relph’s Bay appears to be a very fpacious harbour, but I cannot
fpeak of the depth of water in it.
Pmen Cove, in the northern part of Storm-Bay Paffage, affords
complete flielter from winds at north-eaft, and round by the weft to fouth-
weft;


weft; but at fouth, there would be a conliderable fea thrown into it,
and an eafterly wind would make a Ihort difagreeable fwelk The water
ilioals very fuddenly in the head of this cove.
The water moves fo flowly in the lower parts of the Derwent, that a
good failing veffel need pay no attention to the tides. We fometimes
found the water draining down for twelve hours and more together, and
at other times, as long upwards; whilft the rife and fall by the fliore,
were at the ufual intervals. A counter current at the bottom appeared
to be the caufe af this irregularity . From Shoal Point upwards, the tides
feemed to run true, and to have fome little ftrength, perhaps half a mile
per hour.
I reckoned the time of high water to precede the moon’s pajfage over
the meridian on any day , about four hours'; which is more than an hour
later than in Adventure Bay. # The rife is between four and five feet
in Rifdon Cove.
Every part of the fliores of this river will afford wood for the fire, in
abundance; but freih water is not fo eafily procured by fhipping. The
ii\ ci itsfelf is frefli in that part where it takes a fouth-fouth-wefterly
courfe; but the larger claffes of veffels can only get at it by boats, from
Rifdon Cove. A frefli ft ream falls into the creek, which is in the north
corner of Herdfman’s Cove; but the large ftones at the head of the
creek, will much impede boats in filling their cafks ; and the high banks,
by increafing the power and altering the direction of the wind, will make
rafting very tedious.
Rifdon Cove was our watering place. The hogfheads were rafted
into the creek at high water, filled at the following low water time, and
towed out as foon as they floated. The late rain had made the water
fomewhat muddy; but it was otherwife very'good.
The head of the cove, called Slainforth’s Bay, by Mr, Hayes, was
not examined.
i
Some rills of excellent water come winding through a rich valley,
at the back of Pruen Cove ; and uniling, fall into the head of the cove;
but the flxoals, which dry at low water, are a hindrance to watering a
Ihip at this place. It is probable, however, that Mr. Hayes, or per-
haps admiral D’Entrecafteaux, watered here; for there was a tree lying
near the run, which had been cut, both by a faw and an axe ; and they
would not have pitched upon this as a wooding place only, when there
were twenty others about the cove more covenient for the purpofe.
4
• See captain Cook’s third voyage, and lieutenant Bligh’s narrative of the Bounty’s voyage
to Otaheite. '
C 3 Land
Derwent
River.
Tides.
Wood.
Water.


S. E.
Part.
Inhabitants*
Kanguroos.
Swans.
Ducks and
fea-fowl.
Fifh.
From appearances it feems, that the fouth-eaft part of Van Diemen's
Land is tolerably well inhabited. Once only, in the upper part of the river,
were we able to overcome their efforts to avoid us. Two women ran oft'
fcreaming, but a man {laid to receive Mr. Bals and myfelf; and accepted
a fwan that was prefented to him, with great joy. , He carried two fmall
fpears in his hand, but feemed to be devoid of fear. Our fire-arms were
neither objefts of curiofity or alarm ; and the only part of our drefs that
attraaed his attention, were the red handkerchiefs about our necks. He
was a fhort, flight made man, of the middle age. His countenance was
more expreffive of benignity and intelligence, than of ferocity or
ftupidity. His features were lefs negro-like than is ufual in New,South
Wales; and his hair was either cut or burnt very clofe. He underflood
none of the dialefts fpoken in the neighbourhood Port-Jackfon, or the
common words of the Otaheitean language.
The natives of Frederick Henry Bay, have fome mode of conveyance
by water; for they had vifited Betfey’s Hand, the Ifle of Caves, Smooth
Ifland, and Gull Ifland; and, perhaps, the others. It has been a
received opinion, that the inhabitants of this part of Van Diemen's Land
have no canoes; and, had our obfervations been confined to the Derwent
River, we fhould have joined in that opinion.
A few of the grey, and of the fmaller red kanguroos, were feen here.
The flocks of fwans, in the Derwent, will be the bell dependance
for frefh provifions, to thofe veffels that fhall vifit it early. In De-
cember, and perhaps at all times, from one-tenth to one-third of
thefe fwans are without their wing feathers; and may be taken by a
handy whale boat, whofe only weapon need be a boat-hook. By fwim-
ming and flapping along the water, and by their craftinefs in gaining the
wind, after being once chafed, the fwans would fometimes tire our
little two-oared boat: a few fhot then generally ended the puifuit
The long grafs that grows upon the fhoals of mud, furnifhes the
fwans with food; and where this food is mofl plentiful, there they are
moll numerous. We did hot meet with one in Frederick Henry Bay;
but in the northern part of Storm-Bay Palfage, and in the lower parts
of the Derwent, there were a few flraggling birds. It is in the fhoal
part of the river, from Rifdon Cove upwards, where they are found
in hundreds. Thefe fwans are black, the wing feathers excepted.
Ducks, black fhags, gannets, red-bills, and pelicans, were occafion-
ally feen; principally in the fhoal lagoon, at the back of Relph s Bay.
The only trial that we here made to catch fifh, was in the lower
part of the Derwent; and was not without fuccefs. Fifh are known to
very plentiful in Adventure Bay.
J 1 Venomous.


Venomous fnakes are found here, which fo much refemble burnt
fticks, that it requires a clofe infpection to detebt them. One was
taken alive, but died foon afterwards; apparently in confequence of
his own bite.
The banks of the Derwent are not remarkable for their height ;
but on the eaft fide, the hills rife fuddenly from the water, whilft the weft
fide afcends gradually up to a large body of mountain; the fummit of
which is four or five miles inland. This mountain is the parent of all the
ftreams that fall into the river on that fide; and is fufficiently high to be
feen over the land in almoft all parts of Frederick Henry Bay. Mr. Bafs
found it covered with large timber, to its very top. In the frelh part of
the river, the hills rife rather fuddenly from the water-fide; and the
country feems to be hilly, if not mountainous.
The borders of the river are, in general, much better calculated for
pafturage than for agriculture. They are covered with grafs, equally
difperfed over a good, but fometimes fliallow, foil. The hills defcend
with fo gradual a dope, that they ufually leave a confiderable extent of
valley ; and the depth and goodnefs of the foil, in many of thefe vallies,
feem very fit for the plough.
The ftream that falls into Rifdon Cove, runs out of an extenfive val-
ley, that in the difpofition of the ground, exceeds in beauty every
other that was met with. Round Herdfman’s Cove, the country is unufu-
ally thin of timber, and finely rounded into g rally hills. Upon the tops
of thefe hills, as upon moft others, it is ufually ftony ; but in fome of the
vallies, the foil is capable of a profitable
The remarkably formed peninfula, that furrounds Relph’s Bay, is tole-
rably good ground; and about the Shoal Lagoon, there is fome of a
fuperior depth of foil. Was a fettlement to be formed in this neighbour-
hood, Relph’s Bay would deferve particular attention.
The ftone about the Derwent is fometimes bafaltic, and often contains
iron. From its great weight, it is well calculatad for ballafU and in
many places, as in Rifdon Cove, may be conveniently taken into a
boat.
D HUNTER’S


HUNTER’S ISLES.
This clufter is named after His Excellency the governor of New
South Wales. In latitude, the ides are placed according to four meri-
dional obfervations of the fun, taken in fight of fome of them ; and in
longitude, according to the dead reckoning form Port Dairymple, cor-
rected by the bearings along the coaft.
Albatrofs Ifle is in latitude 40° %5' fouth. Its longitude, by the above
authority, is 145° 4' eaft. No obfervations were taken to find the variation
of the compafs; but in conftruCling the chart, 8° eaft were allowed.
Thefe files are in general high ; and the fouth wefternmoft of them are
furrounded by fteep, forbiding cliffs.
Black Rock is a fmall conic-formed iflet, and may be feen more than
five leagues in fine weather.
Albatrofs Ifle is vifible at the diftance of fix leagues. The heavy fouth-
weft fwell, which breaks upon the fteep fliores of this rocky iflet, will
feldom allow it to be landed upon, and then only at the north-eaftern
end.
The long fpit of land between Albatrofs and Three-hummock Iflands,
I judge to be an ifland alfo, diftinCt from the north-weft; end of Van Die-
men’s Land; but this is a matter of fome uncertainty. The weft fide of
this land is low, and there are fome beaches upon it. The north point is
low, but rocky. On the eaft fide of this fuppofed ifland, the land feems
to rife as it proceeds to the fouthward, and the fliore to become fteep.
The internal parts of it are fparingly covered with a kind of half-ftarved
vegetation.
The three hummocks, on the ifland which they give name to, lie
in the direction of s. 20° w. by compafs, nearly in a line. The fouthern-
moft of them, which is the largeft, is floped fomewhat like a fugar loaf;
and may be feen more than feven leagues from almoft every direction.
Off the eaft fide of this filand, there is anchorage on a fandy bottom, and
fhelter
Nam*.
Situation.
Their fliores
&c.
Anchorage.


flxeltei fiom wefterly winds. Judging by appearances from the anchor-
age, the afcent up to the hummocks is covered with an impenetrable
brulh; over which the heads of a few ftinted gum trees are feen.
Ihe iflands, whofe fituation is neareft to the north-weft part of Van
Diemen s Land, as well as the north-weft part itfelf, muft be confidered
as yet unexplored; and it is neceflary to obferve, that the relative pofi-
tions ot thofe iflands that are more diftindly marked in the chart, may not
be coiredt to one, two, or perhaps three miles; for between the noons of
the 9th and 10th ot December, a long fwell, and ftrong winds and tides,
made a confiderable difagreement amongft our angles and bafes; which
difagreement will, more or lefs, afted the whole of the lands in the neigh-
hood of this part of the track.
Upon Three-hummock Ifland, there were certain marks of its
having been frequented by men; but it is probable, that none of
Hunter s Ifles have ftationary inhabitants.
The tides run very ftrong amongft thefe iflands. The flood comes
10m the fouth-weftward. It appears to be high water about one hour
before the moon pafles over the meridian, and the rife of the tide feems
not to be lefs than eight feet.
Although not a feal was found upon the eaft fide of Three-hummock
Ifland, yet feveral 'were feen in the water near it; and fome of a reddifli
bail fur, were knocked down upon Albatrofs Ifland.
Sea birds are numerous amongft Hunter’s Ifles. There were vaft num-
bers of albatrofles on that ifle to which their name is given, which were
tending their young in the beginning of December; and being unac-
quainted with the power or difpofition of man, did not fear him: we
taught them their firft leflbn of experience.
Out of the great, and almoft unknown, bight, between Three-hum-
mock Ifland and Circular Head, fuch an immenfe number of gannets,
and Mount-Pitt birds* iffued, that there muft be one or more iflands
there, which are much frequented by them. They came from the fouth-
ward at day-light in the morning, and took their way, round the iflands,
to the weftward.
* A footy-coloured petterel, of the fize of a pigeon. They are commonly called iheerwaters
<lt lC3*
D 2
VAN
Anchorage.
Further ex-
amination
required.
Inhabitants#
Tides.
Seals*
Birds*


VANDIEMEN’s LAND.
Th e north coaft of Van Diemen’s Land puts on a very different
affect from that of the weft or fouth coafts. The long fwell fiom the
fouthern Indian Ocean, which ftrikes over to the coaft of New South
Wales from Hunter’s Hies, leaves this fide of Bafs’ Strait m fmoo i
water. From this caufe, and from the moft prevailing winds being
off the land, the north coaft has more the appearance of being the
there of a harbour, than of one that is expofed to the fea.
Circular Head is fteep, refembling a round twelfth cake in foim,
and is high enough to be feen more than eight leagues. The cape
to which it is conneaed by a low ifthmus, and of which it forms the
eafternmoft part, is fmooth, Hoping, and rather low.
The bio-ht between Circular Head and the next projeaion eaft-
ward, is almoft entirely a fandy beach ; and there are alfo fandy beaches
half way from the rocky projeaion towards Table Cape , but e ore
then becomes rocky and more fteep. Bot r lieu ai ea anc a _
Cape and alfo the rocky cape between them, make like iflands when
firft feen from the eaftward. The Table Cape preferves its flat ap-
pearance in every direftion from tire fea. to cliffs are fteep; and .t
is high enough to be feen at the diftanco of twelve leagues.
Taking that fpace of coaft between Table Cape and I rat Dairy mple,
we find a good deal of fandy beach upon it; and although the laud IS
very mountainous at the back, yet the fltores do not appear to be fteep
in general. There is a round hill dofe down to the water five
leases to the eaftward of Table Cape; and a few miles beyond this
° n romin«• from the foufh-weftwaid,
hill, there is a range of mountains comm 0 ' . ,
which break off abruptly at the water fide, and form a bluff head, but
do hot project beyond the line of the coalt,
■4 ' f
North
Coast.
Shore in
general.
Circular
Head.
Table Cape.
To Port
Dalyrmple.


From hence eaftward, we are not fo well acquainted with the nature
oie, and it is not impoffible, but that there maybe a fmall
opening in the bight which lies about five miles weft of Port Dalrym-
ple: the fmall projecting point in that bight is low, and made like
an illand.
CaCh fide . ° f Port MnnypJe. ranges of hills from the mountains
inland approach near to the fea; but from thence eaftward, the coaft
may be called low; and is, with few exceptions, a fandy beach which
continues round Cape Portland, and as far beyond it as I have feen
tne coalt. The principal exception, is a ftony head lying ten miles
for baftWardnofd n 0f P ° rt Dal W le - This is not remarkable
. ’ ut Jt W 1 ea *% be known by its being the only ftony pro-
jca.on ,n the neighbourhood, and from having a finalf rocky iflet
>mg two-and-half miles off it, north-weft-by-weft, by compafs.
The great Similarity that one illand or piece of land, has to fome
rt nei^hh® urhood > is often remarked; and this is exemplified
m the likenefs between Ifle Waterhoufe and the iflet that lies three
foui miles to the weftward of it. They are both moderately high
and level at the top. The fhores of the iflet are rocky; but the inner
point of Ifle Waterhoufe is fandy, and feems to run off Ihoal. We paffed
between this ifle and the main, our fhalloweft foundings being four
fathoms and the bottom fandy; but I would not recommend it to any
Jhip to follow our example, unlefs from neceffity. I think it ftill lefs fafe
for a flnp to attempt paffmg between Cape Portland and the ifles that lie
off it. The northernmoft of thefe ifles is divided into two parts, nearly
equal in fize, whence it may be called double ifle. From this double ifle
and the fands near it, there appeared to be fhoal water connecting them with
the Swan Ifles. The rippling water, which is marked in the chart as a
curving line from the double ifle, is about two cables lengths broad
Upon that part of the ripple over which we paffed, there was nine fathoms*
ant the water appeared to be as much agitated there as in other
parts.
The latitude of the largeft Swan Ifle is 40° 43' fouth, and its lono-i-
-tude, reduced back from the obfervations in Port Dairymple, 148° 13'
eaft. On the fouth fide of this ifle, there are two fmall fandy bays.
ur anchorage in the eaftern bay, was a lliort quarter of a mile from
the lucre, in four fathoms: the points of the ifland bearing, by com-
pa s, n. 6. e. and s. 22°. w. ; and the eafternmoft part of Van Die-
men s Land s. 49°. e. ; the bay is, therefore, open to eafterly winds.
On tins part of the north coaft the tides run ftrong; and on the
E weft
North
Caost.
=====
Stony Head,
„ „
Cape Port-
land and its
ifles.
Swan Ifle.
Tides.


weft fide of Cape Portland, the ebb takes fo northerly a direction, that
we expefted to have found a confiderable opening in the bight; but
from Hie Waterhoufe, where the flood comes from the eaftward, to
Circular Head where it appears to come from the weft, there feems to
be very little tide running. A line drawn from Hie Waterhoufe to the
head, will probably he a boundary, to the fouthward of which, no tide
will be perceptible on this coaft.
In fpeaking of the more interior part of the north coaft ot Van
Diemen’s Land, it will be convenient to divide it into three portions.
That part of the country from Table Cape weftward, has ahnoft as
fterile an afpea as the weft coaft, or as Hunter’s Hies. It is for the
moft part rocky, and is in many places bare rock. This was the
appearance of the country from the fea.
In height, this part of the coaft riles as it proceeds to the eaft-
ward. It may be called a low and level country in its weltern paits,
but, as before obferved, is high enough at Table Cape to be vifible
more than twelve leagues. 1
The fecond portion of the coaft, from Table Cape to Port Dalrymple,
is mountainous inland; but almoft every where has a fertile appearance,
beino- well covered with timber down to the water fide.
About four, or perhaps more, leagues inland, there is a remarkable
hill, which opens round Table Cape at s. 16° e. by compafs, as a
lharp-pointed fugar loaf; but when it bears to the weftward of fouth, it
becomes flat-topped. From the lhape and height ot this peak, it might
be thought to have once been a volcano.
Stretching f ro m hence, round the head of Port Dalrymple, the inland
prefents nothing but mountains ; the back ridges topping- over thofe
that are nearer to the fea. The head which forms the weft fide of the
entrance into the port, is of confiderable height; and the ridge of back
mountains, which it partly hides, is of great Angularity. This ridge is
formed into peaks, hummocks, and knobs, of uncouth lhape, in its more
weftern parts ; and lofes itfelf behind the head in a kind of table land.
Thefe peaks and knobs are generally bare of vegetation, and from the
brilliancv with which they refleaed the fun’s rays, on his appearance after
rain, I judged them to conhft of quartz, like the mountains of Furneaux
The fame kind of mountains are feen reaching to the eaftward, from
the upper part of Port Dalrymple; and they alfo extend fo far to the
northward, as to be vifible from Cape Portland.
In the third portion of the north coaft, from Port Dalrymple, jalt-
North
Coast.
Tides.
Inland
appearance.


ward, the hills form a gradual defcent from thefe inland mountains to-
wards the dow land near the fea coaft. Thefe defcending hills are well
covered with wood; and though the foil feems to be fandy yet it an-
peared to be above mediocrity. There are are alfo fome graffy tracts of
open ground, that are prettily varied by clumps of wood and large finale
tiees Ending here and there : thefe open trafts were principally feen on
the eaft fide of Cape Portland.
There is dually a fpace of from one to five miles, between the feet of
me green hills and the fea; which fpace, in the Avhole of this portion
o e coat, eems to partake of the fame fandy nature as the fhore. Some
rn °^r S *! C P ' tch Ca P e P° rtl and, and on the projection oppofite to
e V aterhoufe, are exceptions to its being univerfally low land.
ie fmokes which afcended from various parts of this Coaft, gave us
to understand that it was inhabited. Thefe fmokes Avere moft numerous
between Port Dalrymple and Ifle Waterhoufe.
Several overgrown hair feats and fome flocks of birds, which were fitting
upon the rocky iflet that lies betwen Ifle Waterhoufe and the main°
v ere an indication, that men do not often, if ever, vifit the iflet; and
confequently, not the more diftant ifle. On the largeft Swan Ifle avc
found no marks of men; but there were wild geefe, penguins, * and
ount-Pitt birds, upon it; and according to the information of a man
who had crofled over from the wreck at Prefervation Ifland, it abounds
with twans at fometimes. Upon this man’s authority, I called this final!
duller the Sivan Ifles, in February 1798; but on vifiting it in the
November following, we found no indications of its deferving fo refpec-
table a name.
On paffing the rocky iflet, Avhich lies two-and-half miles from the
llony head near Port Dalrymple, a few feals Avere feen fitting on the ton
qj it. r
\ r % /
V
Port Dalrymple is the only harbour that the north coaft of Van Die-
men’s Land is at prefent known to afford. It Avas fo named by His
Excellency governor Hunter, as a finall token of refped to Alexander
Dalrymple Efq.
Loav Head is a projection of Hoping land on the eaft fide of the en-
tance into the port; its latitude by fix obfervations taken near it, is 41°
louth.
The obfervations for afcertaining its longitude Avere taken with
/
E 3 Trough ton’s
North
Coast.
Inland
appearance.
Inhabitants,
t
Seals and
birds.
PortDal-
kymple.
Name.
Situation,


Trough ton’s fextant, No. 251, of nine inches radius, and with a five inch
fextant made by Adams. They were taken in different parts of the port;
and when reduced to Low Head by the furvey, will be as follows:
„ . , , -v Troughton, Adam*.
Two fets of * AldebaraiO ea £. 14 g° 35' 6"e. do. 146° 52 36 e.
and two of the fun. . . }
Two fets of * Altair and i we ftoftheD 0 ftheD 147 39 35 do. 147 36 28
two of the fun .... i
Longitude 147 720 e. 147 14 o 2 e.
147 7 20
Mean longitude 147 10 56 e.
■•i • '
The variation of our azimuth compafs, 7j n November, 1798 . 33'e.
by four fets of obfei vations, was }
By one fet for a Troughton’s theodolite, it was 8 30
Mean variation 8 1-e.
The entrance of this port is by no means confpicuous; and it is
difficult to find good marks whereby it may be found. It has been
obferved, that ridges or chains of hills from the mountains inland,
approach nearer to the fea on each fide of Port Dalrymple, than they
ufually do in its neighbourhood. When the entrance bears to the fouth-
eaft, that chain which comes to the back of Low Head appears as a clufter
of irregular hills, with the blue tops of the higher mountains peeping over
them: and the ridge which comes down to the fea on the weft fide of
the port, puts on nearly the fame appearance. Again, the ftony head
which has been mentioned as having a fmall rocky illet lying two-
and-half miles to the north-weft-by-weft, is the only projeaion on the
eaft fide of the port that is not fandy; and on the weft fide, is the
very Angular range of mountains, before mentioned, which is formed
into uncouth fhapes and peaks. Thefe marks, taken together, are the
heft that I can give for knowing the entrance of the port by, in addi-
tion to its latitude and longitude, and the trending of the coaft on each
fide of it, as laid down in the chart.
It will fufficiently appear by the chart, that this port is difficult of
accefs. In addition to the particular chart, I would obferve to a
veffel going in, that the greateft part of the fhoa.s are covered at half
tide;
PortDal-
rymple.
Situation.
Marks for
the entrance*
.Sailing in.


tide; it is therefore by much the heft time to enter the port with the
iirft of the flood, or even a little before that.
A line drawn from about two cables lengths oflf Low Head, for the
middle ot the harbour, will, with a little deviation, carry a velfel
aim oft up to Green Ifland. There are two paffages into this fair
"way. That neareft to Low Head lies amongft the patches of weed.
This weed does not grow up to the furface of the water, but the
patches are fufficiently diftinguifliable from the maft head or fore yard;
and with a fiee ■wind, a velfel that anfwered her helm quick might
avoid running over them, by yawing to one fide and the other. On
coming into this port the laft time, we ran through them before a gale of
wind at weft-north-weft, and faw no breaking upon any but the outer
patch; which, in the chart, is marked as a rock; I therefore conclude,
that there cannot be lefs than three fathoms upon them. At a much
lets dntance than two cables lengths from Low Head, this inner palfage
may piobably be clear ot w-eed: it appeared to be fo when inlpedling
it from the head.
d. he outeimoft flioal from Low- Head lies about mid-"way to the
oppofite fliore. It is, I believe, dry at all times of tide, and is fre-
quented by fliags and other birds. The outer palfage into the fair way,
is, to um to within about a quarter of a mile of this flioal, where nine
fathoms is marked, and then to fleer for the lagoon beach till arrived
in the tan w r ay , wlucli irmft be judged of, by having' deep water by
having the entrance fairly open, and by comparing the chart with
the land.
Having gained the fair way, the middle of the harbour will be
confpicuous; and the Middle Head alfo, if the weather is not thick.
Keep a ftraight courfe for thefe, for one mile and a half, looking-
out Iharply upon the great flioal upon the ftarboard hand, from the
maft head. At the fame time, it is belt to keep to that fide withal;
and fo edge more to port if the water fliould flioal to five or fix fathoms.
The northernmoft of the hills, on the eaft fliore, is alfo the neareft hill
to the water fide. At the top of this hill there is a gap in the trees; and
when this gap bears eaft-by-north, by compafs, a veffel will be in the
w °rft part of the channel, and abreaft of a rock wdiich lies a quarter of a
mile from the larboard fliore. This rock is covered before half tide, and,
is not fteep to; and it is more particularly dangerous, as the ebb tide
feems to fet a good deal upon it. Its place will often be denoted by a
ftrong rippling in the water, but perhaps not always.
On account of this rock it is principally, that I recommend keeping
F rather
PortDai-
RYMPLE.
Sailing in.


Port Da-
l
mmm am
Sailing in.
Tides.
rather over towards the thoal on the ftarboard hand. This flioal being a
mixture of fliells, fand, and mud, upon a rocky foundation, will lliew itfelf
to a man at the mafl-head in almoft all kinds of weather; and if the
veffel comes in before the tide is much rifen, the greater part of it will be
Therefore, having palled the dangerous rock, keep inclining towaids
the ftarboard Ihore, but paying attention to the lead, till you approach
Green Ifland. This ifland will at firft appear like a point, and the diie6t
channel into the port will feem to be on the ftarboard 01 weft fide of it,
but with the knowledge that the channel winds round on the eaft fide of
the ifland, it will be fufficiently confpicious.
The principal thing to be attended to, when palling round Green
Ifland, is to look out for the Middle Rock. This rock is covered
at half tide, like mod of the others. It lies at equal diftances
from Green Ifland, and from the two points of Outer Cove ; and is,
confequently, right in the middle of the channel. The water is deep
to within twenty yards of the rock, and the palfage is clear on either
fide of it; but if the rock fliould be covered, the fateft way is to keep
the ifland clofe on board. This is more particularly neceffary on the
ebb tide, as it fets over the rock on the liift half of the eob, and cloft.
paft it when it becomes uncovered.
After paffing Green Ifland, there can fcarcely be faid to be any
danger in getting into the bafin; for the points are all deep to, and
the Shag Rock is not covered till the top ot high water. A veil'd may
fafely pulh in to the weftward, between the Shag Rock and the point;
taking care that fire borrows near enough to the point, if the flood tide
is mining; and that the does not go too near the flioal water in the
entrance of the weftern arm, before flie anchors.
Upon the whole, although the entrance is certainly a dangerous one,
I confidently hope, that by attending to the chait, and the pieceding
remarks, and by keeping a vigilant look out, a fliip of any fize, undei
fnug fail, may get in fafely. On firft entering this port in the Norfolk
floop, we got up as high as Green Ifland, almoft without peicieving
any danger; this circumftance, however, has often furprifed me.
To run up the river, for I confider it to be a river above Middle
Ifland, there feems to be no direction neceffary, but to confult the
chart, particularly about Bruih Ifland. After paffing the Noifolk s
uppermoft anchorage, a boat or two fliould be kept a-head of the fliip.
The tides run fo ftrong in Port Dalrymple, that a veil el will haully
get in or out againft them; but by their affiftance, may get againft
any wind ; if flie can carry fail. In the fea reach more particulaily, that
is,


1S from Green Wand downwards, the tides occafion ftrong ripplings and
whirlpools. Upon many of thefe we have found deep water ; but it muft
by no means be inferred, that a veffel need be under no apprehenfiou
o t em. The names Point Round-a-bout, Point Rapid, and Whirlpool
teach are defcnptive of the effedt of the tides in the neighbourhood
or tiiclc parts.
I calculate the time of high water in Port Dalrymple, to be about
a quarter of an hour before the moon paffes over the meridian on any
ay; and the rife of the tide to be from fix to eight feet. The ebb
runs out near feven hours.
Outer Cove will afford anchorage for at leaft one veffel, on a fandy
ottom ups that have good boats, may lie in any part of the bafm
where there is deep water; but for fmall craft, the anchorage on the
weft fide of Shag Rock is well calculated. A veffel of even fifty tons
fliould not attempt to go up the Weftern Arm without a previous
examination by boats; and a fiiip that attempts the paffage towards
die Middle Arm, without following the fame ftep, would probably
and fome difficulty in hitting the channel; although the line of direaion
m the chart from the fouth head of Deceitful Cove to Infpeftioa
riead, mould be found correft.
Above Green Ifland, the bottom is univerfally muddy.
Fire wood can be had in every part of Port Dalrymple, in as great
plenty, and as conveniently, as can be wilhed. Our hafty examina-
tion did not bring us to the knowledge of any timber well fitted for better
uies: the growing trees are very heavy, and full of gummy fan
Although the country appears to be well ftored with ftelh-water
for all the domeft.c purpofes that inhabitants might require, yet it is
but indifferently fupphed for the convenience of Ihipping, in the
ower parts of the port. The frefli-water lagoon, at the back of the
beach near Low Head, is the moft convenient place we met with •
but the water was inferior to fome that was procured in a fiioal cove
on the eaftern Ihore, two or three miles above Middle Ifland. In this
latter place, hogflieads could only be rafted off at high water; and
our time and ffiength being ill adapted to fuch a mode of proceeding
we preferred the ftanding water of the lagoon.
For a veffel that wanted much water, or to refit, I fliould think it
mo at vi a le to run up into the frefli-water river at once. It was almoll
thinkable at low water, at the Norfolk’s uppermoft anchorage; from
w lence we concluded, that if circumftances had permitted us to have
* have five or fix miles further up, the water would have proved frefli.
F If
PortDai-
RYMPLE.
Tides
Anchorage,
Wood,
Water*


Port Da-
rymple.
Inhabitants,
Kanguroos,
Swans.
Pucks*
Birds,
If we may form any judgment from the traces of inhabitants that
were found upon, its fhores, Port Dalrymple is peopled in almoft
the fame proportion as the ports of New South Wales. Seven 01 eight
huts were fometimes found ftanding together, like a little encamp-
ment; but the owners of them Avere always abfent. Some natives
once made fires ahreaft of Avhere the Hoop Avas lying; but as foon as the
boat came near the Ihore, they ran off into the woods; and this was
the neareft communication that their fhynefs would permit.
Concurring circumflances feem to point out, that the men of this
place have no canoes. Middle Wand excepted, the ifies in this port
have no appearance of having been vilited; and no tree was ever met with
in the woods, Avhofe bark had been taken off fo as to be fit for making a
canoe. Thefum of our obfervations upon thefe people, and their mode of
exifting, Avas, that they have lefs ingenuity, and are more deftitute of com-
forts and conveniencies, than even the inhabitants of New South Wales.
Kanguroos are tolerably numerous in the neighbourhood of Port
Darlymple, and according to Mr. Bafs’s- opinion, they are laigei than
thofe found near Port Jackfon. The kanguroo is only to be procured by
hunting Avith flout greyhounds, or by ihooting.
Marks of the emu, or caffuary, were met with* but the bird itfelf Avas
not feen.
The fwans that inhabit this port, Avill be a fource of food to its Aufiteis
for fome time. Similar to thofe in the Derwent, a confiderable portion
of thefe fwans Avere without the Aving feathers. In tne flioit intei vals of
time that our little two-oared boat could be fpared from more important
employment, we caught thirty-five ; and as one Avan Avill ferve three or
four people for a day, they conftituted the greateft part of our food. The
Middle and Weftern Arms, and the heads of the coves up the river, are
frequented by the fwans ; but they were moft numerous in the Ihoal bight
above Swan Point, three hundred of them having been counted fwimming
there,- in the fpace of a quarter of a mile fquare. They Avill probably be
found to be more numerous in the freilr water.
Owing to the eafe and certainty Avith Avhich avc fupplied ourfelves
Aidth freflx food by fwan hunting, avc did not follow- after the laige
flocks of ducks that where met Avith in different parts of the port;
thefe birds are fhy, even here.
The fmall, Avhite-bellied, fhag,' and the larger black one, inhabit
here. Pelicans, and the black, and pied red-bills, are alfo found. Gicen
Wand is a breeding place for gulls; and eggs Avere alfo found upon
Egg


Egg Ifland. Ciows, and parrots of dull plumage, arc met with in
the woods.
Of the fifli, I can only fay, that our wants and leifure, whilft in
this port, were never fufficient to induce a trial to catch any.
Mufcles aie nnmeious upon the rocks that arc overflowed by the
tide; and the natives appear to get oyfters by diving; the Jhells being
louna in many places.
Amongft othei icptiles, are poifonous fnakes, and fome brown iguanas.
The Iflands in 1 oit Daliymple would be found very convenient
to a veffel for landing’ fheep upon, or other live ftock, during - her
ftay. Green Ifland is fecure, but the grafs upon it is neither very
good 01 abundant. Middle Ifland is a beautiful place, containing about
forty acres of good pafturage; but the natives fometimes crofs over to
it at low water. Was a fhip to lie at anchor near it, or were two men
to be left on fhore with the ftock, it is probable, that the natives would
not come neai it. Egg Ifland is very fmall, but it is fecure; and the
grafs upon it good.
This port is fituated between two ridges of mountains; which, from
the fea coaft, ftretch inland to the eaft-fouth-eaft, with an increafing
elevation; and approaching nearer to each other, feem to unite in
a point; which point is, probably, the fource of the river. The high
peaks which drew themfelves above the ridges of mountains, from the
uppermoft part of the river now vifited, may perhaps he this point;
and if fo, the river is marked in the chart to but one half of its real
extent: this is corroborated by the ftrengh of tide and depth of water
at the uppermoft anchorage.
Hills ftrike off in various direftions from the ridges of mountains
that bound the river on each fide; in fome places, permitting its
banks to open out to a confiderable extent, and in other parts, con-
tracting it to a fmall channel. The river is in one place nearly two-
and-half miles, and in another a fhort quarter of a mile in width,
and thefe nearly clofe together.
The futile appeaiance of the points in failing up Port Halrymple,
with which an eye accuftomed to the rocky banks of Port Jackfon
is fo much delighted, is no falacious fpecimen of the foil in general.
A good covering of herbage, equally difperfed, clothes the rifmg
grounds; and the vallies are overfpread with a fironger grafs, which
is more particularly adapted to the bite of large cattle.
The hills are generally found to be ftony near their tops; and the
fieep banks of the river, as in Whirlpool Reach, are ftony alfo.
G FUR-


FURNEAUX’s ISLANDS.
The eaftern points of thefe iflands w
- •
Furneaux, of His Majefty’s ship Adventure, whofe name has been given
to them. ' . . i
Various obfervations have been taken for the latitude, upon, and
in fight of, Furneaux’s Iflands; but they cannot well be reduced to
any one particular place.
According to captain Furneaux, the longitude of Cape Barren u
148° 8' eaft; but as it is here placed 25' more to the eaft, it is neceffary
to explain the reafon for fo doing. _ . .
Four fets of lunar diftances taken in fight of Cape Barren, with
Adams’s five-inch fextant, place the cape as follows.
Two fets of the O eaft of the J) give its longitude 148° 48' 14" E.
Ditto ----- O weft of the ------- -- 147 51 29
Mean 148 19 51 e.
The beo-ining and end of a lunar eclipfe, obferved at the 7 14g 5 q 50 E-
eaft end of Prefervation Ifland, place it in 3 ________
Three fets of lunar obfervations, taken in Kent s Bay, by^ l4 g 35 ji e,
Mr. R. Simpfon, of the fnow Nautilus, give it - 3 ______
The before-given obfervations in Port Dalrymle, being le-A
duced by the running furvey to the Swan Hies, iiomr 00 E.
whence the peak of Cape Barren is in fight, place tlief
cape in - J oft
Name.
Situation.


On comparing thefe longitudes together, I determined to place
Cape Barren according to the obfervations in Port Dalrymple, in which
I put molt confidence.
No good obfervations have been taken amongft thefe iflands for
the variation of the compafs; I confider it to have been 8° eaft in 1798.
The weftern fides of Furneaux’s Iflands ufually prefent a rocky Ihore
to the prevailing winds and feas, and as far as we know, are tolerably
fteep to ; but their eaftern fides are almoft univerfally a fandy beach, anc
thelve otf gradually. There are foundings to a confiderable diftance from
the iflands, and perhaps they run acrofs this part of Bafs’s Strait. Ex-
cept fome few fpots that may be rocky, there feems to be every where a
fandv bottom.
1/
The fouthernmoft of thefe iflands, of which a particular chart is
engraved, are by far the heft known amongft this large duller.
Prefervatian Ifland is one of thefe, and has its name from having
faved the crew of the Ihip Sidney Cove, in 1797. She was run
aground between this ifland and Rum Ifland, and part of the cargo
laved. The remains are fcattered about the neighbouring fliores; and
have been feen as far as Wilfon’s Promontory and Port Darymple,
When coming from the weftward to Prefervation Ifland, the ifland
is hid under the higher landj of Clarke’s Ifland. Lumps of white rock
firft appear upon it, and upon Night Ifland. The rocks that lie between
thefe ifles muft be left on the ftarboard hand, and the fouth fide of
Prefervation Ifland kept as clofe on board as the ftate of the wind may
make prudent. A reef that lies a Ihort quarter of a mile oft’ Rum Ifland,
will make it neceffary not to haul up too clofe for Hamilton’s Road. The
anchorage is off the fandy beach at the eaft end of Prefervation Ifland,
in from three to five fathoms. This road has hitherto been the place of
rendezvous for all veffels that vilit thefe parts, being exceedingly well
flickered againft the moft prevalent winds; and is tolerably fecure againft
eafterly winds, with good ground tackling. The wind at fouth, or fouth-
fouth-eaft, is the only quarter whence it can do much injury.
Not having founded all the way between Prefervation and Cape-
Barren Iflands, I cannot be certain that Hamilton’s Road is approachable
from the northward ; but I have no doubt that there is a fufticient chan-
nel of eight or more fathoms between thefe iflands.
Cape-Barren Ifland is, in many parts, high land. The peak, through
which the lines of latitude and longitude pals, in the particular chart,
may be feen ten leagues ; and the mountainous ridge that extends from
it almoft to the pitch of the cape, is of nearly equal height. A round
G 3 mountain


mountain which ftands on the north-weftern part of this ifland feems to
be ftill higher than the peak.
There are various places between this ifland and thofe fouth of it,
where a velfel might anchor fecurely when the wind inclined either to
the northward or fouthward of weft; but Kent's Bay teems to be the
beft anchorage attached to Cape-Barren Ifland. To go from Hamilton’s
Road towards this bay, no better directions can be given than to keep
a good look out for the Ihoal water, and to compare the chart with
the land as you proceed. A veffel may pafs very near to Battery Ifle,
in nine fathoms; and iflhe has a wefterly wind, it will be neceflary
to haul clofe round Sloping Point, and keep m with that flrore till
abreaft of the rocks, at the back of which is the anchorage. My
information upon this place is from Mr. Simpfon; according to whole
furvey and foundings, a Ihip may be fafe here from every wind, and
the lead depth, at low water, is roui fathoms.
The Palfage Hlands are low ; and at a diftance, will be judged to be
but one ifland. A little fandy bay in the weftern ifland, is well adap-
ted for fmall velfels to ride in. It is flickered from all winds, except
thofe between fouth-fouth-eaft and eaft-fouth-eaft.
Between the Palfage Wands there is a fufficient channel for any
fliip; and I have no doubt, but that there is a ftill deeper one between
Inner Rocky Point and the eaftern ifland; although nothing larger than
rowing boat has yet palfed thiough it. ,
Upon one of a fmall cluftev of low iflands, fubordmate to Furneaux s
Iflands is a mountain, confpicuous for being the only confiderable
eminence upon them, and remarkable for its uniform roundnefs. It
received the name of Mount Chappelle, in February 1798, and the name
is fmee extended to the ifles which lie in its immediate neighbourhood.
The pa(fa«-e amongft thefe ifles, through which the track is marked m the
the charC is fafe for any fliip with a leading wind; being two miles m
width, and having more than ten fathoms in it.
The water is very light coloured, both amongft thefe ifles and feverai
miles to the weftward of them, the bottom being a white fand..
The laro-eft of Furneaux’s Iflands feems to be fupenor in many relpefcts
to thofe that have been mentioned, but our knowledge of it is very con-
flned Mr. Bkhop, commander of the fnow Nautilus, palled thiough the
ftrait between it and Cape-Barren Ifland, in a boat; and from him we
learn that there are many rocks and ifles in it, whofe exacT fituaaon an
form are not afeertained ; but it appears, that there is a fate palfage
through the ftrait, and fome well-lheltered anchoring places in it.
Cape-Barren
Ifland.
Pafiagc
UB
gX lto
The largeft
jfland.


The great body of the large ifland is high; but neither on the north-
wcftern part or on the eaft fide, does the high land come clpfe to the
water fide, Sandy beaches, almoft uninterrupted, fldrt thefe parts o
this large ifland. The weft ■ coaft is exceedingly high ; and overtopped
with peaks and knobs of more varied fliape and more bare of vegetation
than even the interior mountains to the weft of Port Dalrymple. It was
our fortune alfo, to fee the effect of the gleaming funfliine amongft thefe
mountains, after they had been bathed in rain. The fpectacle was mag-
nificent. At the foment, we could not blame the fterility that producer,
fo beautiful a fcdne.
The ftrait that divides this large ifland from that of Cape-Barren, was
haftily examined by Mr. Bifliop, commander of the fnow Nautilus. From
him we learn, that there are many rocks and illes in it, whofe exact fili-
ation and form are not afcertained; but that it alfo contains a navigable
paffage, and many well-flieltered anchoring places : one of thefe anchor-
ages is in a bay on the fouth end of the large ifland.
The three peaked hills on the eaft fide of this ifland, called the Patri-
ai chs, are not unlike each other, when feen to the north-weft; but when
feem from the northward, they appear as two pyramids; and the ifland
lying off them makes fomething like the Lion’s Head and Rump, when
failing into Table Bay. " -
Ihe largeft of the ifles that lie off the weft fide of the large ifland, is
hummocky, and moderately high ; the three principal hills upon it all
Hope towards the fouth. The other patches of land to the north-eaftward
of thefe hummocks are low.
The Sifters were very well named by captain Furneaux, being much
alike : they may be feen eight or ten leagues. When the Francis fcooner
was fleering to pafs between them and the large ifland, rippling water
fuddenly made its appearance under the bows. A ftrong tidef might have
occafioned this, but left it fliould not be fo, and to caution others, a reef
is marked in the chart.
The tides run ftrong in the paffages amongft the fouthernmoft of thefe
ifiands. The flood comes from the eaftward, between the Paffage Iflands
and the Inner Rocky Point, and continues its courfe along the fouth
fide of Cape-Barren Ifland. In the deep channel, and particularly off
the projecting points, the tide runs with rapidity.
It is high water here, about an hour before the moon comes to the
meridian. The rife ot the tide appears to be from three to fix feet.
fhc tides are reprefented as running ftrong, between Cape-Barren and
the large ifland.
The lower parts of the fouthernmoft iflands are very thicklv covered
H with
The largeft
ifland.
Sifters,
Tides.
Wood.


Wood.
Water.
Inhabitants.
Kanguroos.
Womats.
Swans.
Geefe.
Moimt-Pitt
birds.
with brufli-wood ; and in a few places, as in the head of Kent’s Bay, there
is fmall timber amongft it. The fouth end of the largeft ifland is faid
to afford timber of a fair growth ; and alfo a run of frefh water ; but the
more fouthern ides are very ill fupplied with this laft necelfary ai tide;
the runs into the head of Kent’s Bay yield it more abundantly than
elfewhere.
Under the high land of Cape-Barren, there are fome fwamps and
lagoons; but the water which drains into them from above, becomes fo
tinged in its way, as not to be drinkable. Some of thefe look like ponds
of blood.
After continued rains, there is a fwampy pond of tolerably good water
at the eaft end of Prefervation Ifland; but a fmall rill that drains fiom
the higher land, on the fouth fide of this ifland, was thought to ha\ e a
deleterious quality, from the deaths that happened amongft the Sidney
Cove’s crew. Sand, with a mixture of tin and copper, is found on one
of the beaches.
No inhabitants have ever been feen, or any marks of them, upon
any of thefe iflands.
Kanguroos are found upon Prefervation, Clarke s, and Cape-Barren
Iflands, of the fmaller, red kind; and the large grey kanguroos have
been feen in conflderable numbers upon the fouthern part ot the largeft
ifland.
The new animal, called Womat, the natives at the back of Poit
Jackfon, is found in no in conflderable numbers upon Cape-Barren Ifland,
and probably inhabits feveral other of thefe iflands. 1 his animal has the
appearance of a little bear. It eats grafs and other vegetable fubftances,
and its flefli fomething refembles tough mutton. Ihe animal is about the
fize of a turnfpit dog ; but there is not too much meat upon it toi thiee
or four people to eat in a day.
A few ftraggling fwans have been feen about Pieleivation Ifland,
and the lagoons of Cape-Barren Ifland. In the fandy bay at the fouth
end of the large ifland, they are reprefented as being numerous.
A kind of brent goofe frequents all the iflands that have yet been
vifited. About the fouthern iflands they are fliy, having been fre-
quently difturbed; but on the firft vifit they ufually allow themfelves
to be knocked down with flicks. Thefe birds are tolerable numerous,
and are excellent food.
The footy pettercl, called JVlount-Pitt bird, is amongft thefe iflands
in great numbers. Wherever the tuits ot wiry giafs aie feen, thefe
birds will ufually be found. They burrow in the ground under thefe
tufts, but the length of a man's arm is fufficient to reach them. The
Mount-
26
FURNEAUX’s ISLANDS.


Mount-Pitt birds, can be taken in any numbers during the fummer
months, at Prefervation Ifland, the Paffage Ifles, and many other
places. They come in from fea in the evening, in numbers that fur-
prife a perfon unaccuftomed to them.
Where Mount-Pitt birds are found, penguins will generally be met
with. There holes, however, are not in the fame places; the penguin
chufing ground to burrow in which is covered with a different vege-
tation. They are of a fmall, blue and white kind, and are very
indifferent eating.
Gannets, fliags, gulls, and red - bills, are found amongft thefe
iflands; but whilft the fwans, geefe, and Mount-Pitt birds are in
numbers, the former will not be much molefted.
Seals inhabit moft of the rocky points and ifles. They are both
of the hair and fur kind. Some of the latter are of a good fur, but there
feems to be every gradation. The feals were moft numerous upon the
fouth-eaftern points of Cape-Barren Ifland, but they are now moftly
deftroyed.
Rock fifli are caught at the weft end of Prefervation Ifland ; but from
the various kind of frefli provifions which thefe iflands produce, few at-
tempts were made to catch fifli.
The ftone, of which the bafe of Furneaux’s Iflands is compofed,
appears to be of a quartzy nature ,* and it is only in fmall pieces
that any other kind of ftone has been met with.
As far as my particular knowledge of thefe iflands extends, there
furface is bare rock, in part; or fand which is covered with brufli
wood; or fwamps, in which fmall trees grow. The brufli is very often
impenetrable ; fometimes growing to a confiderable height, and fome-
times creeping a long the ground: the tall brufli-wood is found in the
inner and eaftern parts of the iflands, and the ferub on the weftern
outfkirts : a proof of the ftrength and prevalence of wefterly winds.
The fouthern part of Furneaux’s largeft ifland is, it feems, of a dif-
ferent defeription. Large timber trees are produced there, and the foil is
faid to be of fufficient depth and quality to grow corn.
In the remarks of my fellow-traveller, Mr. Bafs, upon Cape-Barren
Ifland, is the following paragraph: “ In point of animated life, nature
cc feems to have a6led fo oddly with this and the neighbouring iflands,
“ that if their rich ftores were thoroughly ranfacked, I doubt not, but
“ departments of natural hiftory would be enlarged by more new
u and valuable fpecimens, than they ever before acquired from any land
“ of many times their extent.”
H 2 ' KENT’S
Mount-Pitt
birds.
Penguins*
Other Tea-
fowl.
Seals*
Fifh*
Additional
remarks*


KENT’S GROUP.
This clufter was fo named by His Excellency' governor Hunter.
In latitude, it is laid down in the chart according to the mean of three
obfervations taken in fight of it; but there is no othei authoiity for its
longitude, than what a dead-reckoning run to Furneaux’s Elands
afforded.
The ifles that compofe this fmall group, are rocky and barren; and
their fhores are in general very fteep. They are fufficiently high to b^
feen eight or ten leagues diftant.
The paffage through which the Norfolk's track runs in the chait, is
fafe for any fliip. Its width is about three quarters of a mile; and on
founding with feventeen fathoms, no bottom was found.
In failing through this channel,' it is neceffary to be careful in car-
rying fail, efpecially with a fide wind. Whilft a calm prevails under the
fteep" cliffs, ftrong flurries of wind will rufh down the gullies that
interfe<st the high land, and endanger a veffel that is palling them, it
unprepared. The Norfork floop was nearly oveifet, when failing thiough,
under thefe circumftances.
Two final! coves in the channel, which have fandy beaches at
their head, afford flicker from all eafterly or wefterly winds.
A few ftraggling feals may be killed upon the rooks.
The largeft of the iflets which lie three leagues to the weftward of
Kents Group, is fteep, and tolerable high. One of the rocks obtained
a diftinguifhing name, from the fimilitude of its dorm to a judg-
ment feat.
An extreme degree of fterility feems to prevail through the whole
of this fmall clufter of ifles; and they feem to be fliunned by almoft
every kind of animated beings. Some creeping brufh-wood grows on
different parts of thefe ifles. *
NEW
Name.
Situation.
The fhores.
PaiTage
through.
Anchorage.
Seals*
0
Judgment
Rock.
Additional
remarks.


NEW SOUTH WALES.
"WILSON's Promontory, with its neighbouring ifles, and the
coaft from thence weftward, are laid down in the chart from the eye-
fketch of Mr. G. Bafs, furgeon of His Majefty’s fliip Reliance; and to
him it is ,that we are entirely indebted for our knowledge of thefe parts.
I have alfo to acknowledge the afiiftance which this gentleman’s obfer-
vations have afforded, in various other parts of this memoir, particu-
larly in the additional remarks.
Between Weftern Port and Wilfon’s Promontory, a bold, rocky, Ihore,
and fandy beaches, feem to have almoft equal divifions in the coaft.
In the bights, both the Ihore and the back land are low and fandy;
but everv rocky projection is a commencement of a ridge of hills,
which extends to the north-eaft till it is loft in the country.
One obfervation, taken at the mouth of Sealers Cove, is the au-
thority by Avhich Wilfon’s Promontory is fixed in latitude. Its longi-
tude is according to the fuppofed relative pofition of Kent’s Group;
the promontory having been leen at night, in the Francis fchooner,
and Kent’s Group in the morning.
The latitude of this promontory being fo near to 39°, has raifed
conjeauers, that it is the land feen by captain Furneaux; but unlefs
the longitude of the promontory is more erroneous than I take it to
be, the fituation of the land, which is nearly true north from the Sifters,
will deftroy the poffibility of its being Wilfon's Promontory. We were
two or three times deceived with the appearance of land, when off
this coaft; and poffibly, the fame circumftance might have happened
to captain Furneaux,
Wilfon’s Promontory is a great body of the fame kind of ftone,
of which Furneaux's Iflands are compofed; and it is fomewhat remark-
able, that this promontory fliould be the only part of New South Wales
I m
South
Coast.
Weft of
Wilfon’s
Promontory.
The pro-
montory.
A queftioiu
The pro-
montory.


The ifles.
Tides.
South
Coast.
The pro-
montory.
Eaft of Wil.
fon’s Pro-
montory,
in which this quartzy fubftance has been feen. In general, we meet
with a foftilh grit, or an iron ftone.
Although the height of this land is not fuch as would, by feamen,
be reckoned remarkable; yet it appears ftrikingly fo, by being contrafted
with the low, fandy neck at its back, and other land of the fame kind
in its neighbourhood.
About Sealers Cove, the high land appears as if cut in two, when
made from the north-eaftward, and the parts to have been moved
. afunder.
The ifles that lie of Wilfon’s Promontory, are fome of them tolerable
high, and fome low. The largeft of them, which is placed ten miles
to the fouth-eaftward, is of the former clafs. Thefe ifles are laid
down by Angle bearings and gueffed diftances; therefore, their relative
Situations to the promontory and to each other, may probably be
incorrect.
The northern boundary of BafsVs Strait, from Wilfon’s Promontory,
eaftward, is fronted by a fandy beach of immenfe length. Some rocky
points near the Ram Head, and from thence at intervals to Cape Howe,
are all that break its continuity,
A ridge of hills rife at the diftance of twelve or fourteen miles to
northward of Corner Inlet, and curving to the eaftward, they continue
in a direction nearly parallel to the fliore, but keep gradually approxima-
ting to it, till they join the hills between the Ram Head and Cape
Howe. A considerable part of the low fpace between the back of the
long beach, and the foot of the hills, is fuppofed to be occupied by
lagoons. Some of thefe lagoons may preferve a conftant opening into the
fea, and fome others may never have any; but the greater number will
be fometimes open and fometimes Shut. Lagoons of this laft kind are
common upon the call coall of New South Wales.
The flood tide comes from the north-eaftward, in the direction of the
long beach ; and leaving Corner Inlet, makes a ftraight courfe for the
fouthern part of Wilfon’s Promontory. It then runs to the weft, neither
curving round the promontory, nor yet preferving its original direction,
but taking a courfe between them.
On the ebb, the eaft fide of the promontory and the long beach
alfo, are left out of the ftream. This tide fets paft the promontory to the
eaft, and appears to preferve the fame direction afterwards.
The difference between the times of high water in Sealers Cove and
Corner inlet, is accounted for by the latter being left in an eddy upon
both tides.
We


Mi. me but little acquainted with the inhabitants of this coaft. At
one pace upon the long beach, fome natives came down to the whale
boat spm ty, with very little hefitation. It appeared by their manner, that
maLer w 7 P ; but the * behaved in a friendly
manner. Mdfon s Promontory does not appear to be inhabited; but upon
the low neck by which it is connedted with the main, large fmokes were
leen, as well as in various places at the back of the long beach.
Seals, and moll kinds of lea birds, will be found upon the illes that lie
off the promontory, in greater or lefs numbers; and in the open lagoons
hfti Ox the ray kind may be taken. ?
V 5 V t!7 , information that has yet been gained of this portion of New
out i M ales, inclines us to pronounce it a barren coaft. To the weftward
of the promontory, the high land feems rocky, and the low, fandy; to
the call ward, it is almoft umverfally fandy. The promontory itsfelf, is
an immenfe lump of rocky, barren, mountain. A few fmall gum trees,
dci-rf I" m ° re immUtivC ve B‘ eta ti°n, do, however, often give it a
deceitful appearance of fertility to a diftant obferver.
This port received its prefent name from its relative fmation to every
other known harbour on this coaft.
The fmokes which arofe from the north fide of the port, prevented
any good obfervations being taken for its latitude; but it will be found
to be fomewhere about 38“ 33' fouth. In longitude, it is laid down in
tlie chart by the whale boat's run from Malibu's Promontory. Its real
lit nation may probably be 20' of longitude more to the weft
The eajiern entrance of this place has fo confpicuous an appearance, by
ie gap it makes in the land, that it cannot fail to be known by any one
coming from the eaftward. The point of the ifland is a high, and rather
feep cape, refembling a fnapper’s head. Yeffels whofe draught of water
was more than nine feet, fliould not enter by this paffage; but after
loundmg for themfelves, ftiips of a larger fize might probably go out by
•D Ti r P cbannel IS wincf ing and narrow; but moftly lies on the
fide 10 KC- 1 IIC fCa blCakS at timCS upon the lar§e dwal on the oppolite
.J n the P refent im Pcrfectly known ftate of the port, the zeejern entrance
is the preferable one. A gale of wind form the north-weft would not
a ow us to examine it; but from an eminence, whence any broken water
mult have been Vllible > at a time that a heavy furf was rolling in upon the
b flaores.
South *"
oast.
=====
Seals and
birds ‘
Additional
remarks *
Western
Port.
Name.
Situation.
Entrance*


Western
Port.
Tides.
Bottom*
Wood.
Water.
Inhabitants.
Kangaroos,
Swans.
Ducks.
Additional
remarks.
Sealers
Cove
fhores, no other breakers could be obferved, than thofe that are marked
in the 1 ketch.
The general rife of the tide in Weftern Port is from ten to fourteen
feet. It flows till about half an hour after the moon palfes the mendian.
The tides fet ftrong up and down the large arms, and alfo through the
eaflern entrance.
The foundings are frequently irregular, which is perhaps occafioned by
the crofs fetting of the ebb, out of the two arms into the two outlets, and
from the foftnefs of the muddy bottom. Mud abounds fo much, that the
greater part of the points are not approachable, except at high water;
and then it is at the rifk of having the boat left till next tide ; for the
mud runs out far and flat, and is too foft to bear walking upon.
Fire wood is plentiful upon every part of the main land, but no wood
of any fize appears to grow upon the inland.
The whale boat’s crew met with great difficulty in finding frefli water;
but there was every appearance of an unufual draught in the country, at
that time. The head of the winding was the only place where it could
then be procured free from a brackifh tafle. At half tide, there is water
enough for the largeft boat to enter the creek; and within it there is at
an times a fufficient depth.
Only four natives were feen about this port, and that at a diftance.
Paths and other marks of them were common, but none very recent. No
canoes, or fig'ns of any, were met with.
A few of the fmaller kind of kanguroos were feen.
Swans are feen by hundreds, and ducks of a fmall, but excellent kind,
fly in thoufands. Moft kinds of wild fowl abound in this port.
The land round the borders of Weftern Port is, in general, low
and level; but the hills foon rife, and increafing in height as they recede
back the country has a pleafant appearance. In the different places that
were examined, the foil was uniformly found to be a light, brown, mould,
free from fand; and in the loweft grounds, a kind of peaty earth. The
country is but thinly timbered ; but the grafs and fearns grow luxuriant-
ly. The ifland muft be called barren.
Sealers Cove, on the eaft fide of Wilfon’s Promontory, affords room
for a fmall veffel to fwing in, and water enough for any fhip to ride m
fafety. It is fhut from all winds but thofe from eaft-fouth-eaft to eaft-
north-eaft ; anti it was obferved that thefe throw no gieat fea into it.
It


It is high water here nearly two hours before the moon conies to the
meridian ; and the tide rifes ten or eleven feet.
There is plenty of frefh water to be got in Sealers Cove, and wood
enough at hand to boil down any quantity of feal’s blubber that might be
procured from the iflands.
i' ■ *
. ... v » s
*
j .. r •' j ' *
Round the northernmoft part of the high land of Wilfon’s Promon-
tory, lies Corner Inlet; fo named by Mr. Bafs, from its fituation.
Its latitude and longitude are upon the fame authority as that of the
promontory.
Oft’ the mouth of the inlet, lies a long breaking Ihoal. The deepeft
channel is between this Ihoal and the promontory; the fliore of the latter,
on the larboard hand, muft be kept clofe on board, right into the anchor-
ing place. There is no where more than two fathoms, or two-and-a-half,
at low water; except in holes where the tide fets ftrong. A veflel that
could lie in this draught of water may be completely landlocked.
This inlet can be called little elfe than a large flat, for the greateft part
of it dries at low water: the flioals and bottom are moftly of fand.
Wood may be gotten conveniently enough in this inlet; and there
are two or three runs of excellent water from the high land near the
anchorage.
There are inhabitants in the neighbourhood of the inlet, but we had
no communication with them.
A few feals and Mount-Pitt birds may be found upon the iflets,
’ %
Sealers
Cove.
CORNER
Inlet.
Name.
Situation.
Entrance.
Anchorage.
Wood.
Water.
Inhabitants*
Seals.
Birds*
BASS’s STRAIT.
THE extendve paffage which feparates Van Diemens Land from
New- Holland, was named Bafs’s Strait by governor Hunter. Mr. Bafs
had vifited the north tide of it in an open whale boat, from Port Jackfon,
in January, 1797 ; and the magnitude of the fwell which he found rolling
, ate. K in
Name.


in from the fouth-weftward, ftrongly indicated its origin to be from the
fouthern Indian Ocean ; and came fo ftrong in confirmation of the former
fuppofitions of an exifting ftrait, that His Excellency the governor,
thought proper to order me in a veffel to afcertain its certainty, by failing-
through it. It was with pleafure that I was able to affociate Mr. Bafs
in the expedition; but much more fo, that our fuccefs enabled the go-
vernor to pay a juft tribute to his perfonal exertions and corre«sl judg-
ment. '
In giving fome caution to thofe who may firft fail through Bafs’s
Strait, it is neceflary to .obferve, that as feveral unknown ifles and rocks
may probably lie to the weft ward of Hunter’s Ifles; a fliip fliould be
cautious in running down the laft two or three degrees of longitude, be-
fore the make the ifles.
The latitude of 40° 20' is a proper parallel with a leading wind. After
feeing Albatrofs Ifland, Three-hummock Ifland will immediately appear,
and leave no doubt as to what land it is.
The land of confiderable extent which is marked in the chart as un-
certainly known, is reprefented to be low land. It was feen by Mr. Reed,
in the fchooner Martha; but its longitude is very uncertain. The lati-
tude of its fouth end may have fome little reliance put in it.
With the wind to the northward of weft, it would be as well to go to
* t
windward of Kent’s Group ; but after that, not to fleer a more northerly
courfe than north-eaft-by-eaft, until certain of being to the eaftward of
Cape Howe. I all cafes, the long beach is to be avoided, even if it Ihould
be a weather Ihore at the time.
A Ihip bound to Port Jackfon, and meeting with a foul wind, would
find Hamilton’s Road a convenient place to anchor in for a few days.
It may be neceflary to obferve to fome, that I can by no means anfwer
for there being no rocks or iflands in the middle of the ftrait; or indeed
in any of the blank places, except a few miles on each fide of the
track. Iflands and rocks muft be expected to be fallen in with in other-
places it therefore behoves every man who has the charge of a fliip
here, to run with caution in the day; and if he does run during a moon-
light night, it fliould be under working fail, and with the belt look-out.
But with every advantage, it would be to hazardous to run before the
wind in the night.
Name.
Sailing thro*
lS T EW


NEW SOUTH WALES.
It was intended to have continued the defcription of the coaft of
New South wales, as far as the reprefentation of it is given in the three
charts; but circumftances having now rendered this inconvenient, that
fmall part of the eaft coaft only is fpoken of, which appears necelfary to
a Ihip palling through Bafs’s Strait.
Cape Howe is a low point of rocks ?.nd fand, but hills rife immediately
at its back. A good obfervation taken about two leagues from it, gave
for its latitude 37° 30' fouth.
Green Cape is fo named from its appearance. The land Hopes from
the hills, with a fmooth furface, to the extremity of the point. Cape
Howe and Green Cape lie north and fouth, by compafs, of each other.
*
Twofold Bay, fo named by Mr. Bafs, from its form, is laid down in
latitude from a meridional obfervation taken on the beach of Snug Cove,
with an artificial horizon. Two fets of lunar obfervations of the fun on
the weft fide, gave the longitude 150° 12' 43"; but it is placed in the
chart according to .captain Cook. The variation by mean of the theodo-
lite and azimuth compafs, was 10° 19' eaft, in October, 1798.
The land at the back of Twofold Bay, lies much more in hummocks
than on any part of the coaft near it; and a roundilh mount, which lies
about three leagues inland, to the fouth-weft, is diftinguiflxable above the
neighbouring hills to fome diftance. The outer north and fouth points
of the bay have dry rocks lying clofe to them.
The fhores of Twofold Bay are far from being high. They confift of
rocky points, fteep heads, and fandy beaches.
K 2 The
East
Coast.
Cape Howe,
Green Cape,
Twofold
Head.
Name.
Situation.
Its marks.
Its fhores,'


East
Coast.
The heft anchorage is at the back of the fteep, ftony head, on the
north fide of the bay, in Snug cove; where a velfel may be landloc din
five fathoms, on a fandy bottom. There is room for two, or perhaps three
Ihips in Snug Cove, and fmall veffels would go clofer in; but the water
fiioals rather fuddenly towards the head of the cove.
At the anchorage on the fouth fide, a velfel cannot be landlocked in
more than three fathoms. In deeper water lire would be open to a north-
by-eaft wind.
Large boats may enter the lagoon at the eafl end of the great fouth
beach, at half flood.
It is high water here about three hours before the moon paffes over
the meridian; and the tide rifes fix or feven feet.
Wood is in abundance all round this bay. The only frelh water that
we met with, was in fwamps, near the the anchoring places.
The inhabitants of this bay much refemble thofe at Port Jackfon in
their perfons. They were friendly in the little intercom fe we had with
them. Canoes are in ufe amongfl them, and feem to be much prized.
Both quadrupeds and birds feem to be fcarce in the woods. Very few
marks of the kanguroo were fee A.
There are a few ducks, teal, herons and red-bills on the lagoons,
and fome fmall flights of curlews and plover.
If the quanity of fifli in the bay bears any proportion to the fitnefs
of the beaches for hauling the fein, great numbers might be caught
by it. The fuccefs that was met with by the hook and line, fpoke
rather favourably of Twofold Bay in this ,/tefpedt.
This bay will probably be of fervice to whalers; who, when fifhing
of the coaft, might be glad to get fhelter from a gale of wind, in a place
whence it would take them fo little time to work out; and it is not
unlikely, but that they might find fome right fifh here: we faw the
remains of one that had been thrown on fhore upon the rocky fpit.
The land round the bay is, fpeaking generally, much more barren
than produdlive. The vallies and flats contain feveral patches of good,
and fome few of excellent ground; but by the far greater part is fit
only for pafturage. The hills are univerfally ftony.
0 ■■ si -'i - 4
yjjfjy.
Anchorage.
Tides.
Wood.
Water.
Inhabitants.
Animals.
Water fowl.
Pi(h.
Additional
remarks.
Printed by JOHN NICHOLS.
£ari’s Coui t. Soh«.












