

/ _ 9ern ?fnm
'.Cjvl/ v<Vii
/
Observations and Experiments with the Microscope
on the effects of Prussic Acid on the Animal
Economy.
By Thomas Shearman Ralph, M.R.C.S. Eng., &c.
[Read before the Medical Society of Victoria, December 6, 1865.]
Mr. President and Gentlemen. —Every year as it passes away
leaves behind it additional testimony to the fact that the Microscope
is advancing to occupy a position of importance in medical practice,
equal to that which the stethoscope has attained ; and I feel satisfied
that ere many more years have passed, the regular employment of
the Microscope, as a means of diagnosis, will be maintained and duly
acknowledged. The slow but steady progress which the use of this
instrument has made in the hands of the medical profession, should
tend to point rather to the important nature of the results to which
it is destined to lead us, than to accepting the doubts of some who
occasionally assail its employment, and are unable or unwilling to
avail themselves of its powers.
2. Several difficulties still remain in the way of its free reception
into the circle of daily use by the profession at large, and among
others, which time and increased confidence in its powers will banish ;
there are these, viz., that with the increased powers conferred on the
Microscope, a decrease in the expense, and also a diminution of the
actual size of the instrument as a portable one, are great desiderata.
The more readily it can be brought to the bedside, the more facilities
which peculiarities of construction shall enable the observer to use it
without performing the operation of a preliminary preparation and


setting of it in order, the more favorable reception will it find at the
hands of the medical student and practitioner : and all these require-
ments will be rapidly met, if only the demand for them be made to
those whose occupation it is to perfect the instrument.
The object I have in view is not merely to urge on the study of
disease by the use of this instrument, but also to show how much
practical work yet remains to be done, and that by one class
especially, the regular daily practitioner of medicine, whether attached
to a hospital or moving in the circle of private practice.
3. It has been my custom to examine the blood in all marked cases
of disease, with the view of ascertaining if anything could be learned
by such a process, and the following communication will show that
my labor has not been lost, and, I may add, has proved rather a
stimulus to further efforts in the same direction.
A healthy young child fell ill with hooping cough, and after the lapse
of a few days was brought to me labouring under an early state of pneu-
monia ; extensive puerile respiration had set in, and there was consider-
able congestion of the cutaneous capillaries of the extremities. A few
drops of blood were carefully taken from the back of thehand in the way
I have recommended, i.e., cleansing the skin first by rubbing it with
a wet towel, and then puncturing it and taking the blood on a glass
slide, without touching the skin. The blood presented no unusual
appearances, save the presence of some dark-coloured bodies larger
than bipod discs, to which, however, I did not attach any definite
importance. On the following day more blood was taken, and I
noticed in two slides that some bright blue particles were present,
resembling in color starch when first acted on by iodine, and also
some dark purple particles. The following day three slides were
charged ; these attracted my attention more forcibly, and occasioned
me considerable perplexity, as more blue and purple coloured
particles were present, and the blood had been carefully taken in
every instance ; the child, also, had been healthy hitherto, and had
had no exhibition of iodine I knew of, and had not been in other
hands than mine.
4. Prior to the second supply of blood taken, and after the first ex-
amined, I had ordered Scheele’s Prussic Acid, and it was directed to
be continued up to the third time of taking the blood. The decided
character of these blue particles, their persistence for hours on the


slide, their increased amount in the subsequent examination, all
tended to cause considerable perplexity as to their possible origin.
After some reflection and one or two chemical examinations, I insti-
tuted the following experiments, which tend to show that these blue
particles in the blood are most likely composed of Prussian Blue ,
and are due to the reaction of Prussic Acid on the Iron in the blood.
5. Ist Exp .—Aug. 22nd.— Seven or eight drops of Scheele’s
Prussic Acid were given in divided doses to a rabbit; after a lapse of five
hours, some blood taken from the ear exhibited a number of bright
blue particles. Two more drops were given, and at the end of twelve
hours, two slides of blood showed some blue particles ; subsequently
three drops were given at one time (the doses were all more or less
diluted with water) ; the animal struggled under the influence of the
poison, and most likely would have succumbed but for the adminis-
tration of ammonia vapour. One hour after, the blood exhibited blue
particles satisfactorily. >
2nd Exp.— Sept, \2th.-k. kitten was killed by inhalation of
Prussic Acid vapour. Blood found to contain many large irregularly
rounded dark-coloured bodies, too dark to ascertain if of a blue color.
One or two light blue flaky masses were found ; also, in and about
the sheath of the sympathetic nerve, one indigo blue film of some
size. This was decolourized by action of Potassa; colour restored by
application of Acetic Acid. The decided bright blue particles do not
appear to yield to Potassa : medulla oblongata examined; some blue
points and several dark ones seen.
3rd Exp. — Sept. 14 th. —Tincture of iron diluted, was injected into
the stomach of a frog, and vapour of Prussic Acid was soon after
administered. Died after some hours. Some decided bright blue
particles were seen in the blood ; also, dark particles, of irregular
form (peroxidized iron 1) in abundance.
4th EXP.— Sept. 19^.—Dog killed by Prussic Acid dropped on
the nose and mouth ; death in a minute and half. Blood from heart
presented some dark-coloured bodies : and one large decidedly indigo
blue mass.
6th. Exp. — Oct. 4 th. — Frog killed by concussion ; blood gave no
evidence of blue particles.
6th Exp . Oct. bth. — A frog slowly poisoned by Prussic Acid
administered : the animal did not die from the effects of the poison,


but was killed and examined. Obtained some blue reaction in the
blood, and about the larger nerves going to the extremities.
7th Exp. — Oct. Ith. —A full grown cat had three drops of Scheeles’
Prussic Acid given her, undiluted, by means of a glass tube intro-
duced in the pharynx. In the space of a minute she lay down and
gasped, and died, with the usual symptoms, in two minutes more at
the furthest. Seven hours after, body quite rigid • heart removed
for examination ; two or three specimens of blood from it showed
either dark blue coloured particles, or black ones ; one large flake of
indigo blue was seen. Muscular fibre from the interior of the heart
gave as satisfactory evidence.
Bth Exp. A frog killed by concussion (second experiment of the
kind) ; the blood examined showed no blue coloured particles; a leg
of the animal cut off immediately after death had Prussic Acid
applied to the cut surface j one slide of blood examined exhibited a
solid amorphous body with a blue coloration at one end, while the
other was colorless.
9th Exp.—A strong, recently caught frog, poisoned by | gr. of
Cyanide of Potassium, injected into the stomach. Three specimens
of blood examined only showed a slaty blue colour in one or two
large flakes or patches. The blood discs appeared to be dotted over
with small oily-looking dots.
10th Exp. —A blow-fly was killed by exposure to the vapour of
Prussic Acid, The muscles lining the thorax, in the vicinity of the
principal nerve centres were examined. Several dark blue points
were seen, and one large particle of a decidedly bright blue ; equal
to any seen in the experiments already quoted.
11th Exp.—The same repeated, and with a bee, with similar
results.
Note. —The bright blue particles are, I believe, really due to the
action of the Prussic Acid, but I have also noticed in some flies not
killed by Prussic Acid that there were present some indigo blue
coloured particles. These I refer to the natural pigment of the insect,
serving, perhaps, to tinge the deep steel-blue coloured hairs ; fragments
of which will be sure to be met with in such examinations: hence
this insect is not a fit subject for yielding positive results. With
this in view I instituted the—
12th Exp.—The maggot of the blowfly, which is very difficult to


kill by Prussic Acid vapour, was subjected to its influence in the
fluid state. Two so treated exhibited the characteristic blue masses
and particles. This experiment I consider to be very satisfactory, as
all the organs appear to be free from pigmentary matters.
13th Exp. —A rabbit six weeks old had four slides of blood taken
from the ear ; these exhibited no blue particles. It was then killed
by inhalation of Prussic Acid vapour, administered-on two separate
occasions ; it was intended to examine the blood without killing the
animal ; but the second application of the vapour killed it very
suddenly. The blood in one specimen exhibited a very large, brilliant,
Prussian Blue concretion ; some blue particles in the blood from the
axillary vein, and also from several other sources.
6. I will now, before proceeding, give a resume of the experiments,
and some observations on them. Eleven experiments in all gave
evidence of the action of Prussic Acid, by the presence of blue coloured
particles, masses or films. When I have used the term mass I mean
a solid substance occupying a space which twenty or thirty blood
discs would cover.
The inhalation of the vapour of Prussic Acid goes to show that, in
some of the experiments at any rate, but a very small quantity sufficed
to kill, and its traces were detectable.
The object of giving the Tincture of Iron to a frog, and then killing
it by vapour of Prussic Acid, was to prove that the change was due
to the presence of iron in the blood, and, if so, a superabundance of
iron might yield a proportionate increase in the amount of the blue
particles. This did not seem to be the case, but will be noticed
further on.
7. The impression left on my mind by these experiments was, that
the bright blue particles were due to the action of Prussic Acid on
the iron in the blood or tissue in some state of organic combination,
and that Prussian Blue had been formed.
The dark coloured or indigo blue masses appear to me to be a
mixture of Prussian Blue and perhaps some oxidized state of iron
unacted on by the Prussic Acid. The administration of Prussic
Acid in a concentrated state, i. e., without further dilution of the
Scheele’s strength (== 4 per cent, of real acid) appeared to me to be
followed by a greater formation of the dark blue particles than when
given in diluted and distant doses.


The two experiments not subjected to the action of Prussic Acid,
Nos. 5 and 8, gave negative evidence in favour of the same view.
The instances quoted of blue coloured particles occurring in the
blow-fly without previous action of Prussic Acid, may depend on
the cause I have noticed, or on another : this roving insect may
derive sufficient cyanogen materials from the putrescent sub-
stances it is in habit of visiting, or may possibly derive them from
the flowers it seeks to, which I believe it is in the habit of doing, as
I have seen pollen grains in abundance about its body while making
these observations.
I would here remark that the frog’s tissues contain pigmentary
matters in abundance, and these might be mistaken for the dark
blue particles I have instanced; but when these bright and dark
blue objects have once been seen elsewhere, no mistake of the kind
need occur, or be charged against the experiments. I here specially
refer to examinations of the nerves of the frog.
8. For the purpose of further testing the action of Prussic Acid
on the blood, I obtained some from a patient in the Melbourne
Hospital, who was and had been taking this medicine lately for
some days. I felt some objection to this case, as the Tincture of
Iron had been freely administered prior to the Prussic Acid, and I
thought its action might interfere with the character of the
experiment.
Four slides were charged ; in each of these, the peculiar blue
particles were distinctly seen ; but it required much care and the
use of a magnifying power of 500 diameters. The films of blood
examined were remarkable for the great amount of black-looking
particles which were present. These lam inclined to regard either
as iron in a peroxidized state, or they are dark particles of Prussian
Blue, and due to the iron lately taken by the patient. These dark
particles recall the appearances seen in the 3rd experiment. The
blood on each slide was not greater in bulk than the head of a
large pin.
9. In a patient of mine, a child to which I had occasion to
administer Prussic Acid (one minim and a half in twelve hours), I
took blood on four slides, and in three I found blue particles. The
acid was continued to the same extent, and six more slides charged ;
each showed the blue particles in greater abundance, and also some


dark blue or indigo coloured films. The bright blue particles which
I always look for as the most characteristic colour indicating the action
of Prussic Acid was in this case so decidedly associated with con-
cretionary masses peculiar to the blood, that there could be no
possible doubt as to their internal origin, and not from any extraneous
source. Liquor Ammonise and Potassae and Nitric Acid separately,
do not appear to act on the blue particles, but the last two do so
when following each other.
10. From these observations I feel satisfied in advancing the
opinion that Prussic Acid causes a change in some of the constituents
of the blood, that it attacks the iron when in some particular con-
dition, and with perhaps the aid of some alkaline base the Prussian
Blue is formed : that the deep, or Indigo Blue particles may be some
mixture of Iron and Prussian Blue, or a state of Prussian Blue
definitely known to us ; for this chemical compound is not yet
fully understood as to its exact composition, and is found to vary
both in colour and composition in the laboratory of the chemist, and
may do so also in that of the animal economy. On the other hand,
I find there is a cyanide of iron known which turns blue on exposure
to oxygen, and perhaps ultimately these blue particles in the blood
may be found to belong to this cyanogen compound.*
11, Continuing my observations on the blood as opportunity
presented, I detected the presence of these blue particles in one or two
cases in which no Prussic Acid had been given, and I could in no
way satisfactorily account for their presence. This led me to examine
the blood in three individuals who were in full health, and in all
these I found the same kind of particles. The majority of these
particles, as well as several obtained from the experiments narrated,
were tested with Oxalic Acid, which readily discolourized and dis-
solved them away.
The evidence at this point of my observations assumed a very
contradictory character, and if I had not been at the time in possession
of other facts which supported me in my views, I should have been
brought to an unsatisfactory standstill.
12. In the course of my experiments, I took occasion to examine
* Watt's Chemical Dictionary, vol. ii p. 221: “ Some of the compounds
called Prussian Blue have the composition of Cyanides of Iron ; they appear
to be double Cyanides.”


the Prussic Acid itself, as to its purity, and the following obser-
vations will tend to clear up the evidence. Prussic Acid, like some
other powerful and effective agents in the hands of the medical man,
possesses the property of rapidly undergoing a chemical change and
of losing its powers as a medicine ; this liability to change has been
referred to the action of light, and also been noticed to occur more
frequently the greater the degree of its concentration. Hence, it is
now usually kept covered up from the action of light, and preserved
in a certain state of dilution, and also appears to be more permanent
when prepared after a certain manner.
13, If the ordinary Prussic Acid of Scheele be examined under
the microscope under a power of 200 diameters, the acid, if pure,
will present nothing worthy of remark; but occasionally specimens
will be met with which contain bright blue particles, consisting, as I
suppose, of Prussian Blue, and also a number of starchy look-
ing bodies which actually turn • purple with iodine. Or, sup-
posing the acid to have been pure, these changes will be found to take
place in it, if the bottle is repeatedly opened and portions taken
out ever so carefully, by dipping a glass rod into the fluid; at least
such is my experience.
14. These remarkable changes appear to me to be due to the
renewed access of air, and minute particles of dust getting in, and to
the possible electric state of the glass rod with which I have been in
the habit of dipping out the acid, having always previously carefully
wiped it.
If, after the occurrence of these accidents extended over a period
of many days, the bottle be shaken and a drop placed on a slide and
examined with a microscope, bright blue particles will be seen associ-
ated with a number of starchy looking bodies which polarize feebly
and turn purple with iodine, like vegetable starch.
15, On taking a drop of Prussic Acid, free from such contamin-
ation, as for example, by using some which has not been opened
and has been kept undisturbed, and some organic matter be added,
as blood or albuminous fluid, these starchy bodies will make their
appearance. First of all, a minute dot, resembling an oil globule
will be seen, which if steadily watched for a time will be observed
to increase in size, sometimes attaining to that of an ordinary starch
grain, oval or rounded in form, and then it will assume a thicker


consistence and solidify into a starch grain, occasionally presenting a
laminated structure, or a grooved line in the long axis of the
oval form.
Whenever these phenomena occur, I have also noticed the appear
ance of the Prussian Blue particles, and it appears to me that when
Prussic Acid comes into contact with organic substances containing
iron, then a decomposition takes place, part of the iron combining
with the cyanogen to form ferrocyanic acid, and the remainder
uniting with this ferroycyanic acid to constitute Prussian Blue
that is, according to the accepted chemical views on this subject;
the hydrogen liberated uniting with the carbon and oxygen of the
organic substance, which has brought about this decomposition, to
form thestarch grains.
16. So, in like manner, when the blood of an animal which has
been killed or partially poisoned by means of Prussic Acid is ex-
amined by the aid of the microscope for the presence of Prussian
Blue particles, there may be seen? in very many instances, bodies
which resemble these starch grains, varying in size from below those
of a blood disc to four or five times one in extent. These, when
acted on by iodine, may be seen to turn purple, and they also polarize.
So again in those instances which I have noticed the presence of blue
particles in the blood of patients, whether they have been taking
Prussic Acid or not, I have frequently observed similar looking
bodies, and these tested with iodine have also reacted purple.
17. From all these observations, I conclude that Prussic Acid is
more or less neutralized in the blood by the iron present in it, and
in proportion to the iron thus withdrawn there is so much starchy
matter set free ; whether the starch in this condition is prejudicial
or harmless, owing to its semi-fluid condition, yet remains to
be determined.
18. The interest which attaches to the facts I have brought
forward is not limited to chemical theories, or to our use of Prussic
Acid as a remedial agent, but the facts observed may also serve to
explain important points in physiology and pathology. I here
briefly allude to some discoveries in pathological science, which
relate to amyloid substances discovered in the animal tissue, and about
which so much has been written during late years. That the so called
corpora amylacea , or starch grains found in different organs of the


human subject, and referable to some morbid condition of the blood,
may take their origin from some similar chemical changes as those
to which I have drawn attention, and that perhaps in many instances
these have only been formed at the time of death, and are referable
to post mortem change, except in such cases as resemble the one of
epilepsy, recorded in the Microscopical Journal of 1855, by Mr.
Stratford, of Toronto.
19. If we refer to the history of these corpora amylacea , we find
that they have been gradually associated with amyloid degeneration
of the tissues, a condition which is regarded by Virchow as essen-
tially different,* as the tissue becomes directly filled with a substance
of an amyloid nature, possessing, however, the peculiarity of never
becoming blue under the action of iodine alone, and only by a subse-
quent application of Sulphuric Acid, and, therefore, appearing to be
more allied to cellulose j and this deposit, he supposes, is conveyed
to the part from without, as he has been unable to discover any
change in the blood, from which the inference might be drawn that
this was really the source of the deposits. But what he states further
on, goes to show that the disease in the lymphatic glands consists in
a thickening and narrowing of the arteries, and in the conversion of
the small cells of the follicles, into corpora amylacea, , thus linking
together these bodies and amyloid deposits, and tending rather to
lead us to regard their origin as traceable to the blood.
20. I think the facts which I have brought forward, showing the
formation of corpora amylacea in organic fluids, both while in and out
of the body, due to the action of Prussic Acid, tend rather to the
view that the blood directly supplies the material from whence these
starchy bodies are formed, and points out to us that a chemical
change has been brought about jp it. I am, therefore, inclined to
the opinion that some change in the blood, analogous to that pro-
duced by Prussic Acid, is the most likely explanation of the mode
by which these bodies are formed in the animal economy, and that
we shall probably find other substances beside cyanogen, possess the
property of eliminating starch grains in the blood of animals, and
that amyloid deposits are only a further step of the same process.
21 From whatever point of view we look at these facts, it ap-
pears to me that a large and important field of inquiry has been
* Virchow’s Cellular Pathology, page 371, &c.


opened to the investigations of the chemist, and among the specula-
tions to which these facts may lead there is this to consider. That
perhaps Prussian Blue should rather be regarded as a cyanide of iron
than a sesquiferro-cyanide ] and that iron, perhaps, performs other
functions in the blood than that connected with oxygen, that of being
a vehicle or medium for holding carbon and hydrogen together, for
their more ready distribution to the building up of tissues, and to
the preserving them in a condition which may be more easy of change
by reason of their union with the iron.
22. The fact of the formation of Prussian Blue in the animal
economy from the action of Prussic Acid, should suggest the possi-
bility of detecting this poison in <|ases of poisoning, remembering
that while the volatile and easily decomposable nature of this agent
enables its traces soon to fade away from our chemical grasp, those
portions of the poison which have gone to form Prussian Blue in the
blood, may remain for an indefinite period as evidences of its presence.
On the other hand, if it be true that in some cases Prussic Acid or
some cyanogen compound may be formed spontaneously in the body,
as has already been suggested by others, besides myself, so we may
have an increased difficulty presented to us in a judicial point of view
in arriving at the conclusion on microscopical evidence alone, that
anyone has been poisoned by this agent.
23. Again, with respect to the spontaneous formation of Prussian
Blue in the blood, the suggestion presents itself—may not the iron
in the blood be the normal antidote to the cyanogen so formed; and
supposing that iron was not present in a suitable condition, or
sufficient amount to neutralize the cyanogen, then spontaneous poison-
ing would be the result, and may we not with this view of the process
be warranted in endeavouring to ascertain if the occurence of some
diseases of the nervous system, as chorea, convulsions, &c., may not
be due to some deficiency in the blood at the time of a suitable
condition or amount of iron 1 And further, the pathologist will have
to ascertain, more particularly, what organs are more especially liable
to injury under the action of Prussic Acid.
24. Before concluding this communication, it may be desirable to
direct attention to the fact that some years ago the formation of
Indigo was pointed out as taking place both in the tissues of the
body and also in the urine. The papers on this subject are by Dr.


Hassall, and may be consulted in the Transactions of the Royal
Society of Great Britain for 1855.
The experiments I have recorded show that the blue particles in
the blood answer to tests which indicate either Prussian Blue or a
cyanide of iron, and that no reasons exist for supposing them to be
composed of Indigo.
25. If, a year ago, I had been asked if it were possible to detect
the effects of Prussic Acid on the animal economy by the aid of the
microscope, I should have unhesitatingly answered for myself, I could
not, and if any one else could, I should be only too glad to learn how,
for it seemed to me to be out of the reach of the instrument to in-
vestigate and reveal its effects, v But the direction and extent the
present investigations have ta cen, encourage me to expect that
ere long many more important facts will be brought to the con-
sideration and study of the medical man armed with the assistance
of the microscope, even while endeavouring to fulfil his daily duties
in medical practice, and that more and more additional inducements
will be held out to him to work with it, with a fair promise of
receiving the due reward for his labours.
WItSON AND MACKINNON, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST, MELBOURNE.
