



OBSERVATIONS
UPON
SECONDARY PUNISHMENTS,
BY
COLONEL GEORGE ARTHUR;
TO WHICH IS ADDED
A LETTER UPON THE SAME SUBJECT,
BY THE
ARCHDEACON OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
HOBART-TOWN :
PRINTED BY JAMES ROSS.
1833.


ERRATUM.
Page 4, line 2, from top—After “offences/’ read, “is net defi-
cient in severity.'’


OBSERVATIONS
UPON
SECONDARY PUNISHMENTS,
ADDRESSED TO
THE ARCHBISHOP OF DUBLIN.
Government-house, Hobart,
2ith May, 1833.
My Lord,
Your Grace’s very interesting publication upon
the subject of secondary punishments, having, as I
am informed by His Majesty’s Attorney General for
this Colony, now absent on leave in London, excited
much attention among all ranks of the community
I have been led to consider with very deep attention
the statements which your Lordship has relied upon
as true, and the conclusions which you have drawn
from them.


It has afforded me much satisfaction, that an indi-
vidual of your Grace’s eminent station and great ac-
quirements, has been induced to devote his attention
to the subject, with the evident desire of arriving at
truth, and of benefitting his country ; and lam there-
fore the more disposed to regret that the distance of
these colonies from England, and the consequent diffi-
culty of obtaining accurate statements of facts, have
precluded your Grace from in many instances, enter-
taining such notions as under more favourable cir-
cumstances, I am sure from the whole tenor of
your reasonings, would have been suggested to
your mind ; on this account I feel it to be a duty,
to supply you with that information, which I have
derived from long experience, and I trust you will
accordingly do me the favour to receive and peruse
this letter.
Your Lordship will permit me to premise by ob-
serving, that the exceeding labour and anxiety of the
office I fill, proceeds from Van Diemen’s land being a
penal colony; if therefore your recommenda-
tion be adopted by His Majesty’s Government,
and transportation cease, the greatest possible relief
will be conferred personally upon myself, and feeling
as I do, every day, the full weight of all the evils at-
tendant upon it, for such undeniably there are, most
certainly 1 would not advocate its continuance, were
I not induced to do so, by the fullest conviction


of its efficiency, as compared with every other form
of secondary punishments.
Before I proceed to a more particular investigation of
your arguments, it will be essential to the
cause of truth, to glance at the objections which
your Grace takes to transportation.
First—You consider that transportation is not for-
midable as a punishment. So far as this applies to the
crime class in England, it is acknowledged that it is
not so formidable as it ought, and most certainly might
be made, from causes upon which I shall in the sequel
enlarge; but in the meantime, I think you will
be constrained to admit that a punishment
by which the offender is stripped of all his
property —deprived of his liberty—shut out from
intercourse with his family, totally separated from
them, —denied every comfort, according to the idea
entertained of that word by the lowest class
—placed on board a transport—subjected there
to the most summary discipline—exposed to ill
usage from criminals still worse than himself—con-
veyed to a distant country in the condition of a slave
—then assigned to an unknown master, whose dispo-
sition, temper, and even caprice he must consult
at every turn and submit to every moment, or incur
the risk of being charged with insubordination, which
if proved before the magistrate, will be followed by
corporal punishment, or removal to the service of the


Crown, where his lot will be still more severe ac-
cording to the degree and nature of his offences,
lie has indeed, by the regulations of the go-
vernment, sufficient food and clothing, but the.
dread of his master’s frown is to him, what the
drawn sword was, over thehead of Dionysius’s courtier !
To all these miseries, my Lord, the sentence of
transportation subjects the criminal, and if at a for-
mer period it was not sufficiently formidable, it must
have been mitigated either in England or in the
penal colonies, and thus incidentally deprived of its
natural and proper influence.
Secondly-—The close association of bad characters
during the voyage, is deemed an objection. That,
in seme instances, additional contamination may be
contracted, I shall not venture to deny, because
it is certainly possible ; but I am borne out by the re-
sults of the arrival of every successive vessel for
many years, in asserting, that so far from the mass
of convicts suffering from this cause, a most salutary
change is produced upon them.
Thirdly—There is not that uncertainty in the dis.
tribution of convicts on their arrival, which your
Grace supposes. It is regulated not arbitrarily but
according to a systematic arrangement.
Fourthly— Convicts while under sentence, do not
receive wages.
Fifthly—Convicts do not when they become free.


obtain grants of land, nor can they acquire farms
under ordinary circumstances by purchase.
Sixthly—The atrocities to which you have referred
do not exist.
Seventhly—The assignment of convicts to indivi-
duals is not objectionable ; but highly advantageous
under proper restrictions.
Eighthly—Transportation is daily proved to be
eminently successful as a measure of reform.
Ninthly—Convicts do not here constitute in the
moral sense of the term, a “ community of felons.”
Tenthly—Convicts there can be no doubt, occa-
sionally send home' flattering accounts of their situa-
tion, but, in almost every instance within the last
seven years, these have been prompted more by the
misery of the writers, than from any undue alle-
viation of punishment, or other circumstance affecting
them favourably.
Eleventhly—Convicts of the worst class do not
either before or after emancipation, return to England
in the numbers your Grace has been led to suppose,
as from the best information I have been able to col-
lect, it would appear that not more than two in one
hundred ever quit the colony.
With this explanation I shall now offer such re-
marks as occur to me upon your Grace’s opinions ; and
as the several articles included in your publication
have the sanction of your authority, I shall refer to them
indifferently as equally expressive of your sentiments.


Your Grace assigns the following as the leading
maxims to be kept in view in every system of secon-
dary punishment:—“ That a penalty should be for-
midable is the first point to be looked to; that it
should be corrective is another point of great, though
far inferior importance ; that it should be economical
is, though by no means insignificant, a matter of only
a third rate importance.” The first and second of
these particulars might, I submit, have been conjoined,
for they are so blended and related that the second if
not mergedin the first is at least, as wotdd appear from
the following considerations, the gauge and measure
of its efficacy. A punishment tends to deter other
men from crime, is “ formidable” to them, and “pre-
ventive,” in proportion only as it operates upon or
“ corrects” those who in their own persons suffer or
have suffered its infliction. “If the punishment is
really painful and such that if a person thought it a
sure consequence of detection, he would not commit
crime; then the convict having experienced it in his
own person is of all men least likely to place himself
again in the same situation; if the punishment to be
dreaded needs but to be known, the convict has the
best means of knowing, and therefore the strongest
motive for avoiding it.”
It follows, therefore, that if penitentiary
discipline deter those who have suffered it
from the recommission of crime, some hope


may reasonably be entertained that others
also will be alarmed and that there will be a dimu-
nition of the number of offences committed among
the community generally; but if no such result be
observable as respects the convict thus in-
carcerated, it would be chimerical to expect through
him any beneficial consequence; on the contra-
ry, his indifference will render weaker the bar-
riers which may still resist the influx of crime.
The comparative efficacy of secondary punish-
ments may therefore be ascertained by the “ varia-
tions in the number of recommittals,” or, in other
words, by the tendency shewn by each prisoner
respectively towards improvement of character.
I shall accordingly, keeping in view these princi-
ples, proceed to compare the effect of transportation,
which your Grace considers to be "of all modes of
secondary punishment” the least calculated to check
increase of crime, with that of the discipline of the
American penitentiaries which you approve of as
“ having been carried to great perfection,” and as
being calculated “ to attain the true end of punish-
ment.”
I select these to illustrate the argument, because
their operation can be more clearly determined than
that of any system of punishment had recourse to in
England. For the British criminal on conviction is
uncertain whether he shall be sent to the hulk, to


the penitentiary, or to the colonies, while the Ameri-
can is well assured that the result will be his re-
incarceration, confinement in the penitentiaries or
prisons being alone relied on.
The effect of any particular mode in England can-
not be ascertained, as the cause of prevention is not
the dread of one, but the collective result of several,
some of which singly may even tend rather to
promote than to check crime, and in consequence
may in some measure neutralise or at least diminish
the aggregate influence of the others. In America
as I have said there is no such complexity.
In answer to the questions put to him by the Se-
lect Committee of the Hous'e of Commons authorised
to report upon the comparative efficiency of secon-
dary punishments. Captain Basil Hall who was ex-
amined with respect to the management, discipline,
and effect of the American prisons, replied, —“ I think
this system of punishment did work in some culprits
a considerable improvement, but after a certain age
the recommitments are always certain —there ap-
pears to be a gradually increasing culprit population
growing up in America, of which the legislature can-
not rid the country, the same men come and go round
and round again. It may deter a great many others,
but I fear that a confirmed thief is not to be reclaim-
ed by any system of prison discipline in any coun-
try.”
“I have heard many Americans, competent to an-


Swer such a question, regret that they had no penal
colonies to which their wicked fellow-countrymen
might be exported. The most obvious evil which
arises out of this singular state of things is, that a
crime population exists and is gradually augmenting
in number and in atrocity in the heart of the country
of which they cannot get rid.”
It may be observed that Capt. Hall takes rather a
favourable view of the prison discipline of America,
and is in some measure an advocate for it. As there-
fore he has at all events no adverse theory to support,
his evidence, besides that it concurs with testimony
derived from other sources, is not liable to any ob-
jection, and indeed a very remarkable proof may be
supplied from the statements of Captain Chap-
man, who was examined with reference to the ma-
nagement of the English penitentiary under his
charge, of which your Grace appears to entertain a
Somewhat favourable opinion. He affirms that
even well disposed prisoners when removed from the
first into the second class previous to their discharge,
immediately begin to fall off and to show a disposition
to commit crime, as has been remarked on different
occasions by themselves, when they have said, ad-
dressing the keepers, “ I regret not taking your ad-
vice and that I did go into the second class.”
If prisoners so removed from the more severe to
the more lenient class and allowed to associate with
B


their fellow prisoners during the day, still under some
restraint, immediately degenerate, what more conclu-
sive evidence could by any possibility be exhibited of
the certain evanescence of any improvement accom-
plished by penitentiary discipline ? If its relaxation
is immediately followed by the re-appearance of those
evil propensities which have been for a time sup-
pressed, what must be the condition and conduct of
the prisoners when discharged from custody and left
to the guidance of their own will ?
From these concurrent statements much matter for
serious reflection is afforded, for in the first place the
inutility of the system of punishment, to which your
Grace has affixed your approbation, is rendered ma-
nifest, not in after life—not after the convict has been
returned to society—not after he has been exposed to
temptations,—but on the very instant of its relaxation,
and it is therefore scarcely necessary to carry our re-
searches beyond the prison walls, or to watch the
conduct of the prisoners after their complete dis-
charge ; the re-development now referred to, sets
the question at rest, and the complaint of the Ameri-
cans that their country is about to be overspread by
a culprit population which they have no means of
checking, is, there is every reason to believe, but too
well founded.
The circumstances, however, to which I have now
the honor to direct your Grace’s attention, besides


proving the inutility of prison or penitentiary disci-
pline, shew that something more is necessary to'pre-
serve the moral atmosphere of a country in a healthy
state than the principles you have included in your
definition of the true nature and objects of secondary
punishment. Your system is intended to operate
through the agency of terror or dread, and you place
no reliance upon causes of crime prevention equally
influential and important. Your opinion that the
transportation or reformation of criminals, considered
in reference to themselves, and not to the effect of
the dread caused by their punishment, is an object of
little comparative importance-, because they are not a
peculiar order of the state—do not form a definite
number like lawyers or physicians, but are an uncer-
tain and fluctuating body, liable at any moment to be
increased or diminished according to the motiveswork-
ing upon the community, or in proportion as any man
may at any time be tempted to commit crime by the
prospect, either of great gain, or of complete impunity,
or of slight punishment, is undoubtedly also liable to
objection.
I most readily concur with your Grace in thinking
that there is to be found in every community, as it
were, a body of “waverers,” unsteady persons,usually
engaged in industrious pursuits, but occasionally fall-
ing into the commission of crime. These constitute an
indefinite body of whom it is impossible to rid the


country* and to whom your theory and the observa-.
tions by which you support it* in many points of view'*
very accurately apply. But it is equally certain, nay,
it is quite notorious, that the great mass of crime an-
nually perpetrated in England, does not proceed from
such persons, but from a band of criminals educated
in vice from their childhood, and trained systemati-
cally to it as a trade, who are therefore as definite a
body, as is constituted by any particular profession in
England or elsewhere,
These men are incapable of gaining a livelihood
except in their own avocation. Inveterate habit, loss
of character, and the excess of efficient regularly
trained labourers ready and willing to undertake any
work, and who would always he employed in prefer-
ence, have rendered spoliation the only means by
which they can obtain subsistence. A great propor-
tion therefore, of the crime annually committed in
England, is perpetrated by individuals who have again
and again been inmates of the hulks and penitentia-
ries, Such a class cannot be liable to the addition
and subtraction contemplated by your Grace, and
your system of punishment does not include any pro-
vision for their suppression. They are proof against
the preventive measures you have suggested, and the
country can only be relieved from them by death, by
removal, or by life incarceration. I presume that ca-
pital punishments and life incarceration would never


theless find few advocates in the present enlightened
age, and as this body is definite in its numbers and
not subject to much fluctuation, as is obvious from
the previous education which its members have re-
ceived, its removal from the country is perfectly prac-
ticable, and is probably the only measure to which
policy and humanity are not both opposed.
The deportation of criminals after their first con-
viction would not, as is supposed by your Grace, be
like the undertaking to empty a lake by “ baling out
the water without stopping a river that flows into it
on the contrary, it would be a stopping of the river
itself in its principal source, after which, though a
small stream might still mark its course, the grand
supply would unquestionably be cut off. For, it should
be remembered, that the “proficients in crime,” to
use your own words, “ act as the tutors and em-
ployers of the younger thieves,” who are generally
the “ tools of more experienced offenders,” until after
a long apprenticeship they have acquired sufficient
skill and confidence to thieve for themselves. Now
if these proficients and employers are removed, it
must be admitted that the evil contingent upon their
example and influence will no longer exist. If there-
fore the definite body, the “ Tutors,” the Employers,”
the “Wolves,” be removed, the country will be re-
lieved of the regular practitioners in thieving, and
will have to deal with those only who commit often


ces while under the influence of temptations, strong
enough to divert them from their ordinary course of
life, —with men who at all events have not from their
youth upwards accustomed themselves to regard
prison discipline, and premature death itself, not as
the disgraceful consequence of crime, but as apart of
that destiny in which fate and circumstances as they
are willing to believe, have involved them, which
they cannot escape, and to which, therefore, they
reconcile themselves, in the same manner as miners,
glass-blowers, the reducers of poisonous ores, and
others persevere in their employments, though per-
fectly aware that diseases of a severe and fatal de-
scription must be the inevitable result, a result suffi-
ciently dreadful to those who have not been brought
up to regard it as part of their inheritance, but yet
insufficient to deter these men from pursuing the
only means by which they may procure food and
clothing. The gaol and the penitentiary, nfiy even
the gallows itself are not more formidable to the for-
mer than are the dangers of their occupations to the
latter; and the removal of this definite body of
thieves is therefore the only means by which the
country can be rescued from their aggressions. Were
this effectually accomplished there can be little doubt
that crime would permanently be much reduced in
amount, the offences of which they would have been
the perpetrators would not alone be suppressed, but


those also of which they would have been the indirect
cause in others ; and the remaining occasional trans-
gressors would be less expert and therefore more
easy of detection. They would be more sensitive to
the terrors of the law, and then only could the prin-
ciples included in your Grace’s definition of the essen-
tial parts of secondary punishments be capable of
being brought into efficient and beneficial operation.
The conclusion at which I have arrived is not in
opposition to your views, but is rather an extension
of them, for while you advocate the necessity of
counterbalancing the inducements to crime by aug-
menting the severities of the law, which is a painful
measure, you must necessarily be well pleased in ac-
cordance with the sentiments you entertain with re-
gard to the infliction of unnecessary suffering, if
it can be shewn that it is possible to accomplish
the same end by other means. I think it must
be admitted that it is equally judicious to dimin-
ish the incentives as to augment the terrors. And as
your Grace has instructed us that much crime at pre-
sent arises from the solicitation and tutorage of the
old thieves, it may be presumed that the temptations
to vice do not so much consist in the things which
are the objects of desire as in the enticing points of
view in which they are placed by the old transgres-
sors who inflame the imagination of their young com-
panions by describing in the gayest colours enjoy


tnents which they cannot attain honestly—per-
suade them at the same time that the danger
they would incur in acquiring them larcenously would
be trifling, and urge that even if the vengeance of
the law should fall upon them with all its most formi-
dable accompaniments, its weight might easily be
borne and would oppress them but for a short period.
While then you augment the punishment of crime
for the sake of prevention, undoubtedly you intro-
duce an accessory measure of great importance if you
contemporaneously remove out of the country those*
who by their representations will induce young delin-
quents to regard the severities you are preparing for
them with derision. In order that a carriage may
travel smoothly and expeditiously it is not only ne-
cessary that its several parts should be of the best
construction, it is equally indispensable that every
obstacle to its progress be removed from the road on
which it is to travel and that the skill of Macadam be
put in requisition ; so in order to give your Grace’s
scheme a fair chance of success it is essential to rid
the country of everything which would prevent its
being adequately tried. You have urged that the
mercy so frequently shewn to young offenders who
appear not to have acted of their own free motion,
but to have been seduced by others, is injudicious;
on the ground, that if the temptations to w r hich their
youth is exposed be strong, these need the more to


be counterbalanced by a greater fear of punishment;
but were the deportation of old criminals made a
measure certainly consequent upon conviction, this
painful necessity would no longer exist, at least in so
great a degree, and, therefore, my Lord I do most
earnestly advocate this measure:—“on the same
principle that 1 would extinguish a conflagration to
prevent its spreading, or destroy a mad dog that its
bite may not communicate the infection.”
I would if possible make the convict an example of
terror, but at all events I would “seek to remove the
example of crime.” While I would support and en-
courage in their holy offices the ministers of religion,
while I would promote the spread of religious infor-
mation, while I would depend upon the labours of
zealous and pious men as among the most efficient,
and certainly as the most desirable agents of crime
prevention ; I would expel those who, as respects the
lower orders, are their most formidable opponents,
those who neutralise their advice, who choke the
good seed sown by them, and who endeavour with
unwearied exertions to bring them into contempt.
I trust, therefore that you will consent to include
among the essential parts of secondary punishments
the expatriation of the criminal as an important
though indirect cause of prevention, insomuch as
lowering the inducements to crime is equivalent to
increasing the incentives to virtue.
c


Having as I think established the inefficacy of pe-
nitentiary and prison discipline, and having shewn
that the only way to lessen the amount of crime is to
expel from their country those, who from age and
experience, are the examples of evil; I shall now
proceed to inquire how far this necessary removal
may be accomplished beneficially by transportation
to these colonies. For, as their removal will of course
render it impossible that they should be punished in
England in order to excite terror there, it is obvious
that two points must be included in transportation ;
first, the effectual removal of the criminal in such a
manner and to such a place as to render it exceedingly
improbable that he should ever return to England ;
secondly, that it be sufficiently formidable as a pu-
nishment to deter others from crime, at least in a de-
gree equal to that excited by any which can be ap-
plied in England. Or if this be impossible, that the
combined effect of the indirect cause of prevention,
in the removal of personal example, and of the
direct cause in the dread excited by punishment,
be equal or more than equal with that of any punish-
ment that can be inflicted in England. How far
these results may be obtained by the measure of
transportation will sufficiently appear, without any
formal arrangement, in the following desultory obser-
vations.
Your Grace has observed, and that most justly.


that prison discipline has not been made the subject
of one experiment, but of as many experiments as
there are houses of correction, conducted on dissimilar
plans. But it does not appear to have occurred to you
that the same remark might apply very accurately to
transportation also, and that diversities, equal to those
which have existed among the different houses of
correction, may be attributed to the penal settlements
as compared with each other at the same time, or
even as compared by themselves in different periods
of their progress. Ido not mean that the govern-
ment has ever vacillated in its intention. On the
contrary, great attention has always been given to
the subject by the successive Secretaries of State,
with which no political sentiments have interfered,
and a uniform and consistent mind has in conse-
quence influenced every instruction which had rela-
tion to the grand design of making transportation an
efficient punishment. My observation relates to di-
versities betwixt the two colonies, to which I need
not now more particularly refer, and to changes which
have naturally occurred in Van Diemen’s land, while
emerging from its first condition of a mere penal set-
tlement occupied by convicts only. While none
but criminals could be obtained to perform any ser-
vice, it is obvious that very imperfect discipline only
could have been maintained, or that it must at all
events, have been quite different from that which


the settlement of the island by respectable free fami-
lies and the consequent perfecting of the system of
private assignment has brought about. In every
stage of this progress it is obvious that the convict
establishment must have been subjected to the
most important alterations, and the condition which
you have in consequence of misinformation descri-
bed as now prevalent, if it ever really existed in all
its parts was an “ experiment” which has been long
since tried and as much as possible abandoned.
A mode of management has been substituted, in which,
while the convict is allowed to rest upon and be sup-
ported by the stimulus of hope, he is yet made bitter-
ly and painfully to feel his degradation, and to
dread a second conviction more than, as appears from
the evidence to which I have referred, were he to be
exposed to penitentiary discipline.
These considerations show that however ineffica-
cious transportation may at one time have been in
the correction of criminals, it is yet far from being ne-
cessarily a defective mode of punishment, but on the
contrary, may be rendered the most successful mea-
sure to which a trial has been given. In order, there-
fore, to dispel more completely the prejudices which
you have been led to entertain in consequence of the
difficulty of acquiring accurate information respecting
so distant a country, I shall collect a few of the
supposed facts, and of the reasons upon which you


appear to lay the greatest stress, and make such ob-
servations upon them as the objects of this communi-
cation may appear to render expedient.
Your Grace imagines that convicts receive addi-
tional contamination in their voyage to this colony —
that they are treated like slaves so as to insure
their moral degradation—that the really improved
in disposition settle in the colony, while the unprinci-
pled and unreformed return to England—that society
here consists of a community of unreformed felons,
unchecked by an adequate number of persons of good
character and conduct—that the distance from Eng-
land is not so great as to preclude the fortunate
from sending home accounts of their condition,
while it prevents the misery of others from trans-
piring, convicts being naturally anxious to conceal
the dark side of their prospects.
With respect to the first of these impressions, I as-
sure you that after a long experience and after per-
sonal investigation of the moral and physical state of
the prisoners who have arrived by each successive
transport for several years, I do not believe it to be
capable of proof. Why ?it may be inquired, should
association in a ship be more injurious than associa-
tion on shore ? these men have lived in such society
as they meet with in a transport from their youth—
they have been congregated together in the gaols,
they would again have been exposed to contamination


in a greater or less degree according to the method
pursued in each of the penitentiaries* prisons* or
hulks to which they would have been sent had they re-
mained in England; and after theirperiod of servitude
had expired, they would have returned to their old ha-
bits in order to commence anew their wicked career.
This objection to the deportation of criminals
is also the less valid as during the voyage
they are generally kept in an excellent state
of discipline by the Surgeons Superintendent* and that
little additional contamination is contracted by any
at that time is almost proved by the cir-
cumstance that the farm labourers sometimes sent
out for rioting and machine breaking retain for the
most part on their arrival their original simpli-
city, and a disposition to conduct themselves honestly*
Not having had an opportunity of witnessing the
condition and conduct of convicts previous to their
embarkation for this colony* I am of course unable to
institute any comparison betwixt their state before
their voyage and after its conclusion, but I have al-
ways been strongly impressed with the conviction
that very considerable improvements generally
take place. The Surgeons Superintendent are
usually intelligent and experienced officers* who
observe the men under their charge assidu-
ously, keeping them under the strictest surveillance ;
and Mr. Cunningham’s observations which your Grace


has honored with your notice, appear to have been
dictated by a desire rather to produce effect and en-
liven his work, than to convey correct information.
His inclination to listen to and relate the marvel-
lous stories to which he refers, and his fear lest by
coercion he should make the convicts u hypocrites,”
and his opinion that it was better to allow them to re-
main “ open downright rogues,” seem to indicate that
the discipline which he exercised was not calculated
to produce the very best results, and that the men
under his charge were not likely to afford an average
example of convicts when under more serious and
more prudent management.
With regard to the fact that convicts are treated as-
slaves, any difficulty that can be raised upon it must
hold good wherever penitentiary or prison discipline
is inflicted.
The penitentiary convict in England or America,
is subject to the nod of his keeper and to the infliction
of summary punishment —he has no property in his
own labour, nor even a voice in the application of his
strength—he is reduced to the condition of a mere
machine—his intellect is not excited—his evil passions
are suppressed but not eradicated—his mind is unem-
ployed and receives no new direction —there is no-
thing to correct the improper bias that has been given
to his disposition —he must still regard vice with pre-
ference under the impression that he will not after


nis discharge be able to discover any means of gaining
bis bread honestly,but must follow his old occupation
—commit similar offences—associate with bis former
companions, and engage in the lowest and most de-
graded debauchery —again be convicted, and again
become for the second, third, or fourth time the in-
mate of a gaol. A convict in England is a
without anything in his condition to promise amend-
ment—he does not even hope for it, he makes no
struggle ; if his animal propensities are occasionally
gratified he is satisfied, and entirely forgets that he is
by nature a relative being, and that he ought to pos-
sess rights in society, and to respect those rights in
others. It is true that in Van Diemen’s land the settler
may have a property in the service of convicts,
but then no one is intrusted with their care who is
incapable of their proper management. By the esta-
blishment of a stipendiary police in this territory, over
which in consequence of its limitation and the high
price of land the inhabitants are not widely scattered,
the obedient and respectful conduct of the servant, and
his proper treatment by his master, are equally se-
cured. Neither is there that inequality in the punish-
ment of transported convicts that has been represen-
ted ; on the contrary, it is conducted upon a carefully
arranged system, by means of which a man is made to
suffer privation in proportion as he displays a disposi-
tion to reform or to continue in the practice of those


vices which originally led to his expatriation. Classi-
fication is the soul of convict discipline. The whole
territory is one large penitentiary, over the several parts
of which convicts are distributed, not by chance or
accident, but in obedience to principles rigidly obser-
ved. They are made to work out their bondage
either in assignment, in the service of Go-
vernment, in the road gangs, in the chain gangs, in
the penal settlements, or in the chain gangs in the
penal settlements. This distribution is regulated by
character and conduct, and by no means by an arbi-
trary disposal.
Of all the conditions in which they can be
placed, that of private assignment is the most desira-
ble, and that of being placed in a chain gang in a
penal settlement, the most harrassing, degraded, and
miserable.
The intermediate classes are visited with priva-
tions more or less severe, according to the part of the
scale of character to which each belongs.
Convicts on their arrival, unless they have mis-
conducted themselves in an especial manner during
the passage from England, are very bad characters,
or are educated men, specials as they are called, are
immediately assigned. They generally continue in the
same employment until their sentences have expired, or
until after four, six or eight years’ servitude they have
merited the indulgence of a ticket of leave. The far-
■ r»


mers in consequence of the scarcity of free labourers
are much interested in their conducting themselves
well during this period, for their own prosperity
may generally be measured by the success attendant
upon their management of their servants.
If the farmer or manufacturer who in Eng-
land neglects the concerns of his establishment, and
does not keep a strict eye upon his servants, may be
ruined, it is evident that similar inattention would in
this, a new country, be still more certainly injurious.
The great object of the master is to procure labour in
return for the food and clothing which he is obliged
to provide, and to attain this, he must exert himself
to create in the mind of his servant a principle in op-
position to his former vicious propensities, a counter
habit of industry and exertion. He acts under
a similar inducement with that which prompts him to
break in the colt he intends for a riding horse.
The spirit of the convict however is not subdued
by unmingled severity. Encouragement forms part
of the plan by which he is reclaimed ; and the cir-
cumstances under which he is placed, are very favour-
able to his reformation as well as to his punishment.
His mind is not dissipated by the example and
advice of idle and wicked persons, not under a si-
milar restraint with himself. There is presented to him
the choice of two opposite paths. The one after pa-
tient endurance of fatigue, and a resolute continuance


in its course, will lead him to the possession of a tick-
et of leave. The other on the contrary will conduct
him by a short cut, to the government gang or the
penal settlement where he will be subjected to every
privation compatible with the maintenance of his
health. It is one of the most prominent features of
our convict discipline, and certainly not the least im-
portant, that it works in a great measure naturally,
and from intrinsic forces, and that the distribution
which in the distance has appeared to your Grace to be
the result of confusion and to be productive of uncer-
tainty in the distribution of punishments, proceeds
from classification and is the result of a continual circu-
lation of convicts throughout the territory. The
moving cause of this is not the will of the
government, but the ever active principle of self-
interest operating upon the minds of the settlers,
who return through the interposition of the rnagis
trates, to be punished by distribution in the inferior
classes, such men as after a sufficient trial have
appeared to be disposed rather to retard the refor-
mation of the others, than to become improved in
their own characters.
The assigned servants are, therefore, generally
useful, well conducted men, from among whom have
been weeded from day to day the greater number of
the unprofitable.
The other classes are in like manner each filled by
a peculiar description of men.


The proportion borne by those in assignment to
such as remain in the government gangs or in the
penal settlements and the number in each of the
several classes respectively will therefore afford one
very good test, among many others, of the reforma-
lory effects of transportation.
These arrangements produce excellent results, but
could only be perfected in a country of limited yet
considerable extent. The worst men after their sen-
tences have expired by returning from the penal set-
tlements and mingling among the community, more
especially if the masters of establishments would em-
ploy them, (to do which, however, it is to be presumed,
they would generally decline, from the danger of
their introducing insubordinate and irregular habits,)
might indeed, notwithstanding every precaution, oc-
casion much mischief. But it usually happens
that such ill-disposed men are, for the most part, re-
convicted, and are thus kept in perpetual slavery.
Thus it is that every man has afforded him an op-
portunity of in a great measure retrieving his charac-
ter and becoming useful in society, while the
resolutely and irrecoverably depraved are doomed to
live apart from it for the remainder of their lives.
It is admitted by the authorities who have written
on the subject and by practical men in general, that
of all the measures far the punishment and reforma-
tion of convicts, classification is among the most im


portant, perhaps the most important. This lam
well satisfied could not be maintained by
any other means half so successfully as through
private assignment, which is a strong argu-
ment in favour of transportation. For although con-
victs might be distributed in Great Britain immedi-
ately after their sentences have been passed, some
to gaols, some to penitentiaries, and others to the
hulks, yet this would have to be regulated by the
nature of the offences of which the parties had been
convicted, and not by any very accurate information
respecting the particular disposition of each individual;
which indeed can be acquired only from subsequent
personal observation. In a country so thickly
peopled, any future transfer from place to place
would be difficult, expensive, and troublesome, even
though the keepers could be induced, while their wages
were not in proportion to the improvement of the men
under their charge, to devote so much attention to each
as to acquire a distinct perception of the natural bias
of his mind, and of the means best calculated to de-
velop his character.
I could have wished that your Grace had stated
at some length the reasons which have induced you
to prefer intrusting convicts indiscriminately to paid
superintendents, rather than assigning them to pri-
vate individuals. For my experience has convinced me
that in every point of view the latter measure is cal


culated to be most beneficial. The superinten-
dent receives an annual allowance for his services
which is not contingent upon the advantages accruing
to the public from them, and from the difficulty of
ascertaining the exact result is incapable of being so
adjusted. But the private settler or farmer in Van
Diemen’s land is remunerated in the ratio in which he
succeeds in reforming the persons assigned to him ;
his farm will be unprofitable and his prospects in life
must be blasted unless he can induce his labourers to
cultivate it, at an expense commensurate with the or-
dinary rate of profit, which cannot be accom-
plished by occasional application only. Mea-
sures that work naturally, are always preferable to
those which require supervision and extrinsic influ-
ences. The former move by their own powers, and
the result may in consequence be depended upon, but
the latter are subject to numerous contingences,
against which it is impossible to make any provision.
Simplicity too is the parent of efficiency, but complex
arrangements generally lead to disappointment.
The present state of the colonial market, and the
returns for farming are not such as to admit of the
farmer with his servants sleeping under a mimosa
during the heat of the day, or passing that time which
should be devoted to business in the habits of dissipa-
tion, which prevailed in the earlier periods of the
colony, when the pastures were relatively almost


b oundless, when the best lands only had to be culti-
vated, when the price of produce was higher* and
when the settlers were generally of a much lower
order in society. He must now be up and active, he
must turn every advantage to the best account, other-
wise he will be unable to compete with his neighbours,
and his affairs will fall into confusion. The present
state of the colony does not admit of any such relaxation,
the business of the farm must proceed regularly and
systematically. It is therefore, independently of that
decorum, and that decent arrangement necessary
not only to the comfort, but to the respectability of
his family, clearly the interest of the settler, to com-
pel his servant to live in a sober and orderly manner,
as alone calculated to insure his performing regularly
his stated labour.
And it is to be recollected that this connection
lasts, not for a few weeks only, but for months and
years. The farmer therefore will not permit any ir
regularities or improper indulgences. For these though
they might stimulate the exertions of his servant
for a time, would in the end cause insubordination,
family discomfort and a consequent loss far more than
proportionate to the first advantage.
The assertion made by persons opposed to
transportation, that the master will be regardless of
every thing else, if he can only induce his servants to
labour by any means, no matter how improper, is


therefore evidently untenable. But there would
be much force in the observation, were as-
signments for a short period only, as he might then
accomplish his end by temporary expedients. He
might then excite a man to extraordinary but
brief exertions, regardles of the effect upon his fu-
ture character. Of this indeed there is every day exhi-
bited sufficient proof. Persons who for occasional
purposes obtain men from the loan gang, are much
more apt to abuse the trust confided in them than or-
dinary assignees, and this is an important objection
to the system of contracts, which has lately been
brought into operation in the colony.
Contractors for public works generally stipulate
for a certain number of men from the loan gang, as on
account of the scarcity of free labourers they could
not otherwise complete what they undertake. And it
is almost invariably found that the convicts who
have been put under their charge, have by no means
derived any benefit from it.
The assignee must for his own sake maintain ha-
bits of industry, sobriety and regularity in his esta-
blishment ; are not these the great essentials
of discipline ? and can it be expected that a superin-
tendent who has no such interest in the result of his
labours could accomplish more, or even half so much ?
The overseers contemplated by your Grace, however
highly paid, in all probability would not be either so


respectable or so numerous in proportion to the con-
victs under their charge, as the settler superintendents
of Van Diemen’s land.
To employ in England retired or half-pay officers
of the army or navy, or persons of equal rank in life,
would be too costly a measure, and would pexdiaps be
inconsistent with their habits and their station in so-
ciety, yet such are the individuals to whom under the
denomination of free settlers a large proportion of the
assignments are made. lam therefore, I conceive,
entitled to imagine that your Grace could not have
arrived at the conclusion to which I have referred,
but in consequence of misinformation ; and I do not
hesitate to attribute the success of transportation as
a measure of reform, in a great degree to the arrange-
ment which enables government by granting
waste but fertile lands, to provide for every ten or
fifteen convicts a settler superintendent or assignee of
some standing in the community, whose fortune, re-
spectability, and family comfort may every day be de-
pendent upon the manner in which he controls his
servants and conducts his establishment.
If to all these considerations it be added that the
laws against harbouring convicts who have abscond-
ed, and against exchanging spirits or fermented
liquors for labour, are severe and equally efficient,
half of the penalties going in every case to the infor-
mer, the securities for the due maintenance of disci-
E


pline, will, 1 trust, appear to your Grace sufficiently
ample.
The opinion, that a convict, after the fulfilment of
his period of service, or after the acquisition of his
ticket-of-leave, may, as it were, at once leap into the
possession of a good farm, is most erroneous. At an ear-
lier period it did occasionally take place, but the difficul-
ties attending it will at once be evident from the circum-
stance that the convict while under servitude receives
no wages, and in the present state of the police, can-
not under ordinary circumstancjs either directly or
indirectly acquire the means of purchasing and stock-
ing a farm. The arable lands near the towns (within
fifteen miles) now sell for from £4 to £l5 per acre.
There are no free grants given by government. Land
is cheaper in the interior, but so large a quantity is re-
quired for a grazing farm, the most profitable applica-
tion of capital so far from market, that it is
equally unattainable by any person in the ordinary
situation of a convict who has just obtained a ticket-of-
leave or served the full period for which he received
sentence. The attainment of a competency is the
reward of honest industry alone, as certainly as in
England. Hope deferred maketh the heart sick
here as well as at home, and the acquisition of pro-
perty depends upon similar contingences.
It, is a fact that not more than two convicts
out of a hundred ever return to England. Un


doubtedly men while under punishment in the chain-
gangs and penal settlements, have occasionally made
most desperate efforts to escape, have concealed them-
selves in ships, and remained in some secret place
during the search, though continued for many days,
and have at length been discovered almost completely
exhausted, and with their limbs beginning to mortify,
so determined has been their resolution.
The, idea “that convicts form in this colony a com-
munity of felons,” in the moral sense of the term, if
any such be seriously entertained, is founded upon
mistaken principles, in opposition to the views
contended for by your Grace, as respects the
theory of punishments and their necessary re-
ference, not to the state of the criminal’s mind,
but to the effect of his actions upon society,
and besides, is not verified by their actual condition
of which I have daily the most perfect experience.
Crime undoubtedly exists to a considerable extent.
The moral conduct of many may depend upon expe-
diency, rather than inward principle. But upon the
whole, property is as safe as in England. Commer-
cial credit prevails. The most respectable families
even in the interior, are free from annoyance and live
in comfort. By far the greater number of private es-
tablishments are conducted with regularity and
precision. And the generosity with which religious
and charitable institutions are supported, together


•with the desire manifested by parents, originally trans-
ported, for the instruction of their children, are gra-
tifying proofs that many of the best feelings of the
British character retain their original lustre even in
this penal colony.
If we ask, from what class do thieves chiefly spring ?
we are answered, from among the poor and the ig-
norant, from those who have been pinched with pe-
nury and exposed to temptation, who have been the
victims of an unwilling and unavoidable ignorance of
the force of moral obligations, from the circumstances
in which they have been placed in infancy, and who
upon their arrival here, have for the first time, had
an opportunity of developing traits of character, which
under a happier condition would probably always,
even in England, have distinguished them. If the
rich and educated do not so often expose themselves
to penal inflictions, we are not to attribute the ex-
emption to any inherent mental superiority. There
is in truth no such natural inequality. We are in a
great measure the creatures of education. We
transgress the laws according to the strength of
the temptations to which we may be exposed,
and the acquired capacity to resist them,
which religion, education, and reflection have raised
up within us. This is beautfully illustrated
in the sacred volume, by the words of Agur :
“Two things have I required of thee, deny me them


not before I die, give me neither poverty nor riches,
feed me with food convenient for me, lest I be full
and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord ? or lest Ibe
poor and steal, and take the name of my God in
vain.”
But for the force of external circumstances, an
equal proportion of convicts would be cast forth out
of each class of society, and not almost exclusively
from the lowest orders. If this be granted, and Ido
not think it will be denied by any who are
not followers of Des Cartes, may not the ef-
fect upon the mind of one set of circum-
stances, of one order of causes acting in England, be
counteracted by an opposite order acting in this co-
lony, influencing the senses with equal force, and
suggesting a new train for the mind to reflect upon ?
May not the convict after a certain period, “ being
fed with food convenient for him,” acquire new ha-
bits, new rules of action, and a new character, such
as would have distinguished him always, but for the
poverty which in youth caused him “to steal and to
take the name of his God in vain,” and like a blight
prevented his better feelings from gaining strength
and expanding; and may not all this be true not of
single individuals only, as has often been seen and
admitted, but of a community generally ?
Honesty is here the only policy, and by the time a
man becomes free, his mind has generally lost the


habitual, but not necessarily constitutional, bias,
which would have led him into another course.
He hasbeen subjected for several years to the supervi-
sion of a master, whose own interest and respectabi-
lity required that he should create in him habits of
industry and labour. He has been separated from
the associates who would have endeavoured to check
these good results, and he has been removed from
the scenes in which crime was first made to appear
to him desirable. He discovers, that there is here no
field for larcenous pursuits, that there are no old esta-
blished thief associations to which he may unite him-
self, that the limited population would render detec-
tion inevitable, and that to indulge in crime would
be to follow a losing course, and to secure to himself
misery and lasting privation.
Here punishment is certain, lasting and severe;
there is indeed a variety of degrees, but not of kinds,
proportioned to each offence. These are not the mem-
bra disjecta of several plans but hang together as
the links of one chain.
A man therefore can calculate beforehand with cer-
tainty upon the penalty attached to the commission
of each offence, and he is generally aware that it will
much more than counterbalance any advantage he
could possibly anticipate. While on the other hand
he may look forward to his eventual independence as
the reward of submissive labour long persevered


in, He learns by degrees to superadd to the habit
of toil which it is the object of the Government to
create, “an association” not merely of the ideas of
disgrace and coercion with that of crime, but also of
freedom and independence with that of labour.
It is perhaps in this that one great advantage of
transportation to a new country consists, for “such an
association of ideas” cannot be created either in Eng-
land or in any other country equally over-crowded.
The criminal knows that even many persons pos-
sessed of skill and of character cannot procure the
means of subsisting decently, and that therefore the
love of labour, which his keepers endeavour to incul-
cate will be useless and unprofitable. He connects
with industry the ideas of fatigue and of starvation, and
with theft only can he associate the notion of a plen-
tiful though precarious maintenance.
Can it be wondered then that deeper degradation,
and more depraved conduct flow from imprisonment
in England, and that reformation and good conduct
are almost as certainly the result of convict dis-
cipline in Van Diemen’s land. After having
acquired habits of the worst description, almost all
those persons return to a useful course of life—who, had
the extraordinary causes of crime now operating in
Great Britain never existed, would have continued
from infancy in the honest exercise of a profitable in-
dustry. The number of those thus urged into


crime, not so much from inward impulse as from the
force of circumstances, exciting and increasing desire
by want and poverty, and diminishing moral resis-
tance by ignorance and the bad advice of those who
had been alike seduced, and in the same manner and
by the same causes gradually perverted, may be as-
certained, by comparing the proportion now borne by
the annual committals to the whole population of
England, with that which obtained, when the relative
amount of offences was the lowest, and crime preven-
tion least required The prisoners at the penal settle-
ments and in the most degraded chain-gangs, and
not those under assignment, are probably the coun-
terparts of those who were prone to vice, even when
the labouring classes, were well fed and comfortable,
as in the days of Lord Bacon, when he said it was an un-
blessed thing to make wicked condemned men the
planters of new lands.
Hence from Hobart to George-town, the country is
remarkable for quietness, order, and security of pro-
perty. The former which contains about ten thou-
sand inhabitants, is as free from rioting and burgla-
ries as any town of a similar extent in England. The
most timid female walking with the customary pro-
tection, does not see any thing either to shock or to
alarm her. Highway robberies scarcely ever occur.
Lord Bacon’s declaration to which I have already
referred, has much force in it, as applicable to the


period in which he wrote. It is, as your Grace quotes
him" a shameful and unblessed thing to take the scum
ofpeople and wicked condemned men to be those with
whom you plant.” There was in his time an abun-
dant field for labour in England, and the inducements
to commit crime were not powerful. The citizen
and the husbandman could by industry bring up their
families in independence and afford them an honest
example. If they were compelled to obtain their
bread by the sweat of their brows, they were also
happily enabled to mingle with every drop of that
sweat, blessed ideas of virtue and independence. The
population had not then outgrown the means of em-
ployment, and he who committed crime, and perse-
vered in it, could not plead as his excuse the cravings
of hunger or the effect of habits derived from the ex-
ample of his parents, and the teaching of his fellows.
To plant new lands with such characters, would
therefore, it was reasonable to suppose, be unsuccess-
ful. The change effected by transportation so far as
they were concerned, would be one merely of place,
not of circumstances. The advantages of labour would
not be much greater in the colony than at home, and
they therefore who had acted unblessedly there, were
likely to continue so to do in their new places of
abode.
But experience has shewn that the imputation of
unblessed cannot be applied to the settling of this co-
F


lony, if we believe with the learned Stillingfleet
that as communities exist in time only* so are they
either rewarded or punished in time. If general
prosperity ; if absence of party feeling ; if a regular
subordination; if exemption from contagious or
epidemic disease, while almost every other region
of the earth, including England itself, has been
subjected to its ravages ; if security of person and
property; if a small proportional amount of crime
in a population, the convict part of which had it re-
mained in Britain would with few exceptions have been
entirely devoted to it; if the fact that there is labour
for every one, and that every one is supported by
labour, be favourable indications, we have no reason
to dread that Lord Bacon’s imputation can be applied
to Van Diemen’s land.
It has been observed that the fact that the native
youth are honest is not an argument in favour of the
transportation system, as they would not have
been called into existence had their parents remained
in England, and that the question therefore is not
whether they are good, but whether the children of
free persons would not have been better, and whether
it was prudent to save the worst of the population for
materials with which to plant a new country.
Upon this I would remark that the greater fecun-
dity of the persons alluded to, so far as it really ex-
ists, is in itself a collateral proof of some reformation


of conduct. And as the best conducted of the con-
victs only are allowed to marry, there can be no
doubt, (and indeed there has been some experience of
the fact,) that their children will have fully as good
a chance of being useful members of society as if their
parents had been free paupers. The moral effect of
colonization has indeed been much underrated. The
transplantation of men from an overcrowded and
impoverished soil to one where they may have room
to take root firmly, and to acquire a plentiful subsis-
tence, is followed by equally good effects with those
which attend similar removals of animals and plants.
The vegetables which grew in an impoverished soil
may be improved by transplantation into a richer
one, the sheep which have dwindled away on a crow-
ded pasture may be restored to the original size of
their breed or even made to surpass it, by being
drafted to one where they can have freer scope; so
when men are born where they cannot procure a suf-
ficiency of food, they degenerate both in mind and
body, and propagate a feeble offspring, addicted to
the worst vices; but if these be removed to a land
of abundance they soon recover their former manli-
ness and disposition to exertion.
But after all I am doubtful whether the question
you have proposed, is the proper one, for the more
obvious surely would have been, “ whether is it bet-
ter to leave these countries desert? or to people


them with those who have transgressed the laws ?
and the best answer it appears to me would have
been this, “ there now exists in Van Diemen’s land
a population of between thirty and forty thousand
souls, of whom about seventeen thousand have been
convicts, and by far the greater proportion of these
instead of being the plagues of their fellow-creatures
and unblessed and miserable in themselves are now
useful to society, and are daily contributing, by in-
creasing the commercial importance of the colony, to
the wealih of the empire, while it is equally incontro-
vertible that their transportation has been no bar to
the emigration of the free but rather the means of
encouraging and eventually securing it. They are
the pioneers who have opened the way and made it
straight.
With regard to your proposal for improving the
population I would simply repeat that a large pro-
portion of the free inhabitants of Van Diemen’s land
are of a respectable origin and sufficiently conversant
with the refinements of what is called good society.
While it would therefore be highly desira-
ble that their number should be increased in order
that there may be a greater selection of settler super-
intendents, I do not conceive that any precautions are
necessary to preserve in the colony the customs and
tone of civilised or even polished life.
The system of convict assignment in truth instead


of degrading and contaminating the higher classes is
the means of ensuring them, not merely wealth but
also the leisure necessary to enjoy it in the
manner which you would promote ; and therefore I
cannot concur with you in opinion that the state of so-
ciety at the Swan River settlement will from the ab-
sence of convicts be happier than in the penal colo-
nies. I conceive this distinction will have an opposite
tendency. The scarcity of labourers arising from it will
compel all but the most opulent to work for them-
selves. Many an educated man and delicate female will
have cause to regret the arrangement which deprives
them of the advantage of having convicts assigned to
them. It is to deficiency of labour that the rusticity of
the Americans, most remarkable in the states where
there are no slaves, is to be attributed, rather than to
the thin sprinkling of gentlemen of birth among the
first emigrants. And the great progress in the arts
of life and in that decent and orderly way of living
which is so generally to be observed in this colony,
may with every truth be attributed to the advantages
derived from its being a penal settlement.
With regard also to the distance of Van Diemen’s
land from England which you suppose renders transpor-
tation to it an ineffectual punishment, I regret that I
am obliged to differ with your Gi ace, and to assert
that it is on the contrary, a very great advantage.
Familiarity is the parent of contempt, and if secondary


punishments be inflicted within view of the commu-
nity, that part of the population on account of which
such examples are alone necessary, will soon learn
to disregard them, however severe they may be. But
if, as is complained by every one, severity is not
attributable to them; and if in many instances
convicts would be better off in the peniten-
tiaries than in their own homes, and if many persons
would in consequence be glad to change place with cri-
minals undergoing their sentences, the more secon-
dary punishments are withdrawn from the public
gaze, and the less intimate the knowledge of them
possessed by the community, the greater will be the
chance of a beneficial result. It cannot be disputed
that so long as the humane spirit of the age forbids
the infliction of any punishment by which the criminal
may be personally injured or by which much mental
depression may be produced, and while he is allowed
a sufficiency of wholesome food, and apparel, and .is
kept warm and comfortable, his condition must ine-
vitably be one of desire to the lower classes generally.
The “ peasantry of Bedfordshire” and of the south of
England will compare their own miserable earnings
and their lack of the necessaries of life, with the board
and lodging of the convict, and long for an exchange,
and the more so, that even though the labour in the
penitentiary may be a grievance to the town-bred con-
vict, and may tend to render his incarceration painful.


it would actually, though styled a punishment, be a
relief to the agriculturists, who would have more regu-
lar meals, better clothing, warmer lodging, and less
work. While therefore it is just possible that peniten-
tiary or prison discipline may alarm the effeminate
town thief, this partial benefit will be purchased at a
vast expense, not less than the demoralization of the
farm labourers, upon whom the life and well-being of
England depend, whom if once destroyed, it would be a
hopeless attempt to restore, while the demand for la-
bour is so deficient as compared with the supply of
labourers. But if it be impossible to render such no-
minal punishments other than objects of desire to
the rural population, in what light must they be re-
garded by the manufacturing orders, who are con-
fined for sixteen and sometimes eighteen hours each
day, in crowded and unwholesome Workshops, to earn
a pittance scarcely adequate to preserve life, much
less to provide house room and clothing ? To them
the prison-house must be as it were, a palace, its re-
gular succession of meals, and its moderate labour,
like the translation of Abou Hassan to the splendour
enjoyed by the sumptuous Haroun. No, my Lord, it
is impossible by such machinery to prevent crime, un-
less you can make it appear to the public different
from what it really is, which would be a vain attempt.
Although for a time you may keep the convict
apart, his real situation unknown, and the proceed


ings of your penitentiary keepers, as secret as those
of the Inquisition, you cannot silence those men
whose sentences have expired, and who have been
discharged, perhaps determined to seek re-admission
as soon as they have a little while enjoyed the plea-
sures of intercommunion with their old associates,
to which it is possible an additional zest may have
been [given by the gratuity which you propose
to award. Surely under these circumstances
distance not proximity ought to be the grand
object in every scheme of secondary punishment.
But even if you could generally secure this secrecy
and thus prevent any positive harm being inflicted, or
even if you could invent, which however does not ap-
pear to be possible, a plan of punishment equally effi-
cacious for every purpose with that which obtains in
the colonies, no real advantage would be derived from
conducting it in England. If the convict
is never either seen or heard of, what imports it whe-
ther he suffers his punishment in the city or in the
country, in England, or in Van Diemen’s land ? The
“omne ignotum” pro magnifico will unquestionably be
more certainly realised by sending him sixteen thou-
sand miles from home, than by punishing him secretly in
England. Dread of banishment is a natural emotion,
and the more ignorant any individual is, the more he
fears it. It is quite certain that while residing in
England, he can never become so familiar


with all the circumstances of the condition of the con-
vict in Van Diemen’s land, as with those of the prisoner
in the penitentiary. He will therefore more readily
incur the danger of the latter, than that of the
former condition. Even the evidence of Mr.
Wakefield, whom you consider a man of some
shrewdness and who is opposed to transportation,
may be produced in support of this reasoning. The
Sussex smugglers, according to him were “ incapa-
ble,” a strong expression indeed coming from such a
quarter, of learning that transportation would be ad-
vantageous to them, and Mr. Estcourt, chairman of
the Wiltshire sessions, declared that it was much
dreaded in that county, and deterred more than any
other punishment from the commission of crime.
It may be gathered from the evidence taken before
the Select Committee, that the persons who disregard
transportation and indeed every other description of
punishment equally with it, are the regular thieves,
who harden their minds against the consequence of a
breach of the laws, even though it may amount to
death itself. Those who occasionally only commit crime,
and the country people, as was sufficiently attested
by the misery of the rioters and machine-breakers,
who arrived in the colony in 1831, several of whom as it
appeared to the Colonial Surgeon died from diseases to
which they had been predisposed by despair, regard it
a


with a degree of horror, and are incapable of being
taught that it could be advantageous to them.
Were the regular thieves, with a view to the indi-
rect prevention of crime by the removal of bad ex-
ample, transported to this colony, it is not probable
that more than two in one hundred would ever return
to England. Those only would remain to be dealt
with, who are for the most part inexperienced in
crime, and who retain their natural dread of banish-
ment ; to whom transportation would be a sufficient
terror, and upon whom it would act efficiently as a
direct preventive of crime. As the great stimu-
lus to vice, the example and encouragement of the
old thieves would thus be removed, and as the rela-
tive severity of the punishments now in use, in conse-
quence of the greater sensitiveness of those who might
come within their danger would bp augmented, there
can be little difficulty in arriving at the conclusion
that a great reduction of crime would soon become
obvious. Society would in this respect retrograde
50 or 60 years, and making allowances for the scar-
city of labour and the poverty of the lowest class
which act as direct incentives to the commission of
offences, would partake somewhat of the healthfulness
of former times, when the church was venerated and
the gaol dreaded, and when crime was the result of
sudden sallies of passion, of drunkenness and of oc-
casional temptation yielded to even by the worst men


not without some pain and remorse, rather than a
trade and a regular occupation methodised into sys-
tem, stript indeed of some part of its atrocity, but
more comprehensive and infinitely more injurious.
I may here remark that while the transported con-
vict is sufficiently clothed and fed, though upon the
whole not better, than in the gaols and prisons in
England, and while he is therefore in respect of
sustenance in a better situation than some free
men in Great Britain, yet his condition is far
from being an abject of desire even to the lowest
and most miserable of the population ; he does not
compare his lot with that of the free man at
home, but with that of the free man in Van Diemen’s
land.
The wages of labour and the advantages of
freedom are at the same time a misery and a stimulus
to him. The desperate exertions often made, the
dangers incurred, and the sacrifices submitted to
without a murmur, in the hope of obtaining a ticket-
of-leave, prove how irksome and wretched his condi-
tion becomes, and how grievous to himself the com-
parison is, which he institutes between a state of bon
dage and a state of freedom, or even that approach
to it which a ticket-of-leave confers. The free ser-
vants whom emigrants occasionally bring out with
them under indenture for three or four years, gene-
rally desert their masters upon the very first oppor


tunity, or else render themselves so unprofitable as to
induce them to release their indentures upon
favourable conditions. Until then they are unhappy,
fretful, and uneasy, comparing their own condition
with that of those who have not come under similar
obligations. But if their situation, though superior
to any thing they could have obtained at home, is by
comparison fraught with so much misery and heart-
burning, how much more painful must that of the
convict be who is subjected to real privations, and
to summary and servile punishments, but yet must
bear them patiently.
With respect to the educated convicts, or “specials,”
who it has been reported entertain little dread of
transportation from the hope of being employed as
inferior writers in the government offices, or as pri-
vate tutors, it will be perceived from a perusal of the
accompanying copy of the standing regulations for
Tasman’s Peninsula, that it has been for some time
the intention of government to send them to that pe-
nal settlement, where they will be able neither to
commit offences, nor to transmit to England false or
highly coloured descriptions of their state and ser-
vitude.
I admit that the condition of these men, though by
no means so desirable as it has been represented in
England, has not heretofore corresponded with that
of other convicts. In fact the only hindrance in the


colony to the perfecting of transportation, as a mea-
sure of prevention, has had reference to expenditure.
The economy so much insisted upon in the present
day, has led to the employment of educated convicts
as clerks in public offices, and of expirees and eman-
cipists as inferior overseers, an incidental not neces-
sary adjunct of the transport system, originating
in motives of economy, but attended by injurious
consequences—consequences which however have
been much exaggerated.
I now come more especially to offer for your
Grace’s consideration a few remarks upon the plan of
punishment which you recommend to be substituted
in all cases for those now in use, and I have the honor
entirely to concur with you as to the principles
which you wish to apply. It is your primary object
to create an association not merely of the ideas of
disgrace and coercion with that of crime, but also of
freedom and independence with that of labour.
These unquestionably constitute the objects of every
punishment, and I have indeed done little justice to
my subject, if I have not succeeded in convincing you,
they are closelykeptin view,and generally realized in
the working of the convict system as administered in
Van Diemen’s land; with a success too, little antici-
pated by its first projectors, who feared that assigned
convicts would rather be a burthen than an
advantage to the settlers. The most efficient part of
the system therefore was not foreseen.


As the means of creating this association, your Grace
proposes that the quantity of labour performed, and
not duration of restraint should be the measure of
servitude ; this, I may observe, so far as is prudent—
for if carried the length proposed by your Grace, every
feeling of irksomeness and restraint would be remo-
ved, and the convict would be neither more nor less
than a job labourer —is accomplished with us by the
granting of tickets-of-leave for good conduct, of which
the having laboured faithfully must always form one
of the elements.
You recommend, however, that convicts should be
employed in draining and reclaiming waste lands, and
in particular the Irish peat bogs under superinten-
dents engaged at a liberal expense, a practical appli-
cation of your opinions which I should have little ex-
pected, after the strong and unqualified terms in
which you have reprobated transportation, not to
New South Wales or Van Diemen’s Land, alone, but
generally, for what is this but to substitute
Ireland for these colonies, and to transport English
convicts thither under a management similar to that
which exists Lere in regard to the worst con-
victs, who are not assigned, but are placed—their re-
formation being in many cases almost hopeless, and
their being kept apart from others, under every pos-
sible privation forming therefore the chief intention,
—in the road and chain-gangs and in the penal settle


merits, under superintendents and overseers. Your
scheme merely differs in this, that there could not be
connected with it that minute and most efficient clas-
sification, with its numerous advantages to which I
have referred in a former part of this letter.
The profitable breaking up of the soils of Van Die-
men’s land would be desisted from, in order to reclaim
land not worth “ the cost of the labour bestowed upon
it,” and the convict would be withdrawn from, or ra-
ther not subjected to, a condition which as compared
with that of the rest of the community, is miserable
in the extreme, for one which will necessarily be
rendered desirable by the circumstances of the peo-
ple among whom you propose to execute your plan.
You seem to be of opinion that if the returns for
the labour expended be less advantageous, the loss will
be compensatedfor by the saving of the expense of con-
veyance to these colonies. This is a subject evi-
dently much misunderstood. The maintenance and dis-
cipline of the convict in the penitentiary is stated to
cost about £56 per annum. And your Grace can hardly
anticipate that the persons transported to Ireland
after the pay of the military force required, and of
the superintendents engaged, on the liberal terms
which you consider indispensable, is defrayed, can be
supported at a much less expense. The third part
of £56 is £lB 13s. The cost of carrying a convict
to Van Diemen’s land is about £25, and the average


duration of the voyage may be taken at four months.
Had he been detained in England these four months,
or had he been worked, as your Grace would have
preferred, in the Irish bogs, there would still have
been a charge against government for his maintenance
and superintendence of about <£lB. The loss by keep-
ing him for that period on board the ship, is there-
fore only £7, in consideration of which the country is
for ever relieved from his presence, and from an al-
most certain repetition of crimes and convictions ne-
cessarily involving much expense.
You also observe as a distinction of importance,
that the peat bogs when reclaimed would not be set-
tled upon by convicts. I have already, I trust, satis-
factorily explained that any such result would be
equally improbable as respects improved lands in Van
Diemen’s land.
But if the transports to Ireland were fed in the
same manner as men in the penitentiaries are, how
would theirlot be envied by the half-clad, starvingpea-
santry of that ill-fated country ? and if to this were
superadded, the anticipation, that after the period of
their sevitude had expired, each was to be rewarded
with a gratuity for his labour, in order that he might
associate with it the notion of independence, or,
in other words, that in return for his services he was
not only to be fed and clothed, but also to be enabled
to “ save money,” the competition to obtain admission


into the gangs would doubtless be very great, and an
incentive to crime would be brought into operation,
far more efficacious than even the prison and peni-
tentiary discipline of England.
The utter impracticability of the scheme patronised
by your Grace, except under the modification of it,
for unquestionably such it is, now in use—that of
transportation to these colonies —affords conclusive
proof that the utmost ingenuity and the greatest ta-
lents are equally unavailing, for the discovery of any
method to be executed in England, by which crimes
can be effectually repressed, so long as notwithstand-
ing every severity that can be applied, it is impossi-
ble to render the convict’s situation, if incarcerated
or put to labour there, other than an object of in-
difference and often of desire, to a large proportion
of the lower orders.
Under these circumstances I confidently anticipate,
your Grace’s powerful aid, in rendering transporta-
tion still more efficacious than it now is, and that you
will rather urge the necessity of perfecting an expe-
riment which' has been so auspiciously commenced,
and in a great measure matured, than argue the pro-
priety of abandoning it (before its beneficial effects
have been fully shewn, and while their developement
is at hand,) and having recourse to measures, in the
beginning, perhaps equally expensive,' with that of
the first establishment of these colonies, and the suc-
H


cess of which will be far more problematical, while it is
to be remembered, that for the convicts now here,
the present establishment would also have to be kept
up, thus doubling the charge upon the public. For
though the present and more than the present expen-
diture is required to render the system complete, it is
quite adequate without any proportionate addition, to
keep under equal discipline two or three times the
number of prisoners now subjected to it, which is in-
deed a powerful argument in favour of transportation
insomuch as by concentrating the whole arrange-
ments for secondary punishment, and placing all
convicts'under one or two establishments only, namely,
the Colonial Governments, by far the greater propor-
tion of the expense of Superintendents and Peniten-
tiaries, amounting to a very large sum might annually
be saved to the country.
One very important consideration also, is the fact
that while the chief intention of effectual punishment
is accomplished, collateral advantagesof little inferior
importance are at the same time realized, for as your
Grace is, I doubt not Aware, transportation in-
cludes—
1. —The prevention of crime by the instinctive
dread of expatriation, admitted even by its opponents,
to be deeply fixed in the human breast.
2. —The prevention of crime by the dread of coer-
cion and summary punishment in an unknown country.


3. —The prevention of crime in England by the re-
moval of individuals addicted to it as their trade, and
daily growing in expertness.
4. —The prevention of crime by the removal of the
evil example of professed thieves.
5. —The prevention of crime generally, by the con-
version of criminals into useful members of society.
6. —The transfer of individuals from a state of so-
ciety in which they are a cause of misery not only
to themselves, but to others, to one in which they
fl
will prove a useful accession—i. e. emigration from
an over crowded country to new soils.
7. —An extension of the empire by the creation of
colonies possessed by free men, whose emigration is
encouraged by convict assignment, and for whom
the convicts have acted as pioneers.
8. —An increase of the exports and imports of
England.
It involves therefore advantages which cannot be
united with any other punishment, and which it is to
be remembered are attained at a less expense than
simple punishment by incarceration. Even in its pre-
sent somewhat imperfect state, for undoubtedly it is
not without imperfections, it must be admitted to
have been proved before the Select Committee of the
House of Commons, to have a greater effect than any
other punishment in suppressing crime. For in no part
of the evidence did it appear that the substitution of


penitentiary or prison discipline had ever in any coun-
ty or district caused a diminution in the number of
committals, or that offences punishable otherwise
than by transportation, had been more effectually
suppressed, than those of which it is frequently the
penalty, while its substitution for prison discipline has
been observed to produce such an effect in Wiltshire,
Incidental circumstances however have undoubt-
edly reduced its efficacy below the natural point.
Prisoners after having been ordered for transpor-
tation have been allowed to remain an indefinite pe-
riod before embarkation in the gaols and hulks du-
ring which their fears are somewhat diminished by
the encouragement of their acquaintances, by the
false hopes they are induced to entertain, and by the
state of hurry and excitement under which they are
kept. They are thus so far reconciled, as to leave
with less regret and dread of the future, their com-
panions in crime, the haunts in which they have been
accustomed to concert their schemes of plunder, and
that low debauchery which usually constitutes their
only enjoyment. Transportation is thus brought
more nearly to a level with other secondary punish-
ments. This abatement of suffering, this false equa-
nimity, which as respects themselves only, is almost a
matter of indifference, re-acts unfavourably upon the
very associates whose conversation gave rise to it.
The criminals have the satisfaction of exhibiting per


haps in the presence of their prosecutors, that hardi-
hood, which often even in the jaws of despair prompts
the culprit, in appearance to make light of his cala-
mity, and to affect a power of endurance, which or-
dinary spectators judging only from superficial obser-
vation, impute not to pride or affectation, but to the
circumstance, that even capital punishment is not so
dreadful as they were before disposed to imagine it.
This composure so injurious in its effects upon the
dissolute and immoral, is however, within my expe-
rience, occasionally referable to other causes. De-
spair is sometimes marked by the same or very similar
signs, with the state of mind opposed to it, and then
it so engulphs his faculties, as to plunge the criminal
into a state of besotted insensibility. He sees, hears,
feels, eats, aud sleeps, as in his most innocent days.
He has a sense of present objects—His mind re-acts
upon immediate perceptions. He answers questions
proposed to him, and he converses apparently in his
usual manner. But if his true state be enquired into,
and his feelings and actions be more narrowly scruti-
nized, the calmness that at first strikes the eye, will
be imputed not to his having by an intellectual effort
risen superior to his agony, but to his mind having
fallen prostrate before the realities of his fate. He
cannot now either realize his present condition, review
the past, or appreciate the future. By habitual, or
automatic power however, he appears to retain at


least his most ordinary relations with society.
This mental inactivity gives a respite to his
frame, which performs all its functions well, and
frequently improves both in appearance and
health. Thus the composure of condemned men,
and their ability to take sound repose, immediately
before their execution, which have so frequently
been much extolled by historians, as indicative of
fortitude, frequently originate in mere passivity.
This vis inertise, this power of adaptation so as to
elude suffering, seems to have been a provision in-
tended by nature to limit the severity of punishment,
which vengence or even better motives might some-
times dictate. It has led however to many mistaken
estimates of the intensity of penal suffering. Seve-
ral punishments, and transportation among the
number, have been supposed to affect some men
very slightly, whose previous history gave rise to a
very different expectation, but it might have been
discovered that the intention of the law to excite
terror in others by their endurance had been
defeated, not by lenity but by severity. It is not
easy in this respect to undeceive the multitude, they
for the most part judge of things according to their
first and most obvious characters. Punishments
therefore are much more easily made terrible to
them by exciting their imaginations, than by present-
ing them before their senses. They should therefore


be secret with respect to that class upon which it is
intended they should operate. The midnight toll .of
the Venetian death bell was worth a hundred public
executions. The sentence of transportation should
no sooner have been passed, than the criminal should
be held to be dead as regards England. It is the
substitute, that the humanity of the age has intro-
duced for actual execution, and it is therefore desira-
ble, that in as many respects as possible, it should
retain the properties of capital punishment. There
should be an immediate withdrawal from the felon,
as from a corpse, of the sympathy and consolation of
acquaintances. His return from the judgment hall
to his cell, should be followed by as complete seclu-
sion, as had he in truth been committed to his grave.
The conversation of friends and especially their sym-
pathy, are capable of rendering tolerable the greatest
misfortunes, and the most severe afflictions. Their
unsuitableness to the condition of the convict is there-
fore evident, so long as he remains in England, for
they must tend most materially to counteract the
result contemplated by the law.
I have said that transportation should be carried
into effect as soon as possible after sentence has been
passed. It would be important also, that the precise
period at which it is to commence should, as accu-
rately as possible, be known to the prisoner before-
hand. The mind of the convict, cannot fully re


alize the evils to which he is to be exposed, nor shew
to others, which is the most important part, that he
feels any, unless they be referable to a particular
time and place. For the circumstances with which it
is to be united, are necessary to enable the mind to
appreciate fully, any future event. If a man be
informed that he is to be transported or executed,
while neither the time nor the place is fixed, he
has nothing with which to connect his punishment,
and it is little better than an expectation of which he
may have some indefinite conception, if he choose to
abstract his mind, in order to reflect upon it, but
which will otherwise very seldom occur to him.
Such a sentence,can scarcely as is indeed suggested
by your Grace be considered a punishment, for it
does not differ in any essential particulai*, from that
doom in which all are involved, but which, for the
same reasons, does not deeply impress even those,
w r ho from advanced age and increasing infirmities,
have had sufficient warning, that their decease, though
not fixed, is certainly at hand. These considerations
are familiar, but yet the necessity for their practical
application, has generally been overlooked, with re-
spect to their bearing upon crime prevention. Hence
punishments essentially, most severe and effective,
have not accomplished the results expected from
them, and much eventual suffering that might have been
avoided, is rendered indispensable. Death punish


ment, if immediate, is of course, of these, the most
dreadful, but if postponed to an indefinite day after
sentence has been passed, it will probably excite a less
henejicial dread, than transportation itself, if in-
vested with this character, for then, the whole of
the sufferings inflicted upon the criminal, will contri-
bute to crime prevention. Whereas the difference
between certain and immediate banishment, and un-
certain and delayed death may be expended in neu-
tralizing the effect of the delay and uncertainty,
and the culprit may eventually have suffered, not
for his crime alone, but also for the hope of es-
cape he was allowed to entertain, and the little ap-
prehension excited beforehand. Uncertainty has
thus created a necessity for more severe punishments,
as much as an augmentation of the incentives to crime
or the more dissolute morals of the people, and has
rendered less effectual transportation itself, which
otherwise would have produced much greater bene-
fits. From the frequent substitution for it, of hulk
and penitentiary discipline, it has never had a fair
trial. Its preventive effects have never been ascer-
tained. And there are no data to support your Grace’s
affirmation, that it is an experiment which has failed.
As a measure of reformation, it has certainly been, as
I have shewn, most successful, and there is strong
presumptive evidence, that were its preventive efi
fects as completly put to the test, the result would
be equally triumphant.
i


In order to render it or any other punishment ef-
fective, it is obviously necessary, that there should be
known to the law, one special penalty only for each
offence. The judge should have a discretionary
power, to adapt its degree, its severity, and its dura-
tion to the crime, but not to substitute another for
it, transportation for imprisonment, or imprison-
ment for transportation. No subsequent arrange-
ment should be allowed to interfere with the literal
execution of the sentence, except where His Majesty
is pleased to interpose his royal prerogative of mercy,
in cases considered from particular facts connected
with them, to be exceptions to the general rule.
There is also a collateral circumstance, that has
tended much to render transportation less efficient.
It appears that in many instances it is regarded only
as the last step to be taken with a determined con-
vict. When young and less confirmed in crime, he
is after his first conviction and sentence, sent to the
hulks or penitentiary, instead of being actually trans-
ported. None therefore but the most wicked and
determined, have, for the most part been threatened
with its infliction, and its effect,, has in proportion
been diminished as regards direct prevention.
How much crime, how much loss to the commu-
nity by plunder, and by expensive re-convictions
would be saved, and what a blessing would it be to
the criminals t hemselves, by separating them from


wicked associates, were it made an invariable rule,
that persons convicted of transportable offences,
should always after the first conviction be trans-
ported.
With respect to those who are at present sentenced
to transportation for seven years, an additional reason
may be assigned why immediate embarkation should
take place, namely, the fact that seven years is not a
period of servitude sufficiently tedious with which to
threaten criminals in England, and is even too short
in many instances with a view to reformation. But
if a few months or a year be subtracted from it, the
man has little inducement, as he cannot obtain a
ticket-of-leave until after four years’ service, to con-
duct himself properly, and must be controlled by pun-
ishment alone, and will besides be too soon totally
released from restraint. It would therefore be expe-
dient that offences now punishable by sevep years
transportation, should hereafter involve a sentence of
fourteen years, an increase of duration, which at all
events cannot be objected to by those who regard this
punishment as generally deficient in severity. It
may even be questioned whether transportation should
not always be for life, and whether the necessary
variationsin degree mightnot be provided for by sett-!
ling at the time the sentence is passed, the period of
servitude after which the convict might be considered
eligible for a ticket-of-leave, which it may be remarked


is only a remission in part, and during pleasure, enti-
tling the holder to receive the profits of his labour,
but not exempting him from the immediate control
of the police, or from summary punishment.
If it be supposed that the advantages in further-
ance of discipline which I have stated to arise from the
comparative comforts of the free labourers, do not
sufficiently compensate for the injurious effect they
produce in England in the minds of those who disre-
gard the intermediate state of slavery ; this I submit
does not suggest any legitimate argument against a
continuance of transportation, or against its being
more generally adopted; for after every accession to
the number of convict labourers who receive no
wages, the price of free labour will probably fall, and
thus remove the objection ; but it is reasonable to be-
lieve, never so low as to limit unduly the means of
obtaining food and clothing, and the necessay house-
hold accommodation.
The preventive effects of transportation have been
lessened by the opinions entertained by General
Macquarie, for ten years Governor of New South
Wales, at a critical period in the progress of that co-
lony. Influenced by the most benevolent feelings, he
argued that banishment ought to be considered a per-
fect expiation of the crime on account of which the
Convict had been expatriated, that it should in every
respect work for him a purification of his character*


and that he should be, after a certain ordeal, re-
admitted into society. He was in the habit therefore
of promoting the views of the more respectable among
the emancipists, in every possible way, and as is re-
ported by Commissioner Bigge, of inviting to his own
table, individuals whose original standing in society,
and whose education and manners would, even under
other circumstances, have rendered any such associa-
tion extremely unsuitable.
Some were even entrusted with magisterial power,
and thus, in consequence of the peculiar views of the
Government, and not from any defect necessarily con-
nected with the system of transportation, was raised
into influence that class of persons which has taken
so prominent a part in the political discussions which
at one time prevailed in New South Wales. And
from these causes which are fully detailed in the re-
port of Commissioner Bigge, have sprung the greater
number of those reports upon which your Grace has
so much relied. I say the greater number, for un-
doubtedly some have been the pure fictions of persons
disaffected to the government, who have adopted this
mischievous means of venting their spleen, and many
have been transmitted by convicts in a very miserable
condition, with a view to induce their fami-
lies to join them, in the hope that having decoyed
them into a state of much wretchedness, they might
thus excite the compassion of the government, and as


they selfishly expected, be assigned to their wives.
Some very remarkable instances of this description
have lately come under my notice.
But your Grace will perceive that all these reports
may be imputed to incidental and temporary causes,
and not to any attribute of transportation, of which
it may not be divested. It may fairly be inferred
therefore, that they might be counteracted by adverse
statements sufficiently authenticated, and then as
widely circulated as possible among the more disso-
lute classes. This would be desirable not only as re-
moving a cause calculated to diminish the effects of
transportation, but also as putting the relatives of
convicts on their guard against delusive statements
transmitted almost always with dishonest intentions.
With respect to the opinion entertained by several
persons favourable to transportation generally, that
this colony is too far advanced for the purposes of a
penal settlement.
Let us imagine that it had been the determination
Of government to build and put in order a penitentiary
in some solitary part of Britain, and that it was
deemed necessary as a measure of punishment as well
as of economy, to have the work done by the convicts
who were afterwai ds to be disciplined in it. Suppose
then, two thousand men sent under an adequate mi-
litary guard for the purpose, and the whole charge
entrusted to a Commandant, with perhaps twelve free


persons subordinate to him, as superintendents, ar-
chitects, storekeepers, and clerks.
Imagine the whole party arrived at their station,
and thrown upon their own resources. —Conceive ar-
rangements made for the building, and men unaccus-
tomed to labour of any kind, and of the most disso-
lute and insubordinate habits, put to work! —They
have continued to labour for some time —their provi-
sions are becoming exhausted.—Through some acci-
dent the expected supplies have not arrived—or they
have no fresh meat.—-Their flour becomes musty. —
And they are exposed without any shelter, except
that of a few trees, to the rain and to the cold. All
this might happen, and I would therefore ask, what
discipline could be exercised under such circumstan-
ces ?—what classification? —what moral restraint?
—what regular and methodical coercion ?—what se-
paration of the most perverse from the better dispo-
sed? —what respect for superiors ?—what regard for
religion ? —what subordination ?
It is unnecessary to dwell upon this period. Let
us allow a few years to pass. The house is finished.
—The wards are inhabited.—Arrangements have
been made for a regular supply of provisions.—The
waste lands in the neighbourhood have in conse-
quence of this new market been cultivated,—Every
thing is in order.—Proper officers are appointed.—
And the establishment may exemplify all the method.


order, and excellent management attributed to the
American penitentiaries, and be capable therefore of
accomplishing all that can be performed by peniten-
tiary discipline.
The transitions through which these colonies have
passed, preserve a strong analogy. The history of the
early settlement of New South Yfales might be given
almost in the same terms. And lam confident your
Grace will concur in the opinion, that such a state of
things must have been exceedingly unsuitable for se-
curing the true ends of punishment, but calculated to
be productive of much evil.
Transportation may then indeed have been more
dreaded, because the voyage was longer and more
dangerous, and a considerable proportion of the con-
victs were known to have died on the passage, but it
never was intended to invest transportation with ter-
rorsborrowed from capital punishment, actually put in
execution. Starvation,famine, disease, the being mur-
dered by the natives, and other fears of this description,
may have been well founded, but such are not the means
by which it is desirable to render it formidable. These
are a methodical coercion, a regular and systematic
discipline, a continually applied moral influence, clas-
sification, perfect subordination, regular labour, sum-
mary and certain punishments. But scarcely any one
of these, in the commencement of the settlement,
could be brought into operation. The small number


of free persons, and the scarcity of food, liberated the
criminals from controuh Under such circumstances
it was necessary to mark, by what would otherwise
have been considered undue indulgence and improper
confidence, the conduct of those who deported them-
selves in a more orderly manner than others.
Convict discipline was administered by convicts,
and the first principal superintendent, who had the
immediate controul of the whole, was in fact a con-
vict.
There was no class with whom these persons
could compare themselves. They could not therefore
realize to their own minds their degradation. There
were no free families of character to create a moral
influence. Few would emigrate in order to join a
community or settle in a country so unpromising and
undesirable.
About the commencement of General Macquarie’s
government. New' South Wales had overcome its
first difficulties : it was beginning to acquire wealth
and importance, and to excite notice as possessing
claims to the attention of the free eiliigrant. But
still convict discipline was exceedingly imperfect.
Many of the original prisoners had become free, had
acquired property, and had become considerable per-
sons in the place. The free emigrants, again, were
still few in number, and formed no separate class.
Their example, therefore, had little influence. They
K


were not generally of a respectable station, but were
mostly, with some truly excellent exceptions indeed,
individuals of broken and desperate fortunes and
dissolute habits.
There were then no means of creating a counter
habit of industry and laborious exertion, other than
those arising out of change of place and the value of
labour. These unquestionably had produced some
effect, but were unaided and unsupported by other
causes equally indispensable.
The colony then consisted of a community of con-
victs, occupying every rank, instead of communities
of free emigrants, having convicts as their assigned
servants.
Unfortunately General Macquarie (I repeat my
conviction) from the most benevolent motives, adopt-
ed the opinions to which I have already referred, as
so injurious, and endeavoured to amalgamate the
emigrant families, who were then beginning to arrive
in considerable numbers, with their convictpredecessors.
In the present stage, however, of its progress,
Yan Diemen’s land, (and I presume also New South
W ales,) presents a state of society widely differen t. The
emigrants are respectable and influential. The eman-
cipists and expirees form only the under currents of
society, and scarcely any have risen near to the sur-
face. Very few can be named who have attained to
any consideration, lam bound, however, to say


that these few, instead of being a blot, are an orna-
ment to the country; and, I presume, are only not
received into society from a fear of the consequences
of breaking down the division line which now distin-
guishes the free from the bond, and from those who
have been so.
There cannot be a greater mistake as respects this
colony than that which originated an impression, that
the free emigrants and expirees who have not com-
mitted any offence since their arrival, meet on an
equal footing and associate together. I have plea-
sure, however, in recording, that no bad feeling exists
between these classes, and that this separation does
not extend to the children. They are, as indeed,
justice requires they should be, placed upon an equal
footing.
Nearly one half of the population consists of indi-
viduals who arrived free. Many of them have moved
in very respectable circles in England; and among
them is a considerable number of half pay and retired
officers of His Majesty’s army and navy, with their
families.
These form a party having, with the assistance and
countenance of the government, sufficient influence
to give a healthy tone to the moral feeling of the co-v
lony—concubinage—drunkenness, and low debauch-
ery are, therefore, as discreditable as in England, and
female decorum is as much regarded.


The emigrants have acquired this influence in so-
ciety, jnot only by their general respectability of con-
duct, their having brought property with them, their
having the countenance of the government, but also
because nine-tenths of all the land that has been
granted, has been given to them, and an almost equal
proportion is still in their possession; and they have
had almost solely the immense advantage of receiv-
ing assigned servants —the chief source of colonial
wealth. Being thus possessed of a very large
proportion of ail the property of the place, they have
obtained that influence which is usually associated
with large means, and hence the non-intermixture
between the free and the expirees may be referred in
a great measure to the superiority of the circumstances
of the former, as well as to other feelings. The set-
tlers are now generally in circumstances of comfort.
Their farms are productive—their houses are good—
their offices are, considering every thing, convenient
—the routine of their establishments is arranged, and
thus they are enabled to impress with respect the
convicts who are from time to time assigned to them:
a preliminary circumstance evidently of the utmost
importance in securing the accomplishment of the
proper objects of convict discipline.
Churches are building in almost all the districts,
and schools are establishing, which it is obvious,
could not have been even attempted with propriety.


until the community had firmly fixed themselves, and
begun to partake of those sentiments which are usu-
ally connected with the consciousness of indepen-
dence. To desist now therefore from sending pri-
soners to Van Diemen’s land, would be as injudicious
as to beat the expense of building the ‘'penitentiary”
in England, and appointing all the officers necessary
to complete its establishment, and then from some
caprice to refrain from filling it with the convicts, by
whom it was built and for whom it was originally in-
tended, but to proceed to erect another on a some-
what different construction, and in like manner to
leave it when almost finished without any greater
evidence of its unfitness.
If it be said that to transport all those convicts,
who, by their crimes have rendered themselves legally
liable, would be to overwhelm these colonies, to
swamp the population, and to bring about a
state very similar to that which I have characterised
as objectionable, in the earlier periods of their settle-
ment. I would answer that the list of criminals in
England, is swollen by repeated re-convictions of the
same person. The number of convictions and re-
convictions, during the last ten years, is I presume
at least thrice the number of persons convicted.
The hulk and gaol reports of the conduct of each
transported convict, previous to his removal, suffici-
ently attest this fact.


If a man is not now transported until after the
second or third conviction for a transportable offence*
it is fair to conclude a removal of offenders after the
first conviction, would diminish the number of trans-
portable offences at least one third, in a few years.
It cannot, although I am aware your Grace is in-
clined to adopt the opposite opinion, be truly urged
against this, that the removal of one criminal would only
make way for another, for though crime be now the
object of a regular trade, it is not like those of an
honest description—an overstocked one. For as you
have observed there is much 'plunderable matter
in England, which is not plundered. The increase
of crime is chiefly formidable from moral considera-
tions, and as indicating a general distress among the
lower orders, and a lower standard of morals. It is
not so great even now, as to paralize the industry of
the country, or to diminish in any veryjgreat degree
the aggregate income of the industrious. The expa-
triation of the criminal will, as I have already argued
at considerable length, tend rather to save many
from crime commission, by the removal of evil example
which is the grand incentive, than make room for
others to fall into similar degradation.
As in a theatre by an artful arrangement, and by
making the same men pass across the stage again
and again, the semblance of a powerful force is often
created, so is the number of thieves made greater


in appearance, by the frequent rearraignment of the
same persons at the bar of the criminal courts, and
therefore were they removed from England after
their first conviction, the task of providing for their
proper discipline in the colony, would be, by no means
so herculean as might be inferred from a mere enume-
ration of the number of convictions.
Almost any additional number of convicts might
be subjected to discipline, without any proportional
increase of expenditure. For to return to the ana-
logy I have already more than once introduced :
This colony is like a penitentiary, supplied with all
the necessary officers, while many of the apart-
ments destined for prisoners are yet quite empty, and
the expense of maintaining the establishment is thus
necessarily almost as great as if it were fully occupied.
I da not mean that any of the present officers could
be dispensed with under existing circumstances, but
that their duties might, with every advantage, have
reference to a much greater number of convicts.
In bringing these observations to a close, in order
to transmit them by a vessel now about to sail for
England, I must apologise for having at such length
trespassed upon your Grace’s attention, and for any
obscurities, which may, from haste, have es-
caped my attention. My object is not the defence
of certain opinions, but truth generally. I shall
therefore annex to this communication a


addressed to me, at my request, by the Archdea-
con of New South Wales, containing the substance
of his remarks, during' his present visitation, upon
the convict disciplne of this colony.
His opinions and statements do not entirely coin-
cide with those I have advanced. Your Lordship
will therefore be enabled to compare the results
arrived at by individuals, viewing the same object
through different media.
I shall be satisfied if your Grace, after consider-
ing all the circumstances, detailed in these com-
munications be induced to believe, that transportation
is really a measure of reform ; and that most proba-
bly, were it fully tried, it would prove equally
successful in crime prevention ; that Van Diemen’s
land is now daily becoming better adapted for all the
purposes of discipline—that its distance from Eng-
land is not adverse, but advantageous, as not know-
ing what may happen, the convict fears the worst;
and that the uncertainty which in England has refer-
ence to the particular punishment consequent upon
each conviction, diminishes the dread entertained
by those sentenced to transportation, because know-
ing the worst, they hope its commutation for hulk or
penitentiary discipline.
But while I have been anxious to prove that
transportation is more efficient than any other pu-
nishment, it is far from being my opinion that it is


possible by penal inflictions alone to suppress crime,
a greater prevalence of religious education, and other
means of a similar description, sufficiently obvious,
are equally indispensable.
I HAVE THE HONOUR TO BE,
My Lord,
With much respect.
Your Grace’s most obedient.
Humble Servant,
GEORGE ARTHUR.




A COMMUNICATION
UPON
THE CONVICT DISCIPLINE
OF
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND,
BY
THE ARCHDEACON OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Hobart Town, June 22, 1833.
My Dear Sir,
I beg to return the publication of the Arch'
bishop of Dublin, which you kindly sent to me for
perusal; and which no person in these colonies can
peruse, I think, without interest. You request me
to state my sentiments upon the subjects discussed
by his Grace; and I most readily comply with that
request, although sensible that I have little claim to
attention, excepting that the duties of my office have
carried me into almost every part of both these co-
h


lonics, and have enabled me to observe the effects of
transportation upon the prisoners, in every situation
and under all circumstances in which they can be
placed.
The substance of the Archbishop’s argument
appears to be, that crimes have increased and are in-
creasing in the United Kingdom, because transpor-
tation, the punishment annexed to a great proportion
of them, has lost its terrors, and has therefore ceased
to operate with sufficient force in counteracting
temptation and repressing violations of the law. His
recommendation is, that in place of a punishment thus
proved to have become ineffectual, recourse should
be had to a strict system of penitentiary discipline, as
a secondary punishment, that would be more dread-
ed, and therefore more likely to deter from crime.
Previously to entering into a consideration of the
comparative efficacy of one or the other of these
modes of punishments, I must express ray dissent
from the expectation that either of them, or any other
mode of punishment which can be devised, will in the
present state of moral feeling in England, and in op-
position to the numerous incentives of crime, produce
any very marked improvement. The inefficiency of
transportation might, with greater correctness, have
been assumed, if those crimes alone had increased
which are punishable with transportation. But is
not this the truth—that all classes of crimes have


increased: those which are punishable by whipping,
by imprisonment, by hard labour, and even some
which arepunishable with death ? We must, therefore,
admit that not only transportation, but all kinds of
punishment have ceased to operate so forcibly as
they once did, and the cause of this deserves to be
sought.
At the risk of being thought to make the obser-
vation out of place, I will, nevertheless, state my
opinion, that the very prevalent decay of faith in the
truths of religion, and a proportionate abatement of
its influence, are the chief causes of that rapid in-
crease of crime which we witness and deplore.
I do not introduce this as a mere customary com-
mon-place remark, which it might be unbecoming
my situation to omit: but because I sincerely feel
the subject in this point of view has not been duly
pressed upon the attention of those whose office it is
to consult for the public security ; and that the theory
of the Archbishop of Dublin has a tendency to
tion and confirm the prevailing error. His Grace ap-
pears to maintain, that all our distress arises from
our having chosen the wrong preventive ; but that,
by trying various experiments in secondary punish-
ments, “ there can be little doubt that in the course
of a very few years we should be enabled, by atten-
tive observation, to ascertain what system worked
bestassuming that there is a system of mere legal


coercion discoverable, which may greatly abate if not
wholly eradicate the disease. Now, whatever may
be the deserved character of transportation, and ad-
mitting it for argument’s sake to be as exceptionable
as it is represented, I have the strongest conviction
on my mind that no substitution of another mode of
punishment will operate perceptibly in lessening the
amount of crime ; but that the same result will con-
tinue if that substitution be the only change. In
common with the Archbishop of Dublin, I have been
in charge of parishes in England, and my experience
has taught me that the relaxation of morality prevailing
there has arisen, not from the inefficiency of any particu-
lar mode of punishment, but from a diminished preval-
enceof the fear of God. So long as that fear governed the
general mind of the nation, the dread of legal inflic-
tions, coming in as a secondary restraint in aid of that
which was more prevalent and formidable, was quite
sufficient to curb violence and dishonesty, and to en-
force a tolerable regard for life and property. But
so soon as the barriers of the law are exposed, as is
the case at present, to the whole, rush and pressure
of men’s unruly appetites, those barriers will inevit-
ably bend and give way ; and the wave, if excluded
at one point, will come pouring through with greater
impetuosity at another. I candidly confess, that the
absence of all regard or reference to this cause of the
prevalence of crime, appears to me the leading de


feet of Archbishop Whately’s publication. It is an
omission which could not have been looked for in the
work of a divine; and unless it be taken into consi-
deration, he will greatly mislead those who follow
him as a jurist and a politician.
But being thus guarded against the expectation,
that any scheme of punishment will effect an impor-
tant reductionof crime, where moral restraint, resting
upon a perfectly different foundation, does not widely
prevail, we shall certainly do well to compare dif-
ferent modes of discipline, with a view to ascertain
the efficiency of each : to remove the defects of that
which is in force, or to substitute for it another which
is preferable. My acquaintance with prison or peni-
tentiary discipline, is very limited ; and I am little
qualified to speak with confidence concerning its
practical effect upon offenders. It is possible, no
doubt, to imagine very great severity of suffering in-
flicted under such a system; and that the apprehen-
sion of it may, in some minds at least, excite so much
alarm and horror as to deter them from criminal acts
which would expose them to the risk of such a pe-
nalty.
The plan, however, which his Grace recommends,
(p. 35) “ of requiring of such criminals as are sen-
tenced to hard labour a certain amount of xvorh—
compelling them indeed to a certain moderate quan-
tity of daily labour, but permitting them to exceed


this as much as they please, and thus to shorten the
term of their imprisonment by accomplishing the
total amount of their task in a less time than that to
which they had been sentenced/’ appears to me the
least expedient of all, and least likely to exercise a
controlling or corrective influence upon criminals. —-
This would have the effect of putting them as it were
upon their metal: and when do we find labour so
little burdensome to men as when they are induced
to apply to it with vigour,by the incentive of knowing
that the harder they work the sooner they will ac-
complish a desired end and obtain a particular ad-
vantage ? The prospect of approaching liberty, to
be accelerated by their own exertions, would sweeten
every toil. And upon returning to their associates,
what a feeling of triumph and superiority,—what a
fund for boasting as if they had performed some
great feat, would attend those who by strenuous ef-
forts should abridge the period of their sentence ! In
truth, however, I think, that the conclusive objection
to the penitentiary scheme, under any possible modi-
fication, consists in its failing altogether to separate
permanently companions in wickedness ; that is to
break tip their association. The sentence of impri-
sonment, even though not abridged by the criminal’s
activity or skill, must in due time expire ; and, being
released, he steps from the prison door back into his
former haunts of intemperance, where he finds his


old companions in iniquity assembled to receive and
welcome him. “ The pleasures of society among
convicts,” we are told by the Archbishop, “ besides
diminishing the efficacy of the punishment most,
where it is most wanted, viz. to those who have been
accustomed to bad company, can scarcely ever fail to
have a very corrupting effect.” (p. 17.) If inter-
course of that description have so pernicious an influ-
ence within the walls of the prison, will it have less
effect in “ diminishing the efficacy of punishment”
upon the prisoner whose sentence has expired ? Is
it not reasonable to think that such a restoration to
gratifications interrupted for a time, and to the only
society in which he finds a charm, will speedily blot
out from the recollection of the culprit every painful
visitation that he has undergone ; and incline him to
resume his old practices, even at the risk of again
experiencing the rigor of justice ? It is possible to
imagine the continuance for years together of such a
corrupted fraternity as this, if the members be but
wise and crafty enough to confine themselves to
crimes which inflict no penalty beyond incarceration :
and the money proposed to be allowed in payment
for a certain portion of the work done in prison,
would, in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, be
spent in drowning their sense of past sufferings, and
in screwing up their courage for a repetition of the
crime.
M


If it be admitted, as indeed there is evidence
enough to prove the fact, that men enter into asso-
ciations for the commission of crime, and find no dif-
ficulty in keeping up their numbers, even in spite of
the threat of a violent death ; and if they can be
brought to regard such a death, “ almost as their
natural end,” so as to be no'more deterred from ven-
turing into the field of dishonesty, than soldiers are
from entering into the field of battle, by the know-
ledge that some must fall, it is assuredly a hopeless
expectation that they will be deterred by dread of
imprisonment with hard labor happening to some, or
to all occasionally; especially when it can happen
only in alternation with intervals of compensatory
enjoyment. Under this view of the case, the supe-
riority appears prima facie to be attributable to trans-
portation ; which by permanently separating the in-
dividuals of a guilty confederacy, operates as a com-
plete physical check upon their reorganization for
public annoyance. In this advantage,'incarceration
at home must necessarily be deficient. Our most
venomous serpents are shut up securely enough in
solitary confinement every winter. But -when the
period of their imprisonment expires, they issue
forth into the atmosphere which they delight in, and
being warmed by it into fresh malignity, become as
dangerous as before. Only separate them head from
tail, and take care to prevent a reunion of the parts.


and their power of injury is gone for ever. Such I
conceive to be a just emblem of the comparative re-
sults of the penitentiary and transportation systems,
as they affect the ability and disposition of criminals
to do mischief to the public.
The advocates of the Archbishop's opinions will
object, perhaps that, whatever may be the case
as to ability the illustration is not just so far as re-
lates to the disposition to commit crime ! for that this
is encouraged and multiplied by that very act of
transportation which separates an offender from his
country only to hold out a temptation to others to
break the law through the mere desire of sharing his
good fortune by following him into banishment. It
is however a very difficult thing to imagine that any
part of this attractiveness can be attached to mere
transportation; that is to being placed in chains on
board a ship and conveyed to a distance of sixteen
thousand miles, there to be reduced to the condition
of a slave. It cannot be transportation which is in
itself thus delightful; and therefore the most just, and,
if properly considered, the most humane policy of go-
vernment will be to examine attentively whether any
extraneous advantages have been allowed to attach
themselves to the condition of a prisoner; converting
it from a state of punishment into a state of enjoy,
ment, and from a state of terror into one of tempta-
tion ; and if such should be detected, to remove them.


The character and habits of the master exercise
such an important influence over the condition of the
assigned servant, that however carefully assignments
may be regulated, there must be some instances in
which the intentions of government are not fulfilled;
but the punishment is rendered either more or less se-
vere than it ought to be. But making every allow-
ance for instances of the latter description, I do not
trace any thing in the general condition of the prison
population which can justify the persuasion that their
situation is, or can be, an enviable one. The most
objectionable feature in transportation in my opinion
is that it does not operate as a perfectly equal pun-
ishment ; that is, even where the crimes of two men
are equal in the eye of the law, and the criminals
therefore ought to be, and it is intended they should
be, equally punished, the sentence falls heaviest upon
the one who has the most virtuous feelings and affec-
tions remaining. I know this to be the case among
one particular class of prisoners; the machine-break-
ers as they were termed, from the southern counties
of England. The greater number of these men, up
to the period of committing the outrage, appear to
have been leading the frugal, hard-working, sober life
of the English peasantry; and were literally betrayed
into momentary outrage by representations of which,
many of them have assured me, they now understand
the fallacy. The mental sufferings of these men.


comparing them with poachers and other desperate
characters from their own class, and much more with
regular thieves and men hardened in vice, have been
very great indeed. This will be easily understood
from the fact which in answer to my enquiries has
been officially stated to me, and of which you are per-
fectly aware, that the number of deaths among the
individuals in question, has been Jar beyond the
average of prisoners of any other description in the
same space of time. It is scarcely possible I should
think, that this mournful peculiarity can be attributed
to any cause but one. All of these men were assigned
to masters who would treat them well; and mere
hard work could not, it is very evident, have been
particularly oppressive to those who had been brought
up to it all their lives. And if the effect of time have
quieted the apprehensions of such as survive, and
have arrested that unusual progress of mortality, I
am persuaded that none of these will send home even
now such a description of what has befallen them as
shall tempt others to imitate their crime in the hope
of sharing their condition.
If such inequality in point of severity as applied to
different cases of the same class were peculiar to
transportation, I should at once admit the argument
against it as a punishment to be quite conclusive. But
the defect is not peculiar to transportation. It is one
from which apparently our penal legislation cannot


be exempt. No mode of punishment hitherto known
or devised, is or can be rendered equally severe to
all on whom it is inflicted; not corporal suffering—
not imprisonment—probably not even death itself.
1 have certainly read frequent and even recent ac-
counts of persons committing crime with the inten-
tion of subjecting themselves to imprisonment as a
refuge against the cold and hunger and destitution to
which, while at liberty, they were exposed, and even
thanking the magistrates, and congratulating them-
selves on the beneficial change which a committal to
prison had made in their condition. While peniten-
tiary discipline shares equally with transportation in
this defect, it is open to the further objection which
has been already stated, of failing altogether to break
up criminal associations. So that when I find it sta-
ted to be “decidedly proved that transportation is
worst of all, and open to more objections than any that
has been, or can be proposed or conceived as a substi-
tute.” (p. 4.) lam compelled to think that these as-
sertions have been too hastily advanced; and, when
referred to facts, admit of a difference of opinion.
Still it is urged that “ the removal of criminals to
our Australian colonies, was an experiment whose
failure, though not anticipated to the extent that
should have been expected, has in some degree been
forced by experience upon the minds of most.” The
experiment is assumed to have failed, because crime


has continued increasing, while the punishment of
transportation was in a constant course of infliction.
But it may be asked, how can we argue from this
against the restraining power of transportation and
infer its inefficiency, unless we could tell what would
have been the proportion of crime if there had been
no transportation ? Its amount, for aught we can tell
to the contrary, might have been by many conceiva-
ble degrees, greater than it even now is; and there-
fore for the total depression below the maximum
height which it would otherwise have reached, we are
indebted to the influence of the penal colonies. I
profess myself to be one of those who “ conceive the
system to be a good one,” that is, the best adapted of
any that we know to produce a desired effect; con-
sequently I “ despair of finding a substitutebut I
am not so satisfied that it has reached the perfection
of efficiency as to object to any alteration. Trying
it by the tests of a good system enumerated by his
Grace, I feel confident that this kind of punishment
possesses already the greater number of the requisites
which are required, and might be made to include the
rest. My observation leads me to speak of it as
“ humane,” for it occasions very little if any useless
suffering, or of pain and inconvenience which does
not conduce to the object proposed, that is the re-
pression of crime. The only exception which it oc-
curs to me to make to this, is the instance of the ma


chine-breakers already referred to. Secondly—trans-
portation is “ corrective not necessarily corrupting
the criminal, but offering him rather opportunity and
inducement to reform. Thirdly—that it is “ cheap
for I believe that, taking one criminal with another,
the cost of transport to these colonies, and of mainte-
nance there occasions less expense to the mother
country than would be necessary for building peni-
tentiaries, and for the superintendence and support of
those who might be. condemned to inhabit them.
Independently of this, the labour of convicts em-
ployed here and in New South Wales, has already
opened sources of trade and provided for an inter-
change of commodities, by which the home revenue is,
or will be, so benefltted as to counterbalance much of
the outlay attendant on transportation.
The only remaining requisite is that it be " formi-
dable i. e. that the apprehension of it should ope-
rate as much as possible to deter men from crimes.
I have already explained the reasons which lead me
to think that neither transportation to the colonies,
nor imprisonment in penitentiaries, nor any mode of
punishment which may be devised, will operate very
successfully under present circumstances in dimin-
ishing crime. Still if required to state which of all
such punishments admits of being rendered most for-
midable, I should not hesitate to name transportation.
Consider it simply as expatriation:—What inflic


tion is more to be dreaded ? It may be said, men do
not feel it: But whatever they may pretend, I know
that they do feel it; and most acutely. And when
the moment of departure arrives, they would submit
to any sacrifice or suffering to avoid it. lam aware
that the apprehension of this suffering does not always
operate to deter men from crime; because they do not
sufficiently picture it to themselves beforehand ; nor
until it actually comes upon them, which is after
they have committed the offence. But this also, let
it be remembered, is not peculiar to transportation ;
it extends to all punishments whatever; from the
misery attending which, men under the influence of
temptation obstinately turn their thoughts, and never
truly believe that such will be their fate until it over-
takes them. lam satisfied that the notion of a pri-
soner’s life in these colonies, being a life of ease and
enjoyment, is, 'generally speaking, a pure fiction.—
If such an impression be generally prevalent, it cer-
tainly becomes in its effects little less injurious than
if it were strictly true. But such impressions I can
attribute only to a failure on the part of the law to
exercise all the severity which the case admits of, or
to a want of promptitude on the part of the executive
authority in carrying the sentence into effect.
It forms no part of my office to devise or to recom-
mend such increased severity ; but I must state my
persuasion that the legislature would act wisely in
abolishing transportation for seven years.
N


I would apply the penitentiary discipline with as
much severity as may be necessary, and upon that
system which shall be most strongly recommended
by experiment, to the correction of all those offen-
ders who are now punished by, or at least sentenced
to, the shortest period of transportation. The ob-
jection which I have stated, of its allowing the cul-
prit, when released, to return to the society of his
former companions, must lie against every application
of prison discipline ; but it is least of all applicable
to such cases as lam now contemplating. Many
such convicts are very young; and there may be
some hope of rescuing them permanently from guilt
by the timely infliction of severe chastisement. Even
those who are already associated with gangs of plun-
derers, being convicted for the first time of an offence
not of the most aggravated description, may not be
yet so hardened as to be beyond the reach of reform
by discipline. Many young men, also, in respectable
ranks of life, who are betrayed into crimes which now
subject them to transportation for seven years, might
perhaps be more forcibly deterred by the dread of a
disgraceful punishment in their own country, under
the eyes of all who know them, than by a sentence
which exiles them to a place where all are strangers
to them and they to all: and the sense of shame is,
on that account, less oppressive.
I am, therefore, an advocate for the total abolition


of transportation for seven years; because, although
the punishment itself may be quite as severe as the
offence deserves, yet it leaves a possibility that after
what will appear a very short interval, one offender
may now and then be placed, through a thousand
casual circumstances, in possession of more property
and better prospects than he enjoyed at home. The
shorter the interval, of course the more pernicious
must be the effect upon the public mind. What the
man may have suffered is unknown or forgotten; what
he has gained is alone spoken of and remembered.—
What a thousand others in like circumstances have
suffered without acquiring any thing, is not consi-
dered. A very few examples of this kind are suffi-
cient to spread a belief that all who visit the Austra-
lian colonies may hope within as short a space to ac-
quire equal advantages; and that, consequently,
transportatian must be a benefit, —not a punish-
ment.
There is one consideration which appears to me
not to have attracted due attention, although by le-
gislating without reference to it, we are exposed to
all the inconsistencies which arise from acting without
settled principles. It is most evident, that upon all
propositions which may affect the condition of pri-
soners after their arrival in the colonies, the mother-
country and the colonies have separate interests.—
The interests of the former, is, that transportation


should operate as a punishment, principally that it
may act as a warning and a restraint. This is to
render it “ formidable,” not desirable, in the eyes of
the nation at large. To effect this, it is evidently the
policy of the mother country not only to provide that
the prisoners, while under sentence, should be under
a course of punishment; but, also, that after their
sentence has expired, they should at least not find
readier means of rising in credit, wealth and station
than under any circumstances they could have as-
pired to, if they had remained at home. Every in-
stance to this effect does prove that whatever suffer-
ing transportation may cause, it affords to the indivi-
dual an advantage which, but for transportation, he
would not have enjoyed ; and it thus far undoes the
designed effect of that punishment, and operates ac-
cordingly against the interest of the country which is
seeking thereby to deter from and diminish crime. On
the other hand, when we look at the interest of the
community to which offenders are transported, we
find that, for its advancement we ought to hold out
to prisoners an encouragement exactly the reverse of
that which the state from which they are banished
would approve. To call forth the resources of a new
country like this, it is plain that every man should
be encouraged to exert his utmost skill and industry;
which he will never do but in the hope of acquiring
property. And if a prisoner is in a capacity to ac


quire property, he must from the force of circum-
stances be able, in proportion to his endowments of
mind and body, to acquire it more easily than he
could in England. In the recent act which incapaci-
tates the holders of tickets-of-leave from acquiring or
holding property, the legislature has acted very advi-
sedly no doubt, in furtherance of English objects;
but the operation of that act will be to take away a
great stimulus to industry and enterprize, and thereby
to retard colonial improvement. So again if we look
exclusively to the interest of the colonies, it is plain
that the prisoner whose sentence has expired, should
be encouraged to apply his utmost energies to the ac-
quisition of property by the prospect of sharing those
civil and political distinctions which, unless a prohibi-
tory law intervene, it is the natural effect of property
to confer. But on the other hand, if the road to
honour as well as wealth be laid open to those who
have been prisoners, it is evident that such exaltation
will appear very enviable in the eyes of those honest
people at home, who find that they cannot rise to the
like ; and thus again, what is good for the colony will
be detrimental to the parent state. Their interests
in this respect must ever remain opposed ; and there-
fore it is incumbent on those who legislate for both
countries, to decide at once which of these interests
shall be preferred, and in all their measures to act
upon the principle of making the other give way.


With respect to the moral effects of that mode of
punishment, knowing your anxiety upon that point, I
will speak with the utmost candour, and with as much
accuracy as possible. The author of the article in
the London Review expresses himself to the effect
“ that, in the generality of cases, the discipline under-
gone in the colony should be sufficient even to undo
the evil of the voyage —to remove but the additional
contamination contracted during the voyage out, is
more than either reasonable conjecture or experience
would allow us to hope/’ (p. 79.) Having myself ac-
complished the voyage in a vessel of that class, I
must profess that, so far as my observation and ex-
perience extend, this representation is very erro-
neous ; nor, so far as it is possible to form a judgment
in such a case, do I believe that the prisoners who
came out in the same ship with me were in any re-
spect worse men when they landed than when they
embarked. Such partial instances of change as were
perceptible in any of them, rather gave me hopes to
the contrary. I do not mean that they were impro-
ved by the exhortations they heard from me, (though
they never shewed themselves inattentive to these or
unthankful for them) but simply that the general ef-
fect of such a voyage upon their minds, is serviceable
rather than injurious. That they have “ nothing
whatever to do in all that time but to talk over their
exploits of roguery,” is an incorrect assumption;


since in every well regulated ship constant employ-
ment is found for many of the number, and with re-
gard to the whole regulations as to order, personal
cleanliness and other duties are such as to give them
at least something to do every day. It is very possi-
ble that they may talk over their exploits, but I
should suppose not very freely ; as they appeared ge-
nerally distrustful of one another, and not very com-
municative. Among two hundred men I never wit-
nessed an instance of ruffianism or insubordination ;
and in profaneness of language they were, generally
speaking, far exceeded by the sailors. Upon the
whole, I must say, that if there be no more serious
objection to transportation than the moral injury
which the voyage occasions to the prisonurs, very
little stress can be laid upon this. Under the care of
a vigilant and judicious surgeon, or of a clergyman if
there be one on board, they may not only be re-
strained from going deeper into vice, but some of the
number may be even instructed and improved.
Concerning the moral condition of the prisoners
within the colony, and the degree of reformation and
improvement which has taken place among them, I
rather hesitate in offering an opinion which is to be
universally applied; because upon such a subject it
is impossible to state any conclusion whatever which
particular instances may not be brought to contradict.
Every man’s mind must be made up by the prepon


derance of facts which have come to his knowledge,
favouring one or the other persuasion. I have calcu-
lated in this way. I have never yet met with a per-
son whom I certainly knew, or could reasonably be-
lieve, to have been rendered by transportation a
worse character than he was before, while I have
very many under my observation at this time, whom
I believe to have been served and amended by it;
that is, whom it has checked in a career of vice, and,
to a greater or less extent, reclaimed to habits of de-
cency and order.
I am no admirer of a state of servitude by assign-
ment, or of the exercise of summary jurisdiction. I
cannot hesitate in thinking that they are in them-
selves great evils ; and, when all attendant mischiefs,
direct and indirect, which result from them, are taken
into consideration, I think that the community in
which they exist is paying a very heavy tax for the
financial advantages which the convict system may
confer. But, notwithstanding this, the colony does
certainly afford, to the man whose moral and legal
character is forfeited, a stronger inducement and
more favourable opportunity to reform, than lie in
the way of such a man at home. It would be ridicu-
lous to set up the highest standard of excellence, and
to maintain that no man is reformed who has not at-
tained to it. Judging according to the degree of im-
provement which they may, generally speaking, be


expected to attain, I must admit that my expecta-
tions have been altogether surpassed, and I think
that the country itself and the system under which
the prisoners are here placed, tend very much to dis-
courage and diminish crime. In fact I witness conti-
nual examples of men who are leading harmless, and
in some degree useful lives here ; whereas they could
not be six hours upon the scene of their former crimi-
nality without having their old tendencies revived,
and feeling eager to make fresh essay of their skill in
the arts of dishonesty. If we look to the cause of
this, we should remember that the temptations here
are much feebler ; inasmuch as, putting a few large
towns out of the question, even successful dishonesty
cannot purchase those immediate enjoyments which
in a thickly-peopled luxurious country are always
within reach of all who have money at command.
The ruling desire of the prisoners here, as those who
converse much with them will speedily find, is not
money but liberty; and liberty, he knows, will be ob-
tained by regularity of conduct for a certain term :
while a very trifling breach of honesty or propriety,
will place it at a greater distance from him than ever.
The great cause also which encourages crime in
England, is its being reduced so much to a system; all
the parts of which mutually facilitate each other.
Dishonesty seems to be a science which is regularly
taught; and the professors of it form societies regu-
o


larly organized to keep one another in countenance.
I can, from personal observation, testify how greatly
one offence, that of poaching, has been increased by
such associations, instead of being carried on as for-
merly by solitary marauders. The extension too of a
rapid and regular communication between the metro-
polis and ail parts ofthe country, contributed very much
to the same result. The poacher can calculate within a
few minutes the time at which he must be at a parti-
cular spot, to rid himself, on the passing ofthe coach,
of his booty, without ever conveying it into his own
dwelling to afford traces for discovery. He thus con-
verts it at once into money, which in the neighbouring
public-house affords him the enjoyment for the sake of
which he put liberty and life to hazard. I am per-
suaded that every fast travelling coach which has been
established within the last fifteen years has contribu-
ted vastly to increase the practice of poaching in every
parish lying near the road along which it passed. I
mention this as one instance among many others of
the way in which the mere progress of social improve-
ment will increase crimes by the the greater facility
which it affords for realizing the produce of them ;
and as it multiplies the number of confederated re-
ceivers of stolen property who are the chief encoura-
gers of theft. Now such circumstances neither have,
nor can have, a parallel here. Incentives and oppor-
tunities are fewer than in England; and this occa


sions me to have a greater hope that crime will not
proceed so rapidly. So constantly are the prisoners,
whether in public or private service, under notice, that
they cannot confederate as English thieves and
poachers do, to pursue an illegal course. Their as-
sociations for such a purpose are casual and must be
of short duration. Plunder is not perhaps so easily
concealed, and certainly is less readily disposed of
and converted into money; and money itself will not
in the country districts procure for them the ready
means of debauchery as in England; whereas pun-
ishment on detection is immediate. These conside-
rations must have a very great and constant influence
in restraining the force of temptation among them 5
and although many who are thus restrained may con-
tinue to be, morally speaking, very bad men, yet the
object of the law is attained if they are by whatever
motive influenced to abstain from crime. Those who
are too depraved and daring to be reduced to order
in this way, are generally but a very short time in the
colony without manifesting their true character; and
some act of outrage probably consigns them to a road
party or a penal settlement. And this continual
weeding out of the worst class of all, contributes very
powerfully to the good order which generally pre-
vails.
The extent of reformation through the influence
of religion, it must of course be difficult to trace


without opportunities of long-continued and close
observation of individuals ; for the more sincere it is,
the less it will be obtruded. I fear, however, that
the extent of reiigous improvement is very limited.
A man in a state of servitude and under summary
jurisdiction, soon finds that it is to his own advan-
tage to conduct himself with propriety ; and unless
he be a very desperate character, he will be satisfied
with the indulgence which he thus obtains. When
he becomes free, the habits of regularity which he
has formed often continue to prevail, and to keep him
within bounds. Many such instances are observable;
and the relapse, when it does occur, generally arises
from the breaking out afresh of the vice of drunken-
ness, which fear of instant punishment had for a time
controlled. A disposition to overreach and defraud
within the limits of safety from legal consequences,
is also, I must confess, by far too prevalent. I have
conversed very extensively with the more respectable
among the prisoners, and from a comparison between
their statements, I am led to believe, that even while
the outward conduct is brought to a forced regula-
rity, great depravity does prevail in that class of pri-
soners : such as to render the association to which
they are condemned exceedingly painful to men who
have any sentiment of religion, or any remaining de-
cency of character.
W hile upon the subject of religious improvement,
I must, however, observe, how much surprise and


pleasure at the same time has been occasioned by
the absence of all disposition to scoff at or refuse the
offices of religion, even on the part of those who might
be regarded as probably corrupt and unprincipled
men. You will remember the occasion, not long
passed, of our visiting a very numerous road party,
before whom I performed divine service, and you will
testify I think that there could not possibly be a con-
gregation displaying more fixed attention than these
men, who continued standing during the prayers and
sermon. I have not myself any such suspicion, but
it might enter the minds of others, that the know-
ledge of your being present produced all this serious-
ness. But the many scores, perhaps hundreds, of
occasions in which in travelling through the country
1 have officiated with exactly the same result to pri-
soners belonging to private establishments or to pub-
lic road parties, and when there could be no such
cause assigned for their attentive demeanour, forbid
my thinking it other than sincere and unaffected.—
The general lament among road parties in the inte-
rior of New South Wales, I have found to be the in-
frequency with which they are visited by a clergy-
man. In every such assemblage I have observed
many who evidently prayed with inward fervency ;
and my persuasion is, that some good is effected and
some comfort administered on every such-Occasion ;
nor can I despair of the condition of men among
whom I find so much thankfulness to the preacher


for his services, and so much respect shown to him
in consequence. It is not possible that visits soAare
and casual should generally produce any other than
a transient impression. Indeed the best impressions
in every case are produced, not by a clergyman
preaching once and then going on his way ; but by
his living and abiding among the people and afford-
ing them opportunity of seeing his life and knowing
how far he practices what he preaches. I feel as-
sured, that if it were possible to have among the pri-
soners a number of clergymen stationed so that every
large assemblage of them might know their own
minister and see him day by day labouring for their
improvement, the effect would be truly beneficial.—
It would be difficult, but surely not impossible, to find
men duly qualified, both by piety and discretion, who
would devote themselves to this work. And indeed,
when I reflect that the nation which discharges an-
nually so many thousands of offenders from its
shores, makes not the slightest direct effort for their
religious instruction in the colonies, I can find no
argument which satisfies me that such omission does
not amount to even a national sin. I earnestly wish
it were r viewed in the same light by those who could
make a different appointment.
After all that has been or can be said, I must re-
turn to my original assertion ; that transportation has
been too hastily decried and condemned. It reforms
as many, I believe, as any other mode of secondary


punishment could : and they who are not improved
in morals, become less dangerous than if they had
remained at home. Punishments more formidable
than transportation I cannot deny may undoubtedly
be devised ; but then they could not be equally cheap,
corrective, and humane, and consequently their adop-
tion is out of the question. The course to be pursued
therefore is to render transportation “ something far
beyond ordinary hard work ; and to cut off the hope
of those advantages which have been indiscreetly suf-
fered in some instances to result from it: detracting
from its proper terror and leading many to covet it
as a boon rather than dread it as a punishment-
When this is done, transportation will operate as ef-
fectually as any instrument of mere punishment can
do, in discouraging crime and reforming criminals.
In the present state of the country I am satisfied it
cannot be dispened with ; and should the legislature
try the experiment, afier stocking, and over-stocking
as many penitentiaries as can be built, they will be
compelled at last to have recourse to penal colonies.
Believe me to remain,
My Dear Sir,
Your most obedient humble servant,
W. G. BROUGHTON.
His Excellency
Colonel George Arthur,
&c. &c. See,
