

I- : • /<.
P ftwq
jfe x !
i
Observations and Experiments with the Microscope
on the effects of various Chemical Agents on
the Blood.
By Thomas Sheaeman Ralph, M.R.C.S. Eng., &c.
Up to a recent date, it has been remarked, that the history of the
life of the red corpuscle of the blood has yet to be written ; to this
I would add, that the organic, chemical, physiological, and path-
ological history of the blood as a whole, has yet to be furnished to
the medical student.
The object of this communication is to call attention to some facts
relative to the history of the blood, which I believe have not been
hitherto noticed, and may lead us to modify our views regarding
some portions of this all-important organized fluid.
The substance of this communication has resulted from inyestiga-
tions with the microscope which have engaged my attention from
time to time during the lapse of some years, but it is only lately I
have been induced to place them in the form in which I now present
them. At the same time, I can say, I have not neglected to inquire
what are the views entertained by others on so difficult a subject of
study as the blood is admitted to be. This, therefore, is my apology,
if any be needful, for venturing into a field which has occupied the
attention of able observers, and yet has yielded so little return to
encourage us in our path of observation.
2. At the risk of being tedious I will begin by some general
observations on known facts relative to the blood.
On first examining the blood by the aid of the microscope, one is
struck with the immense amount of those bodies which are known
under the name of blood disks, or the red corpuscles of the blood ;
and which in countless hundreds occupy the small space which the
instrument is able to explore at one time.
These red corpuscles are found to be bi-concave disks ; themselves
possessing no appreciable colour, but presenting the usual bright red
colour of blood, when massed together by hundreds or thousands.
A slight amount of examination suffices to inform us that they are
nearly alike in size and appearance, yet when subjected to chemical
agents, some of them are found to present recognizable differences.
Associated with these disks or red corpuscles, are the white cor-
puscles, markedly different as to form, size, and number, when
compared against the discoids, for they are globules presenting a
larger size than the red corpuscles, and are vastly inferior to them n
numbers. Chemical tests applied to them reveals to us the fact that
they are compound bodies, each consisting of a fine cell-wall or
envelope, including a nucleus or nuclei, sometimes four in number.


These red and white corpuscles are found existing in a fluid which
both supports and preserves them, and is called the liquor
sanguinis.
In addition to these corpuscles we find also a number of small
white or oily-looking spherules, usually of a much smaller size ;
these bodies prove to be either oil globules, or chyle bodies. Briefly
then, the chyle bodies and white corpuscles are said to be derived
from changes in alimentation, and are supposed for the most part to
be introduced from the alimentary organs into the mass of the blood,
where they undergo change and assume ultimately the form of red
corpuscles, which in turn pass through further change ; but these
appear to partake more of the nature of disintegration and
growth.
3. It is now generally admitted, that the nuclei of the white cor-
puscles of the blood become individual red corpuscles by the disin-
tegration of their cell-walls ; that is in mammals.
Several objections have been advanced against this view: Ist,
that the nuclei are for the most part of a spherical form ; 2ndly, that
they are not of the same size as the red corpuscles ; and 3rdly, that
the nuclei clearly differ from the red corpuscles in chemical character,
as they (the nuclei) become dyed red under the action of magenta
dye, which change does not occur with the red corpuscles.
These difficulties appear to me to vanish when the blood is ex-
amined by means of some chemical agents, to which I will refer
by-and-bye.
As regards the chemical difference existing between the white and
red corpuscles, it can be seen that some chemical agents cause the
dissolution of some of the red corpuscles, leaving others untouched;
those which remain thus exhibiting that some chemical difference
existed between them and the other red corpuscles which have dis-
solved away ; at the same time they can be made to assume the
colour of magenta; thus, in a measure, removing the third
difficulty.
These remaining corpuscles are also, for the major part, of an
uniform size, and almost always of the minimum size of blood
corpuscles ; i. e. 1-5000th of an inch in diameter, and are therefore
undistinguishable as to size from the nuclei of the fully developed
white corpuscles.
These observations appear to remove the second and third objec-
tions.
4. The chief objection, as far as I can judge, appears to me to lie
in the difference which exists between the usually spherical form of
the nuclei of the white corpuscles, and the biconcave disks of the red.
My opinion is, that the nuclei of the white corpuscles merge from
their cells as spherules, and that the normal, in fact the absolute
form of the red corpuscle is globular, and not that of a disk; hence I
consider the old term, red globule of the blood, to be a correct one.
All observers who have been at pains to examine the blood by the
aid of the microscope, assert the discoid form of the red corpuscles.
This is correct enough, but I regard this discoid condition to be due


to a change which the red corpuscle undergoes immediately after
transference from the blood-vessels.
It appears to me that when the nuclei of the white corpuscles
emerge from their cells, they are then almost if not quite solid, of a
spherical form, and of the size alluded to ; and that they increase in
size by dilution of, and passing out of their contents, and that in
proportion to the diminution of the contained matters of a red cor-
puscle, at the time when it is withdrawn from a blood vessel, depends
the magnitude of the disk which results ; the corpuscle collapsing
from a semi-empty spherical condition while in the liquor sanguinis ,
to that of a disk, from some changes occurring in the blood immedi
ately after its exit from a blood-vessel. Ultimately, the red corpuscle,
while circulating is reduced to a cell-wall by continued loss of con-
tained matters, and the cell-wall itself finally dissolves away, and in
so doing gradually assumes a smaller size, and is often encountered in
this condition as a mere ring; as in blood seen in urine, or after long
soaking in water; or after the gentle application of heat to stale blood.
If the blood be examined in the capillaries of a mouse immedi-
ately after it has been killed, it will be seen to consist of spherules j
but should these be crowded together within the blood-vessel, each
spherule assumes a polygonal form for the time; and if the cor-
puscles are watched as they slowly escape from a capillary vessel,
they will be seen to be distinctly spherical, and the lapse of a short
time suffices to cause them to assume the discoid form.*
So again, if blood be drawn quickly on a glass slide, and
examined as soon as possible, many red corpuscles will be found to
be spherular. So also, if blood be collected in a mass, sufficient to
form a large clot, and small portions from the interior of this
coagulum be examined, many red corpuscles will be found in the
spherular form.
The difficulty attending the examination of the circulation of the
blood in a mammal, has very probably led observers in time past to
adopt the idea that the red corpuscles are disks; seeing they are of
this form when recently drawn and that the red corpuscles of the
frog also are of a flattened form while seen circulating, t
* In order to succeed with this experiment, the microscope should be in
readiness and adjusted. As soon as the animal (which should not be too fat)
has been killed by a blow on the head, the abdomen should be quickly opened,
a portion of intestine and mesentery cut out and spread on a glass
slide; the mesentery is then covered with thin glass without addition of
water or any fluid, and search should be made for a vessel of minute size
ramifying among the fat cells : one which allows only two or three cor-
puscles to pass together will show the red corpuscles in a spherical form; and
further, that they change in form soon after the arrest of the circulation.
t The globular form of the red corpuscle is almost universally stated in
books to be due to the imbibition of a fluid of lesser density than the liquor
sanguinis , as when water is added to blood disks, and they then assume in
consequence the spherular form ; and so conversely, when glycerine is added
the disks collapse still further, from the withdrawal of the fluid remaining
in them, and they then become corrugated; but the idea that the red


5. It may be deemed a matter of little importance to be certain
whether the red corpuscles of the blood are spheroids or disks; but
with reference to this I have to advance some important con-
siderations.
Granting that the red corpuscles are normally of a spherical form,
on measuring those belonging to human blood I find they may be
estimated to be of a minimum size of 1 -5000th of an inch in diameter;
and that the spherular red corpuscles of other animals, as of the ox,
rabbit, cat, and mouse, exhibit the same minimum size; and, on
acting on the red corpuscles of these animals by various chemical
agents (such as those which do not disintegrate the corpuscles), I
find the minimum size of all these kinds is also 1-5 000th of an inch.
So that the difference in size presented by blood corpuscles of
different animals is only at one end of the scale, the maximum ; there
being no reliable difference as to their minimum size. Now the
difference in size which remains to be considered is at the maximum
end of the scale ; but be it remembered that this result is obtained
by measuring the disks of one animal against those of another ; if
the discoid form of the red corpuscle be the result of changes taking
place in the liquor sanguinis , (or the passing of this fluid into the
condition of serum,) the corpuscles may, under varying conditions
of this fluid, flatten out to a larger diameter by discharging their
contents to a greater degree ; just as a gelatinous sphere of six inches
in diameter, with walls one inch in thickness, would flatten or
collapse into a discoid of smaller diameter than a sphere of the
same diameter, with walls only a quarter of an inch in thickness ;
so the difference in size exhibited between the blood corpuscles of
different animals, appears to be a less reliable index than ever, as a
means of distinguishing one kind of blood from another. Such are
the impressions made on my mind by the appearances presented by
blood disks when coloured by magenta, in the way I shall point out
presently.
6, The experiments with magenta recorded by Professor Halford
and other observers reveal to us the fact, that the nuclei of the white
corpuscles of the blood alone take the dye. The red corpuscles
appear to me to melt away or dialize out their contents; so that on
looking at blood acted on by a solution of magenta, we see, in place
of patches of red corpuscles, a mass of molecular matter surrounding
pale discoid cells. The magenta, in this instance, tinging red the
molecular matter which has escaped. But the application of the
magenta dye, in connection with the other chemical agents, shows
us that the red corpuscles themselves are in different states or stages;
for, by carefully acting on the red corpuscles, they can be made to
assume the magenta dye ; and to assume it while under all forms—
discoid, crumpled, stellate, or spherular, but they do not become
permanently dyed by it.
corpuscles are normally of a spherical form while traversing the blood-
vessels is nowhere stated. Formerly it was asserted that the red corpuscles
were spherical, but this had reference to their external condition, or when
the blood had been drawn from the vessels, and was so far a mistake.


Sometimes the dye lays hold of the contained matter of the
corpuscle, and exhibits it separated from the cell-wall ; at others it
may be seen slowly dializing out. (Again, other chemical agents
when applied merely exhibit the blood corpuscles in the spherular
form, and prevent at the same time the ingress of the magenta ;
and so no colouration follows its application.)
We see, for example, when magenta has coloured the corpuscles, a
blood disk presenting a tolerable level surface ; this is one which
has been somewhat extensively emptied of its contents. Another
disk will present the appearance of a thick rim, coloured red; this
contains more material on some portions of its walls. Another will
exhibit a deep colouration, extending from the edge towards the
centre which is uncoloured ; here the biconcave form is complete.
Again we meet with a corpuscle of a distinct globular form, and
fully tinted ; but this measures far less than the disk we started
with, and which possessed but little material within. So that when
a corpuscle has aged in its transit through the blood vessels, it
probably flattens into a larger disk than those which have not
parted with so much of their solid contents \ and it also is likely,
under favourable circumstances, to lose more, and consequently
become a still larger disk.
This appears to me to be fully illustrated, on examining blood
which has been placed on a glass slide and allowed to dry. We
notice that the central portion of the blood under examination is a
confused mass of coagulum and corpuscles ; and that at the edges
we obtain a fair view of corpuscles in a single layer only. It is here
we have presented to us the red corpuscles lying side by side as
disks ; while at the same time many may be seen drawn into an
angular form, and consequently not in a condition to be measured.
All these I am disposed to regard as being in an artificial or non-
natural condition ; and in measuring such bodies we are measuring
those that have lived out their days, and becoming flattened and
expanded to various sizes are not likely to furnish very certain
metrical data whereby to determine their origin, human or
otherwise.
If it be argued that the corpuscles are measured in fluid, and not
in a dry state, still it is apparent we are are dealing with blood
cells in a discoid condition ; and if we measure any presenting a
spherical form, it will be found that they are of a lesser diameter
than the discoid corpuscles, approaching therefore by so much to the
minimum size ; and in proportion our data are lessened in value ;
because, as I have endeavoured to show, this minimum size appears
to be common to the blood of several mammals, while traversing the
blood vessels.
7. I now come to a consideration of some chemical agents with
which I have experimented on the blood, and by which it would
appear some changes are effected in the corpuscles themselves, and
affording us evidence that some of these are in different states or
conditions.
The following is a summary : —Prussic acid appears to lay hold of


the iron in the blood, and to form a blue cyanide of iron; and when-
ever this occurs, starchy bodies are evolved from the decomposition
which appears to have taken place.
Magenta dye, when added to blood, seizes the nuclei of the white
corpuscles and dyes them red; while the w ater in which the magenta
is dissolved attacks the older red corpuscles, causing them to dialize
out their contents, which then become beautifully tinged by the
magenta ; and if a drop of sp. ether, nitric, be added, the colour is
increased. Many red corpuscles may be seen in a spherular form,
but without colouration.
When cupreate of ammonia, or ammonical solution of sulphate of
copper is added to blood, I believe the white corpuscles lose their
cell-walls ; the red, however, assume different conditions, and when
magenta dye is added, nearly all the corpuscles allow the colour to
pass in. Sometimes the contents of the red corpuscles pass out
tinted, leaving the cell-wall slightly affected by the dye ; sometimes
the contents shrink within the spherular red corpuscles, so as to
occupy the centre as a solid red mass; or the red corpuscles are seen
in a deeply bi-concave form, and a decided red ring is presented to
our notice.
When neutral acetate of ammonia is added to blood, the corpuscles
assume the same marked conditions, and allow the magenta to tinge
them as above.
When oxalate of ammonia is added, the corpuscles are often seen
to be spherical; magenta does not touch them.
When oxalate of ammonia and magenta are added together to
blood, a different condition is induced, and the magenta then lays
hold of the red corpuscles.
When liquor sodas chlorinatae is added, the blood corpuscles
pass into various conditions, and magenta following lays hold of
those which appear to be in some particular condition; thus
indicating that some difference exists between them.
The action of hydro-sulphuret of ammonia is to cause the blood
spherules to resist the action of magenta.
Oxalic acid with magenta causes considerable change in blood;
many red corpuscles exhibit their contents coloured red by the dye,
and in a state of molecular division ; the cellular envelope (1) of the
corpuscles comes out very distinctly.
The effect of a solution of sulphate of copper on blood appears to
be still more curious than that of the ammonical solution ; for when
magenta is added, the dye attacks only some of the red corpuscles;
none of the disks take colour ; evidently only those which may be
considered to be in a more recent state, after having passed from the
condition of nuclei, are attacked. After the lapse of some time,
some of the disks in contact with a large amount of magenta
become coloured, and these exhibit a kind of molecular colouration,
differing from that resulting from the ammonio-sulphate of copper
and magenta,
Ammonical solution of sulphate of copper and magenta together
exhibit the corpuscles taking the dye in different degrees ; the


corpuscles ultimately dissolve away, leaving only a beautiful oily-
looking red smear or patch.
The addition of ammonio-acetate of copper followed by magenta,
exhibits the red corpuscles contracting their coloured contents ;
sometimes these split into two within the cell.
Ammonio-nitrate of silver, charged with magenta, acts much like
the cupreate of ammonia; the corpuscles exhibit colour as the ammo-
nia passes off; some are spherical, others bi-concave, or discoid.
In addition to the foregoing I have made use of an infusion of the
husks of the red grape, called Oporto grape, which yields a colour
approaching the magenta; its application is followed by a coloura-
tion of some of the red corpuscles in preference to others ; and when
a solution of magenta follows, the same corpuscles take the additional
dye prior to the rest.
It is very difficult to obtain exactly the same results in all cases of
experiments with blood; as, for instance, the bringing out of the
interior or contents of a red corpuscle, when coloured by magenta,
so as to exhibit it separate from the cell-wall; but a trial of these
chemical agents in various degrees of concentration, and with blood
in different conditions, will lead to results closely representing those
I have pointed out.
With regard to the colouration by magenta and its dying property,
it has been found that this agent dyes the nucleus of the white
corpuscle ; but, in conjunction with or after other agents, it merely
effects a colouration of the red corpuscles; at least of those which
appear to me to be the oldest, or are in the condition of disks
which have parted with a good deal of their contents; for the
application of water will gradually wash out the stain of the dye, but
the spherical corpuscles appear to lose the dye more slowly. In this
respect magenta agrees with the action of iodine on starch ; for the
deep blue or purple colouration of iodine is also readily washed
away by the addition of water, showing us that its action on starch
is not that of a dye, nor can it rightly be regarded as a chemical
action to be expressed by the term iodide of starch. I have nowhere
seen this peculiarity noticed in any works on the subject.
8. Thus the action of magenta on mammalian blood at once
indicates to us that a chemical difference exists between the nuclei
of the white and the red corpuscles. A difference between the red
corpuscles themselves can be shown to exist by the use of magenta
in combination with different chemical agents. Some differ in form,
as some are discoid ; others appear as spheroids ; the majority of
the discoids appear to empty themselves still further, and while
some of spheroids extrude their contents, others exhibit a distinct
cell-wall, enclosing central or contained matters; others appear
uniformly coloured through, without any accompanying change.
Dr. Lionel Beale endeavours to show that the red corpuscles are
partly derived from germinal matter in the liquor sanguinis and
that these corpuscles exist in a very minute form, and are apt to be
overlooked from their paleness, or rather emptiness. With this
view Ido not concur. I believe the nuclei of the white corpuscles


form the red corpuscles; that these at first are solid and spherical,
and enlarge their diameter as they empty themselves ; and that the
minute corpuscles above alluded to are diminishing red corpuscles ;
invisible because deficient in solid matters.
If old or stale blood be examined under the microscope, and then
heat be applied to the specimen, it will be seen that the empty red
corpuscles become lessened in size, and they seem to me to make
their appearance in proportion as the blood is acted on by time ; or
chemical agents applied; so their presence may be regarded as due to
a process of degradation or decay, rather than to that of growth.
9. Magenta solution, when added to the blood of a fowl, dyes the
nuclei of the red corpuscles (as has already been noticed by other
observers), and the nucleus frequently exhibits a central spot or
nucleolus.
If the cupreate of ammonia is first added and the magenta after-
wards, the corpuscles exhibit colour all through, and the nuclei
then appear to exhibit different conditions. Many corpuscles assume
a rounded form and pullulate ; many exhibit nuclei uncoloured
the white corpuscles do not appear to take the magenta at all.
10. On reviewing the different chemical agents which appear to
have yielded the most remarkable results with the blood, it will be
seen that each appears to possess the property of ready decomposition,
or has been employed as a therapeutic agent supposed to exercise
some power on the nervous system ; i. e. prussic acid, ammonio-
sulphate of copper, acetate of ammonia. The first as acting on the
nervous system ; this would now appear to be by altering the con-
the blood.
The cupreous salt has been employed in epilepsy, but I believe
its action is first on the blood, as seen in enabling the magenta to
seize the blood corpuscles.
The ammonical salt has had no particular or definite mode of
action ascribed to it, but I have always regarded its action as
resulting from its ready change in the blood. This agent has also
considerable effect on the blood corpuscles, as seen by the subsequent
action of magenta.
11. The principal points which I have brought forward in this
communication are as follows : That the red corpuscle, or so-
called blood disk of the mammal, is a spherule or globule, while it
traverses the blood vessels, and its minimum size is 1-5000th of an
inch ; that it rapidly assumes, when fully developed, the flattened
or discoid form, on the exposure of the blood to the action of air;
that the size of the resulting disk is due to the solid amount con-
tained in the blood cell or envelope ; that the contents are easily
passed out when the globule has aged ; that a kind of cell-wall
remains for a while, and then gradually dissolves away; that
probably the molecular matter seen in the liquor sanguinis (and
which has sometimes been called germinal matter) may be due to a
great extent to the disintegration of the red corpuscles.
That chemical agents of different kinds affect the red corpuscle
differently.


That the passage or change of the nucleus of the white corpuscle
of the blood to the condition of the red, may now be regarded as
more demonstrable.
That the possibility of distinguishing the blood of different
animals, by measurement alone, is limited with certainty at present
to the blood of mammals,* against that of birds, or reptiles and fish.
The spherical form of the red corpuscle commends itself to the
mind, when we reflect how differently it must be affected by and
also affect other organisms during its transit through the blood-
vessels, than if it were discoid. Such a form would involve greater
retardation of the blood through the vessels, than in the case of
blood composed of spherules. This spherular form also would
present more points of contact and attrition to each corpuscle, and
so give rise to different physiological phenomena.
A careful inquiry into the physiological history of those mammals
which possess oval blood corpuscles, as compared with those
exhibiting globular, and of other animals, as birds, reptiles, and
fish, as having oval blood corpuscles, compared with mammals having
spherical blood corpuscles, may probably lead us to the recognition
of some important physiological law hitherto unnoticed. The effects
of respiration in all these instances • the heart’s action ; and relative
number of respirations; all suggest inquiry in connection with the
recognition of the fact that the red mammalian corpuscle is globular
and not discoid. The chemical effects of different agents on the blood
corpuscles, i. e. that of so acting on them as to allow magenta to
permeate them, or of preventing such calls for further
inquiry ; as well as may lead us to adopt new views regarding their
therapeutic action on the animal economy.
12. In a former communication of mine to this society, I directed
attention to a remarkable chemico-organic fact; that of the formation
of starch grains, or bodies resembling those termed corpora amylacea,
taking place in serum, or albuminous fluids, on the application of
prussic acid. In carrying on the experiments I have recorded, I find
that other chemical agents besides prussic acid eliminate these
starchy bodies ; as, for example, when the ammonio-sulphate of
copper is added to blood, these bodies make their appearance ; so
also on the application of acetate of ammonia and magenta
occasionally ; and chlorinated soda.
In each of these cases, with the exception of the last, I have also
noticed the constant concurrent presence of the bright blue particles,
which I regard as a cyanide of iron. These combined effects resuls
when some nitrogenous compound, easily capable of undergoing
decomposition, is presented to animal fluids.
This extended list of chemical agents producing such results may
induce us to look for others, and enable us to take the subject of
the formation of starchy bodies occurring in the animal economy
into further consideration ; for their presence is evidently becoming
more and more pathognomonic, and their mode of formation under
* With a few exceptions, as those of the camelidce and musk deer.


the circumstances I have adduced may greatly assist us in deter-
mining their pathological import. The latest notice we have of the
occurrence of these bodies in disease is in degeneration or wasting of
the posterior columns of the spinal cord, or progressive locomotor
ataxy, in a paper by Dr. Althaus, in the Lancet of the 30th
December, 1865.
At the same time I would suggest that the corpora amylacea of
pathologists may require to be classed under separate heads, from a
consideration of the varying and almost contradictory reports which
have from time to time appeared on this subject, by different
observers of acknowledged ability, and from my own experience on
the occurrence of these bodies under apparently so many different
circumstances. The polariscope, as well as the use of spectrum
analysis, may enable us to determine more regarding them. Deeply
interesting do all these facts become when we reflect that we have
only stepped on the threshold of inquiry into the nature and
properties of the blood—that all-important organism of life, in,
health and disease.
Melbourne, August, 1866.
DESCRIPTION OF PLATE.
No. 1. Two white corpuscles of the blood, with their nuclei dyed red by
magenta.
2. Three red corpuscles tinged by magenta, after having been acted on by
ammonical sulphate of copper; the left figure represents a disk;
the others are more or less biconcave.
3. Three spherical red corpuscles after same action.
4. Spherical red corpuscles, exhibiting their contents, variously affected by
same agent.
5. Spherical red corpuscles, after the action of ammonio-acetate of copper,
and magenta.
6. Eed corpuscles after the action of oxalic acid and magenta. Left fig.
exhibits the cell-wall coloured.
7. Action of magenta alone on red corpuscles; these are seen in a discoid
form, and each exhibits a molecula on the margin, and surrounded
by magenta-coloured molecular matter which has escaped from
them.
8. Eed corpuscles exhibiting the effects of the colouring matter of the
black Oporto grape husk ; only some have taken the colour.
9. Blood corpuscles passing into smears or patches, after prolonged action
of ammonio-sulphate of copper and magenta.
*#* All the figures are to scale, as indicated below —the remaining are
not to scale.
10. Bird’s blood. Nuclei coloured by magenta. Middle one exhibiting
the action of magenta with the copper solution. The nucleus in
the rest is acted on, and expands and ultimately dissolves, after
ammonical sulphate of copper and magenta.
11. Three starchy bodies formed by action of various chemical agents on
the blood.
12, Blue coloured particles in the blood, after the action of prussic acid.
WILSON AND MACKINNON, PBINXEES, COLLINS BIEBET BAST.


•
(•) (
D
wa /
yf"
>f
. a A ..... y
# "/
/
’■ \
a
7 \
'•f<\.
1 I
. Wf
fevV;
"V X:>
)
_^y
\ '
V 7 J"' y
).'(•)■ @
4
) \ I) \yjj \Yy
- J
fLJr\
C y
j d
N
0 0
J?
(oj (oj
(v (
-.JOOD*
0 ] ( ■
10
g
(f&t>
J \
%
lit
1
77 ■
