

fttdbourne.
OBSERVATIONS
ON THE
WATER SUPPLY
MELBOURNE
YlPa
'7®
CHARLES J. GRIFFITH, A.M.,
PRESIDENT OF THE COMMISSION OF SEWERAGE
AND WATER SUPPLY.
PRINTED BY LUCAS BROTHERS, 72, COLLINS STREET, EAST.
MDCCCLV.




OBSERVATIONS
ON THE
WATER SUPPLY
MELBOURNE;
CHARLES J. GRIFFITH, A M.,
PRESIDENT OF THE COMMISSION OF SEWERAGE
AND WATER SUPPLY.
jftßltourne.
PRINTED BY LUCAS BROTHERS, 72, COLLINS STREET, EAST.
MDCCCLV.


*
'
.


OBSERVATIONS ON THE WATER SUPPLY
OF MELBOURNE.
Melbourne, Mat Ist, 1855.
Db. Wilkie’s paper on the subject of the Water Supply of
Melbourne, or, as he styles it, “On the failure of the Yan
Yean Reservoir,” having been now published, I feel myself
called upon, as president of the commission entrusted with
the supply of Melbourne, to make some observations on the
subject, and to show on what grounds the commissioners
have come to a different conclusion from that at which he
has arrived.
I shall preface the remarks which I feel called upon to
make upon Dr. Wilkie’s paper with this general observation,
—that in examining the claims to our confidence of any
individual, who sets himself up as a guide in matters
invested with any degree of doubt, it is of importance to
observe how he deals with facts easily ascertained, and with
respect to which accurate information can be acquired with-
out difficulty.
If in such matters we find ignorance and rashness of
assertion, we shall hesitate before we place implicit reliance
upon statements less easy of verification.
Viewed in this light, the assertions of Dr. Wilkie, with
reference to the supply of Melbourne by a pumping scheme
are worthy of particular notice. “ Let us suppose,” says he,
“ that it would have been necessary to expend £60,000 in the
erection of permanent works for raising water from the Yarra
into the reservoir, at St. Peter’s Church ; this would have
been decidedly preferable, as a commercial enterprise, when
we contrast the interest of £60,000, at ten per cent., with
that of £600,000.”
This must mean that a pumping scheme, giving the same
accommodation to the inhabitants of Melbourne as is proposed


to be given by the gravitation scheme, could be carried out
for £60,000, otherwise the comparison is manifestly unfair
and dishonest; but Dr. Wilkie must have arrived at this
conclusion by some process peculiar to himself, for a moment’s
reflection would have shown him that it was ludicrously
inadequate for the purpose.
The temporary supply, which he cites as establishing his
case, has cost £43,000, to supply 50,000 inhabitants with
four gallons of water per day, from three stand-pipes ; and,
although the engine would do considerably more duty, it
affords no ground for assuming £60,000 as an ample
provision to supply 100,000 inhabitants with water, laid on to
their houses, at forty gallons per head.
Dr. Wilkie’s own proposition of a drift from the Yarra to
a point under the tank, at St. Peter’s Church, would, as I
am informed, have itself cost £70,000, if taken from the
Yarra at the nearest point, or if taken from the junction ot
the Merri Creek, have amounted to about £200,000.
Dr. Wilkie ought also to have known that the purchase
and laying of reticulation and service pipes will cost about
£150,000; that this is an expense common to all schemes
for supplying Melbourne, whether by pumping or gravitation;
that it is included in the scheme of the commissioners, which
is estimated at £600,000 ; and should have been included in
the pumping scheme, which he contrasts with it, if his object
had been to institute a fair comparison.*
It is evident that a man who has the hardihood, on such
grounds, to found a charge against the commissioners “of
having altogether sacrificed the pecuniary interests of the
public, in the selection of the gravitation scheme,” is not
much to be relied on in cases where mis-statement would be
less easy of detection.
Let us take another specimen of Dr. Wilkie’s method of
dealing with a different class of facts, I allude to the amount
of water supply required for a given population.
Dr. Wilkie commences his observations on this head by
* In point of fact, any scheme for permanently supplying Melbourne, by pumping
from the Yarra, would have involved the construction of large artificial reservoirs,
as costly as the Yan Yean reservoir, besides a large constant expenditure for fuel,
wages of engineers, repairs, &c.


stating “ that there is a considerable discrepancy in the pub-
lished accounts of the amount of water consumed by different
cities. It appears that London and some other cities in
England are supplied with twenty gallons* per head per day;
Glasgow is supplied with thirty gallons per head, by steam
power; Nottingham consumes forty gallons per head; and
the Croton aqueduct, at New York, is calculated to discharge
sixty million gallonsf in twenty-four hours, which, for a popu-
lation of five hundred thousand, gives one hundred and
twenty gallons per head.”
This is interesting chiefly, as illustrating Dr. Wilkie’s
mode of ascertaining and dealing with facts ; for I hope to
be able to satisfy all unprejudiced persons that the Yan Yean
scheme is calculated to afford a supply amply sufficient for
any demand that can be made upon it.
What is then implied in the foregoing quotation of Dr.
Wilkie’s but this ? that after giving the subject the best con-
sideration, the nearest estimate at which he can arrive is,
that the supply should be somewhere between twenty and one
hundred and twenty gallons per head : and that he has heard
of no population supplied at a lower rate than twenty gallons
per head ; and further on he seems to consider even the latter
quantity, of one hundred and twenty gallons, inadequate,
and thinks that water should not be measured by gallons per
head.
I think it would have been well if Dr, Wilkie, in contrast-
ing the merits of a gravitation and a pumping scheme, had
calculated how many inhabitants his pumping scheme of
£60,000 would supply at this rate, or even at ninety gallons,
which he subsequently states as the proper quantity.
* So stated in the paper, as printed in the newspaper, but in the pamphlets it
is printed thirty gallons, which, however, seems to be a mistake.
+ln a work published at New York, in 1846, by Mr. Schramke, one of the
engineers of the Croton works, the discharge to be calculated on is stated at thirty-
five million gallons, not sixty million gallons. His words are : “ The supply of the
Croton from its daily flow, aided by the reservoir, may, therefore, be taken, with
great confidence, at thirty-five million gallons ; and when the day arrives that w ill
require a larger quantity, it may be obtained by constructing other reservoirs
further up the stream.” Mr. Schramke considers this sufficient for 1,750,000
inhabitants, at the rate of twenty gallons daily per head, including manufactories,
shipping, watering sheets, gardening, baths, &c.


Fortunately for those who have to deal practically with this
question, they are not left to such vague surmises as those
which Dr. Wilkie assumes as the basis of his calculations,
As the Water Supply of Towns was, during the years
1850, 1851, and 1852, made the subject of close investiga-
tion by the General Board of Health in England and two
Committees of the House of Commons, and a vast mass of
accurate information was collected, which showed that, upon
this subject, the most "exaggerated notions had existed.
In London, as stated by Dr. Wilkie, the supply amounts
to about twenty gallons per head. This is on the intermittent
system; and it is stated, by all the witnesses examinad on
this point, that the greater part of this (three-fifths) is waste,
which would be, in a great measure if not entirely, saved by
having recourse to a constant supply. The waste was ascer-
tained in three ways :
Ist, —By guaging the water discharged by a sewer, which
was the only outlet of a block of houses, on days when water
was laid on and when it was not, and it was found that the
excess, on days when the water was laid on, was three-fifths.
2d, —By guaging the cisterns in a block of five hundred
and fifty-two houses, containing four thousand three hundred
and nineteen persons: the highest consumption for first-class
houses, containing water-closets, &c., was twelve and three-
quarter gallons per head, and in model lodging houses, with
baths, wash-houses, &c., the highest consumption was six
and three-quarter gallons per head.
3d, —By actual experience in the towns of Wolverhamp-
ton, Preston, and Ashton-under-Lyne : —At Wolverhampton,
it is stated by H. Martin, Engineer to the Water-Avorks, that
they supply six thousand houses, having an average of seven
inmates ; and that, on substituting the constant for the inter-
mittent supply, the quantity consumed dropped from one
hundred and twenty-five to seventy-nine gallons per house.
In this Avas included an alloAvance for large consumers, trades,
street-Avashing, &c At Preston the consumption is fifty-two
gallons per house : at Ashton-under-Lyne, thirty-nine gallons


per house: both being on the constant service principle,
with a supply limited only by the demand.*
From the accurate information afforded by numerous wit-
nesses, thorougly conversant with the subject, it appears
that the consumption of water, with constant service and un-
limited supply, does not exceed eleven gallons per head, in-
cluding the supply of manufactories in the town of Wolver-
hampton, and that it is less at Preston and Ashton; and I
am myself convinced, that making every allowance for dif-
ference of climate, the demand for water in Melbourne, for
every use to which it can be beneficially applied, including
street-watering, baths, fountains, manufactories, flushing
sewers, &c., &c., will not exceed twenty to twenty-five gal-
lons a-head at the utmost; and I am confirmed in this
opinion by the estimate of Mr. Hodgkinson, who, in a
report on the pumping scheme, made to the Commissioners
in 1853, considers twenty-five gallons a-head sufficient pro-
vision for the population.
Having said so much on what is a matter of minor import-
ance, I now come to that which is the real question at issue*
namely, the amount which can be safely calculated upon for
the supply of Melbourne by the Yan Yean scheme.
In stating the dimensions of the Reservoir, Dr. Wilkie falls
into an inaccuracyf in saying that it will have an area of
seven million square yards: the actual area which will be
covered, when the water is twenty-five feet deep at the embank,
ment and on a level with the bye-wash, is about six millions
three hundred thousand square yards, with an average depth
of eighteen feet, and the cubic contents, in round numbers,
are thirty-eight million cubic yards.
He is also wrong in stating, that the main pipes are per-
• See the evidence of Mr. Crecy, Inspector of Board of Health ; of Mr. Lovick
Surveyor to the Metropolitan Commissioners, Messrs. Gotto, Mylnes, Quick, &c..
also a letter of Mr. Coulthart, containing statistics of Ashton-under-Lyne. As to
waste in the Glasgow supply, see Dr. Sutherland’s evidence.
t This error is of some importance, as it makes the proportion of the drainage
area of the Plenty, to the area of the Reservoir itself, thirty to one, instead of
twenty-six to one, as stated hy Dr. Wilkie; it is, however, a natural error, as it
was originally proposed to make the Reservoir with a depth of thirty feet, and the
Jock-spitted line, cut at that level, does include an area of seven million square
yards.


manently fixed in the embankment at the height of ten feet
from the bottom of the Reservoir : they are fixed at about
three feet from the bottom ; their heads are fixed in the tower
well, and the communication with the water in the Reservoir
will he effected through three circular openings in the tower
well, any one of which can be opened and the other two
stopped at pleasure. These openings are placed, respectively,
at about three, ten, and seventeen feet from the bottom. As
Dr. Wilkie founds some of his reasonings upon this false as-
sumption, it is a strong instance of his rashness in making
assertions, or of his incapacity for ascertaining facts.
He also makes a statement, which I may as well notice
here although it refers to another branch of the subject,
namely, that there is in the Reservoir a vast accumulation of
green slimy mud, the result of decaying organic matter.
I can find no grounds for this assertion.
The sources from which the Commissioners expect a sup-
ply of water to fill this large reservoir are —
First, —The gathering grounds drained by the Plenty river.
Secondly—Those drained by the Reservoir and by the new
cut connecting it with the Plenty.
Thirdly—The rainfall in the Reservoir itself,
The gathering grounds of the Plenty are computed to con-
tain an area of about sixty square miles, or about forty thou-
sand acres. With respect to the rainfall on this area I would
remark, that the allowance made by Dr. Wilkie for increase,
on account of their height above the sea, seems to me to he
insufficient. Dr. Wilkie makes this allowance on the ground
of Yan Yean being six hundred feet above the sea, but he
seems to forget that the highest parts of these gathering
grounds reach an elevation of from fifteen to sixteen hundred
feet, while six hundred is the lowest level. The facts, too,
that they form the side of a coast range, which intercepts the
rain-bearing clouds coming from the south, and that they are
densely covered with timber, add much to the quantity of
rain which falls upon them. In Great Britain, the annual
rainfall in different places is very much affected by the two
first of these causes. At Ferrybridge, in Yorkshire, as


stated by Mr. Hodgkinson, on the authority of Charnock,
the rainfall is only twenty-four inches, while at Paisley it is
fifty-four. Paisley is four hundred feet above the sea, —the
rainfall, as registered for three years, is stated by Mr. Stirrat,
in his evidence before the Board of Health, as fifty-six inches ;
while at Greenock Shaw Water-works, only sixteen miles
west from Paisley, the average height of which is six hun-
dred feet, the fall of rain is sixty-five inches.
Keith Johnston, in his Physical Atlas, has the following
observations on this subject. “In England the amount of
rain which falls in the mountainous districts is more than
double that of the less elevated portions of the country.
Thus, while the meteorological reports for Essex give only
an annual average of 19-5 inches, those for Keswick, in
Cumberland, show no less than 67'5 inches; and at Kin-
fauns, in Scotland, the amount shown, on an average of five
years, was 25'66 inches, whilst in its vicinity, on a hill six
hundred feet above the level of the sea, the amount was 41 ‘49
inches.” It appears to me, therefore, that the influence of
these circumstances is much under-valued in the estimate
made by Dr. Wilkie of an increase of six inches, or rather
of 5 - 2 inches, over the rainfall in Melbourne,* neither does
he make any allowance for dew. Taking it, however, at this,
and allowing four inches for dew, the total quantity of rain
falling on this area during the year would amount to two hun-
dred and fifteen million cubic yards, or nearly six times the
cubic contents of the reservoir.
I now come to the second step in this enquiry, namely, the
proportion of this rainfall which we can calculate on securing
for the reservoir.
Dr. Wilkie and Mr. Hodgkinson are of opinion, that, in
the absence of accurate guagings, the available rainfall can
only (to use the words of the latter) “ be analogically elimi-
nated from the general data afforded by the most trustworthy
English observations and thus, instead of considering the
peculiarities of the drainage area of the Plenty, and its sin-
gular adaptation for the collection and transmission of rain,
and comparing it with the gathering grounds of Great Britain
♦ The ©can rainfall in Melbourne is 30-8 and not 30-0, as stated by Dr. Wilkie,


which are similarly circumstanced, they attempt to arrive at
conclusions from a comparison with the proportion of rainfall
drained off by the English rivers from the general surface of
that country.
According to the opinion of Dr. Prout, adopted by Dr.
Wilkie, the available rainfall, which feeds the English rivers,
is one-fourth of the mean rainfall of England—that is taking
the mean rainfall of all England as 33 ‘5 inches —the quantity
discharged by those rivers amounts to a quantity which would
be 8| inches over the entire area of England, He assumes
the evaporation in this country to be twice that of England,
and, therefore, takes (|) one-eighth of the rainfall, or 4|
inches as available : even in this he does not allow for dew,
which would bring it up to five inches.
Now, if we were comparing the available rainfall of the
whole of Australia, as discharged by its rivers, with that
of England, as discharged by its rivers, the conclusion
arrived at by Dr. Wilkie might perhaps be borne out: but
this is not the case; we are considering a drainage area, highly
exceptional in its character, as far as the general surface of
Australia is considered ; and, in order to come to a just con-
clusion, we must look at the results obtained on drainage
areas in some respects similarly circumstanced, modifying
them, no doubt, to a certain extent, on account of climate
and other causes. But with all the allowances which can
reasonably be demanded, the results will be very different
from those at which Dr. Wilkie has arrived, and will go
far to bear out the conclusion arrived at by the committee
of the Philosophical Society.
The following is a table of actual discharge from some of
the principal gathering grounds in Great Britain and Ireland,
where the water has been guaged for the whole year round.
It is from Beardmore’s tables.*
♦ Nathaniel Beardmore, Member of Institute of Civil Engineers ; Fellow of the
Geological Society ; Member of British Meteorological Society.


-
oT c cs
bc+3 0 o
►j rt a--
2 Ca
ls!s
s|g'2
llegistered
total an-
nual rain-
Height
above Sea.
Drainage
Area.
Square
Miles.
5-15
Inches.
Inches.
Bann Reservoir, moorland
1837
400 to 2800
512 to 1000
Greenock, 1827-8, flat moor
Bute, low country
* Glencorse, Pentland Hills
exclusive of floods
734 to 1600
850 to 1600
Belmont, 1843
„ 1844
„ 1845
„ 1846
Rivington Pike, 1847
Turton and Entwisel, 1836
„ „ 1837
Bolton Waterworks
24-25
410
500 to 1300
800 to 1600
Ashton, 1844
• This is the reservoir for supplying Edinburgh; although Dr.
Wilkie says they get their water direct from the Crawley Springs,
without subjecting the water to the injurious influences A exposure
in a large open reservoir. Its contents are 6,660,000 cubic feet, and,
I presume, therefore, it is not closed.
It will be seen that in all these gathering grounds the pro.
portion of available rainfall is enormously in excess of any-
thing that could be reckoned on, had the general average of
England been taken as the basis of calculation, and that no
considerations founded upon it would, in these cases, have
afforded the most remote assistance in determining a priori
how much of the rainfall could have been reckoned on as
available ; and if this be the case, under the very sky of
Great Britain, it must be still more so here.
It will be observed that the available rainfall, in one in-
stance in the above table, (Turton) reaches as high as ninety
per cent, of the whole registered rainfall; that the mean is
fifty-two per cent.; and that the smallest amount (Ashton)
is equal to forty per cent.
A further illustration of this matter is afforded by the
Paisley Water-works ; and, indeed, the history of those
works, as detailed by Mr. Stirrat in his evidence before the
Board of Health, is so highly illustrative of the subject


under consideration, that I shall make no apology in giving it at
some length. He is asked : Q. “ From Mr. Thom’s state-
ments, and other early documents, was it not estimated that
only one-eighth (|) of any given rainfall was available, and
has not subsequent experience concluded it to be much
more?” A. “ Before investigations made by myself and
others in my neighbourhood, Mr. Thom stated, that it was
altogether impracticable to supply Paisley in the way that is
now done, (that was in 1826;) and again, in 1836, he re-
ported that as much as eighteen inches might be available
from the rainfall, and on this report the Company was formed ;
but now, after an accurate measurement of the available
quantity deliverable to the town, it is found to be about
thirty-six inches annually,* on an average of three years;
and the consequence is that the reservoirs are of too small a
capacity to contain the floods. And although fifty thousand
of a population are supplied with as much as they choose to
consume, at all hours, night and day, besides about eighty
factories, comprising dye-works, print-works, &c., getting a
supply varying from one thousand to one hundred and fifty
thousand gallons each daily, there is water wasted in the win-
ter season, during floods, on an average, to an extent that
would give a supply to twenty thousand more of a popula-
tion.”
The drainage area which supplies this amount of water is
only seven hundred and ninety acres, and the reservoirs con-
tain forty-nine million cubic feet. I would also call atten-
tion to the comparatively small areas on the drainage of which
reliance is placed for the supply of large populations. Riv-
ington Pike, which contains the largest area, has only six-
teen square miles, or about one-fourth of the drainage area
of the Plenty, without taking into consideration the drainage
area of the reservoir; and it is intended to form reservoirs
there for the supply of Liverpool and its neighbourhood.
The supply is calculated to be sufficient for a population of
one million.
Having thus shown that the average discharge of the rivers
* This available quantity was derived from an annual rainfall of fifty-four inches.


of England, a very flat country, can afford no guidance in es-
timating the proportion of rainfall available in favourably
circumstanced gathering grounds in that country, and still
less in the hilly district of the Plenty. I will now make some
few remarks on the characteristics of that district, and its
aptitude for the purposes of a gathering ground.
The drainage area of the Upper Plenty, as I before stated,
skirts the south side of the forest ranges of the Plenty, at a
height above the sea varying from six hundred to one thou-
sand six hundred feet, and comprises within its limits part of
the table land, and the numerous spurs and vallies of these
ranges, and of the lower ones which separate it from the
areas- drained by the Merri Creek, the Reservoir, and the
Diamond Creek or its tributaries.
The greater part of the outer portion of this district con-
sists of steep, hard, and frequently rocky surfaces,* from
which the rain runs rapidly off in small rills, which, as they
descend into the gullies, are formed into streams, which again
unite as they descend into the lower vallies ; the inclination in
the surface constantly diminishing as the stream in its descent
is increased in volume by continued accessions, until first two
and then the third main streams unite, in some comparatively
flat ground, and form the Plenty. A portion of the ground
comprised in these flats forms marshes, covered in some
places with small shrubs, in others with sedge. Their area
is estimated at eight hundred acres, out of the forty thousand
forming the entire drainage area of the Plenty; and their
effect in impeding the flow of the water-, and thereby caus-
ing, during the summer, a large loss by evaporation and ab-
sorption, has been much dwelt upon, but their action on the
floods, during the winter season, seems to have escaped ob-
servation. From the general form of the surface as I have
sketched it—with the constant repetition of the semi-cup-like
forms, steep at the edges, but gradually becoming more flat
as you descend, with a surface hard and frequently bare of
vegetation —the rapidity with which the winter rains would
Dr. Wilkie states that they are covered with a tropical vegetation. There are a
few tree ferns which may give colour to such a statement, but the general character
is such as I have described.


escape into the sea would be very great, were not some
obstruction offered. The heaviest floods would probably run
off in three or four days ; but when the streams meet in these
flat marshes, they experience, from the sedge, the reeds, and
the bushes, a check to their rapid flow, —while there is none
to their spreading out over the flats into lakes, and thus forming
temporary reservoirs, in which the flood waters are stored for
a short time ; and instead of running off at once, probably
occupy a week or a fortnight in doing so. To this facility of
spreading out over the flats, is to be attributed the small sec-
tional area of the channel of the river above the aqueduct;
lower down, where this facility does not exist—although re-
ceiving no further accession than that derived from the reser-
voir and the area drained by it—it has hollowed out for itself,
out of the stiff clay and hard rock, a bed more than twenty
times as large.
This action of the marshes on the floods is most
favourable to the keeping the flow constant during the winter,
—a matter of great importance in obtaining a supply for the
reservoir ; and although, if it were necessary to rely on the
summer stream it would be a disadvantage, yet the Commis-
sioners have deferred carrying out the original design of mak-
ing cuts to bring the streams clear of the marshes, until they
have further exnerience to guide them. All that is necessary
for this purpose can be done at any time for a few thousand
pounds.
Although I have never visited any of the actual drainage
areas mentioned in the above table, yet I am acquainted with
the districts in which some of them are situated ; and the
characteristics of the Plenty district are such, that 1 have
little doubt, from enquiries which I have made on the sub-
ject, that it would, with more propriety, be included in the
same category with them, rather than in that of the areas
drained by the English rivers.
It has been well remarked by Mr. Hodgkinson, that the
size of an area, or rather the distance which water has to run
on the surface, or percolate through it, to reach the outlet of
discharge, must greatly influence the amount of evaporation
and absorption to which it is subject, as it affects the time


Datb.
Quantity of Water
passing per minute.
Velocity
per minute.
September 1st, 1863....
November 2rd, „ ....
August 18th, 1854....
28.000 Gallons
36.000 „
66,906 ,,
94 Feet
105 „
114 „
These gnagings were taken, with great care, opposite the
during which it is submitted to their action. The inclination
of the surface, as it also affects the time, must have a similar
influence. This consideration applies particularly to the large
and level districts drained by the English rivers,—many points
of which are separated, by miles of level country, from the
drainage outlet; while the district under consideration, al-
though the area is considerable, is intersected by three main
streams and numerous watercourses, which run in every fall
of rain, and afford great facilities for its collection.
Having now shown that the characteristics of the drainage
area are such as to entitle it to rank with the more favoured
gathering grounds in Great Britain, —having shown that in
the principal of these the average of available rainfall is fifty-
two per cent, of the entire, —I think that the most cautious
calculator must admit that I am justified in reckoning on
seven inches, or somewhat more than nineteen per cent, of
the rainfall and dew as available for the reservoir ; more par-
ticularly as I have shown that the rainfall is likely to be much
greater than that assumed.* This quantity, I have shown
before, would alone be sufficient to fill it, if the supply were
solely dependant on this source, and there were no separate
area to be drained by it, and no rainfall into the reservoir
itself.
The following guagings will show that the winter discharge
of the Plenty is such as to warrant the highest estimates
which have been formed of it, and to justify me were I to
reckon on at least ten inches as the available rainfall.
house of Mr. Moses Thomas, one of the few places where it
• Forty inches, or the drainage area would fill the reservoir six times over, there-
fore seven inches would fill it once.


is possible to guage this stream with anything approaching
to accuracy. Mr. Jackson used a float with a measured
line, and also a pendulum. Mr. Thomas stated that he
had seen the river about eleven feet higher in a flood,
and pointed out to Mr. Jackson sedge, &c., left in
the branches of a tree at that level Mr. Thomas has since
told me that he did not consider the river in a state of flood
on any of these occasions, nor much above the ordinary level
for four months in the year. This statement is corroborated
by reference to the Rain Register of the months of July and
August, 1854, which I have obtained from the Registrar
General’s Office : from this it appears that the rainfall, from
the Ist to the 18th August, inclusive, in that year, was only
1-39 inches, and that in the entire previous month of July,
it only amounted to U 62 inches. Unfortunately, no Rain
Register was kept at the Government Establishment in 1853,
so that I am not able to refer to the state of the weather upon
the two other occasions ; but this is of less importance, as
when so large a discharge as sixty-six thousand gallons per
minute was going on, there had been no heavy rain for at least
six weeks ; and the rainfall, both in July and the eighteen
days of August, had been much below the average quantity.
I have also been told by many residents on the Plenty,
that the average winter discharge is at least ten times as great
as it is in summer. A discharge equal to seventeen thousand
gallons a minute, through the year, would represent a rainfall
of ten inches over the whole drainage area of the Plenty
above the aqueduct; and looking to the analogies of similar
areas in Great Britain, to the measurements given above, and
the evidence of intelligent settlers, I think I should be justi-
fied in reckoning on that amount; but this would give a
height of twenty-five feet all over the area of the reservoir,
or seven feet more than is required to fill it.
Having shown that if the supply of the reservoir depended
upon the drainage area of the Plenty alone, there would be
sufficient to fill it nearly once-and-a-half, I now come to the
second source of supply, namely, the area drained by the
reservoir itself: and as in stating the area of the reservoir
Dr. Wilkie fell into an error, which, altering its relative pro-


portion to the drainage area of the Plenty, to a certain ex-
tent, deranges his calculations, so here he falls into one of
a far more grave character, and which affects his calculations
to a still greater extent.
In the first place, he is inaccurate in stating that Mr.
Hodgkinson was “ kind enough to measure this area for the
Committee of the Philosophical Society, and his estimate
is three thousand acres, or about twice the surface of the
reservoir.” In answer to a letter from me, Mr. Hodgkinson
states, that it never was measured by him ; but that Mr. As-
sistant Surveyor Rawnsley made a hasty survey of it, for the
purpose of arranging the sub-division of unsold lands, so as
to prevent any sources of contamination accruing to the re-
servoir from Crown lands ; and I am informed that the mode
in which Mr. Rawnsley made this hasty survey was very
rough indeed, —and, although probably quite sufficient for
the purpose for which it was intended, it is by no means to
be depended upon for determining the area.
I have said thus much lest persons should be misled by
Dr. Wilkie’s statement, that Mr. Hodgkinson’s estimate of
three thousand acres was founded on a measurement by that
gentleman, whose character for accuracy as a surveyor stands
so deservedly high.
I have had this area accurately surveyed, and its contents
amount to four thousand six hundred and fifty acres.
There is another small area, amounting to about six hun-
dred acres, drained by the new watercourse from the Plenty,
which is so circumstanced, with reference to the inclination
and nature of the surface, that almost every drop that falls
upon it in winter, and in heavy rains in summer, must find
its way into the watercourse, and thence into the reservoir.
These two areas amount to five thousand two hundred and
fifty acres, and exceed in extent any of the gathering grounds
contained in the table inserted above, with the exception of
Rivington Pike. The small area of six hundred acres is
within one hundred and ninety acres of equal extent with the
gathering grounds which supply the fifty thousand inhabit-
ants of Paisley, Avith their numerous and extensive mills ;


and no gathering ground could possibly be more favourably
circumstanced for the collection and transmission of rain.
As some statements have been made, with respect to this
watercourse, which will not bear investigation, I may here
state its dimensions and capacity. The section of the stream
in it, at its ordinary height, (supposing the Plenty to afford
a sufficient supply) will be fifteen feet on the surface, and its
depth, at the ordinary level, four feet; the bottom is nearly
flat, and the sides have an inclination of 1| to 1. The sec-
tional area of the ordinary stream would be about four square
yards ; and as the fall is from twenty to twenty-four inches in
a mile, the velocity would be about two miles an hour, or
sixty yards a minute. It is therefore capable of discharging
two hundred and forty cubic yards a minute, or two million
four hundred thousand cubic yards a-week, and would fill
the reservoir in sixteen weeks. I cannot, therefore, under-
stand what Dr. Wilkie means when he says, it would take
two-and-a-half years to fill the reservoir, through this channel,
to the height of eighty-eight feet, as it could be done in fifty-
six weeks. In floods it is capable of discharging still more.
But to return to the drainage area: the whole of that
drained by the reservoir is admitted, both by Dr. Wilkie and
Mr. Hodgkinson, to be very favourably circumstanced as
gathering grounds ; so much so, that Dr. Wilkie allows one-
third of the rainfall as available instead of one-eighth, at
which he estimates the Plenty basin: but it seems to me,
taking into consideration the very favourable nature of these
grounds, they may safely be considered as nearly coming up
to the average of British gathering grounds, which is fifty-
two per cent., —indeed there might be no impropriety in
ranking them with the most favourably circumstanced, which
reach as high as ninety per cent.
This area is about equal in extent to four times the surface
of the reservoir,—and taking the rainfall available from it as
fifty per cent, of the entire—estimated at thirty-six inches,
and the dew at four inches the account would stand
thus: —


Ft. In.
Fifty per cent, of rainfall on area four times equal»
to surface of reservoir )
Rainfall and dew on surface of reservoir 3 4
Ten inches available on forty thousand acres 25 0
35 0
It will be observed in this calculation, I have not insisted
on a greater allowance than that of 5'2 inches over the rain-
fall of Melbourne, which Dr. Wilkie assumes as that due to
the altitude and peculiar situation of the Plenty basin, —a
quantity quite inadequate to represent the actual increase.
I now come to the next branch of this enquiry, namely,
the loss by evaporation to be deducted from the amount above
stated. This is estimated by Dr. Wilkie at nine feet, and by
Mr. Hodgkinson at five feet six inches. It is a matter of
great nicety to decide by experiment or observation, on a
small scale, the exact amount of evaporation; and, in my
opinion, more reliance is to be placed on observations made
on sheets of water placed under similar conditions with that
at Yan Yean than on any conclusions to be derived from
such experiments. Before, however, proceeding to state the
results of such observations, I shall make a few remarks on
the means resorted to by Dr. Wilkie to determine this pro-
blem, and also on an omission in his reasoning on the analogy
of the months of similar temperature in England and Austra-
lia, which appears to me entirely to vitiate his conclusions.
I must also say, that any weight which hrs opinion on this
subject might carry with it, is greatly lessened in my mind by
his gravely stating what appears an absurdity, namely,
that the collecting and storing of the winter rains, as is pro-
posed in the Yan Yean reservoir, instead of letting them run
off into the sea, “is likely to swallow up nine-tenths of the
small snpply which nature has provided for our use.”
In the first place, then. Dr. Wilkie selects a pond only
eighteen inches deep, and from fourteen days observation of
this he arrives at the conclusion, that the evaporation amounts
to nine feet for twelve mouths; and hence he argues, that


there will be an equal loss by evaporation from the surface of
a reservoir with an average depth of eighteen feet. Now it
is well known that evaporation decreases rapidly as the depth
of water increases. It is even stated by Mr. Stirrat of Pais-
ley, in his evidence before the Board of Health, that in deep
reservoirs the evaporation is counterbalanced by the deposit
of dew; and that in one pond, ten feet deep, on which he
made the experiment, in two months of summer it did not go
down one-sixteenth of an inch.
Mr. Hodgkinson, indeed, thinks that this statement is
contradicted by the fact that salt is produced by evaporation,
but he seems to forget that this process is carried on in shal-
low cisterns or ponds.
The observations of Dr. Wilkie, therefore, whatever they
are worth, are adverse to his own views, fqf if from a shal-
low pond, eighteen inches in depth, he only deduces an
evaporation of nine feet, the amount from the surface of a
lake one thousand three hundred acres in extent, and with an
average depth of eighteen feet must be very much less.
But it is in his reasoning on the comparative evaporation
in Australia and in England, during months having the same
mean temperature, that Dr. Wilkie falls into the most pal-
pable error, —although it is one of the points on which he
seems to consider himself strongest. This method he de-
scribes as follows: “In calculating the evaporation from the
surface of water here from English tables I assumed, for
each month, the evaporation of a corresponding month in
England, with the same or a less mean temperature; and I
thus obtained eight feet two inches, which is sufficiently
near to Dr. Davy’s estimate of nine feet to show the correct-
ness of the method,”
In illustration of this he takes the month of July in Aus-
tralia, which has a mean temperature of 49-34, and finds
that April in England has a mean temperature of 49-9, and
adds: “Am I not then warranted, on scientific grounds, to
assume that the proportion of the rain evaporated here in
July is equal to that of April in England?” But in making


this comparison he seems altogether to lose sight of the fact,
that the day in April in England is 13 hrs. 47 min. long, dur-
ing which evaporation is going on ; and that the mean length
of the day in July, in Australia, is only 9 hrs. 26 min., and
that the Australian July night, during which dew is deposited*
is proportionably longer,—making necessary a reduction of
twenty-five per cent, on the evaporation of the English
month, in order to equalize it with the Australian month of
the same temperature.
It would appear that Mr. Hodgkinson falls into the same
error. He says: “ That an approximate determination of
the amount of evaporation for all the other months of the
year, (except December, January, and February,) can be
arrived at with tolerable precision; for if we omit these
months, the mean temperature of all the other months of the
year in this Colony agree, very nearly, with the mean tem-
peratures of some of the months in England, for which the
rates of evaporation from water surface have been observed.
By working on this principle, and applying a slight additional
correction for the frequent occurrence of dry winds here, I
have computed the evaporation, &c.” Not a word is said of
a correction for the difference of length in the days ; but as
the months of December, January, and February, are de-
termined on independent grounds, a very large deduction on
this head will be necessary to make his calculations approach
the truth.
Taking the months as grouped by Mr. Hodgkinson, the
following corrections will be necessary :


June
July
August
October
September ...
May
March
April
November....
Month.
t>
g £ Cft
O* 0\ Oi
»-• 05 05 0*
§
a
CO
q co 6
CO O CD
oa 6\<bB
SS a
H
td
0
0
0 -
g. g
09 s
Og
09 ®
og
05 ®
1
IT*
HH
h-' H-
>- 1- — O'
O CO CD
CO H-* CO
o to •
go m 3
£
CO 05 bO
►u CO
CO GO o
O*
P *3.
V* ?
2,
® B
~0
5g
«g
to g
09 t3
=H
g.
0
0
CD
e
s
o
H
H
CO
CO
Ox
00
-<r
05
S’! s
P’s i
P
Q
•>
H-*
5 p*
•A 0
H§ g
p's. ®
•5 ?g
CO
a>
to
W
05
p
2,
1
W
C*
CO P*
i
GO
A g
H-i P,
p
CD
B
CD
CD
These differences would involve a
deduction of upwards of
twenty-five per cent, from the evaporation attributed by him
to the above nine months;
and as he takes that to he forty-
two inches, we may call the deduction ten
inches, leaving
his estimate for evaporation 4-8, instead of five feet six inches.
I will now state my own experience with regard to natural
water-holes, artificial reservoirs, and natural lagoons,—an
experience
which now extends over fifteen years in this coun-
try. And first as to natural water-holes : There were upon
the run which I occu
pied in 1841, a
number
of water-holes
varying from ten to fifteen feet in depth. Like most water-
holes in alluvial flats, their edges were higher than the sur-


rounding level, and consequently their drainage area was
very limited, —not more, in some cases, than two or three
times the area of the surface ; these were filled by the creek
running in 1839, and some of them continued to hold water
until 1844, when it ran again: during that time they were
used to water sheep and cattle, and they were only replen-
ished by the rain that fell on their surfaces and limited drain-
age areas.
But it has been said, that in all such cases there are
springs which supply the loss caused by evaporation ; and
although this is only an assumption, it is difficult to disprove
it, —so that I would not lay so much stress on these cases if
they were isolated.
Secondly, as to artificial reservoirs : Several of these we
formed in convenient situations ; but I will allude to one in
particular. It was formed by excavating to the depth of
about five feet, and by forming a dam with the clay taken
out, so that the average depth was about six feet, —the surface
was about one chain square, —the area drained by it was of
some extent, being about five or six acres ; but it was only
filled in winter, and it was certainly not fed by springs, nor
did it go down to the underlying rock. This reservoir served
for several years, and still serves to water about two thousand
sheep, and in some instances as many as four thousand, con-
stantly during the summer and autumn, and I have neve;
known it to become dry.
Thirdly, as to lagoons : There were several large lagoons,
in a flat forest, which were never known to have any w *°r
in them since the country was occupied in 1839, until tuc
year 1852, nor was there the slightest indication of any
springs ; but the ground having become firm by the constant
trampling of two flocks of sheep, placed at an out-station
formed close to them the previous year,—in the month of
May 1852, they were filled by a heavy fall of rain. Their
area varied from about one hundred to two hundred acres
each, and the average depth was from three to four feet; the
inclination of the surface was so small, that except in very


heavy falls of rain, there was no run of water; they were
freely used for watering sheep and cattle during the whole
summer, but they never became dry : they were replenished
by a flood the following winter, and retained water in them
for two and a-half years.
It is clear to me that these facts cannot be reconciled with
the idea of the enormous evaporation attributed to this coun-
try by Drs. Wilkie and Davy ; and in the face of such facts,
and hundreds of other instances of a similar character, sci-
entific men ought to be careful how they dogmatise, par-
ticularly on a subject with reference to which experiments
carried on, on a small scale, are extremely liable to error. I lay
particular stress upon the observations with respect to the la-
goons, as, with the exception of their being so shallow, the
water in them was placed very much under the same condi-
tions in which it will be at Yan Yean.
I think, indeed, that the practical bearing of this subject
has been much misunderstood. Were all the water to be
brought into the reservoir in one day, and be subject to no
replenishing until the same day in the following year, it might
be said with truth, that in order to have one foot in the Re-
servoir at the end of the year, we must put into it one foot,
plus the amount lost by evaporation ; and I do not object to
this mode of stating the question, in order to show, by a
kind of debtor and creditor account, the balance which may
be relied on. But what will be the practical working ? No-
vember is the wettest month in the year, the mean fall of
rain being stated at 4‘27 inches,—it will be easy, therefore,
to fill up any deficiency in that month. There will be availa-
ble :
Inches.
Rainfall on surface of reservoir 4 - 27
Fifty per cent, on ditto on area four times greater \
than area of reservoir /
And the river at that season may be resorted to for any


additional amount required. There would then remain to be
provided for the excess of evaporation over rainfall in the
succeeding four months, for in May we may look for the com-
mencement of the winter rains.
I have now stated my own views, and the reasons which,
in my opinion, justify the Commissioners in anticipating a
supply which would amount to thirty-five feet in the reser-
voir, or nearly double that required to fill it. I have also
shown why, in my opinion, we are not called upon to provide
for a loss of nine feet by evaporation; and I have brought
forward the evidence of men, practically conversant with the
subject, to show, that in the estimate of probable consump-
tion, Dr. Wilkie’s views are not borne out by actual experi-
ence.
But suppose that I am wrong in all these particulars, sup-
pose that I have taken the available rainfall at twice its real
amount, there would still remain enough to fill the reservoir.
That reservoir once filled will contain thirty-eight million
cubic yards of water, or six thousand four hundred and
twenty-two millions of gallons. Supposing that lam wrong
as regards evaporation, and that nine feet, or one-half, is lost
by this cause, there would still remain three thousand two
hundred and eleven millions of gallons, or sufficient, without
any replenishing, either from rain or the river Plenty, to
supply a population of two hundred and fifty thousand per-
sons with forty gallons a day for three hundred and twenty-
one days,—a much longer time than we are likely to be with-
out rain.
Mr. Hodgkinson cannot be supposed, in anywise, a partial
witness, at least in favour of the Yan Yean scheme; and yet,
taking his data, and correcting his calculations for the error
in the surface of the reservoir, and of the area which it
drains, the results would be more favourable than those
which I have supposed. They would be as follows :


Ft. In.
Available rainfall, taken at five inches, on
40,000 acres, an area thirty times as \l2 6in reservoir.
great as the surface of the reservoir,.
Ditto ditto, at seven inches, on area four 1 9
times ditto ‘
Rainfall in reservoir 2 8
Dew condensed on ditto 0 10
3 6
18 4
Deductions.
Ft. In.
Loss by evaporation 5 6
Supply to inhabitants of Plenty district 3 7
Balance, for supply of Melbourne 9 3
18 4
Nine feet three inches in the reservoir is equal to three thou-
sand two hundred and seventy-four million gallons, or enough
to supply a population of two hundred and fifty thousand,
with forty gallons a-head, for three hundred and twenty-seven
days.
Even taking Dr. Wilkie’s own data, and making similar
corrections, the result would be equally favourable. The ac-
count would stand thus ;
Ft. In.
Four and a-half inches of available rainfall over 4", 000 i
acres, being thirty times as great an area as the sur- >ll 3
face of the reservoir
* One third of rainfall of drainage area of reservoir,) ()
being four times as great as surface of reservoir ..., f
Rainfall on reservoir itself. 3 0
Dew O 2
18 5
It is not to be forgotten, as it seems to be by some writers
on this subject, that the reservoir once full we shall have this
immense store in reserve, as it were, and that the supplies
derived, from time to time, from rainfall and from the river
will be far more than enough to meet the daily demands, for
* The way in which Dr. Wilkie reduces the allowance of one-third rainfall to
seven inches is not to me quite intelligible, so I have not followed it.


filling up the loss caused by evaporation, and the supply of
population. Should, however, the increase of population
demand at any time a larger supply, there are ample means
of increasing the natural capabilities of the drainage area for
collecting rain, by the aid of plough furrows, and of catch
water and other drains, and this without travelling out of
the basin of the Plenty; and as the channels became water-
worn, the supply would each year become more ample and
certain.
The last subject on which I shall touch, is the quality of
the water, of which I think I have satisfactorily shown that
there will be an abundant supply. Upon the general ques-
tion of the desirability of selecting a source, at a high level,
and introducing it by gravitation, in preference to pumping
it from the lowest drainage level, there can be no second
opinion amongst men who have examined the statements and
weighed the opinions on the subject, given by the ablest and
most experienced engineers. But as Dr. Wilkie has revived
what he must permit me to call the old clap-trap arguments, of
theriver surroundingthecitylikeahorse-shoe, &c.,1 shall make
an extract from a letter of Mr. Gale, the engineer of the
Gorbals Water-works, which is published by the Board of
Health, along with the evidence on the subject. He says:—
“ There are many objections to the system of pumping water
from large rivers for the supply of towns. In the first place,
it is found that they are generally liable to become polluted
by public works, and from the drainage of towns and villages,
an evil gradually increasing:—as an example, the Glasgow
Water-work Company draw their supply from the river Clyde,
about two miles above the city, above which point there have
been numerous public works and populous towns sprung up
on the river and its tributaries. This growing evil compelled
the company to apply for power to have it remedied, by
drawing their supply from a source upwards of thirty* miles
distant from the city.” This is only one instance of many
* The distance of Glasgow from Loch Katrine, the intended source of supply to
service reservoir, is 27 miles 4 furlongs 3 chains, from the service reservoir to
Glasgow, 7 miles ; and the estimated expense to supply 20,000,000 gailons per diem
is £470,000, exclusive of reticulation and service pipes.


which might be cited of pumping works, upon which large
sums of money had been expended, have been abandoned in
order to obtain a supply by gravitation ; and that in cities
with rivers flowing past them quite as easy of access as the
Yarra.*
On this subject, Mr. Hodgkinson has given expression to
the most heterodox opinions. Speaking of the contamination
of river water by a resident population, he says : “ Now I
most emphatically declare, that, for that very reason, a decided
preference should have been given to the Yarra.” And fur-
ther on he says : “ Supposing that one of the owners of
land, abutting on the Yan Yean reservoir, or draining into it,
were to convert such land into a township, and, by puffing it
into notoriety,” &c. Mr. Hodgkinson is evidently one of
those who would “ rather bear the ills we have, than fly to
others that we know not of.” And who would prefer the
contamination arising from the presence of an actual popula-
tion on the banks of the Yarra, —with their tanneries, fell-
mongeries, and the thousand other daily increasing sources of
pollution,— to the possibility of having a population settled
in the neighbourhood of the reservoir, by the not very prob-
able means he suggests, of an owner puffing his land into
notoriety, &c., and “ causing a township on paper to become
a township in reality. ?” I think, however, I may assure
him that there need be no apprehension on this head. The
area drained by the reservoir itself is only about five thousand
two hundred acres, and it is chiefly in the hands of the Govern-
ment. Application was some time ago made, to the proper
authorities, that no villages should be laid out in such situations
that their sewerage should drain into the reservoir ; and the
Act of Council gives ample power to the Commissioners to
restrain the owners of land, abutting on the reservoir, from
allowing their sewerage to become a source of polution. No
population is settled there at present, and it is easy to regu-
late any that may hereafter be so.
• The following may be enumerated in addition ; Greenock, Sheffield, Manchester,
Liverpool, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Boston, U. S„ New York, Baltimore, partially.


The basin of the Plenty is indeed occupied, to a certain
extent, by a rural and agricultural population; but, under
similar circumstances, it is particularly stated, that no injury
has been suffered where gathering grounds consist of grazing
and agricultural lands ; and at Yan Yean there is a peculiar
facility for preventing any possibility of contamination from
this source, —as, by shutting the sluice-gate in the water-
course, the first winter floods may be allowed to run off, car-
rying along their natural channel any impurities which may
have collected during the summer. Apart from this source
of contamination, Mr. Hodgkinson does not anticipate much
deterioration from the storage of water in the reservoir, as,
from its great size and depth, and exposure to the winds, the
evils frequently arising from the storage of water will be ob-
viated ; but Dr. Wilkie anticipates that the water of the
Plenty, which he admits to be exceedingly pure, will be
greatly “ altered and deteriorated by a vast accumulation of
green slimy mud, the result of decaying organic substances,”
which he says have been deposited in the reservoir. I am
happy to be able to inform him, that there is no ground for
any such apprehension. I have been over a great part of
the surface of the reservoir myself, and it everywhere con-
sists of a stiff clay, covered, generally, with snort bulrushes,
but in some places with grass ; but nowhere could I see or
hear of the slighest trace of the green slimy mud which is
said, by Dr. Wilkie, to have been so largely accumulated.
I may add, on the subject of storage of water, that the
opinion in England seems to be, that when water is of the
depth of ten or twelve feet, and is collected in a tolerably
pure state, it does not suffer from storage,—but the deeper it
is the better.
The analysis of the Plenty and Yarra water, made by Dr.
Maund, for the commissioners, is as follows :


ONE GALLON PLENTY WATER.
YAKBA WATER, ABOVE
dight’s
MILL.
GK.
GK.
Organic Matter
.1-22
Organic Matter
.. . 1-12
Silica
. -91
Silica
... -86
Carbonate of Lime
. -60
Carbonate of Lime .
... ’48
Sulphate of ditto
. -54
Sulphate of ditto
.. '536
Alumina and Iron’
. -38
Alumina and Iron.. .,
.. -18
Sulphate of Magnesia and
Sulphate of Magnesia
.. "023
Chloride of Magnesia
•29
Chloride of Sodium ..
.. .1-46
Chloride of Sodiam ...
.1-78
5-72
4-659
Dr. Maund observes, with reference to this analysis, “ It
will be seen that the solid constituents of each of the waters
bear a very close resemblance to the other; both of them
containing but a very small amount of either saline or
mineral impregnations or organic matter, much less than
I ever met with in any river I have previously examined, or
of which I have seen any published analysis.” After noting
that the Plenty water contains a slight excess of solid matter
over that specimen of the Yarra water, he continues, “ I am,
however, far from the opinion that the Yarra water is supe-
rior to the Plenty, even if a slight excess of solid matter
invariably existed; for I may state that, after repeated trials
and experiments, the Plenty water is equally as soft as the
Yarra, and that it possesses as high solvent and extractive
powers, and that it keeps equally well. One decided advan-
tage the Plenty water possesses is, that it is more pleasant to
the taste.”
It contrasts most favorably with the water supplied to
London, from the Thames and other rivers, which varies in
hardness from 11 deg. to 17 deg., while the Yarra and Plenty
are only 2 deg. It is stated by Dr. Lyon Playfair that the
average hardness of the water supplied to the different towns
in England is from 7 to 8 deg., so that it is much superior to
these also. It may be also remarked that the fact of the
chlorides of soda and magnesia, forming a large proportion
of its solid constituents, may tend very much, from their
antiseptic qualities to confer on it the property of keeping
well.
I give an analysis, by Professor Way, of the Farnham


Organic Matter
124
Silica
*55
Lime, as Silicate
-37
Sulphate of Lime
Ditto of Magnesia
Chloride of Sodium
Ditto of Magnesium
Ditto of Potassium
*35
water, which is reckoned about the purest in England, and
which hears a close resemblance to the Plenty water.
FARNHAM WATER.
Something has been said of the deterioration which it is
likely to undergo, in passing in summer through the marshes
before alluded to. It does not strike me that such would be
the result: the mai shes are there filled with a green and
healthy sedge, and there is, as far as my observation goes,
but little dead or decaying vegetable matter. It is known
that all growing vegetables absorb ammonia, and thus purify
water. It is, however, by no means necessary to take a
supply from the Plenty during the dry months of summer,
should it be found not to be desirable, as the winter stream
would give all the assistance in filling the reservoir which is
requisite.
It has been suggested by Dr. Wilkie, that the Yarra, high
up the stream, might have been resorted to for a supply on
the gravitation principle. This source of supply, amongst
others, was examined by Mr. Jackson, the Engineer to the
Commissioners, before they decided upon the present one ;
but his report was not favourable to the scheme. Dr. Wilkie
indeed states, that Mr. Blackburne, after a careful survey of
the Yarra, stated that at a distance of twenty-five miles from
Melbourne there is a sufficient head for this purpose ; and he
gives an estimate of the expense of laying a thirty-six inch
pipe for twenty-five miles; thus conveying the impression,
that Mr. Blackburne’s opinion was that water could be con-
veyed to Melbourne in twenty-five miles ; but in the very
same passage of his report, Mr. Blackburne says, that from
“ the peculiarly broken nature of the country, no line of


aqueduct could be led to the necessary level in Melbourne
under a length of thirty-five miles.”
The pipe track from Yan Yean to Melboure is under
eighteen miles in length,—so that, on this score, there could
be no comparison between the two schemes.
I have thus endeavoured to show the certainty, sufficiency,
and purity of the supply which the Yan Yean is calculated to
ensure to the inhabitants of Melbourne and its environs; and
were not this paper drawn out to so great a length, it would
be easy to occupy a considerable space in dwelling on the ad-
vantages derivable to the district between this and Yan Yean,
and to the villages North of Melbourne—as well as to Mel-
bourne itself—from having what is, in effect, a small river
passing through them, at a considerable elevation, and with
a head of water which makes it available for many mechanical
and economical purposes : but these will suggest themselves
to every intelligent reader, and it is unnecessary to dwell on
them here.
In conclusion, I would say, that if anything in the fore-
going observations, which I have felt myself called upon to
make, should appear unnecessarily harsh towards Dr. Wilkie,
that such is not my intention. I know little of that gentle-
man, except that he has, for many years, occupied a respecta-
ble position among the medical men of this city. I can have,
therefore, no wish to say anything personally disrespectful
towards him, still less to insinuate, in any way, that in mak-
ing the statements, many of which I have felt bound to show
were inaccurate, or groundless, he has done so with a know-
ledge that they were so.
Some men have not the faculty of accurately appreciating
facts submitted to their own observation, or the industry pa-
tiently to investigate those derived from the observation of
others. If with the absence of these qualities should be
combined a strong desire to establish a foregone conclusion,
rash and unadvised statement is almost necessarily the conse-
quence.
It is not for me to say which of these causes have been at
work in the composition of Dr. Wilkie’s pamphlet. My task
has been to deal with the results.
[Lucas Brothers, Printers, Melbourne.]




