

OBSERVATIONS
RAILROADS IN THE UNITED STATES.
AUGUSTUS MOEEIS, Esq.,
EXECUTIVE COMMISSIONER,
PHILADELPHIA INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION OF 1876.
[ls.] 10 c* 5—77
suMtesrtr bp 'autfjontp.
SYDNEY: CHARLES POTTER, ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER.




OBSERVATIONS
RAILROADS IN THE UNITED STATES.
AUGUSTUS MORRIS, Esq.,
EXECUTIVE COMMISSIONER,
PHILADELPHIA INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION OF 1876.
fcy 'autfjoritp.
SYDNEY: CHARLES POTTER, ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
[U] 10 6* 5—77




Sydney, 31 March, 1877.
I have the honor to forward, for the information of the
Government, the accompanying Eeport on American Eailroads
and their Plant. Properly speaking, the Eeport consists of
memoranda made by me on such portions of the railway plant
of the United States as appeared to me suitable for introduction
into this Colony.
It may be that my anxious desire to have everything we require
made in this Colony, and as cheaply as it could be imported, may
have imperceptibly to myself influenced my opinions. But
while I am confident that the simpler construction of American
locomotives and rolling stock will enable us more readily to
imitate them than the more complicated English patterns, I think
I have stated sufficient reasons for concluding that the former have
many points of superiority over the latter, and are better suited
to colonial requirements.
As I have said in my report, so I again urge upon the
Government, if it is intended to construct our railroad plant in
the Colony, that the heads of the mechanical departments should
be the most skilful and competent persons who can anywhere be
found, even should it be necessary to pay much higher salaries
than has hitherto been the custom.
The cause of the failure of new industries is almost always
attributable to the incompetency of the management; and if we
desire to retain the Government work for our own people, at
reasonable prices, we must secure the services of the best talent
to direct them.
Should anything I have written serve the interests of the
Colony I shall be well satisfied, and I will gladly aid in giving
effect to any recommendations of mine which may meet approval.
I have, &e.,
AUGUSTUS MOEEIS,
Executive Commissioner to Philadelphia.
The Honorable the Colonial Secretary,
Sydney.




OBSEEYATIONS
RAILROADS IN THE UNITED STATES.
During my visit to the United States I endeavoured, as Report not
J _ professional.
requested by the Honorable the late Minister for Works, to
obtain as much information in regard to railroad matters in that
country as possible. In the following report I will freely make
such observations as have occurred to me ; but 1 desire it to be
understood that they are only what might be expected from an
observer who has not. the slightest claim to professional know-
ledge on the subjects he treats of. The facts can be depended
upon as scrupulously accurate; and although the deductions I
may have drawn from them may not always be correct, the facts
themselves will enable competent persons to compare several
American methods and some of their machinery with those
adopted in this Colony.
What first struck me as different from the method of con- Ballasting
structing railroads in this Colony was the comparatively light
ballasting. This defect, however, is made up by the use o£ a
greater number of ties or sleepers. On the best roads the
sleepers average 2,640 per mile, and the rails are connected
between the sleepers, thus preventing all jarring or jolting.
The Pennsylvania railroad is laid with a double track of steel
rails 67 lbs. to the yard. Its entire line is ballasted with broken
stone 18 inches in depth, but the ties are all visible, and their
ends extend beyond the ballasting, there being no curbing stones
such as are to be seen on our railroads.


Easy travelling. It is not, however, the ordinary practice to ballast as heavily as
this, nor are the ties as large as those on our lines. The
American engineers seem content with numerous ties of oak or
other suitable wood, and dispense with very heavy ballasting.
Nevertheless the railroads of America are remarkably smooth
and easy to travel on ; the greater elasticity of their lines, or
the better springs to the passenger cars, being the reason.
Freedom from Serious accidents from defective construction of the lines are
rare, except occasionally where a bridge has turned out faulty, as
that at Astabula, Not single accident occurred during the
conveyance of the enormous multitudes of people to and from
Philadelphia during the Exhibition which could possibly be
charged to bad lines or the neglect of the railroad officials.
Mr. Higginbotham, the Engineer-in-Chief of the Victorian
railways, says —“ In the construction of the Pacific Railroad
there are, as might be expected, marks of great haste observable,
and very inferior and perishable material has in numerous
instances been used.”
central Pacific I took some trouble carefully to examine into this matter, and
Railroad well . J l . .
fiuilt. I found that the best timber, such as red-wood, mountain cedar,
spruce, and other equally suitable material were used for ties,
and sugar and yellow pine for bridging, trestle-works, and snow
galleries. All structures on that line, as careful inspection
showed, are made of strong and heavy timber, and years of
service confirm my view. The trestle-works, however, which Mr.
Higginbotham terms “ timber-framings crossing the valleys,”
have been since his visit abandoned, and earth-works, filled in upon
arched stone culverts, have been substituted.
It might be supposed that I had taken too favourable a view
of the safety of American railroads, when we find Mr. Higgin-
botham stating, on page 20 of his report,that “no nice adjustment
of the rails,, such as is practised on English railroads, where the
curves Elevated, outer rail on curves is always elevated, would have been practic-
able on American lines. Even now on the best lines it is not
adopted.”


I also endeavoured to ascertain the facts in this case, and I
am sure further inquiry will establish that there are no rail-
ways in the United States, unless some very exceptional one,
of which I could hear nothing, where the outer rail on curves
is not always elevated —some, however, more than others—accord-
ing to the rate of speed at which the trains are run.
The elevation of the outer rail on the Central Pacific Railroad
is calculated for a speed of 20 miles per hour, or a little more
than a quarter of an inch to the degree of curvature. Mr.
Higginbotham is correct when he says that “ in America the prac-
tice of breaking joints is common, and finds many advocates.” Of
course by “ common” it is not meant to be inferred that the
practice is general.
I consulted several eminent engineers and railway managers of Broken rail
i • 11 . objectionable:
long experience who have experimented with a broken rail, and they
all concur in stating that it is with the very greatest difficulty a
track can be kept in proper line and surface if laid with broken
joints. They told me that many engineers had advocated the
idea of placing the joint between the ties, and, in fact, many
roads are laid in this way; but they maintained that the proper
place for the joint is directly on the tie, in accordance with the ‘
practice in this Colony and Victoria, if not in all the Colonies.
The inclines, or grades (as they are called in the States) are in Gradients,
many parts of America very severe. The heaviest gradients
between New York and San Francisco are on the Central Pacific
Railroad, stated by Mr. Higginbotham to be no worse thafi 1 in
50. There are about 66 miles over the Sierra Nevada which
average for one stretch 116 feet per mile, or 1 in 45| feet.
In order to furnish more exact information on the subject of
American iron bridges than can be obtained from any notes of
mine, I subjoin the accompanying letter from Messrs. Wilson
Brothers & Co., civil engineers and architects, of Philadelphia.
I feel satisfied that it will be found worthy of consideration,


whether or not the Government should enter into contracts with
constructors of iron bridges in the United States :
Iron Bridges. Messrs. Wilson Brothers & Co., to Augustus Morris, Esq.
No. 410, Walnut-street,
Dear Sir, Philadelphia, Pa., 24 November, 1876.
We enclose a sheet showing the general plan, &c., of our truss
* See Appendix, bridges,* and give below the prices delivered at New York of the iron-work
for several lengths of spans ; also the cost of erecting the bridges in this
country. By adding to these figures the freight from New York to Aus-
tralia, and any expenses of handling, &c., in Australia, also a percentage for
the additional cost of erecting, over what it would be here, if any, your
engineers can arrive at the approximate cost of our bridges built in
Australia.
Prices.
Iron Bridges for Railroads, single track — gauge, 4<ft. 9 in.
50 feet span —Weight of iron-work per foot lineal of bridge, 400 pounds.
Cost „ ~ „ at 5 c. lb.,
100 feet spans —Weight of iron-work foot lineal of bridge, 550 pounds.
Cost foot lineal of bridge, @4f c., $26T2.
„ „ ~ for erection, $5.
150 feet spans —Weight of iron-work foot lineal of bridge, 800 pounds.
Cost of iron-work foot lineal of bridge, @4f c., $3B.
Cost foot lineal of bridge for erection, $6.
200 feet spans —Weight of iron-work foot lineal of bridge, 1,000 pounds.
. Cost ijp' foot lineal of bridge, @ 4f c., $47'50.
Cost „ „ for erection, $B.
The foregoing prices are all in American currency, and are figured for a
floor-system, like that marked No. 5 on the enclosed lithograph. If floors of iron
beams were required, the extra expense would be, —for four lines of iron
stringers $9 foot lineal of the bridge ; and for two lines of iron stringers,
$6 foot. The moving loads are assumed at 2,500 to 3,000 pounds foot
lineal of the bridge, and 10,000 pounds square inch is the maximum tensile
strain allowed on the wrought iron. The prices here given are what can be
had at the present time, and are of course subject to change corresponding to
any changes in the rates for labour and materials from those now ruling.
Plans can be We think that from the plans and above figures your engineers can form a
correct opinion as to how our bridges compare with those your Government
have heretofore been building. Your engineers might wish to make special
requirements to provide for peculiarities in your railway service not existing
here ;if so, we can modify our plans to conform to such requirements. In
this connection we would call your attention to the difference between our
Links instead of construction and that of English engineers. Instead of riveting we use links
rivets. for our lower chords and main carrying rods, connections. We avoid


the continual re-placing of rivets, which is necessary in all riveted bridges.
We use less weight of iron ; every part of our work is finished in the shop, and
the whole bridge is erected complete in our shop yard before being shipped, so
that we know positively that everything is right. Our bridges can be erected Quickly erected,
rapidly; there is no drilling, chipping, or fitting to be done on the erecting
scaffold, the trusses conform readily to changes of temperature, no after ad-
justment is required, and after a bridge is-once erected the only repairs neces-
sary are to keep it well painted, and to renew when required any timber that
may be used in the floors.
Respectfully yours,
WILSON BROTHERS & CO.
I would say, once for all, that, in recommending trials of riant to be
. . manufactured in
American railway plant, I am actuated solely by a desire to colony,
save the Colony money, and to provide at the same time
superior material to that hitherto imported. I look upon all
or any of them merely as models on which I hope soon to see
all the railway and other plant, required for public or private
service, made in jS”ew South A Vales opt of the raw materials,
whether of iron or wood, which abound in such great quantities
and of such excellent qualities in so many parts of this country.
But until we can manufacture for our own requirements, I
imagine that the cheapest and best markets should be sought
out.
As it has been learned by experience in the United States that American
J A _ locomotive.
the best and cheapest railroads are those which are well graded
and properly ballasted, so also it has been found that the better the
rolling stock the less is the liability to accidents ; and consequently ‘
very great attention has been directed of late to the equipment
of their railways by American engineers. The manufacturers
have produced a locomotive engine which, for simplicity of
structure, for power and economy in working, as well as for
cheapness, compares most favourably with those of England or
Belgium.
I was unceasing in my inquiries on this subject. I consulted
those eminent engineers who were sent by the Eussian, the
German, the Austrian, and other European Governments, to
report on American railroad plant, and my conclusions are
theirs.


They gave the preference to the best American locomotives
over the English, for the requisite qualities ; and I am enabled
to say that a fair number of these locomotives, provided with
copper furnaces and tubes, instead of the more commonly used
steel ones, can be laid down in Sydney for £2,000 each, or £l,OOO
less than for those .contracted for in England. The boilers of
the best engines are now caulked on the concave method known
as “ Connery’s,” which really increases their strength 25 per
cent., and I would recommend that concave caulking should be
insisted upon in all Grovernment work where caulking is required.
A great improvement too has been introduced into the fur-
naces of the locomotives on the Philadelphia and Reading Rail-
road, by which all the smoke is consumed, and the risk of danger
from sparks almost entirely obviated. The saving in fuel by
this invention is said to be considerable, and I think it must be
so. The cost of this addition to a locomotive, including royalty,
is about £2O. This smoke-consumer is also applicable to
stationary engines. Tubes with funnel-shaped mouths are
conducted from the front of the locomotive over the arch of the
furnace, and the draft thus directed accomplishes most satis-
factorily the object intended. This invention has also been
applied with admirable success to the locomotives used on the
Harlem or Underground Railway of New York.
American locomotives have, it appears to me, more perfect head
lights than those I have seen in this Colony, which must be a great
advantage to the drivers, and contribute to the safety of the trains.
Perhaps over the more perfectly ballasted lines of this Colony,
the relative merits of American engines may not be so apparent,
unless the comparison between the Fairlie and Baldwin locomotives
on the admirably constructed English railroad from Yera Cruz to
the city of Mexico may be considered sufficiently demonstrative.
The subjoined schedule was furnished by the officials of the
Mexican Railroad Company, and, I think, fairly shows the
superiority of the Baldwin engines, which, however, are now
somewhat improved.


A.
Compaeatite Statement of Running and Repair Expenses of Baldwin and Fairlie Engines
on the Railroad from Vera Cruz to the City of Mexico.
Class of Engine.
From
To
Miles run.
oil.
Tallow.
Waste.
Packing.
Wood.
t
Coal.
Total cost
of Running
Expenses.
Total cost
of Repair
Expenses.
Total
cost of Running
and Repair
Expenses.
Remarks.
'
Pounds.
Pounds.
Pounds.
Pounds.
Cords.
Pounds.
9 $
9 $
t $
No. 13,
Baldwin
7 Dec., 1873
31 Dec., 1874
3.541
i,8ooJ
232!
53!
X,l42i
96,622
10,438 62!
1,207 7°!
11,646 32!
-
■ Passenger trains between Va. Cruz and Orizaba.
No. 38,
Do
99
99
30,028^
2,975
2.37 1
218
44
I,I2l|
90,526
9.863 55!
1,526 87!
ii,39° 4 2 !
J
00
6
Yorkshire Fairlie, 16" cyl., 22" stroke, 44" wheel ...
6 Nov., 1873
99
19,082!
4,495
1,160
333i
81*
1,363!
253.637
10,688 66f
2,834 75s
13.523 42!
No. 29,
Do.
do.
do.
29 Nov., 1873
99
12,686
3.123
790
1
252
31
978!
146,082
7.532 8 3 f
3,100 88|
10,633 72!
► Mixed trains between Ya. Cruz and Orizaba.
No. 30,
Do.
do.
do.
22 Jan., 1874
99
I 5)9 20 ?
3. g 43
1,094
289
35!
949!
124,582
7,990 20^
2,702 70!
90!
/
No. 31,
Do.
do.
do.
8 Mar., 1874
99
15.509!
3.479
892
248
3 6 *
930!
105,602
7,56i 21!
2,741 08!
10,302 29!
J
No. 32,
Bristol Fairlie, 16"
cyl., 20"
stroke, 42" wheel
1 Sept., 1874
99
4.346!
1,441
449
112
i6f
378!
’ 169,100
3.190 41
790 07!
3,980 48^
•
Passenger and freight trains between Orizaba and Ba.
del Monto Cumbres, 4% grade.
No. 33,
Do,
do.
do.
99
99
3> OI 4!
73 8
3*3
66
276
103,600
2,105 io|
795 20!
2,900 3it
J
- '
Note.—The cost of Banning Expenses includes Wages of Drivers, Firemen, &c., &c.
Repair „ , „ Wages and Material used for repairs.
Cost of Running and Repair Expenses per mile
Baldwin, No. 13 37 ’4° @
„ No. 38 37'93 ,,
Fairlie, No. 28 70'8i ,,
„ No. 29 83-82 „
„ No. 30 67-16,
„ No. 31 . . .. ., 66-42,,
„ No. 32 . . ., 91-51,,
No. 33 | 96-21,,




I also obtained a copy of the monthly report of the “ Amount consumption of
of fuel, cost per mile, and miles run," of 69 locomotives on the
Boston and Maine Bail road, which may be valuable to compare
with similar expenses in this Colony.
Many of these locomotives have been running for a long time
and are not equal to the more improved engines.
The average quantity of coal used per mile was 2,000 lbs. to
46T6 miles, or 47-66 lbs. per mile. When wood was used, the
average was one cord to 28'25 miles.
Some of the locomotives only used 16 lbs. and some 20 lbs.
per mile, while others required 60 lbs. per mile, dependent,
doubtless, on their speed.
The following statements show the comparative working of
the Baldwin “Consolidation” and “Pen-wheeled,” engines, on
the Pennsylvania Eailroad. The work done by these engines, as
given in the schedule, extended from Ist January to Ist July, 1876.
The large amount of work done by the Consolidation engines p en -wheeied and
of class I in a short time shows that they do not need the constant engines.
repairs which it has been asserted such engines would require.
I found it was a commonly received opinion that though Consoli-
dation engines haul more cars in a single train than lighter
engines, they could not do so much work in a given time. The state-
ments of the officials of the Pennsylvania Bailroad and the figures
given below leave no grounds for such apprehensions. These en-
gines were hauling trains on the same schedule as the Company’s
ordinary 10-wheel engines work on, and of course, owing to fluc-
tuations in traffic, engines have often to be run empty or with
half-trains, so that the average train is very much below the
usual load.
The maximum load on a level division, with which the men
are expected to make time, may be taken at 90 cars, though on
one day an engine actually hauled 110 cars into Harrisburg.
I would state that class I, referred to, has cylinders 20 by 24,
driving wheels 49 inches in diameter —total weight, 100,000 lbs.,


and on the “ drivers ” 88,000 lbs. Class D has cylinders 18
inches by 22 inches, driving wheels 55 inches diameter ; weight,
total, 77,000 lbs.; on drivers, 51,000 lbs.
I have photographs of both these patterns of locomotives as
made at the Baldwin Works in Philadelphia.
One of the partners in these works is an English engineer who
had the management of the Pennsylvania Eailroad for many
years, and who ought to know, as he professes to do, the com-
parative merits of the English and American locomotives; and I
do not think he is so imprudent as to send to this Colony one of
his firm’s engines, on the understanding that it is not to be paid
for unless it is in all respects after trial equal to the English
locomotives in use here, without feeling well assured that his
locomotive will stand every necessary test. I furnished the
Baldwin Company, as well as others, with Mr. Eae’s admirable
and exhaustive Eeport on the Eailways of New South Wales, from
which the nature of the gradients on all our lines could be
learned, so that the difficulties to be encountered are known to
them.
PENNA RAILROAD COMPANY,
Philadelphia and Erie R. R. Division.
Howard Fry, Superintendent,
Motive Power.
Statement “ A.’
Engines of Classes “I” and “ D” compared.
Division.
Average pounds of
mass. £ oa j p er car , m ii e
Western (betwecnOve and Langdon’s), heaviest grade
Do. do. do
Eastern (between Reno vo and Jersey Shore), heaviest
grade
Do. do. do
Susquehanna
> “I”
“D”
a j>>
“D”
“I”
, “D”


Statement “B.”
Performance of “I” engines on P. and E. R. R. Division.
* milpao-p Actual number of cars
Engine. Division. Engine mileage. - in train hauled each
engine-mile.
1004 Western 22,924 887,163 387
ion Eastern 24,402 1,730,310 69^4
Statement “C.”
Performance of “I” engines on Susquehanna Division of N. C. Railway.
Actual mileaw Actual number of cars
Engine. Division. Engine mileage. , ° e in train hauled each
engine-mile.
13 Susquehanna... 10,592 868,646 82'©
14 Co 9> 2 4 8 744.973 Bo'6
Notb. —“ I” engines are the “ Consolidation” pattern, 8 drivers and 2-wheeled truck.
“ D” engines are the “Pen-wheeled” pattern, 6 drivers and 4-wheeled truck.
I have been thus particular in giving what I had time to learn
in respect to American locomotives, because I feel I am in some
measure responsible for the advice I have given to try one on our
railroads. And lam glad to be able to say, in consequence of
Mr. Higginbotham’s report, the Victorian Government ordered
two of “ Eogers’s” American locomotives, which ought to arrive v
in Melbourne during the month of May.
It is a question of taste whether the English or American American pas-
arrangements of the passenger cars are more comfortable, but I senser car 3,
think where the traffic is heavy the latter are more convenient.
Eor suburban passenger traffic and for excursions the American
cars, I should say, are altogether more suitable.
There is one enormous advantage they have over English closets,
carriages—which is, the system of always having closets in the
carriages; and I must take leave to differ with Mr. Higginbotham
when he implies their offensiveness is greater than their con-
venience.


I never heard a complaint in regard, to them, and cause for any
could be readily remedied. In each of the three cars ordered for
this Colony—lst class passenger, 2nd class passenger, and
sleeping cars —care has heen taken to have both a ladies and
gentlemen's toilet room, and also a cistern to hold di inking-
water accessible to all the passengers.
There is no question but the American passenger cars, with
their Miller platforms, are safer in case of a collision than the
English, which are always “telescoped” when such an accident
happens, and consequently accompanied with greater loss of life
or with more serious injuries to those who escape alive than
would otherwise occur.
The strong beams or joists, extending from the extreme end of
one platform to the extreme end of the other, on which the
carriage is built, doubtless cause it to weigh more per passenger
carried than an English one, but American engineers prefer, in
this case, safety to lightness.
The comfort, I may say the necessity, of the sleeping cars on
long lines of railroad is too well understood to require insisting
upon. Sleeping cars mostly run on eight wheels—two trucks of
four wheels each, but twelve wheels are common enough, and
even sixteen wheels are used on a few of the Pullman Cars. The
Silver Palace Cars on the Central Pacific Eailroad have only
eight wheels.
To insure the easy motion of the sleeping cars they invariably
are hung on numerous elastic springs, and many of the Pullman
Cars are run on paper wheels, having steel tires.
The usual diameter of the passenger car wheels is 33 inches,
and they are made of cast iron, but I think Mr. Higginbotham
is mistaken when he says that “ there are difficulties in casting
them larger.” lam under the impression that there is no diffi-
culty in casting wheels even as large as forty inches, for I saw
many such at the Exhibition in Philadelphia.
The objection that cast-iron wheels are “never either per-
fectly balanced or truly cylindrical ” has been met by planing,
either before or after the wheel has been used.


Mr. Lobdell, of Wilmington, Delaware,- lias within the last Cast-iron wheels
turned.
year or two patented and made a wheel-lathe suitable for
turning cast-iron chilled wheels. This wheel-lathe is so con-
structed that the tread of the wheel may be turned off without
taking it from the axle.
On the Wilmington and Baltimore Eailroad, wheels such as Longer life,
are by most roads broken up and turned over to the foundry for
recasting, on account of being flat, worn, and having sand,
blisters, have been turned and have made 66| per cent, more
mileage than before they had been turned, and yet they were
only an average wheel when put new under cars. There are
other instances where wheels have run 26,000 miles after being
turned.
I think, however, that the time has arrived wdien the whole
system of car wheels and axles must be changed, whether on
American or English cars, passenger or freight. •
I have repeatedly in my reports from Philadelphia drawn Miltimore wheel
attention to the “ Miltimore wheel and axle,” and I forwarded a ‘
model of the invention to this Colony. The Miltimore invention
consists of a compound axle —one fixed, and the other in form of
a sleeve, revolving, the wheels being independent one of the
other, and of course loose. As described in detail it is as
follows: ' v
“It is a compound axle, involving new principles as well Description,
as new features of construction —that is, the principal axle
is fixed, while a secondary one, made of wrought-iron, has wheel-
sets upon which the wheels may revolve independently of it or
in conjunction with it, on the brass bearing round the fixed axle,
which, as one piece passes through the secondary axle, and at
each end through a cast-iron nut into a pedestal block, and is
firmly held in position by a steel pin; the end of the fixed axle is
in communication with a reservoir, holding the lubricant, which
is prevented from wasting, between the surfaces of the fixed axle
and pedestal block, by a cork held in position by a washer and a
hollow screw plug, which permits the lubricant to flow through


it and a horizontal passage, and thence down a vertical passage
in the underside of the fixed axle, to the bearing. If oil is the
lubricant, a pin is used in the vertical passage to regulate the
flow, but if grease is used the pin is removed.
“ The wheels are held firmly in position, as to width, on the
secondary axle by the long bearing of the wheel seat, and its
shoulder on the inside and on the outside by the cast-iron nut
already mentioned.
“ The pedestal-block, with the reservoir for the lubricant, and
the oil drip, are made of one casting.
“ A washer against the pedestal-block prevents end play of the
wheels and secondary axle.
“An annular ring holds the oscillating-box in position, and at
the same time permits it to accommodate itself to slight changes
of the due to shocks.
“ A slot through the threads of the cast-iron nut permits suffi-
cient lubricant to pass through it to lubricate the wheel upon its
wheel seat.
“ The journal of the fixed axle is tapered, and rk of an inch
smaller in diameter than the box, which, revolving, presents its
entire inner surface for wear.
“ The construction is such that it seems almost perfectly to
exclude dust, as under the microscope, after four months con-
tinuous wear with the same charge of grease, an examination
only showed slight traces of dust, and no particles of grit, no
cuttings of metal of any size having been found.”
The above description, as also all the principal facts, were sup-
plied to me by the experts employed by the Eastern Railroad
Association, consisting of forty-three Companies, which have
combined to test every improvement likely to be of value to their
lines, or in any way to affect their interests.
It has been put to many severe tests, but' I only witnessed it
in operation on the West End Railroad which ran round the


Exhibition grounds at Philadelphia. This railroad, which was
not ballasted, and therefore rough after rain, had a gauge of 3
feet, with a double track each 3| miles long.
It was a very crooked road, being made up almost wholly of w®® l End Kail-
- in order to run near all the principal buildings on the
Exhibition grounds. Many of these curves were on the heaviest
gradients, some having a radius of 250 feet on inclines of 155
feet to the mile.
In ordinary work one engine, with the lever dropped back
three notches, and carrying 25 lbs. less steam, could draw six
cars, fitted with Miltimore trucks 24,000 lbs. heavier than the
others, the trucks having been made for larger cars, and 800
passengers, more easily than a similar engine could draw five
cars with 66G passengers. Indeed, I have often observed that Less friction,
the lighter load on the ordinary wheels required the aid of an
additional engine at the steepest incline with the sharp curve,
while “ the Miltimore” ran without extra assistance.
It was found that the ordinary cars wore out three sets of of
cast-iron break-shoes, while on the Miltimore cars only one set
was required during the same period of time, and that was not
worn one half. The wear of iron on each ordinary car during
the six months of trial was 22 - 92 lbs., and on the Miltimore
cars only 3T25 lbs.
The average consumption of grease on a car equipped with Smaconsu
the Miltimore axle was 26'977 cubic inches of grease, against
268’835 cubic inches of black oil (petroleum) consumed by each
ordinary car in 90 days ; that is, the 26'977 cubic inches of grease
consumed by the Miltimore car for 90 days is 10-035 per cent, of
the 268-835 cubic inches of oil. I may here point out, what the
experts failed to do, that the Miltimore cars used a comparatively
newly, invented grease called “ Albany,” which is fully three
times more lasting than the ordinary lubricants, and in so far
accounts for the smaller quantity used. After running two
months the common black oil was taken out, in order to try the
Albany grease. The latter was used four months without having


to be replenished, and was found to be lowered only one inch in
the oil reservoir, which, being closed by a light screw cap, as
already described, excluded all dust and grit.
Greater wear of It was almost impossible to arrive at any correct data as to
the relative wear of the rival wheels, as no casts had been taken
previous to their commencing running.
An examination of the tread of the ordinary wheels showed
many flat spots in the wheels, and some cutting in the flange.
Two sets of trucks had been removed on account of flat wheels.
Less wear of mu- On the other hand, the Miltimore wheels showed the tread to
timore wheels. gQod) not p aving any flat spots, or but little flange wear,
simply that of brightening up the metal from to aan inch on
the flange.
The Miltimore, as well as the other wheels are cast-iron
(chilled). Of course there were no data to determine the rela-
tive wear and tear of the line itself under the operations of the
two systems of car wheels, but they must have corresponded
with the wear and tear of the wheels.
superiority of the These facts seem to me clearly to demonstrate the superiority
of the Miltimore wheels and axles over those at present in gene-
ral use.
As a consequence of “ removing all tortional strain from the
axle, and lessening the vibratory and vertical strain on the
wheels,” their size can be increased. I learned from the Manager
of the Central Vermont Railroad that he had a train of five
large passenger cars fitted up with 40-inch wheels, mounted on
the Miltimore axle. He had tested them for eighteen months
on regular fast passenger trains, running from 150 to 200 miles
daily. The Superintendent of this line remarked that these
wheels are “ less liable to mount the rail,” and when a set was
taken out for inspection there was no perceptible wear in any of
its parts.
Whipple’s report, Mr. S. M. Whipple, the principal expert of the Associated
Eastern Railroads, reports that he is acquainted with all the


tests which have been made, and that he is engaged in making a
thorough and exhaustive test of the Miltimore axle on the Boston
and Albany Railroad; and “he expects to be able to show that
the Miltimore compound fixed and revolving axle, with inde-
pendent wheels, is safe, and in every way more economical, both
in construction and maintenance, than the axle in common use.”
“ And more,” he expects “to show that this improved axle is a
practical solution of the whole question of railway car journals,
wheels, axles, and their proper mode of lubrication.”
I was in hope that the passenger and sleeping cars ordered some Miltimore
from the United States would be equipped with the Miltimore to colony.
axles, so admirably adapted as they are for our lines with their
steep gradients and sharp curves.
Unfortunately, after I left New York, Mr. R. W. Cameron,
on whom the responsibility lies of sending a good sample of the
American passenger cars, changed the arrangements.
From his stand-point he cannot be blamed. The Miltimore
invention has not been long enough before the railway public to
have been adopted on any of the best lines, and Mr. Cameron
could scarcely be expected to endorse a matter to which he had
never given any attention.
Some wheels and axles are, however, to be sent free of cost, so
that their advantages may be tested by our own engineers.
When tried it will be impossible to tell by any difference of
motion whether the Miltimore cars are on a curve or straight
line, so free are they from any oscillation.
Whatever doubt may prevail as to the propriety of adopting Freight cars.
the American passenger cars on our railroads, I imagine there is
none existing in regard to the merits of the American freight
waggons—especially if supplied with the Miltimore axles.
Mr. Higginbotham says that the ordinary box freight cars on
the Central Pacific Railroad weigh 19,860 lbs. each.
This weight is that of the “ Combination ” cars, of which I
obtained and forwarded a working plan on my way to Phila-
delphia.


Combination
cars.
Wrought iron
tanks can be im-
ported cheaply.
Bodies of cars
to be made in
Colony.
Kiln for drying
colonial timber.
The Combination car is suitable for all kinds of freight,
including live-stock, and will carry with safety 30,000 lbs. The
ordinary freight car only weighs 16,000, and will also carry
30,000 lbs.
The trucks for these ears could be imported from the United
States at a very much less cost than they have been from
England. •
Trucks for freight cars made with the best wrought-iron frames,
four wheels to each truck and two trucks to each waggon, could
be delivered free on board in New York for a sum not exceeding
£7O, royalties included, at present rates for iron.
All of these trucks would be equipped with the Miltimore
axle and independent wheels, and would be complete in every
part, and it must be remembered that these wheels will even out-
last steel ones. Each part of the truck would be made to a
templet , so that the various parts might be interchangeable, and fit
for the corresponding place in any truck. The wheels, axles, and
frames to be taken apart, that they might be stowed compactly
for shipment at the lowest rate of freight; and as the wheels are
loose, very little space would be occupied. I assume that the
bodies of the waggons would be made in the Colony, either out
of our own woods or from imported seasoned woods.
I observe that Mr. Higginbotham recommends the importation
of seasoned woods of the best quality to build in Grovernment
workshops the required rolling stock.
In connection with this subject, I may be permitted to remark
that if there are grown in this or the neighbouring Colonies
various kinds of woods suitable for the construction of rolling-
stock, it would be very little trouble and expense to build a kiln
for kiln-drying timber. No matter how green the timber may
bq, a few days only are required for thoroughly seasoning it.
And in the Exhibition in Philadelphia we saw a process by which
the most rigid of our colonial woods can be bent like whalebone
to any shape. Mr. Eobinson, our Secretary, had a piece of our
wood so treated, and it will be amongst the exhibits in Alfred
Park.


I am certain that the bodies o£ all our passenger cars and car construction,
freight waggons could be constructed in this Colony more advan-
tageously than by importing ; but the Superintendent should be
a man thoroughly acquainted with all the American methods,
and should likewise be a skilful draftsman. Such a man could
be obtained, but not for less than £BOO a year. It is, however,
only by having skilled heads over the various branches that the
railway plant can be made in this Colony and the work secured
for our own people.
I was a good deal surprised, when first I saw an American No platforms,
railroad, at the want of raised platforms at the stations. I soon
however learnt to look upon the want of them not only as a
matter of great economy, but of safety to the passengers. And
notwithstanding what ought to be the better opinion of Mr. Hig-
ginbotham, I feel assured the American railroad managers will
not generally adopt platforms.
According to my judgment I think, with the American style of t 0
passenger car, and the great difficulty of preventing passengers —
men especially —from getting on and off the cars while in motion,
it is much safer that the platform should be about the same height
as the rail; for then, in attempting to get on just as the train
starts, or to get off just before stopping, the weight of the per-
son would be thrown away from the rail and car, instead of
against it, or alongside, as would be the case if the platform
was as high as the lower step. I have been told of many fatal
accidents which have occurred from persons attempting to get
on cars in motion from what is known as the high platform, viz.,
up to the bottom step.
Perhaps it will not be out of place if I say a word of explana- Compromising
tion in reference to what Mr. Higginbotham states about
“ compromising” of cars so as to make them suitable to run on
lines of 4 feet inches gauge up to 4 feet 10 inches gauge. He
says “ they (the cars) have wheels with broad flanges."
The State laws of Ohio require all railroads built in that State Ohio laws,
to be of a gauge of 4 feet 10 inches. The accepted standard of


the United States being 4 feet 8| inches, it is evident that a car
made to the latter gauge could not run over the Ohio roads ; and
as many of the trunk lines east and west of Ohio desired to
run cars through without breaking bulk, they devised the plan of
compromising the car, or, in other words the truck, which opera-
tion is accomplished by casting a wheel with broad tread —not
flange. The tread of the wheel is usually about one inch wider than
that of the ordinary wheel. The wheels are pressed on to the
axle to a gauge of 4 feet 91 inches, that being f of an inch
wider than the standard gauge, and f of an inch narrower than
the Ohio gauge, thus permitting the flange of the wheels to pass
safely through the frogs of both gauges without springing the
axle or breaking the wheel; but on the Ohio gauge the car would
run loose, with much lateral motion, while on the standard gauge
it would run close up to the flanges of the wheel, making a train
pull much harder in consequence of the wheels being a little too
wide. Notwithstanding the Ohio law, I was told that some of
the roads crossing that State are compromising the track at a gauge
of 4 feet 91 inches, thereby permitting both the 4 feet 81 inch
and the 4 feet 10 inch truck, or car, to run over their roads,
which substantially accomplishes the same as to compromise the
trucks, as above referred to.
From all I could learn, there appears no reason to doubt the
correctness of Mr. Higginbotham’s opinion that there is no real
economy in adopting the narrow gauge, especially if the traffic
along the line is ever to be considerable; but to the low-cost
railroads I gave no study, and can form no opinion of my own.
The breaking of the gauge is no doubt a serious
nuisance, but I believe much of the expense of it is to be
avoided by the use of “Eamsey’s Car-Truck Shifting Appa-
ratus,” a model of which I sent from Philadelphia. The
usual method of shifting a loaded car or waggon from
one truck to the other is by a steam hoist. The method is in
itself effective enough, but the cost of the machinery is about
£2,000. By Eamsay’s plan the cost is only about £lOO, and its


operation is very inexpensive. The removal of the body of a
car or waggon from trucks of different gauge is effected by
having at each shifting station part of the track slightly
depressed (say 18 inches) ; before running the trucks to be
removed down a gentle incline into this pit, two narrow side
trucks are placed on either side of the car to be lifted. From
one to the other of these side trucks two beams, at suitable
distance, are passed under the body of the car to bear its weight,
when its own trucks run from under it, which they do in the pit.
To place the loaded car on the trucks on another gauge, it is
brought over the pit on the side trucks to that part of the
incline where the waiting trucks can receive the King bolts and
relieve the others of their load. There are many advantages
incident to Mr. Ramsay’s invention, which will doubtless cause
its adoption, irrespective of its usefulness where the gauges are
broken. I apprehend, however, it will come into play when tfye
Victoria line with its wide gauge, and the Queensland line with
its narrow one, meet that of New South Wales with its standard
gauge. Mr. Eamsay offers the right of his invention to the
Australian Governments for a small sum.
Knowing that the subject of continuous “power-breaks” excited Power breaks,
a great deal of interest amongst all persons connected with rail-
way management, I gave what attention I could to that branch
of railway gear. I observed that in the estimation of disinterested
engineers, such as the various European Governments sent to report
on American railroads, the hydraulic system, as distinguished from
the atmospheric, seemed to have the preference. They told me Westinghouse
in i nr • i • i i • , air and Render-
that, excellent as was the Westinghouse air break, its complexity, eon hydraulic
brsftkff
and liability to derangement in consequence, were serious
objections. Acting under the best advice I could obtain, and
seeing the system in operation, I came to the conclusion that the
hydraulic break invented and patented by Mr. W. M. Henderson,
a Scotch engineer, was, of all, the most suitable for the Australian
Colonies. Having ascertained the fitness of an article for the
purpose required, I always tried to select that one which could
be more cheaply made in this Colony than imported, and I am in


Cheapness of
hydraulic break.
hopes that the Henderson Hydraulic Break will meet the require-
ments I have mentioned. It has many points of merit, arising
out of the very great simplicity of the apparatus its instant
readiness for action —its economy in working, as steam is only
used at the moment of applying the breaks, and difectly to that
purpose—and its cheapness in construction, consisting as it does
of a few simple castings. It can be made in this Colony for less
than half the cost of the Westinghouse Break, but the patentees
expect the various Governments to purchase the right to make
and use their invention. To test its efficacy I have had, by per-
mission of the Henderson Hydraulic Break Company, apparatus
made sufficient for one locomotive and six large American cars,
or twelve English cars, at a cost of about £l3O. I imagine the same
could be made here in the Railway workshops for about £lOO-
- break is under the immediate control of the driver, and in
no way interferes with the working of the hand breaks,
than which it costs no more to maintain. A small quantity
of strong solution of ammonia will not only prevent
the water in the iron pipes from freezing at the lowest tempera-
ture, but will also preserve the pipes themselves from rusting.
One advantage of the Henderson Break is that it can be
applied to freight waggons without any great expense.
I think the “ Railway Turn-tables,” such as are used in the
States, and indeed on both the American Continents, would be
found of great use at our principal stations. They are made
almost exclusively by Messrs. William Sellers & Co., of
Philadelphia. These turn-tables, which are cast-iron, are simple
in form, very durable and easily put in place, requiring compara-
tively inexpensive pits, and turning with ease.
There is no occasion to cover the pits, not even in round-
houses, as they are not deeper than 20 inches, and can be crossed
by stepping into them.
The centre plates and the rolls are steel, making the turning
easier.


The prices and weights of uncovered turn-tables are as follows, size^ price, am*
viz. : . __ . , .
Price. Weight.
60 ft ; £3OO 36,300 lbs.
56 ft. 1 in 295 33,300 „
54 ft. 1 in 290 32,800 „
50 ft. ex. heavy pattern 255 29,050 „
50 ft... 244 24,600 „
10 per cent. off.
The timber work, circular track, and rail for top of table are not
included in above prices.
One man with a lever can turn with ease the heaviest engine. Easily operated.
The power required to turn a table 50 feet in diameter, weighing
over 24,000 lbs., is so small that U lb. pressure, applied at one
end of the arms is sufficient to start its motion from a state of
A table 30 feet in diameter is used in freight-depots for
turning waggons ; it is also adopted on coal roads for turning at
“ tips.”
The “ Fisher Eail Joint” is considered an improvement. It Rail joint.
consists of a double-headed U-bolt pattern, with base plates of
either 22 or 24 inches long. The plate is bolted through the
flanges of the rail, and receives the ends of two rails in its
centre. It is said effectually to prevent “ creeping” of rails, and
to have several advantages over other chairs, especially inas-
much as it does not weaken the rail by requiring a hole to be
bored through it horizontally.
I have already remarked that the easier motion on the oodiey car
American railways may arise from the better springs used on 1
the cars. I have myself tested one spring known as the
“ Godley,” which is especially applicable to freight waggons and
to buffers, on account of its strength, elasticity, and cheapness.
It is a spiral spring, but differently constructed from any other.
It will bear according to its size weights from 10 to 15 tons, and
retain in full force its elasticity. They can be purchased for 2s.
per inch in height,


Improved piston
packing.
Engine No. 300.
Eor passenger cars I imagine arched flat springs are the best.
Both kinds will he at our Exhibition.
The American inventors are a good deal exercised in regard to
car-couplers. I have had one made which is automatic in its
action, and appeared to me to be what is required on our cars
and waggons. It will I fear scarcely be in time for the Metro-
politan Exhibition. If approved of, it can be made here, and the
inventor expects only a small sum for the right to use it.
“ Richards’s” improved spring packing for cylinders is well
worthy of consideration, whether for locomotive, marine, or
stationary engines. It consists in “ the substitution of lugs and
clips for bolts and nuts, giving a permanent and solid backing to
the springs, and allowing the packing to be more rapidly and
uniformly adjusted than with bolts and nuts.”
This packing cannot come down, so that an engine in service
cannot be disabled from that cause. It is said to save, as against
the packing in ordinary use, half a ton of coal during a run of 100
miles by a locomotive. I cannot say that any tests to be relied upon
in respect to saving of fuel have been made, but I have before me
carefully taken weighings of the consumption of tallow by the old
bolt-packing and by Richards’s improved packing respectively.
The old packing was used in 1875 and the improved in 1876,
on the same engines, with the following results :
1875, January to May (5 months)—Bl3 lbs. tallow ; 14,618
mileage, lbs. for 100 miles run.
1876, January to May (5 months) —561 lbs. tallow; 12,370
mileage. 4r O V lbs. for 100 miles run.
Engine No. 49.
1875, same months—s 97 lbs. tallow; 12,204 mileage.
4-iVo lbs. for 100 miles run.
1876, same months—6l4 lbs. tallow ; 13,038 mileage.
4-Jott lbs. for 100 miles run.
Engine No. 348.
1875, two months— 3l9 lbs. tallow ; 4,223 mileage.
7tVo lbs. for 100 miles run
1876, five months—4B4 lbs. tallow; 9,940 mileage.
4v\rV lbs. for 100 miles run,


Engine No. 219.
1875, five months—s 64 lbs. tallow; 10,023 mileage.
siVo lbs. for 100 miles run.
1876, five months—46l lbs. tallow ; 9,716 mileage.
4iVo lbs. for 100 miles run.
The general result is a saving of about 50 lbs. of tallow a month
for each engine, or 600 lbs. for the year. My authority states that
the packing is superior to anything he has seen, and that it is
impossible to get out of order, requiring only a tenth of the usual
labour to keep it in repair, and that labour need not be-skilled.
The piston packing adopted in England has five parts to each Greater sfmpii-
spring, while Eichards’s has only three. In the best English *
packing the head of the bolt is out at the rings ; while in
America, with the same kind of spider, the head of the bolt is
always next the centre. With this alteration the English is
the old spider in use in the United States previous to the inven-
tion of Eichards’s packing.
The “ Wharton Switch” for sidings is generally preferred in switches,
the United States, but this is a subject on'which it is not neces-
sary to enlarge ; I have a plan of this switch.
Some improvement or other is being made every day in improvement
America ; and when it is remembered that there are in the States greafixtent of
and Canada more than 80,000 miles of railroad, it is not sur- ra,lr d 0 ‘
prising that the engineers, many of whom are English, on so
many miles should be in some things in advance of their rival
English brethren, who have only 17,000 miles of railroad to
design for.
As is well known, the “ check ” system for passengers’ luggage Check S y St cm.
is a special feature of American railway management.
A metal disc with a number on it is fastened to every piece of
luggage, and a duplicate of it is given to the owner. This enables
the passenger to obtain his property without delay ; or by giving
the checks to an authorized carrier, it is delivered at his hotel or
private residence for a small regulated charge.


This latter arrangement is found a great convenience, and I
never heard of any one suffering a loss by it. But the check
system does notin American railroads protect passengers’ luggage
from bad usage by the porters. Generally speaking, that class
of freight is knocked about in a most reckless manner, and I can
assure travellers that leather trunks however strongly built will
almost certainly be wrecked on a journey from San Bran cisco to
New York. The Central Pacific Eailroad is the only one lam
acquainted with on which ordinary care is taken to prevent
damage to luggage.
The practice of having agents for the sale of railroad tickets
and for receiving passengers’ luggage in the principal streets of
the cities is also a great convenience, and relieves the office at the
stations from the crowds which would otherwise press round the
ticket-window a few minutes before' the trains start.
These agents send to the hotels or elsewhere for heavy luggage
when desired.
To conclude the information which I have attempted to give, I
find that the total number of accidents to railroad trains in the
United States were for 1875, the latest date to which I could
obtain statistics, 1,201, resulting in 234 deaths and 1,107 persons
being injured.
As I said in the beginning of this report, my statements are
merely those of an unprofessional observer, trying to learn a few
lessons which might interest those who can turn them to
the advantage of this Colony and Australia generally. Exact
knowledge I could not acquire, for it would have taken me many
months to learn the technical terms alone of the multifarious
subjects connected with railroads and their plant.
AUGUSTUS MOERIS,
Executive Commissioner to Philadelphia.
Sydney, 31st March, 1877.
[Diagram.]
Sydney : Charles Potter, Acting Government Printer.—lB77.


Jljjpmjdijc


' ••
■
I''■, ' - . ■ •
*
v
*
1
'
' ' ' '
•' ’ ■
■r- : „ ■
.. • ; • ■ ■ ♦ ' ■. •*...
. . ■' . . _ •. . ,; • - , .. , ■ . • ■■ ;
- ■
■
' ■
.
» I . •
.
, '
S, ( '
/ ■
. < ff ,
■
I-
. ■ ■ > • . ■ . ' ■
■
. :'■■■’■ . ■ ’ ■ • ■ ’
•• ■ -
' ' ...
-,■*‘, % . . • V
•■•■ • . ,
■,''■ - ; .v .
* •
• > •
- 4 ' ■' :' ' ? - .
* *
• , -
.
• 'yj | | • , " •
V ’«




