

TRANSIT OF VENUS
1874
SYDNEY. N.S.W.
Charles Potter Govt: Print:




OBSERVATIONS
OF THE
TRANSIT OF VENUS,
9 DECEMBER, 1874;
MADE AT STATIONS IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
ILLUSTRATED WITH PHOTOGRAPHS AND DRAWINGS,
UNDER THE DIRECTION OF
H. C. RUSSELL, 8.A., C.M.G., F.R.S., F.R.A.S., &c.,
Govebument Asteohomee.
CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, PHILLIP-STREET.
a 1892.
5 d 35—92
Published by Authority of Her Majesty’s Government in New South Wales.




INDEX.
Paoh.
Mr. Russell’s report ... ... ... ... 1
Mr. Lenchan’s report ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
Mr. Savage’s report 10
Mr. P. F. Adams’ report H
Mr. Vessey’s report ... 15
Mr. Hirst’s report ... ... ... ... ... 19
Mr. Du Faur’s report 20
Mr. Fairfax’s report ... ... ... ... 23
Captain Hixson’s report... 24
Captain Onslow’s report... 27
Professor Liyersidge’s report ... ... 28
Mr. Tornaghi’s report 29
Rev. A. Scott’s report 30
Mr. Mac Donnell’s report ... ... 34
Mr. Watkins’ report 30
Dr. Wright’s report ... ... 37
Mr-. Allerding’s report 39
Mr. Holding's report ... 39
Messrs. Belfield and Park’s report ... 41
Mr. Belfield’s report ... ... ... 42




TRANSIT OE VENUS, 1871.
LIST OF PLATES.
Nos. I to YII. —Mr. Vessey’s observations, showing “ Halo on disc,” “ Dusky ligament,”
“ King of light,” “Irregular shape of Planet,” &c., Ac.
Nos. VIII, IX, X. —Mr. Belfield’s observations, showing “ Illumination and colour of Planet
at ingress and egress.”
No. Xl.—Mr. Savage’s observations, showing “ Plash of light on outer edge of Planet at
egress.
No. XII.—Mr. Watkin’s observations, showing “ Elongation of Planet.”
No. XIII.—Mr. Allerdiug’s observations, showing the “Black drop.”
Nos. XIY, XV. —Mr. Hirst’s observations, showing the “ Black drop ” and “ Pringo of
red light.”
No. XVl.—Captain Onslow’s observations, showing “ Halo on sun.”
No. XVII. —Mr. Lenehan’s observations, showing “ Halo and polar spot."
No. XVIII. —Mr. Mac Donnell’s observations, showing “ Halo around Planet.”
Nos. XIX, XX, XXI.—Mr. Park’s observations, showing “ Positions of illuminated edges,”
“ Blue colour of Planet,” and “ Illumination of preceding limb.”
No. XXll.—Professor Liversidge’s observations, showing “ Illumination on Planet ” and
“ Processes at egress.”
No. XXIII.—Dr. "Wright’s observations, showing “ Halo and polar spot at egress.”
Nos. XXIV, XXV, XXVI, XXVIL—Mr. Eussell’s observations, showing “Vibration,”
“ Halo,” “ Polar spot,” “ Haziness,” &c., &e.
No. XXVIII. —Mr. Bolding’s observations of “ Ingress and egress.”
No. XXIX.—Mr. Fairfax’s observations, showing “ Eing of Light.”
No. XXX.—Mr. Eussell’s observations, showing “Eing of Light.”
No. XXXl.—Sydney Observatory.
No. XXXII.—The HJ-inch equatorial at Sydney.
No. XXXIII. —The photo.-heliograph.
No. XXXlV.—Transit of Venus, Camp, Woodford, New South Wales.
No. XXXV.— Waiting for the transit at Woodford.
No. XXXVl.—Waiting for the transit at Eden.
No. XXXVII.—The 71-inch equatorial used at Eden.
No. XXXVIII. —The 6-inch equatorial used at G-oulburn.
No. XXXIX. —Photo taken at Sydney. Time 3h. 13m. 13'525. S.M.T. (Eeproduced directly
from the negative.)
Inch squares placed at a distance of 400 feet and photographed with the Sydney equatorial as
a test of distortion. (See page 2, Sydney observations.)
No. XL.—Photo, taken at Eden. Time, Ih. 9m. 55'895., S.M.T. Photo, taken at Woodford.
Time, Ih. 55m. 5Gs. S.M.T. (Both reproduced directly from the negatives.)




ERRATA.
Plate I, Fig. 3, the time should be 12 hours 15 minutes 30 seconds.
Plates VII and IX and X. Head Armidale, New South Wales.
Plate XII. Head Eden, New South Wales.
Plates XIV and XV. Read Mr. Hirst’s observations at Woodford.
Plate XVII. Venus should be numbered 1,2, 3,4, beginning on the right.
Plate XVIII, should have Eden, New South Wales on it.
Plates XIX, XX and XXI. Head Armidale, New South Wales.
Plate XXII. Head Goulburn, New South Wales.
Plates XXIII, XXIV. Head Sydney, New South Wales.
Plate XXVIII, on diagrams 4 and 5, read “ egress ” for “ingress,” “ Bolding” for “ Balding.”
Plate XXIX, for Sydney, New South Wales, read Woodford, New South Wales.
Plato XXX. Head ring of light at ingress, an enlarged view of fig. 3, plate XXVII.
Corrections to Mr. Vessel’s Report.
h. m. s. h. in. s.
Page 16. For 12 700 00 read 12 740 60.
Page 17. „ 3 4fi 000 „ 3tB o’oo.
Page IS. „ 12 23 5100 „ 423 53-00.




INTRODUCTION.
Immediately after the very satisfactory observations of the transit of
Yenus, made by the observers in New South Wales, it was decided to
publish in full the result of their labours with coloured plates and every
detail carefully revised by each observer, so that the printed diagrams
should represent in each case exactly what he meant by his drawings ; hut
the observers lived in widely separated districts, and so much time was lost
in revising the proofs that a considerable period elapsed before they were
ready. Meantime the Hoyal Astronomical Society deemed the reports and
drawings of sufficient importance to publish them, and had published and
circulated them before this volume was ready, and although some addi-
tional matter and diagrams will he found herein, it was at the time deemed
better not to publish at once. Various circumstances, however, combined
to delay the publication much longer than was at first intended; hut it is
hoped that the work will still he valuable as a record of the New South
Wales observations for the present and probably the next generation of
transit of Yenus observers.
A short account of the circumstances which led up to the observa-
tions of the transit of Venus in New South Wales, will furnish explanation
of various matters which need such reference, notably the delay in com-
mencing the preparatory work, the instruments, and other apparatus used.
In August, 1870, Mr. G. It. Smalley, who had been the Government
Astronomer for New South Wales, died, having taken no steps to prepare
for the transit of Yenus observations. He had, indeed, expressed his
intention of taking no part in the work, owing to other pressing duties.
My appointment followed immediately after his death, and I at once took
steps to prepare for the great astronomical event, fully realising the great
importance of taking advantage of our favourable geographical position on
the eastern coast of Australia for observing the egress. It was obviously
for the honor of the Colony, as well as for the advancement of science, that
the observations and photographs of the transit of Yenus should be as
complete as possible. I therefore at once brought the matter under the
notice of the Government, asking authority to carry out the work, and a
vote to cover the expenses. My request was warmly supported by our


Royal Society, who appointed a deputation to wait on the Government to
urge the importance of this work. Eventually, the Government gave
authority, and a vote of £I,OOO to enable me to carry out the work.
This was in 1872, and inquiry elicited the fact that instrument-makers
in Europe had their shops full of work for European observers, and
could not undertake my orders at such a late period. Eventually, I
succeeded in getting one photo-heliograph with Janssen apparatus, and also
the object glass and micrometer for the large equatorial. Eor other apparatus
required, I had to look to mechanics in the Colony, for the most part
unused to such delicate work. This meant a great deal of additional work in
designing, overlooking, and generally seeing after what was done. To
provide for the photographic work, three equatorials were fitted up with
photographic apparatus with which to take pictures of the sun; others were
mounted on rigid stands; chronographs, buildings, &c., had to he made
necessary to equip four ohserving-parties, each having transit instrument
equatorials, an independent observatory and apparatus for observing and
photographing the transit. Ey unremitting exertions everything was ready
by the middle of 1874, and the work of organising and training the observers
began, each party working in its own observatory, and with the apparatus
they were going to use at the several observing stations, but which, for
convenience, had been set up in the observatory grounds. Everything
being quite ready the observing parties started in good time for their
several localities. The reports which follow record their success. It
would have been quite impossible to accomplish this had I not received
from all who could assist most enthusiastic support.
The following resume of the results was written immediately after
the work, while the Avritten and verbal reports of all the observers were
fresh in my mind. It will serve as an introduction to Avhat follows, and to
call attention to some points of importance bearing upon the physical aspect
of the ingress and egress of the planet, Avhich may be useful to future
observers, and, perhaps, in rediscussion of the transit of Venus values
of the parallax. But since these following observations were incorporated
in the final results obtained by British observers, and fully discussed by
the Astronomer Royal of England, Sir G. B. Airy, and also under his
direction by Captain Tupman, I do not propose to enter into that question
here, further than the quotation of a feAV sentences from the report upon
the general result of all the British observation, which Avas prepared by
Captain Tupman.


There were thirty-one British observers of ingress, whose reports
were available. Of these eight were from New South Wales; hut after
weighting and discussion, the total number was reduced to twenty. Of
these eight received double weight; and of these double-weighted eight,
two, Messrs. Scott and Bussell, are New South Wales observers.
At egress there were forty-eight observers, and again New South
Wales furnished eight. After weighting and discussion, forty-eight are
reduced to forty-one, hut all the New South Wales eight remain, Vessey
and Bussell getting double weight, and Allerding, Captain Hixson, Lenehan,
Liversidge, Dr. Wright, and Tornaghi, single weight. Captain Tupman,
on page 453 of the monthly notices, 8.A.5., June, 1878, says : —“ It is seen
that the observations at Sydney, Ncav South Wales, viz., by Bussell,
Lenehan, Wright, and Allerding, have great weight in lowering the value
of the parallax, and this effect is exaggerated by allowing Bussell double
weight. Mr. Bussell’s is one of the most detailed observations made;
it seems impossible, from his description, to choose his earlier time. Mr.
Lenehan admits he was late, and I have taken 10 seconds from his time, but
still it is late. Dr. Wright made ‘ the most accurate observation possible’,
and agrees to a fraction of a second with Mr. Bussell. Mr. Allerding does
not profess to have made a good observation. Out of mere curiosity I have
solved the thirty-five equations that remain, when Wilson’s, Strahan’s, and
those at Sydney arc excluded, and find the mean solar parallax as 8 //- 894.”
In the previous discussion he made the parallax at ingress, in which the
New South Wales observations were retained, 8"*845, and at egress 8 //- 81G,
the mean of which, 8'8455, he accepted as the value of parallax from 1874
transit of Venus observations. Subsequent discussions show that this was a
a vise course, for the most elaborate discussion of the solar parallax which has
yet been made, viz., that by Professor Harkness, combining the results
from all available methods and published this year, 1892, makes the
mean of all the values obtained since 1769 to be 8‘834, Avhich slioavs
clearly that Captain Tupman was right in retaining the Ncav South Wales
observations, although at the time they seemed to make the parallax smaller
than it Avas thought to be. This is strong confirmation of what appears in
subsequent pages, viz., the accuracy of the observations, made so by the
very favourable state of the atmosphere, and good telescopes.
As already stated, it is not proposed to go into a discussion of the
results here. I have merely quoted Captain Tupman to show what he


thought of New South Wales observations, and their effect upon the value of
the solar parallax, derived from 1874 transit Venus, which was, as we haveseen,
to make it much smaller than was at that time supposed to he its value,
and to bring it more into accordance with all that astronomers have learned
about it up to the present year, 1892. It will be seen in the following
reports (page 5 and others) that the effect of had definition is to make the
observer think contact has been made before it really is made, and therefore
a steady atmosphere is a most important factor in the value of such
observations, any unsteadiness of atmosphere tending to make contact appear
too soon, and therefore to make the solar parallax too large ; turning now to
the resume prepared at the time.
Never perhaps, in the world’s history, did morning dawn on so many
waiting astronomers as it did on the 9th of December, 1874. They were
all anxiously looking for an answer to the old question, to he, or not to he,
and certainly none could have expected a finer day than that which
dawned on the observers of New South Wales. Drom all stations, in return
for the morning clock signals, came the welcome intelligence that the
morning gave promise of a splendid day, and after hearty good wishes had
been given and received, we all turned to the final touches, which were
necessary to complete our arrangements, and when these were done,
waited, not without an involuntary feeling, which I will not call excite-
ment, for that by common consent had been banished, hut rather an
overpowering sense of that responsibility which every true worshipper of
science must feel, when he knows that the answer to half a century’s
questionings is depending upon him; and that he is the observed of all
observers; but each one was determined to do his best in the noble cause
of science; supported by a faint hope that his name and his work would
appear ages hence in the records of science, and he criticised under that
blaze of knowledge which the united efforts of the world’s science should
produce.
And here it may not he out of place to introduce a few words about
the selection of the New South Wales stations. Eor ingress there was little
choice, for, the sun being in the zenith of a place near the longitude of
Sydney, and in 23° south latitude, the parallax was almost nothing
everywhere. At egress, however, our circumstances were much improved
in this respect, and the south-eastern point of New South Wales was one


of the best points of observation in Australia. In addition to this, there
were two conditions to be home in mind in making the selection—viz.,
weather, and telegraphic convenience for determining longitude.
I had for two years previously caused special meteorological observa-
tions to he taken at various places during the month of December. These
indicated Woodford as about the most promising station for clear and
steady atmosphere, and made it evident that the observers should not all be
stationed at Eden, hut he divided between the coast and the mountains.
Bathurst and Goulhurn were alike in chance of clear weather; hut Goul-
hurn was the better station geographically, and was therefore selected.
Eden weather reports were not encouraging; hut as the advantage of the
position was so much in its favour, it was decided to make it the fourth
station, and the Rev. W. Scott, formerly astronomer for New South Wales,
proceeded there with Messrs. W. J. Mac Donnell and J. S. Watkins,
observers; and Mr. Sharkey, photographer to the Government Printing
Office, as photographer, and one carpenter, with observatory, tents, instru-
ments, and all needful appliances. The telescope used by Mr. Scott was
a equatorial of 10 feet 4 inches focus (see plates XXXYI and
XXXYII) ;by Mr. Mac Donnell, 4J-inch Cooke equatorial; and Mr.
Watkins, a equatorial; they had also means of taking 220 photo-
graphs.
Captain Hixson, President of the Marine Board, Captain Onslow,
M.P., and Professor Liversidge, with Mr. Tornaghi, photographer, and a
carpenter, made the observing party at Goulburn; they took with them
the 6-inch equatorial with the camera as shown in plate XXXYIII, the
observatory tents ; instruments, &c., which were similar to those at Eden,
but the telescopes were smaller, having 6 inches, 3f, and 3y inches object
glasses. They had also means of taking 220 photographs.
P, E. Adams, Esq., Surveyor-General, with Messrs. Hirst, a well-
known amateur astronomer, Mr. Yessy, of the Trigonometrical Survey,
Mr. Du Eaur of the Survey Department, Mr. Bischoff, photographer,
and two carpenters, proceeded to “Woodford” the mountain residence
of A. Eairfax, Esq. Their instruments were the photo-heliograph and
Janssen apparatus, a inch equatorial and one of inches, chrono-
meters, clock-chronographs and all necessary apparatus for 220 photo-
graphs, and 30 Janssen plates, each to hold 60 pictures. The observatory
I


was similar to that used at Goulhurn. (See plates XXXIII, XXXIY,
and XXXV.) Mr. Adams gave me every assistance, and provided
Transit Instrument and another observing telescope, and two ordinary
tents.
At Sydney the observations depended wholly on the observatory
staff. The instruments were the equatorial (see plate XXXII), alf
Equatorial by Troughton and Simms, and a 10-inch Browning-With silvered
glass reflector, kindly lent for the occasion by J. Usher Collyer, Esq., with
all usual clocks, chronometers, chronographs, &c., and means of taking 220
photographs.
I cannot leave this part of my subject without expressing my warm
thanks to all who assisted me in observing the transit of Venus. With a
zeal worthy of the occasion, one and all devoted themselves to a course of
previous practice at the Observatory which involved an amount of hard
work and self-denial worthy of all praise. This in some eases extended
over several months in order to make themselves thoroughly conversant
with their work; and this not only during daylight working at the artificial
transit and photography, hut also at night adjusting the instruments. My
thanks, however warmly given, can ho no measure of their work. I shall
always feel grateful to them for their support, and for the enthusiasm and
the zeal with which they devoted themselves to the work, and for their
generous and thoughtful kindness and assistance to me personally in a
thousand ways. Erom the officers of the Telegraph and Bailway Depart-
ments also we received the most cordial assistance; indeed everyone for
once made common cause with the Astronomers.
Previous to starting, all the observatories and instruments were set
up in Sydney, and each party went to work in their own observatory ; this
we found to he of great service in pointing out Aveak points, Avhich required
either more practice, or the instrument maker to set right.
Eor practice in observing, we had tAvo artificial transits, one similar
to that designed by the Astronomer Boyal, the other constructed in the
Colony. The one made in Sydney consisted of first a sheet of metal, out of
Avhich a hole was cut 5 inches Avide and 18 inches long, hounded on three
sides by straight lines, and on the fourth by a curve of such radius that at
a distance of 400 feet from where the telescopes Avere placed, it appeared
like a section of the sun’s limb. Behind this opening a piece of ground


glass, worked in a slide, and on it was fixed a blackened disc of metal having
the apparent diameter of "Venus. This was drawn along by clock-work, so
that the artificial Venus appeared to come on to the sun’s limb at external
contact, and gradually travel in and make internal contact, at which point
a most satisfactory black drop was seen. A large mirror behind all to
reflect a bright part of the sky completed the apparatus. Eivc telescopes
were directed to this, and as many observers, each using his chronometer,
observed ingress and black drop, and then compared their observations.
With this a great deal of practice was obtained, which was useful in
training for observation. At the same time all were warned that there
was no certainty about the black drop phenomena.
We come now to the dav’s work, and take first the weather at each
v 3
station.
At Eden, the morning was fine and very promising, but about
11 a.m. clouds began to come, with a fresh sea-breeze, and led the
observers to anticipate a disappointment. Eortunately up to the time of
ingress the clouds had not interfered with the observations; but from that
time forward the sun was more or less obscured, and at one period wholly
so for 80 minutes, so that few photographs could be obtained, and the sun
was entirely obscured some time before egress.
At Goulburn, the morning was fine, with light Avesterly wind and a
few drifting clouds ; during the afternoon the wind increased to half a gale,
and the clouds were more numerous, but not sufficient to interfere with
observation.
At Woodford, the morning was fine, with a dry hot wind (westerly),
which increased as the day wore on; during the afternoon a few clouds
passed over and interrupted the photographic work for a short time, but at
ingress and egress the weather was splendid for observation.
At Sydney, the early morning was beautifully clear until sh. 30m.
a.m., when a heavy bank of fog came in from the sea and obscured the sun
for three hours; but we still expected a fine day, and were not disappointed,
for by 9 a.m. we had a clear bright sky and light north-easterly wind,
which increased to a fresh breeze during the afternoon. The state of the
atmosphere also was favourable for observation until the transit was over,
except a few moments of bad definition ; but had we been one hour later.


I do not think observations of egress would have been worth anything, for
clouds were rapidly forming in the S.W., and, though thin, they spread
very quickly over the sky.
Ingress.
Por the purpose of convenient comparison I have arranged the times
of observation in a tabular form, and put all into Sydney time. I confess
when I saw the gradual phenomena of the transit myself I did not expect
such a satisfactory agreement between the times of observation as some of
the results show ; and if 4J seconds he taken as a fair estimate of the
probable uncertainty of observed time at one station, when a definite
phenomenon like the breaking of the black drop had to he observed, I think
we, with no such definite phenomenon to observe, may congratulate our-
selves that the differences are in most cases so small.
Only three out of thirteen observers took the. time of first external
contact, and they were evidently a few seconds, probably about ten, late.
Such at least was my own impression at the time, for Yenus had made
something more than contact, —it was a small notch in the sun’s limb.
My time is ... ... ... ... ... llh. 56m. 23’005.
Mr. Lenehan ... ... ... ... ... llh. 55m. 36'345.
Woodford —Mr. Yessey ... ... ... llh. 55m. 14'965.
These times show a very satisfactory agreement, especially when the
difficulty of seeing external contacts is taken into account, and the fact
that in 10 seconds of time Venus would only encroach about half a second
of arc on the sun’s limb, a quantity not easily seen. Por second contact
I think there can he no doubt that different phases of the phenomenon
were taken by observers according to the different effects produced by the
ghost of the black drop, which up to that time had a very tangible existence
for all of us, not only from what we. had read about it, but from seeing it
so constantly in the artificial transit; and as it is very important that the
exact phenomenon taken by each observer as internal contact should he on
record, I will here quote from the reports, beginning at Eden.
Mr. Scott took the time when ‘ he saw the partial obscuration of the
sun’s limb by the planet’s atmosphere gradually diminishing until it dis-
appeared altogether at 12h. 24m. 48s.’, which I take to mean the com-
pletion of the sun’s outline, the same phase which, as will be presently
seen, I and others took for complete ingress.


Mr. Mac Donnell took tlie time when. ‘ the light seemed to he going
in and out several times and prevented any accurate determination of com-
plete ingress as 12h. 25m. Ik 75., but he is convinced he was ,Iss. late,
making the time 12h. 24m. 59'705.’
At Woodford, Mr. Yessey took the time when Venus appeared to
touch the sun’s limb, or when the two limbs were tangential. {See
Plate II.) Time, 12h. 28m. 47’075.
My own report of this phase is as follows, and it will observed that
the first time given is 4 minutes before contact.
At 12h. 20m. Os. indications of distortion or bad definition of the
limbs in contact appeared, like a mass of black wool laid over the place,
rendering it impossible to see distinctly and making the cusps very hazy. (See
Plate XXVI.) I thought the drop was going to form, and watched very
closely for it and for apparent contact, but I found it, extremely difficult
to make up my mind about the latter, and saw nothing of the former.
12h. 20m. 51s. was noted as a very unsatisfactory apparent contact. The
cusps after this appeared to clear up or improve in definition (the telescope
had not been altered), and as they approached each other the sharpness
was very remarkable, but the motion so gradual, that I could not deter-
mine to a fraction of a second when they actually formed the line of light
which I saw complete and took for the moment of internal contact, but
the instant I was sure I made the record on the chronograph, which was
at 12h. 23m. 595., and keeping my eye steadily upon it saw it had in
fifteen seconds become an unmistakable band of sunlight.
Mr. Lenehan says at time of ingress there was an indistinct shading
between the supposed edge of the planet and the sun, which for some ten
or fifteen seconds before the time I quote later, kept me in a state of
uncertainty as to the true time of actul ingress ; the shading did not break
abruptly, but seemed to melt away in such a manner as to leave a doubt in
my mind of the exact time the planet passed the edge of the sun, but I
distinctly saw a clear band of light at 12h. 24m. 48 , 345.
Mr. Savage says: ‘ The definition at this point being so very bad
between the limbs of the sun and planet, and the edges at contact so very
dark as to defy accuracy, as the planet advanced on the sun a little way
this shading still connected the planet with the sun’s edge, but that portion


of it nearest to the planet showed indications of fading away gradually,
until at length it disappeared altogether without any sudden break what-
ever, and at 12h, 23m. 43"935. a streak of light became visible between the
planet and the sun’s limb.’
Dr. "Wright noted ‘ 12h. 24m. 305., hut was quite sure this was
late, probably 80s., making 12h. 24m. Os., having lost true contact looking
for the black drop.’ These times are ;
h. m. s.
12 24 48-00
12 24 59-70
12 23 47-07
12 23 59-00
12 24 48-34
12 23 43-93
12 24 0-00
Mean 12 24 18-00
But I think it is evident that only Mr. Scott, Mr. Yessoy, and
myself have taken exactly the same phase here, and the mean of the three
results is 12h. 23m. 57"125.; the differences arc too great to give a satis-
factory mean from all the observers, but if taken it is 12h. 24m. 18'OOs.
Perhaps some of the differences may he attributed to differences of tem-
perament.
Egress,
Eor the third and really most important phase we had all fortunately
learned to disbelieve in black drops, and during the photographic work had
time to think and talk over what had been seen at ingress, and we went to
our telescopes much better prepared for the work before us; still the
difficulties were by no means gone, and the motion of the planet was so
exceedingly slow that a few seconds variation is, I think, a necessity.
It was unfortunately cloudy at Eden, but the Goulburn observations
now make up for it.
Captain Hickson saw internal contact ... ... ... 3h. 54m. 28'Ols.
Professor Liversidge ... ... ... ... ... Bh. 54m. 20-375.
Mr. Tornaghi ... ... ... ... ... ... 3h. 54m. 25'795.
At Woodford, Mr. Yessey says ... ... ... ... 3h. 54m. 37‘505.


The circles of sun and planet tangential, and the
ring of light about its own thickness outside the limbs of
the sun.
My own time for this phase is ... ... ... 3h. sdm. 39’685.
After a period of had definition my report says,
c the limbs recovered their perfect definition and were
clearly and steadily separated by a line of light which at
3h. 54in. 2G , 35. could not have been more than half a
second of arc in thickness, and then the same marvel-
lous definition continuing just when it was wanted. The
line gradually contracted to a scarcely visible thread, and
the limbs made contact. There was no sudden break,
nothing but the perfectly gradual motion of the one
disc over the other, both beautifully defined, and I saw
one overtake the other at 3h. 54m. 39 - GGs.’
Mr. Lenehan says the first apparent contact was
at 3h. 54m. 21’Gls., a little jumping; afterwards, saw a
band or faint and narrow streak of light between the
limbs of planet and sun, which clearly showed me that
the time above given was too soon. I then waited
until I was absolutely certain contact was complete, at
3h. 54m. 4G’Gls., but I feel confident this time is from
7s. to 10s. after true time, making the true time ... 3h. 54m. 39'Gls.
Dr. Wright makes time of contact ... 3h. 54m. 39 - 595.
Mr. Allerding makes time of contact ... ... 3h. 54m. 35‘005.
Now at Goulburn at this time the wind had become very strong, and
produced a tremulous motion which would no doubt account for the times
being a little early, for it would not be possible under those conditions to
see a very fine thread of light, and we know that such was seen by
the observers who agree best. Mr. Lenehan’s time also is known to be
late, and we have five times left of which the extreme difference is 4’GGs,,
and mean 3h. 54m. 38’275.; and two at Sydney —my own and Dr. Wright’s
—agree within less than one-tenth of a second.


For last contact we have only three observations
which do not accord very well. At Woodford, Mr.
Yessey took the time as 4h. 23m. 52'005.
and says: “ This observation appeared to he correct to a
small fraction of a second. The indentation on sun’s limb
gradually contracted in width till within thirteen seconds
of time given, and it then seemed to contract longitu-
dinally till it became a small notch like a boiling indenta-
tion, This was seen steadily diminishing till it suddenly
flashed out, and the limb of the sun became perfect.”
My own observation makes this ... ... ... 4h. 24m. 27'005.
At this time the last sign of the planet on the sun’s disc
was seen as the faintest possible mark, which then
disappeared, definition being for the time very good, and ,
the observation quite satisfactory.
Mr. Lenehan saw last and final contact at ... 4h. 23m. 49'Gls.
the edge of the planet being then lost in the edge of the
sun.
My own observation of this phase does not seem to be supported,
but the larger aperture of the telescope I used, the 114 inch reduced to 6
inches, and the steady motion by clock-work, probably explain the difference.
Turning, now, to the physical phenomena observed, there are several
of them very interesting and important that will repay a little consideration,
and first in regard to the black drop so called. The account of this phen-
omenon given by Mr. Stone, Astronomer Royal at the Cape of Good Hope,
seemed so thoroughly satisfactory that I fully accepted it, and in common
with nearly all observers, expected to see the planet distorted into a pear
shape as it left the sun’s edge, “as if a stalk or ligament connected it with
the sun’s limb ” (see Mr. Hirst’s observations) which broke suddenly; a
phenomenon the exact time of which could have been easily determined, but
instead of this a set of wholly unexpected phenomena presented themselves.
As the planet encroached on the sun the cusps remained perfectly
sharp until near the time of contact of the limbs, when a curious hazy
appearance became developed, and rendered it impossible, in spite of all
efforts, to see exactly what was going on. Most, if not all the observers.


thought the drop was forming, hut close attention only revealed a gradual
disappearance of the haze until the sun’s and planet’s limbs were left
perfectly clear and sharply defined with a thread of sunlight between them.
Eev. W. Scott says, in reference to this point:— ‘ I continued to
watch the planet for more than three minutes, and saw the partial obscur-
ation of the sun’s limb by the planet’s atmosphere gradually diminishing
until it disappeared altogether.’
Mr. Mac Donnell says : —‘ As Yenus proceeded the shadowy envelope
disappeared, except between the planet and the sun’s limb, where it seemed
to fill up the space between them with faint rings concentric with the
planet’s edge. There was no distinct rupture of this appearance, the light
seeming to go in and out several times.’ Professor Liversidge says, £ A faint
hazy gray filament like a streak of smoke was momentarily observed between
the edge of the planet and the sun; it was very obscure and illdefined.’
My own report for ingress is as follows, at 12h. 20m. indications of
distortion or bad definition of the limbs in contact appeared, like a mass of
black wool laid over the place, rendering it impossible to see distinctly, and
making the cusps very hazy. I thought the drop was going to form, and
watched very closely for it, and for apparent contact, but I found it
extremely difficult to make up my mind about the latter, and saw nothing
of the former. 12 hours 20m. 51s. was noted as a' very unsatisfactory
apparent contact. The cusps after this appeared to clear up or improve
in definition, and as they approached each other the sharpness was very
remarkable.
At egress a curious phenomenon then presented itself similar to that
remarked at ingress; the two limbs at the point of contact seemed to get
confused or badly defined, whether from atmospheric causes near us, or
some peculiarity about Yenus, I am unable to say, but it seemed to disturb
the planet in a most remarkable way.
Mr. Lenehan says, at the time of ingress there was an indistinct
shading between the edge of the planet and the sun, which for some
seconds kept me in a state of uncertainty as to the true time of actual
ingress; the shading did not break abruptly, but seemed to melt away in
such a manner as to leave a doubt in my mind of the exact time the planet
passed the edge of the sun.


It is evident that what we have here described is a phenomenon
very different from that which is known as the black drop, for here the
uncertainty lasts much longer, and does not occur when the limbs are
apparently separated, hut when they are in fact, as well as appearance, in
contact, and slightly overlapping, and while this phenomenon is clearly
made out to have lasted about four minutes. Mr. Stone, Astronomer-lloyal
at the Cape of Good Hope, and the best authority on this subject, estimated
that the black drop would only last 18 seconds.
Of the drop phenomena which we all expected to see we hare two
particularly interesting accounts, which I will quote. The first is that by
Mr. Hirst, avlio was thoroughly acquainted with the phenomenon as
described by Mr, Stone and others, and had practised with the artificial
transit, though the work which was specially his, and of which ho had
made himself master, was the management of the photo-heliograph during
the taking of the Janssen pictures.
Attached to the tube of the photo-heliograph was a finder consisting
of a single non-achromatic lens 1-| inch aperture and I feet focal length.
This was originally arranged by the maker so as to throw the sun’s image
on to a piece of parchment fixed at its focus; hut in order to adapt it to
circumstances which required that one end of the heliograph should be in the
photographer’s dark room, the lens was inserted in the end of a brass tube,
an eye-piece being provided in the shape of a Huyghenian combination,
giving a power of about 50 diameters. The chromatic and spherical aberra-
tion of the single lens were not obtrusive owing to its extreme focal
length, so that fair definition could he obtained of the edge of the sun,
and the existence of even minute solar spots made plainly visible.
Of the drop as seen with this, Mr. Hirst says: —To diminish the
light in the finder I used a thick piece of orange-coloured glass, which
gave an agreeable image of the sun. This was placed outside the eye lens
of the eye-piece.
I had prepared and placed a plate in the Janssen apparatus, Avhen,
on taking my usual glance at the finder, to see that the telescope
Avas adjusted ready to take photographs, I observed the disc of Venus
appearing, as it Avere, rather more than one-third her own diameter Avithin
the sun, and connected Avith the limb by a narroAV line intensely black,
Avith an ill-defined edge. Plate XV represents the appearance as faithfully
as I can recollect; this Avas about five seconds before No. 5 Janssen plate


Avas begun. I bad not time for more than a glance, for I wished to pro-
cure a photograph of Avhat I supposed to bo the black drop, so universally-
observed by astronomers, more than a century ago, at the last transit.
On getting the plate through, however, it shoAved nothing of what I had
so distinctly observed a feAV seconds before.
Referring to the finder, Venus appeared well inside the sun, but
apparently nearer the limb than she seemed before. The drop AA r as gone.
I thought at the time that it might have broken before the exposure of the
plate, and I determined to keep a sharp look-out for its formation at egress.
Soon aftei'Avards Mr. Yessey came in and reported that the had
shoAA r n no drop at all.
ToAvards egress I referred constantly to the tinder, that I might be
ready with a plate directly the drop became visible. When Janssen plate
No. 9 Avas in its place, and upon adjusting Avith the finder, I observed no
black drop, the planet appearing so far Avithin the sun’s disc that I did not
think it necessary to hurry in order to catch the drop and exposed the No.
9 plate, meaning to get another in time. After taking out the plate, which
probably occupied tAventy seconds, I Avent to the finder, and to my astonish-
ment saAV that the drop had formed, appearing about as long as one-third
the diameter of the planet. I hurried on the next plate as much as
possible, but a delay unfortunately of a couple of minutes occurred, before
it was ready; on development it showed Venus a perfectly circular disc
touching the sun’s limb. It appears in Mr. Hirst’s report of egress that
the interval in time between actual contact and his seeing the black drop
was Im. IS’lls., almost exactly the same time as ingress.*
I regret exceedingly that my eye was not at the finder during the
precise moment of the formation of the drop, but my duties at the Janssen
apparatus prevented me from staying there more than a feAV seconds at a
time.
* The exposure of Janssen plate No. 9 was begun at 3h. 51ra. 42 - 425.
And it was finished at 3h. 52m. 31'395.
Mr. Hirst took out the plate and looked in the finder and saw the black drop as
described at 3h. 53m. 3s.
Mr. Yessey in the next tent observing with a first-class 41-inch equatorial saw no
drop, and contact did not take place until (Mr. Vessey’s report) 3h. 54m. 48'415.
hence it appears that at 3h. 51m. 42 - 925. there was no visible black drop at 3h. 53m. 35., the black drop
was visible through the finder of the photo-heliograph ; while it appears from Mr. Vessey’s observations that
actual contact as seen with a good telescope did not take place until 3h. 54m. 48'415., so that the black drop
was seen with the imperfect telescope Im. 45‘415. before contact, and may have been visible a few seconds
earlier.


Referring to what I saw through the finder I am convinced that
my observations, short though they were, have not deceived me. I was
thoroughly prepared, and on the look-out for the phenomenon at egress,
and I have not the slightest doubt that any one, using similar optical
instruments, would undoubtedly have observed what I did.
If we turn now to No. 5 Janssen plate (plate XIY) and seek a photo-
graph of the drop, we find that photography, at least when aided by Mr.
Dallmeyer’s beautiful lenses, refuses to acknowledge any such phenomenon;
on this plate there are sixty photographs without a sign of the drop, hut
all showing a distinct band of sunlight round the planet. It will he
remembered that while this was- going on in the photo-heliograph obser-
vatory, Mr. Yessey was in the next place observing the phenomena of
ingress with a very fine equatoral, by Schroeder. With this in-
strument a splendid view of the ingress was obtained, and he noted internal
contact at 12h. 23m. IS’OTs. No. 5 Janssen plate was begun at 12h. 25m.
35'475., and Mr. Hirst saw the drop ss. before this, or at 12h. 25m. 305.,
or some time after ingress had taken place, and it appeared to him equal
to rather more than one-third of the diameter of the planet. Now
we know it was only Im. 455. after observed ingress, and the photographs
prove that the planet was only 1-22 part of its diameter within the sun’s
limb.
Of course there is the possibility that the drop might have broken
between the time when Mr. Hirst saw it through the finder of the
photoheliograph and the time he began to turn the handle of the Janssen
apparatus on the same instrument; and the time lost in this change could
not possibly exceed 5 seconds, for he passed from one to the other as
quickly as possible, and even if it did break, we have the facts clearly
made out that the drop was seen Im. 455. after ingress, and that although
it appeared nearly equal to the one-third of the diameter of the planet in
length, yet it was certainly not more than l-22nd of the diameter as
shown by the photograph.
Mr. Allerding, chronometer maker, of Hunter-street, also saw the
drop most distinctly, and watched it through the various phases till it
broke. He was using at the time a very good 3|-inch achromatic
telescope, but to avoid sunlight and heat he had reduced the aperture to
two inches, and with this small opening he obtained very satisfactory


definition of the sun and planet. Unlike Mr. Hirst, who observed in the
beautiful atmosphere of the mountains, Mr. Allerding observed from the
hack yard of his house in Hunter-street, which is surrounded by houses.
In a report of his observations, which he has furnished to me, he says :
‘At the internal contact at ingress, I saw a drop which formed into a
cone, and when this had nearly disappeared it seemed to stretch out to a
fine thread (see plate XIII), to which Yenus seemed to he attached. The
thread appeared hard and definite, without any hazy margin, and I
estimated its length at one-third the diameter of the planet. It then instan-
taneously disappeared at 12h. 24m. 445., and Yenus appeared already
well detached from the sun’s limb. Had I not waited for the disappearance
of the fine line, I would have made inner contact at least 30 seconds
sooner,’ The mean of the time for internal contact given by 7 other
observers in Sydney is 12h. 24m. 2Ss. Mr. Allerding made it 12h. 24m.
14s. Now, in this case we have no Janssen photographs to show how
long the drop was, hut my own observation taken in Sydney proves that
the drop seen by Mr. Allerding was equal in length only to the space
moved over by the planet in 45 seconds, that is, P 7 seconds of arc from
the sun’s limb —that is, 2% times the length Mr. Stone estimated it to be.
In New South Wales, therefore, only those who were using tele-
scopes of small aperture, 1-1- and 2-inch, and low power eye-pieces saw the
black drop; and one, Mr. Hirst, was in a remarkably clear and steady
atmosphere, and Mr. Allerding in a very unfavourable one, owing to
the radiation of heat on a hot day from all the houses around him. So
far then as this evidence goes the black drop does not seem to he due to the
atmospheric conditions, hut rather to the imperfections of telescopes of
small aperture and low power.
There are, however, several observations recorded of a kindred
phenomenon that I should like to place on record. At ingress I saw
nothing of it, hut at egress I saw it distinctly ; and the cause is, I think,
easily traced. But to take, first the observations at ingress.
Messrs. Belfield and Park, who were observing at Armidale with a
44-inch Cook telescope, that I examined, and know to he a good one, have
sent me a valuable report and drawings of what they saw, and state that
‘while Yenus was advancing at ingress to about one-fourth her own
diameter upon the sun, a faint tremulous shaking was seen hetAveen the


limb of tbe sun and the planet (both bodies being very sharp in outline),
which disappeared so gradually that it could not be said to have been
obliterated at any particular instant. {See plates IX and XX.)
Mr. Bolding, P.M., Raymond Terrace, observed with a 3-inch tele-
scope, and has forwarded to me a very complete report of the whole transit,
and remarks: —‘ At the moment I expected the complete circle {i.e.,
internal contact) came the apparent pause, instantly followed by a kind of
indistinctness, which resolved itself into the form of a figure 8. The thing
seemed to bo holding up the planet, so to say, and appeared as represented
in plate XXYIII, diagram 3. The line seemed blacker than the central
spot; then the light came very distinctly between the planet and the line ;
then the indistinctness between the sun’s limb and the line cleared up, and
for a short time the line was clearly seen midway between the planet and
the sun’s limb. The sun was very hot at the time, and the definition bad.’
Mr. Russell: At ingress I saw nothing of the phenomenon, but
at egress I did, and my report is as follows :— ‘ At times there were moments
of bad definition, evidently caused by the clouds then forming in the west.
During one of these, at 3h. 53m. 515., when Ycnus Avas less than tAVO
seconds of arc from the sun’s limb, the limb of the planet nearest the sun’s
edge seemed to be in a state of vibration, as if portions of its blackness
Avere jumping over to the margin of the sun Avith an appearance similar
to sketch Avhich represents one vibration only. This lasted only a fcAV
seconds—the vibrations being estimated at six or seven per second.
After this the limbs recovered their perfect definition, and Avere
clearly and steadily separated by a fine line of light. Mr. Lenehan saAV it,
and says, ‘ The first apparent contact was at 3h. 54m. 225., a little jumping.
I afterwards saw a band or faint and narrow streak of light betAvecn the
limbs of planet and sun.’
Messrs. Belfield and Park saAV the same appearance at egress as at
ingress. Mr. Bolding saw nothing of it at egress, Avhich he attributed to
the increased steadiness of the atmosphere.
I think there can be no doubt that this appearance Avas caused by
temporary unsteadiness in the atmosphere, which, by producing rapid
vibrations or apparent motions in the limbs under examination, caused


them, momentarily to overlap, and. so cut off the sunlight and produce the
black appearance, an effect which all who have been in the habit of
observing with powerful telescopes will at once understand.
We come now to the last point that I propose to speak of. The
information I have collected about it is in some respects very remarkable.
I refer to the rings of light and especially the halo seen surrounding the
planet Venus, a conspicuous phenomenon seen by nearly all the observers
in New South Wales. That it was a very brilliant and beautiful object
will be made abundantly evident by the accounts which follow.
And beginning, as before, with Eden. Mr, Scott, who was using
a 7{-inch equatorial, of very fine defining power, and of 'which the
aperture was reduced to two . inches, says:— ‘ Eor some minutes
before internal contact I could sec clearly at ingress the whole of
the planet’s outline; in fact, it presented exactly such an appearance
as might have been expected from a planet possessing an atmosphere.’
Mr. MacDonncll says ; — c At the time of apparent bisection, a shadowy
nebulous ring seemed to envelop Venus (see plate XVIII; on the
preceding side it was of lighter tint than the planet, but was decidedly
perceptible, and appeared to be about one-quarter or one-fifth of the
diameter of the planet in width. When ingress w r as about two-thirds
completed, the whole outline of the planet was distinctly visible in the
telescope, the shadowy envelope surrounding it very plainly.’
At Goulburn, Captain Onslow first saw the halo, or ring of light, at
12h. 17m. ss. A bright light was seen at the lower point of intersection
of the circles (see diagram plate I, figs. 1 and 2), and in a few seconds
a similar one at the upper point, and at 12h. 19m. ss. an apparent circle
was formed by the planet.
Professor Liversidge says, when the planet w r as about one-third of
its diameter from third contact; —‘ It then appeared spheroidal, and not
as a disc merely (see plate XXII, figs. 1,2, 3) ; it appeared illuminated
on the under side in the direction of the sun’s diameter, or on the side of
the planet towards the sun’s centre, and this illumination shaded off on
each side of the planet, but at the portion nearest the sun’s limb it appeared
quite black and opaque. This globular appearance was retained until the
planet had passed off the sun’s limb to the extent of about one-sixth of its
diameter.’


‘ After internal contact, the planet looked somewhat as if it were
pushing that portion of the sun’s limb before it, for the solar limb appeared
to be raised up into two processes—one on each side (plate XXII, fig. 6).
At the time I thought it might, perhaps, be due to an atmosphere sur-
rounding Yenus, or to an optical illusion; but since I have heard that
other observers saw the illuminated edge of Yenus beyond and outside the
sun, lam inclined to think it was that which I saw. However, I did not
see a circle, but merely two portions or cusps brightly illuminated, but not
as bright as the sun.’
At Woodford, Mr. Yessey, who had the best atmospheric conditions
and a first class telescope, saw so much of the shading on the planet and
the halo that it would not be possible to reproduce all he says without
extracting greater part of a long report. The shading on the planet was
first seen at 12h. 7m., but not on the part off the sun; it appeared to extend
inwards from the limb, resembling a gradually fading line of dots.
At 12h. 15m. 30s. the following limb of Yenus was distinctly defined
by a faint line of light or halo which was rather brighter on the northern
side; 3 minutes later ring of light increasing in beauty, silvery, decidedly
brighter on north side of middle, perhaps % a second in thickness.
After complete ingress the definition was magnificent {see plate I,
No. 3), and atmospheric ring or shading on, i.e., within the disc of the
planet similar to what I first saw at 12h. 7m., but broader, and gradually
shading off towards the centre, to be traced all round, giving Yenus an
appearance of relief like an oblate spheroid, or rather a flattened dome
standing away from the sun, the radius of the flattened part being about
half that of the planet.
At egress Mr. Yessey again saw the ring of light directly contact
was made, and steadily as the planet proceeded, at first like a small arch
upon the sun’s limb at 4h. 2m. 355., the ring of light on planet appeared as
a sharply defined line, and less than one second of arc in thickness, G
minutes later, disc of Yenus still continues undoubtedly a globe, and
appearing slightly reddish or copper coloured (plate I, No. 4), like the
moon in an eclipse, the sky adjoining intensely black, with the suspicion of
a greenish tinge contrasting with the colour on the planet.


Mr. Du Paur, observing at Woodford with a 3-inch telescope, the
eye-glass of which (after being smoked) was cracked by the sun, and there-
fore in a very unsatisfactory state for observations, still saw the whole of
the planet Avhen it was about two-thirds on the sun; and during the interval
between internal contacts, bad frequent opportunities of observing Yenus
with a 4A inch telescope after it had been carefully focussed on the sun
spots, and saw Yenus as sharply defined as it would be possible to
represent it on paper, and perfectly black.
Mr. Russell says, ‘At ingress I did not see the halo or ring of light
round the planet (plate XXYII, fig. 3.) until 12h. 16m. Os. It appeared
only round that part of the planet not on the sun. It was very remarkable
and beautiful, like a fringe of green light, through which the faintest
tinge of red could be seen. It was densest near the planet, and seemed
to shade off to nothing with a diameter estimated at one second of
arc. It did not appear solid like the disc of the sun; but, like light in a
dense vapour (see plate XXX), as ingress proceeded, the halo became
more conspicuous; but I did not observe any want of uniformity in its
diameter. At egress I saw nothing of the halo until 3h. 57m. 75., nearly
2-g- minutes after internal contact. The halo was exactly similar to that
seen at ingress, and the whole of the planet at this time appeared to me
intensely black. The halo remained steadily visible for some time, but
gradually faded, owing to increasing cloud causing a great increase in
brightness of the atmosphere about the sun; and at 4h. 6m. 525. I first
observed that the surface of Yenus was not black as it had been, but
appeared as if covered with thin hazy clouds, somewhat thicker on the
planet’s northern hemisphere. At this time, the haze having much
increased, I lost sight of the halo, and at 4h. 12m. changed the coloured
glass for one of lighter tint, and at once saw the halo again, and for the
first time noticed that it was irregular in diameter; it seemed considerably
broader at the north pole of the planet and shaded off more rapidly towards
B than 0 {see plate XXV, figs. 2,3, 4, and 5), but I found it impossible to
look at the sun steadily with this light glass, and again changed it for a
darker one, Avhen all the halo, except the part at the north pole, disappeared;
this Avhite patch continued visible against the sky (fig. 5.) until within one
minute of last contact, and I feel confident I should have seen it some
time after last contact but for the rapidly increasing atmospheric haze,
Avhich had also much increased on the planet, making it difficult to see
Avhere the haze on the planet ended and the sky haze began.
d


Mr. Lenelian says, ‘At 4h. 16m. 21s. the planet appeared with the
outer edge apparent, and I noticed a spot of light on the preceding side as
at A. (See plate XYII, fig. 4.) It did not appear to me as anything more
than a spot.’
Messrs. Belfield and Park saw the following limb of planet at ingress
distinctly illuminated, and when the planet- was wholly on the sun the
body of the planet appeared intensely bluish black in centre, becoming
gorgeous (see plates YIII, X, and XXI) deep blue towards the circum-
ference ; at egress the illumination of the planet’s limb was again seen, hut
only on the north side.
Mr, Bolding only saw the halo at egress, and though visible all
round that part of the planet off the sun was most marked on the north
side. (See diagram, plate XXYIII.)
It will he seen that we have here three distinct phenomena. A
broad ring of light outside the planet, a bright ring of light round that part
of the planet projected on the sky, and hand of light or shading round the
inner edge of the planet, or over its surface. No spots, however, were seen
on the planet, except the very remarkable part of the halo at the north pole.
The cause of the halo seen by Messrs. Lenelian and Mac Donnell has
not been satisfactorily made out, though it has been repeatedly seen during
transits of Mercury. It seems exceedingly improbable that Yenus has an
atmosphere of such extent as would be required to produce such a halo or
ring of light as that seen by both these observers. It appears, however,
certain that it is one of those curious phenomena seen only by some observers
under special conditions. The transit of Mercury in 1868 was watched
very closely by a number of observers in England, who were seeking
information that might be useful for the transit of Yenus; and out of four-
teen observers, including some of the best in England, only three make any
mention of the diffused exterior halo. Mr. Stone thought it simply an
effect of contrast.
Probably some of the light seen on the planet this time had a
similar origin, no observer has, so far, reported seeing both. A part of it,
however, must, I think, be attributed to haze in our own atmosphere,
which, being very luminous owing to moisture then forming, would appear
projected on the black planet, and the contrast would very likely give it a


shaded appearance from the edge towards the centre. To me the blackness
of the planet, both at ingress and egress, was very intense, until the haze
in our atmosphere became thick and gave the surface of the planet a cloudy
look, so that I could scarcely see where the planet ended and the sky
began; and it may be that the same cause produced what Professor
Liversidge and others saw; but at Woodford the air was too clear for such
an explanation. The red tint seen by Professor Liversidge is explained by
bis having used a red glass shade.
The increase or thickening of the halo seen at the north pole of the
planet, and which to several of the observers seemed to encroach on the
planet, is a most interesting feature, especially if taken in conjunction with
an apparent flattening of the planet, seen by Mr. Yessey at the opposite side.
The remaining ring of light or halo is the most interesting physical
feature observed, though at first sight it would be attributed to an atmos-
phere similar to that of the earth. I think a little consideration will show
that it cannot have such an origin. It is spoken of by all the observers as
very brilliant, by some as white compared with the sun; and its actinic
power was so great that, although its diameter was certainly less than one
second of arc, and would only appear as a fine line in a Janssen photograph
less than one five-hundredth part of an inch in diameter, it yet had power
to effect the chemicals more than the sun itself in something less than the
two hundred and fiftieth part of a second; in other words it was more
powerful in affecting the silver salts on the photograph plates than direct
sunlight, and Ave have a number of Janssen plate photographs in which
it is shown by a deposit of silver thicker than that made by the sunlight.
This great brilliance, of course, explains why it was not seen about
the planet Avhile on the sun’s disc. It Avas evidently not to be distinguished
from the sunlight.
In the clear atmosphere at Woodford, it was seen as soon as the cusp
parted at egress, and it will be exceedingly interesting next time Venus is
lost in the sunlight to try if, under favourable conditions, his halo can be
seen. Quite sure I am that, if the air had been clearer at egress, I should
have seen the planet with the halo round it projected upon the sky, as it
was I saAv part of the halo until Venus Avas nearly all off the sun’s disc, and
one minute before last contact. Taking all these facts into consideration,
I cannot see any cause sufficient to produce a halo or a ring of light such


as that described, an atmosphere by refracting, Avould diffuse the light and
by absorption would reduce it, so that the halo cannot be the result of an
atmosphere.
Some of our Janssen plates give results which are obvious enough
without measurement; one of these is the extreme sharpness of all the cusps.
Of the sixteen plates having about sixty photos on each—the first plate
shows a small notch in the sun’s limb ; Nos. 2 and 4, planet still further in;
No. 5 is the one taken when the black drop was seen ; No. 6 shows the
planet wholly within at ingress 7,8, and 9, the same at egress ; No. 9 J shows
the planet on the sun’s limb, with the halo; No. 10, planet partly off sun,
with some pictures of the thickening of the ring of light about the pole of
the planet; Nos. 11 to 16 plates, at egress; No. 17, was passing through
when last contact was observed, and shows the faintest notch in the sun’s
limb till within a few seconds of observed last contact. The value of these
plates is very great; photography is not biassed by preconceived theories
of what it should see, and is therefore a witness upon questions of physical
aspect whose evidence no one may gainsay.
On February 22nd, 1875, I left for England, taking full copies of all
the reports and observer’s drawings, together with ten Janssen plates, each
having sixty pictures of a portion of the sun with Yenus near the limb, and
fifty-seven photographs of the sun four inches in diameter, some taken at
Sydney and others at Woodford ; these were all given to the Astronomer
Royal for England, on July 14th, 1875, as the New South Wales contri-
bution towards the observation of the Transit of Venus, and in January,
1876, others were sent, making up the numbers to 109 Sydney 4-inch
plates and thirty-six Woodford plates, and twelve Janssen plates, some of
these not having quite the full number of photographs on them.
The observations will be found very fully illustrated, and other
plates have been added showing Sydney observatory, the temporary obser-
vatories used at other places, and also, the larger instruments, tents, &c.
Unfortunately, Goulburn buildings were taken down before a photograph
of them was secured and the only one of the large instrument is very
imperfect but it is the best available.
H. C. RUSSELL,
Sydney Observatory, Government Astronomer.
16 August, 1892.


MR. BUSSELL’S REPOET re TRANSIT OF VENUS.
Sydney Observatory, 9 December, 1874.
The early morning was clear and fine, but from sb. 30m. a.m. to 8 a.m.
thick fog-likc clouds covered the sky; they seemed to be very low down,
and all melted away under the increasing beat, leaving the sky beautifully
clear and promising for the work before us—a promise which was fully
realized during the day.
- All the observers were at work early, giving finishing touches to our
preparations, and giving and receiving clock signals to ensure accurate
time. At Sydney this occupied a considerable time, for three stations —-
Eden, Goulburn, and Woodford —required the signals, and some were
given to private observers. By 11 a.m., however, all this was over, and
all the telescopes and photographic apparatus for use in Sydney were quite
ready for the work, and the observers had time to look quietly over the
preparations and see that all was ready.
The principal instrument was the new Equatorial by Dr. Schroeder,
of Hamburgh, which had been obtained for the purpose of observing this
transit. It has a clear aperture of ID4 inches and a focal length of 12 feet
6 inches, and was provided with a full battery of eye-pieces, and a polarizing
apparatus for viewing the sun. The definition of this instrument is superb,
with the new achromatic eyc-pieces supplied by Dr. Schroeder, but owing
to the great heat concentrated in the focus on that bright summer day, it
was found necessary to reduce the aperture to five inches when observing
and six inches when photographing. Eor the purpose of taking photo-
graphs it was fitted with a camera and enlarging lenses of such power that
the sun’s image measured four inches. The photo plates were placed simply
at the end of the camera and held by a spring while the picture was taken,
no dark box being necessary, because the camera end of the telescope
passed into the dark room, which was simply a tent raised inside of the
dome and connected with the telescope by means of a flexible sleeve, so
that the telescope was free to move with the clock-work. A flashing
hd 35—92 A


shutter of the ordinary kind was used, and when the plate was in position,
a very light spring was touched, set the shutter free and made a picture; which
was immediately removed and developed, and as soon as it was washed, the
shutter was lifted, and the camera ready for another. This precaution was
necessary, because the shutter in its motion upwards, which was of course
by hand, and comparatively slow, let a flash of sunlight into the dark
room. Thus arranged it was found that three persons conld and did work
at the rate of one photo per minute, with the ordinary wet collodion process.
One coated the plates and put them in the baths, of which four were used,
fixed on a turn-table, so that by the time a plate had travelled round it was
sensitized. The second worker took the plate out and put it in the camera,
exposed it, and handed it to the third, who developed it and finished the
picture; this duty devolved upon me, and I was thus able to see during
the progress of the work that the plates were properly exposed, and that
the driving-clock kept the sun’s image on the middle of the plate.
Attached to the flashing shutter apparatus was a contact-maker and two
wires that led to the chronograph; every flash of the shutter was thus
recorded, and against each record on the tape the number of the plate
exposed was written, which thus furnished an exact record of the time of
exposure, the plates being identified by numbers written on them with a
diamond beforehand. The same chronograph was used for recording the
times of the various phenomena observed.
Before I leave the instrument, it is necessary to say that the
enlarging combination was of peculiar construction. It had been found
that the ordinary enlarging lenses, and especially the one made for this
telescope, gave to the limits of the field considerable distortion. To get over
this difficulty experiments were tried, and it was found that two plano-
convex lenses of equal focal length placed convex sides towards each other
could be so adjusted that there was no distortion of the field; in fact a
large white screen was carefully ruled into inch squares and placed four
hundred feet from the telescope, when photographed, all the lines were
straight. This combination was therefore adopted for the transit Avork, and
all the Sydney photos were taken with it.
As a proof of its accuracy, the Scale of Inch squares was set up at a
distance of 100 feet and a photograph of it taken, from which by direct
printing the photo herewith was produced. (See plate xxxn.) An inspec-
tion of this shows that there was no distortion, or in other words, the field
was quite flat.


The camera was so made that it could he put on or off the telescope
in one minute. Before ingress the telescope was placed ready with a direct
vision achromatic eye-piece magnifying 100 times, and the coloured glasses
were a green one before the eye-piece and a dark blue or neutral shade near
the eye ;so protected, no inconvenience was felt from the sunlight. Other
magnifying powers were tried, as was also the polarizing eye-piece; but the
observations were made at ingress and egress with the 100 eye-piece
described above. The telescope was clock-driven, so that my Avholc
attention was given to the work of recording the times of contacts at
ingress and egress, and to secure accuracy a chronograph on which the ticks
were marked by the standard clock was used, and against each mark made
by the observer, an explanatory note was made on the paper tape by the
assistant in charge of the chronograph; and in order to guard against the
total loss of the observation by failure in the electrical contacts, I had a
chronometer near me and recorded the time to the nearest second by it.
These notes served also as a check on the chronographic work.
The error and rate of the chronometer were found by comparison
with the standard clock before and after the observations, and the error
and rate of the standard clock were found by transit observations the
nights before and following
As soon as I had observed the phenomena of ingress, the eye-piccc
was removed and the camera put in its place, and wo commenced to take
photographs of Venus in transit, and during 3 hours 10 minutes 190
pictures were taken.
The observations at ingress.
At llh. 10m. a.m.* I began to observe, and adjusted the focus very
carefully, so that spots and faculai on the sun’s surface could be seen
distinctly, and then a close watch was kept on that part of the sun where
the planet was expected. I was surprised I could sec nothing of the planet
at llh. 51m., but kept my eye steadily upon the place, and at llh. 55m. 235.
saw the first sign of Venus certainly on the sun. I thought that the
indent I saw was the planet a few seconds before, but could not be sure
it was not one of the irregularities in the sun’s limb due to atmospheric
causes, until about 15° of the planet’s circumference were in contact.
Probably the time should be 10 seconds earlier. Prom this point until 5
minutes past 12 (noon) there was nothing to remark but the sharp and
definite outline of the planet as it crept over the sun. At this time, 12h. 5m.,
* All the times given in this and other following reports are in Sydney mean time.


tlie whole of the planet became visible (plate XXYII, fig. 1), that portion
of it without the sun appearing on the bright sky near the sun’s limb ;as
ingress went on, the planet became more and more distinct, and seemed to
stand in relief on a hack ground of greenish grey light (fig. 2). It was
uniformly black, and I could not detect any haziness about its outline on
the sun, except during moments of had definition, which were temporary,
and evidently due to changes in our own atmosphere. The outline of the
sun and the cusps were also sharp, hut I would not he certain that the
halo afterwards noted was not then visible.
At 12h. 16m. I first observed the halo (plate XXYII, fig. 3); the
planet had been getting gradually more conspicuous both on and off the
sun’s limb, and my attention had been principally directed to the cusps, to
detect, if possible, any phenomena like the formation of the D-shape, hut
nothing was seen, and when taking a general look at the time noted, I
first observed the halo round that part of the planet not on the sun. It
Avas very remarkable and beautiful, like a fringe of green light, through
Avhich the faintest tinge of red could he seen; it Avas brightest near the
planet, and seemed to shade off to nothing, with a diameter estimated at
one second of arc. It did not appear solid like the disc of the sun, hut like
light in a dense vapour. As ingress proceeded the halo became more
conspicuous, hut I did not observe any Avant of uniformity in its diameter,
and it at all times terminated at the sun’s limb, there being no sign of the
halo on the part of the planet on the sun.
Plate XXX is an attempt to show Avhat Avas seen, hut the halo is far
too broad, and I Avas unable to put on paper Avhat I saAv.
At 12h. 20m. indications of distortion or had definition of the
limbs in contact appeared, like a mass of black avool laid over the place
(plate XXYI), rendering it impossible to sec distinctly, and making the
cusps very hazy. I thought the drop Avas going to form, and Avatchcd
very closely for it and for apparent contact; hut I found it extremely
difficult to make up my mind about the latter, and saAv nothing of the
former.
12h. 20m. 51s. Avas noted a very unsatisfactory apparent contact.
The cusps after this appeared to clear up or improve in definition,
and as they approached each other the sharpness Avas very remarkable,
hut the motion so gradual that I could not determine to a fraction of a
second Avhen they actually completed the line of light; hut the instant I
Avas sure I made the record on the chronograph, for “internal contact”;


tlie time was 12h. 23m. 595., and keeping my eye steadily upon it, saw it
liad in 15 seconds become a distinct and unmistakeable band of sunlight.
The planet and its neighbourhood were then examined with great care, and
presented a perfectly black unmarked surface, with a hard and distinct
outline, and near it nothing hut the uniform light of the sun could he seen.
Observation was then (12h. 30m.) given up, and the camera put
upon the telescope, and in the course of 3 hours and 10 minutes 190 photos
Avcre taken. Pour of these arc useless from accidental causes, hut on the
remainder is a clear and beautiful record of the planet’s progress across
the sun.
Egress.
At 3h. 40m. p.m. avc gave up taking photographs and prepared for
observations. The same eye-piece and coloured glasses Avero used. The
planet noAV had a perfectly sharp and clear outline, that of the sun being
also very good. I could not after careful scrutiny see anything remarkable
on the margin of or near the planet, and the limbs continued to approach
each other beautifully defined (plate XXIY fig 1). Great care Avas exer-
cised to keep a steady watch Avithout straining the eyes. At times there
Avcre moments of had definition, CAfidcntly caused by the clouds then
forming in the Avcst. During one of these, at 3h. 53m. 53 - 595. the limb of ■
the planet nearest the sun’s limb seemed to be in a state of vibration, as if
portions of its blackness Avere jumping over to the margin of the sun with
an appearance similar to fig. 2, plate XXIV, Avhich represents as nearly as
can he estimated the space over which the phenomenon was seen as com-
pared Avith the diameter of the planet. This lasted only a few seconds, the
vibrations being estimated at 6 or 7 per second; after this the limbs
recovered their perfect definition, fig. 3, plate XXIY, and were clearly and
steadily separated by a line of light, Avhich at 3h. 54m. 26 - 30 s. could not have:
been more than half a second of arc in thickness; and then the same mar- 1
vellous definition continuing just when it was wanted, the line gradually
contracted to a scarcely visible thread (fig. 4), plate XXIV, and the limbs :
made contact at 3h. 54m. 39.665. There was no sudden break—nothing hut'
the perfectly gradual motion of the one disc over the other, both being
beautifully defined, and the observer saAv one limb overtake the other. I
have no doubt that had the had definition continued, the moment when the
jumps were seen would have been taken as the formation of the drop.
A curious phenomenon then presented itself similar to that remarked
at ingress,—the tivo limbs at the point of contact seemed to get confused or
Photography.
Jumps.
Fine lino of
light.
Internal
contact.


badly defined, whether from atmospheric causes near us or from some
peculiarity about Venus I am unable to say, but it seemed to distort the
planet in a most remarkable way (plate XXV. fig. 1, and plate XXVI).
And now, as at ingress, I found it very difficult to determine apparent
contact, or what under the strange effect, seemed like the phenomenon
known by that name.
At 3h. 55m. 455. it appeared to me that if Venus could be made
round it would be just in contact Avith the sun’s limb. I took particular
note of the circumstance, in the hope that it Avould throw some light upon
the so-called black drop.
I did not at this time observe any halo or anything to indicate the
exact position of the planet’s margin, and it Avas not until 3h. 57m. 7s-
(plate XXV, fig. 2 at B) that I saAV the outline off the sun Avith the halo round
it exactly similar to that seen at ingress, and iioav as then only on that
portion of the planet Avhich Avas off the sun. The Avhole of the planet then
appeared to me intensely black (as at A, plate XXV, fig. 2); at 3h. 59m. 12s.
the planet Avas all visible and the cusps very sharp ; 2% minutes later the
halo Avas only just visible; at 4h. 3m. definition bad, and the bright haze
about the sun noted to be on the increase. Definition improA r ed again>
and at 4h. 6m. 525. 1 first observed that the surface of Venus Avas not
uniformly black as it had been, but appeared as if covered Avith thin hazy
clouds, thicker somcAAdiat on the planet’s northern hemisphere, but noAvhere
sufficiently dense to prevent me from seeing the dark planet at the back,
at least such was the impression formed at the time; at 4h. 12m. th c
definition again became bad. Since the last note about the halo it had
almost disappeared, and I changed the dark blue shade for one of a lighter
tint; Avith this saw the halo distinctly all round the part off the sun, but
could not look steadily at the sun, thc light being too strong; thc halo
Avas for the first time seen irregular—in diameter it seemed considerably
broader at the north pole of the planet as slioavii (fig. 3, plate XXV, at A) }
and shaded off more rapidly toAvards B than C. At 4h. 15m. 20s. (plate
XXV, fig. 4), the dark glass having been replaced, this northern band of
light was all that was visible of the halo, and the haze on the planet Avas
greater; at 4h. 16m. 2s. the cusps were not sharp but rounded off; the
appearance was coincident Avith another turn of bad definition, and the
atmosphere became noAV so much disturbed that there Avas little hope of a
satisfactory observation of last contact. Thc AAdiitc patch on the planet had
however continued visible since it Avas first seen, though at times it became


very faint; by its aid I was able to make out the outline of the planet, now
a very difficult matter, for the haze on the planet had become almost as
bright as the sky, and must I think have been due to the moisture gathering
in our own atmosphere.
At 4h, 22m. 12s. the white patch was distinctly visible; definition
good again; faintly seen at 4h. 23m. 225. (plate XXY, fig. 5), and at 4h. 24m.
275. the last sign of the planet on the sun’s disc was seen as the faintest
possible mark, which then disappeared; definition being for the time very
good, the observation was quite satisfactory. After this I tried to see the
white spot on the planet but failed, as the haze in the sky was rapidly
increasing.
At this time the whole sky was very hazy, and long tapering clouds
were coming up from S.W., and I have no doubt the moments of bad
definition were caused by the passage of the points of these clouds across
the line of sight.
■White still
visible.
Last contact.
H. C. RUSSELL,
Government Astronomer.
Sydney Observatory,
9 December, 1874.


Copy of Memoranda on Cards used during observations.
INGEESS
noon. Planet perfect black clear outline ( i.e. on sun),
h. m. s.
12 4 0 Planet very clear and sharp, nearly bisected.
12 5 0 Can see the whole of the planet, but not clearly.
12 10 0 Whole of planet plainly visible on a back ground of faint grey light.
12 15 0 Still visible outside sun ; planet’s edge seems perfectly sharp ; just a shadow
of uncertainty about edge, think it is atmosphere.
12 1G 0 All visible, at times beautifully; no small body near Venus; cusps perfectly
sharp. (Halo was marked on chronograph at this time.)
EGEESS: —
3 54 39'GG First contact; sharp contact of limbs; 40s. later distortion about the point of
contact.
Venus looked in apparent contact with sun’s limb.
357 7 Venus’ margin off sun clearly seen with halo round it similar to that seen at
ingress.
359 12 All planet visible ; parts on and off the sun, latter with halo round it.
4 022 All visible, but halo not distinct: bright margin off sun not so marked.
4 1 42 All visible, but only faintest halo.
4 252 Planet’s margin all visible off sun ; not well defined; haze about sun seems to
be increasing.
4 512 All visible ; sun’s edge very steady in glimpses.
4 G 52 Venus does not look uniformly black on north side —it looks as if planet was
cloudy.
4 8 52 All Venus visible.
4 10 52 All visible.
411 52 Bad definition, but all planet visible.
_ 412 52 (Changed sun-shado to lighter one.) All visible ; halo distinct, specially on
the north side.
.415 12 (Dark glass again.) Halo on north side only—it is very remarkable.
4 1G 2 Cusps not sharp—seem rounded off.
417 42 White place still faintly visible; white haze increasing.
418 52 Definition getting very bad —can still glimpse white spot by its aid follow the
outline of the planet.
420 32 Still visible, but very faint.
4 22 12 Can still glimpse it.
4 23 22 Doubtful (glimpses).
4 24 27 Last contact ends, definition good.
4 25 52 Certain I can see nothing outside sun.
H. C. RUSSELL,
Government Astronomer.


REPORT FROM MR. LENEHAN.
Government Observatory, Sydney, New South Wales,
H. 0. Russell, Esq., 12 December, 1874.
Government Astronomer.
Sir,
I have the honor to report result of my observations of the transit
of Venus on the 9th instant.
The instrument used by me was an old telescope by Troughton &
Sims of London, with a focal length of 6 feet 9 inches —an 80-power eye-
piece, and neutral shade glasses of different densities —an aperture of -fl-
inches, stopped down to 4 inches by a cap over object-glass ; fitted
on equatorial stand and under cover of a temporary observing dome.
At about llh. 45m. I took my station at the eye-piece and atten-
tively watched for the first appearance of the planet, having everything in
my favour for a good result—definition of telescope, weather and clearness
of atmosphere, all that could be desired, with the scattered spots upon the
sun’s disc showing sharp and clear.
The first indent on the sun’s edge by the planet was observed at
llh. 55m. 36‘845., although I fancy from the contact then formed I could
have seen it 10 or 15 seconds earlier had I known the exact spot of
entrance.
The planet had crept on the sun’s disc about one-fifth its diameter
at llh. 58m. 21‘345., definition clear and sharp.
At 12h. Im. 31‘345. about one-fourth on, and at 12h. sm. fancied I
saw the outer edge of planet, but was not perfectly clear on that point.
The sun’s limb had bisected the disc of Venus at 12h. 7m. Bs., still
clear and well defined; at 12h. 12m. 80s. it looked as if the edge of planet
was losing its curvature, but later I found I was mistaken, as the cusps
reformed, giving the true curve to the planet.
About three-fourths of the planet on the sun at 12h. 15m. 545., edge
of planet off the sun discernible, but no drop formation.
At time of ingress there was an indistinct shading between the
supposed edge of planet and the sun, which for some ten or fifteen seconds
before the time T quote later, kept me in a state of uncertainty as to true
B
Instrument.
Work.
First contact.
Bisected.
All planet
visible.


time of actual ingress. The shading did not break abruptly, but seemed to
melt away in such a manner as to leave a doubt in my mind of the exact
• time the planet passed the edge of the sun, but I distinctly saw a clear
band of light at 12b. 24m. 48-345. Then I left the telescope for the
photographic room, preparing the plates for exposure in large equatorial
until about ten minutes before first contact of egress, when I returned to
my telescope on the north side of the Observatory to observe the egress.
The planet stood out on the sun’s disc with a clear and sharp outline,
with a luminous appearance or halo outside it about one-third diameter of
the planet (plate XYII), of a greenish yellow, with outer edge an orange
shade, as if the planet had an atmosphere, or perhaps caused intense
brilliancy on that part of the sun’s face by rays being reflected. The
atmosphere was clear, and the following observations were made under very
favourable circumstances.
There was a similar indistinctness betweeen the time I mention as
“ apparent contact” and “ complete contact” as noted in the former portion
of this report at time of ingress.
The first apparent contact was at 3h. 54m. 2T615., a little jumping
* (plate XYII, fig. 2), afterwards saw a band or faint and narrow streak of
light between limb of planet and sun which clearly showed the time given
was in error (plate XVII, fig. 3). I then waited until I was absolutely
certain contact was completed, which was at 3h. 54m. 46 , 615., I feel con-
fident that this time is from seven to ten seconds after true time; thinking
the light might again show between made me wait till I was quite certain
before I noted the second time.
At 3h. 56m. 26 , 615. the points of the sun cusps appeared blunted as
if from vibration, and at 3h. 58m. G'Gls. this formation or appearance had
somewhat increased (this formation was like capillary attraction between
the planet’s limb and the dark sky). The planet was about one-fourth its
diameter off at 4h. Om. ITOls.; at two minutes later the planet’s edge off
sun was apparent. Half off at 4h. 9m. T6ls., the halo still showing
around that portion of the planet on sun’s disc ; about three-fourths off, at
4h.16m. 21‘Gls. with the outer edge apparent, and noticed spot of light on
preceding limb of planet, as shown at A (plate XVII, fig. 4); did not appear
to me as anything more than a spot.
The last and final contact at 4h, 23m. 49 - 615., the edge of planet
being then lost in edge of sun.
* In plate XVII tbc diagrams should have been numbered 1,2, 3, 4 from right to left.


These observations were made through a dark neutral shade eye-
piece, and were not at all trying to my sight.
Shortly after the finish of observations the atmosphere seemed to
become very smoky and thick, but altogether Sydney was favoured Avith
very fine Aveather.
I have the honor, &c.,
HENRY A. LENEHAN,
Computer.
REPORT FROM MR. SAVAGE.
11. C. Russell, Esq., 8.A., Sydney Observatory,
Government Astronomer, — 21 December, 1871.
Sir,
I hereby give you a short report of what came under my notice
during the transit of Ycnus on December 9th, 1871.
The telescope allotted to me was a 10-inch reflector by Browning,
of London, with an unsilvered speculum, and focal length of 6 feet 2 inches,
with an eye-piece magnifying 200 diameters; a dark glass slide was used
to protect the eye from the intense heat of the sun, the day being very hot.
Shortly before the time for first contact I was at the telescope, but the
instrument being a reflector and strange to me, caused me to lose the
observation before I could get the telescope to bear on that portion of the
sun’s limb where first contact took place.
The next point for observing the planet was when it was bisected,
the time of which I noted as 12h. 6m. 33'935. and the apparent internal
contact at 12h. 22m. 1'935., the definition at this point being very bad
between the limbs of the sun and planet.
As the planet advanced on the sun’s disc a little way a shading
connected the planet with the sun’s edge, but that portion of it nearest i
to the planet showed indications of fading away gradually, until at length'
it disappeared altogether without any sudden break whatever, and at
12h. 23m. 43'935. a streak of light became visible between the planet and
sun’s limb.
Instrument.
Bisected.
Shading of
cusps.


Egress.
Dor the same reason as above stated I did not observe tbe first
contact at egress; tbe planet when I got it fairly in tbe field was about of
its diameter off tbe sun. The bisection of the planet took place by my
observation about 4b. sm. 49'685. I did not see any outline of tbe outer
edge of tbe planet during egress, but I did sec a momentary flash of light
in the position shown in plate XI, but I did not record the time. The last
external contact of the planet with the sun’s limb I recorded as being 4h.
19m. 32'685.
During the ingress and egress the definition of both the sun and
planet was very fine. Through my not being able to get the first contact
at ingress and egress the clock motion was dispensed with, and I moved
the telescope gently by band as it required. The interval between ingress
and egress I was engaged in equatorial tower, keeping time records of each
photograph taken.
EDWIN GEORGE SAVAGE,
Meteorological Assistant,
Government Observatory,
Sydney.
WOODFORD REPORTS.
Report prom the Surveyor-General re Transit op Venus observa-
tions AT WOODPORD, ADDRESSED TO THE GOVERNMENT ASTRONOMER.
Surveyor General’s Office, Sydney, 21 December, 1874.
Dear Sir,
I have to report the favourable observation of tbe transit of
Venus, at tbe temporary Observatory at Woodford, on tbe Western Railway,
54 miles west of Sydney, 2,200 feet above tbe sea, latitude 33° 43' SS'?",
long. 10b. Im. 56’205. (for details see Appendix 5), and to append tbe
reports of Messrs. Vessey, Hirst, and Dufaur.


The duties of each member of the party of observation were taken
up as nearly as possible in accordance with your wishes; and I much
regret the breaking of the glasses dark of the 3-inch Cooke telescope, by
which we are almost deprived of the value of Mr. Dufaur’s observations.
Leaving Sydney on Monday, the 23rd ultimo, I was employed until
Thursday afternoon in marking out the position to be occupied by each
observatory, unpacking and attending to tbe instruments, which were
thoroughly wet by rain which- fell at the time the packages were put down
by the train, and which continued the three following days; little progress
could therefore be made in the erection of the piers, the earth being
saturated with wet, so I returned to Sydney, and revisited the camp on
the 30th ultimo, accompanied by Mr. Hirst, and was followed the next day
by Messrs. Yessey, Bischoff, and Dufaur. The day after we were fully
employed in setting up instruments, consisting of the photoheliograph by
Dallmeyer, the siderial clock by Cooke & Sons, a chronograph, the 41-
inch Schroder telescope, kindly lent by A. Fairfax, Esq., a 3-inch telescope
by Cooke, and a portable transit instrument—the two latter being supplied
by the Survey Department.
The place of observation was about 200 yards westerly from Mr. i
Fairfax’s house (Woodford), and the same distance northerly from the
Western Railway and Telegraph line, and nearly upon the summit of the
main dividing ground between the waters of the river Cox on the south and
the river Grose on the north. So narrow was the ridge in the direction of
the meridian, that we could not get a tree or any object as a referring mark
without crossing the valleys, which would have made the mark most incon-
venient, and it therefore became necessary to erect a theodolite upon the
rock, within 70 yards of the transit instrument, to be used as a referring
mark, by observing one of its wires with the transit instrument.
Until the sth the weather was most unfavourable for observations of i
any kind, but opportunity was taken of every fine opening to adjust the
photoheliograph, which, being of peculiar construction, was not so easily i
adjusted as an ordinary equatorial. During this time ample opportunity
was afforded of testing the value of the improvements made by yourself
upon this instrument since it was imported into this Colony, especially the
substitution of an cye-piccc for adjusting it instead of the ground glass-
shade. With this we were able to get a fair image of a star in the same focus
as the image of the wires, so that the instrument with camera attached
became almost as easy to manage as an ordinary equatorial, and the adjust-
ments of both the stand and reference lines were made perfectly satisfactory.
Division of
duty.
Preparation.
Situation.
Weather.
Instruments,


The arrangement also by which the object-glass of the photohclio-
graph was made to pass through a sleeve of non-actinic calico attached to
the shutter opening in the roof converted the observatory into a photo-
graphic room, and gave us every facility for taking the pictures quickly;
because it was not necessary to use a dark slide to transfer the plates to the
camera ; they were taken out of the hath and put at once into the frame
which had been fixed in the camera to receive them, and ensure an accurate
focal position for all the plates. We found the lever and spring attached
to the flashing shutter much more convenient to work than the cumbrous
arrangement for working the shutter with which the instrument arrived here.
On the Gth instant we were, through the kind co-operation of the
Superintendent of Telegraphs, in electric communication with Sydney
Observatory, a matter of considerable moment, as we were, through the
unfavourable state of the weather, all behind with our transit observations,
and telegraphic communication enabled us to compare our time with the
clock in the Sydney Observatory. The telegraph instrument was set up in
a tent close to both the clock and transit rooms. After transit observations
on two successive evenings for time and longitude, I found, on the 7th
instant, when preparing for observing sun’s meridian passage, that the
sixth wire had broken and become entangled with two others. I restored
them to position and supplied the missing one, hut only to he again dis-
appointed, wire No. 4 breaking before we had any further observation, so I
determined on sending the instrument to Sydney for new Avires, and make
the ohser\ r ations for latitude and longitude at convenience.
The morning of the 9th Avas ushered in Avith a dry, hot, Avesterly
wind, which increased to almost a gale at 10 o’clock. Shortly after 10 avc
received your latest time signals; and after wishing success, and asking
further signals as soon after the transit as possible, wc each took our
stations, from Avhich time I have personally no knoAvledge of any occur-
rences beyond the interior of the photoheliograph and chronograph room,
the temperature of Avhich was noted half-hourly. The result thereof
appears as Appendix No. 3to this report. My greatest anxiety Avas for the
maintenance of as even a temperature for the clock as possible, and hut for
the continual revolution of the fan ventilator and the constant application of
wet blankets, w'e should have found it difficult even to exist in the closed
room. The temperature, however remained as steady as could he expected
under the circumstances. Nor the observation of time of ingress and
egress and the phenomena observed with the df-inch telescope I refer you


to Mr. Surveyor Vessey’s report; and from his skill and practice in delinea-
tion of form, and its relationships, I have great confidence in his observa-
tions, especially of the egress after he had time to realize the entire absence
of expected phenomena.
I have next to invite your attention to the somewhat conflicting
report of Mr. Hirst, given as Appendix No. 2, who distinctly saw a "drop’’
whilst observing for position through the finder of the heliograph, and in
reply to my inquiry as to its appearance, said “ more like a stalk.” I
regret now that I did not leave my work to witness the appearance myself)
hut thinking that others would see it, I did not wish a break in recording.
I cannot account for the appearance reported by him, unless it arose from
some optical delusion, resulting from the boiling appearance of the limbs
of both the sun and planet when seen through a telescope of small aperture
with an inferior lens. My experience of Mr. Hirst fully realized your
expectations of him as a gentleman of untiring zeal.
I have next to invite your attention to a short report from Mr.:
Fairfax, to whose kindness and ready assistance we- owe so much, Mr.
Fairfax, though not actually taking part in our work, was yet present
giving every assistance, and when the telescope was not otherwise in use
ho took advantage of the interval to get a look at Venus. His report,
though short, is important, hearing as it does directly upon the character
of the ring of light seen round Venus, From his keen sight and long ;
experience as an amateur observer I attach much weight to his report.
[Appendix 7.]
Before leaving the subject, I should like to say that, even if w r e have
not succeeded quite as well as w r e had hoped to do under more favourable
circumstances, still I shall always look hack upon our expedition with great
pleasure. We agreed together well throughout, and can all hear testimony
to the kindness of Mr. Fairfax in placing his house and servants at our
disposal, and last, not least, the use of his excellent telescope.
During some of the intervals of weather favourable for observation (
u
I saw some of the groups of stars in Argo in a degree of perfection rarely
to he hoped for in Sydney, fully hearing out the high estimate you place
on the Blue Mountains as a point of great advantage in observing celestial
phenomena. I remain, &c.,
Mr. Vcsscy.
Mr. Hirst.
Black drop.
Mr. Fairfax.
Halo.
Clearness of
atmosphere.
P. F. ADAMS,
Surveyor- General,
N. S. Wales.


APPENDIX No. 1.
Report of Observations made by L. A. Yessey during Transit of Venus,
9tb December, 1874, at "Woodford, Blue Mountains, N.S.W., trans-
mitted to tbe Surveyor General.
Instrument, a 4|-inch refractor by Schroder, stopped to 4 inches aperture, and equatorially
mounted in a canvas observatory with revolving dome.
Eye-piece diagonal, with one greenish neutral glass, and power 9G.
Sidereal chronometer by Erodsham, repeatedly compared with sidereal clock; times
reduced to Sydney mean time. Eor convenience of observation and for the purpose of
verifying apparent irregularities in the shape of Venus the diagonal eye-piece was used in
different directions during the transit. At commencement of ingress it was pointed north,
after ingress it was used for the most part pointing west, this being the position in which it
was screwed home.
The time observations at the internal contacts are very unsatisfactory. At ingress a
gust of wind causing the telescope to vibrate fully half the diameter of Venus prevented a
clear view of the phenomena, and the exhaustion caused by heavy night work in giving assist-
ance with the adjustments of the photoheliograph, brought about a certain amount of
nervousness in the observer at the critical moments, which was not lessened by the totally
unexpected nature of the phenomena that occurred.
At egress the time observations were better, but the imperfect observation of ingress
did not give the observer a clear idea of the phenomena he might expect at egress, and ho
was somewhat flurried by their gradual succession and the consequent impossibility of
determining the precise moments of their occurrence.
Indentation of planet first seen on disc of sun, but unfortunately no attempt was
made at the time to estimate the length of the notch. Time, llh. 55m. 14'965.
There was a good deal of boiling on the limb of the sun, but not quite so much on
Venus.
The planet appeared slightly flattened on that portion of the limb nearest the sun’s
centre, and with a slight bulge near northern termination of limb. (Plate I, fig. 1.)
The eye-piece was now changed for one of power 195, with two dark glasses, but the
definition not proving so good the 96 was resumed, and the diagonal pointed west, — i.e., the
observer sat facing west.
Estimated time of half-ingress, 12h. 7m. 0 00s. Previous to this a slight halo 3" or
4'' within the disc of the planet was seen extending about GO 0 in each side from the limb of
the sun, and resembling a gradually fading line of dots about 2" wide. (Plate I, fig. 2.)
There was no similar appearance on the limb of the sun, and the phenomenon remained
constant, although the position of observer’s head and the direction of the diagonal were
repeatedly changed. The definition at this time was very good, the boiling practically nil, and
the sun’s limb wonderfully sharp, with the very slightest glare, which was evidently merely
ocular.


The following limb of Venus distinctly defined by a faint lino of light, which was 1
rather brighter on northern side. (Plato I.) (Fig. 3at 12h. 15m. 30 00s.*) This line of light
very distinct. Making Venus a complete circle.
Definition good, very little boiling.
King of light increasing in beauty, silvery; decidedly brighter on north side of middle '
sketch, perhaps i" in thickness. (Fig. 4, Plate 1,12 h. 19m. 305.)
Apparent internal contact estimated too soon, —12h. 23m. 27125.
Time of ingress taken, —12h. 23m. 47’075. i
Ingress certainly complete,—about 12h. 24m. Os.
The original note here is—“ the telescope was much shaken by wind at 12h. 23m. and
afterwards, and the ring of light around Venus cut through what would otherwise, I think,
have been a drop, lasting 40 seconds, if not a whole minute.” That this was a mistaken
impression, and the natural result of the motion of the telescope, the notes at egress will
clearly show. (Plate II.)
Definition magnificent at 12h. 30m. 30’45.; atmospheric ring on disc of planet, corre-
sponding to the halo noticed before (see fig. 2, plate I), but broader and gradually shading off
towards the centre, to be traced all round, giving Venus an appearance of relief like an oblate
spheroid, or rather a flattened dome standing away from the sun, the radius of the flattened
part being about half that of the planet. (Plate VII, fig. 1.)
The observer then entered the photoheliograph room to assist in taking the large
photographs, and had only an occasional hurried glance through the telescope till near the
time of egress.
Definition very good, 3h. 46m.
The note made at ingress shows that the observer was, by his imperfect view of that
phenomenon, fully prepared to see a drop of perhaps 2" in length divided by the ring of light
around the planet, but the appearances that did present themselves at egress were very
different, and to the observer certainly gradual, without the slightest suspicion of a sudden
change or break in the light between the limbs of the sun and planet; the sun’s light
diminished till nothing but the silvery ring of light around the planet was left, and this ring
was carried out on the sky by the slow motion of the planet.
About this time, 3h. 54m. 25'475. (sec plate IV), the light between the limbs of the
sun and the planet became so thin that in observer’s estimation all direct sunlight was cut
off and nothing but the ring of light around the planet remained; or in other words, the
narrowing of the line of sunlight between the sky and planet then seemed to cease.
At 3h. 54m. 37’505. the cusps of the sun’s limb were distinctly separated but connected
by the fine ring of light around the planet. This ring was rather whiter than the sunlight,
and the cusps at their extremities appeared very slightly thicker than the ring.
This thickening was only just perceptible, and might possibly have been caused by
fatigue of the eye, requiring relief by a slight change of focus, or even by an unconscious
mental influence, leading the observer to see what he was expecting and wishing to sec.
(Plate V.)
At 3h. 54m. 48 , 415. the circles of the sun and planet tangential, and the ring of light
about its own thickness outside the limb of the sun. (Plate VI.). (See next page, halo
estimate as 1" in diameter.)
Bing of light.
Inequality in
ring.
Apparent
internal
contact.
Beal internal
contact.
Globular
appearance
of planet.
Egress.
Apparent
internal con-
tact at egress.
Internal con-
tact.
* The time on Fig. 3, Plato 1, is in error, it should be Oh. 15ui. 30s.
O


The ring now distinctly showing as an arch outside the sun’s limb, 3h. 55m. 3'375.
At 4h. 2m. 80s., Venus not quite circular, slight flattening on the eastern side of the
planet as shown in sketch, ring of light brighter near limb of sun at eastern side, or at N.N.E.
part of planet appearing as a sharply defined line without haze or irradiation, and less than
1" in thickness. (Plate VII, fig. 2.)
At 4h. 9m. Os., disc of Venus still continuous, undoubtedly a globe, and appearing
slightly reddish or copper-coloured like the moon in an eclipse ; the sky adjoining intensely
black, with the suspicion of a greenish tinge contrasting with the colour on the planet.
(Plato VII, fig. 3.)
Eepeatcd comparisons were made between planet and sky to verify this.
At 4h. 7m. 4437 5., probably estimated too early and a difficult observation to make, as a
temporary shift of wind brought tho heated air from the roof of tho photoheliograph building
across the sun, causing a sharp jagged boil.
At 4h. 17m. Os., Venus not quite circular, the curve of planet’s limb slightly flattened
on eastern side, with a slight bulge on western side. (Plate VII, fig. 4.)
At 4h. 24m. 3'405., last contact at egress. This observation appeared to be correct to a
small fraction of a second. The indentation on sun’s limb gradually contracted in width till
about 12h. 23m. 515., it then seemed to contract longitudinally till it became a small notch
like a boiling indentation. This was seen steadily diminishing till it suddenly flashed out and
the limb of the sun became perfect at 4h. 24m. 3'4os.
Definition very good, and boiling of sun’s edge scarcely perceptible.
Apparent in-
ternal contact
deeidedlypast.
Venus not cir-
cular.
King.
Planet eopper-
cofourcd.
Half egress.
Final contact.
L. ABINGTON VESSEY,
Licensed Surveyor, New South Wales.
Appendix to Mr. Ycssoy’s Eoport, with complete drawings of phenomena observed, trans-
’ mitted to the Government Astronomer, by L. A. Vcsscy, Licensed Surveyor.
The thirteen diagrams which accompany this Appendix have been drawn, the smaller ones on
a scale of 40' = 1 inch, and the larger 40'' = 3 inches, and the phases of the planet and points
of the compass have been laid down with all needful accuracy. The- drawings have been
executed after much consideration, and represent to the best of my ability the appearances
presented in the telescope; the smaller ones should bo viewed at a distance of 5 feet, the
larger at about 10 or 12 feet.
In my report I unconsciously adopted the phraseology I had become accustomed to
when using the artificial transit; the drawings will prevent any ambiguity that might arise
from this cause at the critical times of internal contacts, and will make the report more
precise throughout.
Through pressure of professional duties and the large call upon my leisure, made by
the necessary preparations, I did not read up accounts of past transits carefully, except as
referring to tho “ black drop,” but gave my entire attention to acquiring accuracy in taking
time and the estimation of tangential contact with the artificial transit. I did not expect
there would bo any physical appearances to record except at the critical moments, and I
determined then to make sure of my times in the first place, and neglect (if need be) anything
else that promised to interfere with that object.
I therefore went to the telescope perfectly free from mental bias, and with the
exception of the slight eccentricity shown in plate I, fig. 1, watched the planet creep, black
and uninteresting as the sky itself, upon the sun’s limb.
Scale of
diagrams.
Drop phrase-
ology.
Free from
bias.


At the time when my attention was specially drawn to the cusps of the planet in the
endeavour to estimate the time of half ingress I saw the halo. (Plato I, fig. 2.) The idea
of an atmosphere instantly presented itself, but was succeeded as quickly by the thought that
the halo was only an optical illusion, and I waited impatiently till the half ingress was past
and I had leisure to test this. I then revolved the eye-piece 90°, changed the position of my
head, and carefully compared the limbs of the planet with the adjoining limbs of the sun,
and was at length satisfied that the halo was a reality and not telescopic; the sun’s limb was
sharply defined with only a suspicion of a glare as indicated in the drawing, in no way
resembling the halo on tho planet. The phenomenon remained constant, and I watched it
steadily for some minutes, in fact to tho best of my recollection until I caught sight of the
ring of light shown in fig. 3. The beautiful pearly yet sparkling light of this ring would
alone have been sufficient to fix my attention, even if its increasing brilliancy had not made
plain that tho observation of tho expected black drop would be'rendcrcd very difficult when
complicated by tho presence of such a bright edge to tho planet. Figure 3, plate I shows the
northern segment of tho ring brighter than the rest; fig. 4, plate I the north part decidedly
brighter and corresponding exactly to the bright part in plate YII, fig. 2.
Tho halo was not looked for, and was not seen till tho time (plate I, diagram 3)
when it appeared under a somewhat different form and was continuous round the planet; at
egress it was not specially noticed. My note on (fig. 3, plate YII) “ globular” seems to
point to something of tho kind in addition to tho copper color, but not being certain of this I
have not shown it in tho drawing.
Plate II illustrates tho phase of ingress which I endeavoured to catch as the “ apparent”
or tangential contact of tho limbs of planet and sun (in the drawing they slightly overlap to
give tho desired effect). For a minute succeeding this a most untimely gust of wind kept tho
telescope vibrating, and plate 111 is only given as a representation of what I thought I saw
during this time. There was much dimness and uncertainty about tho cusps, whether from
tho motion of the telescope or otherwise, and this cleared off and the telescope became steady
between tho time given against “ ingress certainly complete.” There was certainly no blunting
of the cusps of sunlight nor indication of the formation of a “ drop” up to Oh. 23m. 475., tho
time of plate 11.
At egress I watched the planet creep up to the sun’s edge; there was not the slightest
uncertainty or cloudiness between their limbs, and I waited patiently till I judged the sun’s
limb could not longer remain unbroken, remembering the thickness of tho ring at ingress,
before I noted the time of what I considered “ real ” contact under the black drop nomenclature
(plate IV.)
Twelve seconds later gave me the appearance shown in plate Y; this in the drawing is
probably exaggerated, and it is the only reliable indication of a drop that presented itself;
eleven seconds afterwards I judged the tangential or true internal contact took place (plate VI).
The breadth of tho ring of light is here an important consideration; during the transit
I did not attempt to estimate it, but afterwards set it down as never much exceeding the rJ-uth :
part of tho planet’s diameter, or as 1" in thickness at the greatest. That this was an over-
estimate will appear from tho drawings and from tho times recorded at egress. Even on the
comparatively dull white of the paper a breadth of J" gives the full effect required, and tho
interval in time of 23 seconds between plates IV and VI corresponding to a motion of f in the
planet is a strong confirmation of the breadth given in the drawings, especially when from the
nature of tho phenomena the first time would probably be taken a trifle early and the second
a little late, or when the planet was really slightly overlapping the sun’s edge (in the drawing
it overlaps considerably to give the desired effect).
Thus plate VI is equivalent to the estimation of the thickness of a line wide with
magnifying power 9G. The exact measurement is of course impossible, but that some fair •
approximation may be made will be evident if it is considered that a lino T Joth inch thick
viewed at a distance of 30 inches subtends tho required angle of under such magnifying
power, and a bend in the lino corresponding to “ the ring of light about its own thickness
outside limb of sun” would bo easily seen, especially to an eye practised almost daily in the
reading of verniers.
Plato VII, fig. 2, shows tho ring of light with a bright part on tho N.N.E. side corre-
sponding to plate I, fig. 3, also a decided irregularity in the shape of the planet which fig. 4,
plate VII, shows to have remained unchanged for a quarter of an hour; tho bulge on the
south-west side does not seem to agree exactly with that shown in fig. 1 plate I, but there is
sufficient approximation to make me await with interest the reports of other observers.
Halo on
planet.
Halo on limb
of planet.
Polar pait of
ring.
Apparent
contact.
Egress. No
unsteadiness.
Diagram.
Internal
coutact.
Breadth of
halo.
Measure of


Fig. 3 plate VII is an attempt to show the contrast o£ colour between the disc of the
planet and the sky ; this colouring claimed my attention for the time, and the planet is shown as
circular and tho ring as uniform in brightness, simply because I have no special note about
cither; and my attention being otherwise engaged, recollection will not servo me further than
that the ring was there and was continuous, helping me in contrasting the planet with the sky
L. A. VESSEY.
APPENDIX No. 2.
MR. HIRST'S REPORT.
Temporary Observatory, Woodford, 9 December, 1874.
I n.vvß to report on matters especially under my charge and connected with the transit of
Venus which has taken place to-day.
The instrument with which I was particularly concerned was a photoheliograph by
Dalmeyer, similar to those supplied by him to all the English parties, and provided with a
Jansen’s apparatus for obtaining a number of photographs during ingress and egress. Attached
to the tube of the heliograph was a finder, consisting of a single lens 1-1 in. aperture and about
4 feet focal length. This was originally arranged by the maker so as to throw the sun’s
imago on to a piece of parchment? fixed at its focus ; but in order to adapt it to circumstances
which required that one end of the photohcliograph should be in the photographer’s dark
room, the lens was inserted in the end of a brass tube, and an eye-piece provided in the shape
of a Iluyghenian combination, giving a power of about 50 diameters. The chromatic and
spherical aberration of the single lens was in part compensated by its extreme focal length
so that fair definition could bo obtained of the edge of the sun and the existence of even
minute solar spots made plainly visible.
To diminish the light in the finder I used a thick piece of orange-coloured glass, which
gave an agreeable colour to the sun ; this was placed outside the eye-lens of the eye-piece.
As the time for first external contact drew near, I attentively watched the portion of
the sun’s limb where I expected Venus to appear, and within 20 seconds after first contact
was reported by an observer at the 4f-in. equatorial, I picked up the planet in the finder.
I then commenced taking as many of the circular Jansen plates as possible, referring
to the finder between each plate to satisfy myself that the heliograph had not shifted. Venus
continued to encroach upon the solar disc, preserving at the same time a regular circular
form ; definition at this time excellent.
I had prepared and placed a plate in the Jansen eye-piece, when, on taking my usual
glance at the finder, I observed the disc of Venus appearing, as it wore, rather more than one-
third her own diameter within the sun, and connected with the limb by a narrow line intensely
black with an ill-defined edge (see plate XIV), which represents the appearance as faithfully
as I can recollect; this was about five seconds before Xo. 5 Jansen plate was begun. I had not
time for more than a glance, for I wished to procure a photograph of what I supposed to be
the black drop so universally observed by astronomers more than a century ago at the last
transit. On getting the plate through, however, it showed nothing of what I had so distinctly
observed a few seconds before. (See plate XIV.)


Deferring to the finder, Venus appeared -well inside the sun, but apparently nearer the
limb than she seemed before the drop was gone. I thought at the time that it might have
broken before the exposure of the plate, and I determined to keep a sharp look-out for its
formation at egress. Soon afterwards Mr. Vossey came in, and reported that the 4f-in. had
shown no drop at all.
Towards egress I referred constantly to the finder, that I might be ready with a plate
directly the drop became visible. When Jansen plate No. 9 was in its place, and upon adjusting
with the finder, I observed no black drop, the planet appearing so far within the sun’s disc
that I did not think it necessary to hurry in order to catch the drop, and exposed the No. 9
plate, meaning to get another in in time. After taking out the plate, which probably occupied
20 seconds, I went to the finder, and, to my astonishment, saw that the drop had formed,
appearing about as long as one-third the diameter of the planet. I hurried on the next plate
as much as possible, but a delay unfortunately of a couple of minutes occurred before it was
ready; on development it showed Venus as a perfectly circular disc touching the sun’s limb.
I regret exceedingly that my eye w r as not at the finder during the precise moment of
the formation of the drop, but my duties at the Jansen eye-piece prevented me from staying
there more than a few seconds at a time.
Deferring to what I saw through the finder, I am convinced that my observations, short
though they wore, have not deceived me. I was thoroughly prepared and on the look-out for
the phenomenon at egress, and I have not the slightest doubt that any one using similar optical
means would have seen what I did.
I have forgotten to mention that Mr. Vessey at the 4}-in. reported no drop at egress.
Egress.
Black drop.
Sure of
phenomena.
GEO. D. HIRST.
P.S. —About mid-transit during a pause in taking photographs, I examined Venus with
Mr. Fairfax’s 4f equatorial. The planet appeared intensely black, and perfectly circular, but
it was surrounded by a narrow fringe of dull rod light. I was only able to watch it for a
minute, when other duties demanded my attention. I used a neutral tint glass, so that the
red colour cannot be attributed to it. (See plate XV.)
(Vote by H.C.E.). —The exposure of plate No. 9 was begun at 3h. 51m. 12'425. and
was finished at 3h. 52m. 3T395. At 3h. 53m. 3s. Mr. Hirst looked in the finder and saw the
black drop. Mr. A r csscy saw the actual contact of limbs at 3h. 54m. 48'415. or Im. 45'415.
after Mr. Hirst saw the black drop. So that the inferior telescope produced the black drop
certainly Im. 45'415. and perhaps more before actual contact took place.
Halo on
Venus.
APPENDIX No. 3.
MR. DUFAUR'S REPORT.
Temporary Observatory, Woodford, Wednesday, 9 December, 1874.
Instrument used, Cooke telescope, equatorially mounted, but without rack adjustment for
focus or screw motion, aperture 3 inches, power G 5. Previously to commencement of transit,
the only two coloured glasses having been fractured by heat of sun’s rays, the field lens tvas
Instrument.


smoked, and almost immediately succumbed to the same influence, being starred in all
directions. Under these circumstances, added to the difficulty of adjustment to focus, and in
retaining the sun’s limb in the small portion of the field of view remaining available, all hope
of satisfactory time observations were destroyed. The last contact at ingress and first at
egress were observed. At ingress the whole body of the planet was discernible when only
about two-thirds of it had entered on the sun’s disc. I estimated an interval of about 4
seconds from the time when I judged the planet to be wholly on the sun’s disc and the time
■ when the first light was apparent between their edges ; though there was but little boiling of
the sun’s limb, this first appearance of light was by no means instantaneous, no black drop was
formed, and under the circumstances in which I was placed, little (if any) distortion of the
planet’s following limb was observable. A gust of wind which came up at that time, together
with the noise caused by the blower attached to the adjacent dark house, rendered my
chronometer, which could not bo placed within the range of my vision, inaudible for a con-
siderable space of time, and I could place no reliance on my estimate of the time of completed
ingress.
During the time that the.planet was passing over the sun’s disc, between that of com-
pleted ingress and of the first contact at egress, I had full opportunities of watching its pro-
gress through the 4|-iuch telescope ; the definition was very perfect at times, and I constantly
focused the glass by the groups of sun-spots (of which I could detect about twenty-four) and
not by the planet’s disc. Thus focused, that disc appeared to mo perfectly defined, at times when
scarcely any boiling was observable, and was as sharp as it would be possible to illustrate it
on paper; I could detect no inequalities in its edges—it appeared to me perfectly black.
Ecturniug to the small telescope to watch the egress I found the lens still further
starred, so as to render it extremely difficult to follow the planet at all satisfactorily, but I
again estimated a lapse of about 40 seconds between first real and apparent contact. I again
failed to observe any black drop, but the vanishing of the thread of light previous to apparent
contact, so far from being instantaneous, was so gradual and ill-defined, owing to the state of
my instrument and my inability to adjust the focus satisfactorily without rackwork, as my
eye became weary and required such readjustment, that I am afraid I must again consider the
time taken, Sydney mean time, 3h. 55m. 25.505., to be of little value as an observation.
ECCLESTON DUFAUR.
Observations of Weather previous to and during Transit of Venus.
Temporary Observatory, Woodford, Blue Mountains, N.S.W.
Wednesday, 9th December, 1874.
10.30 a.m.—Sky perfectly cloudless. Light westerly wind.
11.30 a.m. —Light clouds forming.
O.GJ- p.m. —Passing clouds crossing sun’s disc.
0.7 „ —Sun’s disc obscured for about 30 seconds.
0.9 „ —Thin clouds passing sun’s disc.
1.0 „ —Passing clouds. Sun obscured for about 5 minutes-
Wind N.W. Almost calm at intervals.
1.7 „ —Large cloud passing over sun.
1.10 „ —Clear. Thunderclouds rising in the west


Barometer and Temperature.
Hour.
Barometer.
Temp.
Hour.
Barometer.
Temp.
C n.m.
27-88
79-0
1 p.m.
27-85
90-0
7
27-88
81-2
2
27-83
90-0
8 „
27-88
83-2
3 „
27-80
91-0
9 ..
27-89
850
4
27-78
. 91-0
, io „
27-88
86 2
5 „
27-77
88-8
H
27-88
87-5
G „
27-77
860
12
2787
88-8
Mean Time.
Temperature.
Eomarks.
li. m.
0
8 0 a.m.
80
9 0
88
9 30
92
10 0
92
10 30
91
11 0
92'5
Wet blankets applied to outside of observatory.
11 30
92
12 0 noon
£ No observa-
( tion taken.
1 0
92
1 30
93
2 0
93
- Wet blankets and ventilator used almost continuously.
2 30
94
3 0
94-2
3 30
91-3
4 0
94
4 30
93'8
5 0
95
5 30
959.
1'23 p.m. —Passing clouds.
1’25 „ —Sun’s disc obscured for 10 minutes.
Wind westerly—force about 3 with puffs.
2TG „ —Clear. Thunderclouds to westward.
2’3G „ —Passing clouds.
,2'40 „ —No material obscuration during the remainder of the transit—at its close a
bank of clouds rising to south of west to within about 5° of the sun’s position.
While tho sun was unobscured the planet’s disc was clearly visible through a simple
smoked glass, up to the time when the egress was fully half completed. ,
Appended-arc hourly barometric and thermometric observations taken at Mr. .Fairfax’s
house, W oodford.
EGGLESTON DUFAUR.
Woodford, 9 December, 1871.
APPENDIX No. 4.
TEiiPEEATUEE in Clock Eoom at the Woodford Observatory, during tho observation of the
Transit of Venus, 1874.


APPENDIX No. 5.
Eesults of Observations for Longitude of Woodford;—
Difference
in. s.
December 21, 1874 ... y 2 Ceti 2 54'79
a Ceti 2 54-79
S Arietis 2 54-41
B.A.C. 1125 2 54-65
8.A.C.1201 2 54 69
-y 1 Eridani ... ... ... 2 54 - 79
o 1 Eridani 2 54'5S
« Tauri 2 54'52
aTauri ... ... ... 2 54"50
i Auriga) ... ... ... 254 41
Adopted longitude of Woodford west of Sydney... 2 5161
h. m. s.
Longitude of Sydney ... 10 4 50’81
0 2 54 61
Adopted mean longitude ... 10 1 56'20 of Woodford.
Eesults of Observations for Latitude of Woodford :
Of ff
December 27,1874 ... B.A.C. 1150 33 43 58'8
„ „ „ ... „ 2066 33 43 55 9
„ 28, „ ... „ 1433 33 43 62 6
„ „ „ ... „ 2066 33 43 57'6
Adopted mean latitude of Woodford ... ... 33 43 58 7
The longitude was determined by the transits of stars over the Sydney and Woodford
transits, the times being recorded on the Sydney chronograph.
The latitude was determined by placing the transit instrument in the prime vertical.
APPENDIX No. 7.
MR. FAIRFAX'S REPORT.
Woodford, 10 December, 1874.
During the time when the disc of Venus was slowly creeping on to the sun, I had
the opportunity of using my own glass (4f-in. equatorial) for a few moments. Venus was at
the time about two-thirds on the sun and appeared to me perfectly black, and all that part
which was seen with the sun as a background seemed to be as sharply defined as possible
without any haziness, but with the part off the sun it was different; that was marked by a
most brilliant line, which was very narrow, and yet seemed to me like my drawing, plate XXIX,
which represents the general appearance, but I would not for one moment say that the
drawing is correct to scale ; in fact the halo was so narrow that I could not make a drawing
like it. Still I distinctly saw in that very narrow halo such forms and colours as I have
represented. It appeared as if Venus were surrounded with white and red flames mixed and
so close together that they formed a continuous ring which was probably less than - a V of tho
diameter of Venus across.
Halo.
Colours.
A. FAIRFAX.


CAPT. HIXSON’S REPORT.
Goulburn, 10 December, 1874.
The extraordinary power of tbe sun and its vertical position during tbe
period of ingress interfered materially with, my observations. The weather
was comparatively mild previous to the 7th of the month, but on that day
the maximum thermometer reached 102° in the shade, the wind being from
the westward and the atmosphere slightly disturbed by electric storms. A
small quantity of rain fell, but not sufficient to make any appreciable show
in the rain-gauge. On the following day, the Bth, the day previous to the
transit, the weather was of the same character, the maximum thermometer
registering 103° in the shade.
The 9th, the day of the transit, set in with the wind from the west-
ward, light in the morning, with occasionally drifting clouds; the wind
increased to a force of about 6 in the Beaufort tables by 2 p.m.; at this
time about half of the sky clouded, the clouds occasionally but not seriously
interfering with the observations. The thermometer at noon stood at
101°; at 1 p.m. it was 102°, and at 2 o’clock it was 104° and it remained
at this point up to 5 o’clock. The thermometer in the sun was not
regularly recorded, but at noon I am informed it was observed to be 180°.
The barometer was 27‘82 inches at noon, 27*79 inches at 2 p.m., and
27*73 inches at 5 p.m.
The heat was so great in the observatory for photographic work,
notwithstanding that Mr. Bussell had fitted a ventilating fan to it, that
both I and Professor Liversidge remained in the sun uncovered some
seconds after coming out without being conscious of the danger we were
incurring until our attention was called to the fact of our being bare-
headed by a person in attendance.
I used a 6-inch equatorial telescope with a magnifying power of
130 diameters. A shaded glass had been broken by the power of the sun
the day previous, and therefore I was careful to focus the instrument in
such a manner as to expose my shades to a gradual heat. Notwithstanding
this care but a short time elapsed before the glass in front of the lens
became fractured and it had to be removed. This was replaced by a smoked ,
glass, but soon the smoke evaporated and the glass became so cracked as to
Power of sun.
Temperature.
Weather of
9tb.
Strong wind.
Clouds.
Temperature.
Barometer.
Groat beat.
Ventilator.
Instrument.
Glass broken.


be altogether useless. I next, with the assistance of Mr. Tornaghi, tried a
smoked glass' over the object-glass of the telescope, but now the coloured
shades in my movable eye-piece both gave Avay, so that I was reduced to
holding in my hand the shaded glasses which Captain Onslow permitted me
to take out of his sextant. These became so heated as to be difficult to
hold; this, coupled with the uncomfortable position I had to assume,
induced me to take Mr, Tornaghi’s suggestion and attach the camera to
the telescope, and watch the image on the ground glass. In this Avay I
first observed the planet on the sun’s disc at about 12h. 2m. 41-00 s. The
planet as I had the opportunity of observing it through the telescope
appeared to Avork its AA r ay on to the sun’s disc Avithout becoming disturbed
or to assume the shapes which avo had been led to expect. The edges of
each object Averc Avell defined, the planet appearing quite dark and globular.
Eirst internal contact Avas clearly noted to break by Mr. Tornaghi
observing the light of the cusps forcing its Avay from cither side bctAvecn
the planet and the sun at 12h. 25m. 50'275.
Photographic work Avas commenced after first internal contact had
taken place.
My observations of egress Averc taken by holding a shaded glass to
protect my eyes, all the coloured glasses of the telescope having become
fractured as before described; but this became an easy task noAV, as the
position of the sun Avas much more favourable for observations than it was
at ingress, and it had moreover lost much of its poAver.
At 3h. 46m. 4 - 38 s. the planet appeared a dark beautifully defined
globe, the sun’s edge being also sharply defined.
I judged that contact took place at 3h. 54m. 28'01s. Previous to
this there Avas a portion of light visible betAvcen the planet and the sun.
At 4h. 10m. 0 - 455. the planet appeared to be bisected by the edge
of the sun, both objects being clearly and sharply defined. The portion of
the planet off the sun Avas invisible to me.
Several clouds passed over at about this stage of the phenomenon.
At 4h. 23m. 34 , 245. I recorded last external contact, after which
the planet disappeared altogether. I observed a portion of the planet
illuminated, as I thought, at one time, but I do not consider my observations
in this respect of any value, as my shaded glasses were held in my hand and
occasionally spoiled the focus.


The day after the transit was not nearly so hot, and the day after
that the weather became quite temperate, and cold towards evening.
Appended will he found Reports from
Capt. A. Onslow,
Professor Livcrsidge,
Mr. A. Tornaghi.
The instrument at my command for determining the latitude and longitude of the station was
an altazimuth. Telescope If-in. aperture and focal length 19-in. vertical circle 15 inches
provided with two micrometer microscopes reading to 1".
As soon as this instrument was placed in the meridian the azimuth circle was clamped
/md the observations made as with a transit circle. For the determination of the difference of
longitude, selected stars were observed in transit over the meridian of Sydney. I then
observed them in transit over my instrument, and by means of a contact key sent the time of
transit over each of the seven wires to the chronograph in Sydney Observatory; the difference
between the transit at Sydney and Goulburn was thus measured by the standard clock, each
star afforded an independent determination of the difference in longitude, and it is satisfactory
to find such a small range in the differences, when the size of my instrument is considered.
I used the same stars together with a few others to determine the latitude, the observa-
tions being made in the same way as with a transit circle. The differences are not so small as
I should have liked to see them, but no doubt the extreme heat of the weather gave rise to the
difficulty experienced in bisecting them.
The observing tents were placed in the middle of the Market Square, Goulburn, and
the brick pier on which the transit instrument was placed was left standing when we loft.
The height of the observatory above mean sea level was 2,129 feet.
Results of Observations for Longitude of Goulburn: —
Difference,
m. s.
December 11th, 1874... 8 Arietis 6 032
r) Tauri G 025
No name ... ... ... 5 59’90
« Tauri ... ... ... 5 59‘98
a Tauri ... ... ... G 0'34
a Tri. Aust.... ... ... 6 OT3
i Auriga) ... ... ... G 0 - 27
c Loporis ... ... ... 6 004
/i Orionis ... ... ... G o'o2
G 0-14
h. m. s.
Sydney longitude 10 4 50 81
Difference of longitude ... 6 OT4
Adopted mean longitude ... 958 50'67
Altazimuth.
Longitude
and latitude.


Results op Observations por Latitude op Observatory.
December 11th, 1874... 0 Ceti 34 44 43’70
rj Piscium ... ... 34 45 4 - G0
a Eridani ... ... 34 44 41 - 50
a Arietis ... ... 34 45 24'30
C Ceti 34 45 9'Bo
S Arietis 34 45 52-90
77 Tauri 34 45 45'20
o 1 Eridani 34 45 21-10
e Tauri 34 45 3G'9O
a Tauri 34 45 o’2o
t Auriga* 31 44 38'50
e Lcporis 34 44 5G 80
/3 Orionis “ Eigel” ... 34 45 29 30
Adopted mean latitude ... ... 34 45 12'G8
FRANCIS HIXSON,
Capt., E.N.
CAPT. ONSLOW'S REPORT.
Ingress.
Telescope used 3f-in. equatorially mounted refractor.
The time of the planet’s first apparent contact not recorded, as the planet was not seen till it
was well on the disc of the sun.
At 12h. 10m. 14'245. half the sphere of the planet apparently on.
At 12h. 13m. 54'255. the planet somewhat resembled the letter D or the top of a thumb
projecting over the sun’s surface.
At 12h. IGm. 28’2Gs. a bright light was "seen at the left point of intersection of the
two circles (fig. 1, plate XVI.), and in a few seconds a similar light at the right point (fig. 2) ;
time 12h. 16m. 34 - 265.
At 12h. 19m. 29'285. an apparent circle formed by planet, 12h. 21m. 29'285. Venus
apparently just touching inner edge of sun.
At 12h. 23m. 29’285. the internal contact appeared complete, but at this moment the
objects got out of my. field of vision, and when again sighted 12h. 25m. 29 - 28 s. the planet was
well inside the sun’s limb.
JSgress.
Observed by Mr. Tornaghi, time recorded by me:—
At 3h. 53m. 47'785. the light between the internal edge of the sun and external edge of
the planet was a little dim though the circles were quite distinct.
3h. 51m. 25'795. time of contact.
3h. 58m. 44 - 80 s. about £ off.
4h. 3m. 14'825. the upper intersection to the right a little flattened.
Planet about half on 4h. Bm. 59 , 805.
about one fourth on 4 18 22'83
disappearance ... 4 23 27'84
i rtTrr
A. ONSLOW.


PROFESSOR LIVERSIDGE'S REPORT.
Goulburn, 9 December, 1874.
Temperature in shade, 104‘4.
The instrument used was a 31-inch equatorial telescope, and the power employed was
150 diameters. A red dark glass was screwed on over the eye-piece in the ordinary way ; the
neutral tint and blue dark glasses attached to a slide were found to be less convenient for use
although their lights were softer and less trying than the red.
The telescope was placed upon the brick pier built for the transit instrument; this
pier was about 2 feet square, and rose some 22 inches out of the ground; and the only
position which was permitted me during the ingress was a reclining one, with my feet
to the cast and my head to the west. I may mention that it was an uncomfortable and
unsteady one, and prevented mo from taking such full notes at the time as I had wished.
The first stages of the ingress were not observed, so I accordingly waited until I judged
the planet was half on before recording any observations; this took place at 12h. 7m
0'645.; the planet was apparently half on or bisected.
Ingress.
At 12h. 20m. 5T4s. I was inclined to think that there was “ apparent internal contact,’’
as seen in the artificial transit.
At 12h. 21m. 4T4s. I again judged that there was “ apparent internal contact,”
and considered that my estimation of it at 12h. 20m. 5T4s. was made too soon
At 12h. 22m. 5 - G4s. the circle of Venus appeared to bo complete, and apparently
just touching the sun’s limb, i.e. “internal contact” really took place.
At 12b. 25m. 38T5s. the disc of Venus was clear of the sun’s limb, and appeared
to be about I of the planet’s diameter within it.
During the interval between the times 12h. 22m. s'G4s. and 12h. 25m. 38T5s. a faint:
hazy grey filament like a streak of smoke was momentarily observed between the edge
of the planet and the sun; it was very obscure and ill-defined.
I unfortunately failed to note the exact time at which the cloudiness was present
between the two limbs, for while trying to get it more in focus and more sharply defined it
vanished. There did not appear to be any sudden break in it, but it faded away quite
No traces of the “ black drop” were seen, unless the above be considered such.
The absence of the black drop and the unexpected manner in which the planet made its
ingress, unaccompanied by the distortions and other peculiarities previously predicted, rather
upset my expectations, and tend to make my observations of this portion of the transit less
comprehensive and detailed than they might otherwise have been.
Egress.
At 3h. 39m. 40'315. the planet was about one-third its diameter from the sun’s f
upper left-hand limb; it then appeared spheroidal, and not as a disc merely; it appeared
illuminated on the inner side in the direction of the sun’s diameter, and this illumination
Instrument.
Bisected.
Internal
contact.
Complete
ingress.
Haziness.
Spheroidal.


shaded off on each side of the planet, but at the portion nearest to the sun’s limb it appeared
quite black and opaque (Plato XXII, figs. 1,2, 3).
This globular appearance was retained until the planet had passed off the sun’s limb
to the extent of about J of its diameter.
At 3h. 4Gm. 40 31s. I fancied I could see a slight haziness between the planet
and the solar limb. I do not attach any importance or value to this observation, as the
haziness was exceedingly ill-defined.
At 3h. 54m. 57 31s. contact between the two limbs took place.
At 4h. Om. 2'3ls. the planet was just beginning to pass off the sun’s limb, and
it looked somewhat as if it were pushing that portion of the sun’s limb before it, for the solar
limb appeared to be raised up into two processes, one on each side. (Figs. 5 and G, a and i.)
At the time I thought it might perhaps be due to an atmosphere surrounding Venus,
or to an optical illusion ; but since I have heard that other observers saw the illumined edge
of Venus beyond and outside of the sun, lam inclined to think it was that which I saw. I,
however, did not sec a segment of a circle beyond the sun, but merely two portions or cusps
brightly illuminated, but not as bright as the sun.
The cusps of the suu around Venus appeared brighter than the body of the sun.
At 4h. 3m. 10 - 31 s. Venus appeared to be nearly J off the sun’s limb. There was
just the slightest trace of distortion or tendency to the D form retained until the planet
was half off, but hardly perceptible.
' At 4h. 11m. 15'315. the planet was half off; at this stage and afterwards there was not
the slightest traces of distortion.
At 4h. 16m. 40315. three-quarters off.
At 4h. 23m. 3081 s. there only remained the slightest indentation to mark her
presence.
At this moment a cloud passed over the sun from left to right, and at 4h. 24m.
2'Bls. all traces of the plauct disappeared from the sun’s disc, i.e. final external contact at
egress took place.
ARCHD. LIVERSIDGE,
Professor of Geology,
Sydney University.
Goulburn, 10 December, 1880.
Me. Tornaghi reports as follows ; — I took the time when the line of light between Venus and
the sun’s limb at egress disappeared as the time of contact.
After this I saw the halo, and it was best when the planet was half off the sun. The
outside had a greenish colour with red in it, and appeared as if formed by flames issuing from
the planet all round, and densest at the planet. The halo round the part on the sun was
different, but quite distinct and unmistakable.
A. TORNAGHI.


REPORT BY THE REV. WM. SCOTT, M.A., ON THE TRANSIT OF VENUS
AS OBSERVED AT EDEN.
We left Sydney on Tuesday, November 24-tli, and arrived at Eden, Twofold ]
Bay, the next morning. Having landed our observatory, tents, and instru-
ments, together with a good supply of bricks and cement for building piers
for the instruments, my first care was to find a suitable spot for the
observatory. I was not long in selecting an open space known as the
Market-square, on a bill overlooking both bays. This site has the advantage
of being near the telegraph line, and commanding uninterrupted views of
the ranges at some miles distance to the south and west, the w r ocded sides
of which I saw would afford good reference marks for the adjustments of.
the transit instrument in the meridian and prime vertical. The day was
nearly over before we had carted all our baggage to the top of the very
steep hill which forms the principal street. A commencement however
w r as made of setting up the observatory, in which we were most effectively
assisted by Mr. Bussell, the Harbour Master, and his boat’s crew. On
Saturday everything was ready, with the exception of mounting the
equatorial telescope, which was delayed in order to allow the pier to
become quite dry. An approximate meridian had been determined by sun
observations with a theodolite.
Our instruments were—the 7y-inch equatorial telescope formerly
used in the Sydney Observatory (with good driving-clock), a portable 2-inch
transit instrument, a dj-inch equatorial telescope and a equatorial
telescope, the theodolite before mentioned, a clock and three chronometers.
The upper portion of the observatory was provided, besides the usual
shutter, with a frame fitting the opening, to which was attached a bag
of yellow calico, of somewhat conical form, having a hole in the smaller
end, through which the telescope and finder could pass. This bag being
secured round the middle of the telescope tube, excluded all but yellow'
light, so that the whole observatory answered the purpose of a dark room
for photographic work.
This arrangement, though very convenient, was liable to be
influenced by the wind, and so to interfere with the steady motion of
the telescope. All being ready, I waited anxiously for a clear night to
enable mo to make the necessary star observations for time and instru-
Eden.
Instruments.


mental adjustments; but so unusually cloudy was the weather that I could
get no satisfactory observations until Saturday, December 5. On the 7th
and Btli I exchanged longitude and clock signals with the Sydney
Observatory, hut on each occasion was prevented by clouds from getting
more than one transit observation.
On the 7th, being a clear day, we took two sets of photographs, to
satisfy ourselves that all Avas in good Avorking order, and found that by
reducing the aperture of the telescope to 3 inches the sun’s edge Avas more
sharply defined and the reference lines more clearly distinguished.
In our trial observations of the sun seA r eral of our dark glasses were
cracked by the heat; so finding that I could get no sufficient protection
even with the 3-inch diaphragm, I constructed one 2 inches in diameter,
which gave very satisfactory results.
In consequence of the continued cloudy weather my instrumental
adjustments Avere not so accurate as I wished. I Avas assisted one day in
adjusting the reference lines in the camera by a small Avell-defined solar
spot, Avhich appeared to traverse one of the lines Avith great accuracy. In
order to correct any remaining error in the position of the lines, I adopted
the plan recommended by Mr. Bussell of taking tAvo photographs of the
sun, at an interval of about a minute, on the same plate, and determined
to repeat the process at every half-hour during the transit. Now, in order
to make this double image of any service, it is necessary that the common
tangents to the two images should be exactly parallel to the direction of
the sun’s motion. Dor this purpose the telescope must remain perfectly at
rest, and therefore must not be touched during the interval.
This result appeared difficult to obtain, as the flashing shutter must
be made to cross the field a second time for the second image. The method
Avhich I contrived, though somewhat complex, appears to be perfectly
satisfactory.
The flashing shutter, as described by Mr. Bussell in his paper read
before the Boyal Society on September 3, 1873, is attached to the end of a
lever, which is draAvn down by an elastic band, when the other end is released
by pressing a spring. If the second image Avere obtained by raising the
shutter quickly by the hand at the end of the desired interval, the action
of so raising it would probably displace the telescope; or if the dome
shutter were closed, or a cap placed on the telescope, and the flashing


shutter restored to its former position and again released, there would he
the same risk and almost certainty of displacement. To overcome this
difficulty I arranged as follows : —Tor distinctness I call the end of the
lever to which the shutter is attached A, and the opposite end B. I attached
a piece of Avood to the camera so as to project over B. An elastic band
secured to the camera below, and enclosing B, AA r as tied by a string to this
projecting piece, so as to alloAV Bto move freely vvithin it. When a double
image is to he taken, the telescope is so adjusted, by the help of the finder,
that a little more than half of the sun shall appear in the photograph,
The driving-clock is then stopped and the photograph taken in the usual
Avay. The telescope remains at rest for a minute; meanwhile the hand
Avhich pulled doAvn the flashing shutter is cut Avith a sharp pair of scissors,
and at the end of the minute the string AAduch holds the hand at the end B
is cut; Bis thus draAvn doAvn and A flies up with the flashing shutter, so
that a second image is taken. As an elastic hand is cut each time, it is
necessary to haA r e as many hands round the camera at A, and as many loops
of string at the piece over B, as there are double images to ho taken.
On the morning of the 9th the Weather seemed promising. I
obtained clock signals from the Sydney Observatory, and by 11 o’clock avc
were all collected and anxiously Avaiting for the transit to commence.
Clouds Avere coming up and the Avind rising, and we had reason to antici-
pate a disappointment. At the time of ingress, however, the clouds had
not yet intervened. The exact instant of first contact it was impossible to
determine. Mr. Mac Donnell recorded llh. 5Gm. 295. Sydney mean time
as the moment at Avhich he became quite convinced that the transit had
commenced. I found my 2-inch aperture ans Aver admirably, not only from
the diminished light and heat, hut also from the great distinctness of the
outlines of the sun and planet. I soon became convinced that all wc had
heard and read respecting the apparent elongation of the planet’s disc, and
formation of what has been described as the “ drop,” was a delusion. Tor
some minutes before internal contact I could see clearly the Avhole of the
planet’s outline; in fact, it presented exactly such an appearance as might
have been expected from a planet possessing an atmosphere. Whilst the
direct light of a portion of the sun Avas shut out by the intervention of the
planet, a sufficient portion of that light reached the eye by refraction,
through that atmosphere, to render the Avhole outline visible. By means
of a double-wire position micrometer, I obtained a measurement of the
apparent diameter of Yenus; then, bringing one of the Avires into the
E
Weather.


position of a tangent to the sun’s limb, waited until the planet seemed to
touch the other wire. This occurred at Oh. 21m. 75., though Mr. Mac-
Donnell, who judged the same phenomenon hy the eye, unaided by a micro-
meter, placed it nearly two minutes earlier, or at Oh. 19m. 21s. This I
believe to he the most important determination, being the moment of com-
plete ingress; and I regret that the action of the wind on the telescope
rendered it impossible to keep the micrometer wire in its true position as a
tangent to the sun’s limb. Still, I consider the above result to he very
near the truth. I continued to watch the planet for more than three
minutes, and saw the partial obscuration of the sun’s limb hy the planet’s
atmosphere gradually diminishing until it disappeared altogether, when I
left the telescope at Oh. 21m. 18s. Mr, Mac Donnell’s estimate of the
same phenomenon was Oh. 25m. 11s. The discrepancy between Mr. Mac-
Donncll’s results and my own shows how impossible it is to fix the moment
of a phenomenon of the kind, when the motion is so slow and the change
from darkness to light so gradual. The slow rate of the planet’s motion
across the sun’s disc may he estimated hy considering that it occupied over
iour hours in describing so small an arc, not far exceeding one-half of the
sun’s diameter. The difficulty was still further increased hy the planet’s
path not being at right angles to the sun’s limb, hut inclined to it at an
angle of about 32 degrees.
As soon as we had concluded that ingress was complete, the 3-inch
diaphragm was substituted for the 2-inch, and we proceeded to take photo-
graphs, but in doing so we were very much impeded, and the quality of the
pictures affected by the clouds which were continually driving over the
sun’s face: indeed there were very few minutes during which the sun was
not more or less obscured. Again, the action of the wind on the yellow
hag was so great that the driving-clock became almost useless, and I was
obliged to hold the telescope as best I could, with my eye at the finder,
whilst the plates were inserted and the flashing shutter released. We
made two attempts at a double image, hut of course the results were quite
unreliable. On the whole we took about fifty photographs, very few of
which I fear are of any value. At one time we had to stop for twenty,
and at another time for eighty minutes, the sun being entirely obscured.
On the whole the expedition to Eden has not been so successful as I
wished it to he, and I came away under the impression that Eden, though
a beautiful spot, and in many respects a most desirable place to inhabit, is
about the Avorst place for astronomical observations that I ever visited.


The longitude of the Eden observatory, as determined by transits
of two stars over the meridians of Eden and Sydney, the times being
recorded on the Sydney chronograph. The weather continued so cloudy
and unfavourable during'my necessarily limited stay at Eden, that I could
not obtain transits of more stars, and am reluctantly compelled to base the
longitude upon the following differences of longitude :
h. m. s.
0 5 11‘01 west of Sydney.
0 5 11T3
Mean 0 5 11-07
Longitude of Sydney ... ... 10 1 50‘Sl
Longitude of Eden observatory 9 59 39’74
The latitude depends upon observations made with the transit
instrument in the prime vertical, and the mean result is 37° 3' 17" south.
Latitude and
longitude.
W. SCOTT.
Note. —Mr. Scott returned to Sydney overland, and during the long and troublesome
journey ho unfortunately lost all the pajters connected with the determination of the position
of the Eden observatory. I am therefore unable to give the separate observations for
latitude.
H. C. RUSSELL.
MR. MACDONNELL'S REPORT.
Eden, Twofold Bay, Id December, 1874.
11. C. Eusscll, Esq., F.E.A.S., &c.,
Government Astronomer for New South Wales, —
Sir,
I have the honor herewith to forward my report of observations of the transit of
Venus, as seen by me at Eden, Twofold Bay, N.S.W., on the 9th December, 1874.
The telescope entrusted to my charge was an achromatic cquatorially mounted by Cook
& Sons, of York, clear aperture inches, focal length GO inches. The eye-piece used gave a
power of 98 diameters (marked 100 by the makers), and the sun’s light and heat were modified
by a diagonal reflector of unsilvorcd glass, thus enabling the full aperture to be effective, and
a very light bluish screen was all that was necessary for the protection of the eve.
Instrument.


In the early morning the weather was fine, giving our party promise of successful
observations, but later in the day the sky clouded over. Towards noon it cleared up again
overhead, and the observers took up their posts. I used a chronometer, No. 419, maker,
Hornby, of Liverpool.
A little after llh. 57m. Mr. Scott called out that he saw Yenus entering on the sun
I did not perceive it till about 11b. 57m. 80s.,.when the planet was fairly encroaching on the
sun, appearing like a small notch cut out of that body.
The planet continued slowly to advance, and 12h. 4m. 59'Ss. was noted by me as the
time of apparent bisection ; a shadowy nebulous ring seemed to envelop Yenus on tho pre-
ceding side; it was of lighter tint than the planet, but was decidedly perceptible, and appeared
to be about a quarter or a fifth of Venus’s diameter in width.
"When the ingress was about two-thirds completed the whole outline of tho planet was
distinctly visible in the telescope, the shadowy envelope surrounding it very plainly. (See
plate XVIII.) Perhaps it was the solar atmosphere that served as a background to throw
the planet out into relief; whatever w r as the cause, however, the phenomenon was easily seen.
Apparent internal contact was noted at 12h. 19m. 24’25., and all attention was now
devoted to the formation and breaking of the “ black drop.” As Venus proceeded, the
shadowy envelope disappeared except between the planet and sun’s limb, where it seemed to
fill up the space between them with faint rings concentric with the planet’s edge. There was
no distinct rupture of this appearance, the light seeming to go in and out several times, and
prevented any accurate determination of the completed ingress. I marked 12h. 25m. 14'7s. as
the time, but feel now convinced that it took place at least 15s. earlier. Mr. Scott’s deter-
mination was 245. earlier than mine, but he thinks he was a little too soon, as the whole
phenomenon was too indistinct to be noted accurately. There w r as no abrupt breaking of tho
“ ligament,” if it can be so called, but a gradual dissolving away.
Ingress being now completed, the camera was fixed on the largo equatorial, and some
fifty photographs of the transit taken. Clouds thick and heavy covered the sun, completely
putting an end to our operations. "We had some momentary glimpses of the transit through
tho telescopes, and I noted the complete disappearance of the envelope already referred to
tho outline of the planet was very sharp and distinct, like a hole bored through the sun.
A heavy black cloud once more impeded our view, and egress was not observed at all
much to our disappointment.
Tho times of the various phenomena noted above arc as near as I could judge them
but I cannot place much reliance on them, as there was so much difficulty in their deter
mination.
I have, &c.,
W. J. MACDONNELL.


MR. WATKINS' REPORT.
Eden, Twofold Bay, 10 December, 1874.
To H. C. Eussell, Esq., Observatory, Sydney,—
Dear Sir,
As a member of the expedition sent to Eden, Twofold Bay, to observe the transit
of Yenus of 1874, I have the honor to send you my report.
I regret that I missed observing the respective times of the external and internal
contacts on the ingress of the planet. Observations of the egress were prevented by dense
clouds entirely obscuring the face of the sun; I can therefore only report of my observa-
tions of the phenomena accompanying and immediately following the ingress.
The instrument used by mo was an achromatic refracting telescope, of 3| inches
aperture, stopped down to If in. The eye-piece was direct, inverting, magnifying about
120 times, and fitted with a dark glass.
I first saw the planet some half minute after the external contact was observed by the
llev. Mr. Scott and Mr. Mac Donnell. The edge of the disc formed by the planet appeared to
mo clear and sharp. I did not see any halo ; but as I did not observe the planet with the
intention of noting phenomena other than the times of contact, a faint halo might well have
been observed by others without being noticed by me.
As the internal contact drew near the planet seemed to cling to the edge of the sun
and so adopt a slightly, but very slightly, elongated or oval form. (Plate XII.)
Just before the time when, from the observations of Messrs. Scott and Mac Donnell,
the internal contact took place, I observed very thin lines of light flash in a direction parallel
to the edge of the sun, in the dark broad neck joining the planet with the edge of the sun.
The remarks I have before made with respect to a halo must in part be applied to what I saw
of the lines of light. I can only say that I observed the lines of light, and cannot be positive
one way or another as to the direction in which the flashes appeared to move, or whether
or not they appeared instantaneously and vanished in like manner.
The actual moment of contact I did not see, but very shortly after the time when Mr.
Mac Donnell said that contact was made I saw the planet well within the disc of the sun.
As I have before mentioned, no observations were taken of the egress.
I am, &c.,
Instrument.
Contact.
Halo.
Elongated
contact.
JOHN L. WATKINS.


GENERAL REPORTS.
DR. WRIGHT'S REPORT.
The morning of the 9th of December, 1874, at daylight, was calm. a heavy mist obscured
distant objects, and for some time after sunrise was so dense that the sun could bo gazed at
with the naked eye. About 8 a.m. the sky began to clear, and it became evident that the day
would be fine and intensely hot. It was my intention to take the time of the internal
contacts at ingress and egress only, and during the rest of the transit to observe any
phenomenon that might present itself. To assist me in this, Mr. Eussell rated my chronometer
at 11 - 30 a.m. by the siderial clock of the Observatory, and this was again done when the
transit was over. The telescope used was an B|-inch Browning, with silvered glass reflector
of GB-J- inches solar foens, provided with one of Browning’s solar eye-pieces (having two
prisms arranged for single reflections). To this was attached a positive eye-piece by Boss
which gave a magnifying power of 175 diameters. The only shade required to protect the eye
with the solar eye-piece was a light smoke-coloured glass. This was free from heat when
exposed to the full aperture of the telescope. Dor observing the contact at ingress and
egress the aperture of the telescope was reduced by a stop to 5j inches. In some other
observations the full aperture was used. At llh. 55m. 225. the first contact of Venus and
the sun’s limb took place, 3 minutes and 4 seconds later than the time given in the Nautical
Almanac. Definition of both sun and planet was perfect, and the margin of each was
entirely free from colour. When Venus had made a perceptible notch on the sun’s edge I
looked particularly for the outline of the body of the planet, but it w r as undistinguishablc
from the black background of the sky. When Venus was nearly half on the sun, I noticed a
slight form around that portion of the planet yet off the sun’s disc. This brightened every
moment, so that in a very few minutes it presented a bright line of light around the planet’s
edge, throwing it out in bold relief against the sky and giving Venus a stereoscopic appearauce.
The planet now looked to me like a black ball suspended in the sky, that portion of the disc
which was on the sun being intensely black, whilst the remainder of the disc off the sun and
near the halo appeared decidedly lighter. The portion close to the halo was shaded with
reddish-brown colour. As Venus passed slowdy on to the sun’s disc, the bright halo which
at this time was about 1" in diameter became very bright, and was observed until Venus was
fairly on the sun.
Warned by a statement madejby the French astronomers that very possibly the “black
drop” might bo absent,'my attention was wholly taken up by watching the phenomena at
internal contact. The margin of Venus’ [disc continued sharply and beautifully defined as it
passed on to the sun. A slight shimmering of the solar edge might bo observed at the
moment when the two outlines as it were of the sun and planet touched, and also some slight
shading of the planet’s edge (something like a penumbra), but it was clear to me that there
was no “ black drop,” nor any such elongation or distortion of the black edge of Venus that
could be taken for it. I was so intent upon observing this that I allowed some seconds to
elapse before I recorded an observation of the internal contact at 12h. 24m. 305.; this ITiavo
no doubt was half a minute after actual contact, and that it was so is proved by Mr. Eussell’s
observation at 12h. 23m. 595.


Tho planet was now fairly on the sun, the halo had entirely disappeared, although
carefully looked for with the full aperture of 8J inches, nor could any irregularity of the
edge of tho planet he detected. For an hour Venus was constantly watched in her path
across the sun. Her neighbourhood was closely scanned to find if possible any small speck
which might denote tho existence of a satellite, but with negative results. No fresh phono,
menon was seen. Urgent professional duties called me away for nearly an hour and a half,
but I was able at a quarter before 3 o’clock to renew my observations. Meantime tho heat of
tho day had increased to 87° F. in the shade, and the black bulb thermometer in vacuo showed
124'5 F. in tho sun. Tho breeze from the N.E. had freshened and was laden with moisture
which caused a slight haze in tho sky, and at times some unsteadiness in definition, which,
however, on the whole remained sharp and good.
The planet was approachiug the N. by W. edge of the solar disc, and when viewed with
a low power (40 diameters) appeared as a perfectly black spot on the sun; with the full
aperture and a high power (250 diameters) the outline of Venus was still free from any
appreciable irregularity.
Determined to take the most accurate observations possible of the internal contact at
egress, I carefully set my chronograph by tho chronometer, and w’as fortunately enabled to
( catch the precise moment of internal contact at egress, at 3h. 54m, 39'595., Sydney mean
time; the edge of tho planet coming at that instant sharply and distinctly in contact with the
sun’s limb, it was quite as clear as at ingress that there was no black drop. The accuracy of
this observation was corroborated by Mr. Russell at the Sydney Observatory, which is 2,800
feet north and 792 feet west from my house. His time for this contact w r as 3h. 54m. 89’GGs.
Ho was using the new 114 refractor of the Observatory, of 12 feet 6 inches focus, with the
aperture contracted by a stop to G inches, and an eye-piece magnifying on his telescope
100 diameters. Tho edge of tho planet which was in contact with the sun’s limb now was
observed to assume a square form, from blunting or rounding off of the solar cusps. This
lasted a very short time, perhaps half a minute. (Something of the same appearance was
observed at ingress before internal contact, but it was so slightly marked that it did not
excite any attention at tho moment.) When Venus had still further passed off the sun, I
noticed the reappearance of tho halo around the dark body of the planet again, throwing that
portion of her disc (as at ingress) into relief against the sky. This halo gradually became
brighter, and was not uniform as at ingress, but most distinguishable on the N.E. quadrant of
the planet; hero it presented a decided accumulation of light, especially about the centre of
the quadrant, and at this point encroached a little upon the dark outline. (See plate XXIII.) ■
The full aperture of tho telescope was used, and showed the colour of tho halo and the solar
light to bo the same, and gave the impression that tho increased light at the spot above
mentioned was due to reflection from polar snow. The same appearance of shadings of rusty
brown colour was observed at the margin of Venus’ disc as at ingress, and as she passed
onwards from off the sun the halo gradually faded until she ceased to be visible, after the
last contact at 4h. 24m. 275., forty-five seconds before the predicted time. Some very fine '
groups of spots were seen on the equatorial zone of the sun, but as they were far south of
the part of the transit no particular observation was taken of them.
Venus on the
sun.
Egress.
Contact.
Halo.
Polar spot.
Last contact.
H. G. A. WEIGHT, MD.m.R.C.S.E


MR. ALLERDING'S REPORT.
Dear Sir, Sydney, 1G December, 1874.
I have much pleasure in handing you my report of the transit of Venus as observed
by me.
The external contact at ingress I saw well defined at llh. 5Gm. Gs., but at the interna]
contact at ingress at 12h. 24m. 145., I saw first a haziness between the limbs (plate XIII,
fig. 3), and this turned into a cone (fig. 2), and when it had nearly disappeared it seemed to
stretch out to a fine thread (tig. 1), by which Venus seemed to be attached to the edge of the
sun—it seemed as long as fof the diameter of the planet —and then this line instantaneously
disappeared at 12h. 24m. 445., but Venus was then already well detached from the sun’s limb.
Had I not waited for the disappearance of the fine line I would have made the inner contact
at least 30s. sooner.
The internal and external contact at egress I cannot be very certain about, having had
so many interruptions by having to allow a great many friends to have a peep at the transit,
but I give the time as near as possible at internal contact, 3h. 54m. 355., and external contact
4h. 23m. 48s.
I am surprised that no one in the Observatory saw anything like a drop, and my telescope
defines well, for every one that saw Venus on the sun’s disk remarked its clear and sharp
definition. But I must draw your attention to my having put a cardboard cap over the object-
glass, with a 2-inch aperture, to get rid of the heat on the eye-piece. The glass I was using
has an aperture of 3f inches, but it was not well placed, as I was obliged to use it in my back
yard which is surrounded by buildings.
I remain, &c.,
F. ALLERDING.
P.S.—My house is situated in Hunter-street, 1,980 feet south and 1,452 east from your
Observatory. E.A.
MR. BOLDING'S REPORT.
Raymond Terrace (3 miles west of Newcastle),
10 December, 1880.
Don the purpose of observing the transit of Venus I provided myself with amarine chronometer,
which was carefully rated at Newcastle, by means of the time signals sent from the Sydney
Observatory to drop the time-ball; I hope therefore my time may bo relied upon.
My telescope was a very good 3-inch refractor, stopped to If inch, equatorially mounted.
To help in securing exact time I got the services of a friend, who noted the times and any
remarks descriptive of phenomena which I made.


At the commencement the sun’s edge was very unsteady and seemed to bo “ boiling,”
and I did not catch the moment of first contact; when I saw it there was a very perceptible
dent in the sufl’s limb ; five minutes afterwards the planet seemed to be half on the sun, then
appeared for an instant a tendency to a straightening of the curve, but at 12h. 13m. 40s. there
appeared a distinct shoulder on the north side (i.e. as seen inverted on the south, see fig. 1,
plate XXVIII). The rim was as dark as the planet itself, but unsteady, and better defined
towards the north than on the opposite point of the planet. This appendage seemed to shrink
up as the planet crept wholly on to the disc after these shoulders disappeared, and Venus came
on with great steadiness, but at the moment I expected the complete circle came the form
shown in fig. 3, which at the time I called a parachute, time 12h. 30m. 1215.; upon this came a
haziness which I have shown in the same figure, and at 12h. 23m. 43f s. I noted complete ingress.
Egress.
As the time of egress came on the definition was very good indeed, and the sunlight was
now sufficiently reduced, by the sun sinking to the west, to enable me to use the full aperture
of my telescope, and I saw the planet make internal contact at 4h. om. 3'ss. without any of the
peculiarities noted during the unsteady definition at ingress. At 4h. 7m., when examining the
points of contact or cusps, I saw a silvery lino of light extending partly round the west side
of the part of the planet off the sun (fig. 4) ; 30 seconds later I saw it all round that part of
Venus as in fig. 5, and I continued to see more or less of this beautiful silvery line until
4h. 11m., when I saw the last of it on the west side; it looked like a silver edging as if caused
-by refraction from an atmosphere.
The planet then passed off with nothing more remarkable than an occasional blunting
of the cusps from atmospheric disturbance, and at 4h. 20m. 7s. I noted last external contact. .
•
The following notes are explanatory of the diagrams:—Plato XXVIII, fig. 1, the
shoulder noted at 12h. 13m. Pig. 2, shoulders at 12h. 15m. The angles of these shoulders were
sharply defined as I have drawn them, but at 12h. 13m. 395. there was a quivering from shoulder
to shoulder, lasting about a second. I saw both shoulders for 2) minutes, and when the north
one in the inverted image disappeared, the other remained precisely as before for about the
same time and then disappeared. Pig. 3, the change from clear contact which I saw to this
figure was almost instantaneous, a momentary quivering was perceptible, and then this figure
■was clear and steady and remained so for 341 seconds, when the dullness next the planet disap-
peared and was replaced by a clear line of light; it was followed by a still clearer light on the
sun’s edge, then the black centre disappeared; the whole change scarcely occupying more than
one second of time, and at 12h. 23m. 43|s. the sun’s limb was clear. Pig. 4, from first contact
at egress the planet’s outline was seen distinctly for G minutes and then it disappeared, but a
minute later I saw it by the very delicate line shown in this figure. Pig. 5, the slender silvery
line, as seen 7|- m. after first contact at egress, lasted, more or less, untill 11m. after that time,
when only the first part seen remained, and a minute later this was lost.
Boiling.
Shoulder.
Shoulders
disappear.
Haziness.
Hood defini-
tion.
Halo.
Shoulders.
Quivering.
H. J. BOLDING,
Police Magistrate.


MESSRS. BELFIELD AND PARK'S REPORT.
Eversleigh, Armidale, 9 December, 1874.
The day was cloudless and free from haze, the air favourable for observation, and at the
commencement of the transit definition of the sun’s limb clear and sharp.
Instrument used, 4|-inch refractor, by Cooke, equatorially mounted, no driving-clock ;
full aperture used, power 130, with first surface reflecting solar eye-piece.
Chronometer showing Sydney mean time nearly and losing rate supposed to be Tss
daily.
Ingress.
External contact not seen.
At 12h. 14m. 455., when the planet appeared to be about t on the sun’s disc, the following
third of the planet was slightly elongated and its limb distinctly illuminated, giving the
appearance of a thin crescent and thus exhibiting the whole disc of the planet most clearly.
(Plates YIII and XIX.)
At 12h. 15m. 455., these appearances becoming more distinct, the air being very good
and limb of sun and whole outline of planet being remarkably well defined.
The elongation of following side of planet disappeared as internal contact approached.
Internal contact at 12h. 20m. 225., discs being tangential, no appearance of drop, shade
ligament, or other distortion.
At 12h. 20m. 305., light of sun visible all round the planet, limbs of both bodies stil
sharply defined and clear.
While Venus was advancing to about ■} of her own diameter upon the sun, a faint
tremulous shading was seen between the edge of the planet and the limb of the sun (both
bodies being very sharp in outline), which disappeared so gradually that it could uot be said to
have been obliterated at any particular instant. (Plates IX and XX.)
When fairly on the sun the body of the planet appeared intensely bluish black in centre,
becoming of a gorgeous deep blue towards the circumference, which remained well defined and
sharp. No appearance of satellite, spots, or nebulous outline. (Plate VIII.)
At 3 p.m., sun boiling, limb of sun and circumference of planet seething, latter losing
its blue colour and becoming blacker.
Egress.
When Venus approached the sun’s limb a shade similar to that observed at ingress was
caught, but not so plainly; it in no way interfered with the sharpness of outline of either body.
(Plates IX and XX.)
At 3h. 52m. 23scc. the shade no longer visible ; sun’s light still visible all round the
planet. At 3h. 53m. 125., internal contact, edges fairly defined, but not so clear as at ingress
No drop, ligament, or other distortion visible. At 3h. 5Gm., preceding limb of planet illumi-
nated on one-third of its arc.
Bisection of planet estimated at 4h. 7m. 225., external contact at 4h. 21m. 515., definition
uncertain, limb of sun running like a mill-race.
Three drawings (Plates X,XIX and XXI), showing northern limb of sun and illuminated
edges at ingress and egress.


Plates IX and XX show the tremulous shading just before it disappeared and also the
colour on the planet. In the telescope the blue was deep, pure, and utterly beyond practical
representation; the same remark applies to the other effects depending upon colour. The
tremulous shading is nearly accurate, but there was a quivering motion, like that of heated air
on a hot day, which cannot bo imitated.
Plate X shows the halo or illumination at egress:.
A. W. BELFIELD.
A. J. PARK.
MR. BELFIELD'S REPORT— ADDITIONAL NOTES.
My dear Sir, Evorsleigh, Armidale, 24 December, 1874.
I wish to thank you for your letter of the 15th inst., and have much pleasure in
replying to your questions and in forwarding coloured sketches which represent what I saw
as well as I can transfer my recollections to paper.
The illumination of the following limb of the planet at ingress seemed to bo equal in
breadth all round, and was bright enough to give an appearance of elongation to the part of
the planet not on the sun’s disc; it seemed to bo outside the limb, which was quite distinct
its breadth I see has been estimated at 1"—I should have thought it was nearer 2"—when
Venus was on the sun’s disc, but I have no experience in making measurements of the kind
I saw nothing like margin or shading round the part of the planet on the sun’s disc.
The blue colour on the planet was the deepest prussian blue, black in centre, lighted
towards the edge, but the lightest part was a very deep blue. It did not in the slightest degree
mar the clear definition of the planet’s disc or extend beyond it, and was not in the least like
the violet colour seen round Venus at her brighter phases when viewed against the evening
sky. The colour is fairly represented in Plates VIII and IX. There was no trace of colour
visible when looking at sun-spots with samp diagonal, eye-piece and shades.
The colour was very vivid during the earlier part of the transit, when the air was very
steady; during the latter part when the sun began to boil the jdanet to my oyo was a dead black
(Plate X) ; others with me said they saw the blue colour still, to me it was not obvious but
had to be looked for ; there was certainly a very great difference in colour during the earlier
and later parts of the transit. I did not notice the film of cloud you mention.
At egress the illumination was seen on only a part of the planet’s disc off the sun. At
the intersection of the limbs of Venus and the sun on the northern side of the planet (direct
image) it was broader than at any part during ingress, but thinned off to nothing rapidly, and
the rest of the planet’s outline was not distinguishable from the black background of the sky.
When Venus was about \ off the sun the illumination extended over about of the arc
of the planet outside the sun, but as the planet’s disc left the sun the extent of illumination
did not increase accordingly, but was confined to about the same extent of outline as when
first noticed. The air at egress was by no means good.
A. W. BELFIELD.
[Forty-one plates.)
Sydney; Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lB92.




Planet not circular slight bulge on S.W. part
of limb at 23h.57m.30sec Sydney mean time.
Ring of light around following limb
of planet at 0h.6m.30sec Sydney m.t.
Halo on disc of planet at
0h.7m.0sec Sydney m. t.
Ring of light at 0h.19m.30sec
Sydney m.t.
Transit of Venus 1874
Woodford N. S. W.
M r Yesseys Observations.




Ingress "Apparent” internal contact at 0h.23m.47sec.07 Sydney mean time.
Limbs of planet and sun tangential and ring of light separating planet's disc and sky
Transit of Vinos 1874
Woodford N. S. W.
M r VSsseys ObsorvcOwns




Ingress at about 0h.24m.0sec Sydney mean time.
Dusky ligament between planet and sky divided by the ring of light.
Transit of V&nws 1874
Woodford, N.S.W.
M r Vessey's Obserrcubxnvs




Egress Real internal contact at 3h.54m.25sec.47 Sydney mean time.
Sunlight cut off and light of ring only remaining between planet's disc and sky.
Transit of Venus 1874
Woodford/ Jf.S.W
]/T V&ssey's Oiservatwros




Egress at 3h.54m.37sec.5 Sydney mean time
Cusps of sunlight separate slightly thickened at extremities and connected by the
white light of the ring.
Transit of V&ruze. 1874
Woodford If. S. W
MW V&ss&ys Observations.




Egress_ "Apparent” internal'contact at 3h.54m.48sec.41 Sydney mean time.
Limbs of planet and sun tangential and ring of light slightly overlapping limb of sun
Transit of Venus 1874
Woodford. Jf S W
M r Vessel's Observations.




Globular appearance of planet at
0h.30m.30sec Sydney mean time.
Planet copper colored and globular
at 4h.9m.0sec Sydney m.t.
Irregular shape of planet and ring
of light at 4h.2m.30sec Sydney m.t.
Planet not Circular at 4h.17m.0sec
Sydney m.t.
Transit of Venue 1874
Woodford, J'i 5. W.
IW Yesszy's Obserrcuioros.




Ingress_showing elongation, illumination and colour
Transit of V&nas 1674
KS. W.
M r A. KBdfi&loLs Observations




Ingress showing color of planet and shade between the limbs.
Transit of Vsruss /874
¥.S. ¥.
M r A.H£&l/i£,Ld’<s Observations




Egress_showmg partial illumination
TrcurbsW of V&ruuus 1874
KS.W
M r A. HBM&lds Observations.




Flash of Light on outer edge of Planet at Egress.
Transit of Vernas 1874.
JvTE.G. Savages ObservaViorvs.




Planet elongated
Trcbrusuof Kznzus 18/4.
N. 3. W.
M r Wathms Observations.




Black Drop
TrcmsiO 0f1874
KSW
M 7 AUf-rdcng-s ObservcUwns




The Black drop at ingress and egress.
Copy of Photo from Janssen plate No.5 which was taken when the black drop was seen
(Magnified five diameters)




Venus seen with a narrow fringe of dull red light
Trcurosity oF l/knius 18/4.
M r G.D.Hirsti Observations.




Halo on Sun
TrcuasW of Venus 1874.
Capf Onslow's Observations.




TrcbJijsU of VeriAjus 1874.
M r H.A Lenehcuis Obs&rYcUwns.
Halo and Polar Spot




Halo around planet.
Transit of Venae 1874
Its w.
MbMacLonn&UJs Observations.




Shewing positions of illuminated edges.
Tranp-iP of V&rows- 1874
JkP A. J Parks Observations




Ingress shewing blue colour of planet and tremulous shading
Transob of Vemzs 1874
KS.W.
MOA.JJOzrfos OhserwztzoThS.




Egress- Shewing illumination of proceeding limb.
Dark smoky neutral shade used
Transit, of Venus 1874.
N.S.W
M r A. J.Park's Observations.




Transib of Venus 1874
Professor Lwersh&ges OlservaJCuons
S.T.LEICh SrC“LiTH, SYDNEY




Halo and Polar Spot seen at egress
TrajzsU/ of Ihvas 1874
Af.S.W.
Observatwns by EG. A. WrIgfo.MRCS.E7y.




before jumps
1
appearance during
one vibration
2
Transit of Vomas 1874
M r Hassell's Observations
after vibrations were over
3
Just before contact
4




Appearance after contact
3 h.55 m.0sec
Halo
3h.5 7m.7sec
Trcurusib of Vorvous 1Q74
Sydney N.S.W.
M r ßussell's Observatwrvs aoEgress
Halo and Polar spot
with haze on Planet
4h.12 m.0sec
Polar spot greater haze on
Plane t
Polar Spot last seen
4h.2 m.22sec




Enlarged sketch of Haziness Before contact at Ingress and after contact at Egress
Transit of Verows 1874
M 7O Russell's Ohs&rvaßon.s Sydney, NS. W.
S T LEIGH AC?LUH, SYDNEY.




Whole of Planet Visible
12h.5m
Trarosu > of V&nzus 1874
Sydney NS W
M r RAi*ssell 's ObservcuLuoris Irvgr&ss
Planet very distinct on sky
12h.1Om
Halo First seen
12h„6m
ST.LOCH A C?UTM, SYDNEY.




PLATE XXVIII
N
Inverted. Ingress.
Inverted, Ingress
M-Baldmgs Observations.
Ingress Inverted
Inverted, Ingress
Inverted Ingress




CXXIX
Transit of Veruis 1874.
Sydney, 2f. S. W.
\
JIT' A. Farr foal Ois&rvatwrs:




TrconsiJo of V&nyoos 1874.
Observations.




CXXXIII
SYDNEY OBSERVATORY.




CXXXV
LARGE EQUATORIAL, SYDNEY OBSERVATORY.
OBJECT CLASS 11? INCHES.




CXXXVII
PHOTOHELIOGRAPH,
WOODFORD.




CXXXIX
TRANSIT OF VENUS CAMP, WOODFORD, NEW SOUTH WALES.




CXLI
WAITING FOR THE TRANSIT, AT WOODFORD.




PLATE XXXVI.
WAITING FOR THE TRANSIT OF VENUS,
EDEN.




CXLV
7¼—INCH EQUATORIAL USED AT EDEN.




PLATE XXXVIII.
6—INCH EQUATORIAL USED AT GOULBURN.




CXLIX
Inch squares placed at a distance of 400 feet, and
Photographed with the Sydney Equatorial,
as a test of distortion.
Photo taken at Sydney.
Time, 3h. 13m. 13.52s., S.M.T.




PLATE XL.
Photo taken al Woodford.
Time, 1h. 55m. 56s.. S.M.T,
VE3STTJS I IST TEAESIT,
Photo taken at Eden.
Time, 1h 9m. 55.89s., S.M.T.


