

OBSERVATIONS
on the
HYDATID PARASITE
COMMONWEALTH
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
BULLETIN NO. 40
By
I. CLUNIES ROSS, D.V.Sc.
MELBOURNE. 1929
Registered by the Postmaster-General for transmission
through the post as a book. Wholly set up and
printed in Australia
By Authority: H. J. Green, Government Printer, Melbourne.
C. 12041.
(Echinococcus granulosus)
and
The Control of Hydatid Disease in Australia




PREFATORY NOTE.
This Bulletin contains material submitted by Dr. Clunies Boss in
supplication for the degree of D.Y.Sc. in the University of Sydney.
The main portion of the work was carried out by Dr. Ross prior to
his appointment as an officer of the Council, and the Council desires to
make it. clear that the credit for the investigation belongs principally
to the School of Veterinary Science of the University of Sydney, in
which the work was initiated, and owing to the hearty co-operation of
which its continuation has been made possible.


CONTENTS.
4 PAGE.
I. Introduction .. .... .. .. 5
TT. Observations on the Morphology and Bionomics of Echinococcus
Granulosus (Batsch 1786) Rudolphi 1805—
1. The Value of the Hooks and Eggs in the Specific Determination
of j Echinococcus granulosus .. .. .. .. 6
(i) The hooks .. .. .. . # 4 # 0
(ii) The eggs .. .. .. ~ _ _ g
2. The'Viability of the Egg .. .. .. . # 9
3. The Hatching of Cestode Eggs .. .. .. .. \2
4. The Viability of the Larval Stage (hydatid cyst) after Removal
from the Intermediate Host .. .. .. .. 14
5. Observations on the Development of the Adult Echinococcus .. 16
6. Tests of the Action of Certain Drugs on Hydatid Scolices in
Vitro and in Vivo—
(i) General .. .. .. .. .. .. jg
(ii) In vitro .. .. .. 19
(iii) In vivo .. .. .. .. . t # . 20
(iv) Discussion of results .. .. .. ~ 24
(v) Conclusions .. .. .. ~ _ t 25
111. The Incidence of Hydatid Disease in Australia—
1. Statistical Evidence of the Incidence in Man .. .. 25
2. The Incidence of the Larval Stage in Domestic Animals .. 28
3. The Incidence of the Adult Worm in the Dog and other
Carnivores—
(i) The dog .. .. .. .. .. 30
(ii) The dingo .. .. .. .. .. 32
(iii) The fox .. .. .. t , 32
(iv) The cat .. .. .. .. ~ 33
4. Factors Governing the Incidence of Hydatid Disease in Australia
in Relation to —
(a) Infestation of the Dog with the Adult Worm .. 33
(b) Infestation of Man with the Larval Stage .. .. 40
IV. Control of Hydatid Disease—
L Measures Applicable by Private Individuals—
(i) Destruction or treatment of raw offal .. .. 46
(ii) Personal cleanliness and hygiene .. .. . 48
(iii) Freeing dogs from infestation with the adult worm by
anthelmintic medication ; with tests of the efficiency
of arecoline hydro-bromide for this purpose .. 49
2. Other Measures—
(i) Educational measures and propaganda .. .. 54
(ii) Country slaughtering .. ~ ~ _ > 55
(iii) Amendment of meat inspection regulations at abattoirs 56
V. Summary .. .. .. ~ _
VI. Acknowledgments .. .. .. .. 59
VII. References .. .. .. _ t gQ


Observations on the Hydatid Parasite Echinococcus
granulosus (Batsch 1786) Rudolphi 1805
AND THE
Control of Hydatid Disease in Australia.
I. INTRODUCTION.
Over seventy years have elapsed since von Siebold (1853) first
determined the genetic relationship between the hydatid cyst and the
adult tapeworm, Echinococcus granulosus (Batsch 1786) Rudolphi
1805 in the dog and thus paved the way for the control of hydatid
disease of man and animals. It might well be thought, after the lapse
of so many years, and with the growth of what should be, in these
days of the wide dissemination of knowledge, an enlightened public
opinion, that the information so gained would long have been availed
of and that hydatid disease would be now no more than a memory of
the days before modern science made possible the control of such parasitic
diseases. In Australia, where we pride ourselves on the possession of
high general standards of intelligence, education and hygiene, the fact
that such a disease, spread as it is in practically every case through the
agency of the domestic dog, should still rank as a serious affection of
man, appears well-nigh inexplicable, more especially since the measures
necessary for its control are apparently so clearlv defined. That hydatid
disease still is of great importance in Australia must be admitted after
any consideration of the vital statistics of the several Australian States,
since some hundreds of the population are afflicted annually by this
dread disease, while of lesser importance, but still of appreciable econ-
omic value, are the harmful effects occasioned by hydatid infestation
in livestock of which one aspect is seen daily in the destruction of
infested organs of animals slaughtered for food. Australia is not aloue
in the continued incidence of the disease, since concern at its great im-
portance in France was expressed at a meeting of the Society of Com-
parative Pathology in 1922, while Poppe and Thielkow (1926) have
drawn attention to the fact that in Mecklenburg, cases in man and
animals have recently shown an increase.
In the following consideration of the incidence of the disease in
Australia, it is hoped to show to what extent failure to control the
disease in Australia depends on factors hitherto unappreciated or to
the neglect to utilize effectively that knowledge we already possess.


II. OBSERVATIONS ON THE MORPHOLOGY AND BINOMICS
OF ECHINOCOCCUS GRANULOSUS (BATSCH 1786)
RUDOLPHI 1805.
1. The Value of the Hooks and Eggs in the Specific
Determination of Echinococcus Granulosus.
( i ) The books. —Until recent years, generally only two species of
Echinococcus granulosus have been recognized, the type species E.
granulosus and E. oligarthus first described by Diesing (1863) from
Felis concolor. In 1924, Brnmpt and Joyeux considered a hydatid cyst
from an Agouti ( Dasyprocta agouti ) in Brazil to represent a third
species which they named E. cruzi. Cameron, in 1926, in a general re-
view of the genus Echinococcus, considered that E. cruzi was not a
valid species since the variations between it and E. oligarthus could be
explained by the immaturity of the scolices of E. cruzi, Leuckart
(1863) and others having drawn attention to the fact that the mature
and immature hooks of E. granulosus may differ markedly in size and
shape. Nevertheless, after examining material from the Cape hunting
dog ( Lycaon capensis) and from Canis lupus from Macedonia, Cam-
eron found it necessary to create tentatively two new species which
he named respectively E. longimanubrius and E. minimus. Owing to
scantiness or material and indifferent preservation the determination
of these species was based solely on the size ajnd shape of the hooks.
In view of the interesting possibility thus suggested that more than
one species of Echinococcus may occur in canines, it is necessary to de-
termine the specific value of the hooks as -differential features, and in
the light of this to ascertain whether there is evidence that more than
one species occurs in dogs in Australia. A large amount of
Echinococcus material from Hew South Wales was therefore examined,
all of which came from the domestic dog, being collected during the
survey of the incidence of hydatid infestation made bv Ross (1925,
1926).
Examination of this material at once revealed considerable varia-
tion in the shape and size of hooks when compared with those described
and figured for E. granulosus by Cameron. Barge hooks were from 34
to 38 pin length, and small hooks 22 to 30 p. Large hooks showed
relatively less variation in shape, but in no case were hooks seen which
feorresponded closely to those figured by Cameron (Fig. 1). The
guards in all cases were stout with broad rounded ends but varied
somewhat in length, while the handles were irregularly undulating and
showed notches of different depth at the junction of the handle and
guard. Small hooks showed even more variation from Cameron’s
figuies of the type and from one another, though gradations existed


between the extremes of size and shape noticed. Guards were of dif-
ferent lengths, the sides being straight or undulating while the ends
were broad and rounded or tapered to a rounded point. No very short
guards such as that figured 'by Cameron were seen. The variation in
size of the hooks is also of interest since Cameron’s no doubt accurate
observations led him to fix the size definitely as large hooks 34 p,
small hooks 30 p. In the case of E. longimanubrius, Cameron gives
the size of the hooks as 35 p and 32 p respectively, and of E. minimus
32 p and 20 p, the smallness of the latter being one of the points lead-
ing Cameron to believe he w r as dealing with a new species.
FIGURE 1.
A. Large and small hooks of Echinococcus
granulosus (after Cameron).
B. Large and small hooks of E.longimanubrius
(after Cameron).
C. Large and small hooks of E. minimus
(after Cameron).
D. Large hooks of E. granulosus from New
South Wales.
E. Small hooks of E. granulosus from New
South Wales.
It will be seen that tbe ex-
tremes of size of E. granulosus in
New. South Wales cover Came-
ron’s measurements for both E.
granulosus and E. longimanu-
brius, while the measurements
of tbe hooks of E. minimus are
but 2 p smaller than tbe mini-
mum found here. It cannot be
thought that variation in size of
E. granulosus is surprising since
the traditional measurements of
the hooks repeated by such
authorities as Haillet (1895),
Neumann (1914) and Hall
(1920) are large hooks 22 to
30 p and small hooks 18 to 22 p.
Leuckart on the other hand gives
much larger measurements, these
being 40 to 45 p and 30 to 38 p-
In addition, Krabbe in a paper
quoted by Leukart (1886) gives
40 drawings of the hooks of
E. granulosus to demonstrate
the variation in size and shape
which may occur within the
species, though most of these are considered to be due to the
varying degree of maturity of individual books. Moreover, in
spite of the accepted value of the books in tbe determination
of other species of Taenia , considerable latitude has always
been allowed in regard' to tbe extremes of size which may
occur in any species. Hall (1920) gives the size of the books of
Taenia hydatigena as 170 to 220 p and 110 to 160 p, and of T. pisi-
formis as 225 to 294 p and 132 to 177 p. Hall states that tbe maxi-
mum measurements given are those of Deffe and are in excess of bis


own findings. Again, Heumann (1896) draws attention to the varia-
tion in shape of larval hooks of Cysticercus cellulosae, this being so
great that he considers that the hooks are of slight value in differ-
entiating closely related larval forms. ' More recently, Baer (1926),
discussing the very large number of species of Taenia recorded from the
dog, states that one is forced to doubt the value of shape and size of
hooks as specific characters.
Since the Hew South Wales material examined came in every case
from the domestic dog, there appears to be little doubt that it was
E. granulosus, and it must therefore be recognized that, considerable
variation in size and shape may occur within the species. Cameron’s
statement that, in such a closely related genus as Echinococcus the hooks
will remain, within small limits, constant in shape and size for each
species, cannot be accepted without some qualification.
It is not considered that the variations in the hooks indicated that
more than one species of Echinococcus existed in the dog in Hew South
Wales, since all gradations between the extremes in size and shape
were seen, while also all the scolices examined from hydatid cysts
appeared to be those of E. granulosus.
It is concluded, therefore, that only one special of Echinococcus,
namely, E. granulosus, occurs in the dog in Hew South Wales, while the
value of the hooks as specific characters must be interpreted in the
light of the variation in size and shape of the hooks, known to occur
within the species.
(ii) The Eggs. —ln view of
the fact that there are no satis-
factory figures of the eggs of
E. granulosus, it was decided to
figure these and at the same
time to compare them with
those of Taenia pisiformis and
T. hydatigena, the two com-
monest species of Taenia found
in rural areas in Hew South
Wales, in order to determine
whether it is possible by ordi-
nary faecal examination to dif-
ferentiate the three species.
Other observers have found
that the eggs of the various*
species of Taenia in the dog
resemble one another so closely
that no differentiation of
FIGURE 2.
A. Eggs of Echinococcus granulosus.
B. Eggs of Taenia pisiformis.
these has been attempted, and Hall (1922) states that the eggs of
. pisiformis, T. hydatigena and Multiceps serialis, are all very similar
to those of E. granulosus, in form, size and structure. The measure-


ments given by Hall for the eggs of E. granulosus are 32 to 36 p by
25 to 30 /x, and for T. pisiformis 37 p by 32 p, and for T. hydatigena
38 to 39 /x by 34 to 35 /x.
Careful examination of the eggs of tbe three species failed to re-
veal any definite characters whereby they might be distinguished with
any accuracy, and though certain differences in size were shown it is
not thought that these are sufficiently constant to warrant regarding
them as of specific value. The following measurements of a series of
eggs from each species are of interest since they differ considerably
from those given by previous workers.
The size of the egg given in each case is that of the external mea-
surement of the embryophore.
The Sizes of Various Eggs.
Echinococcus granulosus. Taenia pisiformis. Taenia hydatigena.
Microns. Microns. Microns.
39 x 35 .. 38 x 33 .. 33 x 31
39 x 36 .. 38 x 33 .. 33 x 33
38 x 35 .. 33 x 29 .. 33 x 29
38 x 35 .. 38 x 31 .. 35 x 33
38 x 36 .. 37 x 31 .. 33 x 31
38 x 35 . . 38 x. 33 . . 33 x 31
38 x 35 .. 35 x 33 .. 36 x 33
38 x 35 .. 40 x 33 .. 33 x 31
Consideration of these figures shows that the eggs of E. granulosus
in general tend to be slightly broader in relation to their length than
do those of Taenia pisiformis, and this is perhaps brought out in the
figures (Fig. 2), while on the other hand they were in most cases de-
finitely larger than the eggs of T. hydatigena.
In view, however, of the measurements given by other workers, it is
not possible to be dogmatic about the range in size which may occur
in any of the three species, so that in the absence of other more strik-
ing differences such as the thickness or structure of the embryophore
it is considered that no accurate differentiation is possible.
Fortunately, the practical importance of the specific recognition of
Echimo coccus eggs is rendered less by the discovery, to be later de-
scribed, of the efficiency of arecoline hydrobromide for removing the
adult worms from the dog, so that where infestation is suspected, a
diagnosis can be made with a reasonable degree of accuracy by the de-
monstration of the worms themselves as a result of anthelmintic treat-
ment.
2. The Viability of the Egg.
Relatively little is known of the resistance of the eggs of Taeniae
to external influence, though Leuckart (1863) considered that exposure
of the eggs of Taenia solium to sunlight for twenty-four hours resulted


in their death, while Bavaine on the other hand found that the eggs
of the same species might remain alive for twelve months in water.
Though various conjectures have been made in regard to the viability
of the eggs of Echinococcus granulosus, the only reliable experiments
have been those of that great authority Deve (1008), who found it
possible to infest squirrels with eggs which had been desiceated up to
sixteen days, or which had been exposed to bright sunlight for two days
and then desiccated for nine more. Deve (1910) further demonstrated
that eggs would remain alive at freezing temperatures for four months.
Personal Observations. —Since Deve had investigated the resistance
of eggs, in water up to sixteen days, it was decided to limit investi-
gations to periods greater than this, commencing with a minimum
period of three wfeeks. Owing to the difficulty of securing an adequate
supply of squirrels, which Deve (1907) has shown to be the most suit-
able experimental animal, a preliminary series of feeding tests was
carried out on rabbits. Subsequent examination, however, of the con-
trol animals, which were fed with fresh Echinococcus eggs, showed
no evidence of the infestation, and in view of Deve’s (1908) estimate
of the unsuitability of these animals for infestation by feeding with
hydatid eggs no conclusion can be drawn from the negative findings in
these tests.
A second series of feeding tests was therefore carried out on young
pigs which Dew (1925) and others have shown to be easily infested.
Dr. Dew in a private communication has informed me that he secured
100 per cent, infestation of young pigs fed with Echinococcus eggs.
Three series of eggs were employed: (a) eggs kept in dry sand and
exposed daily to bright sunlight for some hours; (b ) eggs kept in moist
sand or shallow water not more than -J inch in depth, the water being
allowed to evaporate from time to time, but the sand being always
kept moist; and ( c ) eggs kept in still water one foot in depth.
The pigs were fed approximately equal quantities (some hundreds)
of eggs, though no accurate estimation of the exact number fed was
made. All pigs at the commencement of the experiments were about
ten weeks old.
Pig No. I.—Fed with Echinococcus eggs on 30.1.26. Eggs had been
subjected to desiccation and bright sunlight for three weeks. The sun
temperature during this period was frequently over 37° C. Fig killed
2.7.26 (five months) and all viscera carefully examined. Negative for
all signs of hydatid infestation.
Pig No. 2. —Fed on 30.1.20 with eggs which had been kept in water
or moist sand for three weeks. Temperature of the water during this
period frequently reached 30° C. Pig killed 2.7.26 (five months) and


viscera examined. Five cysts, subsequently found by microscopic exam-
ination to be Echinoco-ccus cysts were found in tbe lungs. Tbe approx-
imate size of tbe cysts was 1 cm. All were sterile.
Pig No. 3. —Fed on 30.1.26 with eggs kept in deep still water for
three weeks. Pig killed 6.8.26 (six months). Viscera negative for
hydatid infestation.
Pig No. 4. —-Fed 20.2.26. Fed with eggs subject to desiccation and
direct sunlight for six weeks. Post-mortem examination on 16.9.26
(seven months) showed one small caseating mass, 2 mm. in diameter
in the liver. Microscopic examination of this failed to reveal any evi-
dence that it was of an hydatid nature.
Pig No. 5-.—Fed on 20.2.26 with eggs kept in shallow water or moist
sand for six weeks. Post-mortem examination on 16.9.26 (seven
months) was negative for hydatid infestation.
Pig No. 6.—Fed 20.2.26 on eggs kept in deep still water for six
weeks. Post-mortem examination on 20.9.26 was negative.
From the above experiments it will be seen that positive results
were obtained in one case only, that in which eggs were kept in shal-
low water or moist sand for three weeks. It would appear therefore
that complete desiccation and exposure to bright sunlight at summer
temperatures is inimical to survival and results in death of all eggs
in less than three weeks. It is perhaps more surprising that no in-
festation resulted from eggs which had been in deep still water for
three weeks. It is possible in this case, since the eggs would sink to
the bottom, that deficient oxygenation might exercise an inimical effect,
since this factor has an important bearing on the development and
survival of eggs of other species of helminths. When taken in con-
junction with Deve’s finding of the resistance of the eggs to cold, it
is probable we may determine low temperatures and a certain degree
of moisture as the conditions most favorable to survival.
It has been observed that when eggs are warmed to 37° C. that
the embryos make active movements within the egg, while conversely
at low temperatures they remain inactive. It is probable therefore
that heat, apart from desiccation, stimulates the embryo to activity so
that its vitality becomes exhausted, while at low temperatures it would
be conserved.
These factors would explain the widely held opinion, both in
Australia and elsewhere, that the worst centres of hydatid disease are
those in which there is moderately high rainfall and the maximum
temperature is generally moderate, while in hot dry areas the lessened
incidence of the disease is due in part to the sterilizing effects of the
sun. ,


3. The Hatching of Cestode Eggs.
It lias generally been assumed that helminth eggs, whether nema-
tode or cestode, which hatch wdthin the body of the host, do so in the
stomach, as a result of the action of the gastric juice. Thomas (1883),
Brumpt (1922), and Dew (1925), state that the eggs of Echinococcus
granulosus hatch in the stomach, but Leuckart (1886) considered that
hatching is largely due to the active movements of the embryo, and
may take place in the duodenum as well as in the stomach.
In the case of the eggs of E. granulosus, Deve (1907) has shown
that they may hatch outside the alimentary tract altogether, as for
example when injected subcutaneously. Decently, Taylor (1926) has
recorded the hatching of a cestode egg ( Davainia sp.) which was being
observed microscopically, and he considered that hatching was wholly
due to the active movements of the emhryo, hut did not think that this
could occur in the case of cestode eggs possessing an embryophore.
Personal Observations. —ln order to determine where hatching of
the eggs of Taeniae takes place, the following tests were carried out with
eggs of Taenia pisiformis and Echinococcus granulosus. The eggs
were obtained by teasing out ripe segments of these worms, and they
were then placed in artificial gastric juice (HCI 0.4 per cent, pepsin
1 per cent.), or in artificial duodenal secretion (Sodii Bic. 1.25 per
cent., pancreatin 0.6 per cent.), incubated at 39° C., and observed at
frequent intervals on a warmed microscope stage at 37° C. —39° C.
Lot 1. Eggs of T. pisiformis. —Eggs placed in gastric secretion at
2.45 p.m. 3.45 p.m. (one hour). Ho eggs appeared to have hatched.
Embryos in some cases seen to be making contractile movements within
the egg. 5.45 p.m. (three hours). Eggs still unhatched, no sign of any
solvent action on shell.
Lot 2. Eggs of T. pisiformis. —Eggs placed in duodenal secretion at
2.45 p.m. 3 p.m. (15 minutes). Considerable number of eggs hatched.
3.15 p.m. (30 minutes). Majority of eggs hatched. Many shells
appeared to be completely digested. 3.45 p.m. (one hour). All eggs
hatched. Only occasional hatched embryos seen to make active move-
ments after emergence.
Lot 3. Eggs of T. pisiformis. —Eggs placed in duodenal secretion at
4 p.m. 4.5 p.m. (five minutes). Some eggs hatched already. 4.20 p.m.
(20 minutes). 50 per cent, of eggs hatched. 4.30 p.m. (30 minutes).
75 per cent, of eggs hatched. 5 p.m. (one hour). All eggs hatched.
Majority of shells appear to be completely digested.
Lot 4. Eggs of E. granulosus. —Eggs placed in gastric secretion 9
a.m. After two and a half hours an occasional egg appeared to have
hatched. After seventeen hours there appeared to be very few, if any,
further hatchings. Unhatched eggs had shell intact, and showed no
sign of any action of gastric juice. *


Lot 5. Eggs of E. granulosus. —Eggs placed in gastric secretion.
Result as in Lot 4.
Lot 6. Eggs of E. granulosus. —Eggs placed in gastric secretion.
After one Lour about 25 per cent, of eggs had hatched. In two hours
about 50 per cent, had hatched. No further hatching took place in
seventeen hours. Shells of the unhatched eggs appeared to he un-
affected by the action of the gastric juice.
Lot 7. Eggs of E. granulosus. —Eggs placed in duodenal secretion
11 a.m. 11.20 a.m. (20 minutes). About 25 per cent, hatched. 11.30
a.m. (30 minutes). About 50 per cent, hatched. 12 noon (one hour).
Majority of eggs hatched. Some unhatched but outline of the shell
blurred and indistinct. Shells of hatched eggs rapidly digested.
Lot 8. Eggs of E. granulosus. —Eggs placed in duodenal secretion.
Result very similar to Lot 7.
Lot 9. Eggs of E. granulosus. —Eggs placed in duodenal secretion.
In this case very few eggs hatched after three hours. Two further
lots of eggs of Echinococcus granulosus were kept in normal saline, and
one per cent, sodium bicarbonate solution respectively. In these cases,
although an occasional embryo was seen to emerge, there was no evi-
dence of general hatching.
Lot 10. Eggs of E. granulosus. —Eggs were fed in admixture with
bran to a guinea pig which had previously been starved for seventeen
hours. After one and a half hours the animal was chloroformed, and the
stomach and small intestine tied off. By washing and centrifuging the
stomach contents numerous eggs were recovered with shells intact and
showing no effects of gastric juice. In the intestinal contents a few
unhatched eggs were recovered, hut no broken shells were seen. Micro-
scopic examination of the mucous membrane of the duodenum did not
reveal any embryos.
Erom the above results it will be seen that, in the case of the eggs
of T. pisiformis, hatching occurred very rapidly in duodenal secretion,
hut no hatching occurred in gastric secretion. The action of the duo-
denal secretion in these cases was most striking, both hatching and
digestion of shells being almost constant for both batches. The eggs
were taken from two ripe segments only, and were mixed before being
tested, to eliminate errors due to possible immaturity of eggs from dif-
ferent segments.
In the case of the eggs of E. granulosus, the results obtained were
less clearly defined. In gastric secretion, except in one case, there was
little evidence of hatching, and in that case about 50 per cent, of eggs
hatched after two hours, but the remainder remained unaltered. In
duodenal secretion almost complete hatching took place in two cases,
while in a third little hatching had occurred after three hours. It is


perhaps worthy of note that, only an occasional embryo emerged in
lots kept in normal saline and in sodium bicarbonate solutions. The
result of the in vivo experiment is only of value in demonstrating the
lack of batching in the gastric juice, since eggs would probably have
been in the intestine for so short a time that the effect of the duodenal
secretion could not be gauged. In order to avoid error in tbe case of
Echinococcus eggs, only- segments containing apparently fully mature
eggs were employed, one segment being used in each lot tested. It is
possible, however, that the apparently contradictory results obtained in
some cases may be due to lack of complete development of tbe embryo.
It was observed that on first placing eggs in warm solutions, whether
acid or alkaline, that movements of the embryos took place, and, in
many cases the embryos continued to make active contractile move-
ments within the egg for some time.. Another point of interest was the
fact that comparatively few embryos of either T. pisiformis- or E.
granulosus made active contractile movements after emerging from the
egg. Tbe reason for this is not obvious,, but possibly depends on the
fact that there was lacking in the artificial digestive juices some
activating substance rvhich is present in the animal body.
The following conclusions may be drawn from the above experi-
ments taken in conjunction with the observation of previous workers.
Hatching of the eggs of Taenia appears to depend on a number of
factors, first among which is the complete development and vitality
of the embryo, and second, a degree of warmth equivalent to the mini-
mum body temperature of animals serving as tbe hosts of the parasite.
Given tbe above factors, it is probable that batching may occur in cer-
tain instances in varying situations (vide Deve), but that the alkaline
duodenal secretion possibly by its tryptic action on the shell is tbe
most favorable medium for batching, so that this occurs normally
in the duodenum and not in the stomach.
4. The Viability of the Larval Stage (Hydatid Cyst) after
Removal from the Intermediate Host.
The vitality of the hydatid cyst, after removal from the host, may
possibly have an important bearing on tbe measures to be taken in
country districts to guard against infestation of tbe dog with the adult
worm. If it could be shown that hydatid cysts after removal from the
hosts suffered a loss of vitality in a few hours, it would be possible
after bolding the organs of cattle, sheep or pigs for twenty-four hours,
to use those for dog food with safety. Few observations have been
made in the past in connexion with this aspect of the vitality of the
cyst, though Thomas (1884) found that scoliees from, a hydatid, cyst
of man were viable 29 hours after removal from the cyst. In inves-
tigating tbe action of low temperatures on tbe survival of larval,


■cestodes in meat, Porter (1923) found that hydatid cysts were able to
survive freezing temperatures for as long as 70 days. It was desir-
able to test the vitality of cysts in meat under field conditions.
Personal Observations. —Cysts were collected in the lungs and
livers of sheep at the Homebush abattoirs, without adopting any pre-
cautions to lessen bacterial contamination. Cysts surrounded by a
certain amount of liver or lung tissue were then kept under the fol-
lowing conditions and their vitality tested by drawing of scolices and
examining these on a warmed stage at 39 deg. C.
Cyst I.—Cyst kept at room temperature 21 to 23 deg. C. for 52
hours. On examination the majority of scolices were viable, making
active contractile movements and many evaginating.
Cyst 2.—Cyst exposed in the open for four days, being exposed to
rain which fell on two days, but was sheltered from the direct rays
■of the sun. Shade temperatures during this period reached a maxi-
mum of over 25 deg. C. On examination some scolices were found to
be alive, these on. warming, making feeble contractile movements, but
none were seen to evaginate. Humerous solices were apparently dead
(lack of movement, dulling of calcarious corpuscles). The cysts had
a markedly putrefactive odour.
Cyst 3. —Cyst was placed in ice chest at temperatures ranging from
4 deg. to 8 deg. C. for seven days. At the end of the period the meat
had a sour smell and showed some evidence of putrefaction. On
warming, all seolices appeared to be viable, the majority making active
•contractile movements, while many evaginated.
Cyst 4. —Cyst kept in ice chest 4 to S deg. C. for thirteen days.
At the end of this period the meat had a distinctly putrefactive odour.
A few scolices contracted feebly on warming, but only one evaginated.
The great majority of scolices were obviously dead.
From the above, it will be seen that the majority of hydatid
scolioes are able to survive for over two days at room tem-
peratures, and to show overy sign of vitality, while after
four days exposure in the open, an occasional scolex was
still alive. At lower temperatures, which are comparable to those
which might be met in winter on the tablelands in Hew South
Wales, scolices were alive and vigorous after seven days, while a few
scolices survived for as long as thirteen days. An important factor
limiting the vitality of hydatid scolices is, no doubt, the amount of
bacterial contamination present. Cold, by inhibiting bacterial growth,
is therefore favorable to survival. Coutelen (1927) and Ross (1927)
have found that, in culturing scolices in vitro, bacterial contamination
ls inimical to survival. It would appear that meat containing hydatid
cysts cannot safely be utilized as food for dogs for several days after
removal from the host, and until an advanced stage of putrefaction
has been reached.


5. Observations on the Development of the Adult Echinococcus.
As will be shown later, the time taken for the development of the
adult worm in the dog after the ingestion of scolices has a practical
bearing on the frequency with which anthelmintic treatments must be
given to dogs constantly exposed to risk of infestation, to ensure that
they do not become a source of danger. Considerable variation in the
time considered necessary for development is shown in the statement
of different authorities. Yan Beneden, quoted by Leuckart (1886),
claimed to have obtained ripe Taenia echinococcus four weeks after
feeding scolices, while Kuchenmeister found no ripe forms in eight to
nine weeks. Leuckart did not find mature worms till seven weeks
after feeding, while in the experiments of ISTauyn and Pagenstecher,
quoted by Leuckart, and of FTettleship (1866), approximately seven
weeks was also required for development. On the other hand, Zenker
found no eggs present in apparently fully-developed worms after nine
weeks, while Brumpt (1922), apparently summarizing the results of
previous workers, states that development takes from four to ten
weeks. More recently, Dew (1925) found that abundant ripe seg-
ments were developed' after eight weeks, though no mature worms were
found after 35 days.
Personal Observations. —Dogs were fed with heavy doses of hydatid
‘ san d ” previously found to be viable. The attainment of maturity
was determined by demonstrating the presence of eggs in the faeces
by repeated faecal examinations. Faeces were examined by the
glycerine flotation method of Vadja (1922), Sheather’s (1924) method
having been found valueless for this purpose. Prior to being fed with
scolices, dogs were treated with arecoline hydrobromide shown by Boss
(1924) to have a remarkable degree of efficiency in removing cestodes,
and the faeces were later examined to ensure that no other cestode
infestation was present.
Dog No. 1. —Fed with hydatid “ sand,” 15th April, 1926.
Dog subjected to post-mortem examination on 13tli May, 1926 —
28 days after feeding. ISTo Echinococcus seen on bowel with naked
eye. Scrapings taken from the mucous membrane showed num-
bers of very small Echinococcus, which could just be detected with
the naked eye when placed on a microscope slide and held up to
the light. FTo mature worms were present. The largest speci-
ments found were 1.75 m.m. in length, the terminal segment being
up to 950/x long.
Dog No. 2.—Fed with hydatid “sand,” 15th April, 1926.
Faecal examination on 25th May, 1926 (40 days after feeding)
negative. Dog was then give half grain arecoline hydrobromide
after starving overnight. Purgation occurred in 25 minutes. All


faeces were collected and washed, and the washings examined
carefully. Numerous immature Echinococcus were collected. No
mature worms were found. The largest specimens were 4.4 mm.
in length. The cirrus was projecting prominently in many seg-
ments, and the testes were well developed, but no sign of egg
formation could be seen.
Dog No. 3. —Fed with hydatid “ sand,” 12th October, 1926.
Faeces examined daily from the fortieth day onwards. Faeces
were positive for Trichuris eggs each day, hut the first 1 aenia
egg was not seen till the fiftieth day, Ist December. The number
of eggs increased for eight days when the dog was destroyed, and
the presence of large numbers of E. granulosus confirmed on post-
mortem examination. No other Taeniae were present.
Dog No. 4. —Fed with hydatid “ sand,” 12th October, 1926.
Faeces were positive for Toxascaris and Trichuris. Faeces
examined daily from the fortieth day, being positive each day till
the forty-ninth for Toxascaris and Trichuris, hut negative for
Echinococcus. Faeces were not examined on the fiftieth day, but
on the fifty-first showed an occasional Taenia egg. Subse-
quent post mortem examination on the sixty-second day showed
large numbers of mature E. granulosus. No other Taenia were
present.
Dog No. s.—Fed with hydatid “ sand,” 12th October, 1926.
Faeces at this time positive for Toxascaris and Trichuris, hut
were negative for all species of Taenia. Faeces were examined
daily on the thirty-seventh and thirty-eighth days, and then daily
from the fortieth day onward. The eggs remained positive for
Toxascaris and Trichuris until the forty-eighth day when several
Taenia eggs were seen. Subsequent post-mortem examination on
the sixty-fourth day showed the presence of large numbers of E.
granulosus, hut no other species of Taenia.
Dog. No. 6. —Fed with hydatid “ sand,” 12th October, 1926.
Faeces were positive for Belascaris, hut negative for all Taeniae.
Dogs’ faeces examined on thirty-seventh and thirty-eighth days,
and then daily from the fortieth day till the forty-ninth day, being
positive each day for Belascaris and negative for all Taeniae.
On the fiftieth day two Taenia eggs were seen in smears. The
animal was treated with arecoline hydrobromide on the sixty-third
day. Large numbers of mature E. granulosus were removed, hut
no Taeniae. Subsequent post-mortem examination confirmed the
absence of Taeniae.
C. 12041.—2


Dog. No. 7. —Fed large quantities of hydatid “ sand,” 6th Novem-
ber, 1925.
Faeces examined on the forty-first day were negative for all
Taenia eggs, but positive for Toxascaris. Faeces were not ex-
amined again till the forty-seventh day, when one egg was found
after repeated examination of faeces. On the fifty-third day eggs
were more numerous, several being present in each smear. Post-
mortem examination showed the presence of large numbers of E.
granulosus, but no Taeniae.
From the above tests it is seen, that after four weeks (28 days)
specimens of Echinococcus were very small and immature, and were
to be seen with the naked eye only after very careful examination.
On the fortieth day specimens, while approaching the length of the
mature worm, showed no sign of egg development. At this stage
the worms are still difficult to perceive owing to the fact that the
terminal segment is clear and translucent, only later becoming white
and opaque when packed with eggs. The earliest that eggs were
detected in the faeces was the forty-seventh day, but it is possible in
this case that the eggs might have been produced a day earlier, though
owing to the difficulty of recovering any eggs on the forty-seventh
day, it is not thought that this is likely. Eggs were not discovered in
the remaining dogs till the forty-eighth, fiftieth, and fifty-first days
respectively. In the latter case, it is possible that eggs were present on
the fiftieth day, since faeces were not examined on this day. Thus in
four cases eggs were detected first from the forty-eighth to fiftieth
days, while in the other case egg production commenced on the forty-
seventh day. Fairly definite conclusions can be drawn as to the time
taken in development, the minimum time being about seven weeks after
infestation has taken place. The experiments of Thomas (1884) and
recently of Dew (1925) appear to support this, since the former found
no gravid segments in 42 days, and the latter none in 36 days.
The conclusion that development of gravid Echinococcus takes a
minimum time of approximately seven weeks is in striking agreement
with the observations of Leuckart, and as cited by him of Nauyn,
Pagenstecher, and also of Nettleship. It does not appear that esti-
mates of four and five weeks can be regarded as reliable.
6. Tests of the Action of Certain Drugs on Hydatid Scolices
in Vitro and in Vivo.
(i) General. —The successful treatment of diseases caused by such
metazoan parasites as Schistosomum mansoni and S. haematobium in
man, and of Dirofilaria immitis in the dog by anthelmintic medication
has led once more to the hope that some method of treating hydatid
disease of man other than by surgical intervention might be discovered.


Experience in the past has, however, not been encouraging, since, m
respect to claims made from time to time that certain drugs or X-rays
Tiave been found effective in inhibiting the growth of hydatid cysts,
Deve (1911-1925) found no evidence that felix-mas or Kamala were
of value, while Deve and Payenville in (1914, 1922) found neosal-
varsan and novarsenobenzol to be equally ineffective. Again, Deve
and Billard (1922) found that exposure of hydatid scolices to X-rays
either before or after infestation of the rabbit did not markedly inhibit
their growth, though Deve (1925) obtained some evidence that the
vitality and regenerative power of scolices exposed to X-rays of 20,000
R were appreciably affected. Eairley (1922), in the only carefully
controlled tests of the nature carried out in man, found that doses of
tartar emetic administered in amounts approximating those given in the
treatment of Schistosome infestation had no apparent effect in two cases
of hydatid disease, as shown by subsequent operation in one case and
complement fixation tests in the other.
It appeared desirable* however, to test the possibilities of this
method of treatment further/ under experimental conditions, and four
drugs, tartar emetic, emetine* trypan-blue, and acriflavine, were selected
for trial. The selection of these drugs was due to the proved efficacy
of the first two in the treatment of certain affections due to metazoan
parasites, of which a recent example was seen in the employment of
tartar emetic by Itagaki and Makino (1927) in the treatment of
Dirofilaria immitis infestation of the dog. Moreover, the combination
of these two drugs had been claimed by Cawston (1922) to have
inhibited the growth of a hydatid cyst in man. Trypan blue has
been found of value in the treatment of protozoan affections of
animals, while the use of acriflavine was suggested as the representa-
tive of a different group of dyes and one for which striking bacteria-
cidal potency, at least in vitro, has been claimed. Ross (1927), as
a result of in vitro tests of the action of these drugs on hydatid
scolices when used in aqueous solution, found the drugs to be of very
variable toxicity, acriflavine being most toxic and then tartar emetic,
emetine, and trypan blue in the order named.
(ii) In Vitro Tests. —Since Eairley (1926) has shown that the
toxicity of tartar emetic for Schistosome cercariae is immeasurably
greater in the presence of serum than in aqueous solution, and on the
other hand Meleny and Zau (1925) find that acriflavine’s bacteriacidal
power is greatly diminished in vivo, it appeared desirable before test-
ing the action of the four drugs in vivo to obtain first some indication
of their relative potency in vitro in the presence of serum.
Personal Observations —•
Technique. —In testing the action of the drugs in vitro in the pre-
sence of serum the same technique was employed as when using


aqueous solutions (Ross, 1927) the drugs being made up in varying
dilutions in sterile ox serum instead of in normal saline. After the
addition of scolicies to the varying dilutions of the several solutions
they were incubated at 37 to 38 deg. C., and were examined at fre-
quent intervals on a warmed stage at 39 deg. C. The lethal time was
determined by the cessation of the active movements of the scolices, the
dulling of the calcareous corpuscles, and general loss of structure.
The dilutions of the drugs used were:
Acriflavine 1-5,000 and 1-10,000; trypan blue 1-1,000,; tartar
emetic 1-1,000 and 1-10,000; emetine 1-1,000 and 1-10,000.
The results obtained showed certain variation from those obtained in
aqueous solutions.
Acriflavine in 1-10,000 aqueous solution was fatal in eight hours,
but in serum failed to kill all scolices in 20 hours.
Trypan-blue was as ineffective in serum as in aqueous solution,
many scolices remaining alive and active for twenty hours in 1-1,000
solution.
Tartar emetic showed a slight increase in toxicity in serum when
compared with aqueous solution. In 1-1,000 solution all scolices died
in five hours in the former compared with six hours in the latter. In
1-10,000 solution all scolices were dead before those in 1-10,000 solu-
tion acriflavine (exact time not noted), whereas in aqueous solution
acriflavine solution was more rapidly fatal than tartar emetic.
Emetine showed an increase in toxicity in serum, all scolices being
motionless and apparently dead in 1-1,000 solution in five hours, where-
as in aqueous solution a few remained alive for fourteen hours. Some
scolices remained alive in 1-10,000 solutions, both in serum and aqueous
solution for twenty hours.
It appears, therefore, that tartar emetic and emetine are more toxic
for hydatid scolices in serum than in aqueous solution. Acriflavine is
less toxic in serum, and trypan-blue shows little variation.
(iii) In Vivo Tests.
(a) Technique. Infestation of experimental animals with Echin-
ococcus.—Owing to the difficulty in obtaining squirrels which Deve
(1907) has found to be the most satisfactory animals for primary in-
festation with hydatid cysts, rabbits were used in the experiments. It
was hoped that in spite of the difficulty of giving these animals primary
hydatid, that this might be overcome by feeding very large doses
of Echinococcus eggs. Accordingly, six control rabbits were each given
twenty ripe proglottides. After three months, two of these animals
were killed and examined post mortem. Neither showed any signs of


infestation, so that it was necessary to resort to infestation by the sud-
entaneons injection of hydatid "sand.” Deve (1902) has shown that
the rabbit, while most refractory to primary infestation, may easily
be infested with secondary cysts in this way. The method has the
drawback that following the injection of hydatid sand it is not unusua
as a result of secondary infection with pyogenic bacteria, to hud the
developing hydatid elements surrounded by a creamy mass of puru ent
material which again is surrounded by a firm connective tissue
capsule. It was thought that owing to the poor blood supply to such
an encapsuled focus, drugs circulating in the blood stream would have
less chance of exerting their effects upon the hydatid elements than
would he the case in a young primary hydatid cyst developing norma y.
On the other hand, it might he thought that such a focus would more
nearly resemble the conditions under which a drug would have to oper-
ate were it to prove effective in attacking a well-developed, naturally
occurring cyst of man, surrounded as this would he by the thick fibrous
connective capsule thrown out by the invaded organ.
Injection of hydatid scolices. -Hydatid “sand” was obtained from
cysts in the liver or lungs of sheep, the scolices being drawn off under
aseptic precautions. Approximately equal quantities of blood capsu es
and scolices were injected subcutaneously into either the axilla or groin,
and intraperitoneally. In spite of the precautions taken, secondary
infection with pyogenic bacteria followed the subcutaneous injections m
two cases. Prior to the injection of scolices their viability was deter-
mined in all cases.
Injection of Drugs. —Drugs, with the exception of emetine hydro-
chloride, which was given subcutaneously, were injected intravenously,
the injections being made into the auricular veins. It was decided to
employ the maximum safe dose in all cases, in order to eliminate the
possibility of failure through the employment of inadequate doses.
Acriftavine. —Meleny and Zau (1925), in injecting rabbits with
acriflavine, employed a unit dose of 2.5 mg. per kilogram body weight,
and using multiples of this found 5 mg. per kilogram killed 20 pel
cent, of rabbits, while using five times the unit dose, or 12.5 per kilo
gram, 50 per cent, of rabbits died after a single injection. It was
decided to test a dose of 10 mg. per kilogram body weight.
Rabbit No. 10.—Weight, 2 kilograms. Received 4 cc. of
solution, or 10 mg. per kilogram body weight. The rabbit showed no
systemic disturbance, although the mucous membranes were stained
yellow. Some inflammatory reaction followed the escape o a i e
the solutions into the subcutaneous tissues. Dose repeated in one week s
time without any noticeable ill effects.
Trypan blue.— Nutt all’s (1908) experiments showed that a dose of
10 mg. per kilogram body weight is tolerated in the dog.


Babbit No. 13.—Weight, 2.2 kilograms. Received 4 cc. of 1-200
solution, or approximately 9 mg. per kilogram. Mucous membranes
stained deep blue, but the animal showed no systemic disturbance. Dose
repeated in one week without any ill effects.
Tartar emetic. —ltagaki and Makino (1927), in working on Diro-
filaria immitis infestation on the dog, showed that three or four mg.
per kilogram body weight were tolerated by the dog, hut that there
was some danger in giving repeated injections of over 5 mg. per kilo-
gram.
Babbit No. 12.—Weight 2.1 kilograms, was injected with four cc.
of solution containing 3 mg. tartar emetic per cc., or approximately
6 mg. per kilogram body weight. Rabbit showed no ill-effects. Dose
repeated after two days without result.
Emetine. —Rabbit Mo. 9, weight 2 kilograms, given 0.032 mg. of
emetine in solution, or 16 mg. per kilogram body weight. Animal
showed no ill effects. Dose was repeated on following day without
result.
( b ) Action of drugs in animals injected with hydatid sand. Acri-
flavine. —Rabbit Mo. 1, weight 2.1 kilograms. Injected with hydatid
sand subcutaneously on 12.4.27, and intraperitoneally on 2.5.27.
Acriflavine was injected on 23.4.27 in doses of 5 mg. per kilogram
body weight, the second injection, in the same dose, being given on
2.5.27. In the following two months, fourteen injections were given, the
dose rate being gradually increased so that the last three injections were
at the rate of 15 mg. per kilogram body weight. The last dose was
given on 25.6.27. Altogether a total of 145 mg. per kilogram body
weight were given during this period. The animal did not show sys-
temic effects other than a slight loss of weight, which might easily
have been caused by the frequent handling. The fact that this animal
stood repeated doses of 10 mg. and 15 mg. per kilogram body weight
is interesting in view of Meleny and Zau’s findings that single doses
of 12.5 mg. per kilogram caused death in 50 per cent, of cases.
On 1.11.27, six months after the second injection of hydatid “sand,”
the rabbit was destroyed and examined post mortem.
Autopsy.- —ln right femoral groove two groups of hydatid cysts
were found in a slight connective tissue capsule. Both groups of
cysts were approximately 10 mm. x 5 mm. in size. On opening the
capsule of one of these, twelve small cysts, ranging in size from 1 mm.
to 5 mm. in diameter, were seen. The larger cysts to the naked eye
were distended with fluid, and appeared to be actively growing. Some
dead and degenerated scolices were also found in the debris enclosed
by the stroma. In the peritoneal cavity, a chain of small cysts was
found in a fibrous capsule arising from the gastro-hepatic ligament.


The largest cyst was 4 mm. by 2 mm., and the smallest less than 1
mm. in diameter. One group of cysts from the femoral groove was
embedded and sectioned. After staining with gum iodide solution, it
was found that the cysts were viable and actively growing, the ger-
minal layer being rich in glycogen.
Trypan Blue. —Rabbit No. 2. Weight 2.3 kgm. Injected sub-
cutaneously with hydatid sand on 12.4.26 and introperitoneally on
2.5.27. First injection of trypan blue given on 26.4.27, in dose of 4
cc. of 1-200 solution, or approximately 9 mg. per kilogram body weight.
A second injection was given on 2.5.27, and in the following six weeks
eight injections were given, making a total of ten injections in all,
in eight weeks. Owing to the animal showing some depression and
loss of appetite at one stage, injections were discontinued for a fort-
night and it was not thought wise to increase the dose. Altogether
the animal received approximately 90 mg. per kilogram body weight.
On 4.11.27, over six months after the first injection with hydatid
sand, the animal was autopsied.
Autopsy. —In right axilla two well developed groups of hydatid
cysts enclosed in fibrous capsule approximately 8 mm. x 6 mm. in size.
On opening capsules numerous small cysts were seen, distended with
fluid and apparently actively growing. In left axilla an oval mass
of encapsuled purulent material was present in region of inoculation,
of hydatid sand. This was removed for sectioning.
On section of the encapsuled mass from the left axilla, a well de-
veloped cyst was found embedded in the purulent material. On sec-
tioning and staining with gum iodide, the cyst was seen to be alive and
growing, the germinal layer being rich in glycogen. Microscopic
examination of the other group of cysts confirmed their hydatid char-
acter.
Tartar emetic. —Rabbit No. 3. Weight 2 kgm. Injected subcutan-
eously on 12.4.27 and intraperitoneally on 2.5.27 with hydatid sand.
On 2.5.27 first injection with tartar emetic was given, of 2 cc. of
•solution containing 6 mg. of tartar emetic per cubic centimetre, that
is, 6 mg. per kilogram body weight. In the following eight weeks 17
injections were given, the dose being gradually increased so that the
last three were at the rate of 12 mg. per kilogram body weight, the
animal receiving altogether 117 mg. per kilogram body v eight.
Autopsy— On 5.11.27, more than six months after the last injec-
tion with hydatid sand, the animal was autopsied. In the right axilla,
there was a large encapsuled abscess which was removed for section-
ing. In the peritoneum there were two small opaque spots on the


mesentary, which, on microscopic examination, were found to be com-
posed of the debris of degenerated scolices. No living hydatid ele-
ments were discovered. On sectioning and staining the encapsuled
mass from the axilla, it was not possible to find any sign of living
hydatid elements of cyst formation.
Emetine. —Rabbit weight 2.1 kgm. Injected subcutaneously on
12.4.27 and intraperitoneally on 2.5.27 with hydatid sand.
First injection of emetine given subcutaneously on 2.5.27, a second
injection on 11.5.27, and six other injections from 11.5.26-1.6.27, mak-
ing a total of eight injections in thirty days. On 2.6.27 the rabbit
was obviously ill, refusing food, and it died on 6.6.27.
Autopsy. —On post mortem examination a small mass of hydatid
material was found encapsuled in the gastro splenic ligament. On
sectioning and staining with Erlich’s haematoxylin and Best’s car-
mine this showed one living scolex, but without any well-defined cuti-
cular layer or other evidence of cyst formation. Though little de-
velopment had taken place in this case, the drug could not be con-
sidered to have killed all scolices.
(iv) Discussion of results. —The first and most striking result of
the above experiments was the complete failure of acriflavine or trypan
blue to inhibit the germination and growth of hydatid elements since
in both instances actively growing groups of cysts were present. In
the case of trypan blue this is perhaps not surprising, since both in
aqueous solution and serum in vitro, hydatid scolices were able to
survive in concentrated solutions for considerable periods. Acriflavine,
on the other hand, in aqueous solution, was the most potent of the
four drugs employed. In both instances, the administration of the
drugs was commenced almost simultaneously with the injection of the
hydatid elements, so that everything favoured their action were they to
have any effect on hydatid growth.
In the case of tartar emetic, the failure of any elements to develop
either subcutaneously or intraperitoneally is in marked contrast to the
above cases. It cannot be thought that the encapsulation of the ele-
ments in the axilla in a mass of purulent material necessarily explains
their failure to develop subcutaneously, since under similar conditions
in the case of trypan blue development proceeded normally. It is
probable, therefore, that in this case the drug was responsible for the
death of the elements concerned.
Unfortunately, the “emetine” rabbit died only 30 days after the
second injection with hydatid sand, and consequently development
could only have proceeded to an early stage. In this case, however, a
living hydatid scolex was found, though there was little evidence of


cuticular development and cyst formation. While injection of the drug
may possibly have inhibited growth, it had not resulted in the death
of all scolices.
In view of the above results, there are no indications that trypan
blue or acriflavine will prove of value in the control of hydatid disease,
even though the former is used in doses approaching the minimum
lethal dose, and under conditions in which everything favours its action.
In the case of tartar emetic, though probably exerting marked action
on hydatid scolices under certain conditions, it must not be thought that
it would therefore prove effective in the control of clinical hydatid
disease of man. In the case under consideration, the hydatid scolices
were unprotected by thick adventitious capsule having a poor blood
supply such as would surround the hydatid cyst in a naturally occur-
ring case. In addition, the amount of the drug administered was 117
mg. per kilogram body weight, which would correspond to almost 7.5
gm. for a man of 140 lbs., or about three times the quantity given in
the usual course of treatment for Schistosomiasis. The chances of
employing the drug in naturally occurring cases are rendered even
more remote by Fairley’s (1922) observations, when, after administer-
ing 1.5 gm. in a course of treatment extending over a month, and 0.15
gm. immediately before the test was carried out, he was unable to find
any trace of the drug in the hydatid fluid, nor did it appear to have
affected the growth of the cyst. In the case of emetine, though a more
prolonged administration might ultimately have resulted in the death
of all scolices, the employment of relatively large doses failed to kill
all scolices in 35 days, even though they may have inhibited growth.
The employment of this drug, therefore, in advanced cases of the
disease does not appear to be hopeful.
( v ) Conclusion. —The foregoing experiments do not suggest that
acriflavine, trypan blue, or emetine exert any marked action on develop-
ing hydatid elements, and though tartar emetic may exert some action,
it will not necessarily prove of value in clinical cases of the disease.
III. THE INCIDENCE OF HYDATID DISEASE IN
AUSTRALIA.
L Statistical Evidence of the Incidence in Man.
In discussing the incidence of hydatid disease in man, it is not
proposed to compare its incidence in different parts of Australia, but
rather to show how far we are justified in considering that it still
ranks as a serious disease of man, and to determine by comparison
with its incidence in past years how far measures designed for the
control of the disease have failed. Ross (1925, 1926), dealing with
the incidence in ISTew South Wales, showed that while the ratio of cases
of hydatid disease to total admissions to hospitals had fallen very
greatly when compared with 1907, the earliest year for which figures


for the whole State were obtainable, the total number of cases of
hydatid disease showed relatively little decrease; indeed, in 1923-1924,
there were more cases of the disease in New South Wales than in any
year since 1915. At the same time, it appeared that in certain coun-
try districts in New South Wales, which, on the data available, were
likely to be centres where hydatid disease was most prevalent, there
were indications that cases in man tended to increase rather than de-
crease. It is possible that such apparent increase in specific country
districts may be attributable to the increased amount of surgical work
now being undertaken at local hospitals.
Since then, the records of the Dubbo District Hospital have been
examined for the past twenty-one years, and as a result the previous
indications tend to be confirmed. The cases for each quinquennial
period for this hospital were as follow: —1906-1910, 11 cases; 1911-1915,
3 cases; 1916-1920, 7 cases; 1921-1925, 9 cases.
To determine whether these indications were purely of local im-
portance or applied to Australia as a whole, statistics for South Aus-
tralia were obtained. This State, at least so far as its South-Eastern
corner was concerned, had been shown by Thomas (1882-3) to be one
of the worst centres of hydatid disease in the world, but little evidence
is available as to the incidence in recent years. From the records of the
Adelaide Hospital, it was possible to obtain statistics from 1880 on-
wards. It was found that, though there has been a steady fall in the
ratio of hydatid cases to total admissions from 1 in 59 for 1885-1889,
to 1 in 421 for 1915-1919, for the last five-yearly period, 1920-1924,
the ratio increased slightly to 1 in 419. In addition, the number of
cases for the last quinquennial period was 68, compared with 58 and 60
for the two preceding periods respectively. Further, during 1923,
Cleland, De Crespigny and Cudmore reported that in over two per cent,
of autopsies at the Adelaide Hospital lesions of hydatid disease were
present.
In order to determine whether the suggested increase in the num-
ber of cases of hydatid disease in Adelaide was supported by figures
for the whole State, the number of cases of hydatid disease in the whole
of South Australia was obtained for the fifteen years 1911-1925, from
the Statistical Register. A 3 a result it was found that though the
ratio of hydatid cases to all cases had fallen from 1 in 471 for the
quinquennial period 1911-1915, to 1 in 635 for 1921-1925-26, the num-
ber of cases of the disease had increased from 107 in the former period
to 152 in the latter. In addition, the cases for the individual years
1921-22 and 1925-26 were 35 and 34 respectively, both of these being
greater than in any one year since 1909.
It has been shown by Ross (1926) that during recent years the
risk to city dwellers of contracting hydatid disease has decreased very
greatly in such cities as Sydney, Melbourne and Adelaide, as a result


of the centralization of all metropolitan slaughtering at abattoirs, and
the introduction of improved methods of meat inspection. As a result,
a very much greater proportion of cases of hydatid disease now comes
from the country than was formerly the case, t and this factor must he
taken into account in estimating whether there has been any decrease
in the incidence of the disease in country districts. When we consider
therefore that since 1911 the rural population of Adelaide has in-
creased by only 11 per cent., while the number of cases of hydatid
disease has increased by 42 per cent., it is very evident that the disease
was more common amongst the rural population for the last quinquennial
period under consideration than it was for the previous two quin-
quennial periods. These facts are even more disquieting than those
obtained in New South Wales.
In regard to the incidence of the disease in Western Australia, it
was possible, through the courtesy of the Superintendent of the Perth
Hospital, to obtain details of the cases treated at this hospital from
1915-1926. For the period 1915-16/1919-20 there were nine cases,
while in the period 1920-21/1925-26 there were 35. In addition, the
ratio of cases of the disease to total cases was three times as great
during 1923-24 as during 1915-16, being slightly over 1 in 500 in the
former year and lin 1,896 in the latter. It must be remembered,
however, that Cleland, in 1908, found a very irregular incidence of the
disease in Western Australia during the early years of the present
century, but nevertheless such a marked increase as that shown during
the past five years can only be regarded as most disquieting.
The statistics given above from two States besides New South
Wales definitely support our previously expressed opinion that, despite
the general optimism that hydatid disease is of steadily diminishing
importance, there is grave danger that unless energetic measures are
again directed towards its control, a serious recrudescense of the disease
will occur.*
Sex incidence. —The incidence of hydatid diseases among the sexes
shows considerable variation in different countries. Thus Cranwell
(1908) in the Argentine found a very slight preponderance of males,
of 490 to 480 females. On the other hand, Finsen (1869), in Iceland,
found 184 females to 84 males, and Einarrson (1925) in the same coun-
try found that cases amongst females were still more common, though
the disproportion was now much less. Dikoff (1925), in Bulgaria,
found more cases amongst males than females. In Australia, Thomas
(1882) of 870 cases found 493 males and 377 females. Of 920 cases
recently investigated by the writer in Australia 529 were men and 091
women.
* While this paper has been in the press, Dr. H. E. Dew’s valuable, book “Hydatid Disease
has been published, in which he states that there has been little decrease in the incidence of hydatid
disease among the rural population of Victoria in recent years.


It is not suggested that sex has any influence in conferring sus-
ceptibility or immunity, the disproportion being accounted for by the
local conditions which more frequently expose one or other sex to risk
of infestation. Thus in* Iceland, Einarrson (1925) considers that the
habit of women milking sheep exposes them to risk of infestation
through contaminating the hands from the soiled wool of sheep, and
Deve (1923) suggests that the same factor operates in Tunis.
Age incidence. —Owing to the slow rate of growth of hydatid cysts,
the age at which cysts become clinically important does not necessarily
give any reliable indication of the age at which infestation takes place.
Nevertheless, statistics relating to children and young adults are of
importance from an epidemiological stand-point. Cranwell (1904)
found that, in the Argentine, 36 per cent, of cases occurred in children
or young adults under 21, while the greatest number of cases for any
decennial period occurred at from 21-30 years of age, representing 28.1
per cent, of total cases. Brun and Lauriol (1922), cited by Deve,
found that 15.8 per cent, of cases occurred during the first twenty years
of life.
In Australia, in 241 cases in which the age incidence was investi-
gated, 19.1 per cent, of patients were under 21, while the greatest
number of cases in any decennium occurred between the 41-50 years,
representing 24 per cent, of the total, while 21 per cent, occurred be-
tween 21-30 years, and 8.3 per cent, in children under eleven.
Incidence of liver and lung hydatids of man. —Vegas and Cranwell
(1901) found the ratio of liver to lung cases to be 9 :1, while the
authorities cited by Verdun (1913) state that liver infestations out-
number those in the lung by from 6:1 to 9 :1. In Australian cases
examined the disproportion was very much less, being 3.1 :1. It is
possible that improved methods of diagnosis and surgical technique
have resulted in the more frequent detection of lung infestations in
recent years.
2. The Incidence of the Larval Stage in Domestic Animals.
Prior to the survey carried out by the writer, there were few
statistical data available as to the incidence of hydatid disease among
domesticated animals in Australia. The only record relating to the
examination of a large number of animals was that of Cleland (1908)
when, as a lesult of the examination of all cattle, sheep and pigs slaugh-
tered at Fremantle abattoirs, the following figures were obtained:
Animal Number Number
slaughtered. infested. Percentage mfested.
Cattle .. 17,171 .. 339 .. 1.9 per cent.
Sheep .. 69,943 .. 1,408 .. 2 per cent.
■^> s • • 6,253 . . 47 .. 0.75 per cent.


It is considered that these figures may considerably understate the in-
cidence of the disease in animals in Western Australia, since it is
improbable that meat inspectors in the ordinary routine of inspection
would be enabled to detect other than well-developed cysts, which stand
out prominently on the surface of infested organs. The writer has
found from experience that the detection of hydatid cysts in the early
stages of development necessitates careful palpation of the various
organs, and that a very much higher incidence is revealed in this way
than by visual examination alone.
In contrast to the above, however, Chalmers (1921) states that in
the Argentine of all cattle slaughtered under inspection in 1918, 9.6
per cent, were infected with Echinococcus , while in 1919, 11 per cent,
of all sheep, and 20 per cent, of all pigs were similarly affected.
Unfortunately no system is, at present, in force at any large
abattoirs in Australia such as that introduced by Cleland in Western
Australia, so that it is not possible to obtain data relating to the in-
cidence of hydatid disease in the several States of the Commonwealth.
That this incidence may he extraordinarily high in certain areas is
revealed by the systematic examination of sheep and cattle carried out
by the writer on the central and southern tablelands of New South
Wales. Only a limited .amount of material could he examined in this
way, hut as a result of the examination of 179 sheep and 37 cattle it
was found that 35 per cent, of the former and 37 per cent, of the latter
were infested with Echinococcus. It is not considered, however, that a
similar degree of infestation obtained over the whole of New South
Wales, since in material examined at abattoirs from other districts it
was possible to find batches in which no hydatid disease occurred.
There appears to he little doubt that in New South Wales, hydatid
disease of sheep and cattle is most prevalent on the tablelands and
western slopes of the Great Dividing Range, but is much less pre-
valent in the hot, dry districts of the west. This may he easily
understood when it is realized that the former districts are those in
which there is the heaviest stocking with sheep, the distribution of
sheep in the west being much more sparse. There is little doubt
that in this, as in other parasitic affections, heavy stocking plays a
very important part in the distribution of the disease, since on the
mathematical grounds alone the chances of survival of a parasite
increase with the number of available hosts. In other parts of Aus-
tralia, where hydatid disease of man, at least, is reputedly most common
—parts such as the central and western parts of Victoria and the south-
eastern corner of South Australia —there again very heavy stocking
with sheep occurs.
It has been found that the percentage of infestation tends to he
much higher in old sheep than in lambs. The reason for this is not


far to seek since with such a slow growing parasite, even had infesta-
tion of lambs taken place, the growing cyst in most cases would be
sb small that it would easily escape detection. Since age is not known
to confer any immunity to hydatid disease, the longer an animal lives
constantly exposed to risk of infestation, the greater are the chances
of its ultimate infestation. The importance of age in influencing
the percentage of infestation in slaughtered animals has previously
been noted by Dikoff (1925) in Bulgaria, and by Barotte and Vein
(1925) in Morocco. The latter maintain also that the greater fre-
quency of infestation recorded in ew T es than rams, and in cows than
oxen, depends on the same factor, since females are usually slaughtered
later in life than males.
As has been recorded before, the ratio of lung and liver hydatids
in domestic animals is the opposite to that found in man. In the
latter, liver infestations greatly predominate, while in the former lung
infestations are the more numerous. It was found (1926) that in
Australia the proportion of lung to liver infestations in cattle and
sheep was 2.56 : 1.
3. The Incidence of the Adult Worm in the Dog and other
Carnivores.
(i) The Dog. —The incidence of the adult-worm in the domestic-
dog is of primary importance as the factor on which infestation of
man and animals ultimately depends, and the demonstration of a high
incidence in this animal is of the greatest significance, being in itself
a sufficient explanation of a high incidence of hydatid disease in man,
and a sufficient proof that the campaign for the eradication of hydatid
disease has failed.
In our survey of the tablelands of Hew South Wales it was found,
as a result of the medicinal treatment of dogs, that of 79 dogs treated,
sixteen, or 20.25 per cent., were infested with E. granulosus. This
figure probably understates the degree of infestation in the dogs ex-
amined, since it was not based, except in one case, on post-mortem
examination, while the conditions for medicinal treatment were not
ideal for the detection of such a small and delicate worm as E.
granulosus. A number of cases may therefore have escaped detection.
It has since been possible to examine further dogs from the Monaro
district, three of these being station dogs and the others, dogs used at
the abattoirs at the Federal Capital, Canberra. The result of these
examinations are given below—
Class of Dog. Number Treated. Number infested with Echinococcus.
Station .. 3 .. 1
Abattoir .. 8 .. 3
Total .. 11 .. 4


(Four of the dogs at Canberra were treated by Mr. A. C. McKay,
Veterinary Officer, and the material was kindly forwarded to me for
identification.)
If these dogs are included with those examined in the previous
survey, we have the following figures
Number infested with Percentage infested.
Number of Dogs Treated. j granulosus.
90 .. 20 .. 22 P er cent
Infestation of the dog in certain districts of iYew South Wales
thus compares with that found in what were recognized as among the
worst centres of hydatid disease in the past, or those which so rank
to-day. Krabbe only found 28 per cent, of dogs infested m Iceland
as a result of post-mortem examination, and that m days before any
prophylactic measures had been instituted. Baum and Jazas 1920)
as a result of the examination of 71 dogs in Morocco, found, only 14.8
per cent, infested. It is not to be thought that the above figures give
any idea of the degree of infestation of all dogs in Australia, or even
of those in country districts. The above examinations were made m
what appeared to be the worst centres of hydatid infestation m New
South Wales, and the great majority of the dogs examined were ones
which from their occupation and mode of life were most treqaen y
exposed to risk of infestation. As we have recorded before (19_,4),
the examination of over 100 dogs in Sydney failed to show, a single
animal infested with Echinococcus, and, even in country districts, dogs
other than those used on farms and stations or at slaughter yards or
abattoirs are not infested to a degree comparable with that mdica e
above. The factor responsible for the infestation of . all dogs wi
later be shown to be the access they have to the raw viscera of sheep
or other domesticated animals, so that it is in those dogs which are
most frequently fed on the flesh of these. animals that the heaviest
degree of infestation will be found. This is amply demonstrate
by studying the occupations of the dogs in the following table which
is formed by adding the figures just given above, to those of the pre-
vious survey: —
Class of Dog. Number Examined. Number infested. Percentage.
Farm and Station .. 18 .. 7 "on
Slaughter Yard or Abattoir 36 .. 11 •• • ”
Drovers • • . . 14 .. 1
It was previously shown that rabbiting dogs were seldom infested
with Echinococcus, and it is now possible to ofler striking confirma-
tion of this as a result of the examination of twenty dogs from the
Central Plains and Kiverina districts of Yew South Wales. T ese
figures were not included in the above table since the dogs came from
different districts.


The dogs in question were used almost wholly as rabbit catchers,
though six of them were also used for working sheep.
Number examined Number infested with Number infested with
Echinococcus. Taenia sp.
20 . . 0 18
It Avill thus be seen that infestation of dogs depends not only on
the feeding of raw meat or offal, but to a very large degree on the
animals from which this meat comes.
The extraordinary prevalence of infestation of dogs with Taenia
sp. is perhaps worth recording here. We have previously found
(1926) that of 79 dogs, 48 or 60.7 per cent, were infested with Taenia
sp., while the addition of the above figures for rabbiting dogs showed
infestation of 66 dogs out of 99, or 66 per cent. The great majority
of infestations with Taenia sp. were with Taenia hydatigena (Pallas,
1766) or with T. pisiformis (Bloch, 1780), Gmelin,- 1790. The latter
infestation always predominated when animals were fed principally on
rabbits. That such a high degree of infestation occurs in practically
all classes of country dogs demonstrates how worthless estimates of
infestation with A. granulosus are when based solely on the demon-
stration of Taenia eggs in the faeces.
It is possible that in Australia definitive hosts other than the
domestic dog may play some part in the distribution of hydatid disease.
(ii) Ihe Dingo. Ledenfeld (1888) claimed to have found E.
granulosus in the dingo, but, as Harvey Johnston (1916) has pointed
out, this must have been a case of mistaken identity since the speci-
mens were described as being up to 20 mm. in length, while the maxi-
mum length of E. granulosus is probably not more than 7 mm.
Though no subsequent record of the occurrence of the parasite in this
animal has been made, there is little doubt that infestation may occur,
since A. granulosus has been recorded not only in such close relatives
ot the dog as Canis lupus, but also in less closely related species such
as I ulpes lagopus, and after experimental infestation in Felis catus
dom. It is to be expected that, in the case of Canis dingo , which is
so closely related to the domestic dog, that interbreeding is said to be
frequent, infestation could readily occur#
(iii) Ihe Fox. Although the fox has not been recorded as the
host of E. granulosus in Australia, it has been found in naturally
occurring cases elsewhere, while Southwell (1927) has recently in-
fested the fox experimentally. Unfortunately, it has only been pos-
sible to hold a post-mortem examination on one fox, and this showed
no E. granulosus or other cestodes. It must, however, be accepted
that infestation of the fox may occur in Australia, and it will later
be necessary to consider the importance of the fox as a possible dis-
tributor of hydatid disease.


(iv) The Cat The cat has been experimentally infested with
E. granulosus, notably by Deve (1904), and recently by Southwell
(1927), but I have not seen any authentic record of naturally occurring
cases of infestation, though claims that these have been found have
been made from time to time, nor have I succeeded in infesting the
cat experimentally. While it must be admitted that infestation of the
cat under natural conditions is possible, it is probable that this occurs
but rarely in view of the great difficulty experienced in infesting this
animal artificially even by giving large doses of , hydatid scolices.
Deve was only able to infest one cat out of five after feeding enormous
doses of hydatid “ sand.” Again, it is doubtful whether the parasite
ever develops to maturity in the cat, even though infestation occurs.
Southwell succeeded in infesting a cat, but found that after 64 days
no mature worms had developed, though as we have seen it is possible
for the parasite to develop and produce eggs in 47 days in the dog,
while Southwell found that in the fox, mature but non-gravid worms
were developed in 27 days. It is not considered, therefore, that the
cat is more than an accidental host of the parasite. As such, it is
not suited to normal development. A parallel case of the develop-
ment of a parasite of one animal proceeding to a certain stage, but
not to maturity, in another host is offered in the case of the so-called
Ascaris ovis, which is thought to be an accidental infestation of the
sheep with A. vitulorum. In the sheep, development of this worm
proceeds for some time, but gravid or sexually mature worms are very
rarely developed. In view, however, of the record of naturally
occurring cases of infestation of the cat with this parasite, such as
that of Barrahalio (1907), whose paper I have been unable to con-
sult, it must be considered that some slight possibility of the cat
serving as a natural host of the parasite must be borne in mind.
4. Factors Governing the Incidence of Hydatid Disease in
Australia in relation to
( a} Infestation of the dog with the adult worm.
( b ) Infestation of man with the larval stage.
A. Infestation of the Dog with the Adult Worm.
The factors responsible for the infestation of the dog with the adult
E. granulosus are those which ultimately are responsible for the spread
of hydatid disease, since on infestation of the dog all further infestation
of man and animals depends. A clear appreciation of factors respon-
sible for this infestation is necessary if we are to devise effective
measures for the control and eradication of the disease.
Dogs become infested with the hydatid disease as. the result of
ingesting the organs of cattle, sheep, or pigs, and we have seen that
those dogs having the greatest opportunity for eating the raw viscera
of these animals most frequently become infested, as in the two classes


of dogs, farm or station dogs and slaughter yard dogs, while the degree
of infestation in other dogs is very much less. Consideration of the
conditions under which the above classes of dogs are fed will explain
why this is so. On stations, dogs usually receive little food, except
skimmed milk and a very intermittent supply of scraps, other than
the raw olfal of animals slaughtered on the station for human con-
sumption. The fact that the farmer finds an hydatid cyst or other
pathological lesion in liver or lungs renders it the more certain that
the organs are given to the dogs, so that their infestation is rendered
practically certain. Given a high degree of infestation in cattle or
sheep, it is obvious why these dogs are so frequently infested. Tt
is not the fact that they receive raw meat that is the essential factor,
but that this raw meat is in practically every case the viscera. In
the case of dogs at slaughter yards, in the absence of any effective
supervision, every factor predisposes towards their infestation, since
such dogs are almost invariably fed by their owners on viscera which
are not used for human consumption, often owing to the fact that they
are obviously diseased, while the dogs also take an active part in
securing food by walking over the killing floor and taking whatever
organs they find discarded. Tt is apparent that conditions in respect
to the infestation of both these classes could not well be more favorable.
It is not thought that in Australia the various domesticated animals
or the rabbit are of equal importance in producing infestation of
dogs with Echinococcus, and it remains to show the relative importance
of the several animals as a source of infestation.
(i) The Sheep as the Main Source of Infestation of the Dog. —
Thomas (1882-3) and other observers have sought to show that there
is a definite relationship between the number of head of live-stock in
a country and the incidence of hydatid disease, and that the disease
is most prevalent in pastoral countries. In Australia and most other
countries where hydatid disease is prevalent to-day, large numbers of
sheep are reared, and it is postulated that given comparable climatic,
social, and economic conditions, the extent of the ovine population pre-
disposes to a correspondingly high incidence of hydatid disease of
man. In Iceland, the classic home of the disease, there were, as
recorded by Krabbe, 428 sheep to every 100 of human population, a
relatively large sheep population for a European country. In
addition, the very low standards of education and hygiene and the
large number of dogs, undoubtedly facilitated the spread of the disease.
In South America it is possible to contrast countries such as the
Argentine and Uruguay having large sheep populations in which
hydatid disease- is common, with cattle-producing countries such
as Brazil and Venezuela, in the first of which the disease is rare,
while in the latter doubt as to whether or not the disease really
occurred existed for some time. Hot only this, but the increase in


the cases of hydatid disease in the Argentine from 1 in 1877 to 185
in 1897 corresponded with an enormous increase in the number of
sheep during the same period, while in Uruguay a similar increase in
the sheep population corresponded to an increase in the cases of hydatid
disease of man, as recorded by Zerbino (1919), of from 11 in 1896
to 165 in 1915. In most of those European countries- where hydatid
disease is most prevalent, there is again a relatively large sheep popu-
lation as, for example, in Bulgaria (8,923,000). In certain countries
it is true* that the pig may replace the sheep as the most im-
portant factor in relation to infestation of dogs, as, for example, in
Germany, where there are 19,400,000 pigs hut only 4,083,000 sheep,
while Stolpe (1925) has found the incidence of Echinococcus in pigs
in a given district to he sometimes ten times as high, as in cattle or
sheep.
FIGURE 3.
Map showing the distribution op Sheep in Australia.
(Commonwealth Year-Book , 1927.)
In Australia, the distribution of sheep, has a very definite relation-
ship to the incidence of hydatid disease of man. In ISTew South
Wales, there is definite evidence that hydatid disease of man is most
prevalent on the tablelands and western slopes of the Great Dividing
Range, while in Victoria Dr. Dew has informed me that the majority
of cases come from the great sheep-raising areas of the western and
south-western parts of the State. In South Australia, the south-
eastern part of the State now, as in Thomas’ day, is still the worst


centre for hydatid disease of man. The accompanying map from the
Commonwealth Year-Book 1927 (Fig. 3)*, shows that the greatest
concentration of sheep occurs in just these areas which are reputedly
the worst centres of hydatid disease of man. In addition, it will be
found that a very great increase in the sheep population of Australia
occurred from 1870 onward, while it was from about 1880 onward that
the increasing prevalence of hydatid disease began to exercise the
minds of Australian health authorities. It is possible that there is
some connexion between the increase in the number of cases of hydatid
disease of man in Western Australia during the last quinquennial
period as indicated by the Perth Hospital records, and the fact that
the sheep population of Western Australia has increased from 4,800,000
in 1915 to 6,800,000 in 1925.
Why Sheep are of Primary Importance as the Source of Infestation
of the Dog in Australia.
(a) Extensive Home Slaughtering of Sheep. —-The sheep is pre-
eminently the animal used to provide the meat supply for farms and
stations, so that on practically every sheep holding in Australia one
or more sheep are slaughtered weekly. In the aggregate, not less
than 500,000 sheep are slaughtered on private holdings in this way,
while this number may be greatly exceeded. Since it is almost the
invariable custom on such holdings for the viscera to be given raw to
dogs, while still fresh from the sheep, it will be seen that given a
moderate degree of infestation in sheep everything predisposes towards
the infestation of dogs from this source. In comparison with the
number of sheep slaughtered privately the number of cattle and pigs
slaughtered in this way is almost negligible.
(b) Fertility of Hydatid Cysts from Sheep. —ln comparing the
relative importance of sheep, cattle, and other animals, as sources of
infestation, it is necessary to remember that an important factor is
the very great variation in the degree of fertility of cysts from these
animals. It is generally conceded that cysts from sheep, whether in
the liver or lungs, have a very high degree of fertility, and we have
found even very small cysts, little more than 1 cm. in diameter,
to he fertile, whereas Dew (1925) found that cysts in the pig re-
sulting from experimental infestation, even when 10 cm. in diameter,
were sterile. The comparative sterility of ox cysts is well known, and
it is not unusual to find even very large cysts, in which there has been
abundant daughter cyst formation, to be sterile. Ox cysts, of course,
may be found which contains very large numbers of brood capsules,
but these would appear to be the exception rather than the rule. In
view of the high fertility of hydatid cysts of sheep, it follows that
t? . .‘This same map has also been used in Dr. It. H. Dew’s “Hydatid Disease,” which was
published while this paper was going through the press.


the majority of cysts consumed have a high potential mfectivity, and
consequently the consumption of these cysts will produce a high
degree of infestation.
(c) Dogs at Slaughter Yards and Abattoirs also principally In-
fested from Sheep Organs.—Not only are sheep the most important
source of infestation of dogs at slaughter yards and some abattoirs,
because of the numbers of these animals slaughtered and the fertility
of the cysts that occur in them, but also because their organs, by
reason of the convenient size of such, are almost invariably selected
as food for dogs either by their owners or by the dogs themselves. It
is exceptional to see a dog attempt to seize the relatively bulky lungs
or liver of an ox, while in the very numerous cases which have been
personally witnessed of slaughtermen taking raw viscera from
slaughter yards for dog food, sheep viscera have always been selected.
(ii) Cattle as a Source of Infestation. —It is not thought that m
Australia the ox ranks with the sheep as a source of infestation of the
dog. As has been mentioned above, the number of cattle slaughtered
annually on private properties is very slight when compared with that
of sheep, while in addition the lesser fertility of hydatid cysts of
cattle again decreases the infective value of the cysts.
(iii) The Pig. —The pig, were it as numerous as in Germany, for
example, would no doubt be a very important factor in producing
infestation of the dog, but in Australia the number of pigs is rela-
tively small (900,000), and when compared with sheep very few are
slaughtered on private properties. At slaughter yards and abattoirs
it is probable that their importance as infective agents, when com-
pared with sheep, is proportionate to the numbers of the two animals
killed. That the pig may serve as a very important source of in-
festation has been demonstrated in certain European countries, and
Foppe and Thielkow (1926) have shown that in Mecklenburg a recent
increase in the numbers of cases of hydatid disease in man coincided
with an increase in the incidence of the disease in pigs, while the in-
cidence in sheep and cattle had decreased considerably. In Australia,
it is probable that the pig is of importance in producing infestation
in dogs in certain of the dairying areas such as the north and south
coast districts of Hew South Wales, where very few sheep are run.
(iv) The Rabbit. —According to popular opinion the rabbit is an
important host of the hydatid parasite, and what are spoken of as
“ hydatids ” are frequently found in rabbits in all parts of the
country. It is to be expected that were the rabbit an important source
of infestation, dogs which are fed almost wholly on rabbits, as are
those kept on stations as rabbit catchers, would show a high degree
of infestation with E. granulosus. Actually we have found that only
one dog of this class, out of a total of 35 examined, was infested.


Further, there is little doubt that this dog did not derive its infes-
tation from rabbits, it having commenced its career as a rabbit catcher
only a very short time before it was examined. Moreover, in 50
rabbits which were examined while making our survey of the in-
cidence of hydatid disease in Few South Wales, we found no cases of
infestation with Echinococcus, while 40 per cent, of rabbits were in-
fested with Cysticercus pisiformis (Bloch, 1780), and 4 per cent,
with Coenuris serialis (Gervais, 1847). Dir. Georgina Sweet, in a
personal communication, has informed me that in over 1,200 rabbits
which she has examined in the course of her researches, she has not
found a single case of infestation with Echinococcus. Experimental
evidence offers confirmation of the slight importance .of the rabbit as
the host of the parasite, Deve (1908) having first pointed out the
difficulty experienced in infesting these animals experimentally with
primary hydatids. In rabbits, he obtained a eo-efficient of receptivity
of infestation of only 0.02 per cent, compared with a receptivity of
1.65 per cent, in squirrels, giving a degree of infectivity in the squirrel
over 75 times as great as in the rabbit. I have also endeavoured to
infest rabbits experimentally by feeding large numbers of Echino-
coccus eggs, but in six rabbits, each fed with twenty ripe segments, no
signs of infestation were seen on post-mortem examination from two
to seven months later. It may be concluded, therefore, that the-
rabbit is of very slight importance as a source of infestation of the
dog.
(v) General Conclusions. —We have seen that the sheep is the
primary factor in the distribution of hydatid infestation of the dog,,
and that, according to the accessibility of the organs of sheep, so will
the degree of infestation vary. Further, because of this factor two
classes of dog are infested to a very high degree. It is necessary
to remember, however, that practically any country dog may at times
be exposed to the risk of infestation, so that a certain degree of in-
festation must be expected among them. More important still is the
fact that certain dogs, even in the capital cities, may be found to be
infested with E. granulosus, though the degree of infestation of city
dogs in general has been found by the writer to be very small. The
high degree of infestation of dogs at country slaughter-yards is due
to the fact that no system of meat inspection or supervision of these
places exists, and conversely the low incidence of infestation in the
dogs in the cities is due to the fact that in the metropolitan areas
all slaughtering is carried out at abattoirs under supervision, and
where provision is made for the condemnation and treatment of
diseased meat so that it cannot be used for human consumption, or
be capable of spreading disease to man or animals. Efficient in-
spection and destruction of diseased meat, together with the enforce


ment of regulations for the exclusion of hogs from abattoirs, theore-
tically at least, should mean that no infestation of dogs in the cities
cculd occur. In fact, however, dogs infested with Echinococcus may
be found in city areas, hut these in every case in recent years have
been dogs used in the vicinity of abattoirs as those found by 'Dew
(1925) at the Melbourne Abattoirs and by myself at the Canberra
Abattoir That such dogs are found at these places is of consider-
able importance, since it indicates either defects in existing meat
inspection regulations at abattoirs or defective enforcement of regu-
lations in regard to such matters as condemnation of diseased meat
or the prohibition of the entry of dogs to abattoir premises. The
defects in the present system of inspection will be dealt with m detail
later. It is only necessary here to draw attention to the possibility
of dogs becoming infested from this source and their importance as
distributors of infestation of man in the city. , While abattoir dogs
no doubt comprise the majority of those which are likely to be in-
fested in the city, it is probable that rarely dogs having no con-
nexion with an abattoir, but which are fed on raw meat, may become
infested. This will be shown to be due to the fact that with the
present system of meat inspection, it is possible for certain small
cysts to escape detection at the abattoir, and to be subsequently ex-
posed for sale. At the Clinic of the Veterinary School at the Uni-
versity of Sydney, hydatid cysts have been found in meat bought as
food for the canine patients, while in more than one instance other cystic
tapeworm forms have been found in organs intended for human con-
sumption. Though it is necessary to cite these instances, which, if
exceptional, are yet important, nevertheless it is not possible to over-
estimate the value of the localization of slaughtering at abattoirs with
the resultant possibilities for exercising supervision of all meat in-
tended for human or animal consumption as a means of reducing
risk of infestation of the dog with the adult worm, and thus indirectly
of man with the larval stage.
(vi) Summary.— To summarize the factors responsible for the in-
cidence of E. granulosus in the dog in Australia, we may say—
1. Infestation primarily depends on the large sheep population,
while other animals, such as cattle, pigs, and rabbits, play a relatively
unimportant part in the distribution of infestation.
2. Since infestation depends on the availability of raw organs of
sheep as food for dogs, two classes of dogs are of pre-eminent importance
as having a very high degree of infestation, namely, slaughter-yaid
and station dogs.
3. The immediate factor on which infestation of the dog depends
is the lack of any system of meat inspection in country districts, and


the widespread practice of feeding the raw viscera of food animals,
whether healthy or diseased, to dogs.
4. Owing to defects in meat inspection regulations at abattoirs, it
is possible that a small proportion of dogs in cities may be infested.
B. Infestation of Man with the Larval Stage.
It may he assumed that in Australia hydatid disease of man is
derived in practically every case from the domestic dog, and that the
degree of infestation of man depends on a high degree of infestation in
the dog. It has been shown that infestation of dogs is now largely
confined to certain classes of country dogs, and consequently hydatid
disease of man is very largely limited to that portion of the population
which is resident in rural areas.
It is advisable, in considering the factors responsible for the in-
cidence of the disease in man, to deal first with the several methods of
infestation of man and their relative importance.
(i) Direct Association with Infested Country Dogs. —lt is con-
sidered that infestation is primarily due to direct association with
infested dogs, and that infestation of individuals in the majority of
cases is derived from those dogs with which they are most frequently
and intimately associated. Infestation as a result of direct contact
with infested dogs may result in the following ways: —
Deve has coined the phrase for hydatid diseases, “ maladie des
mains salles,” indicating the importance of infestation of man by
contamination of the hands as a result of handling or associating
with infested dogs. It might be thought that the risk of this method
of infestation is slight, but, as we have pointed out before, the con-
ditions under which dogs are kept in Australia are such that this
method of infestation is of great importance. Station dogs, tied up
as they are for days at a time, must pass their faeces daily in a cir-
cumscribed area, and there the faeces disintegrate, liberating the
contained Echinococcus eggs, which mingle in countless hundreds with
the dust. Each time a dog lies down it rises with its coat covered
with the dust and eggs. We have seen that in warm, moist weather,
even when exposed to high temperatures, eggs may survive for at
least three weeks, while under extreme conditions of cold it is probable
they may survive in the vicinity of kennels for some months. Should
such a dog be patted hv its owner or by its mistress, the ease with
which dust and eggs may he transferred from the coat to the hands
may he appreciated. Afterwards, it needs only the careless handling
of a pipe or food for the transfer of the egg to the mouth to be
affected. In the case of very small children, the risk is even greater
since, not only may such children neglect every precaution after
handling dogs, but they may also when crawling on the ground grossly


contaminate their hands, or even pick up and suck any object that
takes their fancy. That nearly 20 per cent, of all cases of hydatid
disease in Australia should he in persons under twenty years of age
proves the frequency of infestation during childhood. When once
one has seen young children crawling round among country dogs, an
being fondled and licked by them, it needs no argument to illustrate
the importance of this method of infestation, and to illustrate that,
so far as children are concerned, its importance far exceeds any other,
while it is probably of little less moment among adults. The possi-
bility of contamination by licking is one which has been stressed in
the past, owing to the fact that the dogs’ uncleanly habits are liable
to predispose towards soiling of the mouth parts with faeces which
may thus be transferred to man. Hot only may the soiling of the
mouth parts occur wihle the dog is actually licking his hind-quarters,
but it may also take place while he attends to other details of his
toilet, since in pursuing fleas on any part of his coat he is liable to
contaminate his mouth parts. That this contamination takes place
is undoubted, since we have been able to recover hydatid eggs in dust
from the coat taken from the region of the hind-quarters and anus of
an infected dog. Hot only may the anus and perineum be con-
taminated with faeces, but also the hair of the hind-quarters, especially
in the case of dogs whose faeces are slightly diarrhoeic. We agree,
however, with Deve that infestation by licking is of far less im-
portance than by the soiling of the hands as a result of carelessly
handling dogs. To the fact that the Australian country man rarely
exhibits any affection for his dog, it is no doubt due that he is not
infested to a much greater degree. Since it is argued that this
method of direct contamination from the dog is the most important
method of infestation of man, it follows that infestation must most
fiequently be derived from those dogs with which one is most frequently
and intimately associated.
(ii) Water-borne Infestation.— While is is not denied that in-
festation by water may occur in certain cases, it is thought that this
mode is of less importance than was previously thought. Thomas
(1882-3) considered that, in Australia, infestation in the majority of
cases took place in the water, while in Tunis, Deve (1923) considers
water to be of very great importance, owing to the habits of the
Arabs in drinking from small and muddy pools which are shared
impartially by dogs and all other domesticated animals. In Australia,
however, should the country man drink from surface water, he selects
clean, clear water as far as possible, and drinks carefully so as not to stir
up the mud. We have shown (1926) that Echinococcus eggs do not,
as was previously assumed, float on the surface of the water, but like
other helminth eggs fall to the bottom. Thus eggs blown on to


surface water would rapidly fall to the bottom and would not be drawn
otf in water taken carefully without stirring up the mud. Never-
theless, it has been found that Echinococcus eggs may easily he carried
upwards should any marked disturbance be caused in drawing otf
water, so that Deve’s computation of the importance of this method
of infestation in Tunis, where water is disturbed by drinking animals,
is understandable. Gertrude Bell (1908) records that in Syria the
water with which her tea was made, and which was drunk unboiled
by the Arabs, was so heavily contaminated that a heavy layer of mud
was left in the cup. In Australia the possibility must also be con-
sidered of eggs being blown with dust into tanks and subsequently
being drawn off with the water. Since tank taps are placed not at
the very bottom of the tank, but some 2 inches above, eggs falling
into the tank would sink to the bottom, and would not be likely to
be drawn off with the water unless the layer of the silt rose to the
level of the tap. It must not be thought, however, that the presence
of dust in tank water necessarily implies that eggs may also be
present. While Taenia eggs sink rapidly to the bottom of water, fine
particles of dust may remain in suspension for a considerable time.
It is thought, therefore, that while water-borne infestation is possibly
of importance, and while suitable precautions should be taken to-
guard against contamination of water supply, it is not in this country
comparable in importance to infestation from direct contact with dogs.
(iii) Contamination of Uncooked Vegetables. —lt has been the-
custom to stress the danger of swallowing eggs which have blown with
the dust on to uncooked vegetables. Though the danger from this
source is difficult to compute, and its possibility is sufficient to neces-
sitate the adequate washing of raw vegetables and the exclusion of
dogs from vegetable gardens, it is not considered to be of major
importance.
(iv) Flies. —A method of infestation with the hydatid parasite
which has not been mentioned previously is that through contamina-
tion of food by flies. Shircore (1915) has shown that flies in India
were the carriers in their bowel of the eggs of Taenia sp., Ascaris
lumbricoides and Ancylostoma duodenale, and that the eggs of the
parasites might pass unchanged through the bowel. In order to
confirm this fact in regard to the eggs of E. granulosus, dog faeces
in which there were a large number of E. granulosus eggs were exposed
to fly attack, and later a number of these flies were trapped and
examined. Of fifteen flies examined, three were found to show the
eggs of Echinococcus in the ingesta, while one also showed the much
larger egg of Uncinaris stenocephala, all the eggs being unhatched
and, as far as could be seen, unchanged. There is no doubt, there-
fore, that flies may carry eggs from faeces and subsequently may


contaminate food or household utensils. The danger from this source
is no doubt of some importance, and constitutes one more reason why
the fly should be considered a most serious disease carrier m country
districts.
It has been found that mosquito larvae are also able to ingest
Echinococcus eggs, and these may pass unchanged through the alimen-
tary tract, but it is not known whether they may also be present m
the nymphal stage or the imago.
(v) Infestation of Man through Handling Sheep— Einarrson (19261
has stated that the great discrepancy between the number of cases of
hydatid disease in men and women in Iceland is due to the fact that
women till recently did practically all the handling of sheep, which
were used largely for milking, and that in consequence their hands
were frequently contaminated with Echinococcus eggs from the soiled
fleece of the sheep which were yarded in small enclosures frequently
soiled with faeces of dogs. As proof of this contention, figures show
that from 1905-1909 the proportion of cases in women to those in
men was 53-22, whereas from 1920-1924 the proportion was only
35 : 30. This change is considered to be due to the fact that sheep
are now being reared for mutton production rather than milk, so that
in this period the handling of sheep by women has greatly decreased,
and in consequence they are not exposed to the same extent to iisk
of infestation in this way. It is not thought that infestation of man
by this method in Australia compares with that in Iceland, since
holdings are much larger, while sheep are not so frequently or closely
associated either with man or dog. One important possibility that
infestation of man may take place indirectly through the sheep. does
exist in this country owing to the habit, as unnecessary as it .is
objectionable, of castrating sheep by dragging out the testicles with
the teeth. It is not difficult to see, when sheep are yarded in places
contaminated with dogs’ faeces, and when on such occasions numerous
dogs are in attendance running in and out of yards, not failing on
occasion to defecate, that the under surface of the lambs’ bodies may
be soiled with faeces and eggs. It is impossible, when castrating
some thousands of lambs, that the face and mouth parts should not
be soiled with dirt and excrement from the hind-quarters and scrotum,
and in such circumstances the risk of swallowing the hydatid egg is
considerable.
(vi) Age and Sex as Factors Influencing Infestation of Man.
There is no evidence that age or sex have any influence in conferring
either susceptibility of immunity, and they are of importance only in
so far as the habit of women or children predispose towards risk of
infestation.


(viii) Other Sources of Infestation. —In the above discussion it
has been assumed that the domestic dog is mainly responsible for all
cases of hydatid disease of man, but since it is possible that other
animals such as the dingo, fox, and cat may be the host of the adult
worm, it is necessary to consider the importance of these animals in
this connexion.
The Dingo. —Owing to the fact that the dingo is seldom found in
close proximity to settlements or houses, it is not considered that it
has more than a theoretical importance as a source of infestation of
man. On the other hand, in certain areas, it may possibly serve as
a source of infestation of sheep and cattle, and thus indirectly have
some relationship to the incidence of the disease in man.
The Fox. —The fox occupies a somewhat similar position in regard
to infestation of man as the dingo, with the additional importance
that- it is definitely known to be a host of the hydatid parasite.
Southwell (1927) has recently discussed the importance of the fox
as a distributor of hydatid disease, in view of the apparent rarity of
infestation- in the dog in England. Whatever the importance of the
fox, it is not reasonable to suppose this to he more than infinitesimal
when compared with that of the dog, both in point of view of the
numbers of the animal and its accessibility to the organs of inter-
mediate hosts.
The Cat. —The experimental infestation of the cat renders it neces-
sary to class it as a potential carrier of infestation of man, but its
importance in this connexion is very slight. First, even though the
cat were infested in an equal degree with the dog, its more cleanly
habits, such as the burying of faeces, would render it much less
dangerous than the dog. On the other hand, cats of only one type,
namely, those which are found in the vicinity of slaughter-yards, are
likely to he much exposed to risk of infestation, since they alone are
likely to be fed to any extent on raw viscera. Dogs would see to it
that no cat disputed with them the possession of the offal of sheep
slaughtered on stations and farms. That country cats often catch
rabbits in the country would expose them to risk of infestation were
the latter important hosts, but we have seen that their importance
as an intermediate host is slight. Finally, the difficulty in infesting
the cat with E. granulosus is the most vital factor in preventing any
widespread infestation. It is only necessary to consider the theoretical
importance of slaughter-yard cats as a factor in the distribution of
hydatid disease and to devise measures which will eliminate this
possibility.


(viii) Summary. —We may summarize our conclusions in regard
to the source of infestation of man as follows:
(1) Infestation of man with hydatid disease in Australia is
almost invariably derived from the domestic dog, while the fox,
cat, and dingo are of little importance in this connexion.
(2) It is considered that the most important method of in-
festation is by soiling the hands through the careless handling of
infested dogs, this danger being especially great in the case of
children.
(3) Flies have been found capable of ingesting Echinococcus
eggs, and are considered to carry infestation through the con-
tamination of food.
(4) It is not thought that infestation through drinking water
and by uncooked vegetables is of as great importance as has
been previously thought. The practice of castrating sheep by the
teeth is a possible source of infestation.
(ix) Factors Influencing Continued Infestation. From the con-
sideration of the factors enumerated above as those upon which the
continued incidence of infestation with the adult worm in the dog
and hydatid infestation of man depend, it should be possible to deter-
mine on what the failure to control hydatid disease in Australia
depends.
First in importance, so far as the continued infestation of the dog
is concerned, is the practice of feeding raw viscera of the domestic
animals to dogs, this being very largely due to the ignorance or
apathy of the private individuals concerned (farmers and station
owners), while a secondary but very important factor is the impos-
sibility of enforcing regulations designed to prevent this practice at
country slaughter-yards, and to a lesser extent the failure to prevent
it at abattoirs. While no effort is made to prevent these all-important
sources of infestation of the dog, it is needless to look further for the
reason why hydatid disease to-day flourishes in this counti}'. The
main factor on which infestation of man depends, apart from the
primary factor of a high degree of infestation in the dog, is the
ignorance found over a very large part of the country and among all
classes of the community in regard to the true nature of hydatid
disease, how it is contracted and how spread. Though m certain
areas, a confirmed dread of cystic growths (Coenurus serialis ) in the
rabbit is exhibited, these when found often being carefully buried,
little account is taken of the dog as the true source of infestation of
man or of the need for preventing its infestation. It is to be feared
that public health authorities are to a certain extent culpable, not
only for their failure to spread knowledge of hydatid disease through
suitable channels, but also through their apathy in tolerating obsolete


systems of slaughtering in country areas when avenues for improve-
ment lie open. In addition, both medical and veterinary practi-
tioners have failed to appreciate the part they might play in the dis-
semination of knowledge in regard to this disease. How little this
appreciation has been was shown in the case of one experienced
country practitioner who claimed to have performed scores of opera-
tions for hydatid disease, and yet asked the writer whether the dog
had anything to do with the disease. It is considered also that in
the past efforts made to prevent infestation of man, emphasis has
been placed too much on the danger of infestation through drinking-
water and uncooked salads, and too little attention has been given to
the much greater danger from direct association with dogs, and
especially the danger from this source in the case of children. Even
more important is the fact that it has not been realized that all con-
trol measures will be abortive so long as infestation of the dog is
allowed to continue.
IV. CONTROL OF HYDATID DISEASE.
1. Measures Applicable by Private Individuals.
(i) Destruction or treatment of raw offal. —We Have seen that
the high incidence of hydatid infestation of dogs on stations and
farms is due to the feeding of these animals on raw offal, particularly
that of sheep slaughtered for home consumption. It follows that the
abolition of this practice will practically eliminate infestation of
these dogs and, perhaps more than any single factor, will serve to
control the spread of hydatid disease in man and animals. If rav
offal is no longer to he fed to dogs, it must either he destroyed or
treated in such a way that it may be safely used as dog food. It is
to be feared that total destruction of all offal cannot be expected.
Any method of treatment of it, to be generally adopted, must be one
which is easily applicable, and which causes the minimum disturbance
of station routine. It appears that partial cooking of all raw organs
offers the most satisfactory solution of this problem, since it has been
found that temperatures as low as 55 deg. C. for one minute will kill
all hydatid elements in sheep viscera. It might be thought that this
measure is not necessary in all cases, and that careful examination of
organs by station slaughtermen and the destruction or boiling of meat
containing cysts would be a sufficient safeguard, but even were this
examination carried out conscientiously, it would not prove effective
for the elimination of all cysts. Only by careful palpation of lungs
and liver is it possible to detect small cysts, and since we have seen
that cysts of little more than 1 cm. in diameter may be fertile, it is
very necessary that even the smallest cysts should be destroyed.


Moreover, even were careful palpation carried out for some time by
the farmer himself, it is idle to imagine that when slaughtering is
done by station hands that this would be persevered with for a long
period. It is insisted, therefore, that the only safe and efficient
method of treating raw offal is the boiling of those organs, such as
liver, lungs, heart, and spleen, which are most frequently the seats of
infestation, for at least ten minutes.
Treatment of offal by boiling can be carried out with the minimum
of trouble by the adoption of the following procedure: —A small fire-
place should be built in the vicinity of the killing pen, and a suitable
receptacle for the offal provided, such as a kerosene tin. The
slaughterman should light the fire under the tin before going out to
bring in the killing sheep so that by the time the animal is killed and
eviscerated the water will be boiling, and the organs as they are re-
moved may be dropped into it. Ten minutes later they can be taken
off, cooled, and immediately used as dog food. The boiling of the
stomach and intestines is not necessary since these are very seldom the
seat of infestation, while the presence of secondary cysts in the
abdominal cavity is relatively rare. It is, however, very necessary
to include the heart and spleen, since these are frequently the seat
of infestation. Where cattle are slaughtered frequently, some larger
receptacle must be provided, and the organs should be cut up to pro-
vide for the attainment of the requisite degree of heat throughout them.
It will be realized that the success of the above procedure, as a
measure aiming at eradication of hydatid disease, will depend on its
general adoption by stock-owners, and that its adoption by individual
stock-owners in isolated cases would fail to achieve this purpose.
Nevertheless, even though failing in the more important objective,
each stock-owner should be made to realize that by adopting this
practice he will have the satisfaction of knowing that by preventing
the infestation of his own dogs, he is thereby lessening to a very
considerable extent the dangers to himself or his children of con-
tracting hydatid disease, since we have seen that danger of infestation
is more likely to come from those dogs with which one is most closely
associated.
In view of the difficulty which may be experienced in securing the
general adoption of this measure, it is suggested that some legislative
amendment to the Cattle Slaughtering , Diseased Animals and Meat
Act 1902, Hew South Wales, or similar Acts making compulsory the
treatment of offal as suggested above might be of value in bringing
about its more general adoption. Though the difficulties of enforcing
any such enactments are obvious, it is thought that the notifications
of all stock-owners that such a measure had legal sanction would have
a very material effect in achieving the end desired.


(ii) Personal cleanliness and hygiene. —While eradication is the
ultimate objective of all control measures, it is very necessary that at
the same time every effort should be made to prevent infestation of
man, and in view of the widespread infestation of dogs in certain
country districts to-day, it is very necessary that to this end the
methods of safeguarding human health should be clearly understood by
every country dweller. The general adoption of the following simple
measures will reduce infestation of man to a minimum.
(a) Cleanliness after handling dogs. —ln this “maladie des
mains sales,” it is essential that every precaution should be taken to
guard against infestation arising from the association with or
handling of dogs. The hands should, therefore, always he carefully
washed as soon as possible after handling any dog, and more
especially before handling food. It must he remembered, however,
that even though no food is taken, eggs of Echinococcus once having
contaminated the hands may be transferred therefrom to pipes, articles
of clothing, or handkerchiefs, so that it should be looked upon as
absolutely necessary to wash invariably, and as soon as possible after
any handling of country dogs.
( b) Young children and dogs. —Owing to the fact that it is im-
possible to impress the danger of carelessly handling dogs on very
young children, they should never be allowed, unless under supervi-
sion, to associate with dogs in any way. Hot only must the danger
from direct contact with dogs be remembered, but also that from
allowing children to crawl in the vicinity of yards, kennels, or places
frequented by dogs, owing to the likelihood of the contamination of
the hands from the soil, or the possibility that they may even pick up
and suck objects which are grossly contaminated. It is needless to
state that as soon as children are able to appreciate the rudimentary
principles of hygiene they should have the necessity of great care and
cleanliness in associating with dogs firmly impressed upon them.
( c) Contamination of water supply. —Though it is not con-
sidered that infestation by means of drinking water is of as great
importance in Australia as was previously supposed, care in the selec-
tion of drinking water and the danger of drinking surface water from
places likely to be contaminated by dogs needs no stressing. It is
also advisable to boil water in all cases where doubt as to its purity
exists. Household supplies should always be drawn from sources
which, as far as possible, are guarded from contamination.
(d) Handling of sheep. —ln view of the possibility of the trans-
ference of eggs from the soiled fleece of sheep to man, however small
this danger may be, it is nevertheless necessary to emphasize the im-
portance of observing elementary rules of cleanliness after handling


sheep, such as always washing before handling food. The objec-
tionable practice of castrating sheep by means of the teeth should be
discountenanced, and less objectionable but equally effective methods
employed.
' (e) Trapping flies and conservation of dogs’ faeces. —Since flies
are known to ingest Echinococcus eggs, and may carry these from dog
faeces to food, every effort should be made to trap flies and limit
their numbers. Fly traps should be placed in the vicinity of dog
vards, killing pens and stables, while these should be kept as clean
as possible. Food should always be covered and protected from
attack by flies. Cleanliness of dog yards is very necessary, and
the daily collection and burning or the suitable conservation of faeces
from around kennels will prove extremely valuable in lessening dangei
of contaminating dog’s coats and disseminating eggs.
(/) Washing of uncooked vegetables. —That hydatid eggs are
capable of surviving desiccation for several days makes the con-
tamination of vegetables with eggs a possibility, even when these aie
passed some distance from the vegetable garden. Uncooked vege-
tables used for salads should, therefore, be carefully washed before
use and, if possible, in running water. Lettuce should be washed leaf
by leaf, and all the outer leaves discarded. Dogs should be excluded
from vegetable gardens as far as possible.
(iii) Freeing dogs from infestation with the adult worm by
anthelmintic medication with tests of the efficiency of arecohne
hydrobromide for this purpose. —In addition to the measures dis-
cussed in the two foregoing sections, which are designed primarily m
the one case to assist in eradication and in the other to prevent in-
festation of man, the freeing of all country dogs from adult Echino-
coccus by anthelmintic medication will prove a valuable and very
important adjunct in achieving both these ends. Ho work has pre-
viously been done in regard to the efficiency of anthelmintics for the
removal of Echinococcus in the dog, though the value of anthelmintic
treatment as a prophylactic measure has been emphasized by other
workers. In view, however, of the apparent efficacy of arecohne
hydrobromide in removing these worms as shown by Boss (1925-26),
and of the critical tests of its efficacy against other cestodes as shown
by Hall (1923) and Boss (1924), the following tests were conducted
to determine its absolute efficacy against Echinococcus with the fol-
lowing encouraging results.
Technique. —Dogs were given large doses of hydatid “ sand,” and
later, on Echinococcus eggs being passed in the faeces, were treated
with therapeutic doses of arecoline hydrobromide, the faeces passed
after treatment being collected and washed for Echinococcus. Sub-
sequent post-mortem examination and the careful searching of the


intestinal tract enabled the approximate percentage of efficacy of
the drug to be determined. One dog was treated with extract of
male fern instead of arecoline in order to compare the efficiency of
the two drugs, the former being well known as an anthelmintic for
the removal of cestodes.
Dog. 1, weight 19 lb.—Twenty-six days after feeding with
hydatid “ sand/’ the dog was starved over night, and in the
morning was given arecoline hydrobromide grain, in 2 drachms of
water. Dog passed faeces in fifteen minutes, and then at intervals
for three-quarters of an hour. Unfortunately, through an error, the
faeces were passed in a site that made collection of fluid faeces diffi-
cult, but some of the stools were collected and examined with a magni-
fying glass. ISTo Echinococcus were seen.
Two days later, the dog was destroyed, and the whole of the small
intestine carefully examined. No Echinococcus were seen with the
naked eye. The bowel contained numerous Toxascaris limbata.
Numerous small haemorrhagic areas were present. Scraping from
the mucous membrane and microscopic examination revealed the
presence of one or two small and immature Echinococcus in several
scrapings from the posterior part of the small intestine. Since no
worms were seen in the faeces passed, no estimate of the efficacy of
the drug can be made other than the fact that it was ineffective in
removing all Echinococcus present. In view of the fact that rela-
tively few worms were found in scrapings, it is concluded that a con-
siderable number must have been removed, but in view of their im-
maturity and difficulty of collection they were unperceived.
Dog 2, fox terrier, weight 14 lb. —Sixty-one days after giving
hydatid “ sand,” and after starving over night, arecoline hydrobromide
•J grain was given in water 2 drachms. Faeces were passed in seven-
teen minutes, and from this first stool 287 Echinococcus were col-
lected. After 35 minutes, copious fluid faeces were passed, in which
were vast quantities of Echinococcus, estimated after a count of 500
at 4,000. Further faeces were passed up to an hour and fifteen
minutes after treatment, all the later stools containing fewer
Echinococcus. The last stool after one hour and fifty minutes con-
tained 109.
After counting over 1,000 Echinococcus from the total passed and
washed, it is estimated that from 6,000-7,000 were passed. No
Echinococcus were found in faeces passed on the following day.
Two days after treatment the dog was destroyed, and the small
bowel was tied off and examined in warm water, in foot lengths.
From the first v/ashings of the bowel 32 Echinococcus were recovered,
and 46 further specimens were recovered in the posterior part of the


small bowel. To determine whether any number of other specimens
had been missed, those passed after treatment were examined to
ascertain whether seoliees were present, thus indicating that the whole
worm had been passed. Only an extremely small percentage was found
without seoliees, so that it may be assumed that the 78 specimens
remaining in the intestine were at least the greater part of those re-
maining after treatment.
Since approximately 6,000 were passed and 78 remained, the
efficacy of the drug in this case was roughly 98 per cent.
Dog 3, fox terrier, weight 16 lb—Fifty-eight days after feeding
with hydatid “ sand ” the dog was given £ grain of arecoline hydro-
bromide after starving over night. Faeces were passed in 25 minutes,
some hundreds of Echinococcus being present in the latter semi-fluid
part of the first motion. A further fluid motion in 35 minutes con-
tained many thousands of Echinococcus, Ho further worms were
passed on the following day. The number passed after counting
1,000 was estimated at over 4,000. Four days after treatment the
dog was destroyed.
Careful examination of the bowel failed to reveal the presence of
Echinococcus. Scrapings were then taken at intervals throughout the
small intestine, especially at those places showing any mucous deposit
and examined microscopically, but no further worms were found.
Eight Ascarids were present in the small bowel and three Trichi/nis
in the caecum. As far as can be ascertained in this case the drug
proved 100 per cent, effective.
Dog 4, mongrel fox terrier, weight 28 lb. —Sixty-three days after
being fed with hydatid “sand” the dog was given arecoline hydro-
bromide, i grain (amount of water not recorded). Passed faeces
in fifteen minutes in which were numerous Echinococcus. In further
motions passed in the next fifteen minutes there were thousands of
Echinococcus. After collection and counting of 500 of these, it was
estimated that between 3,000 and 4,000 were collected. Since all the
faeces and worms were not collected, it is considered that this number
is well within the actual number passed.
Two days later the dog was destroyed. The bowel showed some
congestion of the duodenum and parts of the illeum. In the wash-
ings from the bowel and after careful examination of the mucous
membrane, fifteen Echinococcus were recovered. One hookworm was
also present. Scrapings were taken from congested areas and other
likely places, and were examined microscopically, but no further
worms were seen. Since at least 3,000 Echinococcus were passed
and fifteen remained, the efficacy of the drug in this case is estimated
at 99.5 per cent.


Dog 5, beagle hound, weight 40 lb.—Sixty-six days after feeding
with hydatid u sand,” the dog was given arecoline hydrobromide half
grain in one ounce of water. The dog vomited from five to ten minutes
later, but passed faeces in 35 minutes, large numbers of Echinococcus
being present in the later semi-fluid portion of this motion. Two
thousand Echinococcus were collected and counted.
One and a half hours after treatment, the dog was destroyed and
the "whole bowel carefully examined. The first part of the small in-
testine was intensely congested. One Echinococcus was recovered in
the small intestine, this being free in the lumen, and many others were
present in fluid faeces in the rectum.
Since only one Echinococcus was found in a position which it might
possibly have remained after treatment and 2,000 were passed, the
efficacy of the drug in this case appeared to be almost 100 per cent.
Dog 6, weight 17| lb.-—Sixty-two days after feeding with hydatid
sand after starving overnight, the dog was given 2 gm. of extractum
felicis maris, followed after twenty minutes by 01. ricini 15 gins.
Purgation occurred after one hour and fifteen minutes, numerous
Echinococcus being present in the large semi-fluid motion passed. After
collection of and washing of these, it was estimated that 1,100 complete
worms or ripe segments had been passed. In striking contrast to the
worms passed after the administration of arecoline, much of the mate-
rial passed consisted merely of ripe segments, few complete worms being
found.
Hie dog was destroyed on the following day. Very numerous
Echinococcus were present in the first 2 feet of the small intestine,
ninety-two being counted in one square inch. In washings from the
intestine between 200-300 were recovered. It was not considered neces-
sary to count all the worms present in the bowel, since these were very
numeious. It was noteworthy that the majority of the worms remain-
ing appeared to be immature, and it is probable that many of these
weie those from which the ripe segments passed after treatment had
been detached.
Ihe efficacy of this drug was very low when compared with that
shown by arecoline hydrobromide.
Consideration of the above tests shows that in one case arecoline
hydrobromide proved ineffective in removing a certain number of im-
matuie worms, the exact degree of efficiency not being determined. In
the other four cases the drug was apparently 100 per cent, effective
in two cases (Dogs 3 and 5), while it was from 98-99.5 per cent.


effective in the other two. It is recognized that owing to the difficulty
of detecting immature specimens of Echinococcus, these figures can
only he- considered approximate, hut it is claimed that in view of the
precautions taken, and the fact that scolices were present on the great
majority of worms passed after treatment, that they give a useful
indication of the efficacy of the drug against this species. It will be
realized also that in all cases the dogs were very heavily infested.
In contrast with the results obtained from the use of arecoline, the
employment of felix mas cannot be recommended.
(iv) Routine treatment of country dogs with arecoline hydrobro-
mide.—ln view of the efficacy of arecoline hydrobromide, where the
drug is employed in adequate dosage after a suitable preparation of the
animal, the latter may be regarded as being practically free from
Echinococcus, if a thorough purgation follows the administration of the
drug. Even if complete freedom cannot he expected in every case, the
importance of such dogs as spreaders of hydatid infestation will he
very greatly decreased, and the risk to persons associating with them
proportionately lessened.
All dogs on stations and farms and at slaughter yards should he
treated regularly in any campaign against hydatid disease. How
often dogs must he treated when constantly exposed to risk of infesta-
tion, assuming approximately 100 per cent, efficiency of the drug, will
depend on the time taken in development of the adult worm after in-
gestion of scolices by the dog. We have seen that development in the
majority of cases takes about seven weeks, so that, for practical pur-
poses, routine treatment of dogs every two months, given thorough
action of the drug, will ensure that these dogs, even though exposed
to risk of infestation, never become serious sources of hydatid infesta-
tion to man or animals.
Details of the preparation of the drug, and the dose to be given,
have previously been given by Ross (1924), and little need he added
other than to state that the doses there given are estimated rather con-
servatively and may be increased somewhat without risk. It is, how-
ever, very necessary to emphasize certain precautions which must be
taken when treatment for Echinococcus is carried out. Dogs should
be chained up after treatment, and should be left chained up foi some
hours, until all effects of the drug have passed off. Where farmers
are carrying out treatment it is very necessary that they should reauze
that the first motion passed will contain relatively few worms, the
majority being passed in the later fluid motions. All faeces passed
aft e r treatment must be carefully collected and burnt, since the drying


.and liberation of the eggs passed is most undesirable. Should effec-
tive purgation not follow the first dose of the drug, it should be re-
peated on the following morning.,
Owing to the small size of the worms, especially when immature,
it is possible for an inexperienced eye to overlook these even when
present in large numbers in the faeces, and though no passage of
worms is seen to follow treatment, precautions in regard to collection
and burning of faeces must be scrupulously followed.
While it is essential that the dogs of the classes mentioned above
should be treated in every instance, it should be remembered that
every dog in the country which is fed on raw meat may be a carrier
of the hydatid parasite, and should therefore be treated. In view of
the finding of infested dogs at city abattoirs, the treatment of these
dogs at intervals should be insisted upon until it is satisfactorily de-
termined that such dogs no longer become infested.
In concluding this discussion of the methods whereby private in-
dividuals may assist in the eradication of hydatid disease, it is de-
sired to emphasize once more the importance of aiming at eradication
of the disease by preventing reinfestation of the dog, after once having
removed those worms present by anthelmintic treatment, rather than
concentrating on preventing infestation of man without removing the
sources from which danger of infestation comes. It is neglect of the
former step which has largely contributed to the failure to eradicate
this disease in the past, and it is the private individual who alone
can effect this change to-day.
2. Other Measures.
(f) Educational measures and propaganda. —ln view of the wide-
spread ignorance which exists throughout country districts, and in all
classes of the community, in regard to the nature and method of spread
of hydatid disease, it is essential that as a preliminary to any scheme
of eradication and control, that some general scheme of education
should be carried out in country districts. Knowledge of the disease
could be most effectively disseminated through the medium of sys-
tematic instruction given in all country schools, such instruction to be
based on the information contained in pamphlets specially prepared
for this purpose. In addition, the posting of coloured posters which
depict and explain in graphic and simple terms the outstanding facts
in regard to the disease would be an invaluable aid in focussing at-
tention on the danger of contracting the disease and the methods
whereby this may be avoided. Similar posters should be placed in a
conspicuous position in all places where slaughtering of animals is car-
ried out, such as slaughter yards and abattoirs. Were the importance


of this disease realized by slaughtermen, they would be much less
averse to the enforcement of regulations for the destruction of diseased
offal, while meat inspectors with statements of the seriousness of the
disease always before them would be more assiduous in the detection
and destruction of hydatid material.
(n) Country slaughtering. —At the present time, practically all
country slaughtering throughout Australia is carried out at small coun-
try slaughter yards over which, owing to their numbers and widely
scattered distribution, it is impossible to exercise any effective super-
vision. Though, theoretically, supervision of slaughter houses is exer-
cised under various State Acts, such as the Cattle Slaughtering Dis-
eased Animals and Meat Act 1902, New South W ales, even weie the
provisions of this Act or the regulations under it carried out faitn-
fully, they would still be inadequate to effect the detection and do
struction of all hydatid lesions. No mention is made in the Act of
hydatid disease or the need for the detection and destruction of all
diseased material, or of the danger of feeding such meat to dogs.
Though it is provided that no dogs shall be allowed in slaughter houses,
in the absence of effective supervision this has not the slightest in-
fluence in hindering the free passage of dogs in and out, while it is
only to be expected that their food should consist of meat which is
worthless for human consumption for one reason or another. It is
little wonder therefore that, with slaughtering carried out under
these conditions, slaughter yard dogs constitute one of the most serious
sources of hydatid infestation. The following measures would greatly
minimize the dangers of the present system.
1. In place of numerous small slaughter yards for each country
town, each town with a population of over 2,000 should be required to
establish an abattoir at which all slaughtering should be centralized.
This step has already been taken in New Zealand (the Slaughtering
and Inspection Act (New Zealand ) 1900).
2. Where it is not possible to establish abattoirs, the regulations
should be amended so as to mention hydatid disease specifically, and
to place the onus for the detection and destruction of hydatid lesions
on the licensee of the slaughter house. In addition, it should be re-
quired that all diseased meat should, on detection, be placed imme-
diately in a closed container until destroyed in a manner prescribed.
Fig. 4 shows the type of container which might be employed, which
has the advantage that meat may be thrown into it without lifting
the lid-
3. It should be expressly stipulated in the regulations that no dis-
eased meat of any kind shall be fed to dogs.


(Hi) Amendment of meat inspection regulations at abattoirs. —The
fact that dogs infested with Echinococcus granulosus have been found
at abattoirs in Australia indicates some defect in the existing method
of disease prevention at these places, so that Echinococcus material
escapes destruction and becomes used for dog food.
FIGURE 4.
Type of receptacle suggested for use in slaughter houses and abattoirs for the
collection of hydatid and other diseased material. (after Zabala.)
It is perhaps significant that under no State or Commonweatlh Act
governing the slaughtering at abattoirs is specific mention made of
Echinococcus, and the necessity for the detection and condemnation of
all hydatid lesions. In contrast with this, we find that in the United
States, where the incidence of the disease is considerably lower than in
Australia, specific mention of the disease is made, while Chalmers


(1921) found that in the Argentine and Uruguay inspectors are in-
structed to look for Echinococcus as one of the most important disease
conditions. Chalmers notes that kidneys of cattle and sheep are not
specifically examined, and he considers that this omission constitutes
one defect in an otherwise excellent system.
In addition to the lack of any mention of the importance of
hydatid disease, a very serious defect in existing abattoir regulations
in Australia is the fact that at several of the most important abattoirs
there is practically no examination by competent inspectors of sheep
viscera, and especially the liver and lungs, for the detection of hydatid
01 other diseases. It frequently is left to laymen in the gut-scraping
room to make a selection of what they consider suitable livers for their
particular butcher, and with the detection and destruction of lesions
in such hands, it is not to be wondered at that abundant loopholes are
left for the escape of hydatid material in meat for sale, or for its
removal by slaughtermen or wagon drivers. Such escape is evidenced
by the finding on more than one occasion of hydatid cysts in meat
purchased as food for dogs at the Veterinary Clinic of the University
of Sydney.
Alteration of the present meat inspection system along the follow-
ing lines would eliminate the undesirable features enumerated above.
1. At all Australian abattoirs the attention of meat inspectors should
be drawn to the importance of detecting and destroying all hydatid
lesions.
2. Inspectors should be required to examine all viscera of sheep,
as well as those of cattle and pigs, both manually and by palpation,
and on the detection of hydatid lesions these should be placed in a closed
container of the pattern previously figured, until they are removed to
be boiled down or otherwise dealt with.- It is essential that no respon-
sibility for the detection and destruction of this or other diseased meat
should be left in the hands of laymen.
o. In order to effect the above alteration, it would be necessary
to employ more inspectors than at present, since with one inspector
responsible for several slaughtering units the thorough inspection of
all viscera is impossible.
V. SUMMARY.
1. The value of the hooks in the specific determination of Echin-
ococcus granulosus must be interpreted in the light of considerable
variation in size and shape found within the species. The eggs can-
not be differentiated with accuracy from those of related species of
T aeniae.


2. The eggs of E. granulosus have been found to be viable under
moist conditions at summer temperature for three weeks, but they will
not Avitbstand desiccation by direct sunlight for this period.
3. Hatching of cestode eggs appears to occur normally in the small
intestine, but it probably occurs under certain circumstances in the
stomach.
4. Hydatid cysts may remain viable after removal from the host
for four days at temperatures of from 20-23° C., and for thirteen days
at temperatures between 4-8° C.
5. Adult Echinococcus normally require about seven weeks for
complete development, the minimum period taken being 47 days and
the maximum 51.
6. Tests of the action of acriflavine, trypan blue, emetine and tartar
emetic on hydatid seoliees in vivo do not appear to suggest the employ-
ment of these drugs in the treatment of hydatid disease.
7. Statistical evidence shows that the incidence of hydatid disease
in man in certain Australian States no longer shows any steady de-
crease, Avhile in South Australia there appears to be definite evidence
that the incidence of the disease is increasing.
8. A very high incidence of hydatid disease is shown in cattle
and sheep in certain areas in Hew South Wales.
9. A very high incidence of the adult worm in the dog has been
found in country districts, two classes of dogs, namely, those at slaugh-
ter yards and on sheep stations, being most heavily infested. It is
considered that infestation of the dingo and fox occurs naturally, but
infestation of the cat only very rarely.
10. It is considered that the most important factor in producing in-
festation of the dog in Australia is the large sheep population, and
the widespread habit of feeding raiv viscera of these animals to the
dog. It is not thought that cattle, pigs or rabbits are comparable in
importance to the sheep as a source of infestation.
11. Infestation of man is most frequently caused by the careless
handling of infested country dogs, this being largely due to the wide-
spread ignorance of the true nature of hydatid disease and its method
of spread.
12. Flies have been found capable of ingesting Echinococcus eggs,
and are thought to be possible carriers of infestation to man.
13. Infestation through drinking water or by the ingestion of raw
vegetables is not thought to be of as great importance in Australia
as was previously supposed.


14. It is considered that the most important control measure to
prevent infestation of the dog, consisting of the boiling of all offal of
cattle, sheep and pigs before feeding to dogs, must be put into prac-
tice by private individuals.
15. Infestation of man may be prevented by the observance of cer-
tain elementary rules of hygiene, especially that of always washing
after handling any country dogs, and never allowing young children
to play with or handle dogs.
16. Dogs should be treated periodically to free them from the adult
worm, critical tests of arecoline hydrobromide showing it to have a very
high degree of efficacy for this purpose.
17. An educational campaign must be carried out in order to in-
struct stockowners and others of the nature of hydatid disease, how it
is spread and how it may be avoided. It is considered that teaching
should be given in all country schools, and that coloured posters
graphically depicting the dangers of hydatid disease should be placed
in schools and slaughter yards.
18. Legislative action should be taken to secure the establishment
of abattoirs at all country towns of over 2,000 inhabitants with the
consequent abolition of slaughter yards.
19. Amendments to the regulations governing country slaughter-
ing should include hydatid disease as a disease under the Act, and
should place the onus of detection and destruction of hydatid lesions
on the slaughterman. Receptacles should be placed in all slaughter
houses for the reception of all diseased meat until it can be destroyed.
20. Amendments in regard to the regulations governing meat in-
spection at abattoirs are suggested to ensure the examination of all
sheep viscera by qualified inspectors, and the efficient disposal of all
meat showing hydatid lesions.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.
In conclusion, I would express my indebtedness to Professor J.
P'ouglas Stewart for the facilities he has afforded me in carrying out
much of this work at the Veterinary School, University of Sydney;
to the Walter and Eliza Hall Trust for allowing me to include the
results of research obtained by me while Walter and Eliza Hall
Veterinary Research Fellow; to Mr. A. C. McKay, Veterinary Officer,
Federal Capital Commission, for his great assistance in providing
dogs for experimental purposes both at Canberra and elsewhere; to
Mr. Max Henry, Chief Veterinary* Officer, Department of Agriculture,
Hew South Wales, for making the services of his officers available to
me while I was making a survey of the incidence of hydatid disease
in Hew South Wales; and to Dr. P. Fiaschi for kindly making the
work of South American authorities available to me.


VII. REFERENCES.
Apellaniz, J. de, et alia (1908). Informe de la Commission de Estudiar la
Prophylaxis de los Quistes Hidatidicos, Buenos Ayres.
Baer, J. G. (1926). Contributions to the Helminth Fauna of'South Africa, lltli
and 12th Reports, Director of Veterinary Education and Research, South
Africa. Part 1, Sept., 1926, 61-126.
Barragallo (1907). Sugli elminti parassiti del gatto domestio. Soc. delle Sc.
Med. e nat. in Cagliari, in 11 Poliolinico, sez. prat. no. 10, 297.
Barrotte, J., and Vein, H. (1925). L’Echinococcose au Maroc, Collection des
Travaux de Path. Comp. Paris, 1-51.
Baum and Jazas. L’Echinococcose dans la region de Marrakech. Bull, de la Soc.
de Med. Vet., 96, Nos. 22-24, 471-475.
Bell, G. (1908). Syria. The Desert and the Sown, London.
Brumpt, E. (1922). Precis de Parasitologie, 3rd Ed.
Brumpt, E., and Joyeux, C. (1924). Un nouvel Echinocoque, Echinococcus cruzi.
Ann. de Parasit. hum. et comp., 2, 226-231.
Biun, G., and Lauriol, E. (1922). L’Echinococcose dans le milieu indigene en
Tunisie. Rev. Tunisienne des Sci. med., 427.
Cameron, a. W. M. (1926). Onservations on the Genus Echinococcus Rudolphi,
1805. Jour of Helminthology, 4, 13-22.
Cawston, F. G. (1922). Antimony in the treatment of lepers and hydatid
disease. Jour, of Trop. Med. and Hyg., 25, 27-28.
Chalmers, J. (1921). Export of Meat. Bulletin No. 3, Dept, of Agric., Union of
South Africa.
tleland, J. 8., De Crespigny, C. T. C., and Cudmore (1923). The Medical and
Scientific Archives of the Adelaide Hospital, No. 3.
Coutelen, F. C. (1927). Essai de culture in vitro de seolex et d’hydatides
Echinococciques (Echinococcus granulosus). Ann. de Parasit., 5, 1-19.
Cranwell, D. J., and Vegas, M. H. (1904). Los Quistes Hidatidicos en la
Republica Argentina. Revista de la Soc. Med. Argentina, 12, 1-18.
Davame, C. J. (1863). Nouvelles recherches sur le developpement et la propaga-
tion de l’ascaride lumbricoide et du trichocephale de l’homme. Compt.
rend. Soc. de Biol., 4, 261-265.
Deve, F. (1902). Sur revolution kystique du Seolex Echinococcique. Arch de
Parasit., 6., 54-81.
Deve, F. (1904). Prophylaxie de l’Echinoeoccose. Ibid., 57, 261-263.
Deve, F. (1904). Le chat domestique. Hote eventuel du Tenia echinocoque.
Compt. rend. Soc. de Biol., 57, 262-264.
Deve, I. (1905). Greffe hydatique et Rayons X. Ibid, 58, 304-306.
Deve, F. (1906). Role du chien d’abattoir dans l’etiologie de l’Echinococcose.
Maladie professionelle. Compt. rendus Soc. de Biol., 61, 155-157.
De\ t, F. (1907). L action des sues digestifs n’est pas indespensable pour mise en
liberte de l’embryon hexacanthe echinococcique. Ibid., 63, 332-334.
Deve, F. (1907). Echmococcose primitive experimentale. Ibid., 63, 303-305.
De\e, F. (1908). Echinococcose primitive experimentale. Pseudo-tuberculose
hydatique. Ibid., 64, 807-809.
Deve, F. (1908). Echinococcose primitive experimentale. Resistance vitale des
oeufs du Tenia echinocoque. Ibid., 63, 296-298,


Deve, F. (1910). L’echinococcose primitive experimental. La resistance des
oeufs du Tenia echinocoque a la congelation. Ibid., 69, 568-570.
Deve, F. (1911). Greffe liydatique et fougere male. Ibid., 71, 430-43.
Deve, F. (1923). Enquete etiologique sur FEchinococcose en Tunisie. Arch, de
I’lnstitut Pasteur, 12, 352-386.
Deve, F. (1925). Au sujet de Faction de radiotherapie penetrante sur les
elements liydatiques, Corrupt. Rend. Soc. de Biol., 92, 1184-1185.
Deve, F. (1925). ivyste hydatique et kamala. Compt. Rend. Soc. de Biol., 93,
409-410.
Deve, F., and Rillard, A. (1922). Sable hydatique et radiotherapie. Compt.
Rend. Soc. de Biol., 87, 127-128.
Deve, F., and Payenneville, J. (1914). Greffe liydatique et neosalvarsan. Compt.
Rend. Soc. de Biol., 76, 647-649.
Deve, F., and Payenneville, J. (1922). Echinococcose et arsenobenzenes. Ibid.,
87, 129-130.
Dew, H. R. (1925). The Histogenesis of the Hydatid Parasite (Taenia
echinococcus) in the Pig. Med. Jour, of Australia, 1, twelfth year,
101-110.
Diesing, O. (1863). D.d.k. Alcad. D. Wiss Wien, math-naturw. Cl., 49, 370.
Dikoff, —. (1925). L’eehinococcose en Bulgarie. Zeitsch. fur Fleisch und Milch
Hyg. Abst. in R6v. Gen. de Med. Vet., 34, 250-251.
Einarsson, H. (1926). L’echinococcose en Islande. Sur la mode de contamina-
tion humaine. Ann. de Parasit., 4, 171-184.
Fairley, N. H. (1922). A Note on the Failure of Tartar Emetic in the
treatment of Two Cases of Hydatid Disease. Med. Jour, of Australia, 1,
ninth year, 94-96.
Fairley, N. H. (1926). Studies in the Chemotherapy and Immunity Reactions
of Schistosomiasis. Trans. Royal Soc. Trop. Med. and Hyg., 2, 236-267.
Finsen, J. (1869). Les echinocoques en Islande. Arch. Oen. de Med., 13, 23-46.
Hall, M. C. (1920). Taenioid Cestodes of Dogs and Cats and of related
Carnivores in North America. Proc. United States Nat. Museum, 55,
1-94.
Hall, M. C. (1922). Diagnosis and Treatment of Internal Parasites. Chicago.
Hall, M. C. (1924). Some Critical Tests of Arecoline Hydrobromide as an
Anthelmintic. Jour. Am. Med. Ass., 63, 454-463.
Itagaki, S., and Makino, R. (1927). Studies on the Treatment of Microfilaria
immitis by Intravenous Injection of Natrium Antimonyl Tartrate (in
Japanese, with author’s English abstract). Jour. Jap. Soo. of Vet. Sci.,
6, 1-23.
Johnston, Harvey (1916). The Endoparasites of the Dingo, Canis dingo, Blumb.
Proc. Roy. Soc. of Queensland, 28, 96-100.
Lendenfeld, R. V. (1886). Taenia Echinococcus in Australie. Zool. Jalir., 6
(2), 409-410.
Leuckart, R. (1863). Die Menlichen Parasiten, Leipzig. Two vols.
Leuckart, R. (1886). The Parasites of Man. Edinburgh.
Luhe, M. (1910). Cystotanien Sudamerikanischer Feliden. Zoo. Jahr., 3,
687-710.


Martin, A. (1913). Recherehes sur les conditions du developpement embryonnaire
dee nematodes parasites, these (Toulouse), 151.
Meleny, F. L., and Zau, Z. D. (1925). Action of Acriflavine on the Blood and
Certain Tissues of Rabbits. Jour. Am. Med. Ass., 84, Pt. 1., 337-343.
Nettleship, E. (1866). Notes on the Rearing of Taenia echinococcus in the Dog.
Proc. Boy. Soc. Lond., 15, 224-226.
Neumann, L. G. (1896). Notes sur les Teniades du chien et du chat. Mem.
Soc. Zool. de France , 9, 171-184.
bteumann, L. G. (1914). Parasites et Maladies Parasitaires du Chien et du Chat.
Paris.
Nuttall, G. 11. F., and Hadwen, S. (1909). The Successful Drug Treatment of
Canine Piroplasmosis, together with Observations upon the Effects of
Drugs on Piroplasma canis. Parasitology, 2, 156-191.
I oppe, K., and Thielkow, H. Die Verbrietung der Echinocokken bei den
Schlachttieren im Mecklinburg, Zeit, far Infekt-Krank. der Haust, 29
245.
1 orter, A. (1923). The Effects of Cold on the Vitality of certain Cysticerci
and Echinococci in Meat kept under Commercial Conditions of Freezing
in Johannesburg. Abstracted from the Publications of the South African
Inst, for Med. Res., Feb., 1923, in the Jour. Troy. Med. and Hiiq., 27,
1924, 33-34.
Railliet, A. (1895). Traite de Zoologie Medicale et Agricole, Paris.
Ransom, B. H., and Foster, W. D. (1920). Observations on the Life History of
Ascaris lumbricoides. U.S. Dept, of Agrie. Bull. No. 817, 1-47.
Ross, I. Clunies (1924). Parasites oi Dogs and Horses in New South Wales,
from the Neighbourhood of Sydney. Aust. Ass. for Adv. of Sci., 17,
693-697.
Ross, I. Clunies (1924). The Possible Use of Arecoline Hydrobromide as an
Anthelmintic. Jour. Comp. Path, and Ther., 37, 1-12.
Ross, I. Clunies (1925). A Survey of Infestation with Echinococcus granulosus
(Batsch) or Hydatid Disease in New South Wales. Med. Jour, of
Australia 1, 12th year, 253-258.
Ross, I. Clunies (1926). A Survey of the Incidence of Echinococcus granulosus
(Batsch) or Hydatid Disease in New South Wales. Ibid., 1, 13th year,
96-103.
Ross, I. Clunies (1927). In "Vitro Tests of the Toxicity of certain drugs for
Hydatid Scolices. Aust. Jour, of Expt. Biol, and Med. Sci., 4, 283-288.
Shircore, T. 0. (1915). A Note of some Helminthic Diseases, with special
reference to the Housefly as a natural carrier of Ova. Parasitology, 8,
239-243.
Southwell, T. (1927). Experimental infection of the Cat and Fox with the Adult
Echinococcus. Aim. Prop. Med. and Parasit., 21, 155-163.
Stolpe, (1925 ). Weitere Beobachtungen, über der Zunalime von Echinokokken
bei Schlachttieren. Tierarztl. Rundsch, Jg. 31, 195-196.
laylor, E. L. (1926). An Observation on the Hatching of the Cestode Egg. Ann.
Trop. Med. and Parasit., 20, 220.
Thomas, J. D. (1882). Hydatid Disease in Australia. Trans, and Proc. Boy •
Soc. of South Australia, 6, 1-26.


Thomas, J. D. (1884). Notes on the Experimental Breeding of the Taenia
echinococcus from the Echinococci of Man. Proc. Roy. Soe. Lond., 38,
449-457.
Thomas, J. D. (1884). Note upon the frequent Occurrence of Taenia echinococcus
in the Dog in certain Parts of Australia. Ibid., 38, 457-458.
Vegas, M. H., and Cranwell, D. J. (1901). Los Quistes Hidatidicos, Buenos
Aires, 466.
Verdun, P. (1913). Precis de Parasitologic Humaine. Paris.
Von Siebold, C. T. E. (1853). Ueber der Verwandlung der Echinococcus brut in
Taenien. Zeit. fur. IFiss. Zool., Leip., 5, 409-424.
Zabala, J. (1908). Informe sobre Mataderos, Carnicerfas, Mercados, e
Inspeccion Vetei'inaria de las Carnes en la Republica Argentina.
Annexo E. Informe de la Comision Encargada de Estudiar la Profilaxis
de los Quistes Hidatidicos, Buenos Aires, 1908.
Zerbino, V. (1919).. Hydatid Cysts in Uruguay. Rev. Med. del Uruguay , 22,
No. 9, 628. Abstr. Jour. Am. Med. Ass., 74, No. 3, 213.
By Authority : H. J. Gkeen, Government Printer. Melbourne.
