

OBSERVATIONS
ON THE
PUBLIC AFFAIES AND PUBLIC MEN
OE ENGLAND.
CONTAINED IN FIVE LETTERS.
TO WHICH IS ADDED
AN ACCOUNT OF AN INTERVIEW WITH THE CELEBRATED
THOMAS CARLYLE.
GLADSTONE. LORD STANLEY.
DISRAELI. LORD SALISBURY.
BRIGHT. • SIR ROUNDELL PALMER.
LOWE. GATHORNE HARDY.
THOMAS CARLYLE.
DAVID BUCHANAN,
OF THE MIDDLE TEMPLE, BARRISTEE-AT-LAW,
AND ONE OF THE REPRESENTATIVES IN THE PARLIAMENT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
FOR THE CITY OF SYDNEY,
SYDNEY:
JOHN L. SHERRIFF, 18 WYNYARD SQUARE.


,


M3i6€>/F lb//
PREFACE.
The following pages were addressed during the year 1869, in a series
of five letters, to the press of Australia while I was resident in
London engaged in preparing myself for call to the English bar.
Although engaged in severe and arduous study while in England, I
was by no means blind to what was passing around me, and on re-
reading these productions, previous to publishing them in this more
extended form, I am more than ever confirmed in the soundness of
most of the opinions therein expressed. I now offer them to the
public for what they are worth. Few, I think, will be found to
deny the importance of the matter treated of, and the consequent
interest of the subject. I have written freely, and, I trust, plainly ;
and although many may differ from me, I have arrived at my con-
clusions from a close and observant study of all I saw and heard
while in England,
DAVID BUCHANAN.
Chambers, 49 Elizabeth Street, Sydney.
17 th March 1871.




LETTER t
London, 19 th February 1869.
I dare say your readers will be interested in having some account of
men and things here from an eye-witness, and, with this object in
view, I have presumed to offer you a few of my experiences and ob-
servations since I came to this country, nearly two years ago. While
resident in New South Wales, I could not help observing how con-
stantly the public men of England were held up as an example to the
colonial public men by that section of the press which affected very
high Toryism, and, in its own weak way, thought there was something
very genteel and superior in always disparaging everything colonial.
The clique of snobs and vulgar upstarts referred to were continually
afflicting us with their inflated ignorant veneration of the virtue of
English public men, as contrasted with their colonial brethren, while,
at the same time, the only thing palpable and apparent was their own
utter incapacity to estimate or appreciate a truly able man if they saw
him. In Australia I admired the steady adherence to principle on
the part of public men, and the resolute and honourable attitude they
always maintained when principles were being fought for. I have
seen no such honourable bearing on the part of public men here. On
the contrary, it would be difficult to imagine anything more degrading
than the wholesale abandonment of principle on the part of both the
great parties in this country —the whole thing has resolved itself into
a mere struggle for place and power. Gladstone introduces a Reform
Bill. Disraeli, backed by his whole party, denounces him for going
too far. Gladstone is defeated and ousted. Disraeli finds he can-
not retain office without a Reform Bill; he introduces one going
much further than Gladstone’s, and is supported in this by the very
men who ousted Gladstone for introducing a Reform Bill at all. This
is sad enough, but let us go on a little further. Gladstone, frantic for


office, pushes on the Irish question. Disraeli, without principle, and
destitute of anything in the shape of policy, proposes to give a char-
ter to a Roman Catholic University, and to endow the priesthood.
Although Gladstone and the Whigs were quite ready to do the same,
they affected loud indignation at the proposal, and threw down the
card of disestablishment of the Church. Disraeli, with a sublimity
of insolence unexampled in the world’s history, openly denies that he
ever proposed either to endow the priesthood or to give a charter to a
Catholic University, and raises the cry of No Popery throughout the
land. The cry failed. Disraeli was defeated, and Gladstone is now
in his place. During the whole of Disraeli’s tenure of office he was
in a minority. Defeated on a cardinal question by sixty-five, he still
clings to office, while his opponents are afraid to take the manly course
of trying to remove him by a direct vote of want of confidence. We
consequently have for months looked upon a spectacle which, in
Australia, would have been put an end to in a single day, of a minis-
try continuing to hold office in a hopeless minority every day, exposed
to the taunts and insults of an Opposition which, although superior in
numbers to the extent of sixty-five, is destitute of the courage to drive
a weak and unprincipled minority from power, and rescue the insti-
tutions of the country from a scandal and dishonour without a
parallel. This state of things continues up to the other day, when
Disraeli has the grace to resign on seeing a majority of upwards of
one hundred against him, the result of an appeal to the country.
This appeal to the country was characterised by an amount of bribery,
intimidation, violence, and bloodshed which might make the detractors
of the colonies reflect a little, if anything could bring about so desir-
able a result. Nearly eighty petitions are now being disposed of,
praying for the rejection of the returned members, on the ground of
bribery and intimidation. Violence raged to such a height, that
thousands of voters were afraid to vote, while thousands were mal-
treated and scandalously ill-used for attempting to do so. Mobs of
voters, I saw with my own eyes, driven to the poll, with down-
cast, sullen looks, compelled to vote as their tyrant masters dictated.
The whole scene, as far as I saw it, filled me with disgust, and re-
flected little credit either on the country or its rulers. The consti-
tuencies have rejected such men as John Stuart Mill, Horsman,
Roebuck, and Bernal Osborne, and have returned a set of rich
nonentities, wflthout a rag of qualification but hard cash. All this is
very bad, but what strikes me as infinitely worse, is the apparent
decay of executive authority, or, in other words, the absence of


government. There seems to be no firmness or power in the arm of
authority, which hangs paralytic and powerless when it should strike
with resolute and decisive vigour. In proof of this, may be cited
the contemptible wavering of the Government during the reform
agitation. The Government published a proclamation that no meet-
ings were to be held in Hyde Park: the people pulled down the park
railings, and held their meetings in spite of the Government. It was
on this occasion that Home Secretary Walpole burst into tears on
being assured by Mr Beales, the President of the Reform League, that
the peace would be preserved. Surely this precious Home Secretary
would have done better to have dried his eyes and vindicated the
authority of the Government by some more masculine method.
Throughout the Fenian affair, the Government has been irresolute
and vacillating in the extreme; in fact, in reference to this matter, it
would not be too much to say that there has been cowardice in the
executive, cowardice in the press, and cowardice almost everywhere.
It is the well-known opinion of the police that the worst of the Man-
chester murderers was reprieved. The repeated articles written by
the Times on the subject of Fenianism were also as craven in spirit
as they were contemptible in every other way. In a great measure
to those articles do I attribute the fearful miscarriage of justice which
took place on the trial for the Clerkenwell outrage; and, worst of all,
although abundance of evidence came out at the Clerkenwell trial that
the prisoner Burke devised, originated, and set on foot the whole
monstrous conspiracy, yet the Government was afraid to put him on
his trial as the principal and ringleader of a plot leading to as infernal
an outrage as was ever perpetrated on this earth. Even Barrett, the
only man convicted, having attempted to defend himself by as clumsy
and transparent an alibi as was ever brought forward in a court of
justice, must needs be reprieved until a Commission is sent to Glas-
gow, there to investigate the truth of his allegations; which allegations
had just been inquired into by a jury in London, and by them utterly
repudiated and disbelieved. Of course, the Commission found this
out, and Barrett at last felt the palsied and trembling hand of English
justice encircling his throat. We have now, a liberal and an apparently
strong Government in power, backed by a heterogeneous
which gives it a majority of upwards of a hundred; but I have no
faith in either it or its followers. Mr Gladstone has no opinions of
his own on any political subject, and may be driven to any course.
There cannot be much cordiality between Mr Bright and Mr Lowe.
Although they are all pledged to the disestablishment and disendow-


ment of the Irish Church, they are not in earnest about it, and
through this want of earnestness and absence of strong conviction, the
least hitch may upset everything. A Government of men in earnest
on this subject could carry it with ease, and in no time; but, if I
mistake not, many members of the Government, and many of their
supporters, are sighing for any chance that will give them an oppor-
tunity of escaping from their pledges. Even Mr Bright had no decided
opinions upon this subject not so very long ago. I remember a long
conversation I had with him in his own house shortly after it was
mooted. On that occasion Mr Bright wished to endow all sects in
Ireland by way of bringing about religious equality. I argued that
such a course would be a gross injustice to that numerous body of the
people who did not believe in the endowment of any religious sect,
and that if religious equality was his object, he could attain it far more
effectually by disendowing all than by endowing any ; I added, that I
was just fresh from the very battle-field in Australia that he was about
to enter in England, and that in Australia we had brought about a
rational religious equality by universal disendowment. Mr Bright is
now pledged to the disendowment of all sects, and I only hope the
Government may remain firm and true to this programme. If the
ballot is not carried this session, a very large number of votes will be
recorded in its favour; the scandalous outrages of the late general
election have made many converts to the ballot of men previously loud
in their opposition to it.
From all I have seen in England, I think more highly of the colonial
public men than ever. I have spent many a weary night in the House
of Commons listening to as bad speaking as it is possible to imagine.
I am fully alive to the powers of the leading men here, but, with the
exception of Mr Bright, I have no very great opinion of any of the
others. In Australia the people are far ahead of England as regards
the wisdom of their legislation, and it is refreshing to listen in the
House of Commons how often Australia is cited as an example to
follow.
There are only four men in the present House of Commons who
could with justice be termed orators, and in the true sense of the
word there is only one, and that one is John Bright.
8


LETTER 11.
London, lith March 1869.
The House of Commons at the present moment is singularly dest-
tute of the class of men who have associated with the name of St
Stephen’s a bright and lasting renown. I will not look back so far as
the days of Burke, Pitt, Fox, Sheridan, &c.; for even in our own
time, and within very young memory, the fame and reputation of
this illustrious assembly has been upheld by the great qualities of
such men as Peel, Graham, Stanley, Palmerston, Shiel, Macaulay,
and O’Connell. We have one man, and only one, in the present
House of Commons, who can with justice be termed an orator —an
orator in the grand sense of the word,—in the sense in which we
apply it to Cicero or Chatham, and neither of those great names
deserve the title more than John Bright.
I have heard Mr Bright on two or three great occasions, in the
House of Commons, since I have been in England, and I have heard
nothing to compare to him. I should think Mr Bright is about fifty-
five years of age, about the middle height, and possessed of a power-
ful physical organisation. His voice is singularly musical, and of
great compass and power. His face is full of expression, reflecting
vividly all his emotions. His style is most interesting and fascinat-
ing, consisting of plain, good English, clearly and beautifully articu-
lated. He is frequently argumentative, and, when so, nothing could
be more forcible or convincing. As he warms under the excitement
of the subject, he is all earnestness, driving to his conclusion with an
irresistible force which carries all before it. From first to last his
action is graceful and expressive, although perfectly simple and
natural. His eloquence is quite spontaneous, and is distinguished
by brilliant and remarkable imagery, which occasionally thrills his
audience by its grandeur and beauty. He makes an immense impres-
sion on the House, and when he speaks on great occasions, the House
is crowded in all parts long before the expected time. Mr Gladstone
Ido not like at all. He is never eloquent, and seems to me to be all
circumlocution. He will speak a column of set, commonplace phrase-
ology before he touches the subject at all. There is a constant and
nauseous affectation of humility about him, finding utterance in such
phrases as —“ If such, an humble individual as the person who now
addresses you may be allowed to offer an opinion.” He lives in an
atmosphere of canting insincerity, and labours hard to earn the repu-
a 2


tation of a saint, although he is petulant, peevish, bad-tempered, and
puerile to a degree Ulrich has on one or two occasions seriously
offended his party, and imperilled his position as its leader. He is a
convenient Premier for the Liberals to have, as he can he driven any
way they like, and will yet, I predict, propose the ballot, and would
he brought to disestablish the English Church if the wind only blew
strong enough from the proper quarter. He is in many, respects a
clever man, not so. good a speaker as Mr Lowe, but quite his equal in
insincerity and the absence of all fixed political opinion. The only
one redeeming feature in Mr Lowe’s character is his liberal and
correct views in reference to public education, and his hatred of, and
resolute, determined resistance to, Ultramontane insolence and inter-
ference. I respect him for this, and have a true admiration for his
distinguished intellect and many brilliant qualities. As a speaker,
according .to my humble opinion, he is much superior either to
Gladstone or Disraeli. The late Premier, Mr Disraeli, is beyond all
doubt the prince of humbugs,—there is not a grain of genuine stuff
in his whole composition,—he is mosaic even to the very watch-chain,
—and his rise would be an enigma, did not the circumstances of the
case render it susceptible of easy solution. When the great Conser-
vative party broke up under Sir R. Peel, almost if not all the talent
of the party followed Peel, leaving a herd of some three hundred
country squires without a leader, and conscious of only one feeling,
that of hatred of Peel, who had so scandalously betrayed them.
Disraeli was at this time known only within a narrow circle, as the
author of a few trashy, unreadable novels. He had paid most
assiduous court to Sir Robert, with a view to some subordinate office,
but Peel seemed to have had a very accurate estimate of his worth,
and treated him with systematic neglect, accompanied by very thinly
disguised contempt. When the disruption of the party took place,
Disraeli, swelling with hatred, and eager for revenge, seized the
opportunity to assail the great Minister, and the savage character of
his invective proved how deeply Peel’s contempt had wounded him.
This continued abuse of Sir Robert by Disraeli was the sweetest
music to the herd of squires behind him, and the sheer necessity
which demanded that they should have a leader, combined with the
total absence of all choice, resulted in Disraeli’s elevation to that
position; his subsequent rise to the Premiership was, under the cir-
cumstances, a matter of course. Disraeli is looked upon fvith great
distrust and suspicion by his party, and his statement of having
educated them up to Reform has exasperated and inflamed them to a


high pitch. When he announced this education process at a great
public dinner, he accompanied the statement with a knowing wink,
as evidencing his appreciation of his own jugglery and chicane. My
authority for this statement is no less a person than the renowned
Thomas Oarlyle, who mentioned it in the course of conversation, and
while he was expressing, in his own graphic style, his contempt for
Disraeli. I question if Disraeli will ever again be Prime Minister of
England. The Conservatives despise and hate him; the absence of
all talent in their ranks makes Disraeli a necessity to them, and he
is clever enough to brand this fact well into them. His late Admin-
istration was without doubt the most ignoble that England ever saw.
Without policy or principle, it lived its short term on sufferance
alone, and at last expired, without a struggle or a blow, from sheer
inanition.
I had not the pleasure of hearing Mr John Stuart Mill in the
House of Commons, but I went on two occasions to hear him address
his late constituents, the electors of Westminster. It was a great
opportunity, and if any occasion could have called Mr Mill’s great
powers into play it was this; hut it was all of no avail, Mr Mill
must be content to he thought a great and powerful writer, hut a
speaker he is not, and never will be. . His physical defects are sadly
against him—a bad voice and a hesitating, wretched delivery, with
great poverty of language, render it a disagreeable occupation to listen
to him; and, independent of all this, his matter is poor, commonplace,
and uninteresting. Mr Mill seems to he incapable of thinking in
public or of expressing himself as quickly as he thinks; at all events,
on the two great and interesting occasions that I heard him, his
speeches were about the poorest stuff I ever listened to; I regretted
all this the more when I reflected on the great pleasure I experienced
when I first read his able work on Liberty. But if Mr Mill was had,
his colleague, the Hon. Captain Grosvenor, who addressed both meet-
ings before Mr Mill, was something to dream of. Captain Grosvenor
was dressed most elaborately, and might he said to stand in the same
relation to men that girls of the period do to women; his hair was
carefully oiled and parted down the middle, which added to the
natural vacancy and inanity of a face that expressed nothing hut
self-sufficiency and conceit. He began his address in an affected
drawling haw-haw style, with his eyes half shut, and his thumbs
stuck in his waistcoat-pockets, where they remained till he finished :
his speech was a disjointed, incoherent jumble of commonplaces, the
subject-matter of his discourse becoming every moment thinner and


more imperceptible, till at last, such as it was, it vanished altogether,
leaving the Hon. Captain in a state of bewilderment and dismay,
when, greatly to the relief of his audience, he collapsed and sat down.
Can such things be, thought I, that the great city of Westminster
can find nothing better than this to represent it? My thoughts
wandered back to the times when the thunders of the great Fox’s
eloquence awakened the echoes in this very place, and oh! what a
falling off to think of this, while listening to the drawling drivel ol
the pitiful object before me! He is now, however, member for
Westminster, and John Stuart Mill is rejected. If Mr Bright was
correct when he said that the first six hundred men who passed
through Temple Bar any morning would be as competent and well
qualified for parliamentary duties as the members of the last Parlia-
ment, how much more correct would he be in applying it to the
present ? I will take Mr Bruce, Mr Corry, Sir Stafford Northcote,
the Earl of Mayo, Mr Walpole, Mr Hardy, all men who hold or
have held high office either in the present or former Government, and
I will say of them that they are comparatively inferior men, and
not capable of gaining a first position either in the Assembly of
Sydney or Melbourne. The House of Commons is, however, always
an interesting place to be in, from the magnitude of the matters
talked of; but if any one goes there, at the present time, to hear fine
speaking, in nineteen times out of twenty, he will be disappointed.
The time was when the only passport to high office was a long and
distinguished parliamentary career; it is not so now. For instance,
who in Melbourne, or anywhere else, ever heard of the present Home
Secretary, Mr Bruce, or his predecessor, Mr Hardy,—of the late
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr Hunt, or of many others at present
in office, that I could mention ? Many of them have bungled and
blundered seriously, one indeed to the extent of compelling his
instant resignation. In my last letter to you I complained of the
timidity or rather cowardice of Governments here. They do not
seem to take office for the purpose of governing, but, when once
installed, all their acts and policy is apparently shaped for no other
purpose than to retain their position. For instance, Mr Childers
came in with a great flourish of trumpets about retrenchment, and
proceeded at once, in the most praiseworthy style, to sweep away
whole hosts of clerks and workmen. The clerks, however, could
command some influence in the House, and when it was brought to
bear upon Mr Childers, we are told all the clerks are to be reinstalled
again; but the poor workmen, having no influence, are left to their


fate. This statement, as I have told it you, is published in some of
the daily papers here, but in the meantime, I cannot say how much
truth there may be in it. I have seen it published, but I have not
seen it denied. If true, it would be a small matter compared with
other acts of the Government. In deference to Fenianism, the
Church is being disestablished. Ido not complain of the disestab-
lishment of this Irish Church, or any Church. Had I only a very
short time of my own way, I would make short work of all establish-
ments of the kind, but I do protest against a Government acting
against the convictions of almost every one of its members, through
evident fear of, and for the purpose of conciliating, an organised con-
spiracy of bloodthirsty assassins. But the Government of England,
not satisfied with the destruction of the Establishment, has resolved
upon the wholesale liberation of Fenian prisoners, and this after it
has been asked for in insolent terms by some portion of the people
of Ireland in public meeting assembled. The Home Secretary
announced to the House the other night that all the Fenian prisoners
would be liberated immediately, with the exception of the worst of
them. Thirty-four of those who are to be liberated, were thought bad
enough to be sent to Australia; and on hearing this remarkable
announcement, Mr Hardy asked the Home Secretary if the Govern-
ment intended to pay their passages home. In reply, the Home
Secretary stated, that in the meantime the Government had come to
no conclusion as to this, but would take it into consideration. I will
make no comment upon this, but leave it to justify all the contempt
I feel, and have expressed, for the thing which is set up here, and
nicknamed Government. I do not know how this Government will
deal with the Alabama question. As things stand at present,
England has gone to the utmost limit of concession; and yet the
news comes across the ocean that the American Government is not
satisfied. Nothing could be fairer than the proposition made by
England. She says ; “We may have done wrong in allowing the
Alabama to leave England; but, if so, we are ready to refer the
matter to arbitration and abide the result.” America says: “You
recognised the South as belligerents, and your right to do this must
also be referred to the arbitrator.” England, of course, declines this,
and so the matter rests for the present,—the Americans all insolence
and vituperation, and England, I trust, resolute as well as dignified
If the British Government recognised the South as belligerents, it was
a part of its policy for which it was accountable only to the British
people; and this reference can be looked on in no other light than a


most insolent request on the part of America, a request which
England could never comply with but at the cost of -her own honour.
The question is, Will the present Government remain firm and true
to the great nation they pretend to rule. I hope so. But who can
avoid doubt and despair when we see such things as I have already
recorded. This is indeed a grand old country ; and the very least I,
for one, hope for it is, that' it may always have Ministers worthy of its
greatness and renown.
P.S. —I would like to add, in reference to what I have said of Mr
John Stuart Mill, that I esteem and admire him as the boldest and
most correct thinker in the House of Commons; that he has never
hesitated to express his thoughts, and has upheld what he believed
to be truth with an ability and fearless independence which should
have gained him golden opinions from all sorts of people, and would
have done so did we not live in a world of prejudice, sham, and dark
ignorant bigotry.
LETTER 111.
London, 15 th April 1869.
The great Irish Church debate has ended, as all true Liberals wished
it to end, by a large majority in favour of disestablishment and dis-
endowment; but if any of your readers imagine that the Church or
Churches will be left in poverty by the operation, they are labouring
under a serious delusion. As a measure of disendowment, as it pro-
fesses to be, and as it is understood by the great body of the people
to be, it is a hollow, impudent sham. For instance, the Presbyterians
are to receive, under the bill, by way of compensation for the with-
drawal of their annual grant of £50,000, fourteen times that sum,
which will amount to £700,000, a pretty comfortable thing for them,
and, if well invested, will bring them a splendid revenue in all time
coming. Is this disendowment ? Well, the Maynooth grant is to be
dealt with in a similar fashion, and, of course, the Church will fare
no worse than their Presbyterian and Catholic brethren. lam not
surprised that the clergy of the Established Church should have
remained so peaceable during this pretence of disendowing them.
They have remained very quiet during the whole process; indeed


the only active movement among them seems to he, as Mr Fronde says,
a constant and energetic brawling and quarrelling as to the colour of
their petticoats. They have gone, and are continuing to go, so far in
this direction, that it has elicited nothing but bursts of unmeasured
scorn and derision, and, I doubt not, hastened the growing conviction
in many minds that the sooner the abolition of all religious establish-
ments takes place the better. That things' are shaping for this great
end, no one who listened to the great debate just concluded can, for
one moment, doubt; the prominence given to the power and efficacy
of the voluntary system; its remarkable vitality, as illustrated by the
history of the Free Church of Scotland ; the overwhelming power and
majesty of its march in the United States of America; all this fell
with destructive effect upon the upholders of establishments, and
made one destructive and fatal assault upon every establishment of
the kind in Great Britain.
The debate brought out the whole talent of the House of Commons.
Mr Disraeli moved an amendment that the bill be read that day six
months. He spoke two hours, and if his reputation as a speaker
rested upon this speech, it would rest upon a very rotten reed. It
was falsehood from beginning to end —not animated eloquent false-
hood, but silly, trifling, pitiful falsehood, not even clever or witty, but
rambling, clumsy, sluggish- drivel. The Saturday Review justly pro-
nounces it the very worst speech ever made in Parliament on a great
occasion, and it reminded me of nothing so much as the vapid twaddle
that used to flow from the supporters of State aid to Religion in the
■Sydney Assembly. It would be difficult to find any argument in Mr
Disraeli’s speech, or even much meaning; but just imagine him saying
that the Established Church of England was the bulwark of religious
liberty, because it opened its arms to receive all those who had been
excommunicated or turned out of the other Churches ! And this is a
fair specimen of the arguments of a speech extending over half a
dozen columns of the Times. His supporters are by no means pleased,
and listened to Disraeli’s conversational talk with a melancholy dis-
may, while his opponents laughed derisively. The Tory party could
only muster two other speakers of note, Dr Ball and Mr Hardy. Dr
Ball’s speech was the best delivered on behalf of the Establishment,
with the exception of Sir Roundel! Palmer’s great effort. Sir Roundell
is a Liberal, but opposed his party on this great question. His speech
was so great that the Times says it would have been much more
warmly received by the Church party if they had had the capacity to
understand or follow it. It struck me as being a continuous and


painful splitting of hairs with infinite subtilty, failing altogether to
grapple with the plain, broad question before the House. He, how-
ever, displayed great logical acuteness, and was evidently thoroughly
in earnest and sincere—a rare thing among public men here. As
to Mr Hardy, his oratory was well described as going bump, bump,
bumping along the ground like a balloon unable to rise. He wants
intellect, and so threw little light upon the subject. It was a relief to
listen to Mr Bright’s manly, truthful periods, after so much milk-and-
water talk. Mr Bright had it all his own way, and made frightful
havoc of Mr Disraeli, who had given him a rare opportunity. Mr
Lowe also attacked Mr Disraeli with great spirit and effect; and Mr
Gladstone wound up the debate, cutting short his oratory, as he said,
“so as not to interpose one moment longer between the Church of
Ireland and its inevitable fate.” And so the Church was doomed by
a majority of one hundred and eighteen. The question now comes to
be, Will this measure do any good in reference to the pacification of
Ireland? Whether it does so or not, it is an act of simple justice,
and as such ought to have been done years ago, or rather ought never
to have required doing. Every conceivable item of bad government
was collected and concentrated in that one act of attempting to estab-
lish the Church of the minority in Ireland. It was an insane policy,
and could result in nothing but disaffection and open rebellion. Scot-
land resisted it successfully, with invincible spirit and determination,
and has since been the loyal, true, and faithful ally of England. Will
this measure, then, make Ireland equally so ? It remains to be seen.
I, for my part, believe it will not. British statesmen must be indeed
blind, and many of them are wilfully so, who imagine for one moment
that a Roman Catholic population will submit to the rule of a Pro-
testant power without combining and plotting for the overthrow of
that power. This is the genius, the very soul of the system, and
never will cease or alter until the system itself is destroyed.
The Ultramontanes of Ireland have always and will always favour
the repeal of the Union. Their object is to have Catholic Ireland
ruled by a Catholic Parliament and handed over to Rome, bound
hand and foot; and, notwithstanding the spectacle of Spain and Italy
struggling to emancipate themselves from the blighting, stifling in-
fluence of Popish misrule, still the Irish Papist is always ready to kiss
the rod and prostrate himself before a priestly tyranny as insolent as
it is arrogant, intolerant, and unbearable. The duty of England
towards Ireland is to do justice and to administer the laws faithfully
and impartially ; to favour no sect, but to tolerate and protect all; to


discard all influences whether Protestant or Catholic; and to strike
down crime with a resolute and unerring hand. Had this been done
all along, there would have been little trouble from Ireland. But
when we find Government after Government attempting to rule with
neither policy nor principle, but resorting to a mere system of favour-
itism and bribery, it is not surprising that failure and discomfiture
overtake them. The last Government thought to bribe the Catholics
by giving a charter to a Roman Catholic University and endowing
the priests, utterly blind to the fact that this pernicious connection
between Church and State was the main cause of Irish misery and
discontent. Then we have the present Government bribing all
sects with the funds of the State Church, and thinking to rule a
nation by a pitiful pettifogging system of this character. “ They do
but skin and film the ulcerous part, while rank corruption, mining
all beneath, infects unseen,” I assert, as I have done in former
letters to you, that the members of the present Government, with the
exception of Mr Bright, have not brought forward this measure of
disestablishment from a sense of its justice, but from a wretched
fear of the thing called Fenianism. It is humiliating enough to have
to assert this, but it is true notwithstanding. How is it that Mr
Gladstone was so very long in seeing the injustice of the Irish
Church Establishment ? Hot a word about it during his long tenure
of office; on the contrary, he frequently defended and upheld it.
Whence the change, I ask, unless Fenian intimidation has wrought
upon him ? Suppose there had been no such thing as Fenianism, is
there a living man who supposes Mr Gladstone would have proposed
the disestablishment of the Irish Church ? And the lesson which
this teaches, and which the Fenian party will not be slow in learning,
is only perpetrate the requisite number of Manchester murders, and
Clerkenwell atrocities, and there is nothing which you may not
wring from a weak and timid Government. That the present
Government answers that description, few will deny. They are
afraid of the Catholic priesthood, they are afraid of the Orange-
men, and they are afraid of the Fenians, and their whole policy and
action seems to be, instead of ruling like men, to conciliate each in
turn by a sop here and a sop there. This system has, however, been
carried too far, and has recoiled upon the Government with damaging
results. The wholesale liberation of Fenian prisoners was a sop
which the feeble, timid Government consented to, I believe, through
sheer fear; and as a return for the kindness of the Government, the
liberated prisoners have everywhere denounced them, and reviled
17


them for their base weakness, and at the same time announcing
openly their own determination never to cease in labouring to over-
throw British authority. Nothing could equal the demoralising effect
of this unparalleled display of weakness and cowardice on the part
of Mr Gladstone and his colleagues. The tearful Mr Walpole was
pitiable enough in the last Government, but there is something fear-
ful in this capricious and wholesale liberation of men who only a
few months ago were convicted of grave crimes, and sentenced to
long terms of imprisonment. Either these sentences were right or
wrong. Mr Gladstone now says, in effect, with the whole weight and
sanction of the British Government, that they were wrong, and so
brings contempt upon the administration of the law, and infuses new
life and fresh vigour among the ranks of the disaffected. The
Fenians now look upon Mr Gladstone as one of themselves, and after
what has happened, I suppose they think they can get him to con-
sent to anything. They are not far mistaken. All that Mr Glad-
stone requires is a sufficiency of pressure to mould him to any pur-
pose. He commenced life an' extreme Tory, he is now a Eadical.
He was all his life the champion of State Churches, he is now their
destroyer. He was for years a rabid Protectionist, he is now a Free
Trader. Up to the other day he was in favour of open voting, he is
now inclined to support the ballot, and only waits the necessary
pressure, not conviction, to complete his conversion. Whoever puts
faith in a man of this stamp, I hope I may never be found among
them. If ever any crisis or difficulty overtakes England and Mr
Gladstone is at the head of affairs, the weakness and infirmity of his
character will soon make itself apparent ; he is all hesitating, vacil-
lating indecision, and seems to have no capacity to understand what
is truth until it is laboriously hammered into him, and then I don’t
believe he is convinced, but merely from policy makes a pretence
of being so. Mr Bright, although a great orator, is about the last
man I would wish to see ruling a great nation, simply because he is
against going to war, and refuses to hang a ruffian if he deserves it.
The horrors and disasters of war cannot be over-estimated, but as
long as human nature remains as it is, this argument will be resorted
to ; and I believe that the honour and dignity of a nation is not safe
in the hands of a man whose fanaticism leads him to suffer insult
and contumely at the hands of any Power, without an instant
sacrifice of every consideration to avenge and wash out the stain. I
believe Mr Bright will not remain long a member of the Cabinet.
He evidently commands great influence in it, and on many social


questions is sound and enlightened. But there may come a time
when exorbitant claims on the part of other Powers, accompanied by
an unreasoning and overbearing tone, may demand a spirited and
resolute bearing on the part of England, and if ever this time comes,
Mr Bright will inevitably break down. In such a crisis, the English
nation would not endure his counsels for a single moment. Long
may England remain at peace, but may that peace never be attained
or secured by the surrender of the most infinitesimal of her rights,
or by the slightest descent from that high position of honour and
glory which she has ever maintained among the nations of the earth.
F.S. —I would strongly recommend Mr Disraeli’s speech to the
consideration of your readers, merely that they may see how much
absurdity may be talked to the House of Commons with impunity.
I doubt not there are many able men in Australia, but I would like
to ask the ablest of them to explain the following passage from Mr
Disraeli’s speech : —“ When the insoluble is met with, intellect de-
parts, and when intellect departs religion begins.” If any Australian
representative were to address the Assembly in this style, I expect
the House would think he had fallen in with the insoluble.
LETTER IY.
London, 18 th May 1869.
When a Lord appears in English public life, a very slender capacity is
required to buoy him up, and drift him safely and speedily into high and
responsible office. He may be possessed of very paltry talents, never-
theless, they are magnified by the press and the public, and very soon a
considerable name and reputation attaches to him. There is some-
thing, to my mind, intensely humiliating to our common nature in a
vulgar Englishman’s worship of a Lord. What is the cause or origin of
it I know not, but I suppose it is engrained in his very nature, and
preached up to him wherever he goes, even in the church on Sundays.
The great Sam Johnson, with all his genius, was a slave to this feel-
ing, and said that when a Lord appeared as an author, his merits should
be handsomely acknowledged; and this is undoubtedly the feeling of the
English people: whenever a Lord appears, they acknowledge his merits,
whether he possesses them or not. Lord Stanley, the Foreign Secre-
tary of the late Administration, has a great name and reputation in


this country. What it is founded on, or how it has been achieved, I
am totally at a loss to understand, and must content myself with
thinking that the Johnsonian theory has been applied to him, and his
merits handsomely acknowledged from the first day of his appearance
up till now. I have gone into the House of Commons several times
on purpose to hear Lord Stanley, and have heard him, and have heard
nothing from him that I might not have heard from any other gen-
tleman of respectable mediocrity. He is a poor speaker, and a very
forbidding-looking man. He never attempts eloquence, because it is
not in him, and his ideas are neither strikingly original, nor expressed
with the least felicity, I would call him a plain, ordinary man of
business, exact and punctual, and familiar enough with the ordinary
beaten track, but without the capacity to look beyond or above it, and
totally devoid of the courage to carry out any bold, original scheme, even
if he had the ability to conceive it. Now this view of Lord Stanley’s
character and merits, I think, was admirably borne out and sustained
by his conduct during the Irish Church debate. When Mr Gladstone
first introduced his resolutions in reference to the Irish Church, Lord
Stanley, then Foreign Secretary, moved an amendment, and in the
course of his speech admitted that Ireland was the question of the
hour, and that the Church was a great grievance, and that something
must be done, and much more, which was received with absolute con-
sternation by his party behind him. Mr Hardy, the then Home
Secretary, the same evening, unsaid all that Lord Stanley had pre-
viously said, and refused to admit any one of his conclusions. Then
came the dissolution, throughout which Lord Stanley was silent, and
on the assembling of the new Parliament, on the second reading of
Mr Gladstone’s Church Bill, Lord Stanley’s character appeared in
its true light, and exactly as I have above depicted it. He had pre-
viously admitted the right of Parliament to disestablish the Church,
which, strangely enough, had been denied by Disraeli and his party.
He had heard Mr Gladstone denounced from his side of the House as
a sacrilegious spoliator, and yet during the entire debate on that bill
he not only never said a word, but was never seen in the House till
the time of division, when he appeared, and voted against the bill, to
the surprise of every one, who, at the very least, expected that he
would not have voted at all. There cannot be a. doubt that Lord
Stanley favoured Mr Gladstone’s policy, and almost avowed it, and
yet we find him voting with a set of men who denounced the bill as
sacrilegious robbery, and its author as something worse than a brigand.
Lord Stanley is now, in the House of Commons, neither one thing nor


another, a mere cipher. He is suspected and distrusted by his own
party, and he has neither the courage to stand by them in spite of
himself, nor the magnanimity to walk over to the other side. He
has disavowed the doctrines of his party on this church question,
and yet he votes with them notoriously against his convictions; and
so we see this noble Lord, night after night, wincing under a wretched
thraldom without the courage to free himself, or apparently the capa-
city to understand or appreciate the degradation that attaches to
his position. A man possessed of the ability and force of character
of his father, Lord Derby, under no circumstances would consent to
play so tame and weak a part. Had he been in Lord Stanley’s place on
the second reading of the bill, instead of cowardly silence, we would
have had him thundering forth his opinions, whatever they were, with
an eloquence and epigrammatic force which would, at least, have
challenged the respect and admiration of the House. Lord Stanley,
in my opinion, is in no way fitted for public life, and I know he would
make no sacrifice for the sake of opinions he holds and upholds so
feebly. Lord Salisbury is another instance of a man largely indebted
to English flunkeyism for his reputation, name, and public position.
He is not so clever a man as Lord Stanley, yet how quickly they
both made their way in the political world ! Neither of them possess
a tithe of the ability of Mr Higginbotham of Melbourne, or of Mr
Parkes of Sydney, while Mr Bright might retain a full half of his
own great talent, and with the other half make half a dozen Stanleys
and Salisburys ; and yet how long it was before Mr Bright, with all
his splendid genius, could gain a hearing, far less a position, in the
House of Commons ! —as to a position in the Government, the thing
was not to be dreamt of. Mr Stansfield, Mr W. E. Eorster, Mr
Horsman, are all men of far higher ability than either Lord Stanley
or Lord Salisbury, and yet what an uphill fight they have had to
gain the recognition, such as it is, of their very great talents ! Had
they been Lords, how different would have been their political history !
This worship of titled people runs through all ranks, and is nurtured and
fostered by the press with a depth of snobbishness which might make
one believe that the editorial uniform was yellow plush. It is pitiable
to see the servile Times devoting leader after leader to some third-rate
political Lord in a first-rate position, and in fulsome accents betray-
ing, at every turn, the national reverence and blind worship of mere
title. lam afraid colonial society is even worse in this respect, if we
may judge by the ardour with which the poor, perishable affair of
knighthood is coveted, and by the circumstance that even ladies, I


am told —surely not well-bred ones—crowded round the Duke of Edin-
burgh on the public streets of Sydney, and stared at him as if he had
been some strange animal never before seen or heard of. Lord Stan-
ley has now reduced himself to a most anomalous position, and I am at
present watching his action with much interest, to see how long so
untenable a position can be maintained, and how much inconsistency
and absurdity the English press will suffer a Lord to perpetrate with-
out remark or remonstrance. In the meantime he is worse than an
Adullamite, because he has neither the pluck or courage to go into
their cave, or even into one of his own ; and so he sits with his party,
repudiating and despising their opinions without the courage to speak
out manfully his own convictions, or the spirit to avoid voting for
principles and opinions he neither holds nor in any way sympathises
with. Had Lord Stanley been a man of the right metal, he would
have declared himself before the House and the country—have boldly
enunciated his own opinions, and voted for what he believed to be
right at all hazards ; and if this involved a fatal breach with his party
—with the wretched, obsolete, narrow-minded, herd of squires behind
him—he had nothing for it but to “ whistle them off and let them
down the wind to prey at fortune.’’ Had this been Lord Stanley’s
action, the country might have been proud of him ; and, in the interests
of truth, surely it would have been a preferable spectacle to his pre-
sent humiliating and truly despicable position, I happened to go
into the House of Lords a short time ago, and found them debating a
measure, originating with themselves, entitled the Habitual Criminals
Bill. This bill is intended to deal with the criminal classes in a
manner that will surprise some of them. Now, however desirable it
may be to put down crime, and no one would go farther than I would
to attain this great end, still I have a prejudice in favour of waiting
'till a man actually commits a crime before inflicting punishment.
This bill of the Lords does not do this. One clause of the bill pro-
vides that after a man has been convicted twice, the third time he
must receive seven years’ imprisonment, no matter how trivial the
offence may be of which he has been convicted. Then follows a clause
absolutely hateful in its tyranny : it is to the effect that any criminal
who has served his sentence may be apprehended by the police, and
taken before a magistrate, and if he cannot prove to the satisfaction of
the magistrate that he is earning an honest living, a punishment of one
year’s imprisonment may be inflicted on him. There is nothing more
detestable than this in the history of legislation. It is simply an atro-
cious wrong which I doubt not the Commons will never suffer to be


enacted. The fact of the matter is, no legislation is required on the sub-
ject at all, if judges would only do their duty properly, and inflict just
sentences when they have those ruffians in their clutches, I read in the
Times the other day of the apprehension of three men charged with
housebreaking; one of them had been twelve times convicted, one of
them nine times, and the third seven times. Now, whose fault was it
that these three men were at large, and at their old work again ? If
the law had dealt properly with them, they would have been so amply
provided for long before their villany had culminated in even seven
convictions, that the public would have had no further trouble from
them at least. As far as I can see, what is wanted here is the appoint-
ment of public prosecutors, and I would enact that former convictions
might be received in evidence against any man charged with crime.
Suppose a man charged with the crime of burglary, is it not material
evidence to go to the jury, that this same man has already been three
or four times convicted of that crime ? This in itself is, of course, no
proof of his guilt, but I think it is most material, when taken in com-
bination with other circumstances. The adoption of this course, and
the infliction of due and proper punishment by judges would go far to
relieve England from the daily increasing trouble of its criminal popu-
lation. The Government, indeed different Governments, of Sydney
were heavily blamed for the height bushranging was allowed to reach
in New South Wales, and for the impunity with which it was,suffered
to continue, and too much blame could not have been attached to any
authority calling itself Government under which crime not only
existed, but frequently went for a long time unpunished.
But bad as New South Wales was in this respect —because it was
pretty well eradicated before I left —your readers will no doubt feel
surprised when I state that things are much worse, at the present
moment, than ever they w r ere in New South Wales, in that part of
Her Majesty’s dominions called Ireland. Almost every mail brings
accounts of some cold-blooded, heartless assassination from that
country. As I write at present, I read in this morning’s Times the
narrative of a cruel, savage murder of a Mr Bradshaw, a magistrate
of the territory; and the papers, for months past, have recounted
frequent cases of a similar kind, characterised by the same depth of
atrocity and heartless barbarity. But the worst remains behind: in
no case have the perpetrators been discovered, and, moreover, on the
authority of a leading article in the Times, I assert that in one Irish
county, the county of Westmeath, no less than thirty murders have
been perpetrated during the last ten years, and the murderers, up to


this hour, neither punished nor discovered ; this is altogether inde.
pendent of those crimes or murders that have been discovered and
dealt with; and while it opens up to view a sad picture of the state
of that county, it also enables us to speak with some emphasis as to
the capacity of the English executive. Thirty murders in ten years
undiscovered and consequently unavenged ! Will England after this
boast of her executive machinery, or dare to criticise unfavourably the
most imbecile Government on earth ? It was the duty of the English
Government to have arrested and punished every one of those
murderers. Can we call it a good Government when it so outrageously
fails in its clearest and first of duties ? Can we indeed say there is
Government at all where murder is perpetrated in open day, with
perfect impunity, and where the murderer, with his hangman’s hands
reeking from his act, glides into the recesses of the society he lives in,
with an absolute guarantee of his safety and security ? Much as I
desire to see justice done to Ireland, and I believe the present Act for
the disestablishment of the Irish Church is an act of simple justice,
and a step in the right direction, yet the blood of those murdered men
calls to heaven for justice, and no British Government will fulfil its
duty which does not look to this. There is a justice to Ireland that
I wish to see quickly performed, and that is the spectacle of a vigor-
ous, lynx-eyed English executive fastening upon the brutal, savage
assassins who flourish there, bringing them and their crimes to a
speedy and terrible end. This is a justice that should have been per-
formed in Ireland long ago, and now that the English authorities are
disposed to legislate for Ireland in a spirit of perfect fair play, let them
never for a moment forget that the first and most important duty of
all governments is rapidly to discover crime, and as rapidly and cer-
tainly to punish it. The Government that fails in this respect is an
unreal mockery and a miserable sham.
LETTER Y.
London, 17 th June 1869.
The Gladstone Government is now in full power with the eclat of
having disestablished the Irish Church, and the glory, in prospect, of
settling the Irish land question. The question often occurs to me, Is
it a strong Government, and will it last? The answer is, that if


everything remains quiet and peaceable, there is little prospect of
danger, and the shrewdest politician would not be justified in predict-
ing a speedy termination of the present Administration. But is there
in this world a more unlikely thing than that affairs will remain quiet
and peaceable ? Ever since I have arrived here I have been looking
forward to some great Continental disturbance, as a thing that, sooner
or later, must and will happen. What that disturbance will be it
requires no great amount of sagacity to determine. A revolution in
France, or a war between France and Prussia, are events which may
come upon us at any moment, and are as much within the bounds of
probability as that a shower of rain may fall next week. In the event
of such a calamity happening as a Continental war, how will the pre-
sent Government deal with it ? Well, if England remains strictly
neutral, and adheres to this policy with inexorable determination, she
is safe, and the Government will have no more difficult navigation than
plain sailing. If England, under any pretence, allows herself to be
pulled into any Continental quarrel, the country will witness, not-
withstanding the Crimean experiences, as fearful a break-down on the
part of England’s naval and military system as it is possible to imagine,
I do not say that England, with her vast resources and power, would
not right herself before the struggle lasted very long, and come out of
it with her accustomed glory and distinction; but that she would
suffer fearfully at the beginning, who can deny who knows anything
of the men who are at the present moment charged with the govern-
ment of her naval and military departments ? It appears to me quite
clear that Mr Childers, the First Lord of the Admiralty, looks to
nothing but economy- —an economy which may one day cost England
no end of treasure. He is one of those small men whose mind is not
big enough to take in the whole subject, and seeing only a small part
of it, he arrives at conclusions so absurd, that one might pass them
over with a smile did they not involve consequences of the most por-
tentous import to the future fate of England. Mr Childers, it is
plain, knows nothing as to the state of foreign navies, nor does he
appear to think it necessary to obtain this knowledge, and to keep
England’s navy always in a state of superiority. He evidently has
entered upon his great duties inspired by one idea, and that idea is
this—l can almost imagine him saying to himself—“ lam a bit of a
business man, and all that I know about ships or navies I acquired as
collector of customs in Melbourne. If I can save England money, it
will tell. I will therefore aim at cutting down in every direction, and
there being no prospect of war, I will get credit and popularity for


this.” And, acting upon these notions, Mr Childers has left England’s
navy, at the present moment, in so weak and crippled a state, that
one day’s active war with any formidable power would reveal the fact
to the blindest of his admirers—if he has any. As to the army, it is
simply laughable, and, under the direction of such men as now officiate
at the Wax* Office, it may he viewed as a mere plaything and splendid
toy to amuse sightseers and holiday people, but in no way adapted for
service in the field. In the department of field-artillery alone, which
will more than ever play a most conspicuous part in war, I believe
that England is sadly behind her neighbours, and her state in this
respect would alone suffice to justify the heaviest censures on the
management of the War Department. Well, then, what are the pro-
spects before us as to peace or war ? I think every one will admit that
France and Prussia are busy preparing for it, and have been so engaged
for some time past. France is jealous of the extraordinary rise of
Prussia, and Prussia has a very long and heavy score of insult and
wrong to settle with France, and every drop of blood in her veins is
tingling and boiling over with anxiety and impatience to settle this
score promptly and effectually. It is mere policy that prevents either
nation flying at the other’s throat, and the world may look for this at
any moment. When it does come, if ever, it will enable us to form
some idea of the capacity of the Emperor Napoleon. He will find it
a very different affair from his Austrian campaign. From what we
know of the Prussian arms and resources, so splendidly exhibited at
Sadowa, France may well pause before encountering so formidable a
foe; but should France ever so far forget herself as to try conclusions
with Prussia, one thing I am sure of will appear at once, and that
will be the utter incapacity and imbecility of the Emperor Napoleon.
I am aware of the preposterous terms the English press and people
have constantly employed when speaking of the French Emperor,
“ That profound and sagacious man —that deep and far-seeing political!
—that most able and vigorous ruler,” &c., &c., are terms that I have
often smiled at as I listened to them or read them. Mr Kinglake,
in his most able work on the Crimean war, has described the Emperor
most accurately and truthfully; and I venture to predict, that if ever
circumstances place Napoleon in a position of difficulty or danger, or
bring about any serious emergency, requiring the exercise of those
very qualities the English press and people have so freely and gratuit-
ously endowed him with, he will be found woefully deficient ; and Mr
Kinglake’s estimate will be realised to the letter. His elevation to
the throne of France, or rather, in the first instance, to the great


position of President of the French Eepublic, was an act of sheer
madness on the part of the French people, all the more insane when
we reflect on the character, standing, and ability of some of the very
able men who were candidates along with him, and to whom he was
preferred in spite of the French nation’s knowledge of his previous
history, and his grotesque and ludicrous attempts at Strasbourg and
Boulogne.
The French people elected a man merely in consideration of his
name. They have suffered enough, and richly have they deserved to
suffer, for this already. The hollowness and shallowness of this man
and his rule may, perhaps, be made very apparent some day. In the
meantime, the unfortunate French people are insulted by his tyranny
and oppression, and have for twenty years been compelled to endure the
insolence of his rule, and the discomfiture and disaster of most of his
fine schemes of foreign enterprise. Mexico and Pome are notable
instances of this; but there is worse than this behind, if we could
only penetrate the mystery and secresy of that overshadowing despot-
ism under which France has so long suffered. That this despotism
will come to a violent end every child knows, and then, I predict, we
will learn something that will open the eyes of most people. Napoleon
thinks he is a soldier, and a great one, and I believe half the English
people think so too; but what grounds they have for thinking so,
other than that he had an uncle who was one, I am at a loss to under-
stand. It may be that his military genius may one day be put to the
test, and if so, what sensible man, who knows anything of the French
ruler, can doubt the result. If he is dealing with anything like an
equal power, his timidity, indecision, and bungling incapacity, coupled
with his very gross ignorance of military matters, will be the first news
the world will hear of ; and if he has such a power as Prussia to deal
with, his discomfiture and utter defeat is, in my humble opinion, cer-
tain enough. We shall see. Although things are quiet on the Con-
tinent at present, we all know what Prussia is doing, and how offensive
is her conduct to France. Prussia is advancing in power and great-
ness, and that is sufficient cause for France to wage war with her. If
such an untoward event does happen, I have only to hope that wisdom
will guide the councils of England; that she will remain neutral, and
stand firmly by her neutrality. England can have no interest in any
Continental quarrel, and can gain nothing by interference. Nor
can I imagine upon what grounds it is possible for her to interfere.
The policy of fifty or a hundred years ago is, I trust, abandoned for ever
by England. The Crimean mistake will, I hope, never be repeated;


a calamity brought upon England, I believe, entirely through the
influence of the Emperor Napoleon, whose influence and alliance was
disastrous to England in many other ways than this, and utterly dis-
creditable and disgraceful to her as a nation. While the presence of
Mr Bright in the Cabinet is a great advantage, as affording a guarantee
that no foolish warlike inveiglements will likely occur, that he will
stoutly oppose any interference with Continental quarrels, yet I
object altogether to his principles prevailing where England is sub-
jected to insult, and compelled, in vindication of her honour, to resort
to the last argument. The affair of the Alabama may be used to
bolster up a quarrel with England, and if so, much as I respect and
regard Mr Bright, I hope he will retire from the Cabinet. England
has already reached the utmost limit of concession, and for the honour
of the great old country, I trust that firmness and stern resolve will
rule her councils.
The nation that wilfully provokes England to war will get her
bellyful of it before she is done with it. England may bungle and
blunder at first, but as soon as she warms to her work, the whole
nation will rise in enthusiasm and power, and push matters with a
vigour and energy that will strike terror to the souls of her enemies,
and prove to the world that the grand old nation is more powerful,
more capable, and more invincible than ever. The claims put for-
ward by America in reference to the Alabama matter can never be
entertained by England. If America is not satisfied to let the
business be settled by arbitration, on America’s head let all the con-
sequences fall. England can go not a hairbreadth farther, and in
going thus far she has acted with singular justice, fairness, and
candour. Well, then, if America is not satisfied, and pushes matters
to an extreme, England’s duty lies plainly and clearly before her, and
that duty is to buckle on her armour and be ready for the worst;
and it is in view of such a crisis as this that I object to the presence
of Mr Bright in the Cabinet. War is undoubtedly a great calamity,
but there are calamities so much greater, that war itself is a blessing
in comparison. Loss of honour is a calamity that any nation would
be justified in pouring out its blood to the last drop rather than
suffer, and no man who does not hold this opinion is fit to rule a
nation like England at any time, much less at a time of danger and
difficulty. Unquestionably, Mr Bright acts from the purest principles
of patriotism, and is in every sense a most amiable and high-minded
man, and his genius we all admire and are proud of, but his opinions
on the subject of war, if acted upon by a British Cabinet, wmiild bring


disgrace and contumely on the nation, and reduce it to a third-rate
power on the very first occasion of any serious misunderstanding
with any of the great Powers of the earth. It is therefore pretty
evident that Mr Bright cannot remain long a member of the Cabinet.
If there is one thing on this earth more hateful to the British people
than another, it is a timid, spiritless attitude on the part of their rulers
in view of any danger. The characteristic of the British nation is
courage, not a vain ostentatious courage, hut a steady, inflexible,
dogged, self-sacrifiing determination to die sooner than yield. It is,
therefore, not with such a people that their own rulers will dare to
trifle. The British nation demands that every insult to it shall be
promptly avenged, and nothing is more intolerable to that nation
than the bare thought of intimidation or menace from any Power
on earth. Mr Bright’s opinions are at variance with the genius and
spirit of the people among whom he lives. Of course lam speaking
solely of his opinions as to war, and I know of nothing so calculated
to rouse the savage anger of that people than to witness timidity or
spiritless hesitation on the part of the Government in the face
of danger or in the presence of menace, Mr Bright will soon feel
all this, if he continues a member of the Cabinet, and America
attempts to enforce her claims. If so, there is no course open to
Great Britain but war, sooner than see which, Mr Bright wmuld, of
course, retire from the Government. I hope that wiser councils will
prevail and guide America. England desires most cordially to
remain at peace with her, and I believe it will be no fault of England’s
if that peace is not preserved for evermore. That a great and power-
ful nation, sprung from Great Britain, speaking the same language,
having the same laws, and knit by innumerable ties of friendship and
love, should talk of war with Great Britain lightly, is pitiable enough ;
but that it should assume the attitude it does in the face of Great
Britain’s most anxiously-expressed desire to refer the whole matter
to arbitration, and abide by whatever decision is arrived at, is sorrow-
ful and humiliating in the last degree. If, however, this insolence
—for it is nothing short of it —is persisted in on the part of America,
Great Britain’s course is clear and unalterable ; and in pursuing that
course with steadfastness and resolution, she will be cheered by the
consciousness of right, and inspired by the reflection that her action
has the sympathy of all civilised nations, and may expect the approval
and the blessing of the God of all justice as well as the God of all
battles. Let us hope that any such untoward result may be avoided,
and that both nations may grow in friendship and mutual good-will,


and that the day may never come when they will do otherwise than
emulate each other in the arts of peace, and aid by their powerful
influence in preserving the peace of the world.
It is now nearly twenty years since I was last in Great Britain,
and I have great pleasure in stating that the improvement in the
humbler classes of the people is most remarkable. The working classes
are greatly better off in point of wages, intelligence, and homes to
live in. This, I think, is undoubtedly to be attributed to the prin-
ciples of Free Trade so entirely and completelyadoptedasthe permanent
policy of England. This policy has largely increased her revenue,
stimulated her commercial enterprise to gigantic proportions, and
doubled and trebled the wealth of the nation. The man who would
talk to an Englishman of a return to Protection would be pitied as a
lunatic, and in no other way answered. Free Trade is understood by
all classes in England, and will never be relinquished. Comparing
the state of the working classes when I left England twenty years ago,
with what it was when I returned a short time ago, I believe they
have risen several grades in the scale of society, and enjoy as many
comforts, and live in nearly as good houses, as the middle class did
then. All this is pleasing and remarkable, and in no way accountable
but as the result of Free Trade. In my own native town, Edinburgh,
although the working classes are quite as prosperous as their brethren
in England, I think they are more addicted to excess in drink. While
walking through the streets of Edinburgh on any holiday, the number
of men to he met with staggering drunk struck me with astonishment.
I had never seen anything of the kind in Sydney or Melbourne, and
in San Francisco, where I resided some time, I never saw a drunk
man; so that the sight of drunk people in broad daylight in such a
town as Edinburgh, struck me as something shocking and outrageous.
I went, one day, to a review of Volunteers in the Queen’s Park, and
the drunkenness that I saw around me was in every sense degrading
to the people. That day I returned home by the High Street, and
almost all the way the numbers of men and women I saw drunk made
me think less of my country and my countrymen than ever I thought
before. I have seen twenty thousand of the people of Sydney
assemble at a review or cricket-match, and have seen them turn out
in immense numbers on ordinary holidays, but I never saw such a
thing as a drunk man on any of these occasions, not even one. The
working classes of the colonies, with their wives and children, are
on a level with the middle class here, and in point of dress and style,
rather go beyond them. How long is this stain of drunkenness to


rest upon Scotland? No doubt the open way in which the working
classes go about it may lead to an erroneous estimate of its extent ;
but still, if they valued their own self-respect, they would avoid any
public exhibition of this weakness. I have been in no city in any
part of the world that was not above Edinburgh in this respect, as I
have been in no town in any part of the world that in any way
equalled Edinburgh in intelligence, enlightenment, education, and
genuine sterling worth. It is this fact that makes me long to see
the ugly excrescence I have spoken of lopped off without delay, and
that ruthlessly. I like this fine old country more and more every day,
and if there is a spot on the face of the earth where I do long to live,
that spot is here where I am —glorious old London. If I did not live
in London, I would rather live in Sydney or Melbourne than in any
other part of England, or even in Edinburgh or any other part of
Scotland. No one should feel low spirits in London. The vast ocean
of life around you, the infinite variety of people, the innumerable at-
tractions, and many other things, all tend to deepen the regret I feel,
as I contemplate my departure for Sydney next month.
LETTER YI.
THOMAS CARLYLE.
My slight acquaintance with Mr Carlyle, if I can claim such an honour,
was brought about through Mr Henry Parkes, the then Chief Secretary
of the Government of New South Wales, commissioning me, when I
left Sydney for England in 1867, to deliver a small present to Mr
Carlyle. On my arrival in Great Britain, I sent on the present from
Edinburgh, and when I came to London I addressed a short note to
Mr Carlyle, intimating that I would be happy to call upon him if he
would inform me of a convenient day and hour. Mr Carlyle informed
me, that any day would be convenient after three o’clock. I accord-
ingly lost no time in wending my way to Chelsea, and was soon ushered
into the presence of Mr Thomas Carlyle, undoubtedly the greatest
name in English literature. I need not say how much I was in-
terested at the thoughts of a conversation with Mr Carlyle. I had
read and re-read all his works. I wa,s a devoted admirer of his genius;
most of his opinions I had long held, and his withering assaults on
the humbug and shams of the world made his name dear to me.
Mr Carlyle received me with great cordiality and warmth, which I


attributed to the esteem and admiration he expressed for Mr Parkes,
of whom he always spoke in terms of the highest regard. I was de-
lighted to see Mr Carlyle looking so fresh and well. There is nothing
very remarkable in his appearance. His face is expressive and thought-
ful, and full of intelligence; but as we entered into conversation freely—
and I may say here, he is by far the best talker I ever listened to—he
became excited, animated, and warm ; and then I think his conver-
sational eloquence was as good as the best of his writings. His
humour was so keen and exquisite, and sometimes so grotesque and
overpowering, that even when I had left him, and was returning to
London, I was occasionally seized with uncontrollable fits of laughter
at the recollection of it. He is perfectly simple and natural in
manner, without the veriest trace of affectation. We conversed a
good deal upon the political affairs of England, and I soon found he
had a sad opinion of her public men, pointing out in graphic terms
the feebleness and cowardice of the men who pretend to rule England.
He seized hold of Disraeli, and ridiculed him with a bitterness of
sarcasm, and a force and vigour of expression, which made me feel I
was listening to an intellectual giant. He then assailed fiercely the
lords and gentlemen who have so long allowed themselves to be led
by such a man, mentioning the circumstance of Disraeli having winked
his eye to a large Edinburgh audience, as he informed it of the pro-
cess of education to which he had subjected the aforesaid lords and
gentlemen in the matter of reform. He was full of fun and satiric
humour while handling Disraeli, and seemed to be utterly unable to
get over the monstrous anomaly of all the great lords and gentlemen
suffering themselves to be led by this notorious political juggler. He
literally dissected poor Mr Disraeli, with a sharp, incisive power, and
an amazing knowledge of the anatomy of his subject, which was
striking and entertaining in the highest degree. Nor did he confine
himself to Mr Disraeli. He assailed the public men of England gene-
rally, that is, the ruling public men, commenting in bitter terms, and
with incomparable wisdom and power, upon their insincerity, their
time-serving hypocrisy, their timidity and falsehood, and their fear to
do the right thing even when they have ascertained,what that right
thing is. It was refreshing to listen to this eminent man of genius
as he descanted upon all this with piercing and electric eloquence.
Every oratorical weapon seemed to be at his command —ridicule,
satire, rare humour, bursts of blighting scorn, all expressed with a
conversational ease and natural eloquence, which struck me as being
the most enchanting and attractive thing I had ever listened to. I


got from Mr Carlyle the pure unadulterated truth, and I could not
help contrasting it with the prevailing falsehood and insincerity of the
House of Commons. I will never forget the impression Mr Carlyle
left upon me. His boundless knowledge, his strong masculine sense,
the genuineness and truthfulness of his convictions, the thorough
honesty of his nature, his fierce hostility to humbug in all its shapes,
and his ruthless power in exposing it, all those qualities governed
by a genius of unequalled power, the glory of which will illuminate
the world for ages yet to come, made me feel that I sat in the pre-
sence of England’s brightest intellect and ablest man. Ido not
think I will ever meet with such another conversationalist, and I
have often since reflected that, if he so impressed me, a mere stranger,
on a first interview, what must be the power and attraction of his
conversation when indulged with unlimited freedom among his inti-
mate friends ! I can imagine no more admirable friend, no more in-
structive companion, no more interesting man. When coming from
the West Indies to England, I met on board a Dr Nicholson, who in
course of conversation informed me that he was a student with Mr
Carlyle at the Edinburgh University, and that they lived together in
lodgings, along with another young student, and that the whole three
slept in the same bedroom. Dr Nicholson added, that Mr Carlyle
took the dux prize in the mathematical class, and that their other
bedroom companion took the second prize ; but he observed, that
while Mr Carlyle seemed to master the subject without much effort
or application, the other lad laboured at his problems with desperate
zeal, sometimes sitting up all night at the task. I happened to men-
tion this to Mr Carlyle, who remembered Dr Nicholson well, and
described him accurately. He also remembered their residence in
Edinburgh wdiile students at the University; but he said that Dr
Nicholson was greatly deceived if he thought he mastered his mathe-
matical difficulties with ease, or that it did not cost him much exer-
tion. He said that he laboured most intensely at the study of
mathematics, and that he has gained nothing in this world worth
speaking about without the hardest of labour, Mr Carlyle gave me a
most interesting account of his labours in connection withhis great work,
“ Frederick the Great.” His search after accurate information seems
to have been most unwearied. Even in Germany, where he went on
this business, it was with the greatest difficulty and trouble he could
get any authentic information as to the uniform worn by a German
infantry soldier in the days of Frederick. He told me he got this
information accurately at last after spending a considerable time over


it, and no end of toil in digging among tlie records of the place. No
public man in Germany to whom he applied could give him this in-
formation, nor much guidance as to where to find it. He also re-
marked upon the general ignorance of historical matters, even among
the class in London who pass for sages and oracles. He said he
scarcely ever put a question, to these people that they could answer;
and as he had always some questions to put, if they saw him coming
along the street any day, they turned off in another direction to avoid
exposing their ignorance by an inability to answer any question that
might be put to them, which was sure to take place if they encoum
tered him. I remarked that his labours must have been very great
before he produced such a work as his “ Life of Cromwell.” He said no
one would credit the prodigious labour he had undergone before he
even begun the work. He said he laboured to gain almost as inti-
mate a knowledge of the man he was going to write about, as he had
of himself, and this was only to be attained by a minute examination
and close study of every letter and document that had ever emanated
from him, and an intimate knowledge of all the circumstances under
which he acted, the events by which he was controlled or impelled to
action, and the men who acted with him and against him, and every
detail respecting the circumstances and surroundings of the position
or situation. All this knowledge was only to be got at, he said, by
enormous labour, and was valuable when attained only as it was made
use of with intelligence and insight. In talking of the treatment of
criminals, Mr Carlyle ridiculed the effeminate and mistaken philan-
thropy which sympathised so much with the scoundrelism of the
land, and condemned in severe terms England’s rulers for their weak-
nessin thisrespect. He laughed to scorn the conduct of Home Secretary
Walpole, and pointed out that the presence of such a man in any im-
portant department of Government would bring about incalculable
injury to the best interests of any country. He hoped we had no
such blockhead in any important office of Government in Australia.
We had a long talk about the Crimean war, Mr Carlyle saying that
he was quite satisfied that the rulers of England at that time did not
know what they were about, and thought less about it. I think he
said that twenty-four hours before war was declared, Lord Aberdeen
told him that he would never consent to it, and seemed quite ignorant
of such a thing being likely to happen. He spoke of it as being fhe
most wretched business that had happened in his time, and proved
how unfit were the then rulers of England for their positions. I
took my leave of Mr Carlyle after an interview that I shall always


look back upon with pleasure. I shall always remember with ad
miration the great powers of the man as displayed in conversation.
His kindness and affability to me while resident in England, I shall
always be grateful for; and as an instance of this, and of the good
ness of his disposition, I may state that, some time after this I
wrote him a note, asking him if he could give me an introduction to
two gentlemen, eminent members of the English Bar. In reply, Mr
Carlyle sent me the following very kind and considerate communica-
tion :
“ 5 Cheyne Row, Chelsea, 25 th May.
“ Dear Sir, —My uncle bids me say he received your note last
night. He would have been most happy to introduce you to either
of the gentlemen you name, but he is not personally acquainted with
either of them, nor indeed with any Templar at all likely to assist
you in your present enterprise.
“ Yours truly,
“Mary Carlyle Aitken.
“ Since I wrote this, my uncle has given me this general in-
troduction to any of his friends that may be of use to you.”
The general introduction was the following, written in Mr Carlyle's
own handwriting:—
“ Mr David Buchanan, now student in the Middle Temple, was
recommended to me by perfectly creditable and trustworthy persons
in Sydney, and I can state the impression his conversation left dis-
tinctly on myself, that he is a man of probity and sense, with a
certain rugged strength of faculty, both intellectual and moral, who
has already done victoriously a great deal of hard labour in the world.
“ T. Carlyle.
“Chelsea, 25 th May 1869.”
I cite this letter as showing the generous goodness of Mr Carlyle
to me, who had no claim on him whatever, and the communication
published above I shall ever value and cherish, as an illustration of
the kind sympathetic disposition of one of England’s most distin-
guished and illustrious men.
I have seen it stated in the public journals that the infirmities of
age are creeping on Mr Carlyle. I hope not, and, as far as I saw, I


thought he possessed considerable physical energy. At all events,
his splendid genius burns with as clear and steady a lustre as ever,
and like Milton’s day-star—
“ Tricks its beams, and with new spangled ore,
Flames in the forehead of the morning sky. ”
36
