

Ocean Penny Postage.
BY
J. HENNIKER HEATON, M.P.
Facts and Arguments in its Favour.
1. My scheme is to convey a letter weighing half an ounce from
any place in the British Empire to any other place in it, or to the
United States of America, for one penny.
2. Penny postage exists at the present moment in the United
Kingdom, in Canada, in the United States (America), in the Cape
of Good Hope, in Natal (Africa), and in part of Australia, and
halfpenny postage throughout India. All we require is, that the
links should be completed by Ocean Penny Postage between these
countries.
3. I estimate the initial cost to England at only £60,000 a year.
4. Not an extra train or steamship would have to be provided
to carry out this reform, for the requisite machinery is now in
full operation.
5. A letter can be carried to the Antipodes at a profit for one
penny, and Sir Rowland Hill declared that a farthing would com-
pensate the shipowner.
6. The postage of a letter from New York to Alaska, 5,000
miles, is one penny. Surely if it pays the American Government
to convey a letter by this expensive railway route, it should be
possible to send one by sea from Liverpool to New York, only
3,000 miles, for one penny.
7. I can send a newspaper weighing four ounces to Australia
for one penny postage, but a letter of the same weight, by the
same route, and in the same steamer, costs 4s.
8. France, Germany, and Russia charge 50 per cent, less than
we do for postage to forty of our British Colonies and possessions.
9. France, with a few poor Colonial dependencies,, expends
more than a million sterling, viz., 26,060,000 francs, on her mail


steamship subventions; while England, with immense and wealthy
Colonies and dependencies, only expends ,£640,000 per annum.
Germany also spends proportionately a larger sum than England.
10. It !s perfectly well known that the object of these foreign
steamship subventions and low rates of postage is to cut out British
trade with British possessions. Other countries recognise that
cheap postage means enormously increased business and improved
social relations.
11. I put forward a special plea on behalf of the 350,000
emigrants who leave our shores every year, never to return. As
showing the nature and intensity of their feelings towards the “ old
folks at home,” I may mention that in 1888 600,000 emigrants
sent £2,500,000 to England, in small orders from 10s. to £5 in
value, for their friends and relatives in this country.
12. The Board of Trade embodied in its emigration returns for
1886 figures showing that between 1848 and 1886 no less than
£32,294,590 was remitted by settlers in the United States and
British North America to their friends in Great Britain and Ireland.
13. England, with her huge postal profit of £4,000,000, should
lead the way in this matter. The State, in my opinion, should not
make a profit out of the Post Office. But Ido not insist on this.
I merely propose that the Treasury should take this year from the
Post Office exactly the surplus of last year, and that all sums
over and above that surplus should be devoted to cheapening,
extending, and facilitating postal and telegraphic intercourse with
all parts of the Empire.
14. The amount expended on a single warship would be
sufficient to pay for establishing Ocean Penny Postage for three
years.
15. Already a great example has been set us. Throughout the
wide Australian continent newspapers are now conveyed and
delivered free.
16. At present, as I wish to establish my facts beyond all
possible question, I am asking for a Select Committee, or Royal
Commission, to inquire into the feasibility and cost of establishing
Ocean Penny Postage.
J. HENNIKER HEATON.
March , 1890.
Printed and Published for the Cobden Club by Cassell & Company , Limited , La Belle
Sauvage , London , E. C, } who supply this Leaflet in packets of 100, price is,
March, 1890.
