

1 • v :.. ?*' •• "V / :> CX
' ! Vv . - <
/\ /\ V
OVEEaEDEUKT
C> V K IJKU K _L
TJIT DEN
FEESTBUNDEL VAN TAAL-, LETTER-, GESCHIED- EN
AARDRIJKSKUNDIGE BIJDRAGEN
TER GELEGENHEID VAN ZIJN
TER GELEGENHEID VAN ZIJN
TACHTIGSTEN GEBOORTEDAG , 1
V
TACHTIGSTEN GEBOORTEDAG
u . r. ti. v li i u
OUD-HOOCtLKERAAR
#
DOOR EENIGE VRIENDEN EN OUD-LEERLINGEN AANGEBODEN
DOOR EENIGE VRIENDEN EN OUD-LEERLINGEN AANGEBODEJN
\/xX \7 v V XX V V XX XX \X XX O XX XX XX XX XX AA XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX XX V V XX XX V xx
. • • ■-X : V , , -(J ■■ ■-• ' ' .< • ■ ‘ ■ . , ■ ■ ■ ' ' - ' ■ ' -
w-'V - : .s-.*:.v--. -.-■■■■ ■■ • ...■.: :
■
k.: H - ■ , '
S* ' ,v-" * *;■: f....- u: ' <,&■:'{ '■ ’A I - *4 ..-‘ ■ ■ .7 ■■•?**? \
'fik?'-'’-' -' ' : Y’' ;: Y' - r Vv*>V ; j ‘'YYaX~"'"YY
' ' . ' ' „ ' v :■ - - ■ ' .< ■
-■
,
'■ ” X ' •> - f J V v. 5J iJw-X- Sci\ •■■■'■. ■'■ uASffi ■£ '' ,
■ \ J-H.vY . >: ~; v . i* p . v . ?As .> 'T* >• ■ - - > -\ J \A . ,
; - v/ ' ; '> ■;.■} '%>/*’ :? . ■ .■'-■■ p 'K£- : £Vo SM. &> ; 's('■ : -; ;
• • • . ■■ /.-Vi V :
■■ . :
■
■
■
o'V. ■ ■ . ‘ : A . ... * ■ ■
‘ ■■ ' , • : ■■■ ■ , ' , ■ . .
' V-' ' v *
■


’• : • V '■ . W; ,v ™ - .... £
••• u . * *. A '- a ■ V,V '' • r •■•■>*•- , ~ ‘ - • •" ■ ? " a '4 7 ■ '■■ r*
v.- o ' •>- ’< ■ ■ -i v .'- v -V/-' *.* ‘ .-v ■ . . - ' :> .► m ’ r ' .■ • '
••■. > • ’
■
\ V - , • ‘ • V ‘- ' ' J ’’ „


OCEANIC ETHNOLOGY AND PHILOLOGY;
ITS PROGRESS AND PROSPECTS.
In offering my tribute to the savant whose labours this album is designed to com-
memorate, I cannot do better than call attention to the remarkable field for study and
investigation which is now being opened in the Oceanic region. Dr. Veth’s life work has
dealt with the Geography and Ethnography of the Western portion of the region, with
the Netherlands Indies, but the Eastern Bounds of this portion lead to New Guinea, and
New Guinea to Micronesia and Melanesia, with Polynesia in the distant East. The Ethno-
graphy and Language of each of these illustrates the Malayan region with which they have so
much in common, and Malayan study must be regarded as incomplete without including
among its objects a knowledge of the people and languages of the other divisions of the
Oceanic World.
No apology need therefore be made for discussing the progress and prospects of
Oceanic Ethnology and Linguistics in connection with Malayan Subjects.
In some respects the Eastern Languages of the Oceanic Family have the advantage
over the Western. The Malay for example, is pre-eminently a commercial rather than a
literary language, and though known for centuries, has no national classic, no national
hero, and its literature consists for the most part of translations from other tongues, of
trivial songs, and unimpoTtant histories. Even the Javanese, the most cultivated of the
Malayan tongues, which has an ancient and sacred dialect, the Kawi has no
purely indigenous epic, and its chief poem, the Bratayuda, is founded on the Sanskrit
Mahabharata.
The native heroes of the Malays and Javanese, whose memory has been obliterated
by the flood of literature from Hindu and Mohammedan sources, can never be restored,
but far away to the east, among the rude peoples speaking a kindred, if now widely
separated language, we find a native mythology comparable in extent and poetry with
those of India, Greece and Rome; which has a national hero, and anthropomorphous
Gods directing and controlling the affairs of men. The epic, it is true, is wanting, but
so was that of the Greeks before Homer, of the Hindus in the Vedic Age, of the
Scandinavians in heroic times. The materials and legends for the epic exist, but
the peculiar dispersion of the race among innumerable islands, has prevented the evolu-
tion of a national bard.
Recent years have seen a great increase in our knowledge of the people and lan-


guages of the Pacific. The first notices of the Melanesian languages by H. C. von dee,
G,abelextz have been greatly extended by the labours of the Rev. Dr. Codeington, who
has also given us the first reliable study of the Melanesian People. In New Guinea, the
opening up of the British and German portions to commercial enterprise cannot fail to
greatly extend our acquaintance, with the various dialects and peoples of that great island.
The valuable reports of the British Administrator, Sir William Macgregor, and Herr
Zoller’s work on German New Guinea are decided acquisitions to the Oceanic student.
In Polynesia little Philological progress is to be recorded except the notable work of E. Tre-
gear on the Maori language, with its valuable collection of words in other dialects. But
the mythology of the region has been enriched by the publication of the Myths and Songs
of Samoa, undertaken by the Royal Society of New South Wales. The relations between
New Guinea and Australia across the Torres Straits have been illustrated by Professor
Haddon and myself in various papers. They open an interesting question as to the origi-
nal inhabitants of New Guinea which I have discussed elsewhere *).
Though much has been done, there are still many and interesting subjects of enquiry.
These, in the limited space at my disposal, I propose to briefly mention here.
Probably the most interesting enquiry is that regarding the mutual relationship of
the various native races now existing in Oceania. The Australians and Tasmanians may
possibly represent an older population of the island region, but for this supposition there
seems no anthropological or linguistic evidence, nor will it ever be obtained. In New
Guinea, however, my study of the native dialects seems to clearly point to the existence
of a race or races, indigenous in the Papuan island, which is quite distinct from the so
called Malayo-Polynesian or Melanesian. The mixture of Races and Languages in South-
Eastern New Guinea suggests the possibility of a mixture also in Melanesia, in the
island region which extends from the Solomons, through the New Hebrides, to the
Loyalty Islands and New Caledonia. What is required is a better knowledge of the sou-
thern languages and people. These are in so many respects different to those of the better
known Central region, that they may present evidence of an assimilation of two dif-
ferent races.
Between Melanesia and Polynesia the connection in language is clear. The Polynesian
dialects cannot but be regarded as simplified forms of an originally fuller Melanesian speech.
This may be clearly seen from a comparison of their grammatical forms, as, for example,
the loss of the pronominal suffixes, and the passing of the transitive termination of the
verb into a passive suffix. The mythology of the two people also appears to be related,
but there are wide differences in its nature which are well worthy of investigation.
The Polynesians have preserved in their songs and legends an elaborate and poetical
cosmogony, having for its heroes a host of supernatural beings. „The Gods in heaven
above are a ‘family’; they are Sa Tangaloa, the ‘Tangaloa family’; they assemble
in council in c fale z ula% the ‘bright home’ of the highest Tangaloa, and sit in
a circle while they deliberate; they depart to execute the fono’ s behest, each in his
own sphere; they visit earth and return again to heaven; they partake of food and
drink down below, just as they do in their own realms above; for up there too they have
fono , ‘cold food’, to eat the heavenly fishes and they have the kava drink, made
from the heavenly plant; they have birds of the air to do their bidding, and in heaven
1) Languages of British New Guinea in Journ. Anthropological Institute, Sept. 1894.


above, the gods are swift to know and to requite the evil that is done among men” J ).
All this is wanting in Melanesia. The People certainly have their heroes, Qat or
Tagaro, or Mauitikitiki , but none of these have the exalted rank or boundless power
of the Polynesian gods. The Melanesian Qat „is the hero of story-tellers, the ideal char-
acter of a good natured people who profoundly believe in magic and greatly admire
adroitness and success in the use of it; Qat himself is good-natured, only playfully
mischievous, and thoroughly enjoys the exercise of his wonderful powers. When he is
said to create he is adding only to the furniture of the world in which he was born,
where there were already houses and canoes, weapons, ornaments, products of cultivated
gardens and of such arts of life as the natives possessed when they were first visited
by Europeans” s ). In the simple stories of the Melanesian heroes we probably have the
beginnings of the Polynesian myths, the details of the apotheosis by which the hero
Tagaro becomes the god Tangaroa is a theme which has still to be written.
Micronesia, and not New Guinea is the connecting link between the Malayan region on
the one side and the Melanesian and Polynesian on the other. In the Southern islands of
the Caroline Group the languages are clearly of a Melanesian type. On the West they
approach the Malayan of the Philippines, and on the East they approach the Polynesian.
The traditions of the people refer them to a Western origin, and their location probably
indicates the route by which the original Malayo-Polynesian people entered the Pacific.
In his Lectures on the Science of Language, Professor Max Muller has
emphasized the importance of language in attesting the history of human institutions.
It is perhaps not too much to say, that when a literature is wanting, the language itself
is the history. And what a history of the Oceanic peoples can their language tell. A story
of ancient and long separations, of common customs and arts which have been in some
places reduced to a mere memory,-and survive only in the meaning of a word, without
correlation in facts. Examples may be seen in the existence of such words as ra-veve-na ,
and ra-soa-na for ‘mother’ and ‘wife’ in the languages of Melanesia, in which ra-veve-na
indicates not the individual, but the whole kindred for whom the child was born, and
ra-soa-na , his members, the whole assemblage of women to whom he could be husband.
These are acknowledged to indicate a time of communal marriage long since passed from
the memory and customs of the people who use the words. 3 )
Similarly, in the Loyalty Islands marriage by capture exists only in the phraseology
used on the occasion; a short sojourn of the bride in her father-in-law’s house being described
as ‘the running away with the woman’. In a New Guinea village the dubu, or sacred
house, the reserved platform for chiefs, no doubt represents the suqe of the New Hebrides,
where, however, the word does not indicate a building but an institution, an assemblage
of persons, who though not chiefs, exercise undoubted influence, and whose common
meeting house is conspicuous in every village. By a natural transition the word is elsewhere
used for a chief 4 ), and in one island at least has been taken by the missionaries as the
native name of the Supreme being 5 ).
1) Some Folk Songs and Myths from Samoa. Translated by the Rev. G. Pratt. With introduction
and notes by John Fraser LLD. Proceedings of Royal Society of New South Wales. 1891, p. 102.
2) The Melanesians-Studies in their Anthropology and Folk-Lore by R. H. Codiungton DD. Oxford,
1891, p. 155.
3) CoDHiNGTON. Melanesians, p. 28.
4) Epi. supwe, Espiritu Santo, supe.
5) Nguna. Central New Hebrides. Supwe, God.


I have elsewhere indicated the importance of the Oceanic languages as materials for
the general study of linguistics and there is no need to refer to the subject here. It is
hoped that something has been done in this brief sketch to indicate the possibilities which
lie before the student of the Oceanic races. Among the ruder and more primitive popula-
tions of the Eastern portion of the region we may deal with customs and language which
will illustrate and explain for us many of the thoughts and ways of the more advanced
people of the Western region. Such studies may fitly find a place among those promoted
by Herr Yeth for the better knowledge of the Geography and Ethnography of the Nether-
lands Indies.
London, Sept. 1894.
Sidney Herbert Ray,
Member of the Anthropological Institute.




J
V i-fX.-J ,-t; ■% ' t
! ■.7- ■ ■> .■ r. ;i-; : i /;' j; ;V ' _ ,'.:C V' : ;i r " ■'*
■
■
. . . . v.' "■
.V ; '*fV-. -v -.r Vi •;>> ■''. ;^V'- ••*■- \ '-/■]_ -v : : % /S. . C ; ' : ' h * ,'■* *>* ,-fvr ' : . "• ■•- "•.
LEIDEN: BOEKDRUKKERIJ VAN E. J, BRILL.
- T -. ■ MBBBWWT'nWtIr 111 1 II Mil '■ . '■
■ ■ . '■ .1 .• ; ’■•: - •■. . . ‘ . ■ • ' . <-' ' a -. .. * ' > . ' v , . ' • ,v<* ' . . .„■
;ik : K%i '
■
■
* - ■■'> •- -. 5 ’ r '- ;' ' f .■■• ■>•-■ -X V- v,'-' ■ ■ _■' ■?*.-/-"> ■ V ;• .• ■ ''.V •; , '..v : ' ■ r -i - - < •« ■■-■ ~-X
' - • ••- ‘ - -
' .....
’
-. ? .'.
* ■ ■ . . : ■?• : •
y
- , ■■ - ; s
- ■■ • ‘ ■ ! ?.* -.-■■•••• . ■
• ... - ■ /■ .
. ■ ■-...■
- ' - . - ■ , ■' • . , , • , .'•' . • •
-'-> , ‘ *
' •. • > ■ * • . “ * ; ' ■ . .
.
v
• . % - \
.
