

TT ?
[NG’s BIRTII - D A Y,
•
•
. •
•
f
• * JC
jr>-
0
•
10 trace the mystic Course of Time
H
,1
Thro’ each revolving Age,
The Mus k aspires, with Views sublime,
And, wondering, turns the Page !—
That Page, where Hist’ry’s treasur’d Lore
Legends unfolds of Days of yore.
When Romf, her sov’reign Flag unfurl’d.
.Hose the proud Mistress of the World.;
And, rich in Arts, in Arms renown’d.
A w’rl fbp dpwtiipf! N I -.Mi rnnnr! •
for the
Aw’d the devoted Nations round.;
Mill Luxury’s intemp’rate Trains
Spread Desolation o’er her Plains;
And Industry, with nerveless Hand,
Ketir’d, dejected, from the Land:
V> hi Ist rent by Pact ion’s wily Spell,
tier Senates droop’d-—iter Fame and Freedom fell I
JNot so, yon Isle, against whose sacred Shore
Bellona bids reluctant Thunders roar!
JNot so, our Albion, wdiose imperial Shield
Still waves triumphant in the tented Field f
Like the firm Oak her native Forests form,
She stands, undaunted, ’midst the mighty Storm ;
Indignant hears the fraudful Despot’s Boast,
And frowns Defiance on his venal Host,
Whilst patriot Feelings with one Ardour glow—
Urge to-chastise* * * ♦yet pause to spare the Foe I


'Time, wtfsr-and long in Albion’s Land
Shall Memory hail the Day,
That saw her favYite Prince’s Hand
Assume the sceptred Sway :
When rob’d in Honour, Virtue, Truth,
The Graces form’d His op’niug Youth ;
And, what projiiietic Bards foretold,
And hade progressive Days unfold.
Time! '-the’ his iron Hand appears
To mark the -Lapse-of yielding Years,
Shall bid lire faithful Trump of Tame
To Ages yet unborn, proclain,
Out Monarch’s mild and lengthen’d Sway,
Applauding Worlds rever’d,
And, brilliant as his morning Bay,
His setting Sun appear’d :
Whilst cherish’d Millions liv’d to prove,
His proudest Empire was His People’s Love !
Time was, when o’er this drear Expanse of Land,
Ko Trait appear’d of Culture’s fosi’ring Hand ;
And, as the wild Woods yielded to the Blast,
Hature scarce own’d the unproductive Waste.!
O’er rugged Cliffs fantastic Branches hung,
’Round whose hoar Trunks the slender Scions clung.
Impervious Mountains met the ling’ring Eye,
Whose clond-cap’t Summits brav’d the sultry Skv.
Hocks, whose repulsive Frown Access defy’d,
And Bays, where idly ebb’d the slumb’ring Hide—■*
Unless some Straggler of the Native Race,
In crank Canoe expos’d his sooty Fact ;
With lazy Motion paddled o’er the Hood,
Snatch’d at the spear-struck Fish—and liugg’d his Food,
Bub when Britannia’s Sons came forth, to brave
The dreary Perils of the length’ning Wave;
When her bold Barks, with swelling Sails unfurl’d,
Trac’d these rude Coast?, and hail’d .a new-found World,
Soon as their Footsteps press d the y-ieunng Sana,
A Sun more genial brighten’d on the Land ;
■Commerce and Arts ennend tue social Sou,
Burst thro’ the Gloom, —and bade ail Nature smile !
Now. mark, where o’er the populated Plain
Blythe Labour moves, and calls her sturdy Train


Inlsr, nurs’d by demon t Skies, and genial Gales,
-Abundant Harvests cloathe the fruitful Vales.
Oer the green Upland see new Hamlets spread,
11 he frugal Garden, and the “ sfraw-built Shed •”
? ne Cot, tv here Peace a smiling Aspect wears,
And tliechamP d Husbandman forgets Ins Cares.
See, opening Towns jvMi rival Shill display
d’he Structure bold—the Mart, and busy Quay :
Streets ably form’d by persevering Toil,
And Loads the Tray’jlej’s wearied Coarse be-mile •-
' ' *
And, hark ! where mild ftm*oton's heav’n-born Strain
Courts meek Repentance to her hallow’d Pane ;
H hence, as the transient Breezes wander round,
the cneamti Beils in lively Peals resound !
iHESE are thy Trophies, Time! and these shall raise
A lasting Monument to Britain’s Praise : -
And Hist ry s faith-hi 1 Page shall fondly' dwell.
And future Bards ta Strains sublirner tell,
i hat I ruth and Loyalty, by W isdom led,
Lade Australasia raise her drooping Head :
Gave to the People's Wish a CHIEF approv’d,
A Man they honour’d—arid a Friend they Lv’d ?
'&ew South Wales / 1
June 4, 1811. §


.
■
✓
‘•■■■- f
-'V-.
