

-S3 ODE 7^
fn Commcmoration of the ffinniYcr6arv) of the Birthday of
Her lost Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria,
2;4th Mm tSSft
(g.ffl.G.
Now, once again the month returns,
And once again the day,
And through our golden Autumn burns
The glorious sun of May;
And to our hearts again returns
A blessing on the day.
Let all who feel no shame in faith,
No scorn for loyal truth,
Stand firm, whoever else betrayeth
The lessons of his youth;
And bless Her name ;
And shield Her fame ;
Unswerving in their truth.
Victoria ! Sovereign of the seas !
Queen of the many isles ;
Whose glory fills the vagrant breeze
Wherever Ocean smiles :
Wherever Ocean bears afar
Thy .ps of commerce and of war,
Men who are men Thy name repeat
With old regards and reverence sweet.


Keep, Britons, in the sun’s bold light,
That none may challenge, or obstruct thy path,
That two-edged sword, The Fleet, its name and might,
Its power of succour, and its power of wrath:
Thine ocean roadways safe from shore to shore —
From Dover’s cliffs to distant Albany ;
From sweet Pacific Isles that slumbering lie,
To where the vast Atlantic’s billows roar ;
Keep, whatsoe’er it cost without a stain.
What broke the banded might of France and Spain ;
Thy bulwarks and thy legions. Sword and Shield
Live in thy monarchs of the Ocean field!
Across the waves a golden gleam
Falls from the Western Star,
Which long shall shine with gentle beam
And bless us from afar.
The far-off years our eyes can read,
When history, with its crowning meed,
Shall this and many coming years review ;
And trace our Royal Lady's honor’d name
In golden words of long-enduring fame.
Look at the lands, for fifty years
Beneath Her influence blessed ;
Or read the record -which appears
In every eye expressed ;
The frank, free tribute which endears
Her name among the best.
The growth of Freedom, Peace, and Power —
Unless where foes afar
Have forced the lines in sudden hour,
And fed the flames of war;
But even then, and even there,
Has Britain, sore beset,
Come forth triumphant from each snare
Across her pathway set.
Her glory sunk ? Her fame amerced ?
She treats with equal slight
The foe who had her name aspersed,
Or shrunk before her might.


And she is with you, and defends
And takes and holds the van.
Only be true as she is true,
And toil for human good,
And all her power she gives to you,
And all her willing blood :
But cross her path, her mission mar,
Enslave or wrong mankind;
And she shuns not the flames of war,
Nor lags its van behind :
But smites, e’en as the lightnings smite,
The highest evil-doers in their might.
Her Indian Empire she forego !
Or Egypt torn askance
By sudden dash of Russian foe —
Or wilder rush of France ?
Nay, then, it is no fancy fine,
When thousands, on this day of pride,
Fill high to Her the festal wine
And scan the prospect wide ;
And see, what e’en our foes must see,
She rules o’er men —the guardians of the free.
They stand, and they shall stand for aye,
Who won at Plassey and Assaye;
Who won at gallant Trafalgar ;
Who won at glorious Waterloo ;
Who triumphed centuries before
At Cressy and at Agincourt;
In Indian climes ; on Afric’s shore;
And shall, —so long as they be true,
And shun aggressive or unrighteous war.
Old England ! Old men, in this far off clime,
Think of thee in their dreams, and when they wake,
And bless thee for thyself, and for the sake
Of Her, thy Queen and theirs, at this glad time.


Her fifty years of righteous rule serene,
Of civil freedom and of popular power;
And bless, as well they may, their gracious Queen;
And bless, as well they may, Her natal hour.
Yea, if truth lives in speech—
In what men say :
In whatthe preachers preach ;
In poet’s fiery lay;
In the sweet words of many a noble maid;
In the bold speech of youth;
Behind the counter ; in the market-place ;
The farm; the squattage free ;
Then do thy people love and honor Thee.
Then do they own, O Queen ! Thy queenly grace,
The purity and truth
Which have pervaded and which still pervade
Thy golden rule of Right;
Right robing Might,
As sunshine robes the mountain in its height.
How good a thing it seems,
That the great conflicts troubling other lands—
Where Power keeps Freedom from the People’s hands —
Save in their dreams,
When they, to frenzy fired,
Start up, to seize in blood, the thing desired,
Are turned aside from us by Thy law-loving hands—
Thy people’s happiness Thy constant care,
Thy hope, thy prayer :
Thine only grief, as ’twas great Albert’s grief—
That for the nations there seems no relief;
No hope to make them free as we are free ;
And trusting in their kings, as we in Thee.
The Lord of Light!
The Lord of Hosts !
The Lord of Might!
Shield still Old England’s coasts :
Shield her free people, and still keep them free ;
And shower His blessing, Queen, on them and Thee 1
