

Of ROBERT BLAKESLEY, who was Exe-
cuted on Monday Nov. 16, 1841. at
the Old Bailey London.
LIFE
OF ROBESRT BLAKESLEY.
Robert Blakesley is the son of Mr. Robert Blakesley,
ot’ 2i, York Place, City Hoad; and of 70, Basinghall
Street; a clothier, in a very extensive way of business,
tie is 28 years of age, of dark complexion, 5 feet 8 in
to height. On leaving school he acted as clerk iu his
father's warehouse, and it was his father’s intention to
have taken him into partnership had he found his con-
duct deserving. He, however, indulged so much in
dissipation, that his father discarded him, after receiving
him home several times in hopes of reclaiming him.
the last time he was sent from home was about twelve
menths since, in consequence of him having absconded
with a large sum of money with which his father was
about to place him in a comfortable way of business
What he did for his living no one could tell but he
shortly afterwards became a visitor at the King’s Head,
in Lastcheap, where he became acquainted with the sis-
ter of Mrs. Bnrdon, who was there in the capacity ot
barmaid. He proffered her marriage, representing him-
self a respectable man, and Mr. Burden, believing such
to be the case, cousented to the match, and the marriage
took place about four months since, at the church of
Bt, Stephen’s, Wal brook, Mr. Burdon. the murdered
man, giving his sister-in-law away. Blakesley's wife
had some money, and, a day or two after marriage, he
repaired with her to Seveuoaks, Kent, where he starled
bj business as a carcass butcher, and agreed with a build-
er to erect a slaughter-house. The builder completed
the building; but not being able to get his money, he
put iu an execution, and the whole of their go ids. &c..
were seieed for £H(). They remained at Seveuoaks un-
til all the money they had was spent, and Blakesley
wrote to his father, informing him of his marriage and
his situation, and requesting that something might be
done for him ; whether however, he received any assis-
tance was not ascertained. They returned to London,
and, on Mr. Bnrdon being informed of their situation
he considered that Blakesley had acted ill towards his
sistcr-i i-lavv. having married her without, h iving suffi-
cient means of support. He took Blakesie; ’s wife again
into his house, but refused to assist Blakesley in any
way, and forbade his coming there. Blakesley obtained
lodgings at the White Hart, in the neighbourhood of
Gracechurch-street, kept by a person named t orbes,
but he was compelled to leave on account of his profli-
gate habits- lie was shortly afterwards apprehended
lor the murder ot Mr. Burdon, by the Hertfordshire
police, ami sent to town for examination ; the evidence
being conclusive, he was fully committed to Newgate,
for trial, and found guilty of the horrid deed on Thurs-
day. the 28th of October, and the awful sentence of
death passed on him.
TRIAL.
The Court opened at nine o’clock, on
Thursday last, and already many persons
were present to hear the trial.
The judges Lord Ahinger and Mr Baron
Guerney, arrived and took their seats on
the bench, accompanied by Alderman Sir
G Carroll, Sir Chapman Marshall, and
Hooper.
Mr. Payne stated the case for the pro-
secution. He said he should confine him
self to a statement of the law and facts
of the case. The death of the unfortunate
deceased took place on Tuesday *2lst Sep.
At seven o'clock on that morning, the pri-
soner went with a police constable named
Bristow to Mr Bunion’s, to demand his
wife. Mr. Burdon told him he had belter
go about his business. He afterwards
went to a hairdresser’s shop and spoke
disrespectfully of Mr Burdon. The nexi
account of him was that he went about
ten o’clock to purchase a knife, of the
make of which he had given particular
directions. The learned council then
briefly traced the drisouer up to the time
that he went to the house of Mr. Burdon
and inflicted the wound of w'hich he died
The law upon the subject, stripped of its
technicalities, was this, that if a person
of sound mind killed another, without
justification or provocation, such killing
amounted to murder-
Edward Bristow, the constable alluded
to, proved that the prisoner accosted him
on the morning of the murder, said that
his wife was at Burden’s, and asked if he
could not go and demand her/ Witness
thought he could, and went with him.
Burden’s redly was still, ‘I know nothing
of you.’ The prisoner then left.
W. Braddon, of the City police, heard
the prisoner make the same complaint
against Burdon. ‘We passed,’ said the
witness, *a batcher’s shop at the .time, and
ceing a knife the prisoner said, ‘lf I haci
„ad that in my hand I should have usee
V
John Charles Davis, a cutler, living in
Aldgate. High-street, saw the prisoner on
the 21st Sept., and sold him a knife ot the
kind used by butchers.
Eliza Bur don. tho widow of the decea#*
ed James Burden, was ne x t called* She
appeared deeply affected as she
into the witness-box, “ I am the w idow
of the deceased James Burdon. He was
thirty eight years of age, and kept the
King’s Head. 1 recollect Tuesday eve-
ning. the 21st of Sept. I saw (he priso-
ner- I see him now, the murderer! ”
Lou» Abingh?—You must endeavour
to calm your passions-’
The prisoner here covered his face
with his hands and sobbed aloud-
The witness was then accommodated
with a chair, and proceeded—* My hus-
band was, at the time the prisoner came
in, sitting asleep on a chair nearthe table
and I was sitting there with my sisier. I
heard something, and, looking up, saw*
Blakeslev- He sprang to my sister, and
stabbed her in the left side, saying, ‘Your
life, your life-* He then stabbed my bug-
band, who was silting in the chair. He
had a knife in his hand. He then at-
tempted to stab me, but was prevented
by my sister- He then rushed out of th*f
bar with the knife in his hand streaming
with blood- My sister and my husdand
followed him as far as tho bar door, when
mv husband reeled against the bar coun-
ter and fell- My husband died almost
inmediately-’
Braddeley , of the City police’ produced
the Unite, which was identified b\ the
witness and Davis; and the surgeon being
railed, said such a knife had inflicted
Burden's wound-
Robert Dunn, the constable of Hitchin,
who arrested _the prisoner on the Sunday
following the murder, said he and hie
colleague, Polly,ate, were at the time in
the market-place- ‘Seeing a man loiter-
ing about, we went up to him and spoke
to him, when he complained of being al-
most mad- He asked me if 1 had beard
of that circumstance in 1. on don- 1 said,
M suppose you mean the murder of the
landlord and your wife? Hereplied. ‘Yes,
of Burdon anil his wifeand added, ‘I
did mean to kill my wife, but I did not
mean to hurt Burdon or his wife.il he had
not interfered-”
Here closed the case for the prosecution.
Alter an absence of about twenty mi-
nutes, the jury returned into court with
a verdict ot guilty-
On the prisoner being called upon to
say what he had to urge why sentence should not be
passed upon him, he raised his right hand, struck it
with violenoe upon his breast, and in a loud voice said,
So help me <; < >d, L am innocent of the intent to murder
James Burdon.”
Lord Monger then put on the Hack cap, and senten-
ced the prisoner to death amidst the most death-like
silelice.
'1 he prisoner did not, during the sentence, manifest
any greater degree *f mental suffering than at any o-
ther portion of the trial ; but he kept his eyes steadfast-
ly fixed upon tiie floor, and w as removed from the dock
retaining precisely the same attitude.
EXECUTION.
Since the conviction of this unhappy man the utmoe
exertions have been made by his friends,and also by big
attorney, to get up a statement of facts, embodied in »
petition to the St cretury of State, with a view to obtain
a commutation of the capital punishmunt—the chief
ground relied upon being, that, although the prisoner
may not he, perhaps, in an actual state of insanity, yet
that his mind was naturally weak and feeqle, and that
at the time he committed the dreadful deed his reason
was completely overpowered by the distressing situation
in which he was placed, and that when he committed
it, he was not aware what he was doing. Blakesley ha*
been visited in the gaoel by his father and some other
members of his family, and he has generally conducted
himself with prepriety ; but on Thursday morning he
became very violent, and attempted to assault one of the
turnkeys, whilst conducting hint to an adjoinging closet_
At an early hour this morning the front of New-
gate was crowdesd, as early as seven o’clock there was
no less than 12 000 spectators present, he wassisitedat
an early hour by the Rev. Chaplain, who was unremit-
ing in his exertions towards the unfortunate Criminal
After partaking of the sacrament, a few minutes before
eight, the melancholy procession moved slowly towards
the scaffald, after a few minutes spent in prayer this
wretched man, was launched into a world of spirits.
T. DODDS, PRINTER, NEWCASTLE*
