





OF THE
DEFENCELESS STATE OF SYDNEY.
TO THE CITIZENS OF SYDNEY
(Per favour of the Sydney Morning Herald.)
THE Duke of Newcastle’s circular despatch, to the Governors of
the Australian Colonies, on “ the anticipated war with America,”
is worthy of serious consideration. His Grace says : “It can
never be impossible that an active enemy, by the employment of
single privateers or cruisers, may find the means of inflicting
occasional injury on exposed parts of the empire .” Now, where is
there a more exposed city than that of Sydney ? Captain
Wilkes, of the Jacinta, knows well the Sydney harbour. He
has already entered the Heads during the night, and, in company
with another American Man-of-war, anchored before the City,
without being observed. It was a few hours’ wonder the next
morning ; but you apparently never reflected, what awful conse-
quences might have ensued, if Captain Wilkes had entered the
harbour as an enemy, instead of as a friend. Every shell he fired
into the city, might have ignited one of your streets, destroyed
goods of immense value, and killed very many of you, young and
old. It would, in fact, be impossible to estimate the vast extent
of damage that an enemy could do to the exposed city of Sydney
and its inhabitants.
We all know this, and still we are apathetic. A prudent
people would not rest until they made their capital as secure as
it could possibly be made; but we appear to be determined not
to move in the matter, until there is imminent danger, when,
possibly, it may be too late. How egregiously mistaken the
Duke of Newcastle was, when he said, “ And I am confident that
the efforts which Her Majesty will be called upon to make for
the protection of the colonial coasts and commerce, will elicit
from her loyal subjects throughout her empire, renewed exertions
in all that is requisite to defend their homes against such attacks
as she may be unable to avert from them.” The Duke has never


been in Sydney—knows not the apathy of its citizens, and how
difficult it is to set our Government in motion, except on some
popular question, or he would not have written with so much
confidence.
The Duke, in another despatch, informs the Australian
Governors that “ the question which threatened this calamitous
consequence (a War with the United States of America) has
been amicably settled,” and goes on to say, “ the alarm, however,
which has been felt, will not have been wholly useless, if it shall
have impressed on Colonial Governments the necessity of prompt
and effectual preparations against contingencies which, though
happily no longer imminent, can never in the present disturbed
STATE OF THE WORLD BE REGARDED AS IMPOSSIBLE.”
I am afraid that the late alarm, and the imminent danger we
were in, have failed to impress the Government of this colony,
with the necessity of making “prompt and effectual preparations
against contingencies ,” which may happen at any moment, and
when we are totally unprepared. If we were to have a visit
from an enemy s ship-of-war-—even a privateer—every one would
be surprised that Sydney should have been left in such an un-
protected state; and the Government, of course, would have all
the blame and all the odium of the consequences.
It is, unquestionably, one of the first duties of a government,
as the trustees of the public, to take such measures, as may be
essentially necessary, to secure life and property. This is one of
the chief functions of Government, and it is a responsibility which
they cannot neglect, or even transfer to another, without a serious
dereliction of duty.
It is not by erecting batteries in Port Jackson that the city
can be protected, and I think it was a mistake to allow Sir
William Denison to spend so much money in their construction.
“ If we multiply the batteries, as contemplated,” says a sensible
writer, “ how can we man them p They must be isolated ; their
very number will tend to weaken them (for we cannot adequate-
ly man them all) and render some of them liable to capture,
when their guns may be turned to our destruction. Stone walls,
and guns without men, are in fact more dangerous to us than to
an enemy. The cost of these batteries has been already some
£50,000 —to this we must add £50,000 or £lOO,OOO more, and
then, should we be secure on a dark night, when it would be
difficult to distinguish an enemy from a friend? Added to which
all naval history proves that batteries, even against wooden-sided
ships, are inferior means of protection; and, now that they are
building steel-plated frigates, which almost renders them in-
vulnerable, how much less confidence can we have in stone
work!”


The fact must be patent to every man who will take the
trouble to think, that the buildings of Sydney, and the goods
therein, the ships in the harbour and their cargoes, never can be
secured unless we can effectually prevent an enemy from, entering
the Harbour: his shots must all be fired out of reach of our city.
It is madness to allow (if it can be prevented) the guns of an
enemy to come within range of property worth probably twenty-
five million pounds sterling.
During the Russian war, Commodore Loring, C. 8., Colonel
Percival, Colonel Barney, and Major Nasmyth reported, at the
request of our Parliament, on the defence of our harbour. The
views of each were published in extenso in the Herald of 2nd
December, 1859 ; they one and all condemned the system
adopted, and advocated the plan suggested many years pre-
viously by General Sir John Burgoyne — that of keeping the
enemy out by shutting the door ; permanently blocking up with
stone the east channel, and temporarily obstructing the west
channel by a boom from the Sow and Pigs (only half a mile
across), and this being four miles distant from town, would
render Sydney safe from a sea attack. Or, instead of a boom,
as suggested, it might be still better to secure the west channel
by sinking vessels, suitably prepared for the purpose, and laden
with iron and stone, having rings, by which they could be easily
raised again. An invisible barrier, such as sunken vessels, would
unquestionably be infinitely superior to a boom, for many reasons.
It would require no men to defend it, and no enemy would
attempt to pass it. A boom, would require a great number of
men to defend it, which is an important consideration in a country
so sparsely populated as this, and it might be broken through
by powerful steamers and a strong force, whereas it would be
utterly impossible to pass suitable ships, properly sunk.
The only objection to closing the entrance to the harbour
which I have ever heard raised is, that it would entirely put a
stop, for the time, to all our imports and exports. This would
be true and most valid, if we had no other inlet or outlet to the
harbour than the Heads of Port Jackson, but such other means
of ingress and egress are not only possible, but the way to
secure them is simple, efficient, and economical.
Any one who will take the trouble to go as far as the toll-bar
on the Newtown Road (not a mile from Sydney), may see at a
glance that nature herself has pointed out both the way and the
means of effecting this great object: —the latter, by uniting with
a ships’ canal the waters of Botany Bay with those of the
Sydney harbour ; —the former, in the long, low valley —very little,
if anything, above high water mark, extending from Botany Bay
to within about half a mile from Sydney.


A ships’ canal could be cut between the two harbours with
the greatest ease. Through this valley, on the Botany side,
Shea’s Creek runs for a considerable part of the way; in fact
from the month of the Cook’s River to within about a mile and a
half of Sydney ; this, of course, will he so much towards making
the canal. Almost the whole of the soil from Botany Bay,
to near Parramatta-street, via Shea’s Creek and Waterloo
Swamp, (west) is mud or sand, and could be excavated without
any difficulty, and at little expense ; indeed, I am informed, the
greater part could be done by the steam-dredge. There is a
natural dip in Parramatta-street, near the Sugar Company’s
works : advantage should, I think, be taken of this, and the canal
should cross the street at this point, being continued on to deep
water through Blackwattle Swamp. This would be. the most
expensive part of the undertaking; but the distance is very
short, and all that was taken out of this part of the cutting could
be used to raise Blackwattle Swamp—now a nuisance—and
render it of immense value. Fifty to one hundred acres of worse
than useless land, would thus be reclaimed and made worth as
much as any in the neighbourhood— say in round numbers from
£IOO,OOO to £150,000 sterling.
This land belongs to Government, and might thus be made
the means of paying the greater part of the cost of the canal.
At present it is not only an eyesore, but a pestiferous nuisance
o the neighbourhood. Again, there is a portion of the Waterloo
Estate, through which the canal would pass, which lies so very
ow as to be almost worthless; but by being drained and raised
about one or two feet, it would become of great value.
There would be no locks required—a most expensive item in
canal cutting, —and, what is equally important, scarcely a single
house would have to he removed.
But, after all, the cost of such an undertaking as this is only
a secondary consideration. Even supposing this canal of four
or five miles (partly formed by nature) together with some
dredging at the mouth of Cook’s River, were to cost £IOO,OOO
or £200,000, or even £250,000, it would be the very wisest ex-
penditure that ever was made in the colony. The Sydney Heads
could be closed at a moment’s notice, if there were the least
danger of a war, and our commerce would, uninterruptedly, go on,
via the ships canal and Botany Bay. In a time of war, a ships’
canal to Botany Bay, would be the salvation of Sydney, and the
entire colony Our merchant vessels would he perfectly safe
when once inside our harbour, for no enemy could reach them;
the Sydney Heads would be closed, and, certainly no man-of-war’
however powerful, would ever attempt to force a passage up the
canal. When our merchant vessels are outside the Heads, they


will, of course, have to take the chances of war ; but this has
clearly nothing to do with the defence of Sydney. I have, how-
ever, the Duke of Newcastle’s authority for saying, that they will
then be defended by the strong arm of England, and enjoy the
immense advantage of those “ efforts which her Majesty will be
called upon to make for the protection of the colonial coasts and
commerce.”
But, if the Heads were closed, without making a side entrance
to the city, we should have tea, sugar, and other necessaries of
life, at famine prices ; while onr wool, hides, and tallow, would be
almost unsaleable. The owners of stock would have ±o pay fabu-
lous sums for their supplies, and get hardly anything in return
for their produce. It is clear that it must be so. We cannot
use more than a fractional part of the wool, tallow, hides, &c.,
produced in the colony ; nor can we obtain tea, sugar, &c., except
by importing them ; and, if our graziers cannot turn their produce
into money, and purchase supplies with that money, they and all
who are dependant upon them, must soon come to a dead lock.
In times of profound peace, a ships’ canal would be an
immense benefit to the colony. Almost every vessel going to, or
coming from, the southward, would make use of this canal and
pay a tonnage duty, more than sufficient to keep it in thorough
repair. lam informed that sailing vessels from the south, bound
to Sydney, and caught in a northerly breeze, would be saved
twelve miles of beating against a head wind by coming up
Botany Bay, and through the canal, while steamers and coasters
would be saved days, in their trips to and fro, by taking the same
route.
There is one other remark I have to make with respect to our
harbour defences, and that is, I think we are making a mistake
in trusting too much to the officers of the Royal Engineers. I
should be exceedingly sorry to say anything to the disparagement
of these gentlemen ; they are clever men —ad clever, scientific
men—but I submit with great diffidence, that their scientific
knowledge is, for our purpose, perhaps, too much circumscribed
by routine. What I mean is, that I think the officers of the
Royal Engineers are, by their education and profession, too ex-
clusively confined to constructing and destroying fortifications,
and such like military matters ; that they would, in all probabili-
ty, reject a project, like that of ships’ canal, which would have
the effect, of setting free our commerce, and still keeping the
enemy at a distance.
We only need to refer to the introduction of Railways, not
quite forty years ago, to show how professional men frequently
stand in the way of great social improvements. We shall find
that odium and abuse, in .no measured terms, were heaped


upon the great father of railways, George Stephenson, by the pro-
fessional men of that time. He was stigmatised as “an ignoramus,
a fool, and a maniac .” The great card of the railway opposition-
ists, then, was a Mr. Francis Giles, C.E., who was spoken of by
counsel, before a select Committee of the House of Commons, as
“ a most respectable gentleman, who has executed a vast number
of works,” &c. Mr. Giles in his evidence before the Committee,
said: —“ Ho engineer in his senses would attempt to make a rail-
road through Chat Moss. In my judgment” —[the judgment of
Mr. F. Giles, C.E., against that of the unprofessional man ‘ not in
his senses’ who proposed to form the railway,] —“in my judgment,
a railway cannot he safely made over Chat Moss without going
to the bottom of the Moss [nearly forty feet]. The soil ought all
to be taken out undoubtedly; in doing which, it will not be prac-
ticable to approach each end as you make it with the carriages.
Ho carriages would stand upon the moss short of the bottom.
My estimate for the whole cutting and embankment over Chat
Moss is £270,000 —nearly, at those quantities and those prices,
which are decidedly correct It will be necessary to take
this moss completely out to the bottom, in order to make a solid
road.” How, what was the result ? Instead of the four miles of
railroad over Chat Moss costing £270,000, according to the
evidence of that “ most respectable gentleman ” (Mr. Giles, C.E.),
under the superintendence of an unprofessional man—said to be
“ out of his senses ” —the whole expense only amounted to about
£28,000. Ho portion of the moss was excavated, and it is now
the best part of the line between Liverpool and Manchester, and
costs the least in repairs. Look, again, at Brindley —a man of
whom it was said, “ the poverty of his family prevented him
receiving more than the rudiments of education.” He it was
who undertook and completed the making of the Bridgewater
Canal, a work “ which all the scientific men of the period ridi-
culed as impracticable.”
The cutting of a ships’ canal is, in reality, a question with
which the Royal Engineers have nothing to do, and about which
they are no more competent to form an opinion than a civilian.
Shutting the front door, by closing the entrance, to the harbour
near the heads, in order to prevent an enemy from shelling the
city, is a military matter, and probably no one is better able to
determine how it can be most effectually done than the Royal
Engineers. But, as the closing of the harbour would annihilate
trade, by putting a stop to our imports and exports, raise the
necessaries of life to famine prices, and throw thousands out of
employment,—it is a question for you and the colonists generally
to consider how these evils are to be avoided. On such a simple,
but most momentous question, as that of making a canal between


Botany Bay and Sydney, I hold that every thinking man of
ordinary understanding, who will take the trouble to walk from
Sydney via the Waterloo Swamp (west) and Shea’s Creek, to the
Water-works at Botany Bay, is able to form as correct and sound
an opinion, as to the feasibility and advantages thereof, as any
professional man ; and the thews and sinews, of some of our able-
bodied “ navvies,” directed by men, with brains of the Stephenson
and Brindley stamp (many of whom are now superintending the
works on our railways), would speedily demonstrate that the
work was practicable —by doing it. All the labour will consist in
excavating, dredging, and walling, or planking, with no engineering
difficulties.
There is not, I suppose, in the colony, one dissentient voice,
as to the necessity of protecting Sydney; but the plan recom-
mended by our late Governor, Sir William Denison, R.E., viz., to
allow an enemy to come within range of the city, and the shipping,
and then fight him from the batteries, —will, by few civilians, be
considered an efficient protection of our capital. Look at what an
immense disadvantage we should have to fight him : the national
wealth would be within easy reach of his fire-balls (shells), and
property, worth millions of pounds sterling, might be destroyed
by him, —whereas all the advantage we could possibly gain, by
the most complete victory, would be the destruction of one or
more of his vessels of small comparative value.
As to its economy, I need add nothing to what I have
above said, viz., that £50,000 have been already expended, and
£50,000 or £lOO,OOO more will probably be required, except this,
that the works are, and always must be, not only entirely unpro-
ductive, but also enormously expensive to maintain them in a
state of efficiency.
A ships’ canal, on both these points —efficiency and economy
—must unquestionably have precedence over any other plan
which has yet been suggested. Its efficiency, as the one great
link wanting to make Sydney not only secure, but at the same
time accessible, must be admitted by all. And I feel assured,
that every one, who carefully considers the matter, will be of
opinion that I have neither understated its probable cost, nor
overrated the pecuniary and sanitary advantages, which will
accrue to the Government and the people, by its construction.
Pestilential swamps would be drained, and made either fruitful
gardens or valuable building sites. You could then sleep secure-
ly, without any fear of shells falling on your roofs, for there would
not be the slightest risk of an enemy approaching the city via
Botany Bay and the ships’ canal. Sydney, which at the present
time (for its size and importance) is one of the worst protected
cities in the world, would then become one of the most secure,


for no enemy’s guns could reach it, or its shipping, either from
the mouth of the canal at Botany Bay, or from the Sydney
Heads.
Nor must it he supposed that any private interests would be
injured, or interfered with, by the opening of this canal, for whether
vessels entered at the Sydney or Botany Heads, they would, of
course, discharge and take in their cargoes, at their respective
wharves as heretofore.
Fellow citizens! I earnestly urge you to take the subject of
this letter into your most serious consideration. It affects the
lives and properties of every one of you.
As to the practicability of the undertaking I have suggested,
go out and judge for yourselves; as to its efficiency as a certain
means of protection, think for yourselves ; and as to its economy,
both in a military and commercial point of view—calculate for
yourselves.
The Government neither can nor will do anything until the
voice of the public has been heard. Let them hear it, and that
quickly, for we know not, how soon, our homes and our families
may be in danger. Let not our noble capital be any longer
exposed to the attack of some roving privateer, lest, when it be
too late, we have to mourn over our city despoiled, and her
people ruined.
VERBUM SAPIENTI.
Sydney, sth April.
READING AND WELLBANK, PRINTERS, BRIDGE STREET, SYDNEY.


