

OFFICIAL CHARGE
TO
YOUNG MINISTERS.
BY THE
REV. WILLIAM P. WELLS.
EX-PRESIDENT.
VICTORIA AND TASMANIA CONFERENCE,
1888.




OFFICIAL CHARGE
ADDRESSED TO
DAVID BUCKLEY BBIDGWOOD, JAMES FLETCHER BRIGGS,
ALEXANDER M‘CALLUM, SAMUEL JAMES SERPELL,
JOHN GLADWELL WHEEN, AND FREDERICK HARVEY
WILLIAMS,
ON THEIR
to t(|e Cljtfistutii
DELIVERED IN
WESLEY CHURCH, MELBOURNE,
JUESDAY, jJ ANUAKJ 24, 1888,
BY THE
REV. WILLIAM P. WELLS.
Ex-President.
WESLEYAN BOOK DEPOT, LONSDALE STREET.




ORDINATION CHARGE
Delivered in Wesley Church on Tuesday, January 24 th, 1888,
by the Rev. W. P. Wells, and published by request of the
Conference.
“ For God hath not given us the spirit of fear, but of power,
and of love, and of a sound mind.” —2 Tim. i. 8.
MY DEAR BRETHREN — I should have been glad had
the duty I have now to discharge fallen to some one else,
but as it has been placed on me I must endeavour to do
it as best I can. I congratulate you on the position you
occupy. You commended yourselves, as men renewed in the
spirit of your minds, to the officers of our church in the several
circuits in which you laboured as local preachers; you so
impressed them by your gifts that with their approval you
appeared before our higher courts. For four years you have
been usefully and honourably employed in our work, and now
by the vote of the Conference you are placed in full connexion
with our ministry. In accordance with our usage, a few
words are to be spoken to you this evening for your encourage-
ment and your guidance.
The text I have selected as the basis of those words is in
2 Tim. i. 8: “ For God hath not given us the spirit of fear,
but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind."
These words specify certain gifts of God to true Christian
ministers; certain marks by which the Christian ministry
should ever be distinguished.
Let no one ever shake your confidence that you have to-day,
by a true ordination, entered the ranks of this blessed ministry.
You may be told that no one has a valid ordination who has
not been ordained by the laying on of the hands of a bishop.
Be it so. This need never disturb you, for by men who, in
the New Testament sense, are true bishops have you been
ordained. A bishop as now understood in the Church of
England or the Church of Rome—a diocesan bishop, an over-
seer of presbyters—you cannot find in the New Testament.
This is an office which, under this title, did not exist in New
Testament times. Then, as you find both from the Acts of


the Apostles and the apostolic epistles, bishops and presbyters
were two different names for the same officer and the same
office. A presbyter was a bishop, and a bishop was a
presbyter; so that if a bishop and none but a bishop had power
to ordain, seeing that all who have ordained you are, in the
scriptural sense of the word, bishops, you have been scripturally
ordained.
If any one raise another objection, viz., that no ordination
is valid which does not come in the line or chain of apos-
tolical succession, then you have another answer. You ask,
what were the first links in the chain? and no man living
can tell; for the last seventeen hundred years no one has
known. But supposing they could tell, then what about other
links ? All is uncertainty. This we know, that many
ordinations have come through bishops of Rome who were
heretical, and even shamefully immoral; and any chain con-
taining such links as these is a chain on which we do not and
cannot rely. The whole theory of apostolical succession is, to
say the very least, unreliable. Ho wonder, therefore, that
John Wesley said : “ I firmly believe I am a scriptural bishop
as much as any man in England or in Europe. For the
uninterrupted succession I know to be a fable, which no man
ever did or can prove.” And no wonder that Archbishop
Whately wrote : “ There is not a minister in all Christendom
who is able to trace up with any approach to certainty his own
spiritual pedigree.”
What, then, is the true apostolic succession, as far as there
can be any such succession? We answer, in preaching the
apostolic doctrine, in possessing the apostolic spirit, and in
achieving apostolic results. And in all these respects we
claim for Wesleyan ministers that they are in the apostolic
succession as much as any ministers on the face of the earth,
including those of the Church of England, some of whom
deny validity to our orders. Do they receive the three ancient
creeds —the Apostles’, the Nicene, and the Atlianasian ? So
do we. Do they subscribe to the thirty-nine Articles ? With
but few unimportant exceptions, so do we. Are they devout,
fervent, holy, loving ? They themselves will not contradict
us when we humbly declare—so are we. Have they witnessed
saving results of their labours in different parts of the world ?
So have we. And looking at thousands and hundreds of


thousands of saintly men and women, in various parts of the
earth, we can say, as said Paul, “The seal of our apostleship
are ye in the Lord.”
Hold fast, then, to the validity of the ordination you have
received, and do not forget the grand succession into which
you enter. Ho one will deny that Wesley was a genuine
presbyter of the Church of England, and as such, in the Hew
Testament sense, a bishop. Your credentials come through
him, and through successive generations of holy men who
have followed him. In the line of succession are such men as
Dr. Coke, Henry Moore, John Pawson, Joseph Benson, Dr.
Clarke, Richard Watson, Dr. Bunting, Dr. Hewton, John
Rattenbury, Dr. Punshon, William Butters, Daniel Draper,
John Eggleston, Dr. Dare, and others of similar character,
and excellence, and usefulness. Hoble men! Hever shame
them. Ever emulate them. “In all things, approving your-
selves as the-ministers of God—by pureness, by knowledge,
by long-suffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love
unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the power of God, by the
armour of righteousness on the right hand and the left.”
Do all this and you will be able to say, “God hath not given
us the spirit of fear, but of power, and of love, and of a sound
mind.”
I. God hath not given us the Spirit of Fear.
1. Many a one serves God from fear, rather than from filial
love. Mr. Wesley speaks of such as servants of God, not sons.
But you have in the good confession that you have confessed
before many witnesses told us that you have experienced that
change which has brought you into the blessed relationship of
sons. “Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to
fear, but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby ‘ ye’
cry, Abba, Father. The Spirit itself beareth witness with
* your’ spirits that ye are the children of God.” For you
the prayer has been answered—
“ If I have only known Thy fear,
And followed with a heart sincere
Thy drawings from above ;
How, now, the further grace bestow,
And let my sprinkled conscience know
Thy sweet forgiving love.”


You now, therefore, serve, not from fear, but from love. You
are not slaves, you are sons. Your religious duty is not dis-
charged from fear of the lash or the torture : it springs from a
loving, joyous impulse, which throbs within your breast and
thrills you into activity. Ever keep this, I beseech you.
Guard it with assiduous care. So live as never to lose the
Spirit’s witness to your adoption. Keep that and it will keep
you. If from sloth, or half-heartedness, or worldly-mindedness,
or sin of any kind, you lose that precious gift of God, you
lose that which makes your life a song, and your ministry a
joy. Without the sunshine of His love in your hearts your
preaching and service will be to you a drudgery. Never, I
beseech you, by any tampering with sin, take the bloom off
this fruit of the Spirit in your soul.
2. God hath not given us the spirit of fear. —It is sometimes
said that it is good for a man to have a fear of falling, that he
may daily keep on the alert, and be quickened into activity.
I greatly doubt this. On the contrary, as I read my Bible, I
find that what stimulated the activity of the early Christians
was the confident hope of victory and immortal reward.
True we read, “Be not liighminded, but fear.” “Let us
therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into His
rest any of you should seem to come short of it.” “ Let us work
out our own salvation with fear and trembling.” But what do
these injunctions mean '? Not that we are to fear as to whether
we shall conquer—of that we are to be well assured ; but that we
are to fear to do that which would prevent us from conquering,
and fear to neglect what is necessary to enable us to conquer.
They are injunctions, not against confidence in God, but against
confidence in self. As Mr. Wesley says: “ This fear is not
opposed to trust, but to pride and [self] security.” An army
dispirited has hardly ever won a battle. “He conquers who
believes he can.” Let me commend to you the blessed con-
fidence expressed by St. Paul in the twelfth verse of this
chapter: “For the which cause,” says he, “I also suffer these
things. Nevertheless, lam not ashamed.” He was in prison
and in chains, but he was not ashamed—expecting martyrdom,
but he was not ashamed. He had complete confidence for his
future, both in time and eternity. “ For,” said he, “ I know
Whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that He is able to
keep that which I have committed unto Him against that day.”


3. God hath not given us the spirit of fear. —We are not to
fear for the success of our principles. You have spent the
last four years in studying the Gospel, its evidences, doctrines,
duties, and institutions. You have surveyed the field of
Divine truth both in its subjects and its history. You have
seen how, from small beginnings, it grew into a majestic tree.
The handful of corn sown in the top of the mountains has
shaken like Lebanon. The little stone is becoming a moun-
tain, and is filling the earth. You hare seen the attacks of
emperors, and persecutors, and heretics : how they have
sought to check, and even destroy, the Word of God. But
you have seen the Gospel, in spite of them all, like the phoenix
rising from its ashes, taking a wider and a grander flight.
ou have seen it triumphing over sovereign and subject,
over savage and sage. And can you in view of all this have
fear for the result? Never! You will rather sing—
“ The gates of hell cannot prevail,
The church on earth shall never fail.”
Be sure, then, that you never allow your faith to yield to fear.
If you enter upon your work in a circuit doubtful of success
you will be stricken wtih paralysis. Go in the strength of God.
•Remember you wield a weapon which has been victorious in
millions of instances, and shall be in millions more. Expect
it to be so in your hands. If God has called you He will be
with you, and if He be with you He will be more than all
that are against you. Never preach a sermon God cannot use,
and being satisfied He can use it, believe He will. Of John
Rattenbury one said : “ His confidence in the Gospel message
was strong; he looked for saving effects under every sermon.”
And be not only hopeful in regard to your own work, but
equally so as to the work of the denomination to which you
belong. An excellent minister, speaking in England a few
weeks ago, said : “ Some say Methodism is declining, and it
is time to dig her grave. Dig her grave !” said he. “No !
Gather wicker to make cradles for the thousands of her future
children.”
4. God hath not given us the spirit of fear. —Green renders
this “ a craven spirit;” Alford, i( a spirit of cowardice;” the
Revised Version, “a spirit of fearfulness;” Wesley’s note is,
■“a spirit of fear or cowardice.” Perhaps Paul knew that


Timothyjust then was timid and trembling, lacking in courage, in
danger of shrinking from the combat, and the toil, and the peril.
Hence he adds, “Therefore be not thou ashamed of the testimony
of our Lord, nor of me His prisoner, but be thou partaker of
the afflictions of the Gospel according to the power of God.”
A Christian minister is to be a good soldier of Jesus Christ,
and what would you think of a soldier who was cowardly and
craven? TSTo matter what the danger, you must face it; no
matter what the foe, you must meet it—meet it, not in the
spirit of terror, but in the spirit of valour. “ Bold to take up,
firm to sustain the consecrated Cross.” The enemies you may
have to meet will sometimes be many, and strong, and fierce,
and unscrupulous. But you must not grow timid. You may
have to do battle for Christ, sometimes in favour of the
Sabbath, sometimes temperance, sometimes social morality,
sometimes fundamental truth. Be sure you fail not of your
duty in the day of conflict. “ Quit you like men, be strong.”
“ The minister,” says Dr. Punshon, “ who is fearless to
declare the truth, who does not smooth it down that it may
fall blandly upon courtly ears, nor cease from it when its
announcement produces unpleasant muscular twinges in the
faces of those who hear him, who maintains the right when
friends turn craven, and the timid blush and cower, he has
been girt with courage from heaven.” With this courage
may Heaven gird every one of you !
11. God hath given us the Spirit of Power.
“ The glory of young men is their strength” physical
strength, mental strength, moral strength, spiritual strength.
And no one needs all these kinds of strength more than does the
young minister of Jesus Christ. But it is not to any one of
these the apostle specifically refers, though the power he
means may embrace some of them. The power of which he
speaks is power for the work given them to do, the power
promised by Christ when He said : “ Ye shall receive power
after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be
witnesses unto Me.” What, then, is this power?
1. It is not the power of working miracles. —That power
they had already. They had been able to heal the sick, and
to cleanse the lepers. But this was a power of another kind.


Suppose you had power to work miracles ; that would not
necessarily make you soul-winners. You need power othei
than that, higher than that.
2. It is not eloquence. —The apostles, after they were endued
with this power, were not what we call eloquent. Paul
probably had as much eloquence as any of the apostles, yet he
said: “My speech and my preaching was not with enticing
words of man’s wisdom, but in the demonstration of the Spirit
and of power.” Eloquence is a wonderful power. We have
seen it sometimes captivate an audience, sometimes arouse
it to enthusiasm, sometimes melt it into tenderness; but
eloquence alone, however great its splendour, never converted
a soul.
3. It is 'power to understand the Gospel. —The Gospel has
mysteries—heights, depths, and, I may add, simplicities, which,
without the power imparted by the Divine Spirit, no one can
ever understand. “ The natural man receiveth not the things
of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him;
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually dis-
cerned. But God hath revealed them unto us by His Spirit,
for the Spirit searcheth all things—yea, the deep things of
God.” It is by the Spirit of Truth that we are to be guided
into all truth. Believe me, you will never be effective preachers
of the truth unless you master the truth yourselves. If you
would have others through you obtain a grip of the Gospel,
you must have a grip of it yourselves. “We believe,” said the
apostle, “ and therefore speak.” It is not merely that we are to
speak what we believe: we are to speak because we believe, feeling,
as did Peter and John, that “ we cannot but speak the things
which we have seen and heard.” Thus speak, and speak with
the whole force of your soul, and you will speak as the nun
who, having seen the holy grail, addressed the knight —
“ And, as she spoke,
She sent the deathless passion in her eyes
Through him, and made him hers, and laid her mind
On him, and he believed in her belief.”
Spare no pains, I beseech you, shirk no study, regret
no time, that may be necessary for you to become mighty
in the Scriptures. “ Let the word of Christ dwell in you
richly.” You urge your people to search the Scriptures;
but if they are to do this, how much more you 9 “All


Scripture is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correc-
tion, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God,”
especially the minister of God, “ may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good works.” Brethren, be hungry for the
word of God. Study it under the Spirit’s light till it shines
with resplendent radiance through your soul, and fills you with
divine ecstasy. Let your life-long prayer be, “ Open Thou
mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of Thy law.”
4. Power to 'preach the Gospel. —The great work of the
preacher is to preach. Never think anything else can com-
pensate for lack of power to preach. There are many things
very important to you. Learning is important—secure as
much of it as you can. Style is important—study to form a
style clear, correct, concise, forceful. Science is important,
and so is philosophy. But whatever you may acquire of any
or of all of these, if you have not preaching power you are
not fit for the position you are to occupy. Power to preach
means that you ha ye power to preach clearly. So put the
truth that those who attend shall understand what you mean.
Never get into a fog; never be misty. Let every sentence
have a meaning—a meaning easily perceived, perceived even
by young people. If the point is not clear to yourself you
cannot make it clear to others. Think it out and pray about
it till it is clear to you as sunlight. As Mr. Wesley says,
See that you make out the point in hand.” Power to preach
means that you have power to preach forcefully. Where this
power is, the truth comes with a force that makes its way to
the mind and conscience. “Our Gospel,” said Paul to the
Thessalonians, “ came not unto you in word only, but also in
power and in the Holy Ghost and in much assurance,” words
which tell not of how the Thessalonians received the Gospel,
but how the apostles delivered it. Be sure you speak so that
your words shall come with power. Let there be, for example,
the power of earnestness. John Angell James wrote a book
entitled “An Earnest Ministry the Want of the Times.”
And he is right. A preacher who is not in earnest belies his
position. I sometimes think that the Irish minister was right
who proposed to add to the three questions “ Has he gifts ?”
“ Has he grace?” “ Has he fruit?” this one, “ Has he fire?”
To deal with such themes as those of the evangelical pulpit
in a careless, unsympathetic, half-hearted manner or spirit


is unworthy of any man. Put soul, fervour, fire, into
everything you say, and this will give your message force.
Power to preacli means 'power to preach successfully. No
one will say that preaching will always, and to the extent of
every one that hears it, be crowned with success. Christ
taught that there are four classes of hearers, only one of which
brings forth fruit to perfection. The apostles often preached
with but partial success. But let us remember that one of four
kinds of soil represented successful sowing, and that though
many rejected the message of the apostles some almost every-
where received it. So now if the word be clearly and force-
fully preached, preached in the Holy Ghost, depend upon it
some success will be attained both in the building up of
believers and in the conversion of sinners. What we have to
deprecate and dread above everything is a fruitless ministry.
Never be satisfied without fruit. If you were in business it
would not satisfy you to open out your goods and make your
proposals ; you would only be satisfied by effecting bargains
and securing gain. And, my brethren, souls are our gain,
our profit, our wages. “What,” says Paul, “is our hope or
joy or crown of rejoicing ? Are not even ye in the presence
of our Lord Jesus Christ at His coming ? For ye are our
glory and joy.” Again I say, never be satisfied without fruit.
“ Make the passion to save men the master-key of every
sermon and of every prayer.”
Power ! —Remember the seat of this power is within you.
It is not the mere words you speak ; it is something in your-
self which lies behind the words. Your words will not have
much power unless you have power. It is soul that moves soul.
Seek first greatness of soul. Make yourself strong if you want to
make others strong. Don’t expect to make a sermon that is
much, unless you yourself are a sermon. Believe me, more will
depend upon whatyou are than upon what you say, or what you do.
“Arms and the man,” especially the man, is said to have been
the theme of the charge given at the last English Conference.
Best not without being able to say with Micah : “I am full of
power by the Spirit of the Lord.” And mark the source from
which this enduement comes. God hath given us the spirit
of power. It is not power that comes merely from study, or
art, or diligence of our own. It is a Divine gift ; it comes in
honour of Christ, and in answer to prayer. Look to God for


this gift. Without it your ministry will be a failure, your
life a blank. Go to Him who has promised it. Tell Him
how much you need it, long for it, look for it, how much He
must see your need of it, how He has promised it, and how
much you trust His promise. And wait, wait, wait, wait, as
did the apostles till the blessing comes. And come it will,
“ perhaps in the rushing wind ; perhaps in the still small
voice; perhaps in closet privacy; perhaps in sanctuary
fulness ; perhaps lighting the spirit up into an ecstasy never
felt before; perhaps smiting the spirit down into the speech-
less awe that dares not move: but I know it will come, and
your hearts will know it when it comes.” You shall be filled
with the Holy Ghost, and shall begin to speak as with other
tongues the wonderful works of God.
111. God HATH GIVEN US THE SPIRIT OF LoVE.
The greatest power of all is the power of love, and without
the spirit of love no man can be a true minister of Jesus
Christ. This means—
1. Love to Christ. —The fountain from which true work for
Christ springs is love to Him. Ere Christ gave to Peter His
thrice-renewed commission He thrice asked him, “Lovestthou
Me ?” Look at Paul himself. He had once hated Christ, but
he had come to love Him supremely. And, speaking of the im-
pelling power which carried him and others on, as on the bosom
of a rapidly-running stream, he tells us it was love to Christ.
“ Whether we be beside ourselves, it is to God; or whether we
be sober, it is for your sakes ; for the love of Christ constraineth
us.” This love it was which sustained them in their toil, and
cheered them amid opposition, and inspired them everywhere.
0, young men, keep your love to Christ all aglow. Look at
Him till your love to Him is such a fire within you, it
consumes all sloth and all sin ; such a sunshine within you, it
makes to grow and bloom all the graces and virtues of
character; such a lever within you, it raises you to deeds of
daring; such a force within you, it impels you to say, “ I
am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I but
Christ liveth in me, and the life which I now live in the
flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me and
gave Himself for me.”


2. Love to souls. —Think of the value of the soul, of one
soul, and you will think nothing too great to do or to endure,
if only you may save it. And then think of the twelve
hundred millions or more of souls that people the earth,
multitudes of them every hour leaving it and entering into
eternity. Think of these until your own heart is drawn out
in intense desire and burning zeal to do all in your power if
by any means you may save some.
3. Love to your 'people. —We shall never do much for our
people unless we love them. Some of them are very lovable,
and we cannot well help loving them. But we should love
them all. Some of them may oppose you, and try you, and
pain you, but you are still to love them. Oh, how the
disciples of Jesus tried Him , misunderstood Him, disappointed
Him, grieved Him. But, having loved His own, He loved
them to the end. The Corinthians resisted Paul, questioned
his authority, maligned his motives, pained him much; but
his love for them bore the strain of all this, and he wrote them:
“ I will very gladly spend, and be spent for you, though the
more abundantly I love you, the less Ibe loved.” Let your
love, even for those who grieve you, be undying love—like that
of your Master and that of His apostle Paul. Love the aged
among your people, and let them feel they have your sympathy.
Love the poor , and let them feel you are their friend. Love
the sick and the feeble, and do for them all you can to comfort
and to cheer them. And love the young people. Be to them
winsome. Get access, if you can, to their hearts. Be to
them a guide and a helper. Nothing will repay you more
than the service you render to the young men and maidens,
and the boys and the girls. In one word, love everybody.
The way to get hold of the people is to love them. “ When
City-road Chapel was on fire they found the plugs were
frozen, and after chiselling away for some time they had to
fetch fire to melt the ice. And if the main of hufnan hearts
is to be opened, it must be melted by the fire of love.”
IV. God hath given us the Spirit of a Sound Mind,.
What a priceless gift to a minister is a sound mind —a
mind able to see things clearly and correctly, a mind able to
balance things as to their relative importance, a mind able to


discipline itself, control itself, and to carry itself with sober-
ness. Every day, every hour brings occasions and circum-
stances requiring a sound mind; and if it be there, what a
blessing, both to the minister himself and to all connected
with him.
Our time is so far gone that we can only give a few par-
ticulars.
1. A sound mind will be seen in the arrangement of your
iime. —lime to you is so precious that you will need to make
the most of it. You cannot learn everything about everything,
but it will be well to learn something about everything, and
everything possible about something. As a general plan, your
mornings should be given to diligent, whole-hearted, vigorous,
effective, successful study; your afternoons to pastoral visita-
tion ; your evenings to preaching or the various kinds of
meetings which in our church abound. The details of your
plan can only be drawn up by yourselves from time to time. But
having mentioned study and pastoral visitation, let me say a
word on each. With my views of a minister’s work, I cannot
regard anyone but as failing in duty who does not systematic-
ally and perseveringly visit his flock. One may say he is not
adapted to this work. My reply would be, if you have a
sound mind you will seek to adapt yourself to it as speedily
and as perfectly as possible, If I might be allowed to speak
of myself, I think I might say that, if by the grace of God I
have been enabled to succeed to some good extent in my circuits,
I. owe it much to my habit of persistently and periodically
visiting my people in their homes. Nothing more than this
has led to my love for my people and their love to me. And
I counsel you to do everything in your power to fulfil all
reasonable claims as to this thing. As to your reading, let
me say, read everything you can which it is wise for you to read.
Be omnivorous readers. And what you read, read so as to
master it, and retain it, and so as to be able legitimately to
use it as occasion may require. Read so as both to furnish
your mind and train it. Never read listlessly or drowsily,
but with vigour and alertness, so as to fit yourself to meet
successfully those who oppose you, and oppose the truth.
But in all your reading let the Bible be first and chief. There
are fountains there almost sealed. Go to them. Remove the
seals. Study your Bible consecutively. Read both Old


Testament and New. Be so familiar with the Bible that you
could pass a fair examination on it at any time. Commit
portions of it to memory. Often read a book through at a
sitting, so as to get a comprehensive view of it as a whole.
2. A sound mind will be seen in the selection of your texts
and hymns, and in the conduct of your 'public services. —Be sure
you get a good text, then unfold it. There is much wisdom
in the expression sometimes employed by the old divines.
Such and such a text, “ open and applied.” Open out your
text, and point out its use. As Mr. Wesley puts it, “Explain
and apply.” . . . Much of the interest and influence of
a service depends upon the hymns you select, and with such a
hymn-book as we have you will, if you have a sound mind,
have no difficulty in selecting hymns that may be made a
wonderful blessing. . . . And let every part of the
service be governed by discretion. Let your prayers be com-
prehensive, orderly, reverent, fervent, and neither unduly loud,
nor unduly low, nor unduly long. Let your people leave each
service feeling that they have been fed and feasted on heavenly
food, and that the hour has both brought them nearer to God
and given them strength to get nearer still.
3. A sound mind will be seen in your management of men. —
Most men are capable of being brought to what is reasonable
if they are dealt with wisely and kindly. If you are sometimes
opposed in some of your movements and plans by men of
strong will, you will need, as Mr. Wesley says, “to have all
your wits about you,” or you will bring much pain to your
own mind, and much confusion into your church and circuit.
Bemember each such man is your brother. You may draw
him; you cannot drive him. Proceed with self-control, with
tact, with sober-mindedness, with kindness, and you may win
such a brother, and make him your friend, and the friend of
our church everywhere and for ever.
4. A sound mind will be seen in the aim and results of your
ministry. —The first aim of a true ministry, considered on its
earthward side, is, as we have already seen, to bring men to
Christ; the next is to fold them in His church. For the
farmer to reap his grain and leave it exposed in the open field,,
or to purchase a sheep and leave it unfolded away from the
flock, would be sufficient to prove himself mentally unsound.
And so with the minister of Jesus, if he were to leave a soul


won to Christ out in the open field or wilderness of this world,
exposed to Satan and the agents of destruction he employs.
Brethren, be it yours to fold your sheep, to garner your grain.
“The Lord added to the church daily should be
saved.’’ If any hesitate, press upon them alike the duty, the
privilege, and the advantages of church membership. Get the
young people who love Christ into the church as early as you
can. They will bless you as long as they live. And others
who refuse to come in, urge to enter into this divine fellow-
ship. Every year of your life endeavour to add much people
to the Lord and to His church. Never let a circuit in this
regard go down in your hands. If each one of the 133
ministers of this Conference can secure a net gain of but ten
members in the year, that would give us an increase of 1330 ;
whereas, if each of us loses ten, that will give us a decrease
of 1330. The Church is a temple. Every living stone you
can find build up into the temple. Thus help Christ to build
His church. For such building as this there is promised
a glorious reward: so labour that that reward may be yours.
5. Many other thoughts crowd here which I must pass over,
that I may say, a sound mind will lead you to look with
special care to the maintenance and the growth of your own
piety. Let it never be that you shall have to say, “ They
made me the keeper of the vineyards, but mine own vineyard
have I not kept.” To build others up, and not to build your-
self up—to lead others on, and yourself to fall behind—to
preach to others, and you become a castaway—to save the
souls of others, and to lose your own soul —I know no woe
more bitter than this. “ But thou, 0 man of God, flee these
things: and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love,
patience, meekness.” Follow after these, everyday, in every
circuit, and to the end. “ Fight the good fight of faith ; lay
hold on eternal life, whereunto thou art also called, and hast
professed a good profession before many witnesses. I give
thee charge in the sight of God, who quickeneth all things,
and before Jesus Christ, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a
good confession, that thou keep the commandment without spot,
unrebukeable until the appearing of our'Lord Jesus Christ.”
These, brethren, are amongst the qualifications for the suc-
cessful exercise of the ministry to which you are now ordained


—the spirit of power, and of love, and of a sound mind.
Let me remind you once more that they are all the gift of
God, and are to be sought by prayer. It is to be feared that
in some instances even ministers restrain prayer before God.
Dr. Binney was once addressing a meeting of ministers, and
he said—“ This, then, is the defect that poisons everything ;
they are not men of frequent, earnest, private devotion.
They have great abilities ; but they do not pray. They are
ministers of Christ, according to outward order ; but they do
not pray. They are good, and perhaps even great, preachers ;
but they do not pray. They are fervent, pungent, persuasive,
convincing ; but they do not pray. They may be zealous and
enterprising leaders in the movements of public activity, the
first and foremost in popular excitement, frequent in their
appeals, abundant in their labours, working zealously in various
modes and in divers places ; but they do not pray. They are
men of integrity, purity, benevolence, but they do not pray;
and this one thing—their restraining prayer—this, like the
want of love in the Christian character, stains the glory of
everything else; it renders worthless their genius, talents, and
acquisitions ; obstructs their own spiritual prosperity, impedes
their usefulness, and blasts their success.” Brethren, let such
words as these never apply, even in a modified degree, to any
of you. The measure of your success will be gauged by the
character and the constancy of your prayer. Ob, be men of
prayer. If the gifts we have dwelt on be from God, their
attainment by us is conditioned on prayer. Pray as Abraham
prayed before Sodom, pray as Jacob prayed by the brook,
pray as Elijah prayed on Carmel, pray as our Lord prayed
when he was heard in that He feared, pray as the disciples
prayed when they were all filled with the Holy Ghost; pray
as Fletcher, and Bramwell, and Smith, and Ann Cutler and
many others prayed, till they were richly endowed with heavenly
gifts ; and praying thus, men shall take knowledge, even of you,
that God hath given you, not the spirit of fear, but “ the
spirit of power, and of love, and of a sound mind.”
And now another scene rises before me—a scene in view
of which the present crowd dwindles into insignificant little-
ness. It is the whole race assembled before the judgment
throne. There sits the Judge. Around Him are the angels.
All mankind are there to be judged. And you are there to


be judged, each one of you by himself. What will be the
sentence? “Well done, good and faithful servant?” Or,
“ Take ye the unprofitable servant and cast him into outer
darkness?” Alas, on that day, on some ministers, this latter
sentence will be spoken ! Terrible ! terrible ! “ But, beloved,
we are persuaded better things of you, and things that
accompany salvation, though we thus speak.” May your
reward that day be glorious! May your brow be decked with
jewels many, representing the many souls you have won for
Jesus ! May you be able with exultation, each one of you,
to say, “ Here am I and the children which Thou hast given
me !” He who on that day will sit as your Judge now smiles
upon you as your Gracious Master, and hands to you through
us the grandest commission ever entrusted to man. And as
He smiles He says to each of you, in tones inspiring enough
to cheer you for a lifetime, “ Be thou faithful unto death, and
I will give thee the crown of life.” Oh, be ambitious worthily
and successfully to fulfil your ministry, and when you lay it
down after a shorter or longer period of service you will find
the crown ready, and you will wear it for ever and ever.
Amen.
Mason, Firth & M'Cutcheon, Printers, Melbourne.




