

[1023]
Cfftfftttntttßeaitu of gnstrana
sa*rttr
EXTRAORDINARY.
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY.
[Registered at the General Post Office, Melbourne, for transmission by post as a newspaper. ]
No. 30.]
MONDAY, 9TH MAY
[l9lO
Prime Minister’s Office,
Melbourne, 9th May, 1910.
HIS Excellency the Governor-General directs that it he notified for general information that,
in consequence of an Order having been received for the Proclamation to-day of the
Accession of His Majesty King George the Fifth, the Order as to the firing of minute guns
and the hoisting of flags half-mast to-day, directed in the last Gazette Extraordinary has been
cancelled.
His Excellency directs the following additional notification to be made :
(1) That a Royal Salute be fired at Noon to-day on the Proclamation of the King’s Accession.
(2) That the Royal Standard, Union Jack, and all other flags be hoisted to the mast-head at
Noon, and so remain until sunset, and that to-morrow and on each succeeding day until and
including the day of the Funeral of His late Majesty, flags be hoisted half-mast high.
By His Excellency’s Command,
A PROCLAMATION.
ANDREW FISHER.
WHEREAS it has pleased Almighty God to call to His Mercy our Late Sovereign Lord
King Edward the Seventh, of blessed and glorious memory, by whose decease the
Imperial Crown of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and all other His
late Majesty’s Dominions, is solely and rightfully come to the High and Mighty Prince George
Frederick Ernest Albert: We, therefore, William Humble, Earl of Dudley, Governor-General
and Commander-in-Chief of the Commonwealth of Australia; Andrew Fisher, Prime Minister,
and His Majesty’s Treasurer of the said Comtnonwealtb ; and Egerton Lee Batchelor, Minister of
State for External Affairs of the said Commonwealth, do now hereby, with one full voice and
concert of tongue and heart publish and proclaim that the High and Mighty Prince George Frederick
Ernest Albert is now, by the death of our late Sovereign of happy and glorious memory, become our
only lawful and rightful Liege Lord, George the Fifth, by the Grace of God, King of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas,
Defender of the Faith, Emperor of India, Supreme Lord in and over the Commonwealth of Australia,
to whom we do acknowledge all faith and constant obedience, with all hearty and humble
affection, beseeching God, by whom Kings and Queens do reign, to bless the Royal Prince
GEORGE THE FIFTH with long and happy years to reign over us.
Given at Government House, Melbourne, this ninth day of May, in the Year of Our Lord
One thousand nine hundred and ten, and in the first year of His Majesty’s reign.
God Save the King !
DUDLEY,
Governor-General.
ANDREW FISHER.
E. L. BATCHELOR.
