

OFFICIAL REPORT
OF
ANTI-OPIUM DEMONSTRATION
HELD AT THE
CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, PITT STREET, SYDNEY,
ON
THURSDAY, APRIL 5TH, 1894.
DR. T. STORIE DIXSON IN THE CHAIR.
To which aub Appended Copies op Letters received- jn
CONNECTION THEREWITH.


ANTI-OPIUM=MEETING.
CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, PITT STREET, SYDNEY,
THURSDAY, APRIL 5TH, 1894.
REPORT OF PROCEEDINGS.
A large and enthusiastic public meeting, convened by Mr. Quong Tart,
■with the object of urging upon the Government the immediate necessity
for restricting the sale of opium, so far as possible, to purposes strictly
medicinal, was hold ou Thursday, April sth, 1894, in the Congregational
Church, Pitt Street, Sydney. The Church, which had bean beautifully
decorated, was crowded to excess in every part, and the proceedings
throughout were strongly marked by earnest enthusiasm. Dr. Thomas
Storio Dixson occupied the chair, and on the platform with him were
Mr, Quong Tart, Miss ,Jessie Ackerman (World’s Missionary W.G.T.XJ.),
the Eevs. F. B. Boyce (President of the New South Wales Local Option
League), Eainsford Bavin, J. Bonnott Anderson, Soo Hoo Ton, E, S.
Paterson, Young Wai, Messrs. W. J. S. Gordon and E. T. Tale, M’siL.A.
(Victoria), Mr. J. L. Fegau, M.L.A. (New South Wales), and Messrs.
A. C. Hewlett, J. Eoseby, G. I. K. LTlir, and others. The appearance
of Miss Ackerman and Mr. Quong Tart was greeted with loud applause,
the audience rising en masse and waving their handkerchiefs.
The meeting was opened by prayer, and the singing of the
“ Coronation Hymn.”
The Chairman, before introducing the first speaker, said that the
movement which they wore mot to discuss did not lack support from
the general public outside that great meeting. (Loud cheers.) A'great
many friends—more than he had time to mention—had taken the trouble
to write and express their hearty sympathy with the agitation, but he
could only read a few of those communications, as tile time at his
disposal was comparatively limited. Ho then proceeded to read several
of the letters mentioned. (See appendices.)
Miss Ackerman, who was received with loud applause, said that that
great meeting which she was about to address gave a fair indication of


the Interest felt in this very important question. She had felt some-
times as she travelled from country to country that perhaps less
■was known concerning the evils of the use of opium than any other
great evil of the day. Her attention was first brought to it in her
own country (America). ’While in that terribly wicked city called
Sau Francisco, a lady had said to her, “We want you to see something
•of what opium is doing for our white people,” and then, for the first
time in her life, she visited an. opium “ don.” She knew that countless
thousands and thousands of people were addicted to it, but not till then
was she aware that it over touched the English-speaking or white people.
She went through the Chinese portion of San Francisco, with its popu-
lation of 60,000 people, and there dawned upon her for the first time
the consciousness that the evil had spread amongst our own people. In
some of these dens she saw as many as six white women smoking and
lying about on the doors. Then she travailed the whole length of the
Pacific slope, and from Denver to Kew York she found the trail of this
evil everywhere. Indeed, so widespread had it become in that country
that it had bean necessary to take decided action by all those engaged in
mural reform. She was told that in Sau Francisco alone there were
3000 white women who went regularly to the opium dens to smoke.
This was, perhaps, one of the most shocking things within her observa-
tion, But they had not met that evening to “orate” mid make pretty
speeches, but to bring before the meeting some plain facts concerning tho
giant evil*of the age. Well, she went on her travels, and it would he
perfectly useless for her to try and describe what she saw in China,
India, Eurmah, Geylou, Java, and Singapore; in fact, wherever she
went she saw the dreadful effects of opium-smoking and opium-eating.
Under one roof in China she saw over 3000 people in every stage_ of
intoxication from the drug, and she was told that there wore sometliing
like 2000 dens in that one city alone. So that the whole city had been
cursed and blighted by the drug. It was equally as bad in India,
although the effects were not so apparent. ’.But it was not so much use
talking of China, because as a rule people were interested first, of all in
their own people, and perhaps a plea from China would not have much
effect; but she wanted more especially to present to the meeting the
solemn fact that men and women in Australia, whom we called our own,
were being degraded and debauched from the use of opium,. When she
first met Mr. Quong Tart—(loud applause)—she naturally thought ho
would interest himself mostly with his own people, and when she was
asked to work on an Anti-Opium Committee of which he was a member,
she did not expect to hear anything from him, about the use of opium in
Australia. She expected to hear him put in a, plea for his own country-
men, and was surprised to hear him say, “We must suppress tho traffic
in Australia because of the English people of this colony as well
Chinese.” (Loud cheers.) And so they saw before them that night
those from the distant Orient joining hands with those in Australia for
the common good of mankind. (.Renewed applause.) In travelling
over this groat island continent she had gone to remote regions and tried
to find out all she could about the opium-smoking and its use in Aus-
tralia. She would sum it up very briefly, hut first she wanted to read


a letter from a Miss Guinness, a young lady in England, who had taken
a great interest in the question. She said, in referring to the opium
work
“ The work is not yet in. connection with the W.0.T.U., though all our
workers are in deep sympathy with the Worlds movement, and would gladly, I am
sure, unite if it were suggested.”
A Department of Opium had since been added, and she (Miss Ackerman)
had been appointed World's President, in which capacity she had tried
to find out all she could with regard to the opium traffic. Her assistant,
in London, thus continued in her letter :
“The Anti-opium Demonstration is needed in Australia. When we were
there in *B3 the habit of opium-taking was very much on the increase, among
servant girls, and one hears such sod reports of its later wide extent. We are so
■glad to think that our fellow-country women in Greater England are joining with
us--in prayer and effort fur the suppression of this terrible and now world-wide
•curse. Here, In London, our Women's Anti-opium Urgency League was founded
two and a half years ago, and (working in connection with the Anti-opium Society)
now extends right over the country'. Our principal needs here arc study and
prayer. People don’t know about the question. Ignorance is remarkably wide-
spread add profound, though the agitation of the last three years has drawn public
attention a great deal more to the subject. Wo are trying, above all things else,
to get our women to study the question, to pray about it, and then to do their part
in seeking to make known the abuse, and lead to its abolition. No doubt the same
needs exist in Australia Ask our fellow-women there from me, do they know that
England, every good opium year, sends out 82,000 chests of this terrible drug to
China—enough poison (if taken internally instead of being smoked) to depopulate
the globe twelve times over 1 Do they know that our British Government—their
Government as much as ours—the Government which at the last, analysis is we, is
carrying on a huge business in poison—that our Queen Is the largest dealer in
opium the world lias ever seen ? That wc raise £3,000,000 every year by trade in
this demoralising drug; and that Chinese Christians so hate and abhor the habits
and degradation which its consumption produces, that the Christian Churches in
that country invariably exclude the opium smoker from the Lord’s Table } I dare
say that full weight has not been given to the fact that the House of Commons, on
the 10th April, 1891, condemned the traffic as ‘ morally indefensible ’ by a majority
of 31, on the motion of Sir Joseph Pease. Barely such facts speak for themselves !
lighting a parallel light to that which our forefathers engaged in, in the Anti-slave
Trade Movement a generation ago. The misrepresentations and conflicting state-
ments made about the Opium Traffic are singularly similar to those then current,
and foisted on the public in. connection with the Anti-slavery debate. God grant
us, as Ho did Wilbcvforcc, Clarkson, Harriot Beecher Stowe, and many another, to
pmy and work for the abolition of this crying iniquity! For if wo might help
•and do not, surely our hands arc not clean in the matter, The opium question is
entirely different from the drink traffic in this respect (which is often overlooked),
that the production and manufacture oil the drug arc entirely in the hands of the
Government —the whole business is a Government monopoly. There are no private
opium factories engaged in the work as in the. drink business. Thus wc have a
great advantage in combatting the ill,* for it can be arrested if the one. source of
supply be stopped. Much wishing I could be with you at your Sydney gathering,
and with heartiest greeting to our Australian helpers, for whom we pray that in
•this supremely urgen t question, each one may ho consciously a fellow-labourer with
God. I am, etc. (signed), Luoy E. Guinness.”
On referring to her manuscript she found that when in the far north—
Port Darwin—she tried to ascertain definitely how the case stood there;
but failing that she commissioned a gentleman residing there to send her


all tlio information he could gather. IVora. this olio found tliat 3000 Ilia,
of opium were consumed annually in Port Darwin by about 400 people.
It sold there for ss. per ounce, and that price restricted its use almost,
entirely to people with money. Seventy eases wore imported last year,
the duty upon, which brought the cost up to £IO,OOO. In the whole of
Australia 80,000 lbs. were annually consumed, of which 1000 lbs. was
for medicinal purposes, and the remaining 79,000 lbs. was Indian opium
imported by persons other than druggists. The duty in Victoria was
.1150 per chast, and it retailed for 60s. per Ih. In the northern
Territory it was £2lO per chest. The number of Chinese in Melbourne
was 3000, in Victoria 8500, and in all Australia 35,000, more than half
of whom were victims to opium smoking. Of the English-speaking
population, there were 700 smokers in Victoria, and 2000 in the whole
of Australia. Surely these startling figures showed the need of some
concerted and decided action. Surely this was sufficient to awake in.
everyone a desire to save our own people as well as the foreigners on
our shores, from falling victims to this withering, blighting curso. (Loud
applause.)
The Uev. Soo Hoo Tun’s choir then sang, in Chinese, “ Work, for
the Night is coming.”
The Chairman then called upon Mr. Qnong Tart, who, he said, had
been closely identified with this movement for many years, to move the
first resolution.
Mr. Quong Taut, who, on rising, was received with loud and
continued applause, moved :—“ It having been proved that the use of
opium for purposes otb.Gr than medicinal has been steadily extending to
the white population, and that the custom is well established amongst
one or more sections of the foreign element resident in the colony, it is
hereby resolved, ‘That in the opinion of this meeting a measure
should he brought before Parliament at the earliest opportunity
having for its purpose the restriction of the sale of opium,
or any preparation of it, whether imported or locally grown, so
far as possible to purposes strictly medicinal.’ ” He said it would hardly
be necessary for him to remind them that this meeting was no party
movement. It spoke for itself more plainly than any words of his.
One had only to glance round quite casually to see the thoroughly
representative nature of the gathering, and ho was particularly pleased
to see so many ladies present. No doubt the women could help
materially in this movement as they could in many others, and he felt
certain that if the ladies got the vote, which they were anxious to
obtain, the opium traffic would soon he stopped most effectually.
(Cheers.) At the same time he would hardly like to see the women get
so far as Parliament. (Laughter.) He could not help thinking that if
ever the citizens of any country spoke out on any subject, that great
meeting with its unanimous voice would say most unmistakably that
this opium traffic must cease. (Cheers.) There were, no donht, people
who thought the drug harmless, and the smoking of it fraught with
little danger, hut let them wait till the shoe pinched (cheers); let them.


•wait till it touched their own daughters or their own sons, (Loud
applause.) That was the time they found the pinch, and that was the
time—when the evil came to close quarters—that it touched their hearts.
(Cheers.) And it was beginning to touch their own people here, as well
■as the Chinese. He would like to say here that he had no animosity
■against anyone on this great subject; it would he of no personal benefit
to him if the trade were absolutely abolished, or if it wore allowed to
exist as at present. He was actuated purely hy a desire to see the best
done that could he devised to ameliorate the lot of the unfortunate
victims, and prevent others from falling under the fatal spell. Hut to
return, he was glad to see so many sections of the community repre-
sented at the meeting; some were there in sufficiently strong force to
■ensure the success of the agitation. Since ho had taken the organization
of this meeting in hand, he had been almost besieged with letters of
sympathy and encouragement from all parts of the colony. Ministers of
religion, leading politicians, municipal bodies, and prominent citizens in
every walk of life had combined to wish theSmovement Godspeed.
■(Cheers.) Ho had received all these (holding up a lingo hag packed with
letters) within a fortnight. Where, then, could he the difficulty in
stamping out tho evil! There was no difficulty at all. (Cheers.) He,
would send out, a full list of these communications all over tho world to
let people see what Australia thought of the traffic. They wore not all
asleep in this colony. (Laughter.) Miss Ackerman once said that they
were a little hit slow, hut he replied that we were sure, and we were
getting quicker, (lieuowed laughter.) Letters of sympathy wore still
pouring in like a shower of vain, all sympathising strongly, with the
exception of one or two who thought the matter should he loft to
Parliament. That was what the meeting wanted—(cheers) —but they
also wanted to see to it that the proper men wore put into Parliament
who would do their utmost to stamp out the evil. (Loud cheers.) But
who, he asked, could stand out of such a movement with clean bauds ?
Although he had not experienced personally the evils which fell to the
lot of the opium-smoker—and he trusted to be spared this infliction in
the future—he could claim, without egotism, to have as close a know-
ledge of the degradation which followed in the wake of the drug as
anyone whom he had yet met on those Australian shores. (Cheers.)
Tho opportunities afforded him in many ways of studying this great
question, gave him tho right to apeak with some little authority. Over
thirty years ago, when, as a youth, lie went to Braidwood in the old
digging days, he first noticed the presence of the opium-smoker. There
wore few European smokers in those days, hut how had tho number
increased since then t He soon found that as a result of his indulgence,
the unfortunate victim began to lag in the race; he began his work late
in the day, finished early, and was always down with a sort of fever and
ague. His companions who didn’t smoke began to light shy of him, and
refused to “share.” Tho smoker then began to waste away physically
and financially, always being behindhand with his fees, etc. His appear-
ance became mors woebegone and emaciated, hut still he must have hia
opium j there was no question of that. Then the storekeeper refused to
trust him, and he was forced to little acts of larceny, such as fowl-stealing


(< underground engineering.” Did they know what that meant 1 ?
(Laughter.) Well, finally, the poor victim would get six months 11
imprisonment or something like that. Was it to he supposed that he
still continued to get his opium in gaol ? No. Within six weeks or two
mouths the opium taste had gone from,him altogether. (Cheers.) Ho
became a new man. Surely that was sufficient proof that the abstinence
from the drug would not kill right away. (Applause.) But to proceed.
In 18bl ha took a trip to China, where he studied .the question In its
ellect upon his countrymen there, as well as upon the Europeans. He
would like to point out that in China a large proportion of the better
class did not smoke. . It was in the cities, where there was comparative
freedom from interference by relatives, that the drug was smoked to any
extent. There was a good reason for this. The penalty imposed upon
those who commenced to smoko, if they were detected in the practice,
was sufficiently severe to stop a great many. The better class of Chinese
kept a, sharp lookout upon their relatives in this respect. They knew
the deadliness of the drug when it touched their own kith and kin.
(Applause.) But if once a young man fell a victim ha would spend his
all and pawn everything he possessed, leaving his children without the
necessaries of life, in order to gratify the appetite for opium. If be
knew that his wife had money he would agitate and agitate—as Sydney
was now agitating in the opposite direction—to get it out of her.
(Laughter.) If his house were burning over his head he would still
have his opium. As he had said, however, the smoking was principally
confined to the cities; and he would like to point out here that the
unnatural crowding together in. cities was not so much the cause of
opium smoking as it was the effect. Take away the smoking and they
struck at the very root of the crowding. He might also mention at
this stage that although there wore many bad cases here the condition
oi the smoker in China was mom than ten times worse. There he was
much poorer than the average Chinaman here, and he had to resort to
all sorts of expedients for gratifying his passion at the risk of depriving
himself of the hare necessaries of life. He would rehoil the dregs of his
pipe* with a slight admixture of fresh opium, in order to save expense,
and the commodity thus consumed had much the same effect, highly
magnified, as the tobacco smoker experienced when trying to smoke stale
tobacco saturated with nicotine. Even then he impoverished himself so
much that lie had to live upon food which far from counteracted the
effect of the deteriorated drug. Here the smoker was slightly better off
as far as this world’s goods were concerned. He was able to get the
drug comparatively pure, and also keep himself on' wholesome food, so
that he ■was seldom found at the very last stages of opium poisoning, so
general among smokers in China. But they were bad enough, in all
conscience: the drug found its way surely into the very bones of the
victim, and his outward appearance was miserable in the extreme. Some-,
forty or fifty years ago there was a Viceroy in China named Lum Talc
Tooy, who took a great interest in this question. He went round the
country and cities, and saw the degradation and misery which was settling
down upon the’people owing to this habit, and at once set himself to try
and remedy the evil. He built large bamboo houses, or hospitals, as they


would bo called hero, for the treatment of smokers, and tried in every
way to wean them from the habit. He also placed a law upon the
statute-hook making it a capital offence for anyone to commence the
indulgence. Hot long after Ms only son was decoyed away from Mm,
and induced to smoko, hy some people who thought that the Viceroy would
alter his decision when he found his own son’s life involved. But
it was ordered to stand, and the result was that the Vioeroy signed
the death-warrant of his only son, as an example to the rest of the
people. Surely, here was a high and noble example to sat to the
world ! Could mortal man do more to show his fellows the imminence
of their peril, and could one possibly find a stronger argument in our
favour than this ? He thought not. But even the sacrifice of an
only son had but a passing effect upon the opium scourge. The un-
fortunate Viceroy never lived to report the matter to the Emperor,
and a further stimulus was given to the traffic from outsido, and from
no other source than “ Christian England.” (Cries of “ Shame.”)
Their dear old mother-country poured shipload after shipload of the
drug into China, and the Chinese were powerless to stop it. They
were not strung enough to risk the chances of another war, should they
repudiate the commercial treaty with England ; and although a noble
effort was made to prevent the iniquitous importation, it ended un-
fortunately, and China sat down meekly under the defeat. The
strenuous attempts made to stamp) out the evil were more than,
counteracted by outside influences, and now he was given to under-
stand the Chinese wore growing largo quantities of the poppy them-
selves. They found it useless to make farther attempts at stopping
tiie cultivation, when they could not stop the importation of the
manufactured article, But let them return to How South Wales
again. Ten years ago he had the honour to be appointed, iu conjunc-
tion witli Sub-Inapeotor Brennan—now Superintendent Brennan—to
visit the different places in tire colony where the Chinese camps were
located. They went to Wagga, Albany, Urana, Hay, Doniliquin, and
Narandora, whore the principal camps were to be found. Out of 73
European women located in these camps, no less than 07 were found
to be habitual smokers, while tho rest were in various initiatory
stages. Everyone to whom they spoke, in the course of their inspec-
tion, agreed with them aa to the baneful effects of the practice, and
the crying need of suppressing it once for all. Well, their inspection
ended, they reported to the Inspector-General of Police on the subject,
and be (Mr, Quong Cart) immediately took steps to lay the matter
before the Government. A deputation was formed to wait upon its
head, and they presented a petition in favour of the suppression of
opium-smoking, which was signed by 768 municipal councillors,
ministers of all denominations, 2,500 European citizens, and 500
Chinese. On the 24th April, 1884, the interview took place, the late
Sir Alexander Stuart and Sir George Bibbs receiving the deputation.
But previous to this he had visited Victoria in furtherance of the
movement, and found the large majority of the public there, especially
in Ballarat, heart and soul with them. Sir Alexander Stuart, however,
told them that while he sympathised with their objects, he could not


help thinking that were the drug not imported it would be smuggled,
and consequently the smoking would not cease, while the Government
would lose the revenue. Subsequently, Sir George Dibbs, who took
great interest in the question, accompanied him (Mr. Quong Tart) on a
tour of inspection round some ot the “ dens ” where the smoking was
indulged in, and he saw for himself how it was getting hold of the
unfortunate people. Unfortunately, however, owing to some change
of Government, the matter dropped, and it had dropped many times
since from one cause or another. In November, 1890, they brought
the subject under the notice of Sir Henry Parkes, but again with no
definite result. This, then, in brief, was the history of the agitation,
but still the opium had been coming in all the same Some one must
smoke it. It was for the country to say whether it should be allowed
to continue or not. He might mention that during the past few days
he had had tho opportunity of conferring with Mr. Gordon, M.L.A.,
of Victoria, on the subject, as they would have seen from the Sydney
Morning Herald's report of the interview. He was pleased to learn
that there was a prospect of fresh legislation being introduced in the r
sister colony to prohibit the traffic. Bills had been brought in by the
Assembly there more than once, but both times thrown out in the
Upper Chamber, mainly on the ground thatif New South Wales didnot
take action in the matter smuggling would be so easily accomplished
that no preventive internal measures would be of any avail. Here,
then, was a chance for combined action on the part of the two
colonies. Mr. Gordon told him that they were beginning to grow the
poppy largely in his colony, and if that was so, and the cultivation
paid, we should have it here before long, depend upon it. Prevention
was better than cure, all the world over. Let them, then, take up the
matter seriously and earnestly ; let them make their voice heard, and
stamp out the evil for ever while there waa yet time—(loud cheers) j
for, let him tell his temperance friends, whom he waa delighted to
welcome to that meeting, opium-smoking was far more deadly in its
■effects than drink. The demon drink was bad enough for anything,
but opium was a hundred per cent, worse. The taste for alcoholic
liquor took time to develop, hut how different with opium! Taste the
drug a lew times only and the system cried aloud for it in rapidly
increasing quantities, and refused to be comforted without it. Ii was
like the tiger which once tasted human blood. He had intended, had
time permitted, to say a few words on the reverse side of the picture.
He had already said enough as to the crying need for preventive
measures, but, in Heaven’s name, if they could not put a stop to it
altogether, let them not make the smoker’s lot worse by increasing
the duty an tho drug. He had intended to. try and show the effect of
such a step. The opium-smoker must have his smoke, if he could get
it by hook or by crook, and no matter at what cost. Double the price
of the article and they forced him to the expedients he had described
aa being resorted to by the poor in China. He was driven to the use
of the inferior article, and his ability to provide himself with the
necessaries of life was proportionately diminished. Thus he suffered
doubly, and no one was the better on for it. Let them be honest and


fair to tile smoker, as well as to other classes of the community. If
they could not stop him smoking do not let them lull Mm outright.
Moat people know that the smoker’s opium was entirely different from
that used for,medicinal purposes. The former was imported in a kind
'of jolly, ready prepared. Let them try and stop the use of this article ;
the other did not matter. But if they could not do that all at once let
them make it as easy for the poor Chinaman to get his opium as for
the rich, by appointing certain persona in each district to sell it, sub-
ject to certain conditions. Thus they should do away with that
detestable class of individuals who throve on that unholy practice of
turning '• informers” on such of their fellows as happened to ran
■counter to the present Poisons Act in regard to the sale of the drug.
All that he wanted was to see fair play for all. If they could do
anything to atop opium-smoking they were benefiting the whole of
the community, and this, he thought, was one of the highest aims in
life; but if they could not stop it let them make the burden as light
for the sufferer as might be. He had to thank them for their patient
hearing. It needed few words of his to make them realize the
importance of the subject, and if he said much more he might defeat
his own purpose. He would, therefore, conclude by moving the
resolution which he had read at the beginning of his speech. (Loud
and prolonged applause.)
Mil, John Vaj.w (Victoria) said he had much pleasure in seconding
the resolution. He would like to say that whiJe he had had some
experience in connection with this matter, and while it had been hia
privilege to help a little in the work in Victoria, this was the first
occasion upon which he had ventured to address a meeting on the
subject. He was glad to see that from the presence of members
of the W.0.T.1J. at the meeting, it partook of a federal character,
and this was a question pre-eminently adapted to federal action.
(Hear, hoar.) If they wanted any reason for that they had it in
one of the observations made by Mr. Qnong Tart before he concluded
his speech, It was tills, that if the traffic were prohibited here, the
Victorians would smuggle it over the border and the New South
Wales Government would lose revenue. That was exactly Victoria’s
objection to passing legislation without any corresponding law on this
side of the border. If one colony prohibited and the other did not, the
opium would travel across the border in spite of all the Customs
houses. When last year the Opium Prohibition Bill was before the
Victorian Parliament the Melbourne Bemld published a telegram in
which it was stated that Sir George Dibba had been interviewed in
reference thereto, and had expressed some degree of satisfaction bs
ha believed the Bill would practically increase the revenue of New
South Wales. That sentiment, lie (Mr. Vale) thought did not by any
means represent the opinion of Hew South Wales with regard to the
traffic. He was sure it did not. He did not mention this as any real
objection to colonial action. Let any colony that could prohibit the
traffic try it, but at the same time it was a thing that would have to
be dealt with by all the Colonies in order to make prohibition success


fal. Did they not see how the devil seemed to use one place
against (mother to perpetuate an evil ? When one argued for the
prohibition of alcohol, one’s opponents replied that people must have'
a narcotic, and if alcohol were stopped -opium would be resorted to,
which was worse, and in India they argued vice versa.. (Laughter).
The devil must surely laugh to himself to see how beautifully he
fooled the people in this way. He rejoiced to mow that mainly
through Mr. Q-ordon, M. LA, who was on the platform, the Legislative
Assembly of Victoria was sound on this great question. At the fag
end of the session the Government had introduced it prohibitive
measure, but one iron, member ventured to move an adverse motion
that gentleman was Dr. L. L. Smith, and there was not another
member in the House found to second it. (Cheers). The Bill went
through the Assembly without division, but it was at the cud of the
session, and it came to grief in the Legislative Council. The reason
given was, insufficient time, but everybody Imew that in Parliamentary
matters, as in others, the reason which seemed to he on the surface
was not the real reason. Here was the true reason : they had a few
acres of poppies growing in Victoria, and these ware to be saved. To
save the poppies the Bill was slaughtered with the innocents (cries of
“ Shame ”) One member of the Legislative Council told him, that they
would pass a reasonable Bill next session, but the sentiment of the
House was that the poppies must be saved ! It was an abominable
sentiment —(cheers) —but it was in keeping with the whole of the
business from beginning to end. Here in our Australian Colonies wo
had an evil in our midst which was not only cursing the stranger
within our gates, but sapping the manliness from our native popula-
tion by slow and sure degrees—a traffic which was robbing many of
our fair daughters of Australia of all that women hold most dear, and
a traffic which, if allowed to continue, would certainly ruin hundreds
and thousands more. There was, however, a strong and noble dis-
position to atop it—(cheers) —but unfortunately there were Those, who
raised the cry, '‘there is profit in it.” He replied “righteousness is
more than revenue ” (applause) ; that the people are more than, profit.
He wished all our legislators—could ha got to that standard expressed
by the Chinese Hmperor, who before the Chinese opium war was beard
by the British Ambassador to condemn the traffic in those words :
“ I will never raise revenue by the min and vices of my people.” (Loud
applause). This was the principle that must in time prevail. In
many respects ■ the opium curse was akin to drink, and while one
could admire the spirit of the man who,, having made a law that the
opium-smoker should be beheaded, carried it oat though it sent his
own son to the block, one must remember that when once a man
became thoroughly possessed of the craving, it became in him a disease,
and one might as well blame him for having typhoid fever as for
being drunk, The only remedy waste out off the supply—(cheers)-—:
and they were in this happy position,. unlike the drink evil,
that the opium habit was only just beginning We. It was in Ita
early stages now, hut 1 the longer it was allowed to remain the
stronger it would-become. Bat-it was not yet" too 'strong to kill),
uttdlet them kill it in the name of 'righteousness. (Cheers).


• i PWan, M.L.A., supported the resolution. He said it
might be asked, why should thoy advocate the suppression of what
might be called an imaginary evil ? Let them know this : the opium
evil was one of the worst that had threatened civilization, and was now
eating its way into the heart of the people. The time had come
when some pressure must be brought to bear on the Government to
oope with the great evil. They might talk of revenue and prosperity
in trade, but when the morals and the health and well-being of the
community were threatened, it was time for mothers and fathers,
brothers and sisters, to rise to the responsibility of their position and
agitate for the of the vice. (Applause). It might be, as
Mr. Quong art put it, that they did not realize the danger till it
reached their own doors, but no one after hearing Mr. Quong Tart’s
speech could hold himself or herself blameless if he or she did
not take part in getting’ rid of this dire curse. (Cheera). It was
time that they looked the matter fully in the face. (Cheers.)
limo after time petitions had been presented to asking the
Assembly ot New South Wales to assist in passing a measure for the
suppression of an evil which had taken captive some of their best and
noblest. (Hear, hear.) Ho asked them, in the name of God — et E’er
God, home, and humanity”—to consider this question well, and do
what they could to send men to the House who would legislate for
the suppression of the opium traffic. (Applause.)
The Key. Soo Hoo Ten - had much pleasure in supporting the
resolution.
The Chairman then put the motion 10 tho meeting, and it was
carried unanimously, with great enthusiasm.
The Bey. F. B. Bosce moved: “That a committee be appointed
of the following gentlemen to frame a constitution for the Anti-
opium League, to be submitted to a public meeting of all interested as
soon as possible :—Mr. Quong Tart, Dr. T. Storie Bisson, Bev. S. J.
Bennett Anderson, Soo Hoo Ten, B, S. Patterson, Messrs. G. J 3. Ardill,
«T. L. Tegan, M.L. A., John Boseby, and the mover.” He said that the
committee would meet regularly, and have a proper organisation, and,
headed by Mr. Quong Tart, would never rest until victory was
achieved. (Applause.)
The Rev, Young Wax's choir sang, in Chinese, “ Blessed
Assurance.”
Mr. W. J. S. Gordon, M.L. A., of Victoria, said that he had not been
in Sydney ainoe 1870, and was struck with the magnificence of the
city, and he congratulated them upon that circumstance. But there
were some things which bad struck him, and upon which he could
not congratulate them. For the last ten days he had been moving
about the colony a great deal, fulfilling a certain mission, and one
thing that struck him was the magnificence of their public-houses
and the immense number of them, and the bars were full. (Hear
hear.) When he looked upon them he could not help saying to
himself: There is surely no such thing as poverty here. New South


Wales was the largest consumer of intoxicating drinks of the colonies,
and in regard to the opium traffic he liad obtained a return from the
Custom-house authorities of the quantity of opium consumed in the
colony during the past 18 years. The figures astonished him.
During the last IS years they had consumed 176 tons 7owt. Iqr. 61b.,
or an average consumption or 21,9471b5. (Sensation.) That was
putting the matter in the most forcible way. And in the same period
the revenue from opium amounted to .£305,653, and that amount of
money had been received by the Treasury from that source. That
was demoralising to the community. (Cheers.) Ho was happy to
say that in Victoria the Premier, Mr. Patterson, was thoroughly in
accord with the anti-opium movement, and had stated : “We do not
care one pin about the revenue ; we care a great deal more about the
morals of the community.” (Cheers.) He hoped that meeting would
take action, and that a deputation would wait on the Premier, and that
he would act in the same sensible way that the Premier of Victoria
had acted. (Loud applause.) Some time ago he had gone through
the slums of the oity and visited opium dens, and there saw things
that he could not tall that meeting. And if their Member a of
Parliament would visit those opium dens they would take the matter
up. He trusted that that meeting would take action, and very decided
action. (Hear, hear.) He congratulated Mr Quong Tart upon the
energy he had displayed in this matter, and that gentleman deserved
the warmest thanks of the meeting. (Cheers) If the subject were
taken up in a practical manner by Sydney, action in Melbourne must
follow. (Cheers) He advised them to get the franchise for women
(cheers); in that would lie their success. They were going to give
them the franchise in Victoria. There was no fear about that. The
A.N.A. had taken the matter up as a question that it would support,
and that meant success, (loud applause,)
The JJbv. Young Wai supported the motion, which was carried
unanimously.
A vote of thanks was passed to Miss Ackerman for her attendance'
to the choirs for their services, and to the chairman.
The South Sea Island Home choir sang “There will be showers
of blessing.”
The Doxology was then sung, and the Eev. E. Bavin pronounced
the Benediction.


APPENDICES.
Among the scores of letters which Mr. Quong Tart received, expressing
•sympathy with the movement, may he mentioned the following: —
Sir J. P. Abbott, Spanker of the Legislative Assembly, writes : “My
sympathies are entirely with your views, and I do hope you will be energetically
■supported in the good work in which you are engaged.”
The Hon. L. if. Hoyden, M.L.0., Attorney-General, says : “ I very gladly send
you the expression of my hearty sympathy with the movement you are heading.
You arc doing an excellent work, and it would be well for our community i£ wc
had more citizens like yourself—to aim at the extirpation of those criminal
indulgences which have had a large share in producing our present troubles.”
The Hon. (t. B. Simplon, Q.G., M L. 0., writes: “The movement has my
warmest sympathy, and I should have liked an opportunity of expressing it
personally, and. of adding my testimony to that of those who can well testify, as I
can, to the great interest you have invariably taken in advancing the welfare and
promoting the good of your countrymen. You have, in this, as in many other
matters, proved yourself a most useful colonist, and have won for yourself the
reputation of being a man well entitled to the esteem of the people, amongst whom
you have lived for so long.”
The Hon. It. H. I). White, M.L.0.. writes: “You have my sympathy entirely
in your efforts to put down the traffic hi opium in this colony, and I wish you
every success. I have watched with pleasure the great interest you have taken for
many years to better the condition and promote the welfare of your countrymen in
Australia, and.your services deserve recognition from the Chinese Empire. You
have spared neither time nor expense in this object, and I am glad to find my
countrymen approve of your action in this direction, and will work with yon. The
Chinese arc hard-working, law-abiding, sober, and good colonists Their cheap
garden products come under the reach of the poorest people, which English
gardeners neither could nor would supply to meet the great demand. Their
knowledge of irrigation has enabled them to grow vegetables in distant inland
parts of the colonies where they were never grown before, to the benefit of the
health of the colonists. It haa always been my pie'Slug duty ns a magistrate of
these colonies to protect them from insult and oppression whenever the opportunity
ofi'ered,”
The Hon. Geo. Thornton, M.L.C., writes : “I fully concur in the objects of
the proposed meeting.”
The Hon. E. Webb, M L.C., writes to say that: “He wishes to convey to Mr.
Tart, his entire sympathy with the object sought to be obtained.”
The Hon. E. Grcville, M.L.0., also wrote to express regret at his inability to
be present at the meeting.
Members of Legislative Assembly, who wrote, thus expressed themselves
Mr. Jacob Garrard, M.L.A.: “ I wish you God speed in this work, and any-
thing I can do to restrict or, better still, absolish this traffic, shall be cheerfully
done.”
Mr. Hugh Taylor, M.L A. : “I write, to assure you of my unhesitating sympathy
with the movement. The traffic in opium is a thing accursed and must bo deplored
by every friend of humanity. Any legal method of discountenancing and
suppressing it is, to my mind, quite justifiable. I am satisfied that if due repre-
sentation, properly supported, be made in the right quarters, a practice abhorrent
to morality and physiology will receive a blow which should put an end to it
finally. The matter is in good hands, and I have every hope that your praiseworthy
and phihurtropic efforts will meet with success.”


Dr. Hollis. M.L.A. ; “ I desire to assure you oE my cordial sympathy with the
objects of the meeting, I have noticed with much pleasure the great interest you
have taken in this movement, and trust you will have a successful meeting.”
Mr. J. H. Young, M.L.A.: “ You have my heartiest sympathy in the effort
you are making to stop the traffic in opium. There can be no doubt that the use
of that drug (otherwise than as a medicine), has a very degrading influence both
morally and physically, and should be put a stop to.”
Mr. J. ftf. Chanter, 3M.L.A. : 14 You are engaged in a noble work for the
suppression of the opium traffic, and have my deepest sympathy—as I am sure you
have also that, of the great majority of the people. Wishing you God speed.”
Mr. T. J. Houghton, M.L.A.: “ Your laudable endeavours to prevent the
spread of this noxious drug are deserving of every encouragement, and you have
my hearty good wishes in the matter.”
Mr. D. 0. J. Donnelly, M.L.A. ; “ I can only offer you my sincere sympathy
in your great endeavour.”
Mr. F, Clarice, M.L.A. : “ The movement has my fullest sympathy and
support.”
Mr. T. Bavister, M.L.A.: “ T should have been glad to bo with you, and lend
any assistance in my power to check the great evil talcing place in our midst from
the traffic, surrounded ns it is by so many objectionable and degrading practices.”
Mr. G. Donald, M.L.A. : “ I have every sympathy with you in your endeavours
to prevent the importation of opium.”
Mr. J. Sheldon, M.L.A.: “You will have my utmost sympathy in your efforts
to suppress the trade in question.”
Mr, A. Hutchinson. M.L.A. : “ Please be assured of my fullest sympathy with
you.”
Mr. Alfred Allen, M.L.A. ; !i I am body, soul, and spirit with you.”
Mr. W. C. Wall, M.L.A. : “ I .write to' assure you of my hearty sympathy in
the movement, and you may rely on my co-operation hi any direction in which
I can he of assistance in furthering the movement you have so patriotically-
undertaken. 1 ’
Mr J. H. Gann, M.L.A. : “lam thoroughly in sympathy with the movement,
and if I am not present at your meeting, it will not be for want of the desire to
see you succeed in such a movement.”
Mr. B, B. Nicoll, M.L.A. : “ The object has my fullest sympathy. I may add
that, you and those working with you deserve the thanks and support of all citizens
of our country, for your praiseworthy efforts in endeavouring to stamp out this
‘ blot ’ upon our fair band Australia.”
Mr. J. Hinclie, M..L A. : “ Permit me to congratulate you on your holding fast
to the anti-opium cause for the past ten years—l am strongly opposed to the opium
traffic, ami wish your meeting very great success.”
Mr, 35. Lonsdale, M.L.A. : “ My sympathies are entirely with the object of the
meeting, and any support that I can give to any means that may be taken for the
suppression of the opium traffic will be freely given.”
Mr, T. 11. ITassail, M.L.A. : “ The object you have in view and with which
your name has been identified for so many years—has my hearty sympathy and.
approval and, I sincerely trust your efforts to minimise the great moral degradation
caused by the opium traffic may secure the success they so richly deserve.”
Mr. T. Rose, M.L.A. ; “ I hope that your consistent and energetic endeavours
to suppress tliis vice will, at no distant date, be crowned with success.”
Mr. J. L, Fagan, M.L.A. : “I shall be only too pleased to do what I can to assist
you in the movement, as I am sure it must recommend-itself to all lovers of
humanity, and more especially to those who have seen, so many lives wrecked
though its shocking influences.”
Mr. Geo. Black, M.L.A. : “Let mo assure you of my hearty sympathy, of which
I trust to be able to give you practical proof some day. Nowhere is the evil more
rampant than in the constituency of West Sydney.”
Mr, F. Darnell: “My services can he counted on in co-operating with any
movement for regulating the traffic. You arc entitled to the thanks of the
community for your action in trying to eradicate what is causing great injury in
our midst.”


Letters wore also received expressing sympathy from Messrs, J. H, Carrnthers,.
-A. Campbell, C. Collins, A. Chapman, 0. J. Danahey, K. Stevenson, T, Walker,
A. bidden, and J. Eve, M’s.L.A,
Major-General Hatton. A.D.C. to the Queen, and Commandant oi! the N. S. W.
Forces, wrote : u I regret that other engagements will prevent my being present at
the meeting on the sth instant to protest against the opium traffic in tins and the
neighbouring colonies. 1 need hardly add'that you have my hearty sympathy in
your efforts to oppose a traffic which Ims produced, and is producing, so ranch
degradation wherever it is practiced.”
Mr. E. Fosbery, Inspector-General of Police, says: “I cordially wish the-
movement every success.”
Mr. J. W. Edwards writes to
against the traffic and your commendable efforts to stay the great evils arising-
therefrom, it may strengthen your hands perhaps in some way to hear of the great
misery the use of opium is causing amongst a race we have not treated ton well,
viy.., the Aborigines of this Colony, anti especially Queensland. Under the
u Destruction of Marsupials Act,” in the latter colony more particularly —white men
employed in. this work used to engage large numbers of blacks to hunt anti entrap
the creatures whoso destruction was aimed at by the Act quoted, and In payment
for their services opium was tendered and greedily accepted by the natives, The
consequence of this is—the blacks, male and female are now utterly degenerated
and worthless—stockmen, boundary-riders, and others (natives) that used to be
smart useful hands, are now not worth their suit, and as for the women (gins),
and oven the children, they are debased and degraded to the lowest degree.
Something- ought to be done to restrict the importation and use of opium amongst
these poor creatures. Grog Was bad enough, hut now they will do rmytMiuj for
opium I have seen and heard of dreadful scenes amongst the blacks and their
women, assisted and -abetted by the lowest type oi! white bush ruffians of our own
and other races. Wishing you every success."
His Honor Judge Murray writes : You may take my assurance of my fullest
sympathy with the object which you have at heart. If —and I take it there is no
doubt of this—the Chinese as a nation, arc opposed to the use of opium, an,
injurious and demoralising drug, this should be sufficient reason for us, as a nation,
to do our best in aiding them ; if we find that the evil habit is spreading among
Europeans, there is still further reason for our co-operation ; but if it is really a
fact—and I am afraid it is so—that the British nation, disgraced its flag by attempt-
ing to compel, by force of arms, for motives of gain, the Chinese race to accept a.
poison tending to its own ruin, then still more binding is the duty cast upon us, ns
tbatons, to undo the evil we have done,"
His Honor Judge Forbes says ; “ I wish the object you have in view every
success. I visit when on circuit the townships of Wagga. Albury, Doniliquiu, Hay,
and Nammdera, and I have visited the Chinese oampa at these places, and I ara
quite sure from what I have seen that opium-smoking has aa great a demoralising
effect upon the Chinese as drunkenness Ims upon Europeans.”
The Trades and Labour Council of New South Wales, through its Secretary,
says: “I am instructed to convey to you the Council's deepest sympathy with the
object for which the meeting is being convened, and to inform you that it sincerely
regrets its next meeting will fall on the date mentioned, thus precluding its
members from attendance at public meeting. Trusting your cAorta will be
rewarded with deserving success."
Mr. F. W, Webb, C.M.G., says : “ The movement to suppress the traffic in opium-
in this colony has my entire sympathy, and will have whatever support 1 can
give. I send this short intimation to support you in your most praiseworthy effort
to benefit your fellow-countrymen in this part of the world.”
Mr. E. Wilkins, M.L.A, (Victoria), telegraphed : “ Deeply regret cannot attend
meeting to-night. Movement my entire sympathy. Trusting your noble example-
will bo followed in the colony I have the honor to represent (Victoria).”
The Grand Chief Templar, X.0.G.T., writes : “My sympathies are altogether
with yon in the work you have in hand, and trust the time will soon come when


our legislators, in their wisdom, will make laws to prohibit the importation and
: «ale of opium, except as a medicine.”
Letters were also received from Miss Scott. Messrs. 11. A. Arnold and R.
Seymour.
Among the letters from Ministers of Religion anc,l religious bodies may he
mentioned:—
The Primate. Bishop Smith : “ I regret that absence from Sydney will prevent
me from complying with your request that I should open the meeting which it is
proposed to hold on April o, for the purpose of enlisting the interest of tho public
in the serious question of the mischief which is being produced in this colony by
the opium traffic. I cordially sympathise with the object which you have in view,
and trust that yon may have an influential and successful meeting.*’
The Dean of Sydney : “ I beg to assure you of my hearty sympathy with the
movement, and with the object of the meeting 3 and I wish yon the fullest success.
I am aware that not only your countrymen, but also Europeans, are, to a
considerable extent, victims to the use of opium, anil, that in an increasing degree.
Wc have a great responsibility in this matter, and every lawful step should bo
taken to root out the terrible use of so destructive an agent of all that is good and
virtuous In the lives of our fellow-creatures as opium.”
The Rev. George MaoTnnes, Moderator of the Presbyterian Assembly; “ I may
be allowed to convey to you the opinion of a distinguished medical man in Sydney
to whom I put the question—‘ Is the habitual use of opium injurious V His reply
was that opium was very useful as an anodyne ; that in malarial countries it might
be useful ns a prophylactic, but that in New South Wales the habitual use ni: the
drug was a vice, and the effects were deleterious both physically and morally. To
that opinion I'fed bound to subscribe, and I therefore am heartily with you in
your anti-opium crusade.”
Australasian Wesleyan Methodist Church, New South Wales Conference : “ I
am instructed to express the hearty sympathy of its members with your uoble
efforts to suppress a traffic so wholly auti-christiau and demoralising as the opium
traffic.”
Presbyterian Olinrch of Now South Wales, Committee on Religion and Morals:
“ The Committee having had their attention directed to the meeting to be held this
evening on the opium, question desire to express their deep sympathy with the present
anti-opium movement, and wish its promoters every success in their endeavours to
suppress what they cannot but regard as a giant evil.”
The Rev. Rabbi Davis : “I am entirely with yon in your laudable desire to
restrict, by means of legislation, the promiscuous .sale of opium. It appears to me
that the habit of resorting to this obnoxious drug is first contracted, in order to
allay the feeling of extreme lowness of spirits and physical depression induced in
those who once have recourse to the narcotic. I shall be glad to learn that the
meeting has been well attended, and that there are hopes of your efforts on behalf of
the victims from this fatal drug among your race becoming ultimately successful”
Canon Moreton : " 1 consider that wc, as a British community, owe you a deep
debt of gratitude for your efforts to. remove the evil which we forced upon your
countrymen. I have seen something of the vile traffic in China, and the deadly
effects of opium. 011 your countrymen.”
The Rev, W. A Charlton : “ Let me assure you of my warmest sympathy with
the movement. I trust the result of to-night’s meeting will be a good step towards
the consummation of the cause you have, so zealously and for so long a time,
pleaded. As Hon. Sea to the Church of England Chinese Mission, ray Committee
feel that your earnest protestations against the opium curse have greatly helped
the cause of our Missionary Rev. G, Soo Hoo Ten. Whatever may be in our power
to do, you may be assured will be done to help you in your good work.”
The Rev. E. Youugman (Maryborough, Queensland) : '“Had it been possible
I should have been glad to make one more at the meeting, and hold up both hands
In favour of the prohibition of opium. Having lived in China, as you know, and
had the best opportunities of seeing the awful effects of opium-smoking in that
country, I feel ashamed that ever an English people had anything to do with the
introduction of opium into your country, and especially by physical force. If ever


England did a grevious wrong it was when she forced the opium trade upon an
unwilling people. However, the mischief having been done, our next step is to
make a vigorous effort to lessen its severity as much as possible. I hope the day - '
will soon come when not a pound of the vile drug will be exported to China by
Englishmen. lu these colonies the matter of the opium traffic is in our own. hands.
When engaged in mission work amongst the Chinese in Victoria I strongly-
advocated the policy you hold, and are so worthily pressing. Our colonial
Governments ought to take a firm stand and prohibit the importation of opium, in
the interests both of Chinese and Europeans. I hope your meeting will be a great
success, and that much good will come out of it.”
The Rev. J. G. Soutliby : “ I am fully in sympathy, for when resident several
years in India the opium evil became very painful to witness as an unmitigated
evil. May the Lord mightily bless every* such good effort for the well-being of
society.”
Archdeacon GUnther : 44 He has full sympathy with the movement, and hopes
that Mr, Quong Tart’s efforts may be successful.”
Communications were also received, couched in the warmest terms of
sympathy, from the Revs. R. Noake, 11. Wallace Moil, John W. Gillett, Mervyn
Archdall’, T. B. Tress, W. Martin, and Thos. Parr.
Letters of sympathy were also received from Messrs. Dillon, Burrows and
Company (manufacturing confectioners), Mr. John W. Eaton (timber merchant)
Messrs Pearce Brothers (florists), and Messrs. Potts and Paul (ship chandlers).
Borough of North Sydney : “ I am directed to inform you that the Mayor
feyrnpathiaea with the movement and will be glad to attend the meeting and render
any .support in his power.”
Balmain Municipal Council: " This Council's sympathies are with the work of
opposition to the noxious traffic of opium.
Randwiok Borough Council; 41 The movement has the entire sympathy of this
Council, and the earnest desire that it will he successful.”
Bt. Peters Municipality : 14 The Council, of which I have the honor of being
Mayor, and myself are in deep and sincere sympathy with the movement. I beg
that you will give it to be understood how earnestly ray feelings are with you, and
that any assistance I can render in furthering your principles will be with much
pleasure,"
Borough of Waverloy : “ At a meeting held yesterday it was resolved that the
Council Olerk be instructed to write to Mr. Quong Tart assuring him of the
sympathy of the Mayor and Aldermen of Waverley In the movement with which
his name has been, so prominently identified.”
Borough of Newtown: "This Council deeply sympathises with you In your
efforts for reform, and trusts that they will shortly be crowned with success.”
Borough of Oamperdown : " The members of this Council are in sympathy with
the .movement.”
Borough of Eraldncville: “I am directed to convey to you the Council's,
warmest sympathy with the movement for the suppression, of this objectionable
traffic.”
Borough of Botany : "My Council fully recognises the importance of the
object, and arc prepared to support it.”
Borough,of Hunter’s Hill: " This Council desires me to state that it la in full
sympathy with your views in the matter,”
Mayor of Rockdale : " I wish to say that personally (and I feel sure I apeak
for the other members of the Council aa well) I am in full sympathy with the
object of the meeting, and I sincerely trust that your noble efforts for the abolition
of the opium traffic, for which you deserve the support of the entire community,
will, at no distant date, be fully rewarded. I hope you will have n successful and
enthusiastic meeting, and that steps may be determined upon, which will ultimately
achieve the desired object."
Borough of Burwood ; "This Council at its last meeting unanimously resolved
to convey to you, per letter, an expression of the Council’s entire sympathy with
the movement you have initiated, and which the Council trust you will carry to a
successful issue.”


Ashfield Borough Council: “At the last meeting of this Council it was resolved
•unanimously that a letter he forwarded to you expressing the entire sympathy of
his Worship the Mayor and Aldermen, in this movement, and they earnestly trust
that some practicable steps may be taken to remove the evils resulting from this
•objectionable trade. 1 '
Bedferu Municipal Council: “ The members of this Council arc in sympathy,
with the movement.”
Mayor of Port Macquarie : “ I beg to assure you of my fullest personal
sympathy with the noble movement.”
Borough Council of Queanbeyan : '* I am directed to say that this Council
sympathises with you, and sincerely trusts your efforts will meet with every
success.”
Municipality of Campbelltown : “My Council expresses its hearty sympathy
with the movement, and will most willingly do all in its power to assist you in your
laudable efforts to mitigate this most objectionable traffic by which so many of
your countrymen are morally and socially ruined.”
Grafton Borough Council: “ The Mayor will be in Sydney, and will attend
the meeting.”
Municipal Council of Balranald : “ Whilst deeply sympathising with the
object of the meeting, the Council is not in a position to appoint a delegate to
attend, Trusting the meeting will be a success, and result in the suppression of
■the opium traffic. 11
Municipal District of Tumut: “My Council desires to express their warm
approval of the action taken by the citizens of Sydney by endeavouring to take
measures to suppress the evils arising from the abuse of opium.”
Municipal Council of Ballina i “ This Council begs to express its sympathies
with you in the movement you have undertaken, and trust that your energies will
be rewarded by bringing the matter to a successful issue.”
Ooomunble Council : “ Accept my Ommoil’s hearty co-operation and sympathy
with laudable object of meeting to night.”
Borough Council, NewLambton : “The movement has our heartiest sympathy,
as we fully believe the degrading traffic la one of many which is steeping in misery
u large number of both Chinese and Europeans in this colony. You can rest
assured that your valuable services are highly appreciated in this labour of. love for
the alleviation of your fellow-beings, irrespective of creed and colour, and wc have
no doubt you will ’be accorded hearty support from every part of the Colony, which
is only due to yourself and the committee.”
Merewcther Council: “ You have the fullest sympathy of the Connell iu your
noble and praiseworthy efforts to suppress the deplorable opium traffic. Our
Mayor trusts the meeting will be a popular one and that your Committee may meet
with every success iu their good work,”
Uralla Council: “I am instructed to state that the Mayor and Alderman have
some knowledge of the evils, morally and physically caused by the traffic in opium,
and are strongly of opinion that it is the duty of any Government, under a
constitution such as exists in these Colonies, to prevent by Legislative enactment —
so far as such can be prevented—any traffic or customs which may bo an injury to
the people morally or physically, or retard the progress of the country. Believing
us the Mayor and' Aldermen do, that the traffic in opium is wrong and its use
destructive to man and degrading to the country, they most cordially sympathise
in any effort to remove the baneful thing entirely from the land and people.”
Bourke Municipal Council: “This Council fully sympathises with the action
you are taking in your opposition to the opium traffic in these colonies.”
Borough of Young : “ This Council earnestly sympathise with and will support
any movement tending to bring about legislation bearing upon this important
matter. 11
Mayor of W arisen d : “ I herewith desire to express my .sympathy iu the
movement, and cordially wish the meeting every success. I consider you are to be
commended for your actions in tho past, and the efforts you arc now putting forth
to try and eradicate a pernicious evil that is fast growing and tending to dissipate
and demoralise the European and Asiatic races."


St. Marya Council; “ Our sympathies arc with the movement, and I hope
you will be able to explain this to those who are fortunate enough to be there, and
trust you will do so in the moat emphatic manner.”
Municipal District of Gundagal: “ His Worship desires me to inform you that
his sympathies are entirely in accord with the movement, and he would very much
like to see your persistant and well-directed efforts crowned with the success they
so richly deserve.”
Mayor of Newcastle : “ You have my strongest sympathy, and I can assure you
of the sympathy of the Council, as expressed at its last meeting. There can be no
doubt of the very baneful effects of the degrading traffic, and I trust that your
efforts in this direction may be crowned with success.”
Town Council of Doniliquin : •' My Council sympathise with you and your
co-workers in, their endeavour to prohibit the traffic in opium."
Borough of East Maitland ; “ The Mayor and Alderman desire me to say that
the movement has their entire sympathy, and wish you every success in your
opposition to this objectionable trade.”
Maclean Municipal Council You have this Council’s sympathy in your
crusade against the opium traffic. They gladly give their support to the movement
having for its object the extinction of the evil ”
Singleton Municipal Council : "I am directed by the Singleton Borough Council
to inform you that this Council heartily join you in your condemnation of same,
and hope that your efforts to suppress the evil may bo crowned with success.”
Ulmarra Municipal Council: “I am directed to inform you that this Council is
in sympathy with the objects of the meeting. I trust that you will receive a large
measure of support from’ the citizens, and that success will result from your efforts
in trying to suppress such an obnoxious trade.”
Municipal District of Walleudbeeu: “ The Council of the above Municipality
desire to convey to you their sympathy and moral support in your efforts for the
suppression, of the opium traffic. They hope your efforts will be successful, as they
deserve to be.”
Municipality of Oudal : “ I have to convey to you the Council’s sympathy with
the movement, and to wish you success therein.”
Gerringong Municipal Council: “ The Council fully approves of your action in
this matter, and desire me to say that the Mayor ami Aldermen arc entirely in
sympathy with you, and hope you will succeed in your laudable efforts.”
Borough oE‘Stockton : “ I feel certain that I voice the sentiment not only of
the Stockton Borough Council, but of all right-thinking men, when I say that any
movement tending to prevent the Indiscriminate importation and abuse ot opium
merits their strenuous support,"
Hamilton Municipal Council : 11 1 have to inform you that the members of
the Council express their heartfelt sympathy with the movement initiated by you.”
OooiiFirable Municipal Council: “I am directed to extend to you the hearty
co-operation and sympathy of my Council in your laudable efforts with respeet to
the suppression of the opium traffic, and their heartiest wishes that your worthy
work may prove successful.”
Municipality of Cornki ; “ I have the honour to inform you that the following
resolution was.passed at last meeting of this Counoil: —‘That the Council Clerk
write to Mr. Quoug Tart to the effect that this Council wishes to express every
sympathy with the movement for which the meeting on April sth lias been
Convened.’ 1 ’
Municipal Council, Gulgong ; "I am directed to state that the Council
sympathises with the object of the meeting, also your endeavours in the matter.”
Municipality of Qulrindi : “I mu directed by my Council to assure you of its
syrupdhy with the object you have in view. Trusting that you were amply
■supported in your views by kindred Corporations, and that the movement may bo
•claimed a success,”
Moruya Municipal Council: '■ This Council deeply apnipatliises iu the move-
ment re the opium traffic, and trusts ere long that the moral degradation will be
wiped out of the Australian Colonies especially the Colony of New South Wales.”
Municipality of Smithficld and Fairfield : “I am instructed by his Warship
the Mayor to inform you that the Municipal Council of Smith-field and Fairfield
has adopted a resolution according their sympathy in the movement."


Municipal District of Wickham; “I am directed to state that this Council
will give hearty co-operation to assist in the movement,”
Municipal District of Bingara : “ I am directed hy the Municipal Council of
Bingara to forward you an expression of their sympathy with you in your
endeavours to stamp out the opium traffic existing in the Australian colonics.”
Municipal District of Emungton and Ilydalmere : My Council desire me to
intimate to you that you have their sympathy with the movement.”
• Borough Council, Nairandem : “ T am instructed by this Council to state that
they consider it is a subject which should be regulated by legislation.”
idiama Municipal Council: “lam to assure you of the sincere sympathy of
the Council with the object of the meeting in opposing the opium traffic, which
has caused such degradation to our civilised people.”
Jamberoo Municipal Council: “ The Council fully approves of your action in
this matter, and desires me to say that the Mayor and Aldermen are entirely in
sympathy with you, and hope you will succeed in your laudable efforts.” .
Greta Municipal Council: “ This Council sympathises with the movement.”
Municipal Council of Carrington : 11 Our sympathies are with you towards the-
suppression of the traffic ”
Burrowa Municipal Council: “ The matter was submitted for consideration at
the last meeting of the Council, when the resolution hereunder was unanimously
carried : That this Council heartily expresses its sympathy with the efforts which
Mr. Quong Tart is making in the suppression of the opium, traffic among the
Chinese and the races in the Australian Colonies.”
Bungog Municipal Council: “ You have the Council’s fullest sympathy in the
movement.”
Borough of West Maitland: “I am, instructed to convey to you the warmest
approval of the Council in your endeavours to bring about so desirable an object.”
Municipal Council of Gkmnedah : ‘‘You have the heartfelt sympathy of the
whole Council, which trusts that, your efforts may meet with the success they
deserve.”
Berry Municipal Council: !i At a meeting of this Council held last evening-
the Mayor and Aldermen were unanimous in instructing me to convey to you their
sympathy aud support in the great undertaking, and express a hope that yon will
he entirely successful in your efforts to suppress the opium trade.”
Borough of Oowra: “The Aldermen of this Council have instructed me to
convey to you their fullest sympathy with the movement.”
Municipal District of Nowra: "At a meeting of this Council held ou XOth
inst., I was-ordered to write and assure yon of the sympathy of this Council in the
movement for the abolition of the opium traffic."
Borough of GouTburn ; “The Council have requested me to express the regret
they feel at not being able to co-operate in the good object aime I at, owing to the
meeting having been held on the sth inst., and at the same time to express-
sympathy with the promoters of the reform in the opium traffic.”
Hill Bad Borough Council; “lam instructed to inform you that this Council,
though unable to be represented at your meeting, heartily endorses the action
taken by you, believing that opium is the cause of much misery.”
Municipal District of Wingham ; “ I beg to inform you that this Council is-
nnanhnously in favor of your movement and wish you every success in the matter.”
Scone Municipal Council; “ I am directed to inform you that this Council
agrees with the whole of your suggestions.”
Municipal District of Moree : “lam directed to inform you that this Council
sympathises with you in your movement.”.
Toraora Municipality r “ I have the honor by direction of this Council to
inform you that at a meeting of the Council, held on Monday, the 9th instant, the
following resolution was unanimously adopted and ordered to be transmitted, viz
< That this Council is of opinion that the efforts of Mr. Quong Tart to suppress the
sale of opium to hie countrymen is deserving of all sympathy and support from
the public generally and all constituted authority and that this resolution be
transmitted to Mr. Quong Tart, with an expression of the wishes of the Council,,
that the prayer of the Petition may be acceded to by the .Government,”


ADDENDA.
The following letters wore received by Mr. Quong Tart, but too late for
classification : " ,
Sir George Dibba, K.C.M.G., Premier and Colonial Secretary of New South
Wales, wrote through his private secretary : “You have Sir George Bibbs’ per-
mission to attudi his name to rho list of those who arc iu accord with the 1 Anti-
Opium 1 movement.”
Sir Henry burkes, G.C.M.Ct., Ex-Premier, wrote : “ Although I have nob been
able to attend any of the meetings which have been held iu Sydney, chiefly owing
to my absence from the colony, my sympathies arc entirely with you in the move-
ment for the suppression of the consumption of opium You have my
permission to use my name in any way that may promote your object.”
Expressions of sympathy were also received from the Mayor of Sydney (Sir
W. P. Manning, M.L.A.), the Hon. W. H. Pigott, the Hon. T. M. Slattery
(Minister of Justice, and Minos, find Agriculture), the Hon. John Kidd (Postmaster-
General), and the following members of the Legislative Assembly : —Mosers. J. H.
Nicholson, A. J. Kelly, W. H. Sharp, J. F. Barnes, J. Newton, J, S. M'Gowen,
J. Cook, E. Darnlcy, J P. Cullen, Joseph Abbott, ami E, W, Moleaworth.
The Molong Municipal Council also sent a letter expressing sympathy with
the movement.
Other letters are expected within, the next few days from members of both
Houses of Parliament, prominent clergymen, and other distinguished gentlemen.
These will be duly published in n subsequent edition of this pamphlet, as the
present issue cannot be delayed.
