

[ 1025 ]
Commotitß raltn of Australia
&mtu
EXTRAORDINARY
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY.
[Registered at the General Post Office, Melbourne, for transmission by post as a newspaper.']
NTo. 31.]
THURSDAY, 12TH MAY
[l9lO
Prime Minister’s Office,
By His Excellency’s Command,
ANDREW FISHER.
Prime Minister’s Office,
ANDREW FISHER.
Prime Minister’s Office,
Melbourne,- 12th May, 1910.
funeral of His late Most Gracious Majesty
morning of Friday, 20th May ; and that it
mourning from the 12th May and until the
By His Excellency’s Command,
ANDREW FISHER.
6432.
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by J. Kemp,
Government Printer for the State of Victoria.
Melbourne, 12th May, 1910.
HIS Excellency the Governor-General directs it to be notified for general information that he has
received the following cablegram from the Right Honorable the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, dated London, 9th May, 1910 :
“In reply to your telegrams of 7th May, I am commanded by His Majesty the King to
convey to you on behalf of himself, Her Majesty Queen Alexandra, and the members of the Royal
Family an expression of their deep gratitude for the sincere and loyal sympathy shown to them in
their bereavement by yourself, your Ministers, and the people of the Commonwealth of Australia.
I am to add an expression of their appreciation of your message of personal sympathy with them
in their great sorrow.”
Melbourne, 12th May, 1910.
HIS Excellency the Governor-General directs it to be notified for general information that, on the
9th instant, he caused to be despatched to the Right Honorable the Secretary of State for the
Colonies a cablegram of which the following is a copy :
“ I have the honour to transmit the following message which I have received from the
Prime Minister, and with which I desire most heartily to associate myself; —
‘ The Prime Minister presents his humble duty to His Excellency the Governor-
General and requests him to transmit to our lawful Sovereign the loyal congratulations
of His Majesty’s Ministers of State for the Commonwealth of Australia on the occasion
of His Majesty’s accession as King George the Fifth. Their earnest prayer and that of
the people of the Commonwealth is that His Majesty’s reign, and that of Her Most
Gracious Majesty the Queen may be happy, long, and memorable in human progress, and
marked by peace among the nations of the world.’ ”
By His Excellency’s Command,
HIS Excellency the Governor-General directs that it be notified for general information, that he
has been informed by the Right Honorable the Secretary of State for the Colonies, that the
King Edward the Seventh will take place on the
is requested that all persons will wear suitable
issue of a further notification.
