

IMPERIAL WAR MUSEUM
OFFICIAL
GUIDE
1922
Published by Authority Crown Copyright Reserved
UNDER REVISION


Information concerning the Library and the Cinematograph
Section may be obtained on application to the Curator’s offices.
The Position of the various rooms, the Curator’s offices, etc.,
may be located by reference to the plan (p. 3 of cover).
The Attendants who are all ex-Service men have instruc-
tions to give all information in their power concerning the
exhibits.
The arrangements of exhibits is subject to revision from
time to time.
Leave to photograph exhibits must be obtained from the
Curator.
The Trustees of the imperial War (Museum do not hold
themselves responsible for any injury or damage caused to
visitors by their handling the exhibits.
The Curator will be glad to receive Additional information
and details of a personal nature, corrections, etc., concerning
any of the exhibits from serving or ex-service officers and men.
All communications should be addressed to—
The Curator and Secretary of the Imperial War Museum,
Crystal Palace, 5.E.19.
Publications :—lllustrated catalogue of the pictures
(price 2s. 6d.).
Detailed Historical Guide (in prepara-
tion).






THE IMPERIAL WAR MUSEUM.
On the sth March, 1917, the War Cabinet approved
of the institution of the National War Museum under
the following governing body :
First Commissioner of Works (Chairman ex officio).
Director-General.
Representative of the Admiralty.
~ ~ War Office,
~ ~ Ministry of Munitions.
Representatives of Literature and Art.
Secretary.
Sub-Committees were immediately formed to deal with
the different aspects of war by sea and on land, and for
the collection of books, posters and art.
Towards the end of 1917, at the request of the
Dominions’ Sub-Committee and under approval of the
War Cabinet, the title was changed to the Imperial War
Museum, and representatives of Air Force and Women’s
Work in the War were added to the Committee.
The terms of reference were wide, and included the
collection of all objects which were considered to be of
material interest and value in connection with the war.
Stores were taken in Pimlico and at Catford for the re-
ception of service exhibits; storage facilities were also
arranged for in France and in several Naval dockyards.
In order to form a liaison with the fighting services an
Inspector of War trophies was attached to G.H.Q. and
an Inspector of Naval trophies was appointed by the
Admiralty.
In 1919 Treasury sanction was given for the hiring of
277,000 square feet of floor space in the Crystal Palace
for a period of four years, and early in 1920 the Museum


staff removed thither. The work of collecting and in-
stalling the exhibits was begun immediately, and in spite
of the fact that over 500 tons of exhibits (many of them
of a highly complicated and technical nature), had to be
moved in many cases through a quarter of a mile of the
Crystal Palace floor space by man-handling alone, the
Museum exhibits were satisfactorily installed by
June 9th, on which date His Majesty the King, accom-
panied by Her Majesty the Queen, declared the Imperial
War Museum open.
On July 2nd, 1920, Royal Assent was given to the
Imperial War Museum Act which established the Board
of Trustees, with His Royal Highness the Prince of
Wales as the first President, consisting of 24 members
appointed by the Treasury, Admiralty, War Office,
Colonial Office, India Office, Board of Education, Air
Ministry, and as ex-officio members the First Commis-
sioner of Works, Director and Principal Librarian of the
British Museum, and High Commissioners of Canada,
Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and Newfound-
land.






OFFICIAL GUIDE
TO THE
IMPERIAL WAR MUSEUM.
NAVY.
SPACE 1. British Naval Ordnance, etc.
Full Size Model of 18-inch Naval Gun (throws projectile of
ii tons).
6-inch Gun from Cruiser Kent (present at the Battle of the
Falkland Islands).
6-inch Gun from Armed Merchant Cruiser Kildonan Castle.
6-inch Gun from Battleship War spite (this gun having- been
damag-ed by collision).
4-inch Gun from Destroyer Lance (which fired the first
round in the Naval operations of the war).
Specimens of Armour Plating damag-ed by shell-fire, mines,
etc., from the following: ships: Broke, Vanguard, Tiger,
Invincible, Princess Irene, Agamemnon, Vindictive,
Terror, River Clyde and others.
BAY 2. Mercantile Marine.
Models of Merchant Ships which took part in the War, as
follows: Alsatian, Orama, Narragansett (old and new).
Clan MacArthur, Goldmouth (in Floating Dock),
Persol, Kaisar-i-Hind, Arcadian, Kinfauns Castle,
Celerol, British Major, Petronel, Leinster —all pre-
sented or lent by their respective Owners or Builders.
Model of typical Mercantile Marine Convoy and Relics of
s.s. Brussels, Carmania, Leinster, Lusitania, etc.
Model illustrating submarine attack on merchant ship.
House Flags and War Records of all Shipping Companies
which participated in the Peace Pageant on the River
Thames, 4th August, iqiq.
SPACE 3. (Central Nave.)
5’5-inch Gun (from British Cruiser Chester ) which was
served by Boy Jack Cornwell, who gained the V.C. for
his heroism at the Battle of Jutland.
SPACE 3a. (Central Nave.)
4’i-inch Gun from German Cruiser Konigsberg, mounted on
locally-made field carriage, captured by British Naval
Forces at Bagamoyo, 15th August, iqi6. (Konigsberg
was destroyed in July, 1915.)
Two i-pdr. Guns captured from Turkish Motor Launches at
Nasiriyah (Euphrates River) on 24th July, 1915.


Turkish Mortar taken when Hodeida was captured, Decem-
ber, 1918.
5-c.m. Gun captured from German Armed Vessel Nachiigal
by British Gunboat Dwarf, Cameroons, 16th September,
1914.
Sub-Calibre Gun from German Cruiser Emden (destroyed
9th November, 1914).
Turkish Brass Gun taken at occupation of Runfidah, Bth
July, 1916.
German 37 c.m. “ Revolver-Kanon ” captured at Baga-
moyo, 15th August, 1916.
German 3-pdr. Gun captured in the Cameroons.
German 3-5-o.m. Gun removed from Zeebrugge Mole.
SPACE 3b. (Central Nave.)
Coastal Motor Boat No. 4 which, under the Command of
Lieut. Agar, V.C., torpedoed and sank the Bolshevist
Cruiser Oleg in the Gulf of Finland on 17th June, 1919.
Model of another type of Coastal Motor Boat presented
by the Builders, Messrs. J. I. Thornycroft & Co., Ltd.
Boat from Motor Launch 276 and other relics of ships which
took part in the operations at Zeebrugge.
SPACE 3c. • (Central Nave.)
British and Captured Torpedoes, various types (including
tubes).
Turkish Field-Gun put out of action by the British Sloop
Odin at Fao, Mesopotamia, on 6th November, 1914.
Two 80-m.m. Guns (Austrian) 1 captured in Galicia, 1916,
used subsequently for arming British Merchant Ships.
German 150-m.m. Gun from Submarine U. 24.
Zeebrugge Raid relics.
Cases containing Wireless Instruments, Torpedo Mechanism,
Sextants, Compasses and other technical Instruments.
(Space 3d. — See Air Force.)
BAY 4.
British Naval Howitzers and Bomb Throwers of various
calibres.
Badges of Naval Ranks and Ratings (table and wall cases).
Cameroons, case containing relics from.
ROOM 5.
Models of H.M. Ships, comprising the following Battleships:
Canada, Agamemnon, Hercules, Russell, Swiftsure,
Commonwealth; Cruisers : Furious, Good Hope, Dia-
dem, Berwick; Light Cruisers : Doris, Falmouth,
Sentinel, Champion, Dauntless, Galatea; Flotilla
Leaders : Scott, Shakespeare, Swift; Floating Dock at
Portsmouth; Aircraft Carrier: Argus.


Fragment of Boat from Hampshire (the cruiser which was
lost when conveying- F.M. Lord Kitchener on his journey
to Russia, sth June, 1916).
Locker which belonged to H.M.S. Good Hoi>e (sunk in
action near Coronel, November, 1914).
Ensign flown by H.M.S. Chester at the Battle of Jutland.
Ensign flown by H.M.S. Invincible at the Battle of the
Falkland Islands.
Commancler-in-Chief’s Flag worn by H.M.S. Iron Duke at
the Battle of Jutland. Lent by Lord Jellicoe.
Charts showing world-wide operations of the Navy.
Guns, Mortars, etc., from H.M.S. Vindictive.
The other guns in this room are the following:
4-inch Q.F. from H.M.S. Scvpfhire (present at the
Dardanelles operations).
4-inch Q.F. mounting from H.M.S. Laurel (present at
Jutland and other operations).
French 90-m.m. (type purchased from French Govern-
ment for use in British Merchant Ships).
Russian 3-pdr, (type of gun mounted in Trawlers and
Drifters).
Jutland and Falkland Island Photographs, and others
(German official) illustrating damage sustained by
German ships.
Half-block Models of Warships; Dreadnought Colossu s,
Orion } King George V., Queen Elizabeth, Weymouth,
Melbourne, Arethusa, InvincibleLion } Tiger.
Ships’ Bells from various British ships.
BAY 6.
Captured Trophies.
Brass Mortar (Turkish) captured at Sedd-el-Bahr, Dardan-
elles, 1915.
3-5-inch Gun from German surrendered Cruiser Niirnberg.
Two 50-m.m. Guns from German Trawlers which were sunk
at Ostend to avoid capture by the enemy.
Searchlight and Binnacle Compass from surrendered German
Cruiser Niirnberg.
Model of Schooner made by interned German sailors.
Ensign from German Battleship Baden (scuttled after in-
ternment).
8-c.m. Gun (Austrian).
ios-c.m. Gun from German Submarine UB 98.
BAY 7.
Types of Paravanes; and Guns of the following calibres:
6-pdr. Q.F., 13-pdr, Q.F., 10-pdr. Q.F. (Russian),
4-7 inch Q.F., 12-pdr. Q.F. (Marks I. and II.),
12-pdr. Q.F. (Japanese), 4-inch.
Anti-M ine Bow Defence Gear (model in case).


ROOM 8.
Pictures of Naval subjects.
Models of British Monitor: Marshal Soult; Destroyers.
Mastiff, Wishartj Radstock, Warwick, Goshawk I eazer;
“Q ” Ships- Hyderabad , Convolvulus; and smaller
craft as follows : Kildary, “P ” Boat, Tigris Gunboat
Mantis, Myrtle, Ormonde, Belvoir, Ascot,
Richard Briscoll, William Leech and Daniel Henley, all
presented or lent by their respective Builders.
BAY 9.
Searchlights, Net-Defence Gear, Depth Charges and
Throwers, Smoke Producing Apparatus, etc.
Dazzle-Painted Model Ships (in case).
Hydrophone Gear, model of Hurdle Defence Frames for pro-
tection of harbours, etc. (in case).
ROOM 11.
British and Enemy Submarine Trophies and relics.
Periscope (damaged by Turkish shell) from British Sub-
marine En. (Lent by Captain Nasmith, V.C.)
Periscope salved from German Submarine U 48 (destroyed
by British Naval Forces, 24th November, 1917).
Models of E, K and M Classes of submarines (presented
by Messrs. Vickers, Ltd.).
Sectioned Model of British Submarine E 29 (specially con-
structed for the Museum by Messrs. Sir W. G.
Armstrong-Whitworth & Co., Ltd.).
(Bays 12, 13— See Air Force.)
ROOM 14. Naval Medical.
Model of R.N. Ambulance Car as presented by various Indian
States to the Royal Navy.
Model of Hospital Ship China (presented by the Peninsular
and Oriental Steam Navigation Co.).
Model of Hospital Ship Soudan discharging patients to a
Naval Ambulance Train alongside quay.
Specimens of Cots, Stretchers, Bandages, Medical and
Surgical Instruments, Anti-Gas and Anti-Flash Appara-
tus, Medical Stores, etc.
German Appliances, etc., obtained principally from sur-
rendered ships and submarines.
Badges of Ranks and Ratings of Medical Personnel.
Toys made by patients in hospital.
Life-Saving Jackets, etc. (British and German).
Photographs and Roll of Honour of Naval Medical Personnel
who lost their lives during the War.
(15, 16, 17. — See Air Force; A—H.— See Army.)


BAYS J, K, and L.
Paintings and Drawings of Naval subjects.
BAY M.
Mines, British and German, and Mine Gear.
(Bay N. — See Air Force.)
BAY 0.
Collapsible Boat from which Roger Casement and his con-
federates landed in Ireland. (Presented by H.M. The
King.)
Model of German Cruiser Konigsberg , showing (a) water-
tight compartments, and (b) engines and boilers.
Torpedo-Canoe captured at the taking of Ukereme Island
(Lake Victoria Nyanza). .
Canoe used by H.M.S. Chatham for locating the German
Cruiser Konigsberg in the Rufigi River, East Africa,
July, 1915.
BAY P.
Models of British Battle Cruiser Tiger and Aircraft Carrier
Campania.
Sectioned Instructional Model of German Battleship Baden.
Pictures of Naval subjects and portraits.
BAY Q.
Table on which the Armistice with Turkey -was signed aboard
H.M.S. Agamemnon at Mudros, 30th October, 1918.
Models of Ostend and Zeebrugge showing the blockships in
position.
Portraits of Naval V.C.’s.
BAY R.
List of H.M. Ships, from Battleships to Coastal Motor Boats,
and Armed Merchant Cruisers to Trawlers and Drifters,
which were employed by the Admiralty during the war.
Chart representing the dispositions of British and enemy
ships at the Surrender of the Germany Navy on 21st
November, 1918.
Ensign of the German Battleship Baden and signal made
by Sir David Beatty after the surrender of the German
Fleet.
Cases containing specimens of Ships’ Badges.


AIR FORCE.
SPACE 3d. Aeroplanes.
“ Short ” Seaplane (British), flown in the Battle of Jutland.
“ Sopwith ” Camel Scout (British), which destroyed a
Zeppelin in daylight over the North Sea.
“ Sopwith ” Triplane (British) ; fighting Scout produced in
I 9 I 7-
“ R.E. 8” Biplane (British); two-seater reconnaissance
machine produced in 1916.
“ Bristol Fighter ” (British) ; two-seater biplane produced in
1917, possessing remarkable speed and fighting quali-
ties ; much used up to Armistice.
“ B.E. 2c ” (British) ; two-seater machine produced in 1915 ,
much used throughout the War.
“ Friedrichshafen ” (German) ; twin-engined bomber used on
night raids.
“ L.V.G.” (German); two-seater reconnaissance machine;
used throughout the War.
“ Fokker ” Biplane (German) ; successor to the Fokker
monoplane; single-seater fighting Scout.
“ Roland ” (German) ; single-seater Scout; used towards the
end of the War,
Engines: specimens of French, Italian and Spanish engines
used by the Royal Air Force in various types of machines.
Specimens of the chief types of British engines used during
the War in aeroplanes, seaplanes and airships.
Specimens of the chief types of German engines used during
the War in aeroplanes, seaplanes and airships.
Aircraft Relics; including portion of German all-metal
armoured “Junker” biplane; portions of German all-
wood, giant bomber.
Aerial Bombs; specimens of the largest British bombs used.
Non-Recoil guns.
Relics of distinguished Flying Officers, etc.
BAYS 12 and 13. Models.
Models of various types of aircraft, British and German ;
kite balloons; motor vehicles, seaplane tender, etc.
Pictures showing various phases of aerial warfare painted
by artists who served with the Royal Air Force.
ROOM 14. (See Navy.)
BAY 15. Anti-Aircraft.
Anti-Aircraft Guns, on sea and land mountings (see also
Space 32) ; spotting tables ; charts, etc. ; model of anti-
8
AIR FORCE.






aircraft lorry; model of Hyde Park Corner Searchlight
Station; German parachute.
Fragments of Zeppelin “ L 85 ” brought down by British
Naval Forces at Salonika.
BAY 16. Airships.
Cars of various types of airships; models, fittings, engines,
relics, etc., of British and German airships.
“ Guardian Angel ” (British) Parachute.
ROOM 17.
Guns; types of machine guns, British and German on various
mountings; devices for firing through propeller; large
calibre airship guns.
Bombs; types of aerial bombs of all sizes; specimens of
German bombs dropped in England; bomb sights.
Aerial Photography; cameras and accessories of all kinds
used in aerial photography.
Aerial Instruments; compasses; height and speed recorders;
navigation lighting system and other instruments used
in aerial navigation during the War.
Wireless Telegraphy and Telephony; instruments produced
at different dates showing development.
Medical Exhibits; first-aid cases for aircraft; instruments
used in the medical examination of candidates for com-
missions in the Royal Air Force.
BAY N.
Aerial Clothing; electrically heated flying clothing, British
and German, and specimens of uniforms.
Air Intelligence; documents, maps, etc., illustrating British
and German Intelligence methods.
Meteorological Exhibits; instruments used in recording the
weather conditions in connection with aerial warfare.
ROOM 23. Women’s Work; General.
Memorial Shrine to the women who lost their lives during
the War.
Busts and Portraits of distinguished women.
Models and Statuettes representing :—Woman leading a
blinded soldier from St. Dunstan’s Hostel; Bandage
making at Central Surgical Depot, Queen Mary’s
Needlework Guild; Papier mache splint making, Mul-
berry Walk; Y.M.C.A. recreation hut; Taking a radio-
graph; X-Ray ambulance on the Italian Front; Sol-
diers’ and Sailors’ free buffet at Victoria Station;
Women working on T.N.T. at Woolwich Arsenal; Land
Army girls ploughing; Women working in a leather
9
AIR FORCE AND WOMEN’S SECTION.


tannery; Women lacing up an airship envelope at the
White City; Sergeant-Major Flora Sandes in the Ser-
bian trenches ; Doctor Elsie Inglis operating in a hospi-
tal tent in Serbia; Girls packing fruit for Covent Garden
Market; Taking a plaster cast for splint making; Mem-
ber of the Military Massage Corps at work; Packing
parcels for prisoners of war; Lena Ashwell concert
parties at the Front; Timber felling (Women’s Forestry
Corps) ; Hay baling (Women’s Forage Corps) ; Stacking
tank chains (Central Stores Department, Ministry of
Munitions) ; Women at Hayes filling factory; Police-
women inspecting munition workers in a filling factory;
Initial canteen effort at Woolwich Arsenal; Women’s
Royal Naval Service cleaning and testing depth charge
pistols in stern of a destroyer; Creche for Belgian
refugees (Earl’s Court).
Industrial Substitution: Articles produced wholly or in part by
female labour, indicative of the replacement of male
labour in the trades concerned. Series of Charts showing
the growth of women’s employment.
Uniforms and Badges worn by the Voluntary Women’s Corps, the
official Women’s Services, canteen workers and indus-
trial workers.
Pictures, Sketches, Photographs and exhibits of all types of
women’s work.
ROOM 24. W'omen’s Work; Munitions.
Munitions:
Collection of parts of guns, shells, aeroplanes, motors, etc.,
produced by women workers, illustrating the technical
proficiency attained by them during the War.
SPACE 25.
Trophies ; captured guns, howitzers, trench mortars and
machine guns; white flags used at the surrenders of
Jerusalem and Dar-es-Salaam; captured flags; large
signboard left by the Germans in Peronne in February,
1917.
Belgian Light Howitzer recaptured from the Germans
by the 77th Bn. Canadian Infantry.
Mountain Guns (German) captured in German South-West
Africa by the Imperial Forces of the Union of South
Africa.
Gas and Anti-Gas, chemical warfare.
SPACE 26. Artillery.
13-Pounder Quick Firing Gun. This piece, fought by “E ”
Battery, R.H.A., 1914 to 1918, fired the first British
round of the War on land, at Binche, on 22nd August,
19M.
10
WOMEN’S SECTION AND ARMY.


13-Pounder Quick Firing Gun and Limber. Ihis piece was
fought by “ L ” Battery, R.H.A., and at Nery, on the
ist September, 1914, fought successfully against twelve
German guns for about two hours, the other guns of
the Battery being silenced in the first ten minutes’
fighting. Three Victoria Crosses were awarded in
respect of this action.
9-2 inch Howitzer Mark I. This piece was known as
“ Mother ” and, the first of its type used by the British
Army, was in action in France in 1914-15 and again in
1918.
German Field Gun captured by the New Zealand Division.
BAY 28. Artillery and Munitions.
German Artillery Range-Finders: Artillery boards from
batteries near Ostend.
Optical Instruments, for use with artillery.
18-Pounder Field Gun, Mark IV., on Mark 111. Carriage;
in action in France from September to November, 1918.
Latest and best type of field gun.
18-Pounder Q.F. Field Gun, Mark II.; in action in
France from September, 1916. to November, I 9 1?. an< f
March, 1918, till Armistice.
15-Pounder Field Gun, 8.L.C., Mark IV.; took part in the
Battles of Ypres, Loos, La Bassee, etc., March-Novem-
ber, 1915. The field gun of the Territorial Armies.
Wheel ; 2nd Class C. No. 49. Mark I. Original experimental
specimen of type adopted throughout Service.
Models of 12-inch Howitzer Mark V., on railway mounting,
and of 18-pounder Gun Pits.
Photographs; aerial and panoramic.
Sound Ranging and Flash Spotting; apparatus, record
strips, plotting boards, etc.
Munitions: Fixed ammunitions, cartridges, shells, fuzes,
etc. ; for guns, howitzers and trench mortars, sectioned
and "whole. Small Arms ammunition.
Artillery Boards as supplied by field survey battalions for
use of batteries.
Collection of shell baskets, rammers, trophies of captured
Arms.
Photographic Enlargements of various types of guns and
howitzers in action ; series of photographs illustrating
artillery work.
SPACE 29. Artillery.
Caskets of Addresses, Swords of Honour and other presen-
tations made to Field Marshal Lord Haig.
8-inch Howitzer Mark VII. ; was in action in France from
March, 1918, to Armistice.
11
ARMY.


60-Pounder Gun Mark I.; served in Mesopotamia from
March, 1916, to November, 1918.
6-inch, 26 cwt. Howitzer Mark I.; was in action in France
from October, 1916, to the Armistice.
6-inch, 30 cwt. Howitzer; served in France from June, 1915,
to February, 1916.
2’75-inch Mountain Gun Mark I. ; was on service from May
to October, 1919.
3’7-inch Mountain Howitzer Mark I.; was in action in North
Russia, December, 1918-September, 1919.
5- Field Howitzer (Territorial Artillery) replaced during
the war by the 4’5-inch howitzer.
15-Pounder Quick Firing Gun; served in Egypt. This type,
made in Germany during the South African War, proved
unsatisfactory.
6- Gun Mark XIX. ; in action in France and Belgium.
4’5-inch Field Howitzer Mark I. ; this piece, known as the
“ Lone Howitzer ” was in action in France from Septem-
ber 1914 to August 1917, and in April 1916, was
captured by the Germans and recaptured a few hours
later.
BAY 30. Trench Mortars.
Trench Mortars: British and German, heavy, medium and
light; original experimental Stokes mortar; catapults
and spring-guns ; German wooden “ minnenwerfer ” ;
grenatenwerfer, Turkish bomb thrower, etc.
On the walls: Trophies of captured arms, etc., and photo-
graphs of howitzers and trench mortars in action.
Machine Guns. Specimens of practically all types of
machine guns and automatic rifles used in the War of
1914-18. Infantry range finders. Model of machine
guns in action.
BAY 31. War of Trenches.
Model of Breastwork Trenches near Festubert, 1916.
Models of Front and Support Line Trenches, 1918, Regi-
mental Aid Post, etc.
British Grenades used during the war; specimens of French
and German grenades.
Stands for rifle battery, fixed and grenade rifles, Temple
bomb-gun.
Machine Guns on trench mountings.
Periscopes, sniperscopes, etc.
Helmets, specimens of all types; armour and shields of
various nationalities.
Clubs, Daggers, etc. ; wire cutters, specimens of wire,
illuminating pistols.
ARMY.






Devices of various kinds connected with the warfare of
trenches.
On the walls: Trench Sign-Boards, entrenching tools; photo-
graphs illustrating trench warfare.
SPACE 32.
Models of the City of Ypres in 1918, Vimy Ridge;-and the
southern end of the Gallipoli Peninsula.
German anti-aircraft gun on lorry; 210 m.m. howitzer;
German, Austrian and Turkish field and mountain guns
and howitzers ; anti-tank gun.
BAY 33. War of Movement.
Model of Austin armoured car.
Clyno Motor Machine Gun outfit, Army bicycle.
Vickers, Lewis and Hotchkiss guns on pack saddles; pack
saddlery; cavalry saddle and equipment.
Model showing the units engaged and the advances made at
the Battle of Messines, 7th July, 1917.
On the walls: Bronze Wreath and Flag from the tomb of
Saladin.
Road Signs from Palestine.
Photographs illustrating war of movement.
Rifles; British, French, Belgian, Italian, American,
Japanese, Russian, German, Austrian and Turkish.
Telescopic sights.
BAY 34. Engineering.
Workshop Lorry; served in France from July, 1915, to
December, 1918, in Germany till August, 1918.
Large Map of the Western Theatre of War, 1914-18.
Map Production; specimens of maps, etc.
Camouflage, models illustrating methods; camouflage tree
observation post, etc.
Models of railway, pontoon and floating bridges.
SPACE 35.
German, Turkish and Austrian Guns and Howitzers.
German Periscopic Artillery Directors.
BAY 36. Transport, Supply, Camps, etc.
Model of a Motor Omnibus as altered for war service in the
War of 1914-18.
Models of motor lorry, travelling kitchen and water cart.
Models of Nissen hut and tents.


Models of Barges, etc., used on the waterways of France by
the British Forces.
Models of Dog and Reindeer Sledges as used by British
Forces in Russia.
Model of 20-ton Railway Waggon as made in the British
workshops in France.
On the walls : Drawing of the Army, Corps, Divisional and
other Badges used on Motor Transport. Photographs
illustrating transport work.
BAYS 37 and 38. Signals.
Electrical Apparatus; wireless, telegraph, Fullerphone and
telephone.
Switchboards ; exchanges, test panels, etc.
Visual Apparatus; lamps, heliographs, shutters, flags, etc.
Model of cable cart.
Pigeon baskets and model of pigeon loft.
ROOMS 39 and 40.
Pictures and other works of Art.
SPACES 41 and 42.
Army Medical Exhibits, instruments, stretchers, surgical
requisites, models, facial surgery cast and photographs,
models, etc. (Note; This collection is at present under
re-arrangement.)
Posters; a few specimens of War Posters of various nationali-
ties are on exhibition. The remainder of the large
collection are filed for reference and may be examined
on application at the Curator’s offices:
BAY A.
Exhibits from G.H.Q. France, maps, etc. Field Marshal
Lord Haig’s desk and chair.
Uniforms, Badges and Brassards and drawings of types of
the British Forces, 1914-18.
BAY B.
Sculpture.
BAY C.
The Cenotaph ; the upper part of the original structure
erected in Whitehall.
Official Headstones, etc.
Model of a typical cemetery in France.
Model of the Butte de Warlincourt.
Model representing a devastated town.
14
ARMY, POSTERS.


BAY D.
Models of Veterinary Appliances for treatment of mange;
horse ambulances; building, etc., for surgical treat-
ment ; buildings for treatment of sick animals.
Pictures, drawings, diagrams and photographs illustrating
the purchase, care and treatment of animals and the
work of the Veterinary Sections on all fronts; statistics
of sickness, mortality, etc.
Books, Documents, etc., of special interest.
Mascots carried by soldiers of various nationalities.
BAY E.
Graph used for recording the movement of divisions during
the Battle of the Somme.
Exhibits relating to Intelligence, Identification, and Counter-
espionage.
BAY F.
Models of Marks I., IV., V. “ Whippet,” gun carrier and
German Tanks.
Mobile Cupola, shields, etc.
Anti-Tank rifle and machine gun.
BAY G.
Roumanian Govt. Exhibit.
BAY H.
French 75 m.m. Field Gun and Flag of the 61st Regiment
of Artillery of the French Army.
French Renault Tank.
Uniforms and Equipment of Allied countries, etc.
(I to R. —See Air Force and Navy.)
Photographic Section.
The Official Photographs of the War, about fifty thousand in
number, taken by the official photographers on all
fronts, in Great Britain and with the Grand Fleet can
be inspected and copies, enlargements or lantern slides
may be purchased. Full particulars may be obtained on
application to the Photographic Stall, Space 2 (near
the 18-inch naval gun).
Map Section.
The following may be examined on application to the Keeper
of Maps, North Terrace Building: —
Relief Maps made and used in France in the planning and
direction of operations.
Trench and other Maps of various editions, Admiralty Charts,
and specimens of captured maps.
Photographic Copies of Maps can be obtained; prices cn
application.
15
PHOTOGRAPHS, MAPS.


Index to Numbers and Letters on Plan.
1. 18-inch Gun, Naval Ordnance, Damaged Plating.
2. Mercantile Marine.
3. Chester Gun.
3A. Captured Naval Ordnance, etc.
38. Coastal Motor Boat.
3C. Torpedoes, Captured Ordnance, Instruments, etc.
3D. Aeroplanes, Engines, Large Bombs, Non-recoil
Guns.
4. Naval Howitzers.
5. Warship Models, Naval Charts, Vindictive Relics,
Naval Ordnance.
6. Captured Ordnance, Trophies, etc.
7. Paravanes and Naval Ordnance.
8. Warship Models, Pictures.
g. Depth Charges, Net Defence, Searchlights.
11. Submarines.
12, 13. Aircraft Model, Pictures of Aerial Warfare.
14. Naval Medical.
15. Anti-Aircraft.
16. Airships.
17. Aircraft Instruments, Cameras and Armament.
23, 24. Women’s Section.
25. Captured Trophies, Gas and Anti-Gas.
26. British Artillery.
28. British Artillery, Munitions.
29. British Artillery, Presentations to Lord Haig.
30. Trench Mortars.
31. War of Trenches, Grenades, Armour.
32. Models, Captured Artillery.
33. War of Movement.
34. Engineering, Maps, Camouflage, etc.
35. Captured Artillery.
36. Transport.
37. 38. Signals.
39, 40. Pictures and Works of Art.
41, 42. Army Medical and Posters.
A. British Uniforms, Exhibits from G.H.Q., France.
B. Sculpture.
C. The Cenotaph.
D. Veterinary Section.
E. Intelligence Exhibits.
F. Tanks.
G. Roumanian Govt. Exhibit.
H. French 75 m.m. Gun and Tank.
I. J. K. L. Pictures.
M. Mines.
N. Aerial Clothing, Meteorology.
O. Roger Casement’s Boat, etc.
P. Instructional Warship Models.
Q. Works of Art, Models, etc.
R. List of H.M. Ships, 1914-18; Ships’ Badges.
(38913r—19) Wt. 13893/220. 10,000 9/22 H. St. G. 36


