

1 NLf 919.52 AUS
• •
1
ij »
■
' 4 ■■
i
?




Official Record of the Unveiling of the
Mount Lamington Memorial
Popondetta Cemetery, Papua
LAMINGTON, in the Northern District of Papua, erupted in a major volcanic explosion
on the morning of Sunday, 21st January, 1951, causing great loss of life and property in an area up to
eight miles from the crater.
Thirty-five Europeans and 2,907 Papuans lost their lives, and a further 6,000 Papuans, many of
them wounded, were driven from their villages.
The Government Station at Higaturu, headquarters of the Administration in the Northern District,
was completely destroyed and the surrounding countryside, containing many native villages and gardens,
was devastated. The district headquarters of the Anglican Mission at Sangara were also destroyed.


Emergency headquarters were established by the Administration
at Popondetta, approximately 11 miles from Mount Lamington, and
rescue and relief work was carried out from there under the personal
direction of the then Administrator of Papua and New Guinea, Col.
J. K. Murray, by local residents and missionaries and relief parties of
Administration officers and others flown into the area from Port Moresby
and Lae. The air services of the Territory were organised to bring in the
relief parties and necessary food and medical supplies, and to take out
those of the wounded who were in need of hospital treatment.
Two relief camps were established at Ilimo and Oro Bay where the
homeless Papuans were cared for by the Administration until such time
as new villages and gardens could be made. The necessary administration,
health, education and other services for the proper conduct of these
community camps were provided by the Administration. The rehabilita-
tion of the displaced people was carried out as speedily as possible, and
by February, 1952, they had been re-settled in new villages and had
resumed their normal existence.
After investigation by the Administration, Popondetta was selected as
the most suitable site for the permanent headquarters for the District,
and plans for the establishment of headquarters on that site were
approved. The Anglican Mission also decided to establish its headquarters
at Popondetta rather than rebuild at the former site at Sangara.
As the work of rescue and relief proceeded, the bodies of the victims
of the eruption were recovered, identified and buried. Most of the Papuan
victims were buried in their village cemeteries. The members of the
Anglican Mission were buried in the Mission Cemetery at Sangara. The
bodies of the remaining European and Papuan victims were buried at
Popondetta.
When the rehabilitation of the native people had been completed, the
question of a memorial to the victims of the eruption was considered,
and it was decided to develop the cemetery at Popondetta as a memorial
cemetery. The construction and preparation of the cemetery was done
by the District Commissioner, Mr. S. Elliott-Smith and Sub-Inspector
G. Allen of the Royal Papuan and New Guinea Constabulary.
In design the cemetery combines dignity and simplicity. It is in the
form of a large rectangular space with intersecting coral pathways form-
ing on the ground a great white cross which from the air is visible for
many miles. At the centre of this great cross and projecting along both
nave and transept a smaller cross is formed on the ground by raised
garden beds bordered by stone. At the base of this central outline of a
cross the memorial plaque has been placed. The pathways of the
cemetery are bordered by dwarf shrubs, and on either side of the entrance
are raised gardens with flowering shrubs forming the words "Memorial
Cemetery.” The graves of the victims are in the two upper quarters of
the cemetery in a setting of green lawn. Each grave is marked by a small
white cross.
ON Monday, the 24th November, 1952, a commemorative service
was held at the cemetery and the Minister for Territories, the Honourable
Paul Hasluck, M.P., unveiled a memorial plaque.
The official party at the ceremony comprised:—
The Minister for Territories, the Honourable Paul Hasluck, M.P., and
Mrs. Hasluck.
The Acting Administrator of Papua and New Guinea, Mr. D. M.
Cleland, C.8.E., and Mrs. Cleland.
The Anglican Bishop of New Guinea, the Rt. Reverend P. N. Strong.
The District Commissioner, Mr. S. Elliott-Smith and Mrs. Elliott-Smith.
Sub-Inspector G. Allen and Mrs. Allen.
The Official Secretary to the Administrator, Mr. D. Sullivan.


The following ladies attended the ceremony as guests of the Adminis-
tration and represented relatives in Australia of the victims of the
eruption:—
Mrs. M. Humphries, of Port Moresby, widow of the late W. R.
Humphries, Director of Native Labour, who with his daughter and
son-in-law died in the eruption.
Mrs. A. M. Cowley, of Sydney, widow of the late Cecil Cowley, District
Commissioner of the Northern District, who with his son died in
the eruption.
Mrs. D. Maher-Kelly, of Melbourne, widow of the late T. E. Maher -
Kelly, Project Manager of Sangara Agricultural Station, who died
in the eruption.
Official guests who were flown to Popondetta from Port Moresby and
from other parts of the District were as follows: —
From Port Moresby:
His Honour Judge R. T. Gore; Mr. E. A. James, M.L.C.; the
Reverend Father Conlen; the Reverend Father Randall; Mr. W. C.
Groves, Director of Education; Mr. J. Arthur, Regional Director
of Civil Aviation; Mr. Ivan Champion, Chief Commissioner of
Native Lands; Colonel J. S. Grimshaw, Commissioner of Police;
Mr. W. McGowan, Acting Director of Works; Dr. A. J. May,
Acting Director of Health; Mr. L. F. Burford; Captain Orm
Denny; Mr. J. Samuel; Mrs. C. Perichon; Miss K. V. Jones; Mr.
F. Edwards; Mr. F. Warren; Mr. G. H. C. Carter; Mr. J. Watson;
Mr. B. Schleusener.
From Gona:
The Rt. Reverend D. Hand, Coadjutor Bishop of New Guinea; the
Reverend Father Wardman; the Reverend Father Roberts; Brother
Jones; Brother Marriott; Sister E. Marley; Sister R. R. Baxter.
From Kokoda:
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. Yeomans and Mrs. Yeomans;
Patrol Officer P. Sevire; Mr. J. Casey, Manager of the Government
Rubber Plantation.
From Sangara:
Mr. and Mrs. Johnce; Sister McPhee; Mrs. Henderson.
From Saiho:
Dr. and Mrs. Sobel.
From Tufl:
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. Marsh and Mrs. Marsh.
9.30 the graves of the victims were consecrated by His Lordship
Bishop Strong and by the Reverend Father Conlen.
Shortly before 10 a.m. the official party and visiting guests assembled
at the cemetery, where 1,500 Papuans of the District, in ceremonial
headdress and paint, had formed on three sides of the cemetery. A con-
tingent of the Royal Papuan and New Guinea Constabulary lined the
roadway at the entrance to the cemetery, and at each arm of the central
cross a member of the Constabulary stood with arms reversed.
At 10 a.m. Mr. Hasluck addressed the gathering and unveiled the
plaque, which bears the following inscription:—
To the memory of those who
lost their lives in the eruption of
Mount Lamington
21st January, 1951.
This plaque was unveiled by
the Honourable P. M. C. Hasluck, M.P.,
Minister of State for Territories,
24th November, 1952.


The "Last Post” was sounded by two buglers of the Royal Papuan and
New Guinea Constabulary, and Mr. Hasluck then laid a wreath on
behalf of the Commonwealth Government.
Wreaths were also laid by:—
The Acting Administrator, Mr. D. M. Cleland, on behalf of the people
of the Territory.
The District Commissioner, Mr. S. Elliott-Smith, on behalf of the
Administration of the Territory.
Mesdames Humphries, Cowley and Maher-Kelly, on behalf of their
families and on behalf of relatives in Australia of the victims of
the eruption.
Colonel J. S. Grimshaw, on behalf of the Royal Papuan and New Guinea
Constabulary.
Mr. W. McGowan and Mr. A. McDonald, on behalf of the Common-
wealth Department of Works and the staff of that Department.
A Papuan member of the Royal Papuan and New Guinea Constabulary
and a Papuan member of the Department of Education in memory
of Papuan friends and relatives who died in the eruption.
Many private wreaths were laid.
the unveiling ceremony the Acting Administrator held an
investiture of awards which had been approved by Her Majesty, Queen
Elizabeth the Second, in recognition of services rendered following the
eruption of Mount Lamington. These awards were:
George Cross:
Mr. G. A. Taylor, Government Vulcanologist.
0.8. E. (Civil):
Mrs. Barbara Lane, Anglican Missionary, Isivita, Papua.
The Reverend George Porter, Anglican Missionary, Isivita, Papua.
Mr. L. J. Hart, Anglican Missionary, Sangara, Papua.
B.E.M. (Civil):
Mr. Leslie Topue, Assistant to the Government Vulcanologist.
Other awards approved by Her Majesty the Queen had been conferred
at a previous investiture held by the Acting Administrator at Govern-
ment House, Port Moresby, on the 25th October, 1952. These awards
were:
0.8. E. (Civil):
Mr. T. J. S. Arthur, Regional Director, Department of Civil
Aviation.
Miss P. M. Durdin, Anglican Missionary, Isivita, Papua.
Mr. F. H. A. Kleckham, Assistant Agricultural Officer, Department
of Agriculture, Stock and Fisheries.
M.B.E. (Civil):
Mr. J. J. McKee, D.F.C., First Officer, Qantas Empire Airways Ltd.
Mr. J. R. Rose, Pilot, Qantas Empire Airways Ltd.
Mr. I. C. Taylor, First Officer, Qantas Empire Airways Ltd.
Mr. C. E. Searle, Planter, Awala, Papua.
Mr. I. Tomuavadila (Elliott Elijah), Native Co-operative Adviser,
Department of District Services and Native Affairs.
George Medal:
Mr. B. Schleusener, Sangara Rubber Plantations Ltd., Sangara,
Papua.


The Memorial Cemetery at Popondetta, Papua, on the
morning of the 24th November, 1952, when the
Memorial Plaque was unveiled before a large crowd.
The pictures of the Unveiling Ceremony
in this album were made available by
courtesy of Papuan Prints, Port Moresby.


Mr. Hasluck addressing the gathering at the cemetery
before unveiling the Memorial Plaque. The Acting
Administrator, Mr. D. M. Cleland, is standing second
from the left, with the District Commissioner, Mr. S.
Elliott-Smith. Official guests are in the background.


Buglers of the Royal Papuan and New Guinea Con-
stabulary sounding the “Last Post” after the unveiling of
the Memorial Plaque by the Minister for Territories.


The gathering stands in silence while the “Last Post”
is sounded by Papuan members of the Constabulary.


A member of the Royal Papuan and New Guinea Con-
stabulary who laid a wreath on the Memorial Plaque
in memory of Papuan relatives and friends who died.


The Commissioner of Police, Col. J. S. Grimshaw, laying
a wreath on the Memorial Plaque on behalf of
the Royal Papuan and New Guinea Constabulary.


An officer of the Administration laying a wreath.


i •».
The crater and lava dome of Mount Lamington taken
on 7th February, 1951, by Mr. G. A. Taylor, Govern-
ment Vulcanologist, Bureau of Mineral Resources.


The lava dome at Avalanche Valley, looking north,
taken on 11th February, 1951, by Dr. N. H. Fisher,
Chief Geologist of the Bureau of Mineral Resources.


l eeeiei-so sosi- 5




■)
"wi/v v<s w*
1 < v>
' ?)' I ? ■ • - -jo •* ■> ' i-t -f V-^S'.JI
7c i-;' I
; fv/r\s? '§i
j£;'sj£f‘V^lJ^w* *7s)
'* : ‘ >4 £*y '*} '•*'>■ [}i - '■; :/.]
' ••
-■ ■ ■'
: .' j
vl'i •* ¥1
IB
