

— ..- d-S* - ; S.ijB"" I
OFFICIAL
DE


€| sdrplicF shirt. ®
r\ ALL THE NEW PATTERNS IN
C ° CAMBRIC
268 & 870, OXFORD STREET,’ LONDON.
The Archbishops and Bishops of the Church'of England,
and a large number of eminent Clergymen and Ministers
concur in recommending
The OXFORD BIBLE
FOR TEACHERS.
The Additional matter has been carefully
Revised and Enlarged from time to time by
Dr. STUBBS, Bishop of Chester, Arch-
deacon PALMER, Dr. ANGUS, and other
eminent Scholars. The Scientific informa-
tion was prepared under the supervision of
Professors ROLLESTON, WESTWOOD,
LAWSON, and EARLE—names of the
highest authority In their several depart-
ments.
THE ARCHBISHOP OF
YORK.— THE OXFORD BIBLE FOR
TEACHERS in some o f its forms should be
in the hands of every teacher.
REV- C. H. SPURGE ON.-If
you want to buy a new Bible, and want the
vert best, write for a list of the OXFORD
BIBLES FOR TEACHERS.
THE TIMES, Dec. 23. 1884.—“ The
whole has been done with admirable com-
pleteness.”
The PALL MALL GAZETTE,
Dec. 20, 1884.—“ Every Bible student knows
them to be the best collection of Biblical
Information ever brought together in so
small a compass.”
In various Sizes and Bindings, at all Booksellers’.
London; HENRY FROWDE, Oxford University Press
Warehouse, Amen Corner, E.C.
S. SAINSBURY S
iILAVENDER
The Strength, Reflne-yYT V ■ ■ •«.
ment, and great lasting 11/ H fills’ll
quality of this perfume, l/ll I H
render it one of the most V V I 9 1 i | 1
economical, as well as II 1A JL JLIJLI
elegant, Scents extant.
176 & 177, Strand, London.
Prices from 1/- to 6/-
CHRISTIAN LITERATURE
IN THE
MISSION FIELD.
RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY
Proclaims the Gospel of the Grace
of God in 174 languages.
It is supported by, and aids Christians of all Evan-
gelical Denominations. Circulated nearly 86 millions
of publications last year.
Does not expend one shilling of its subscriptions or
donations on management or other expenses.
Uses all its Missionary Funds for the object for
which they are subscribed, but pays all its expenses
out of Trade Funds.
Has aided in printing the Pilgrim’s Progress in 70
languages.
Has published its New Testament Commentary in
nine languages—Chinese, Arabic, Syriac, Mahrati,
Bengal, Canarese, Urdu, Singhalese.
Distributes packets of healthy interesting literature
to almost all the Emigrants leaving the ports of the
United Kingdom.
Provides for a very large distribution of Books and
Tracts for sailors of all nationalities.
Has issued nearly forty thousand libraries.
Helps all the great Mission-
ary Societies.
Maintains in all its publica-
tions a testimony to Evan- jf
A subscription of ioj. 6 d. or« H
upwards constitutes member-li S
ship in the Society ; a sum of a
101. ioj. constitutes Life mem-
bership. All subscribers re- _rfa
ceive copies of the new tracts jy
and other small publications.
Subscriptions may be sent to the Secretaries, Bev. LEWIS
BORRETT WHITE, D.D., and Rev. S. Q-. GREEN,
D.D., 56. Paternoster Row, London, E.C.
Visitors are invited to inspect the FINEST
and MOST Complete Collection of
ETCHINGS,
ENGRAVINGS, AND
WATER-COLOUR
RAWINGS,
at W. R. BRIGHTON'S,
4 & 3a, GRAND HOTEL BUILDINGS.
( Underneath the Grand Hotel; exactly facing the
National Gallery,')


/ P wHr KEY \
r=iy| pl p y -J
3 1508 00539059 1
COLONIAL AND INDIAN EXHIBITION
OFFICIAL GUIDE
LONDON:
WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, Limited,
printers anU ta tfje &ogal Commission,
13, CHARING CROSS, S.W., and at THE EXHIBITION.
IBG6.
All Rights Reserved.


“Our English Homes
AT Kl Nso nTc°' s MWWPm
Exhibition of Decorative Art , ’ :
FURNITURE is the most complete of any similar j|i|i|i| jijjil
Establishment in London, and will be found in point of value J
and cheapness quite-unequalled. Choice examples of Jacobean, fl&’PfP' RM8TOS|||fi ' I I
OmpncNDALE, Anaa, (joxitN Anxe, Italian, and Caikeke. Bril I f ■ ! I ■
Drawing Room Suites, from £9 15s. to 80 gs. 1 ■ ' **
Dining Room Suites, >,£12 10s. .. 70 ,, M rlsim o IK 11 * ■ ; 3 * j i - -
Bedroom Suites, solid wood, £8 10s. „ 65 „ t- ft | i ,
CARPETS .-ORIENTAL and other CARPETS In al
the new colours and designs. Brussels Carpets, best
and extra qualities, from 2s. lid. per yard. Patterns Free. ifUltl (v
CURTAINS of all the latest and most novj.1 productions jFjljllJt || I® m
in every make and material. Lace Curtains, of excep- » tzwi&fa Sf ffiraa |
donal beauty, from 2s. lid. to £5 5s. per pair. Samples f j]k\ lraj|||j s lipj
NO BETTER COLLECTION of NEW GOODS and pjjgt tyi mlm
NOVELTIES will be shown this Season by any House in the WBjyCU Sw6*
Kingdom, aud at prices that mm>t he satisfactory to every ip|^|yg>
5 ATKINSON & CO., -
198, 200, 202, 204, 206, 208, 210, 212,
WESTMINSTER BRIDGE ROAD, S.E.
“Our English Homes
NO BETTER COLLECTION of NEW GOODS and
“NOVELTIES will be shown this Season by any House in the
Kingdom, and at prices that must he satisfactory to every
Purchaser.
ATKINSON & CO.,
198, 200, 202, 204, 206, 208, 210, 212,
WESTMINSTER BRIDGE ROAD, S.E.
S. FISHER & SON,
TAILORS AND HABIT MAKERS.
GENTLEMEN’S DEPARTMENTS.
219, REGENT STREET, W.,
173, FENCEURCH ST., E.C.
LADIES’ DEPARTMENT.
217, REGENT STREET, W.
Have always a large selection of the Latest Specialities in stock
PATTERNS AND SELF-MEASUREMENT.
FORMS SENT ON APPLICATION


PURE WATER ! ! !
JUDSON’S * FILTERS
FOR HOT CLIMATES.
Catalogue post-free, on application to
DANIEL JUDSON & SON, Limtd., 77 Southwark Street, London.
CONTENTS.
Introduction ........... 5
Organisation and scope of the Exhibition—Classification of contents —Colonial
dining-rooms, food products and wines—Aquarium and conservatories —
Refreshments and recreation —Old London —Indian palace.
I. —General, Description of Buildings and Arrangement of the
Colonies and India 9
Bird’s-eye view of buildings—Coloured ground-plan—Arrangements of buildings
—Arrangement of the Colonies and India —Best way of visiting the Exhibition.
11. — The Entrances and South Gallery with its Courts . . 10
Entrances —Subway—Colonial Hall—lndian Hall —Duval dining rooms—South
Gallery —Hunting trophy—lndian collection —Ceylon—Indian palace.
IIL —The Central Buildings * . .29
New South Wales —Western Australia —Queensland —South Australia—Fiji—
Victoria.
IV. —Old London , . . , . .... , . .40
Coloured View of Old London facing 41
V. — The Queen’s Gate Annexe 44
Cape of Good Hope—West African Settlements—Natal.
VI. —The West Galleries, Arcade and Annexes, and the Central
Gallery 47
The Aquarium—New Zealand—Dominion of Canada.
VII. — Eastern Gallery, Avenue, Arcade, and Annexe . . .53;
British Guiana —Hong Kong—North Borneo—Straits Settlements—African
Islands—lndian Administration Court—West Indies—Cyprus—Malta.
Coloured View of Indian Palace ..... facing 56-
VIII. — The Albert Hall and Gardens 61
Picture Gallery—Grounds—llluminated fountains —Tea and coffee houses—-
South Promenade—Emigration office—Colonial market—Miscellaneous
buildings.
Index , t , , , ... * , .65


MANUFACTURERS
Oar Steel Castings are of special Advantage for Coloi'al and Foreign Users, on aoocurt of tlicir
li'gitness, Strei g h, and Durability.


“EGYPTIAN BEAUTIES,”
t“AU SOLEIL”
S And “THE MOSLEM”
I CZG-ABIEiTTBS,
Are pronounced by connoisseurs to be the finest imported
Egyptian Cigarettes. Sold by all Tobacconists, and "Wholesale
only by The EGYPTIAN" CIGARETTE and FRENCH GOVERNMENT
TOBACCOS COY-, Limited, London, E.C.
OFFICIAL GUIDE
TO THE
COLONIAL AND INDIAN EXHIBITION.
NOTE. —For Contents, see p. 3; Coloured View of Old London , p. 41 ; Coloured
Ground Plan , between pp. 48 and 49; Coloured View of Indian Palace , p. 56;
Index, p. 65,
ORGANISATION AND SCOPE OF THE EXHIBITION —CLASSIFICATION OF
CONTENTS COLONIAL DINING-ROOMS, FOOD PRODUCTS AND WINES
AQUARIUM AND CONSERVATORIES REFRESHMENTS AND RECREA-
TION OLD LONDON INDIAN PALACE.
The Colonial and Indian Exhibition differs altogether, both in organisa- Organisa-
tion and scope, from the three great displays which preceded it. To tion and
begin with, its affairs are presided over by a Royal Commission, ° f .
appointed by Her Majesty the Queen, and of which H.R.H. the Prince bitioic
of Wales is executive President. The Royal Commission includes
representatives of the various Colonies and of India, and has for its
Secretary, Sir Philip Cunliffe Owen, K.C.M.G., C.8., C.I.E. In
addition, each of the exhibiting Governments has appointed a local
commission, to organise its own contribution. The Exhibition is in no
sense International. It is confined exclusively to our Colonial and Indian
fellow-subjects, both British and Foreign Exhibitors being excluded.
The object which the promoters of the Exhibition had in view was to
bring prominently under notice the development and progress which
have been made in the various parts of the Empire, in the hope that a
more intimate knowledge may thus be obtained of the vast fields for
enterprise and commerce which exist throughout the British Dominions.
Coming at a period when the strengthening of the ties which unite
the parent country to its numerous Colonies and Dependencies absorbs
so much public attention, this Exhibition, which places for the first
time before our fellow-countrymen a true and graphic representation of
what the British Empire really is, cannot fail to be of the greatest
national interest and importance.
Ihe products and manufactures of the various Colonies and of India Classiflca-
Tor Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan, ExMbits
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56; index, p. 65,


differ to such an extent, that it was found impossible to lay down any
hard-and-fast rules for classification, such as has been the custom at
previous Exhibitions. It has, therefore, been left to each Exhibiting
Government to arrange its own display in the manner best suited to its
special circumstances. Consequently the space available has not been
divided up in such a way as to accommodate groups of subjects, but has
been simply partitioned up geographically amongst the various countries
that take part in the Exhibition.
Colonial _ In order still further to bring home to us the conditions of life existing
S““J in the Colonies > s P ecial arrangements have been made to illustrate
Vegetable Colomal . f ood-products and cookery by means of a kitchen and dining-
Market, rooms given up partially to this object. In this dining-room Colonial
and Wines, frozen meats, and also preserved meats, fish, vegetables and wine, will be
served up under the auspices of the National Training School of Cookery.
In furtherance of the same idea a Colonial Fruit and Vegetable Market
has been organised, which will be kept supplied throughout the season.
There is also a very complete exhibition of Colonial wines, and a bar at
which the wines may be bought by the glass.
Aquarium The Aquarium will this year be continued as at the three previous
aad Exhibitions, of which it proved to be so attractive a feature. Many or
tories™' the Colonies will have a ttached to their Courts large conservatories, in
which will be shown collections of the more important indigenous flowers
and plants.
Refresh- While no pains have been spared in making the Exhibition itself as
E©crea- and com P^ ete as the available space would permit, the Refreshment Depart-
tion. ments and the Gardens have been made more attractive than ever.
The Refreshments are again in the hands of Messrs. Spiers and Pond,
who provide dinners, luncheons, and other refreshments suitable for every
taste and every purse. As before mentioned, the National Training
School for Cookery takes special charge of the Colonial Dining-Room*
and numerous tea and coffee buffets are scattered over the grounds, all
of which will be alluded to again in greater detail in their proper places.
The buildings are lit up throughout with the Electric Light, and the
gardens and fountains are more brilliantly and attractively illuminated
than ever before; while every care has been bestowed upon the Musical
arrangements. i
Old Amongst the recreative features of the Exhibition may be mentioned
London, the Old London Street, which was found to be such a popular feature
during the last two years that it was determined to retain it, although it
has, properly speaking, nothing to do with the subject-matter of the
existing Exhibition.
Indian A new attraction of great interest is the Indian Palace and Durbar
Palace. Hall, which occupies the site of the Prince of Wales’s Pavilion of the
three former Exhibitions. This building, which was designed by
Mr. Purdon Clarke, C.1.E., the Keeper of the Indian Museum, will,
both on account of the beauty of its design, and the interest attaching
to the native workmen plying their various trades in the small shops
which surround the outer court of the Palace, undoubtedly constitute
one of the most popular features in the Exhibition.
With this short account of the general character, scope, and special
features of the Exhibition, we may now proceed to the more detailed
examination of the various buildings and their contents.
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56: Index, p. 65.


01 «
of
u 3 co
2
|l 5
*2 j.o
|h
|S
to >W
_o a
IjU LU
> >
® rt -1
■£+3 hi
it “
CQ *h
; v vw
Ms- 05
,C S2?
'*»* z
« S§ O
®s| Q
as| S
C m O
H «+* |
n ■ dri
y fs co
®s 55
®3- O
-$i cc
■it’i O
. ®3!
V fl® i-rt
A O
_r p(.2 -»
Qj H-g 2.
" ..H “““
doVh /v-
-. ®«H *■*“
6|2 <
0 *‘3 X
0 8* .n
fc u
-
« oo®. h- ,
sSSd
*3*S<.
s|*s
6b®-h
gw ® I
wtJ S ““
•£ fl ® _J
a <
S CL


DR. JAEGER’S
SANITARY WOOLLEN SYSTE
IS HIS NOW FAMOUS DISCOVERY THAT
1. Health depends upon an active skin.
2. The skin will only act properly when the covering is pervious throughout.
3. The only pervious covering is porous Animal Wool, other materials, especi-
ally linen and cotton, being impervious to the vapour exhaled by the skin,
the repression of which is most injurious.
THIS TRADE
MARK IS THE
OF MANUFACTURE
SOLE-GUARANTEE
UNDER DR. JAEGER’S
AUTHORITY.
HEALTH IS ENSURED
On Common Sense Principles,
USING
DR. JAEGER’S
SANITARY WOOLLEN CLOTHING & BEDDING
COOL IN SUMMER, WARM IN WINTER.
(Highest Award of Gold Medal, Health Exhibition, London 1884.)
DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUE SENT FREE BY
Dr. Jaeger’s Sanitary Woollen System Company, Limited.
{Sole Representatives of Dr. Jaeger throughout the British Empire .)
Head Depot 41 to 44 Fore Street, London, E.C.
{42 and 43, Fore Street, London, E.C.
Mercers’ Hall (85 & 86), Cheapside, London. E.C.
3 and 4 Princes St., Cavendish Square, London, W.
Head “Jaeger ” Depot in the United States, 827 and 829 Broadway,
New York, U.S.A.
Bead Dr. Jaeger’s “Essays on Health Culture,” cloth Bvo., 197 pages,
price 1«., post free 1«. 3d.


C 9 )
I. GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF BUILDINGS AND
ARRANGEMENT OF THE COLONIES AND INDIA.
bird’s-eye VIEW OF BUILDINGS —COLOURED GROUND-PLAN —ARRANGE-
MENTS OF BUILDINGS ARRANGEMENT OF THE COLONIES AND
INDIA —BEST WAY OF VISITING THE EXHIBITION.
All the principal Courts and Galleries in the Exhibition are designated Bird’s-eye
with reference to the points of the compass. The visitor will therefore view of
do well before going the rounds to acquire a general knowledge of the Buildin S a
situation, as otherwise such names as South Gallery, East Arcade, West
Quadrant, &c., will convey to his mind no idea of the actual situation
of these buildings. The Albert Hall, at which many visitors will arrive by
road, and which is a conspicuous object from most parts of the grounds
and from many points in the buildings, is at the extreme northern end
of the Exhibition. The southern boundary runs parallel with the
Natural History Museum, The main entrance in Exhibition Road is
on the eastern side, and the west is bounded by Queen’s Gate. The
visitor, standing with his face towards the Albert Hall, has the east on
his right and the west on his left-hand side.
With these general indications, and with the help of the Coloured coloured
Plan between pages 48 and 49, the reader will experience little Ground
difficulty in finding his way to any part of the buildings. It will be Kan *
noticed that the Plan is covered all over with numbers; these refer to
the pages of this Guide which contain the description of the part
indicated.
The buildings are the same as those of last year, considerably Arrange-
enlarged and extended. Frequenters of the three former Exhibitions of
will be struck immediately by the great improvement in the interior Buildiu b a
aspect of the various courts and galleries, due to the decoration of
the walls and wooden roofs. Broadly speaking, the buildings consist
of three galleries running east and west: viz. the Great South Gallery,
with its North, Middle, and South Courts; the South Central Gallery,
and the Central Gallery, with its two annexeswhile the remaining
buildings, viz. the East and West Arcades, Avenues, Galleries and
Annexes, run north and south. The Queen’s Gate Annexe, which runs
parallel with the latter buildings, is situated at the extreme west, and is
quite detached from the remainder of the Exhibition. The East and
West Arcades are united to the Great Conservatory in front of the
Albert Hall by means of two covered galleries, called from their Plan
the East and West Quadrant. The Albert Hall, and also the celebrated
India Museum, are included in the Exhibition.
The Great Southern Gallery, with its three courts, is given up Arrange-
exclusively to India, Ceylon, and the principal dining-rooms. Between mentofthe
this gallery and the central block of buildings is a stretch of ground now
nearly covered by the Old London Street, the Indian Palace, and the
For Contents) see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Phr.
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 53: index, p. 65.


Electric lighting shed. To the extreme east of the Palace there still
remains a charming bit of garden, in which are the Indian and Colonial
Tea-rooms, an orchid-house, Messrs. Clowes’s Printing-office, and the
Press-room. The central block, consisting of the Central Annexe,
South Central Gallery, and East and West Central Galleries, is given up
to the five Australian Governments. Canada occupies the Great
Central Gallery and a large part of the West Gallery, Avenue and
Arcade flanking the gardens; and New Zealand fills the remainder
of this portion of the buildings. The African Colonies occupy the
Queen’s Gate Annexe; while the West Indies, the Mediterranean
Settlements, Hongkong, North Borneo, &c., axe to be found in the
various galleries and arcades on the east side.
Best way The casual visitor, with the help of the Coloured and Numbered
an ’ ave 110 difficulty in finding his way to any particular part of
bition. " t^ie Exhibition. The greater number of sightseers, who have only
a limited time at their disposal, will probably prefer to go the rounds
systematically. As the great majority of the latter class will reach the
Exhibition, either by road or rail, at the principal entrance in Exhibition
Road, we propose to commence at the latter point, and lead the visitor
through the Great Entrance Halls to the Southern Galleries; having
passed through these, to proceed up the Central Avenue, visiting the
Indian Palace on the right, and thence to make the round of the Central
Block. The next part to be seen is the Old London Street, which leads
direct into the Queen’s Gate Annexe; having passed through which
latter, the sightseer can next visit the western buildings, and afterwards
cross over to the eastern side through the Central Gallery, reserving the
Albert Hall, the Gardens with their musical attractions, fountains, and
illuminations, till the end.
DJI.—THE ENTRANCES AND SOUTH GALLERY WITH ITS
COURTS.
ENTRANCES —SUBWAY COLONIAL HALL —INDIAN HALL DUVAL DINING
ROOMS SOUTH GALLERY HUNTING TROPHY INDIAN COLLECTION
CEYLON —INDIAN PALACE.
Principal The principal entrance to the Exhibition by which the great majority of
Entrance, visitors pass the turnstiles is situated near the southern end of Exhibition
Road, about a quarter of a mile from the South Kensington Station of
the Metropolitan and District Railway. The Entrance and Railway
are connected by a broad subway, lined with white-glazed bricks. This
subway has been found to be a great convenience to visitors both in wet
weather and in the heat of the summer, and has done wonders towards
relieving the traffic in Exhibition Road.
Colonial On passing the turnstiles from the road, the visitor enters the Colonial
SalLj Hall, the sides of which are decorated by large pictures representing
For Contents, see p. 8: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41; Coloured Ground Plan*
between pp. 48 and 49; Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56: Index, p. 65.


JAMES SPENCE & CO.,
Wholesale anb IRetatl Drapers,
76 77. 78, 79, ST. PAUL’S CHURCHYARD. E.C
(Facing West Front of St. Paul's Cathedral .)
DEPARTMENTS.
WHOLESALE
CITY
PRICES.
JSIItK,
JOTTIiE,
oegiajM,
DREgg,
PATTERNS
FJIfIOY,
FREE.
SPECIAL TO LADlES.—Ladies visiting London are invited to inspect our Large Collection of Novelties
A large Assortment of NOVELTIES always in Stock, marked at Wholesale City Prices. Costumes, Mantles-
and other Made-up Garments made at the shortest notice, and’charged at the lowest prices. Correct style and
perfect fit guaranteed. A visit of inspection will be esteemed.
All Patterns and Estimates Free.
N.B.— New Illustrated Catalogue (just published) sent Free.
76, 77, 78, 79, ST. PAUL’S CHURCHYARD, LONDON, E.C.
IRISH LINENS.
The Oldest Establishment for Linen in the North of Ireland.
The Celebrated Table Linen from the Royal Manufactory, Ardoyne, stands unrivalled for beauty of Design,
Richness, and Durability. Linens of all kinds sold at the Lowest possible Prices. Samples and Lists Free.
Our beautiful novelty in Damask made of Silk and Flax, is the most recherche of the Season, and can be had in
Afternoon Tea Cloths. “VISITORS Dinner Cloths, Table Centres, etc.
Desiring to see the interesting process of weaving Table Linen, can have card of admission, on application.
GOODS BENT TO ALL PARTS OP THE WORLD.
i UR £KJ£’I DAMASK TABLE LINEN
INVALID
The ‘LION/ Registered Trade Mark
ESSENCE OF BEEF, BEEF-TEA
JELLY, TURTLE SOUP.
AND OTHER
All the above are put up In Glass Jars, and are there-
fore free from all metallic taste.
SPECIALTIES
CONCENTRATED BEEF TEA,
In Skins and in Tins, if desired.
EDGE BROTHERS (Limited)
ABSOLUTELY PURE.
17, FAEEINGDON EOAD, E.C.


many of the principa" Colonial towns, ports, &c., at different stages of
their growth. The pictures are very interesting as showing the present
size and importance of these towns, and also as illustrating their rapid
rate of progress. Immediately over the turnstiles is a long view of
London, taken from a point overlooking the Thames Embankment, and
showing the Houses of Parliament and the River in the immediate
foreground, and St. Paul’s and the City beyond. Amongst the other
views may be noted Melbourne as it was in 1839, and again after an
interval of forty-two years, during which time it has grown from a collec-
tion of shanties into a fine city of 280,000 inhabitants. Here also
are pictures of Sydney Harbour, Wynyard Square, Sydney, Adelaide,
Brisbane, at two different epochs, and Perth, the capital of West
Australia. There are also two views of New Zealand scenery. On the
right hand, or north side of the hall, is a view of the Graving Dock at
Cape Town, and also of Kandy, the mountain capital of Ceylon, and of
some of the principal cities in the Dominion of Canada.
The end of the hall opposite to the turnstile is ornamented by a
handsome and richly coloured screen in tile-work by Messrs. Doulton
of Lambeth. The panels and tile-painting to screen are in impasto work,
by which the jointing is hidden. The peacock panel represents the
East, and the eagle the more vigorous West. The pilasters are Indian
conventional ornament. In the lunette panels above, India is repre-
sented by her pottery, Australia by her mining and agriculture, and
England by her mechanical engineering. The large equestrian statue
Of the Prince of Wales in the Hall is a reproduction of one made by
Mr. Boehm, R.A., and presented by Sir Albert Sassoon to the Municipality
of Bombay.
Beyond the Colonial Hall is the so-called Indian Hall, which is richly
draped with artistic Indian printed cotton. In it are exhibited figures
clothed in the various picturesque uniforms of our Indian Army.
Both the Colonial and Indian Halls contain numerous models of the
large steamers which carry the mails, and trade between this country and
the Colonies and India.
On the right-hand side of the Indian Hall is the Duval Dining Room
of Messrs. Spiers and Pond, for the service of cheap dinners d la carte.
In this room can be obtained a well-cooked and varied repast at an
extremely moderate price. There is also served here a fixed-price
dinner from the joint at one shilling per head, between the hours ot
■l2 and 4, and an abundant tea from 4 till the closing of the Exhibition.
The distinguishing feature of the Duval system, which was first intro-
duced in Paris, is that the lowest remunerative price is charged for each
dish, and each diner is provided with a bill of fare, on which the prices
are marked, and as each dish is ordered, its price is entered on the
account, which should be left on the table during the repast, open to
the inspection of the guest, who can thus know at any time exactly what
he has spent, and can compare at his leisure the prices as charged with
the figures on the bill of fare.
On passing through the Indian Hall the visitor finds himself at the
head of a broad flight of steps, from which point of vantage he can
overlook the whole of the great South Gallery, with its beautiful carved
screens and gorgeously coloured carpets; the effect of the whole being
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plani
between pp. 43 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 53: Index, p. Go.


enlivened by the countless banners and lamps hanging from the wooden
arC l h n S th°e f tee Courts of this Gallery are placed the exhibits from our Indie.
Indian Empire, which, taken together, constitute a collection such as has
never been equalled in the annals of The shawls curtains,
carpets embroidered fabrics, metal work, porcelain, jewelry, inlaid furm-
tore, and the wonderful variety of carved screens illustrating the art of
everv province, will be found a ventable Paradise by the lovers of
Oriental art. All the objects exhibited in the Middle Court of the
Gallery behind the screens were collected under general instructions
from the Government of India by special officers appointed by the
Government or prince ruling each separate province or state. It is to
the exertions of these officers in the face of innumerable difficulties that
this splendid and complete representation of Indian art industries is due.
It is satisfactory to know that nearly all these beautiful objects will b
retained in this country, for most of them were for sale, and have been,
eagerly bought up at the moderate prices 1
The Indian Collection is divided into five principal sections. In t
Middle Court of the Gallery, immediately in front of the visitor, as he
passes out from the Indian Hall, is placed the great collection of art
ware, textile fabrics, and the screens, which have been collected wfih
great trouble and selected with much care and discnmmation, by the
various local governments and committees from all parts of the great
the 3 " North Court, on the visitor’s right as he looks d°wnthe
Gallery, are to be found the private exhibitors from India, and here
will be shown amongst other things a large collection of Native tea
cocoas, and coffees, and also a representation of the rapidly-growing
Indian tobacco industry. _ „ ,■ ••.
In the South, or Imperial Court of the Gallery on the visitor s left,
the economic and commercial collection, in which are to be
samples of the raw products and rough manufactures made by order ot
the Government of India to illustrate the resources of the Empire.
The fourth section of the Indian Exhibition i s tbe mffitaty and
geographical collection in the Eastern Arcade; while the fifth and
possibly most interesting is the Indian Palace, with its °^ r s > ,
hall, and vast tent which have been erected in the grounds between t
South Gallery and the Central buildings, and immediately opposite to
th Before passing the screens by which access is gamed to the Indian
Courts, the visitor will do well to turn sharp to the right at the foot ot by
the steps and inspect the great hunting trophy designed and erected by Eowlanfi
Mr. Rowland Ward. This group is certainly one of the most remarkable Ward,
sights in the Exhibition. To the right-hand side is the trophy of Hooch
Behar, formed by His Highness the Maharaja. This itdie
forefront of a tiger hunt. A hunting elephant preceding the beaters
has come upon a group of tigers in the long jungle grass. The elep a
has wounded one of the tigers, but another has taken vigorously the
offensive and has sprung upon the root of the elephant s trunk, at whicn
he is clawing and biting. The remaining tigers are slinking away in
the long grass.
Jot Contents, see p. 3. Mooted View of Old London. P. 41: Coloured GroundlPlan.
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 66. Index, p. w>.


The left-hand side of the trophy represents jungle life in India, and
was designed by Mr. Ward for the Royal Commission. Here are
collected together specimens of the most interesting birds, beasts and
reptiles which inhabit the jungle. In the foreground are wounded boars
seeking refuge, and a cheetah in the act of bringing down a deer. Two
magnificent peacocks are represented getting on to wing, and there are
also shown buffaloes, black buck, hog-deer, sambur, and bears, not to
Hunting Trophy (Indian Jungle).
mention numerous other animals. High up on the crags may be seen
fine specimens of the ibex and of the great horned sheep, the Ovis
Ammon. Twined round the branches of one of the trees overhead
is a huge python; while below, emerging from a pool of water, are
shown several alligators. All the animals are grouped with great spirit
in the most natural attitudes, and the whole scene certainly reflects tho
greatest credit upon its designer, and far surpasses anything of the kind
which has been before attempted.
For Contents, see p. S: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41; Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49; Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56: Index, p. 65.


We can now proceed to the Middle Court of the Indian Gallery, Jeypore
entering under the great wooden screen or gateway contributed by His Gateway.
Highness the Maharajah of Jeypore. This gateway is surmounted by
a so-called drum-house and by a kiosk for musicians, such as is common
in India over the entrances to royal palaces or temples, and in which
the musicians play at intervals. On the front of the platform has been
carved the picture of the sun, which is symbolical of the descent of
rulers of the Jeypore. There is also engraved the motto of the Royal
house, the translation of which is, “ Where valour is, there is the victory.”
The great beauty and diversity of pattern of the carvings of this screen
should be noted. In every case the workmen have made their own
designs, and carried them out in their own way, subject to the approval
of the master workmen, who were responsible for the whole work being
in harmony.
Directly the Jeypore Gateway has been passed, the visitor will at
once notice how much better this Exhibition is laid out than were its
predecessors. In the late Exhibitions the centres and sides of the
Courts were invariably crowded with stands, only narrow passages
having been available for the public. The result was that on crowded
days the traffic became so congested in these passages that locomotion
was difficult, and sight-seeing almost an impossibility. This year,
however, the centres of the galleries have been left entirely free, and a
broad passage, 23 ft. wide, which will afford ample accommodation for
the public, runs from end to end of the Courts. The exhibits are
arranged in small Sub-Courts, each belonging to some particular
Province, their fronts being made up of the beautiful carved screens,
behind which the exhibits are displayed in cases so arranged, that the
maximum number of visitors can inspect them without interfering with
each other.
It would be impossible within the limits of this Guide to give a Contents
detailed account of the thousands of art-ware exhibits which are shown ° f d<^ e
in this Middle Court of the South Gallery, or even of all the screens
which flank the central passage. Nor is this indeed necessary, as the Gallery;
great majority of the goods have full descriptive labels attached to them,
from which the visitor can obtain information. The objects exhibited
consist for the most part of carpets and rugs, which are hung upon the
side walls of the Gallery; of printed cotton stuffs, which are often used
to drape tire screens; of embroidered muslins, silks and velvets, in
endless variety; of cases of jewels; of silver and other metal art-ware;
of pottery and glass, furniture, arms, saddlery, and countless other
objects, which cannot all be alluded to. The great majority of the
Native Governments, as well as the British possessions, are represented
in their several Sub-Courts.
We must, however, notice a little more in detail a few of the Indian
more important screens which form such a distinctive feature of this Screens.
Exhibition.
Immediately after the Jeypore Gateway is passed, we find that on Kajpu-
both sides of the central passage the Sub-Courts and the screens which tana,
form them belong to the several Rajputana States. On the right hand,
or North side of the Court, we first notice the beautiful Screen of
brown Shisham wood inlaid with ivory, which comes from the State of
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
'jetwean pp. 48 and 40: Coloured View of Indian


Indian
Screens
Kotah. The architectural design is Hindu, and has been copied from
old buildings in the City of Kotah.
Next to Kotah is the Ajmere Screen, made of wood, painted white, to
resemble cut stone and plaster. This screen is a sample of the ordinary
street architecture of the City of Ajmere.
Following on, we come to the Bikanir Screen, which is totally devoid
of architectural features, but is remarkable for the richness of its
colouring and decoration in gold, scarlet and black. The raised pattern
in this Bikanir decorative work is formed by painting within the outlines
of the leaves, stalks, &c., successive layers of liquid clay, each of which
is allowed to dry thoroughly before the application of the next coat.
When the pattern is sufficiently raised, the whole is fixed by a coat of
black paint, which is subsequently covered with gold leaf.
On the left hand or southern side of the Court there are likewise three
Sub-Courts given over to the Rajputana States. In the first part of
these are represented Bhartpur, Karauli, and Dholpur. The red sand-
stone screen in the front of this Sub-Court comes from the second of
these places. It may be said to be a representation of local architecture
in its details, but not as a whole.
The beautiful perforated stone Screen separating this Sub-Court from
the next must, on no account be passed over. It is made in perforated
stone work from Bhartpur, called “ Jalli," and so beautifully is the
intricate carving executed, that at a little distance it looks like a huge
piece of delicate lace.
Next we come to the Johdpur screen, made in carved teak, carried
out in the Rajputana modification of the Delhi style of architecture, and
close by is a very striking structure in white and black marble from
Ulwar, surmounted by a decorative design in glass-work, on which are
wrought the crest and arms of the Maharaja. The sides of this Sub-Court
are formed of beautifully carved panels of red sandstone. The last
screens on both sides of this Court, before we come to the passages
leading to the adjacent galleries, come from Central India, and are
made of wood and stone mixed. The upper and horizontal panels are
made of Gwalior carved stone-w r ork, which are partly copied from actual
buildings, and partly designed by the workmen.
On crossing the passage above mentioned, we come to the Bombay and
Baroda Sub-Court, in which are contained what are acknowledged to be
the most striking screens in the Exhibition. The rich central portion is
contributed by the Gaikwar of Baroda, and the bays on either side of it
were supplied by the ruler of Bhavnagar. So beautiful are the last-
mentioned portions, that they were selected by the Royal Commission
as the models on which to make the painted plaster screens which form
the Courts in the adjacent North Section of the Gallery. The Bombay
Screens on both sides of the central passage are identical, and are
placed exactly opposite to each other. Including the four end bays,
they are over 200 feet in length, and cost over 16,000 rupees to make,
the larger proportion of which was defrayed by the rulers of Baroda,
Bhavnagar, Cutch and Junagad. Amongst the goods exhibited in the
Bombay Court the silver ware is pre-eminent, and deserves careful
study, the samples of design and workmanship being both admirable.
Next in order come the Bengal Screens, which will be immediately
Bombay.
Bengal.
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. si; Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49; Coloured View of Indian PaL.ce, p. 56: Index, p. 65.


recognised by their curious design and colour. They are imitations in Indian
■bapier-mach'e castings of red brick and terra-cotta work, and represent Screens,
the styles of architectural ornament which are most characteristic of the
Hindu and Muhammadan buildings in Bengal. The screen on the
North or right-hand side is Hindu, and is taken from the Temple of
Krishna at Kantanagar, built about 150 years ago. The surface of
the temple is covered with terra-cotta reliefs, most of them being figure
subjects illustrating the daily life of the people. Some of the best of
these have been reproduced on the screen. The form of the five
central arches was dictated by the necessities of the Exhibition, and
does not resemble anything in the temple, but the side arches give a
fair idea of the pointed style adapted in Bengal from Muhammadan
sources.
The Southern or Muhammadan Screen was designed on the lines of
the architecture of the ancient City of Gaur, which was made the capital
of Bengal about 1198 a.d., but was abandoned in 1575, in the time of
Akbar, in consequence of a pestilence which devastated the city. The
general idea of the Screen was derived from a Mosque built by Nusrah
Shah in 1530. The flat pilasters are adapted from the tomb of Sultan
Ghyasuddin at Panduah, built early in the thirteenth century, and the
ornaments are casts taken from the remains of buildings preserved in the
Indian Museum in Calcutta. The painted designs at the western end
of the Screen represent the enamelled tiles with which the houses of
Gaur were covered.
Amongst the fabrics shown in the Bengal Court, the celebrated Dacca
Dacca Muslins deserve special notice. It is true that the art of manu- Muslin,
facturing them has been to a certain extent lost; for, whereas formerly
a piece of muslin 15 yards long and 1 yard wide could be made so fine
as to weigh only 900 grains, nowadays the finest piece of the same size
weighs 1600 grains. The former piece would be worth the
latter only £\o. The names by which these old muslins were known
were most poetical. Some of them, translated into English, are, “ dew
of the evening,” “ running water,” and “ woven air.” The two first
names were given because the muslins were so fine as to be invisible
when laid on dewy grass or in a running stream.
At one end of the Northern Bengal structure is a very remarkable
carved wooden screen, sent from Nepal. The plaques are in carved
birch, and of most intricate design, framed and bordered in woods of a
more marked colour. The central plaque is a copy, to half scale, of a
window in an ancient monastery in the town of Patan. T.he original is
from two to three hundred years old. The side plaques are also repro-
ductions of windows frequently seen in Newar buildings. The double
row of pillars and arches supporting the screen are copied from the
temple at Tripureswar. The front face of the central arch is carved to
represent a cloudy sky, with winged angels and dragons, the latter being
supposed to represent lightning. Amongst the objects exhibited are
two models of temples, which are good types of Newar architecture, and
also several specimens of wood-carving, which is the principal art
industry of the country. Unfortunately the arts of Nepal are at a very
low ebb, for the country was conquered in the last century by the
Ghoorkas, a warlike people, with little taste for architecture or any other
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56: Index, p. 65
* 5


arts, and the original inhabitants, the Newars, are no longer in a position
to cultivate their own tastes.
North-
West
We next come to the Sub-Courts of the North-West Provinces and
Oudh, which are enclosed by screens of a very varied character. On
the north side of the Court they are of stone, executed at Muttra and
Agra for the Royal Commission. The two ends are filled in with
Provinces,;
designs of great beauty in white stone,
carried out by the masons of Muttra.
The front comes from Agra, and consists
of open arches in light-coloured stone,
- copied from work in the fort of Agra, and
flanked on either side by two beautiful
specimens of trellis-work in redstone,
which are exact copies of screens at the
celebrated Taj and at Fatehpur Sikri.
On the South side of the Court the
screens are in massive woodwork, the
greater part of which has been dug out
of old houses in Lucknow, which have
become ruinous from age. At the east
end of this Sub-Court is a remarkable
wooden doorway, the panels of which
are decorated with brass wire inlaid in
the wood, an art which had nearly be-
come extinct, but is now being revived.
Amongst the most noteworthy of the
goods exhibited in this Sub-Court are
several specimens of most artistic pot-
tery, soap-stone ornaments, copper,
brass, silver, and lacquer ware, and
some very beautiful carpets.
In the middle of the central passage
at the end of the Screens of the North-
West Provinces is a remarkable and
most beautifully designed Pigeon-house
in carved wood, sent by the Gaikwar of
Baroda. In Baroda and throughout
Gujerat the inhabitants erect similar
structures for the purpose of feeding
pigeons and other birds. According to
the religion of the people, it is sinful to
take the life of animals, and an act of
charity to feed them. In the mornings
men and women may be seen laying
offerings of grain before these houses,
for the use of the birds, as a sort of
religious exercise.
Baroda Pigeon House.
The Baroda Pigeon-house well deserves the prominent position which
has been assigned to it, for, both in design and workmanship, it is quite
exceptional. It stands exactly in the centre of the Southern Gallery,
and by turning sharp round to the right at this point the visitor will find
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56: Index, p. 65.


himself in the Central Avenue, leading past Old London and the Indian
Palace, and continued right through the central block of buildings up to
the Gardens and the Albert Hall. A knowledge of this fact will facilitate
visitors in finding their way about the buildings.
The next Sub-Courts beyond the pigeon-house, on both sides of the Punjab.
Court, contain the collections from the Punjab. Each Sub-Court is 100
feet long, and nearly 250 feet of carved wooden screens are used in their
inclosure.
These screens, though simple in design compared to some of those at
the Exhibition, are very beautiful. One of them forming the front of a
sub-court was made of Shisham, the cabinet wood of the Punjab, at the
village of Udoki, by a large family of Sikh carpenters. The Sikhs have
long been famous as carpenters. The opposite one is made of deodar
or Himalayan cedar, which is well-known as an ornamental tree in this
country, but which in the Punjab attains to very large dimensions and
furnishes the principal building timber of the country. The latter screen
was made at* Lahore. The end screens forming the sides are in a
different style. The horizontal panels are not, as might at first sight be
supposed, of perforated or fret-work, but are framed geometrical patterns
strongly resembling the lattice-work seen in Arabic architecture. It is
locally known by the name Pinjra, or “ cage-work.”
The contents of the Punjab Sub-Court are of special interest. On the
walls of the south side are some exquisitely carved windows and doors,
including a bow window of lattice-work, surmounted by a carved
wooden half dome. The silver, pottery, metal and lacquer work, and
arms exhibited here are also most decorative. The beautiful cotton prints
already alluded to, which have been used to drape the Indian Hall at the
main entrance, form part of the collection from the Punjab. These
printed cottons rank amongst the very best of the art-products of India.
Beyond the Punjab lies Kashmir, the screen of which is of ex- Kashmir,
ceptional interest. It is a reproduction of the verandah of an old
mosque on the Kashmir Murree road, which is supposed to have been
erected at the beginning of the last century. During the last few years
the mosque had fallen a prey to tourists and other depredators, who re-
moved every bit of carving which was portable, and soon nothing would
have been left, had it not been for the efforts of the British Resident,
Sir Oliver St. John, who, after the building had been wrecked by an
earthquake last year, obtained permission to have what remained of it
removed to Srinagar to serve as a model for wood-carvers. The screen
was made in four months by eight carpenters, who earned from to B d.
a day; their only tools were the small native chisels and a heavy adze.
The material of construction is deodar wood.
Cashmir is celebrated for its enamelled metal-work, and for its
shawls and other textile fabrics, of which most beautiful specimens are
exhibited.
The screens in the Central Provinces Sub-Court were designed after Central
illustrations in Fergusson’s ‘ Architecture,’ and were made at Nagpur, ovinces,
Carving in wood is the only art in which the natives of these Provinces
excel, and it is not uncommon to find the fronts of houses, even in
small villages, beautifully carved in teak.
The Assam Sub-Court, which is next to-that of the Central Provinces, Assam.,
Tor Contents, see p. 3; Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56; Index, p. 65.
B 6


differs in character altogether from anything else in the Gallery. It is
made of bamboo and a kind of native mat, called sital patti, the work-
manship of some of the best specimens of which is so fine that 23 strips
of plaiting go to the inch. The panels of this screen are formed of
intricate designs of fine cane. From the decorative point of view, this
screen cannot, of course, compete with some of the others.
Burmah. In striking contrast with the last is the Burmah Screen, which
is made of carved teak, with scarlet cloth panels, the latter having
figures worked upon them. The framework of the screen is an example
of the ordinary wood-carving of the country. The upper part resembles
the eaves and gables of the superior class of buildings, such as temples
and palaces. The small flame-like pinnacles are supposed by some to
be a survival from some former period of fire worship.
The silver-ware of Burmah is very beautiful, and is well represented
here ; as also are the native-made laces and embroideries.
Madras. The Madras Screen, of four bays on each side of the gallery, has a very
good effect. It is executed in the style of the Dravidian architecture of
Southern India, the period being about the 15 th or 16th century.
Indian The eccentricities of the old style of architecture have been avoided!
Screens. One of the characteristics of Hindu architecture which is reproduced iii
this screen is the use of an elaborate system of superposed brackets
in place of arches, which latter were first introduced into India by its
Muhammadan invaders. Accordingly we find that, over the capitals of
the columns, two highly carved brackets, one placed above the other,
are used to support the long beam which carried the entablature of the
screen. This screen is constructed of Burma teak by Madras carpenters
and carvers.
Among the most interesting objects contained in the Madras Courts
may be mentioned a fine collection of jewelry, and some very artistic
metal-work, pots, plates, &c., made of mixed brass and copper. There
is also a very good carved window-frame exhibited on the wall of the
North Sub-Court.
Mysore Beyond Madras we find Mysore and Coorg, on the north side,
and Coorg. This Court is enclosed by a screen, the front of which is seventy feet long,
divided into 1 seven bays. The Mysore portion takes up five of these
bays, the Coorg Sub-Court being formed of the remaining two. The
pillars and arches are copied from the so-called Golden Palace, built by
the famous Tippoo Sultan, at Seringapatam, but are reduced to half the
size of the originals. The panels above the arches are filled in with
pictures of Mysore scenery and mythological subjects.
The principal art-ware exhibits in these Courts are finely carved wood
and inlaid furniture, jewelry and textile fabrics.
Hydera- 3 Opposite to Mysore, and on the southern side of the Gallery, is the
bad. Hyderabad Sub-Court, the screens of which differ completely in character
from any others in the Exhibition, They are intended to show off the
various art, metal, and textile industries of the country. The screen
consists of seven arches, of which Nos. 1 and 7, next to the two
ends, are intended to show off the native brass-work. The second
and sixth arches are of Bidri ware, which is blackened pewter, inlaid
with gold, silver, or copper. In the present instance brass has been
used for the inlaying. The pieces in the recesses in the sides of the
Por Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41; Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p, 66: Index, p. 65. '


supports are imitations of Tidri ware. The arches on either side of the
centre are entirely formed of lacquer ware, the panels being made of
such forms that they can be utilised as trays, fire-screens, &c. Crossing
the end of the Gallery and closing the West, as the Jeypore trophy
closes the East end, is an elaborate screen in gilt lacquer work,'made m
London from Indian moulds. It is presented to the Royal Commission
by H. H. the Nizam of Hyderabad. It bears the following inscription,
“ La Ghalib ilia Allah,” with God alone is Victory, a fitting answer to
the Jeypore motto at the other end, ‘Where Valour is, is Victory.” _
Some of the exhibits in the Hyderabad Sub-Court are very beautiful.
The specimens of black and silver metal-work are amongst the very
best in th( Exhibition. There is also a case of curious lacquer-work
bottles, vases, &c., and the gold embroideries are perfectly dazzling.
The above completes the list of Sub-Courts in this division of the
Gallery, but there are two more very handsome screens from the North-
West Provinces, which are placed diagonally across the extreme end.
Before returning to the end to inspect the Economic and the Private Refresh-
Exhibitors’ Courts, it should be noticed that on the southern side of“«“ 8 o “ h
this Gallery are situated the General Dining and Luncheon Rooms of oalle ry.
Messrs. Spiers and Pond, as well as the very popular Dining Rooms
conducted by the National Training School for Cookery. A short
description of the nature of the refreshments and of some of the prices
charged in each of these rooms will be useful to visitors.
The room at the eastern end of the Gallery on the South side is the an
Restaurant, in which dinners and luncheons are served A la carte till 9 p.m. General
Next to it is a luncheon buffet for the supply of light refreshments, Dining
wines, spirits, beer, &c., open till the close of the Exhibition. Further Rooms, &c.
west is a Dining Room, in which are served hot or cold luncheons at
2 s. 6 d. per head, from 12 till 3, and a table-dhole dinner at separate
tables from 5 till 9, at 3 s. 6d. per head. On the North side of the
Gallery, at the end, is a Grill Room, where chops, steaks, cutlets,
sausages, devilled bones, &c., are served from noon till 9 p.m. Just
outside the Gallery, and opposite the end of the Electric Light Machinery
Shed, is a large Second-Class Refreshment Room, where cold luncheons,
teas, coffee, beer, spirits, &c., are provided at moderate prices. Outside
the Gallery, in the Grounds on the South side, is a canteen, where
refreshments can be had at very cheap prices.
The National Training School of Cookery occupies its old situation National
towards the middle of the Gallery, and will there continue, under the Training
able management of the Lady Superintendent —Mrs. Charles Clarke— Coo j £ery
the useful work which it carried out with so much advantage to the public
during the preceding Exhibitions. In one room a portion of meat or
fish, bread and potatoes, is served every day for 6d. } from noon till
9 p.m. In the other a dinner of two courses, consisting of either hot or
cold joint and pudding, with bread and potatoes, is served on every day
from noon till 5.30 p.m., for is. From 5-3° to 8.30 p.m. a 2 s. 6d. dinner is
served in the same room. The dinner consists of soup, fish, entree , joint
with vegetables, sweets and savouries, bread and butter, and cheese.
Luncheons of Indian curries are served in thfi Is. Room from 12 to 3 p.m. _,
daily. As an illustration of the appreciation in which these dining-rooms
were held by the public, it may be mentioned that in the year 1884,
Por Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41; Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 66: Index, P. 66.


122,606 dinners were served at is., 163,715 dinners at 6d, and 111,965
teas at 4 d., making a total of 398,286 meals served. Also 2,895 persons
attended the 6d. demonstration lessons. The provisions consumed
amounted to 23,682 lbs. of beef, 1,400 New Zealand sheep, and 49 tons
3 cwt. offish.
A special feature of these dining-rooms is the use made of Colonial
provisions. A cooking demonstration room is attached to the Colonial
market in the South Promenade. On Wednesdays, at 2 p.m., a Demon-
stration Lesson on Curries is given by a Native.
Colonial The old lecture theatre of the School of Cookery is now converted
Wine Bar. j nto a wine Room, which is under the Royal Commission, and which
was instituted for the purpose of enabling the public to become familiar
with the wines produced in our Colonies. The wines of Victoria, New
South Wales, South Australia, Queensland, and the Cape may here be
had by the bottle or the glass at very moderate prices.
Economic Close by the Colonial Wine Bar is the passage leading to the west end
OoSt ° f the Econon ? ic or Imperial Court, in which has been brought together
a vast collection of the useful products of India, This division of the
South Gallery differs altogether in its arrangement from the Middle Court
which has just been described. In the latter the arrangement was geo-
graphical, whereas here the objects are grouped together in classes, quite
irrespective of the districts from which they come. The Economic Court
is intended to be a survey of the resources, the productive powers, and
the commerce of India, which ranks as the fifth great commercial power
in the world, the annual value of its foreign trade being about 166 millions
sterling. An attempt has been made to secure for this Court at least a
small sample of every product, and, where possible, a larger quantity of
all the more important ones. It should be noted that the small samples
are placed in tin boxes on the walls of the Court, so as to form an
Index Collection, for they thus constitute an index to the larger exhibits
which are arranged on the tables, and in cases and trophies, as nearly
as possible opposite to the small samples.
The following are the principal divisions of subjects in this Court:
I. Foods. VII. Dyes and Tans.
11. Beverages. VIII. Fibres.
111. Narcotics. IX. Skins and Leathers.
IV. Oils. X. Canes and Basket work.
V. Medicines. XI. Mineral and Ores.
VI. Gums. XII. Timbers.
The very important exhibits of tea, tobacco, and silks are not shown
in this Court. The two former have a large space assigned to them in
the North Court, and the silks are displayed in cases placed round the
Pavilion of the Indian Palace.
In addition to the foregoing, the collection contains an interesting
ethnographical collection, and models of Indian villages, of natives
employed in agricultural operations in the fields and in gardens, and of
agricultural and other implements.
Indian 1 Amongst the models, one of the most interesting is that of a village in
Village. Northern India, made by natives of Lucknow. In it we see the
Zamindar, or local landlord, seated in the verandah of his house, having
Por Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41; Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56: Index, p. 65.


the accounts of rent collections read out to him by the village accountant,
while he is dispensing justice, an evidence of which is the beating being
administered to the culprit below the threshold. Close by is the village
Women Corn Grinding.
well and near it is a Brahmin priest decorating the local idol. In front
of the Zamindar’s house are grouped together the village shops and work-
places, amongst which may be seen a pair of bullocks working the mitt
made of the trunks of trees, and used for pressing sugar-cane. Behind
the shops is a group engaged in shoeing a bullock, and, close by, an old
woman is engaged in tending pigs, which do the scavenging of the
village, being well aided in this occupation by the dogs and some
of which are busy on the carcass of an ass close to the pond In this
model are illustrated some of the methods in use for irrigation, by means
of bullocks working on inclined planes, by balanced levers and by
labour In the fields various agricultural operations are being earned
on. The crops shown growing are yams and tobacco. A bullock in the
fields having struck work, is being forced to nse by having his tail twiste
Three of the trophies in this Court will attract universal attention. Trophies
The first is the bamboo trophy in the middle of
made of thirty different species of this gigantic and most usefilgss^
The trophy consists of a platform raised twelve feet above the floor
on four columns, and approached by two flights of stairs containing
between them forty steps. The steps and platform are covered with
split bamboos arranged in geometrical patterns. It would be
enumerate all the uses to which bamboo is put in the far East. Amongst
them maybe mentioned the construction of houses, bridges andother
buildings, mats, furniture, water-pipes, pails, pots, co ° kin^^
knives and spoons, agricultural implements, fishmg fllustrates
pliances, musical instruments, and weapons. The second ihustrates
the grains and pulses of India, and the third and most conspicuous
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p 41: Coloured Groundjian,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 66 . Index, p. 66.


trophy is the great timber archway which forms the entrance to
the east end of the Court. The trophy, which is 46 feet wide and
15 feet high m the centre, is built entirely of Indian timbers, of which
more than 300 separate varieties are used in the construction. The
greater number of specimens belong to the Bengal Economic Museum,
and have been lent by the Bengal Government; but in addition to these
a large number of new blocks have been supplied by the Inspector-
General _of I orests. The different coloured specimens have been
worked into geometrical patterns, and a border of alternating dark and
light wood surrounds the entire frame-work.
The inner face of the arch is decorated with some very fine
specimens of horns. Close to the arch are specimens of furniture
made of Indian timber, amongst them being a table, the top of which
is made of one complete section of an enormous cinnamon red-wood
tree, and is a fine example of the size to which this fine, hard, close-
grained wood attains.
The Ethnographical Collection consists of models in clay and plaster
of Pans of many of the Native races in India. These models are
dispersed throughout the Court, and give a fair idea of the vast number of
separate races which people the Empire. On the south side of the Court
is a picturesque representation of a Market Place with models of natives.
Ethno-
graphical
Collection.
Shops in Market Place.
Private If w e leave the Economic Court by the timber trophy and cross over
" ie Gallery at th , e . foo . t of . the steps, we enter the North Court of the
C 11 , • , . . " v ' XKUfLII 01 UIC
torS a ° Urt * South Gallery, which is given up to private exhibitors from India, and
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41 : Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56 : Index, p. 65.


also to the collections illustrating the tea and tobacco-growing indus-
tries. These latter are placed on the south side of the North Court,
and the teas, coffees, &c., may be tasted at the opposite side and in the
tea houses in the adjoining garden. The screens in this department are
for the most part plaster casts, taken from one of the Bombay screens
and painted in various colours 5 and within these is arranged a collec-
tion, consisting for the most part of fabrics and artware, sent by Indian
manufacturers, and exhibited in most instances by London agents.
Down the centre of the Court are arranged several models, some m
stone, others in metal, and a few in wood, representing temples, shrines,
and palaces. Opposite to the tea collection, on the north side of the
Court, is a collection of furniture by the East India Art Manufacturing
Company. Further on in the central space is a very curious bullock
cart for a lady of high rank, sent by His Highness the Thakore of
Bhavnagar, and close by is another highly-coloured and ornamented
Bullock Cart.
native vehicle, lent by H.H. the Gaekwar of Baroda. Passing on, we
come to a beautiful tomb made of blue and white'tile work and m the
small courts on both sides of the tomb are many beautiful specimens
of carpets, pottery, and metal work, and also some finely carved doors
and window frames, surrounded by a curious and effective wall-decora-
tion formed of panels of “cage work,” as the framed open geometrical
wood-work is called. .
The visitor has now reached the Great Central Avenue of the Exhi-
bition, as he will see by noticing that the Baroda Pigeon-house is on his
left-hand side. Before turning up this Avenue it will be better first to
keep straight on and visit the Ceylon Court. By the doomay leading
from the Gallery to the Avenue is a band-stand, in which plays the
band of one of the West India Regiments. The bandsmen form
conspicuous figures in their Zouave costumes. . . Cev , 0 _
Ceylon is approached through a porch made of teak-wood, which is ceyi° ■
an exact representation of parts of the Buddhist Temple of the Sacred
Tooth at Kandy. The Ceylon Tea-house in the grounds just outside
iQUlll iU JVctllLl y. J-uv . ' ~
*he Court is in the same character. The decorations on the walls and
roof are Sinhalese in character; yellow, the sacred colour of Buddhism,
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, P; .41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between PP . 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, P . 66: Index, p. 66.
** B 7


predominating. The dado round the Court is covered with represen*
tations of mythological animals—the elephant, the lion, the bull, and the
goose—which are taken from sculptures on the ruined monuments which
are found in the ancient cities in the island. The frieze is decorated
with Sinhalese paintings, illustrating some of the popular stories about
the birth of Buddha. The Gautama Buddha is represented on the west
wall of the Court facing the entrance. The figure is in high relief,
seated in the usual attitude of contemplation. There is a gateway at
the west end of the Court, which is a reproduction of one carved in
stone at Y£pahu, the ancient royal city of the Sinhalese; it is remarkable
for its fine carvings in ebony, Coromandel, and tamarind, which are the
principal cabinet woods of Ceylon.
After passing the porchway the visitor will notice on his right-hand
side a fine group of leopards, arranged by Mr. Rowland Ward. The
lower leopard, which is a remarkably fine specimen, has just killed a
dog, and was afterwards itself killed with a knife by Mr. Downhall, who
owns this group, together with several other cases of animals exhibited
in the Court. Mr. Ward has also carried out an elephant-trophy at the
west end of the Court, consisting of the head and fore-part of a rogue
tusker. Ceylon has long been famous for its elephants, and many
curious examples of the skulls of these animals are exhibited. On the
left-hand side are some cases of gems. The island is celebrated
for its pearls, rubies, cat’s-eyes and other precious stones. One of the
cat’s-eyes exhibited here is said to be the largest in the world, and
is worth £ 3OOO. The artistic industries of the island are represented
By some cases of lace, by furniture in black and variegated woods, and
By metal and lacquer-work. At the west end are several cases of food-
products, and the walls of this part of the Court are hung with a series
of water-colour paintings, representing the scenery and the ruined cities
and monuments of this most beautiful and most interesting island, which
is a paradise both to the archaeologist, the sportsman, and the lover of
Nature.
Returning now to the door beyond the band-stand, and passing through
it into the grounds, we find ourselves in the midst of interesting objects.
On the right is the colonnade of marble, inlaid with precious stones, from
Agra, and further on one of the great features of the Exhibition, viz. the
Indian Palace, while on the left is the Ceylon Tea-house already referred
to, and, in complete contrast with all its surroundings, the embattled
Gateway of Old London.
The marble pillars were presented by the Government of the North-
West Provinces to the Museum at South Kensington. They were
selected from amongst a number of similar columns in the fort at Agra.
The beautiful inlaid work is similar to much of that on the famous Taj,
and it is supposed that the columns were intended to form part of an ex-
tension of the buildings known as the Diwan-i-Khas. Before this design
could be carried out, the town was taken and held by the Raja of the
neighbouring Bhurtpore, by whom the pillars were buried previous to
the town being re-captured from him. They were only recently
re-discovered during the process of excavating the foundations of a
Guard House.
Agra
Marble
Pillars.
We next come to the Indian Palace, which was designed by
Indian
Palace.
Pot Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41 : Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49 : Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56 ; Index, p. 65.


Mr. C. Purdon Clarke, C.1.E., the Keeper of the Indian Museum, and
built under his superintendence. All the elaborate wood-carvings have
been executed at the Exhibition by a party of wood-carvers, whom
Mr. Clarke brought back with him from India.
Scindiah’s Gateway.
The Palace is divided into three principal parts. First, there is the Scindiah’s
■outer Court, surrounded by workshops, in which various artificers, such Gateway ’
as jewellers, weavers, carvers, &c., carry on their trades. This part of
the building is called the “ Karkhaneh,” or workshop. It is approached
from the Central Avenue through a great stone gateway of a beautiful
design, and highly decorated, which is the gift of the Maharajah Scindiah
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41; Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49; Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 66: Index, p. 65.
B 8


to the South Kensington Museum. It was designed and executed under
the superintendence of Major Keith, of the Archaeological Survey of
India. It may here be noted that the construction of this gateway, and
indeed of most Indian stonework, is quite different to the system of
masonry practised in Europe, and in fact more nearly resembles our
practice in joinery than in stone-work. The gateway is protected by
two bastion towers, and loopholed walls surround the courtyard.
The shops surrounding three sides of the Court number thirteen, and
seven more line a passage on the right, which leads to the North Court
of the Central Gallery. The shops are raised about two feet above the
level of the pavement, and each front is divided into three openings by
columns and arches with lattice panels. Many of the native trades which
are here pursued, notably the carpet making, modelling, jewelry manu-
facture, and wood and stone carving, attract large crowds of visitors.
The native artificers are apparently very slow and leisurely, but they
are nevertheless extremely persistent, and manage to get through much
more work than the on-looker would at first sight think possible.
Hall of The second principal part of the Palace is the Durbar Hall, which
Columns, takes up the better part of the fourth side of the Court, and which
stands upon a series of columns, with bracket capitals, supporting the
cross beams which carry the floor of the hall. The space occupied by
these pillars forms a sort of wide porch, known in the Exhibition by the
name “ Hall of Columns.” Here are placed the carpet looms, and the
office where all arrangements are made, and all orders received for
the work to be executed in the courtyard.
Passing through the Hall of Columns we enter the third section of
the Palace, the Garden Vestibule formed under the roof of the old
waterworks pavilion, and which is draped to resemble a large marquee
or tent. The floor is mosaic, and in the centre is a tank fountain, and
at one end a double flight of red sandstone steps leading up to the
Durbar Hall.
Durbar This room is undoubtedly one of the most remarkable objects in
Hall. the Exhibition. Entered from the east side, through a triple arched
opening, the whole hall is taken in at a glance, and is seen to be
decorated with a perfectly bewildering extent and variety of intricate
carved ornaments, which cover the wall and ceiling. The foliated
arches of the courtyard are again repeated in the casements of the
windows, and a panelled bracketed cornice carries the line of the
arches round the room. The whole of the carving of this room was
carried out in buildings adjacent to the Exhibition by two native carvers,
and it certainly reflects high credit on their skill, taste and industry. The
room is lined with settees, and will be used by the Prince of Wales for
the purpose of holding grand receptions.
The exterior of the palace is painted in terra-cotta colour, with white
tracery, and is in the Hindu-Persian style known as Moghul Architecture,
Indian In the passage round the tented vestibule will be found a beautiful
SUkB, collection of Indian silks. At the Paris Exhibition in 1878 Indian silks,
like Indian teas, received the highest award, and the industry has made
considerable progress in the meantime.
We now return to Scindiah’s gateway, and regain the Central Avenue,
and passing “ Old London ” by for the present, we enter the central
For Contents) see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan*
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 66: Index, p. 65.


block of buildings, which are occupied by the Great Australian Group of
Colonies, and by a portion of Canada.
Carpet Making.
111. —THE CENTRAL BUILDINGS.
NEW SOUTH WALES —WESTERN AUSTRALIA —QUEENSLAND —SOUTH
AUSTRALIA —FIJI —VICTORIA.
The first building which we enter from the Central Avenue runs east
and west, and is called the South Central Gallery. On the right, or
eastern side, is New South Wales; and on the left is Victoria. Taking
the former first, it is proposed to go right round the central buildings,
taking the Colonies in the following order: viz. New South Wales,
West Australia, Queensland, South Australia, Fiji and Victoria, and fina y
leave the building by the same door as we entered it. .
The space in the centre between the entrances to Victoria and
New South Wales is common to both Colonies, and on the walls are
hung shields with some of the principal statistics painted on them.
There are also two fine trophies on the right-hand side, made up of arms
and implements from New Guinea.
Passing now under the archway on the east or nght-hand side, we South
find ourselves in the New South Wales Court; the exhibits in which Wales-
consist partly of manufactured goods, and partly also of the mineral
and other raw products, in addition to which there is an interesting
collection of birds, animals, shells, and plants. The Court is tastefully
decorated, the arches at the top of the side-walls having designs painted
on them representing the principal birds, fruits, and flowers of the
Colony; and wherever the Court is bounded by the end of a gallery
the space is filled in with a large painted scene. On the right-hand
side, after we pass the archway, are several pieces of furniture made of
native woods. On the left are cases containing stuffed specimens of
Australian birds, some of which are famous for the beauty of their
plumage. Amongst these will be recognized at once the lyre-bird,
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Co^?L G /°^ d fJ lal1 ’
between, pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 66: Index, p. 66.


AGENTS.
The undermentioned Newspaper and Advertising Agents are authorized to receive
Advertisements for the SYDNEY MORNING HERALD, SYDNEY MAIL, and ECHO:—
London Mr. GEORGE STREET, 30, Cornhill, E.O.
THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD
Is the oldest established Newspaper in the Australian Colonies, and in New South Wales
has maintained the highest position for many years past. It circulates widely throughout
New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, and other parts j)f Australia.
THE SYDNEY MAIL,
AN 7
ILLUSTRATED WEEKLY NEWS JOURNAL
This paper has been repeatedly enlarged and continuously improved, with a view to
adapting it equally to the wants of town and bush residents. It aims to supply the latest
trustworthy intelligence to all classes of the community, its news budget being compiled
t* l9 oldest newspaper office in Australia. Special attention is devoted to Sporting.
Agricultural and Pastoral, and Mining Subjects. The Illustrations are drawn and
engraved by the best procurable Artists, and the Fiction, Essays, and other Literary con-
tributions are from the pens of writers of acknowledged ability.
, y r tothe Journa! itself, it will be seen that agencies are established through-
Honolulu S “ ES , mc udm § New Zealand, also San Francisco, New Caledonia,
THE ECHO,
ANT EVENIN' Q- PAPES,
Is Published every Afternoon. It contains the news of the day up to the hour of
publication, also general reading matter.
The intention of the Proprietors is to make the ECHO (which has a large and rapidly
increasing circulation) a bright, racy, outspoken, and entertaining evening paper.
LONDON OFFICE:
8, GEORGE YARD, LOMBARD STREET,
Where Advertisements and Subscriptions are received, and Files of the
Newspaper may be seen.
Files of the above Newspapers are also open for inspection in the Nbw South Wales Court.
” Messrs. G. MITCHELL & Co., 12 & 13, Red Lion Court, Fleet Street. E 0.
». Messrs. BATES, HENDY & Co., 4, Old Jewry, E.C.
»» M*- F. ALGAR, 11, Clement’s Lane, Lombard Street, E.C.
_. »» Messrs. GORDON & GOTCH, St. Bride Street, Fleet Street, E.O.
Birmingham.., Mr. R. S. KIRK, 90, New Street.
Liverpool LEE & NIGHTINGALE, 15, North John Street.
Bristol JAMES & HENRY GRACE, Royal Insurance BuUdingg,
Edinburgh ROBERTSON & SCOTT, 13, Hanover Street.
»» KEITH & Co., 65, George Street.
Glasgow W. PORTEOUS & Co., 15, Royal Usohange Place.


so called because its tail-feathers exactly resemble a lyre. On this side
are also cases containing a collection of New Guinea arms and imple-
ments. Further on is a billiard-table, intended to show off several
varieties of the native
cabinet woods.
Going back to the
south side, we find a
large collection of pho-
tographs, representing
landscapes, public build-
ings, scenes in the towns,
&c. Amongst them is
one which will be of
the greatest interest to
every Englishman. It is
a large photograph of
every officer and private
in the New South Wales
Contingent, which was
so generously placed at
the disposal of the Home
Government during the
recent troubles in Egypt,
and which rendered such
excellent service in the
Soudan. The action of
the New South Wales
Government in equip-
ping this expedition will
possibly hereafter rank
as one of the most im-
aS One ot tne most im- Aborigines, New South Wales,
portant events in the
history of the Empire, and will perhaps be counted as the first step
towards the consolidation of the power of the British races throughout
the world. Hence the photograph of the Contingent deserves a con- Photo-
spicuous position, and will no doubt prove to be an object of great **
interest in an Exhibition which cannot fail to further the federal ideas
which prompted the despatch of the force. In the centre of the photo- w a i eß con*
graph is the portrait of the Brigadier, General Richardson, C.B. ] and tingent.
around him are grouped the heads of all his officers and men.
Flanking the photographs are a number of cases containing the
collection of Australian shells, formed by Dr. Cox, who is one of the
most eminent living conchologists. Against the walls of this side of
the Court are several educational exhibits, and also a case containing
books which were printed and bound at the Government printing office
in Sydney, and which prove to what a degree of perfection the arts of
binding, printing, and engraving have been brought in New South Wales.
Most of the books exhibited bear in some way upon the state of the
Colony. Upon the opposite side of the Court will also be found a large
number of interesting photographs, while at the end of the Gallery is a
large aviary containing live specimens of the native birds. * /
For Contents) see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Flan»
between pp. 48 and 49; Coloured View of Indian Palace* p* ®6; Index, p. no,


p3 h r r T a ! n ?'i, of *\ N N ew South Wales collection is shot™ in the
Central Gallery, which runs north and south, that is to sav at
angles to the part of the Gallery which we have just visited In
this Court will be found specimens of silversmith’s work, saddlerv cloth
manufacture, sugar refining, meat and other provision preserving.
Here also is a trophy of New South Wales wines, and close by is the
Court office which is an exact representation of a country timber hut
roofed with bark, and opposite to it is a trophy of animals. Further on
in this same Gallery is the collection of raw products. These are of
great importance, and consist for the most part of wool, timber coal
copper, tin iron, gold, and silver. We come first to a great trophy
formed of bales of wool, which is surrounded by a fine show of fleece
wool. Next we come to the timbers, which are arranged in two lame
S CV ? y Speci f *? bein S labelled; and beyond these is the fine
collection of minerals from the Government Department of Mines a
r f^ ot trophy vt fine , trophy from the Pyrmont Smelting Com-
p ny of Sydney, a gold trophy, and a large collection of silver ore. At
the sides of the Court arc two large piles of coal, the samples in one
” d ““ * » •
The north end of the Court is filled in with a large picture of the port of
wfr lch is certainly one of the most beautiful harbours in the world
The whole of the west side of this Gallery is flanked by a lame
SThfs'colony. “ the fems ’ palms ’ and otber plants
Australia. ? a r° f southem end of this Gallery it is easy to enter
Faster? fT r ? Court ’ whlch 18 situated on the east side of the
East Central Galleries. West Australia, though in point of area the
argest of the colonies m the island, is very thinly peopled, the population
at present numbering only 33,000. “
West Australia is still a Crown Colony. Its chief products are wool
unber, pearls, and pearl shells, lead, copper, horses, and cattle. ’
Ihe objects exhibited consist of furniture made from the native
woods, cases of stuffed birds, native implements and weapons, and
specimens illustrating the leather industry. In the centre of the
Court is a large trophy of pearl shells; and close by on the east
side is a collection of pearls, some being of great beautv exhi-
sorts of p r V Streeter - The P rin cipal raw products shown are various
sorts of timbers grasses, gums, and wool. The east end of the
Karri Til a represe . ntin S a for est of Karri timber.
Timber. rival tl A ! i° f T largeSt treeS ln the world Tt has only one
eastA^tr h alia AA U ra ian Contment ’ th . e Ewalyptus amygdalina of South-
east Australia. Some monster specimens of the Karri tree have been
measured. Some have been found to be over 400 feet high. In other
cases the stems have been ascertained to be 300 feet in height from the
ground to the first limb. The circumference of another! round Z
base, was found to be sixty feet. It requires an effort of the imagination
ofthtr bI V?p 1 f tUre t0 ° n6 ’ S mind SUch tre es. Th e g towers
of the Crystal Palace are pretty well known objects to Londoners Thev
give the impression of great height, but the whole tower would stand
n er one of the largest specimens of Karri timber without even interfering
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured RrnnnH
between pp. 48 and 49.- Coloured View of Indian Palace, p.“d«^^ £


with the lowest of its branches This timber is very durable and is in
great request for harbour work, piles, and sleepers.
also shows skins of animals and other products of the chase, wool, fish
oils fruits, vegetables, and a few samples of wine. The specimens
of mother-of-pearl and other shells which come from this part of the
world are most remarkable.
It should be noticed that the
roof of the Queensland Court
is decorated with black swans
on a yellow background, alter-
nating with a design in the
same colours, consisting of
the monogram of the Colony
surmounted by the royal crown.
To the north of West Aus-
tralia, and partly in the same
Gallery, is situated the Queens-
land Court. Queensland was
constituted a separate Colony
in 1859, and is consequently
just over a quarter of a century
old. It is essentially a tropical
country, the greater part of
the Colony being well within
the tropic of Capricorn. The
chief sources of wealth are
the cattle- and sheep-runs and
the mines, the latter being still
to a great extent n ideveloped,
Queens'
land.
Pearl Fishing, Diver’s Dress.
though they are kr own to be of .
exceptional richness. Every kind of tropical and temperate products can
be grown in Queensland. Wheat, barley, and oats are cultivated on the
downs: large crops of maize are also raised. Upwards of 40,000 tons
of sugar are made in the Colony, and arrowroot, tobacco, coffee, cotton,
oranges, peaches, grapes, pine-apples, and bananas are also grown
successfully, n Q ueenslanc i Court from West Australia, one of the
first objects of interest is a large case of stuffed birds, and close by are
specimens of the animals of the Colony. All round the walls of the
Court are arranged cases of minerals, of which no less than. 1,40 7
different sorts have been collected. They include gold, silver, iron, t ,
copper, lead, manganese, and coal, and in addition many sorts o
building-stones, marbles, &c. This Court contains also large trop ies
of gold and tin, with samples of gold-bearing quartz, some of which wi 1
be stamped in the South Promenade by means of a battery of stamp..
One of P the most attractive objects in this part of the Court is a case
containing precious opals of rare beauty, both in the rough and mountc -
The opal necklace set with brilliants is a sight not to be seen every day
Close to the gold-trophy are some cases containing fine examples ot
shells and coral?, and also specimens of furs and saddlery. Some of the
Australian saddles used for riding buck-jumping horses appear curious
For Contents, see P. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41; Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56: Index^p.^o.


to English eyes. The Conservatory belonging to this Colony is on the
east side of the Court.
The remainder of the Queensland Exhibition is in the Central Annexe,
which runs east and west, joining the East and West Central Galleries
together. At the east end of the Annexe is a large trophy of animal
life with a scenic background, containing specimens of marsupials and
wingless birds of this Colony, as well as the curious duck-billed platy-
pus ( Omithorhynchus paradoxus), which is a very remarkable type of
animal. This trophy, like most of the animal groups in the Exhibition,
has been modelled and arranged by Mr. Rowland Ward. On either
side of the trophy are arranged, on the walls of the Court, groups of the
arms and implements used by the natives of New Guinea. The trophy
is also flanked by two magnificent specimens of cedar timber, and in
front are several specimens of stuffed fishes, including two specimens of
the gigantic dugong, the flesh of which very much resembles bacon.
The principal exhibits in this part of the Court are the wools, arranged
in cases on the north side of the Central Passage, and the sugars on
the south side; beyond these again are the timbers, of which no less
than 427 specimens are shown.
On passing through the screen at the west end of the Court we find
ourselves in a part of the Annexe, through which passes the Central
Avenue of the Exhibition, and on the other side of which is the trophy
forming the screen of the South Australian Court. Here is placed a most
interesting collection of New Guinea curiosities, weapons, boats, nets,
and other appliances exhibited by the Queensland Commissioners.
Just outside, on the south wall of the Annexe, is the large Map of the
World, by Messrs. W. and A. K. Johnston, of Edinburgh and London.
The diameter of each hemisphere is over twenty-one feet, and the area
of the whole over seven hundred feet. The canvas on which it is
painted was manufactured in one piece by a firm in Kirkcaldy, but was
found to be too large for manipulation, and had to be cut into four
pieces. The British possessions are coloured bright red. Above the
map are five clocks, which show the time simultaneously at Greenwich,
Cape Town, Calcutta, Sydney, and Ottawa.
South Australia is the second largest of the Australian Colonies, but
its name does not aptly express its geographical position, for it stretches
right across the great Island, being bounded on the north by the Indian,
and on the south by the Southern Ocean. Its land frontier touches all
the other Australian Colonies. The territory of South Australia did
not originally run right through the island,ithe northern part not having
been annexed till 1863, after the adventurous journey of the gallant
John McDonnell Stuart right across the heart of the continent.
South Australia is less dependent upon mineral than upon agricultural
and pastoral resources; the only mineral industry of any great import-
ance to the Colony is copper mining—the mines of Kapunda, Burra
Burra, and Wallaroo being famed all the world over. The principal
export of this Colony is wool. Great attention has for some time past
been paid to the cultivation of the vine, many of the most important
varieties of Australian wines being made in this Colony.
On passing the entrance trophy the decorations of the Court should
be noticed, the walls being tastefully adorned with paintings of the native
Map of
the World,
South
Australia.
Jo r Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56: Index, p. 65.


flowers and fruit, while the west end of the Annexe immediately in front
of the spectator is filled in with a large scene painting representing
an Australian landscape, of which more hereafter.
On the walls of the Court, near the entrance, are several paintings
of Australian subjects; and below these, on the north side, are cases
of minerals, and also a large trophy of copper ingots from the Wallaroo
mines. On the other side are cases containing models of fruits from
the Colony, various ornaments and appliances made of emu eggs and
silver, and also furs and saddlery.
The scene at the end of the Court is very remarkable and is most South
effectively arranged. The background represents a hilly and wooded Australian
landscape of a type very common in South Australia. The sides and
roof are covered with representations of trees arching over head. On
the ground in front are three natives modelled from life; one standing
in a rough canoe, spearing fish, and another crouching down in front of
a hut, engaged in making a fire by friction. Among the rocks in the
foreground are many specimens of kangaroos of various sizes, and in
different attitudes, and an air of reality is given to the whole scene by
birds on the wing in mid-air, one being an eagle flying away with a
young kangaroo in its claws, while close by is its nest or eyrie on the top
of a rock. To the right is a pelican flying to its nest, with its gullet
full of small fish for the female and young birds. The bird on the left-
hand side, in the act of dropping a snake, is the far-famed laughing
Forest Scene.
jackass, which is one of the most characteristic of the Australian birds.
It laughs in exact imitation of a human being.
Turning down the steps to the left we find the remainder ot the South
Jor Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49; Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56: Index, p. 65.
33 10


Australian collection in the West Central Gallery. On the right-hand,
or north side of the Gallery, is a backwoodsman’s rough hut, made of
timber and thatched with bark. On the left are specimens of carriages
adapted to the needs of the country, and immediately in front, on both
sides of the Court, is the great exhibition of South Australian wool. In
all,* 125 fleeces are exhibited, of which 121 are merinos and 4 Lincolns.
A Settler's House.
Merino In pens on the right are stuffed specimens of merino sheep and
sS m rams ‘. The Colo . nists have g iven m uch attention to the improvement
Australia. breed, which is so valuable on account of the excellent quality
of its wool. Their efforts have been rewarded with every success, as
will be acknowledged by connoisseurs. Some of the stuffed
rams exhibited are extremely fine specimens, and would fetch, alive,
two hundred guineas each.
On the left of the Court is a torpedo of Colonial manufacture, which
is interesting as showing the capacity of our larger colonies for taking
care of themselves. It is one of some hundreds made last year when
there was a probability of a Russian war taking place. The Colonists
had had no previous experience of this kind of manufacture, but they
obtained models from this country, and soon turned out a sufficient
number of torpedoes to protect all their harbours.
South It will be a surprise to many people to leam that camels are used in
CamSs Aust . ralia as beasts of burden. Yet so it is, and here we have two
specimens of South Australian camels exhibited. Camels were first
imported in 1866 from India by Sir Thomas Elder, and were landed in
Port Augusta, the most northern port of the Colony. They have proved
to be extremely useful in the transit of goods in the interior, where
severe droughts are not uncommon. They have been known to travel
twenty-five miles a day for nine successive days, without a drink of
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56: Index, p. 68.


water, and with only such food as was furnished by the scanty bushes.
They now thrive and breed remarkably well in the Colony. Without
these useful animals the settlement of the interior would have proved
costly and precarious, and it would have been very difficult to have
carried out many of the public works, such as telegraphs, railways, and
water conservation works without their aid. Mr. H. J. Scott, who is
one of the representatives of
South Australia in the Exhi-
bition, has greatly improved
the value of the breed by
importing camels from Bikanir
in Rajputana, the soil, climate,
and herbage of which resemble
those in the Colony.
Beyond the camels is a stand
containing photographs in na-
tural size of the edible fruits
of South Australia, all of them
having been taken from speci-
mens exhibited at the Agri-
cultural Society’s shows in
Adelaide. Amongst them may
South
Australian
Fruits.
Merino Ram’s Head.
be noticed a bunch of grapes grown in the open air, which weighed
1 lbs. To the right of this stand is a case in which will be exhibited
fresh fruit. The Colonial Commission have arranged for a fortnightly
consignment of fresh fruits and vegetables from the Colony; the bulk of
the consignment will be on sale at the Colonial Market in the South
Promenade, but samples will be exhibited in this case. Close by on the
same side are several cases containing samples of olive oils and cordials.
On the opposite side of the Court is the great wine trophy from South
Australia. Wine growing is one of the most promising industries of
the Colony. No less than 105 different sorts are made; but it is intended
in the future, by judicious blending, to prepare about a dozen standard
wines for the English market, the flavour and strength of which will be
maintained uniform. The wine-growers of the Colony are sparing no
pains to improve the quality of their wines, and with these objects in
view, they have obtained the assistance of experienced French wine-
makers, who have settled down in the wine districts. Australian wines
can be bought by the glass in the Royal Commission’s Colonial wine-
room in the South Gallery.
At the south end of the South Australian Court is the Fiji exhibition. Fiji
Fiji is one of the youngest of the Colonies, having been annexed in the
year 1874, since which period it has made considerable progress; its
total trade in the year 1876 having been only of the value of
whereas in 1884 it had attained the value of jSI BO,OOO. The principal
exports are sugar, coffee, cocoa-nuts, fruit, cotton, molasses, pea-nuts,
maize, curiosities, and fibre. The Fijian Archipelago consists of two
large and of 200 smaller islands, of which about eighty are inhabited.
Much of the scenery in the islands is extremely beautiful. It is well
illustrated in the Exhibition by numerous water-colour drawings hung
round the walls of the Court.
Fpr Contents) see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Flan>
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace) p- 06 : Jude?) p. 65.


Ihe hiji Collection is not large. It consists chiefly of native pottery
utensils mats timber, cocoa-nuts, and ropes, and various food products.
Ihe walls of the Court are decorated with trophies of native arms
We how come to the flourishing Colony of Victoria, which occupies half
the West Central, and the western half of the South Central Gallery. It
will be convenient to commence at the north end of the West Central
Gallery, to reach which the visitor must retrace his steps till he reaches
the steps which lead from the Central Annexe into this Gallery
Victoria, though in point of size the smallest of the Australian
Colonies, possesses the largest population of any. It is estimated that in
the present year there are just about one million of inhabitants, of whom
Melbourne, the capital, _ absorbs 283,000. The Colony owes its great
prosperity and its relatively large population to the discovery of the
gold-fields in the year iB s r-the year in which the Colony was separated
from New South Wales. In addition to the great gold-mining industry,
the agricultural and pastoral interests in the Colony are very large.
Wool is one of the most important exports, and the wheat traders
rapidly increasing, the value exported in 1884 having been /T -762 007.
In common with some of the other Australian Colonies already men-
tioned, Victoria seems destined to become at no distant date one of the
greatest wine-producing countries of the world.
The Victoria Exhibition reflects, as might be expected, all the above-
mentioned industries, and it also proves that the Colony is rapidly
developing a considerable manufacturing power.
On entering the Court, at the north end of the West Central
Gal ery, we find ourselves at once in the midst of the wool samples.
Victoria, hke South Australia, shows not only fleeces and bales of
wool, but also stuffed specimens of the celebrated merino sheep to the
improvement of which breed the greatest attention is paid. Close bv
the wool exhibits are specimens of Colonial carriages and agricultural
machinery On the east side, or left hand, as we go down the Court,
is the collection illustrating the forest-products. The Technological
Museum at Melbourne has a Sub-Court, formed of 200 specimens of
the most valuable Victorian timbers, named and illustrated by pictorial
specimens of the fruit, leaf and flower of each. The Government
ilotamst shows 166 species of Australian woods in book-form, and
cases containing 132 articles manufactured from them. The
remainder of this Gallery is taken up with manufactured articles, such
as preserved meats, biscuits, and other provisions, hats, boots, and
various articles of clothing, woollen goods, and also furniture. At the
Cm 1f n r\ /\f 4-U C 1 _ll * 11 . • _ _ v
Victoria.
south end of the Gallety is a collection of billiard-tables, made of
native woods. The east side of the Gallery is flanked by the Victorian
Conservatory, which is filled with beautiful specimens of palms and ferns.
Close to the billiard-tables mentioned above is an interesting trophy
representing the output and other statistics of several of the gold mines
of the Colony. The quantity of gold returned by each mine is repre-
sented by a gilt cube of the exact size that the gold would occupy.
It will probably astonish most spectators to learn what a very small
bulk is occupied by a huge sum of money. Bullion to the value of
a million sterling could be put into a box measuring only thirty
inches cube. On either side of the Court are furnished rooms, fitted
Output of
Victoria
Gold
Mines.
Vor Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41; Coloured Ground Flan,
Between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 66: Index, p. 65


up with fine samples of Melbourne cabinet-work, made out of native
woods. These specimens prove that some at least of the more artistic
manufactures have been brought to a high degree of perfection m e
manuiacaiucs iwvc utui - —o-- --o * , •
Colony. Beyond the furniture are the wine and beer trophies, ine
end of the Court is filled in with a large painting on canvas of a
flourishing valley, with a river flowing along the bottom, both its banks
being covered with vineyards. The mansion of the proprietor appears
just over the brow of a hill in the middle distance. •. r. c w
Ascending the steps on the south side we find ourselves in the South Fomt
Central Gallery once more, the remainder of the collections from
Victoria being contained in the western half of this building. At t e vietQiia
west end of the Gallery is a marvellous forest scene, which will certainly be
one of the most popular sights in the Exhibition. The scene is mac e
of rockwork, studded with palms and ferns; over the rocks tumbles a
cascade, which flows away as a stream, crossed by a small bridge,
giving access to the Court from the Gardens. There are many wild
animals and birds picturesquely grouped. On the left-hand side is a
family of aboriginal natives in their house, which is of the most
Aborigines in their Hut.
elementary simplicity, a mere lean-to of planks, which be tumed
any way against the wind, open on the sides and front. This is a real
native hut, which has actually been used by a family of aborigine
The planks which form the lean-to are decorated with rough but spirited
incised carvings, representing an emu pursued by a huntsman, and a
fight between two warriors. Under the hut is shown the fatiier skinning
an opussum, while the mother is making ready a fire to cook it, and a
child prostrate on the turf watches the; operations wi^
On the other side are more natives, of an .evidently better class, looking
" „ . “ o ■ fViioTired View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
fC View.( Man Palace 66: Index. P. 65.


at the first group with suspicion, and evidently not knowing whether to
regard them as friends or foes.
The decorations in this Court are very well thought out, and most
effective. The panels between the arches of the roof are each filled in
with a coloured vellarium, and on the walls are painted arches repre-
senting the fruits and beautiful flora of the Colony. Below these again
are paintings—those on the' south side being for the most part in oils—
by Victorian artists, and those on the north being a collection of
ninety water-colours of Australian flowers, most beautifully executed by
Mrs. Rowan, of Melbourne.
Next to the forest scene on the north side of the Gallery are the
educational exhibits, and beyond them is a large case of Eucalyptus oils
and other products, made by Mr. Bosisto, the President of the Victoria
Commission, vho has done so much in discovering and in making known
the valuable properties of the different varieties of the Eucalyptus.
Close by is a case of silver ware made at Melbourne, and further on
the valuable and important collection of minerals lent by the Govern-
ment Department of Mines. There are also some cases containing rich
samples of auriferous quartz, and another case, shown by the Bank of
Australasia, containing fine gold to the value of In an adjoin-
ing stand are models of some of the most famous nuggets, the largest of
which weighed 2,300 ounces.
On the south side is a large collection of photographs, illustrating
Victorian scenes and celebrities, and then come a number of cases con-
taining models of no less man 600 varieties of fruit.
The end of the Victorian Court is closed in by a large gilt archway,
flanked on either side by banks of auriferous quartz. The Archway
represents the exact bulk of all the gold which had been raised in the
Colony up to the end of the year 1885, the value of which is 216 millions
sterling, or more than a quarter of the National Debt of Great Britain.
On the quartz banks are shown models of famous nuggets and retorted
cakes of gold. One of the latter, which was the result of a single
crushing, representing a fortnight’s work, was of the value of
On passing out by the golden arch, the visitor finds himself once more
in the part of the Gallery common to Victoria and New South Wales,
and close by on the right is the door by which he entered the Central
Block of buildings.
Victorian
Golden
Archway.
IV.—OLD LONDON.
Old On leaving the Central block of buildings the gateway of the Old
London. London Street is found on the right-hand side, just opposite to the
entrance to the Indian Palace. During the Health and Inventions
Exhibitions Old London was one of the most popular features, the
narrow roadway having been always well filled with sight-seers. This
year the Street remains, not only because of its intrinsic interest, but
also because the houses in it are most convenient for many purposes.
For instance, the Colonial Commissions have their offices here, and
there are also Railway, Post, and Exchange offices, and a Club. A
coloured view of the Old London Street will be found opposite to p. 41.
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp, 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, v- 56; Index, p. 65,


HWlfft^’: Nl i^ir'&.vjM^tlp ~ Jr ±
jMiil 1 :,. {l!-fra| jSa|[| ,'|W^p-Rj[ !■ | -jffi'^r/' y'4j
ifP 1 JQ| i TfwJiiii
'Ml ' i f -. >
U.. %;V | y sjjf. .3' ■ ' J u~~% % .
o
m
o
o
30
>
H
m
o
»
1 X
m JH
m m
So
5 O
o|
O i
o yj
2 W
m -
po O
_ m
is
H O
V £
-:s
S!
CJI -
P O
gG
1 O
Pi
si
$ 3
r
o
z
o
o
z




SHARING CROSS
TURKISH BATHS
J. & H. NBYILL.
Gentlemen’s Entrance—NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE.
Separate Bath tor ladies. Entrance-Sortlminberland Passage, Craven St., Strand.
PRONOUNCED TO BE THE FINEST IN EUROPE.
Admission —7 a.m. to 7 p.m. 3s. 6d.; after 7 p.m. *
Sundays, Gentlemen only, 8 a.m. till IS noon 3s. 6d.
These Baths stand on what was formerly part of the grounds of Northumberland
have occupied nearly three years in building, and involved an expenditure ot £30,000. I hey
comprise a suite of Bath Rooms, having a floor space of about twelve thousand feet, with a
smaller set in a separate contiguous building for the exclusive use of ladies, ihe cooling
rooms, which are surmounted by a lofty dome designed to permit free circulation o air and
to insure perfect ventilation, are fitted in a most luxurious manner. The whole ot tho
decorations of both cooling and hot rooms have been designed by most eminent authorities,
while the heating and ventilation of the hot chambers are brought to a state ot perfection by
the use of the system first introduced by the Proprietors.
And at Aldgate Baths, 44, High Street, E.; and 7, Commercial Road E.; and the London Bridge
Baths, 7 & 8, Railway Approach, S.E. (Prospectus post free.)
OFFORD & SONS,
PRACTICAL COACH-BUILDERS.
Factories & f 92, GLOUCESTER ROAD, SOUTH KENSINGTON,
Show Rooms | 67, GEORGE STREET, POETMAN SQUARE, W.
Prize Medals from London 1851-1885,
Every kind of Carriage suitable for all climates and roads.
Specialities: Carriages hung upon light steel perches, Cee and under-Spring,
and proper leather braces.
Patentees of Self-acting Hoods, India-rubber Tyres, Brake Blocks and Steps.
Drawings and Estimates Free. Carriages Let on Easy Terms of Purchase.


The following account of the buildings is based upon the description
written by Mr. George Birch, F.R.1.8.A., from whose designs, and under
whose superintendence, the street was erected :
Entering from the Central Avenue, immediately in front of the Indian Palace,
stands one of the City Gates—Bishopsgate, reduced in proportion and flanked by the
City wall; this gate (not one of the original gates, of which there were but four) was
broken through the ancient walls, the peculiar Roman manner of building, with
courses of tiles, being shown on the lower part. Above the arch on each side are the
arms of the City of London and the arms of the Bishopric, and immediately over the
gate, in a niche, stands the statue of one of the bishops, William the Norman, to
whom the City was particularly indebted, for by his good offices all those rights and
privileges and immunities which the City had inherited from Roman times, and which
had been confirmed and strengthened under the Saxon Kings, were reconfirmed by the
Conqueror. Above, on the towers which flank the gateway, are the statues of Alfred,
who wrested the City from the Danes, and of his son-in-law, Aldred Earl of Mercia,
to whom he committed the government thereof.
Passing through the gate, the corresponding statue, that of William the Norman, is
seen, representing St. Erkenwald, the Fourth Bishop of London, A.D. 675, after the
reconstitution of the see and re-establishment of Christianity by St. Augustine, The
ground floor on each side shows on the right a debtor’s prison, and on the left an
ordinary lock-up, and beyond are the staircases to the first-floor. After passing
through the gateway, the first house on the left is the “Rose Inn” (No. x), Fen-
church Street, curious as having its front covered with small cut slates, instead of the
ordinary lath and plaster and timber construction usual in London.
Ihe next house (No. 2) stood in Leadenhall Street, and was known as the “Cock
Tavern,” The representations of this house, of which there are many, show it
after the gable had been removed, and a flat coping substituted, but in this instance
its pristine condition has been reverted to. Following in order is a block of three
houses (Nos. 3, 4, and 5) formerly existing in Fleet Street, towards Temple Bar, on
the south side, and known by the name of the “Three Squirrels,” now Messrs.
Gosling’s Bank.
The house (No. 6) is a copy of the one which stood at the comer of Fleet Street
and Chancery Lane, and was traditionally known as the “Isaac Walton’s house”
“Vir et Piscator optimus,” but there is a doubt that tradition in this case was
tradition only, as the actual house was two doors further to the west; but apart
from this, the house itself was a magnificent specimen of an ordinary citizen’s
house in Elizabeth’s reign, and was for many years a conspicuous ornament to
Fleet Street, and in close contiguity to those well-known haunts of the wits of the
period, the “ Apollo ” and the “ Devil ” Taverns.
Set back a little from the main line of the street, in order to give prominence
to Walton’s house, and to give it the appearance of a comer house, arg two unpre-
tending wooden structures (Nos. 7 and 8), which formerly stood hard by the ancient
church of St Ethelburga, Bishopsgate Street, and were the ordinary type of hundreds
of others in the old City, a shop below, and a solar or chamber above.
Standing prominently in advance of these is the old tower of a church, which
though not strictly modelled from that of All Hallows Staining, differs from it only in
having a larger traceried window, and resembles in its general form and outline many
others in which our forefathers were wont to worship. Most of these churches
were small, for the parishes attached to them were also diminutive, and this tower
type, with bold octagonal staircase turret on one side, was almost universal. There
were exceptions, in which the towers had lofty pinnacles at each comer, like the
present St, Sepulchre’s, Holbom, or the more modern re-buildings by Wren, of
St. Michael s, Cornhill, and St. Mary, Aldermary j and the curious arched super-
structure with its five lanterns of St. Mary-le-Bow, or del Arcubus, and the very
fine spire of St. Laurence Pountney; but the generality of the churches possessed
towers similar in character to the one depicted here.
Next to the church, and fronting down the street, is a portion of the Middle
Row (No. 9), which stood in the Strand, just outside Temple Bar, and was known
as Butchers’ Row. These houses well represent the overhanging of the stories so
prevalent in London where the ground-floor space was very limited, additional room
above being obtained by these means at the expense of light and air.
Elbow Lane. The site at this point considerably narrows from 70 to 30 feet, and
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 66 ; Index, p. 65. ’


the houses are not continued on parallel lines, in order to break a perspective which
would have been too long for a picturesque effect, and also in order to obtain that
sinuosity so characteristic of London streets.
Next ©n the left is a fine large house of two gables (No. 10) which stood in
this Middle Row, Strand, and was known as the French Ambassador’s house, or
the Duke of Sully’s; also Monsieur Beaumont’s, both ambassadors here from the
Most Christian King to the Court of St. James. This Duke de Sully was the famous
Henri de Bethune, the wise and popular Minister to Henry Quatre, King of France
and Navarre. That this house was probably occupied by him there can be little
doubt; not only from the commonly accepted tradition, but from the fact of its
being decorated with badges of the De Bethunes, the French crown and fleur-de-lis,
and two hands grasping one another in a true “ entente cordiale.”
The next (No. n) is a low structure of wood and plaster, and has been modelled
from an old engraving representing a portion of Bishopsgate Street.
Beyond this is an old house (Nos. 12 & 13) which was in Goswell Street, of the
date of Elizabeth’s reign. The windows are mullioned and transomed, and show one
peculiarity very general in old London, in carrying on the upper lights continuously.
No. 14 is a timber house with carved bargeboard, which stood next to Blue Boar’s
Head Yard, King Street, Westminster.
The last house (No. 14a), decorated with medallions of the Roman Emperors in
plaster, stood on Little Tower Hill, There is nothing remarkable in the building,
beyond that the roof line is level, and was chosen as a contrast to the all-prevailing
gable.
At this point (No. 15) —the termination westward of the street —the entrance
thereto is masked by one of the galleried fronts of an old London inn. The “ Oxford
Arms,” Warwick Lane, was chosen as a typical specimen; but there are still
remaining in Bishopsgate Street, Holborn, and more especially the Borough, several
examples of these.
The house beyond (No. 16) was on the west side of Little Moorfields, Finsbury,
and was a very fine specimen of plaster work. It was not removed until the com-
mencement of the present century. A low building connects this with two houses
(Nos. 17 & 18) possessing considerable interest; they stood at the south corner of
Hosier Lane, Smithfield, over against the famous “Pye Corner,” where the fearful
conflagration of 1666 was arrested, after having laid considerably more than three-
fourths of the City in ashes ; they were not removed until 1800.
Another gateway here arrests our steps : this was the entrance to the famous
Priory of the Holy Trinity, Aldgate, founded by Queen Matilda, and whose Prior, by
virtue of his office as representing the Knighten Guild, who had made over to this
priory their lands and soke, was admitted as one of the Aldermen of London, of the
Ward of Portsoken. According to custom, he sat in Court, and rode in scarlet, or
such livery as the other aldermen used.
Beyond this (No. 19a) is the gable end of the Hall of the Brotherhood of the Holy
Trinity (which is reached by ascending the staircases to the first floor) in Aldersgate
Street, near to Little Britain. This Hall has been selected as a typical example of
the Hall of a Guild or Livery, of which there were many within the boundaries of the
ancient City. The ancient stained glass with a figure of St. Blaise, and several
ancient shields which existed in 1611, have been faithfully reproduced.
The house beyond is one of the most remarkable in this street (No. 20), remarkable
not only for its extreme richness of decoration, but as being connected with Sir
Richard Whittington, famous in song and in story. It was situated four doors from
Mark Lane, in Crutched Friars, or Hart Street, up a courtyard, and was described in
old leases as Whittington’s Palace. Although the house, from its style and orna-
mentation, could-not possibly have been of his time, it is possible that the front only
had been ornamented and altered, for in general outline and arrangement it resembled
houses of that date; it was richly ornamented with carvings of the armorial bearings
of the City Companies, which stamped it as being the house of a remarkable personage,
and one whom the City delighted to honour. It was impossible to reproduce the
extreme richness of its decoration. The ornamentation has therefore only been
painted, the original having been entirely carved and painted and gilt.
The next two houses (No. 21) were drawn by Mr. Gwilt before they were removed;
they were situated in Bankside, and are picturesque examples of plaster decoration
and open balconies.
The last two houses (Nos. 22 & 23) in this street, on the left before arriving at the
gate at which we entered, were also from the GWilt collection (now in the Gardner)
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 66: Index, p. 65.
B 12


and stood in the High Street, Borough ; they were only removed of late years, and
were drawn and measured by Mr. Gwilt.
As to actual size, the whole of the buildings have only been slightly reduced, but
this has been done in proportion, although such reduction is not to a uniform scale,
tut has been adopted in the different cases to suit the uniformity of the plan and
arrangement of the whole. The interiors, it must be recollected, do not in all cases
correspond in size with the exteriors.
The buildings were designed and constructed as bearing upon and connected with the
special objects of the International Health Exhibition, 1884, to which the Corporation
of the City of London and several of the Livery Companies liberally subscribed.
The street is now illuminated at night by electricity, thus avoiding the necessity of
closing it at dusk.
V. THE QUEEN’S GATE ANNEXE.
CAPE OF GOOD HOPE. —WEST AFRICAN SETTLEMENTS. —NATAL.
After inspecting the houses in Old London, the visitor’s best plan will
be to leave the street by the narrow, or western end, and visit the
Queen’s Gate Annexe, which is given over to the African Colonies.
Cape of Immediately on entering, we find ourselves in one of the Courts set
Good Hope. a p art f or t h e Cape of Good Hope. The Cape is famous for its ostriches,
diamonds, and wild animals, and the most interesting exhibits from the
Colony have reference to these subjects. Overhead, as we enter the
Court, is the head of an African elephant, with ears flying and trunk
extended, on either side of which is a half-elephant’s skull, which will appear
small by comparison with some of those in the Ceylon Court. To the
right are glass cases containing a magnificent collection of ostrich
plumes, and behind these, against the wall, are shown samples of South
African tobacco, and also of crocidolite, which is a species of cat’s-eye,
found on the asbestos mountains in Griqualand West. On the opposite
side, against the central partition, the most prominent object is a large
machine for washing and sorting the blue ground in which the diamonds
are found.
Cape Dia- On the left of the entrance in the Southern half of the Court the
Diamond 11 * 1 Walls are hun S with P ictures and decorated with the heads and horns of
Cutting. t^ie antelopes of South Africa. Here also are arranged stuffed
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 66: Index, p. 65.


rh" . . f^*~
I v 8S'.- : - _ > >^|f|Il. ul •..- ; tiU^^^, J -. .r: “ " - - , -'/' pvSsrj
models of ostriches and other animals, also specimens of horns and ivory,
and samples of pebbles and minerals. The most impressive exhibits in
this part are arranged down the centre of the Court, and consist of a
complete representation of the entire process of diamond mining,
washing, sorting, and polishing. The mining is illustrated by a large
model to scale of the Bulfontein diamond mine in Griqualand West
Diamond Mine. General View,
The blue ground in which the diamonds are found is lent by the De
Beer’s Mining Co. The washing and sorting machinery in which the
blue ground is puddled and reduced is also shown ; while the whole pro-
cesses of cutting, polishing, and setting the stones is illustrated under the
direction of Messrs. Ford & Wright, of Clerkenwell Green. The sorted
stones are shown in four cases, containing diamonds to the value of
ln another case, beyond the south end of the model of the
diamond mine, are shown several specimens of sham diamonds made of
glass, one of which was actually sold in the Colony for fs°°-
In addition to the above, plans and models of several other diamond
mines are shown on the partition wall, and of the machinery and
apparatus used in working them.
The remainder of the Cape collection is shown in the Western part
of the Annexe in a Court parallel to the one which has just been visited.
The Southern end of the Court is taken up with a trophy of the heads
of antelopes collected by Mr. J. S. Jameson, and modelled and arranged
by Mr. Rowland Ward. This is said-to be the most complete and
Por Contents, see p. 3; Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56: Index, p. 65.


perfect collection of South African heads in existence. Underneath the
large elephant’s head, which forms the centre of the collection, is a
painting representing Cape Town, with Table Mountain and Table Bay.
Advancing up the Court from South to North, we find on the right
hand several samples of furniture and cabinet work made at the Cape
from native woods. Immediately opposite these, on the left hand side,
are the timber exhibits. Outside the Court, facing Queen’s Gate, is a
large conservatory filled with specimens of palms, ferns and other
plants. Advancing further up the Court, we find cases filled with skins,
furs, flowers and medicinal waters, and specimens of copper ore and
refined copper from the celebrated mines in little Namaqualand, situated
about 400 miles to the north of Cape Town. On the left-hand side is
a large collection of pictures, flowers, fishes, &c., and beyond these
again are samples of minerals. The Cape collection of wools and
mohairs is found on the left-hand side of the Court at the extreme end
of the section reserved to this Colony; and opposite these on the right
is a large model of the breakwater, harbour and docks now being con-
structed in Table Bay. Beyond the railings is a court, given up almost
exclusively to exhibits connected with the aboriginal races of South
Africa. The walls are decorated with trophies formed of weapons,
articles of attire, implements and horns. Some idea of the force of a
South African hailstorm may be gathered from the sheet of galvanised
iron on the west wall of the court, which was perforated in numerous
places by the hail which fell in the celebrated storm that passed over
Queenstown in February, 1879. Many of the hailstones were six inches
in circumference.
Proceeding straight on, we enter the Court reserved to the West
African Settlements. Here the decorations of the Court should be
noticed: they consist for the most part of trophies of native weapons
and implements tastefully arranged in the panels of the walls, which
latter are richly coloured in black, yellow and white. The articles
exhibited consist for the most part of natural produce and the rude
native manufactures. The specimens of metal-work from the barbarous
regions of Central Africa are very interesting. They show that the
natives have some elementary artistic conceptions, combined with a rude
skill in handicraft. The forms of some of the bowls, coffee-pots, water-
bottles and other utensils betray most clearly the influence of Arabic
art. One of the most interesting things exposed in the Court is the
collection of gold ornaments paid by King Coffee as a portion of the
indemnity claimed at the close of the Ashanti Campaign. The King’s
golden axe is also exhibited by Her Majesty the Queen.
After passing through the West African Court, the visitor will turn
sharp round to the right at the end of the Annexe, and enter the space
reserved to Natal. At the north end of the Court is a small con
servatory, and in front of this are arranged several specimens of South
African antelopes standing under ferns and spreading palms. On either
side of the centre are specimens of birds, insects, drugs, corals, and a
model of a tea farm. It is not generally known that tea is one of the
products of this Colony, which indeed seems to be remarkable for the
richness and variety of its natural products. Amongst these are in-
cluded, in addition to tea, coffee, sugar, rice, red pepper, maize, pulse
African
Settle-
ments.
Natal
For Contents) see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan*
between pp. 4* and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56: Index, p. 66.


and grain, samples of all of which are exhibited. Natal tea and coffee
may be obtained in one of the tea houses in the grounds to the North
of the Indian Gallery. There is a large collection of samples of coal
on the west side of the Court, together with maps illustrating the coal
measures, and statistical and other information illustrating’ the produc-
tion. On the opposite side one of the prominent objects is the skull
of a hippopotamus, remarkable not only for its size, but for the formid-
able character of its tusks and teeth. Beyond the samples of agricultural
produce are the collections of timbers and minerals, including gold.
Here also is a large waggon used for trekking into the interior; samples
Native making Fire from Sticks by Friction.
of wools, and the models and other exhibits of the Castle Mail Steam
Packet Co. The walls of the Court are decorated with Zulu shields,
assegais, and other weapons and implements; and there is also a collec-
tion of pictures and photographs illustrating the aboriginal inhabitants,
the scenery and life in the Colony.
VI. THE WEST GALLERIES, ARCADES AND ANNEXES,
AND THE CENTRAL GALLERY.
THE AQUARIUM —NEW ZEALAND —DOMINION OF CANADA.
The visitor had now better return to the main body of the Exhibition
by the same doorway by which he entered the Queen’s Gate Annexe.
Passing up the steps on his left-hand side he will find himself in the
Aquarium, which was constructed for the Fisheries Exhibition at a cost of Aquarium,
some and in the incredibly short space of time of about six weeks.
The salt water for the tanks containing the sea fish, to the amount of about
65,000 gallons, was brought from Brighton, and clarified through Maignen’a
Maignen’s patent “ Filtre Rapide.” It is kept in a state of circulation Filters.
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41; Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56; Index, p. 65.


through the tanks by means of pumps driven by Otto gas-engines, in a
pumping station at the southern end of the gallery. The fresh-water fish
are kept in tanks supplied with water which has been softened by
Maignen’s process, for the water supplied by the London Companies is
too hard for fish to live in for any length of time. By means of this pro-
cess the carbonate and sulphate of lime, which render the water hard,
are thrown down, and easily removed by filtration through Maignen s
large supply “ Filtre Rapide.” Ihe various tanks certain many in-
teresting specimens of fish, but probably the one which will most attract
sightseers is that which contains the collection of Sea Anemones, many
of which are of rare beauty. This department of the Exhibition has
been handed over to the Council of the National Fish Culture Associa-
tion, the President of which is the Marquis of Exeter, and the manager
and secretary, W. Oldham Chambers, F.L.S. The object of the Council
has been to render the Aquarium instructive as well as interesting, and
consequently arrangements have been made for stocking the tanks with
various species of food fishes, in addition to which there is a well-
arranged establishment for the artificial culture of marine and fresh-
water fishes, molluscs and Crustacea. The collection is further enriched
by the loan of numerous cases of stuffed fishes.
The Council of the National Fish Culture Association have spared no
trouble and expense to still further heighten the attractiveness of the
Aquarium, and preparations have been in course of progress since the
beginning of the present year for bringing to perfection the several
necessary preliminaries, to ensure the successful retention of fish in
captivity. During the winter the Aquarium was maintained in such
a manner that the collection now shown to the public might include as
many well-seasoned and matured fish as possible. Elaborate arrange-
ments have been made for replenishing the tanks with marine and
fresh-water fish, so that the Aquarium may always be replete with
carefully selected fish, forming a unique display as far as London is
concerned. . .
In order to still further intensify the interest attaching to the living
collection offish, the Council of the National Fish Culture Association
obtained the consent of the Lords of the Committee of the Council of
Education to a portion of the magnificent exhibits in the Buckland
Museum being transferred to the Aquarium for exhibition. An excel-
lent show of interesting and edifying objects is thus presented to the
public tanks, forming a rare and important combination of exhibits
hitherto rarely excelled.
The Fish Culture department, belonging to the National Fish Culture
Association, is situated in the western portion of the building, and runs
parallel with the Aquarium, containing exhibits of fish-hatching and
rearing apparatus invented by the Marquis of Exeter and Mr. W.
Oldham Chambers. During the winter and spring this department has
been a scene of lively activity, on account of the spawning season, when
many hundred thousands of fish-eggs were successfully incubated, and
the fry transferred to waters at the Delaford Park Fishery belonging
to the Association, It is to be regretted that, on account of the time of
year, the public were prevented from viewing the hatching operations,
which were of a most interesting and instructive character.
Culture.
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 66; Index, p. 65.


ADVERTISEMENTS
THE HOTEL
METROPOLE,
LONDON. S.W.
THIS MAGNIFICENT HOTEL, SITUATED IN NORTHUM-
BERLAND AVENUE AND WHITEHALL PLACE, TRAFALGAR
SQUARE, IS ARRANGED AND FURNISHED TO AFFORD
RESIDENTS EVERY POSSIBLE CONVENIENCE AND COM-
FORT. IN ADDITION TO A LARGE NUMBER OF SINGLE
AND DOUBLE BEDROOMS, THERE ARE ELEGANT SUITES
OP PRIVATE APARTMENTS. THE POSITION IS CENTRAL,
THE ARRANGEMENTS ARE COMPLETE, THE PUBLIC ROOMS
MAGNIFICENT, AND THE CHARGES MODERATE. THE
GENERAL ORGANISATION ENABLES THE PROPRIETORS
TO PROVIDE THE HIGHEST CLASS BANQUETS, DINNERS,
AND WEDDING BREAKFASTS, FOR WHICH SOME OP THE
MOST LUXURIOUS SUITES OP ROOMS IN EUROPE ARE
AVAILABLE.
COLONISTS AND VISITORS TO THE EXHIBITION HAVE
AN OPPORTUNITY OP INSPECTING THE MAGNIFICENT
HALLS AND PUBLIC ROOMS OP THE HOTEL METROPOLE
BY AVAILING THEMSELVES OP THE TABLE-D’h6tE
BREAKFAST, LUNCHEON, OR DINNER. SEPARATE TABLES
FOR TABLE-D’HdTE DINNER, SERVED BETWEEN 6 AND
8.30 P.M., MAY BE SECURED IN ADVANCE BY LETTER OR
TELEGRAM. J
Telegraphic Address, HOTEL METROPOLE, LONDON.


J I ,» U E E N’S GATE
| “ I SS | :J f . . • • • | I
¥ - H s :rr-‘.« t si 1 -.=1
| S , _-&pB f_ Ip 1 — 1 — 1 '
. 1 i f I I nmf'.T;.i..j
I £ Ui=i—------ * g : g'g. : . -
I m r—'j ! |“T '■ : j~ Zj [t ft WEST ARCADE
K II ’ Sms? gg^ajaKihafe^
IT ® |L lE i;S - west A g >
St “ k> «r, 1 »« M r •;[ . P
f i L * ? r - 1*?
Zj- Isl S O 1; UJ . «! L conservatory . (-ZI: „rH
i .gif f-s -^nJjgi.
> I? r > a s ig’ifl CD Qj o|« - d > i ij
> L 3 is g SiCLj m 0 Ifco ' a 5 ii t
SI* 3 .♦ SC" S,f as&B. « >«/!| J |fcpi N f
„ »| o "|i'05 sf ?ny r %^
u |i* !f( o f IlifO
ii iM fr|: >|rt
g (A / rp ■LLMllii V Ai LOg* -**! ~ \ ~ ~
| ■ I In! lA-jalMU ® 0 f»
s f+i m fxi iorr~T’- 0 ,t r - •*? T '*******^ S. T i—i-f T
I p * a> I « 05 M 5 jfejj .^rVp^^ 1 £ y J
i | pf S i*i i I ■ |l '• S
i i| & IO !js gn /©l&i 14 |-®ji|]' rMt— “—-J-* j._.___,X-
*1 h« ■© f$ (Pip o»SsS, be~-i pi- f
J g S rffi rr; rS-f s n f $t><^-;? - w:cap *-.- Q
I I Lj ' ■' j !,^r • • .1 ■ I N DIA M USEUM . S.K|
I -.-.y i : ill
I §Aj I ■■■'■; i n P ., ■ { r^
? KOJ,ON , .... :-|v,hT7....| ' -■■ '■ : rn ' *~—--I I.'_ .
" EXH I BIT! ON ROAD
THE NUMBERS ON THIS PLAN REFER TO THE PAGES IN
THE NUMBERS ON THIS PUN REFER TO THE PAGES IN


MM I
pi
5 ? > g ? SB
H - M
1
THE GUIDE. WHERE THE DESCRIPTION WILL BE FOUND.
• . 9
l:& !
r 1 1
Jsj; : .liiul 1
if ®:
<c w ►
r § gSsgaga-saS|i * I
S W 33§g p S : nS|®2 g- I g
| a §?g. O. g"|r 3 § c
I I rg.; r: i; ls?l; ;*i
5 : |::::?: |:I: e ?- s
SS. m 5! m t? *’ O
88 S .g. .. . . B . .r• . . , ►
m • “ • :
o
Co A.
2. C
I r-
~ . o
SP I 3 tz{
0 $ i
1 5 hh
SC 1 lUlHfft to a,
I—R 1 — R S>.ina?l ,, g's,g'S’’L * g-
f“h<?w £ f Ifif l“S|'pf leg. gr §| I,
Pr” l TTT “tl \ O CS 2 ® 2-* CO- * M Sj'-i L. as L. J3 * m
pi Hi . M g §.ss®FhbE ,^?s- ss S§ S p s *
gS* ££ § 1
L* -cxX 'A >Q po - s s i oD.“£» b i§i :s F s -
r_ \v\ u '.ll s i% »
1 ® <ft> rJi ||. p 9 ?lg‘ p^fe 9 ? ■i 9
i* • nr *II t r®a © §
£ f r jJJI ! I !
If tih i B m QAL^
► i*T i „ - 1 -
& & I o I > \%_
$ I ® I [fc / I r n ™—
|i f ra a u / n 0 , i
. I I sl u 2 ? m< 2 entrance
IT -1 Rj > I r» ' _ _ > / S— 1
I® |t> | 1 I iV\ r /J^
i» Mi y 3 iA-v„ H yf
£ * <x\ i if . I—i
►v. • TJ r—^
~ * 1 rO jg Q
5 ?o ?S 1 '" k S
Mss fIMISi p Pg
?o|g O-w h : ’ QO«a J * PO
f|r M|i|* Hi;N §"! o
'.ifttfifis ;ig:; gs? s
===“* = = -%i ®
I -: §
liil?l»|s|s|ll“| "g 5 o
-oq C?J 3- J Ssjog* S® g2 ra
fjo I 5 5 sag ><
rg I * H i» ? g.3s §sS O(3
CO 2 2. nS O C X 's^-'
■«l S °?2 £- OO
op J ? h §l2 -|5" P o>
o 5 E - • pcf p
■■■§"■ w £ t-< O
: : H“ ” o
« ■ a
525
c* K L
§. 8P s’ t-1
8 8 *0
(t *■*
( fv
w § a.
§T I g M
Js? i o j
S w W O
0 * 00 hh kJ
- W tzS t>
O HH M lL
a£ so
fe? H0 Kj w~.
C r.> > Q
3 f o
S M O
»?5 g
Ssg w 5
Sgg * s
?o| a 2
M £ C
?§ a 2 *
.» w “
►p S S 2
3S m h
S w 2 co
tzj . W t-H QQ
- o CO W hh
M C
S W H tS 2
f£| W HH
w” w w H
L P hd l-H 0
rP wo S
" ss w
Hs § i 3
„“ M H
• w oo « w
gf b w
& 00
p» _
IE GUIDE, WHERE THE DESCRIPTIOH WILL BE FOUHD.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE HOLBORN RESTAURANT.
One of the Sights and one of the Comforts
of London, for
LDNCHEOHS, DIMERS, AM SUFFERS.
The Best Cuisine and the Finest Wines.
The Famous Table d’Hote Dinner from 8.30 till 9 o’clock.
Accompanied by an Efficient Orchestra under a Distinguished
Conductor.
GRILLS FROM THE DOULTON GRILL, AND SUPPERS AFTER
THE THEATRE,
Served in the Magnificent New Grill Boom, which is constructed almost entirely
of Choice Marbles and Venetian Mosaics.
Visitors should not leave London without seeing this palatial Restaurant,
which is considered to be the Finest in the World.
BENTLEY PRIORY,
Formerly the Seat of the Duke of Abercorn, and afterwards the
Residence of the late Queen Adelaide,
IS NOW OPEN
AS A FIRST-CLASS RESIDENTIAL HOTEL.
The Mansion has a south aspect, and is situated on the slope of a hill, sheltered from
the north-east winds. The Apartments afford all the comforts of an English nobleman’s
residence at a moderate expense.
TENNIS LAWNS, CRICKET AND FOOTBALL GROUNDS.
FOUR ACRES of ORNAMENTAL WATER for BOATING and FISHING,
k Magnificent Conservatory or Winter Garden, Cedar Gardens, and Deer Part
The Hotel Stabling is acknowledged to contain some of the Finest Boxes in England
with every accommodation. The Hotel Omnibus meets frequent trains at Harrow, the
nearest Station to the Priory, for the convenience of Visitors travelling from Eus ton' and
Broad Street, and Private Carriages will be sent if notice is given to the Secretary.
On and after April 20th, a well-appointed Coach will leave the “Metropole”
Hotel daily at 11.30 a.m., calling at the “Grand” Hotel and “White Horse
Cellars,” arriving at the Priory at 1.15 p.m,, and returning at 4.30 p.m.. due in
London at the “ Metropole ” at 6 p.m.
A Pamphlet descriptive of “Bentley Priory” and its surroundings. Tariff of Charges, and all further
particulars, may be obtained on application to the Sbckktart— j
BENTLEY PRIORY, GREAT STAN MORE, MIDDLESEX.


In regard to the exhibits contained in this section, on one side is to
be seen a tank of large proportions, in which magnificent specimens of
salmonidas of various species, including grayling, are shown; whilst on a
line with it is a row of hatching-boxes, in which ova are deposited, and
the fry maintained until such a time as they lose their umbilical sac.
Exactly opposite are several tanks in which are exhibited some of
the fry hatched last year on the premises, including salmon and trout,
which are interesting as affording an idea of the capacity of artificial
fish culture. Among other exhibits are a model of an Oyster Culture
Establishment, designed by the Marquis of Exeter; models of Fish
Culture appliances designed by Livingstone Stone, Esq., H. C. Chester,
Esq., M. G. Holton, Esq., W. H. Wroten, Esq.; and a model exempli-
fying the most efficacious and economical method of constructing
breeding ponds for fish, invented by Mr. W. Oldham Chambers, F.L.S.,
all of which are well worthy of note, forming, as they do, edifying and
interesting studies, selected from the Buckland Museum. At the south
end of this part of the Aquarium are several tanks containing specimens
of tortoises and turtles. And close by is a turtle-hatching house taste-
fully arranged with rockery and ferns by Mr. Dick Radclyffe.
If the visitor leaves the Aquarium by the southern end he will find Lockhart’s
himself in the grounds, close by one of Lockhart’s Cocoa Rooms, of ocoa f
which there are now several existing in the Metropolis. r l hey have oom ”
been founded to supply temperance drinks, such as tea, coffee, choco-
late, and cocoa, of good quality and at low prices, on a strictly com-
mercial basis. Light refreshments, such as scones, cakes, bread and
butter, eggs, &c., are also obtainable here.
Close to Lockhart’s Cocoa Rooms is the entrance to the West Gallery, New
the southern half of which is occupied by New Zealand. This will be Zealand,
found to be a most interesting section of the Exhibition. Zealand,
though generally classed among the Australian Colonies, is in reality
separated from the continent of Australia “ by at least a thousand miles
of ocean as destitute of islands as is the Atlantic between Ireland and
America.” The islands are very nearly the antipodes of Great Britain,
hence they enjoy a much more temperate climate than the mainland of
Australia. The principal exhibits of New Zealand are wool, gold and New
grain, to which must be added the comparatively recent trade of frozen Zealand
meat, which has latterly attained to very large proportions, and is still Meat
developing. The frozen meat industry is well represented at the Exhi-
bition, though, for the sake of convenience, the refrigerating machinery
is not shown in the New Zealand Court, but is placed in the South
Promenade, where it is much more suitably situated for the supply of
the Restaurants. A glance at the Exhibition will show that this Colony,
in addition to being rich in the raw products which it sends to the home
markets, has also evidently attained to considerable skill in many
branches of manufacture. On entering the Court by the left-hand
door, the visitor will find on either side of him numerous specimens of
furniture and cabinet work made from native woods. The whole of
this section of the Court is given over to manufactured articles, and
includes samples of biscuits, carriages, books, boots, tweeds, and other
woollen cloths. On the right-hand side are excellent specimens of
sanitary pottery ware, and there is also a case full of highly-finished
Fox Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56: Index, p. 65.


brass-founders’ work. The walls of this part of the Court are adorned
with water-coloured drawings representing New Zealand scenery. The
great majority of the New Zealand pictures are to be found in the
Albert Hall.
Crossing over to the Eastern section of the New Zealand Court, we find
at the extreme end a well-arranged collection of fine merino and other
wools. Going South, on either side are preserved specimens of
various species of fish. Those on the Eastern side are very re-
markable ; one of them is a large blue shark, preserved by Professor
Parker’s method for the preservation of cartilaginous substances. In
the centre of the Court are some immense skeletons of the extinct
species of bird called the New Zealand Moa, and these are surrounded
by cases containing specimens of parrots and other New Zealand birds.
Close to these are three trophies; the first of seed anti pulse, the
second of timber, and the third of gold. On either side of the latter
are arranged samples of minerals and stones. Amongst the timber
specimens will be noted a large section of the trunk of a Kawri pine, on
the top of which is shown a huge piece of the Kawri gum which is
found in this tree. In the immediate neighbourhood is a case con-
taining specimens of that remarkable plant, called by the New Zealand
shepherds the “ vegetable sheep,” because it somewhat resembles a
recumbent sheep. It
grows only on the bare
shingles on the high
mountains. On the right
hand or Western side is
a large geological map
of New Zealand, and
beyond this again is the
section of the Court re-
served to the Maories.
In it the most prominent
object is the front of a
Maori storehouse, which
proves to what skill in
decorative carving this
wild race has attained.
Here also are to be seen
numerous examples of
Maori weapons, imple-
ments, canoes, and
clothing, together with
paintings representing
the native races. The
East side of the Court is
flanked by an enormous
Maori
Exhibits.
Maori House and Natives.
conservatory, which runs right down to the edge of the fountain, and
contains a wonderful collection of ferns. Some of the surplus exhibits
of the New Zealand Court are shown in this conservatory. Amongst
other things there is a coal trophy, and a large collection of timber
and tinned meats.
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Flan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 66: Index, p. 65.


On leaving the New Zealand Court and going north, the visitor will Canada,
find the entrance to Canada before him. The Canadian Dominion
makes one of the finest shows in the entire Exhibition, occupying as it
does a large portion of the Western Gallery and Arcade, and the whole
of the Central Gallery, Northern Annexe and East Quadrant.'
Immediately on entering we find the Educational Court, which
contains exhibits relating to the various schools and higher educational
establishments of the Dominion,
The West Gallery is almost exclusively filled with agricultural Canadian
machinery, machinery in motion, stoves and hardware, and tools and
implements. Many visitors will no doubt be surprised to learn by the nery '
evidence afforded by this Gallery that Canada is already so far advanced
in manufacturing power.
The portions of the West Arcade and Avenue not occupied by the Canadian
Aquarium and Fish-Culture Departments, are filled with the Canadian Fisheries.
Fisheries Exhibits. The fishing industry is one of the great national
Objects in Canadian Court.
pursuits, and accordingly considerable space and prominence is given
to the collections illustrating it. This portion of the Exhibition embraces
stuffed specimens of fish —of which there are several very fine examples
—fish-oils, and other products, models of boats, fishing-tackle and
appliances, and a very fine collection of canoes.
The greater part of the remainder of the Canadian exhibition is Canadian
placed in the Great Central Gallery. We obtain access to this building Minerals -
For Contents, see p. 8: Coloured View of Old Londpn. p. 41; Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49; Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 66: Index, p. 66.


by going down the flight of steps in front of the large Galloway Engine,
which drives the machinery in motion. At the foot of the steps is
arranged the Canadian collection of minerals, which includes two
obelisks representing respectively the amounts of gold which have been
obtained from the fields in Nova Scotia and British Columbia. A most
interesting portion of the mineral exhibition is to be found in the small
Court on the right hand side, the door of which is opposite the larger of
the two obelisks. In this Court is also to be found a stuffed specimen
of a beaver in the act of felling a tree.
Machinery n nort; h side of the Court the visitor will see the two pairs of
for Galloway Compound Engines, and the four Elwell Parker Dynamos,
Lighting which generate the electric current by which part of the Gardens are
hardens, illuminated.
Immediately m front is a great trophy of Canadian wild animals,
which includes specimens of the Polar bear, seal, walrus, moose, the
great Wapiti stag, and many other animals. Close by on the garden
side is a collection of the natural and agricultural products, and the wild
animals of the Island of Anticosti, in the Gulf of St. Lawrence. On the
further side of the Garden door is the collection of furs and skins,
Hudson’s exhibited by the Hudson’s Bay Company, which includes specimens of
pany. ° m * j rar ® silver fox; there is also a carriage wrapper made of fifty
dark sable skins. All the specimens of furs shown here are the very
finest of their kind. Mr. Ince, the agent of the Company, shows some
splendid specimens of heads and horns, including grizzly bear, prong
horn antelope and cariboo. The Hudson’s Bay Company shows also
several other interesting exhibits. In the cases adjoining the furs is a
collection of curiosities and of articles of native Indian manufacture.
In front of the trophy of wild animals is a dog sledge with its harness.
This type of conveyance is used in carrying the mails to the inland
settlements, which are at great distances apart. In the Grounds are
some Indian tents and a birch bark canoe.
Maim-* an „^ ter passing this trophy we come to the great collection of Canadian
factures. Manufactured Goods, which occupies nearly the whole of the Central
Gallery and of the North Annexe. Here will be found, amongst other
things, furniture and furnishing accessories, sewing-machines, a collection
of New Brunswick timbers, the arrangement of which is to be particu-
larly commended, a large number of pianos and organs, and tweeds and
other woollen goods. At the east end of the Gallery is a fine trophy of
Canadian agricultural and garden produce, including samples of corns,
pulses, _ grasses, and numerous fruits. This trophy is surrounded by a
collection of tinned provisions. Up the steps to the right is a collection
of Canadian drugs, and on the left is a model representing the Montreal
Ice Palace, which is erected every winter, and which attracts large
crowds of visitors.
The remainder of the Canadian collection, consisting for the most
part of carriages, harness leather, tanning materials, school furniture
and games, is in the East Quadrant, while the exhibition of pictures,
which will be found of great interest, is placed in the Albert Hall.
See page 61.
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 66: Index, p, 66.


YXX. eastern gallery, avenue, arcade, and
ANNEXE.
BRITISH GUIANA —HONG KONG NORTH BORNEO STRAITS SETTLE-
MENTS AFRICAN ISLANDS —INDIAN ADMINISTRATION COURT
WEST INDIES —CYPRUS —MALTA.
We have now arrived at the Eastern Galleries, the description of
which will complete the account of the main buildings of the Exhibition.
Turning to the kft on quitting the Central Gallery, the first Court to be
visited Is that occupied by British Guiana, the principal products of British
which Colony are sugar, molasses, rum, timber, barks, gums, and fibres,
all of which are represented in the Court. There are also shown a model
of an Indian house, and several specimens of Indian weapons, imple-
ments, utensils, furniture, and clothing. One of the most interesting
obiects in this Court is the model of a native woman with a child on
her back engaged in the operation of straining cassava pulp in order to
turn it into mell for bread-making. The strainer is a long and narrow
cylindrical receptacle formed of closely-woven strips of bark, open above
and closed below. The upper end is attached to a beam and the lowe
to a lever, on the end of which the woman is sitting. By the motion
of the body the strainer is alternately distended and relaxed, and the
poisonous juice contained in the cassava is squeezed out, leaving the pulp
nearly dry.
Native Bread-making.
Beyond Guiana is the Hong Kong Court, but 'Sf-
small portion of the space reserved to the Stralts Se “
contains, amongst other things, a very picturesque b M
Temple, a portion of which is represented in the accompanying
Son. Hong Kong very appropriately occnp.es the space held by
Vrr Contents see p 3- Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
SfcrLred Vie. ot Indian PalM* P- “• “•


China in the three former Exhibitions. A considerable portion of the
Chinese decoration remains, and gives to this Court a particularly
bright and pleasing appearance, which is increased by the gay colours
Old Chinese Pagodas,
of many of the exhibits. Amongst the most interesting objects in this
Court are the models of Chinese houses and temples; the great model
of the Hong Kong Islands and Docks; and the large collection of
Chinese boats, some of which are extremely picturesque. In the
centre of the Court are two shops, the fronts and sides of which are
formed of carved screens filled in with glass. There are also cases
containing specimens of silver and other metal wares of native manu-
facture. There is also a large trophy of Hong Kong pottery, and on
the east side of the Court a representative assortment of mats, baskets,
and! basket furniture. In the cases round the end of the Court is
arranged a fine collection of silks, and some magnificent specimens
of clothing worn by the wealthier classes of Chinese resident in the
Colony.
Flanking the Hong Kong Court and looking out on to the Gardens is
the Chinese Restaurant, in which Messrs. Spiers and Pond serve a
superior tea with light refreshments at one shilling per head. The
Hong Kong Bazaar, in which are sold furniture, porcelain, pottery,
metal work, &c., is to be found at the head of the stairs leading to the
Albert Hall.
Chinese
Restau-
rant.
North
On leaving the Hong Kong Court, the visitor’s best plan will be to
enter the adjoining East Arcade and proceed to its northern end, where
will be found the collection from North Borneo, which is one of the
Borneo.
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49; Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 66: Index, p, 68,


latest fields of British enterprise. The exhibits here consist principally
of samples of timbers, and of collections of weapons and other native
appliances. One of the most striking objects in this Court is the large
stuffed specimen of the great ape, the ourang outang.
Going south we next come to the Straits Settlements and Perak, which Straits
occupy a considerable space in the East Arcade and the adjacent East t g’ and
Avenue. The ethnographical collections in these Courts are very inte- p era k.
resting. They include photographs of the native races, models of Malay
houses and palaces, and a large collection of weapons, implements, and
clothing. In the Grounds are three Malay houses, built on piles, formed Malay
of wooden framing with panels of matting, and fitted complete. Among ouses *
Chinese Junks.
the photographs should be noticed the representations of the curious
tree-dwellings, which are lightly constructed houses, perched like nests
on the boughs of standing trees.
Various weapons are arranged in trophies on the panels of the
walls between the pilasters, and below the trophies are placed semi-
circular stands, on which are displayed the various products and manu-
factures of the country. Some of the art ware, such as textile fabrics
and metal-work, is very beautiful. The Commissions of the Straits
Settlements and of Perak deserve great credit for the completeness and
interesting character of their collection.
After leaving the Straits Settlements, the next portion of the Arcade Mauritius,
is reserved to the Mauritius and Seychelles, the exhibits from which
islands consist principally of sugar, spices, vanilla, cocoa-nuts, fibres, Ascensioni '
timber and coral. The next spaces are reserved for St. Helena and Falkland
Ascension. St. Helena is rich in relics of the Emperor Napoleon, and Isles,
shows the coffee-pot, toast-rack and egg-cups used by the illustrious
prisoner during the period of his captivity on the island. Next come
Tor Contents, see p. 3 : Coloured View of Old London, p. 41 : Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56; Index, p. 66.


fcBMKS; WLANs]
SAFE DEPOSIT.
THE CHANCERY (61 & 62) LANE
SAFE DEPOSIT
For the Secure Keeping of Valuables in the FIRE-PROOF and
BURGLAR-PROOF SAFES and STRONG ROOMS.
GUARDED BY MILITARY PATROL,
LIGHTED THROUGHOUT WITH ELECTRICITY.
WRITING ROOMS FOR
RENTERS.
General Waiting
Room for Visitors.
21 Separate ©Slatting
-m mi -■ A Enom for ILaitfs.
SAFE DEPOSIT.
Height. Width. Depth.
IN. IN. IN.
4+ X 6* X2O £1 1 0
4* X Vi X2O I 10 0
V X Vi X2O 2 2 0
9 XHiX 20 3 3 0
14 XHiX 20 4 4 0
23i X 23i x2O 6 5 0
Immovably fixed in the
New Fire and Burglar
Proof vaults.
Visitors and Travellers
can have the use of Safes
for short periods at special
rates. i
Note.—lf more than
one Safe is taken, a reduc-
tion will be made.
ANNUAL RENT
OF
STRONG ROOMS,
5 to 100 Guineas.
Plate Chests, Jewel
Cases, or Parcels.
Per Package.
For 1 Month ... £0 6 0
„ 2 Months... 0 V 6
„ 3 „ ... 010 0
„ 6 0 15 0
„ 12 110
Larger ones according
to Size.
CASH SOXES, given
in at night to be re-
turned in the morn-
ing, £2 2s. per annum.
WILLS may be DE-
POSITED for £1 Is.
for Life.
A Prospectus and Admit Card to view sent post-free on application.
61 & 63. CHANCERY LANE, LONDON, W.C.


IH 'smBsUrJSMm §
i i - • ».i iwmi _j


'OURCOYNE’S Gold Medal
•“Anstraliaii Wines.
Dr. Plnhall writes: —“ I never realized the character and refinement Australian
Wines are capable of display ng till 1 tasted yours.”
The Gresham Lecturer on Medicine writes:—“l believe the Health Exhibition
will open people’s eyes to the value of your wines. As a juror, though not In the
Food Department, 1 shall take care to make known the value of your exhibits.
When I dined at .... 1 called on each occasion for your wine, and all my friends
and neighbours who dined at the same time and who took the Hermitage were
greatly pleased with it, and will come upon you for more. If Australian wines
when first introduced into England had been of a similar kind, the general feeling,
still so prevalent, against them would not have existed.”
of ill wm niMßiifs ill miiii
Dowgate Hill Vaults, Cannon Street Stations.
THE DAILY & WEEKLY STAR,
The Circula-
tion of the
* Daily Star ’
exceeds all
other papers
in Montreal
combined.
The * Weekly
Star’ quad-
ruples the cir-
culation of the
Daily, and
reaches all the
Agricultural
Districts in the
Dominion of
Canada.
MONTREAL, CANADA.
GRAHAM * CO., Publishers.
London Office: Ho. 440, ITBASD,
(Opposite Charing Cross Railway Station.)
Montreal is
the Largest
City in
Canada, and is
the terminus
of the Cana-
dian Pacific
Railway.
The * Star ’ is
the best
Advertising
Medium in
Canada.
Rates and
Estimates for
Advertising
given upon
application at
the
w.c.


the Falkland Isles which show wools, specimens of birds, and photo-
graphs of the islands. Beyond the Falkland Islands, we come to
the tasting bars of the Royal Commission, where visitors will be Mont-
allowed to taste, free of charge, samples of Lime Juice Cordials s 6 ™*
and non-alcoholic drinks exhibited by the Montserrat Company, and Bar> 6
by George Irish, of Montserrat, The remainder of the Arcade is
given up to the fifth or Administrative section of the Indian Exhibi-
tion, which has already been referred to. The exhibits in this
department all relate to the Administrative and Public Works Depart-
ments of our Indian Empire. They embrace, amongst other things,
models and photographs of public buildings, conveyances, boats, bridges,
canals, railroad works, docks, water and irrigation works, which are very
interesting as showing die pitch of material civilization to which India is
attaining under British rule.
About the middle of this section is the entrance to the far-famed Indian
Indian Museum, which is this year included in the Exhibition. In Museum,
it the visitor will find a magnificent collection of all the art wares of
India, and will have a good opportunity of comparing the quality of its
contents with the more modem work which he has already inspected in
the South Gallery.
The next portions of the Exhibition to be inspected are the various West
Courts set apart to the numerous West Indian Islands. The visitor’s
best plan will be to enter the East Gallery at the southern door. He
will notice at once the extremely brilliant manner in which these Courts
have been decorated with carved and coloured screens and numerous
banners, with the arches, walls, and partitions painted so as to represent
the numerous palms, ferns, fruits and flowers of the West Indies, dhe
whole of the West Indian Courts have been arranged under the super-
intendence of Mr. Adderley, whose object has been to illustrate as far
as possible, not only the present state of the islands as regards their
commercial products, but also their pre-historic condition, and their
histoiy since they became known to European settlers.
On the right-hand side, as we go in, is the Court reserved for British Honduras.
Flonduras, famous all the world over for its mahoganies and other
timbers, magnificent specimens of which are exhibited here, together
with samples of furniture made from them by the native Indians.
Round the walls are grouped numerous picturesque specimens of native
Indian implements, musical instruments, and other appliances, while the
decorative effect is increased by the manner in which several of the
products of the country, such as cocoa-nuts, skins, &c., have been
arranged. The pre-historic condition of the country is illustrated by an Aztec
extremely interesting case of Aztec remains, consisting for the most part emains<
of pottery, utensils, and images, and stone weapons and implements.
Some of these latter are quite unique in their character. T. his case, how-
ever, is not in the Honduras Court, but is exhibited, together with the other
historical collections, in the Centre of the West Indian Gallery. On the
left-hand side as we go in are the Courts belonging to the group of
Leeward Islands; the names of the separate islands are painted upon the leeward
walls. On the walls are hung illustrations of the machinery used in the Elands,
sugar manufacture, for which these islands are famous. One of the first
stands to attract attention is filled with the- products of the Montserrat
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p, 66: Index, p. 66.


Company, some of which, such as lime-juice syrup, are already well
known in this country. The Company also shows photographs of their
estates, buildings, and natives at work. Round the walls of the Court
are hung photographs illustrating the scenery, buildings, and many of
the races which now inhabit these islands. One of the panels between
the frames of the building has been removed, and its place supplied
by rockery, palms, and ferns, most tastefully arranged, the plants having
been specially brought over from the West Indies. There is also in
this Court a most interesting collection of old maps, some of them
dating back to the 16th century, collected by Sir Graham Briggs. There
are also here large collections of sugar-canes, native timbers, and
samples of the sugar manufacture, and some curious Carib stone imple-
ments. Some of the cases contain bead ornaments, which is one of the
native industries, and also old coins, many of which are veiy curious.
Turning to the right we find the Barbados Court next in position to
Honduras, This island is chiefly remarkable for its sugars, samples of
which as well as of the canes are exhibited. There is also exhibited
here a large collection of pickles, preserves, and the produce ot the
breadfruit-tree on which the natives live principally. In the centre of
the Court is a model showing the type of building in common use in the
island, surrounded by a deep verandah to keep off the tropical sun,
and built upon so-called hurricane cellars, in which the inhabitants take
refuge during the raging of tempests, which often sweep away the super-
structure. In one of the cases are exhibited samples of bituminous coal,
■which, being found in a coral island, can only be due to volcanic agencies.
In the same case in which the coal is exhibited are some wonderful
specimens of native-made point-lace and tatting, and also artificial flowers,
fans, and baskets, made of a white material, called Spanish Needle. In
another case are exhibited many extremely pretty necklaces and other
ornaments made of natural shells, principally white and green. _ i
The next Court on the right belongs to the great island of Jamaica,
which is celebrated for the importance and variety of its products. Here
we have sugars, coffees, cocoas, rum, licjueurs, numerous timbers, pre-
served provisions, foremost amongst which stand the canned and dried
turtle. Some of the mountain coffee of Jamaica is said to be the finest
in the world, and commands a very high price in the market.
We now come to the Central Court, which is common to all the
West Indian Islands, and is illustrative of their history. The frieze
around the walls is painted with views of many of the most famous
towns and places, and the walls are covered with pictures illustrating
scenery and plants of the various islands. Amongst these should be
specially noticed a large oil-painting, by Albert Bierstad, who is called
the Millais of America. It represents the surf coming in on one of the
Bahama Islands. There is also a collection of portraits of the sovereigns
of England who have been most famous in West Indian history, and a
statue of Columbus. Special notice should be taken of a large collection
of water-colour paintings of West Indian flowers, butterflies, and other
insects, reptiles, fishes, &c., made by Mrs. Blake, the wife of the
Governor of the Bahamas. This is one of the most beautifully painted
Barbados.
Jamaica.
collections of colonial plants and flowers to be found in the Exhibition.
In the various glass cases in this Court will be found an extremely
For Contents, seep. 3: Coloured View of Old London, P. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p, 56 : Index, p. bo,


valuable collection of stone implements used by the Caribs, also Aztec
pottery, gold ornaments from the tombs in Central America, and other
pre-historic remains, lent by W. Copeland Borlase, M.P.
Beyond the Central Court, on the right, is the section reserved to Bahamas,
the Bahama Islands, which is most tastefully decorated with star-fish
and a species of marine plant, called gorgonas. Amongst the pro-
ducts of these islands are sponges, corals, ornaments made of shells,
several of which are made by native black boys, and also tinned pi ne ~
apple and other plants. It was on one of the Bahamas that Columbus
first landed after his adventurous voyage across the unknown Atlantic.
The Court is remarkable for a magnificent collection of pink pearls,
including a pearl and diamond necklace lent by Lady Wallace. Ihe pink
pearl is only found in the Conch Shell, a specimen of which is exhibited
in the case. The body of the shell is used for cutting into cameos.
On the same side of the Gallery is the Trinidad Court. Trinidad is Trinidad,
one of the most important and fertile of the West Indian Islands, Ihe
products exhibited are extremely numerous; they include _ cocoa,
chocolate, arrowroot, preserved fruits, sugar, rum and various liqueurs,
angostura bitters, of which 600,000 bottles were sold last year, and
many species of timbers and cabinet woods. Some tables are shown
which illustrate the beauty and variety of the latter. They are made
by black workmen, and are extremely creditable specimens of workman-
ship. A model is shown of a cocoa-curing house, the roof of which is
movable. The cocoa-beans are exposed to the solar heat, and if rain
comes on, the roof is moved over them. One of the most important
natural features of Trinidad is the great pitch lake, which contains
apparently inexhaustible quantities of asphalt, about 60,000 tons or
which are shipped every year for paving streets and other purposes.
Another important product of the island is gypsum or sulphate of lime,
from which plaster-of-Paris is made- . ...
Numerous photographs are exhibited of the various black races which
now inhabit the island. It may be noted as an interesting fact that
coolie labour from India has been most successfully introduced. About
2,000 coolies arrive annually, and there are at the present moment
between 25,000 and 30,000 of them in the island. The great
majority of them settle there permanently, and become land-owners on
their own account. A few return to Hindostan with large sums of
money. The coolies, although not so muscular as the negroes, are
held in great esteem, as they give far less trouble, and are much more
persevering and careful in their work than the blacks of African descent.
The left-hand side of the Gallery is filled with the collection from Windward
the Windward Islands. The last Court on the left contains samples isianas-
of sugar-canes and sugar-manufacturing statistics from every sugar-
producing country in the world.
The last building which remains to be visited is the East Annexe, con-
taining the collections of the two Mediterranean islands, Cyprus and Malta.
On leaving the West Indian Court by the northern entrance, the
visitor will find on his left the Canadian Gallery; and if he proceeds
down this for a few steps, he will find again on his left the entrance
U.UWU LIJULO iV/j. Cv iv n ■*** —q , ~
to the Cyprus Court. On both sides as he goes in are Turkish divans
arranged behind woodwork screens. The decorations of the Court Cyprus.
Far Contents, seep. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 66. Index, p. 66.


deserve attention. The frieze with its rose-and-lotus pattern was repro-
duced by Mr. Gordon Hake from the ornaments of antique Cypriot
pottery, dating from 700 to 400 b.c. The flags down the centre of the
Court are all hand-painted, with enlarged designs, as found upon old
coins belonging to the different conquerors of the island. Particulars
of each of these are painted on the flags. In the centre of the Court
will be a loom with natives weaving silks, and near to it is a cart and
plough of the country made without nails or screws. A curious agri-
cultural instrument is shown for threshing com, made of a flat board
with sharp flints inserted in it. A labourer sits on the flat surface of the
board, underneath which is the grain, and an ox which is harnessed to
the apparatus, pulls it slowly round. Round the walls of the Court is
arranged a collection of minerals, silks, lace, and embroidery; some
of the latter coming from the district of Lefcara is particularly fine.
There are also a few specimens of antique pottery and statuary, and
a collection of water-colour sketches of the island scenery and buildings
by Mr. Tristram Ellis and Capt. Sinclair, R.E. A few samples are
shown of Cypriot wine. Cyprus, it should be noted, is the mother of
all wine-producing countries. Many of the finest varieties of grape now
in existence trace their origin to the vineyards of this island. i
Locust One of the most interesting objects in the Court is the model showing
Catching the method adopted with complete success since the English occupation
in yprus. f or extirpating the locusts. It is a peculiarity of the locust that it
always crawls forward in a perfectly straight line, surmounting instead
of turning every obstacle. It occurred to an Italian resident of the
island that this peculiarity might be made use of to entrap the insect.
He accordingly proposed to surround the tracts of cultivated country
with continuous lines of canvas fencing. To the upper edge of the
canvas he attached strips of smooth Italian cloth, the slippery surface
of which affords no foothold to the locusts. Accordingly, when the
swarms on their march climb up the fencing and reach the strip of
Italian cloth, they are unable to proceed, and fall back to the ground,
and their line of march is deflected round the fence. Here deep pits
are dug into which the locusts fall in millions, and as soon as the pit
is nearly filled, they are covered up with earth and buried alive. In
this way Cyprus has been practically freed from this scourge, and the
result is a great increase in the prosperity of this wonderfully fertile
land, the wheat lands of which are so rich that they produce from 60 to
65 bushels to the acre.
Malta. A stuffed specimen of that rare animal, the moufflon, which has the
body and feet of a deer and the head and horns of a sheep, from the
Troados Mountains, is exhibited. At the end of the Court is a
counter, on which are displayed the usual bazaar goods of the country.
The remainder of the East Annexe is taken up with the Maltese
exhibition. Malta has long been celebrated for its lace and silver filigree
work; excellent specimens of both of these industries are exhibited.
As we enter the Court we find two rooms, in which are shown specimens
of domestic furniture, and two figures clad in the faldette, or costume
of the country. On the other side of the Court are samples of inlaid
marble work. About the middle of the Annexe, on the left-hand side,
is a large portrait model of the first Grand Master of the Knights of
For Contents, see p. 3; Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan?
between pp. 48 and 49: Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56: Index, p. 60,


St. John of Jerusalem in the act of receiving the keys of the town.
Nearly opposite are several specimens of garden vases and ornaments,
which at first sight appear to be made in pottery, but are in reality carvings
in a fine kind of stone which is found on the island. On the wall of
the Court is an engraving of Her Majesty the Queen in a very finely
carved wooden frame, highly gilt, which is an excellent specimen of
workmanship. There is also a case containing several beautiful speci-
mens of Venetian glass, collected and lent by Admiral Inglefield. At
the end of the Court are four stalls, in which are sold Maltese sweet-
meats, lace, tobacco, silver filigree, and the gaily-coloured mule cloths.
Outside, at the end of the Court, is a handsome stone archway, of a
type common in the island; it is backed by a rockery made of the same
stone in the rough state.
VIII.—THE ALBERT HALL AND GARDENS.
PICTURE GALLERY —GROUNDS —ILLUMINATED FOUNTAINS —TEA AND
COFFEE HOUSES SOUTH PROMENADE EMIGRATION OFFICE
COLONIAL MARKET —MISCELLANEOUS BUILDINGS.
We have now completed the tour of the main buildings of the Exhi-
bition, but there still remains much that is interesting to visit. One of
the sights which the visitor should certainly inspect is the picture gallery Picture
in the Albert Hall, to which he can ascend either by lift or staircase. Gallery in
Most of the Colonies have exhibited their pictures in their own Courts;
but India, Canada, New Zealand, and Malta, having no available space
elsewhere, exhibit theirs in the Upper Gallery of the Albert Hall.
Close by the head of the lift is a large portrait of Her Majesty the
Queen, by Winterhalter, and another of the late Prince Consort. The
Queen is surrounded by portraits of the great Indian princes in their
picturesque costumes. As far as bay fourteen the Gallery is taken up
with Indian pictures, many of which are very beautiful; amongst them
may be noted the water-colour drawings of Horace van Ruith. There
are also several paintings by J. Griffiths, and a collection of water-colours
of Indian scenery by Miss Gordon-Cumming.
Canada is represented by a large number of pictures; some, illus-
trating Rocky Mountain scenery, are very impressive. Amongst them is
one of the Falls of Niagara, by H.R.H. the Princess Louise.
There are a few pictures from Malta, the most notable of which are
by Bonavia; and New Zealand sends a collection illustrative chiefly of
the beautiful scenery of the islands. Some of the most remarkable are
by J. Gully, S. H. Moreton, Barraud, and Bloomfield, who has painted
views of the celebrated hot lakes of Rotomahana. A curiosity of paint-
ing is the long panorama in water-colours, by Lt.-General E. Wray, C.8.,
representing the march of a central Indian column of 10,000 men, of all
arms, through Rajpootana at the time of the Mutiny.
The Gardens, with their ten thousand electric lights, are a spectacle Gardens,
which has never been rivalled elsewhere. They are this year better than
ever, and will undoubtedly prove now, as hitherto, the great popular
evening feature of the Exhibition. The illuminated fountains, devised Fountains.
For Contents, see p. 3: Coloured View of Old London, p. 41: Coloured Ground Plan,
between pp. 48 and 49; Coloured View of Indian Palace, p. 56: Index, p. 65.


lUpl Th Resilient
Universally
as *
J[ Comfortable
Brace ever worn.
by Sir Francis Bolton, have been considerably improved. The fountain
basin has been lined with grottoes in rock-work.
Over the Quadrant which forms the western boundary of the gardens
is a large dining-room of Messrs. Spiers and Pond, in which is served a
high-class dinner. From this room visitors can obtain a splendid view
of the fountains and illuminations. The temperance refreshment room
is over the opposite or Eastern Quadrant.
The Gardens contain numerous Indian and Colonial tea-houses,
in which visitors can take refreshment while watching the fountains and
Music. listening to the military bands, which will play in the afternoons and
evenings in the two band-stands on the Upper Terrace and in the stand
in the South Gallery. Among the bands which will play during the
season may be mentioned those of three regiments of Guards, the Life
Guards, and the Royal Horse Guards, the Royal Artillery, the Royal
Engineers, the Royal Marines, and the West India Regiment.
In the Grounds to the north of the South Gallery will be found
several tea-houses, and an additional attraction in the shape of an
orchid-house. Here is also to be seen a Turcoman tent, which was
brought by Colonel Ridgeway from the Russo-Afghan frontier.
South Pro- In the South Promenade are several detached buildings which deserve
menade. visits. The first of these as we enter the Promenade from the east end
is the Emigration Office, in which every information will be given to
intending emigrants. This office is in an iron building lent to the
Royal Commission by Mr. Humphreys.
Next comes a building occupied by the Bombay-Burmah Trading
Company, in which are shown some huge balks of teak timber and lattice
archways, &c., made of smaller pieces. The building following is a
Market l Canadian Machinery Depot, and then comes the Colonial Market,
ar 6 ' which will be one of the most distinctive features of the Exhibition. In
it are exposed for sale the fruits and vegetables of many of the
Australian and West Indian Colonies which have not hitherto found a
market in this country, but which, it has now been proved, can be
delivered in perfect condition by being kept on the voyage in a chamber
cooled down to about 40°. The other buildings in this part of the
grounds are the Canadian Bee House and the Queensland Gold Quartz-
Crushing Shed. Finally, there is the Canteen, where Messrs. Spiers and
Pond provide refreshments at the lowest possible prices.
The British
SPRING BRACE 4 Brace
(PATENTED). ° u
(Patented).
The only Self-
adjusting Brace
as the
the World.
GIVES TO EVERY
MOVEMENT of the BODY.]
Contains no Rubber, the Cords'
running on Pulleys.
" OP EVERY HOSIER AND DRAPER THROUGHOUT THE WORLD.
Manufacturers; W. BLENKIRON & SON, 123, Wood Street, London.


■sgjEßggßga. E. TAUTZ & SONS,
BREECHES MAKERS. SPORTING TAILORS.
485, OSFOED STEEET, W., LONDON,
and 84, RUE DU FAUBOURG ST. HONORS, PARIS.
Specially made materials for all kinds of RIDING- and
SHOOTING DRESS for INDIA or the COLONIES.
DEPARTMENT FOR LADIES. HABITS OR SPECIALITY BREECHES.
Vide QUEEN, COURT JOURNAL, LADIES' PICTORIAL, Ac.
“ All an intending Queensland Colonist needs to purchase In London are several pairs
of TAUTZ’S TWILL RIDING BREECHES.”— FieId, May 23rd, 1885.
n A TTTTOTtf The above are our ONLY Addresses, and we have NO CONNECTION
UAL) iiUiN. with any other house ANYWHERE.
RAILCARD'S
MUSICAL BOXES
They all bear the above Trade Mark, and can be obtained at almost all the principal Music Sellers and Jewellers in
die United Kingdom.
PAILLARD & CO., Manufacturers, 62, VIADUCT, LONDON.
SOLI MAHUFACTUEEKa OT
The “AMOBEAN” Musical Boxes,
To which an unlimited number of Cylinders can be supplied at any time, without having to return the original
Box to the Factory.
HARRIS JONES & Company,
(ESTABLISHED 20 YEARS,)
265 & 267, OXFORD STREET, LONDON, W.
GENTLEMEN’S AND LADIES’
FASHIONABLE TAILORS , OUTFITTERS, ETC.
Colonial Customers can depend on being-
well treated at tbis Establishment.
SANGSTER & COMPANY,
UMBRELLA, PARASOL, & EN-TOUT-CAB MAKERS,
140, REGENT# ST.; 75, CHEAPSIDE;
i 94, FLEET ST.; 10, ROYAL EXCHANGE.
Colonists, Tourists, and Visitors to London during the Colonial and Indian Exhi-
bition are invited to inspect S. & Co.’s large and varied assortment of the above
articles, in the newest designs suitable for presents or daily use, at moderate prices.
N.B. Specialities for Children in Small Umbrellas and Parasols.


“ PAINLESS AND PERFECT DENTISTRY.”
A NEW PAMPHLET
DR. GEO. H. JONES, F.R.8.L., F.R.M.8., 4c., SURGEON-DENTIST,
OF
57, GREAT RUSSELL STREET, Facing British Museum Entrance
LONDON,
Contains a Lid of DIPLOMAS, GOLD and SILVER MEDALS , and other AWARDS
obtained at the Great International Exhibition, forwarded Gratis and Post Free.
HER MAJESTY’S SURGEON-DENTIST SAYS:
My Pear Doctor,—Allow me to express my sincere thanks for the skill and attention displayed In the construction of my Artificial
Teeth, which render my mastication and articulation excellent. I am glad to hear that yon have obtained Her Majesty’s Royal Letters
Patent to protect what I consider the j>erfection of Painless Dentistry. In recognition of your valuable services, you are at liberty to use
my name.—S. Q. HUTCHINS, by appointment Surgeon-Dentist to Her Majesty the Queen.
Geo. H. Jones, Esq., D.D.S.
ESTABLISHED 1836. Jubilee Year, 1886.
Knitting and Fancy Wools
FOR HOME AND EXPORT.
To” SCOTCH FINGERINGS,”
THE “HIGHLAND SOFT KNITTING,”
ON (Cord Spun for Wear) '
application. SPECIAL MAKES FOR MACHINE-KNITTING.
BALDWIN & WALKER,
Works: West Croft Mills (King Cross), HALIFAX, Yorkshire,
LONDON Warehouse: 35, CARTER LANE, ST. PAUL’S, E.G.
29 PRIZE MEDALS and FIRST-CLASS CERTIFICATES for EXCELLENCE.
Prize Medal and Certificates of Merit of the Sanitary Institute of Great Britain. ,
Authorised by H. M. Board of Trade; aiso H. M. Government of India.
JEYES’ “PERFECT PURIFIER,”
THE BEST AND CHEAPEST DISINFECTANT, DEODORISER, CURATIVE, AND CLEANSER.
Used by Government Establishments, the Royal tousehold, Corporation of London, the London Hospitals, Sanitary
Authorities, Markets, Railways, the P. &0. and other Passenger Steamers. Non-corrosive and Non-poisonous in n»e.
(See Testimonials.)
Supersedes Carbolic, being four times as efficacious. Prevents Contagion by destroying its cause. Instantly
Removes Bad Smells. It is an unfailing Destroyer of Insects and Vermin, and although Poisonous to Parasites, is
Harmless to the higher animals.
J EYES’ “PERFECT PURIFIER.”
Sir Robert Rawlinson, C.8., C.E., Local Govern-
ment Board.—“ Undoubtedly the Disinfectant of the
future. The best in use.”
JEYES’ «PERFECT PURIFIER.”
De. Barnardo’s Infirmary. —“ Most efficacious
in skin disease and ulcerated wounds.”
J. R. Peankeed, M.D.
JEYES’ SANITARY
JEYES’ SANITARY POWDER.
JEYES’ SHEEP DIP.
J EYES’ " PERFECT PURIFIER.” •
Professor Dugald Campbell. —“ Superior to all.
Disinfectants and Antiseptics.”
JEYES’ “PERFECT PURIFIER.” \
C. A. Cameron, Esq., r M.D., M.0.H., Dublin—
“ A most powerful sanitary agent, which I strongly
recommend to ward off the attacks of contagious
disease."
COMPOUNDS consist also of
JEYES’ DOG SOAP.
JEYES’ DISINFECTANT SOAPS'
For Household, Toilet, Stable, and Veterinary Uses.- y
The Best and Cheapest I Free from Poison 11 most Efficacious 111
Sold by all Chemists, Druggists, Stores, Oilmen, &c. j
JXTEB’ SANITARY COMPOIJSfBB COMPACT, limited.
43, CANNON STREET, LONDON, E.C.


INDEX.
f! . PAGE
Agra Marble Pillars . .26
Aquarium . . . • • 47
Arrangement of Buildings . . 9
Arrangement of the Colonies and
India ..... 9
Ascension . • . . *55
Assam . . • ..19
Australia . . . . *34
Aztec Remains • . . *57
Bahamas 59
Barbados ..... 5^
Baroda Pigeon House . . . x 8
Bengal . • • id
Best way of visiting the Exhibition . xo
Bird’s-eye view of Buildings . . 9
Bombay . . • • • id
British Guiana . » • >53
Bullock Cart, Indian . . .25
Burmah . . . • .20
Camels (South Australian) . 3d
Canada . • . . • 5 1
Canadian Fisheries . . • 51
Canadian Machinery . . • 51
Canadian Manufactures . • 5 2
Canadian Minerals . • • S 1
Cape Diamonds and Diamond Cut-
ting. . . • • -44
Cape of Good Hope . . .44
Cassava Bread-making . . -53
Central Provinces. . . .19
Ceylon .... .25
Chinese Restaurant . . 54
Classification of Exhibits . • 5
Colonial Dining Rooms, Vegetable
Market, and Wines ... 6
Colonial Hall . . . .10
Colonial Market . . . .62
Colonial Wine Bar * i. . . 22
Coloured Ground Plan , . . 9
Cyprus . . . ,i£ • • 59
# #
Dacca Muslin . . . • 17
Diamonds (Cape) . . • -44
Doulton Screen . . . .12
Durbar Hall . . • .28
Duval Dining Room . . .12
Economic or Imperial Court . 22
Electric Machinery for Lighting
Qarde n s . • * • •5 2
Emigration Office. . . .62
Ethnographical Collection (Indian). 24
Falkland Isles . . .5s
Fiji 37
Fish Culture . . . .48
Forest Scene trom Victoria . . 39
Fountains . . . . . bi
Frozen Meat . . . - 49
Furs (Canadian) . . . . 52
Gardens 61
Gold (Victorian) . . . . 38
Ground Plan . . . .48
Hall of Columns . . .28
Honduras . . . . *57
Hong Kong . . . -53
Hudson’s Bay Company . . 52
Hunting Trophies by Rowland
Ward . . . . . 13
Hyderabad. . . . .20
India 13
Indian Hall . . . .12
Indian Museum . . . *57
Indian Palace . . . .26
Indian Screens . . . 15-20
Indian Silks ' . . . .28
Indian Village . . . .22
Jamaica . • 4 . . *5B
Jeypore Gateway . . . . 15
Karri Timber . . . .32
Kashmir . . . . .19
Leeward Islands . . • 57
Lockhart’s Cocoa Rooms . . 49
Locust Catching in Cyprus . . 60
Machinery (Canadian) . . 51
Madras . . . . .20
Maignen’s Filters. . . .47
Malay Houses . . • *55
Ma1ta...... 60
Maori Exhibits . . . • 5°
Map of the World . . * 34
Market (Colonial). . . .62
Mauritius . . . . • 55
Merino Sheep in South Australia . 36
Montserrat Tasting Bar . « 57


~ PAGB t ' " PACK
Music. . . /.' . , .62 School of Cookery,] ].ll r . 21
Mysore and Coorg & . . ,20 Scindiah’s Gateway . 1 , 1 .27
m Screens . . . , .15
Natal . . . , ,46 Seychelles . . • . 55
National Training School of Cookery 21 Silks (Indian) . . . ,28
Nepal Screen . . . .17 South Australia . . . *34
New South Wales . . .29 South Australian Camels . . 36
New Zealand . . . .49 South Australian Forest Scene . 35
New Zealand Frozen Meat . ] . 49 South Australian Fruits . -37
North Borneo . . . *54 South Gallery . . # , . 12
North-West Provinces . . .18 South Promenade. . , .62
Spiers and Pond’s General Dining
Old London . . . 40 Rooms, &c. . . . .21
Organisation and scope of the Exhi- St. Helena 55
bition ..... 5 Straits Settlements and Perak | . 55
Output of Victoria Gold Mines . 38 i
Tea (Indian) . , . * . 28
Perak 55 Tea (Natal) . . . .46
Photograph of the New South Trinidad . . . , . 59
Wales Contingent . . .31 Trophies in the Economic Court . 23
Picture Gallery in Albert Hall . 61 Turtles . . . . .49
Pigeon House . . . .18
Principal Entrance . . .10 Victoria . . . . *3B
Private Exhibitors’ Court (Indian) . 24 Victorian Golden Archway . . 40
Punjab . , . , .19
West African Settlements . 46
Queensland ~if. In . j . 33 West Australia . . . .32
0 West Indian Islands . . *57
Rajputana . . ,• *l5 Windward Islands . . • 59
Refreshments and Recreation . 61 Wine Room . . . .22
Refreshments in the South Gallery . 21
PEPPING Tporests“
VISITORS to the EXHIBITION should SEE the FOREST, now in its
greatest beauty, and stay at the
ROYAL FOREST HOTEL, (Nw.
ROYAL FOREST HOTEL,
o-
Chingford is 35 Minutes from Liverpool Street, Great Eastern Railway.
INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION, LONDON 1884,
BIQKBST A W AKD.
The CELEBRATED “BECTIVE” BOOTS and SHOES.
Highly recommended by the Queen, Court Journal, Court Circular, Sanitary Record, Boot and Shoe Trades
Journal, &c. &c. None are genuine unless stamped
“THE BECTIVE.”
These goods are glove-fitting, their shape is retained; also durability and comfort secured by the use of best
material and workmanship. May be obtained from the leading Bootmakers in all important Towns in the United
Kingdom and the Colonies.
, POSTAL ADDRESS (FOR TEE TRADE AND SHIPPERS):
BECTIVE FACTORY, 19, 20, and 21 Bethnal Green Road, London, E,


FIK.3QZ FIRE!! FIRE!!!
THE LEWIS HAND FIRE EXTINGUISHER.
INSTANTLY PUTS OUT FIRE being the MOST EFFECTIVE APPLIANCE
yet introduced to the Public. It is fast superseding all the glass (or
partly glass) “Grenades.” The Liquid contained in the LEWIS HAND FIRE
EXTINGUISHER is far more POWERFUL in its FIRE EXTINGUISHING
CAPABILITY, than anything yet before the Public,
It only requires to be seen,
when it is at once chosen by
all discerning persons in'prefer-
ence to all other Extinguishers.
It has been supplied to—
HER MAJESTY THE
QUEEN.
The MARQUIS of SALIS-
BURY, K.G., Hatfield
House.
The EARL of NORTHESZ,
Winchester.
HIS HIGHNESS the MAH
ARAJAH of JOHORE.
LORD BURLEIGH, Stam-
ford.
And to INNUMERABLE
PUBLIC BUILDINGS,
65, QUEEN VICTORIA
STREET, E.C.
CORPORATIONS, IN-
STITUTIONS, WARE-
HOUSES, and PRIVATE
ESTABLISHMENTS, the
“ P. & O.” COMPANY, the
ROYAL MAIL STEAM
PACKET COMPANY
&0., &o.
Public Exhibitions are given
every Tuesday and Friday, in
the City op London. Tickets
to view which, can be obtained
( gratis ) on application to the
Highest Award at the
Fireman’s Exhibition, held
at the Aquarium, West-
minster, May, 1886.
The “CELESTINA.” 1
Is a most charming
Mechanical Musical In-
strument, and has been
awarded the Prize
Medal at the Inter-
national Inventions
Exhibition. It has
advantages which place
it far above anything of
the kind hitheito sub-
mitted to the Public.
Unlike Musical Boxes,
or 01 her similar Instru-
ments, the Celestina
plays thousands of tunes,
there Is no limit to the
number, either Sacred or
Secular (Psalm, Sono,
March or Dance). The
Music Rolls are so small
and compact that they
can be carried in the
: pocket without incon-
\ venience.
I The price of this Music
is less than one-third
that of any other Instru-
ment. having the same
capacity, hitherto put
upon the market.
The Tone of the Celestina enchants everyone who hears it—rivalling any Reed Pa rl( ™ r ™ .^hn^n^no
The Celestina is a really fine and genuine Mcsical Instrument which con be played by persons ha ig
bt a child. It is well adapted for Schools. Mission Services, or to make Home
SS66s.fmay P tehad on easy terms or a liberal discount allowed for Cash. Every Instrument fully Warranted.
Smaller Instruments from £2 2s. and upwards.
GEORGE WHIGHT & CO.,
143, HOlißOßlff BA.RS, LOHTUOW, B ”°*
(DORMER OR BROOItE STREET.)


W*NW%jp;_Jß|f MW ,jS gjf 2
. - <|W fe|.a|3|.as'3|i|l iiesa
. -i S SKB « .-” , a p 'lS«?S? “‘A L
~/ ijlfc#:" "• j 73 ddd‘_r.-S M-g-SW «r \V /«
oi* *s is r ° r ' 3 s&* S'tS 3 ’Q^kc
o S c = ■g. |s^|
Jap* . cq 03 CD -d-d >d >d •‘l w 7313 73 *g g g
O3 c: CO Q eo o
l— S few" £- t: ■*- Ss 0000 $“asa8fii5|13ri
hj cj £3 w i 1 MBtii ■3) rf S2S’S'a^g“"3«
>■ 02 Cl. fe O O o^J-H
iJ®®pti||h o W OOCjWfi hKhM
Mi
PQ
-mf' JBBV *
2 / MWI *
n i famwh ■
.ss fo-I(EZ fill <
S*a UmLfy ¥M 1 ,
w§ |B| «|!
■i N
5§ . itff
Oc-ioS'C co ■«£ S
r* Jj .000000 -m 55 oo oo cS
t> Hoooo 00 »-l o S<*> 00
t> ■« t- ,5 i-h -r ® ” t-i h m
„ 641 0° m§M CD ,T 99
jaiLJg ll iLj! .
Bisi
w«g | I i q) m mg, /t
t>w jEajb
M 12 60
d-9 HP
Hp M
I I II on , lIESS
I 11 I<B° I'ilpW
H||r JI »r^
pji *
.| S O'? S g 6
& a S
■8 ° s 5
« AS
i ujl
I »4Rhf
~„J o
© u A
58 2
S® Z
Hg <
-d »
S — 1
Is o
I I LU
•a a
o-2
M 2 •
y
£2 _1
ftPn “
'h| O
SO
l« s z
o
£
Flo,
I,
lid
Sttlo
|L
ill I s
II I a
kI. m
■ |i! S-
Be| i o -1^"
HI |o , ■
m L LlI
tail t “
id I Icq
■i s O
w cc


[—■<
/tali' Mr,; tiapppiij ii.
uiflMlf 6Efc Tp. W® fir
§91 Pi i *ak§
i
i|gHj
TANGYES LIMITED,
CORNWALL WORKS, BIRMINGHAM.
. i 11Q Tint-Mnvof flrfAar
.«c On nan Victoria St.. E.C. Manchester: Deansgate. Sydney: 119) Bathurst Street.
Newcastle: ’st. Nicholas Buildings. Glasgow: Argyle Street. Melbourne: Collins Street West.
Paris: Placo do la Bepublique*
3 rntim Tg-^1
l -in A


GOLD JIEDAL miSTCUSS
PARIS, 1867. L0ND0N » 1862 ‘
S. Allsopp & Sons,
INDIA PALE ALE.
For Exportation and Home Consumption.
S. Allsopp &Sons,
THE BREWERY,
BURTON-OST-TBlSlff T.
London Offices: 6i, KING WILLIAM ST., E.C.
ALLSOPP’S ALES in cask or in bottle can be obtained from
THE FOLLOWING AGENTS IN THE COLONIES, INDIA, AND ABROAD:—
Bombay Bean, Ashley & Co.
Calcutta Gladstone, Wyllie & Co.
Madras Gordon, Woodroffe & Co.
Penang Boustead & Co.
Singapore Boustead & Co.
Hong Kong ... Norton & Co.
Shanghai George Smith,
Sydney Scott, Henderson & Co.
Melbourne F. G. Nutting.
Brisbane Ernest Goertz & Co.
Townsville Burns, Philp & Co.
Rockhampton ... W. Thomson,
Fremantle 1. Samson & Son.
Auckland, N. Z. ... Arthur Heather.
Christchurch, N. Z. Warre, Hockley & Co.
Dunedin, N. Z, ... Mackerras & Hazlett.
Wellington, N. Z. Levin & Co.
Cape Town J. Searight & Co.
Port Elizabeth ... Dunell, Ebden & Co.
King William’s
Town G- B. Christian & Co,
Durban Edward Snell & Co.
Mauritius Ireland, Fraser & Co.
.United States ... E. &J. Burke, New York, '


■ rpHE perfect cleansing and purification of body linen
BU red by our system ot Steam Laundry Washing, which.
I embraces a double wash, a double bud, a double rinse
rjLANS 1 and ESTIMATES furnished for fitting up
1 Laundries complete (hand power or steam power),
suitable tor Family Mansions, Schools, Hotels, and i'ublic
0 Churns, “ Albany ” and “ Alderney ” Butter
Workers, Krvolying-Disc Mii.k Pan Stands, and
other Dairy Appliances and Utensils, have been awarded
over 4 0 Gold and Silver Medals, including Gold Medal
and Silver Medal, Dublin, last year.
Cnmnlete Illustrated t'atalonue free hu vast.
VISITORS to the Colonial and Indian Exhibition are respectfully invited to inspect our London Show Rooms
which contain a most comprehensive selection of Laundry Machinery—both for domestic and steam Laundry
purposes—and Dairy Appliances, as exhibited by us (with important additions) at the International Health Exhibition
in 1884, and for which Two Gold Medals and Two Bronze Medals were then awarded to us.— Thos. BRADFORD & Co.
OUR “Diaphragm” Churns, “Declivity Box"
Churns, “ Albany ” and “ Alderney ” Butter
Workers, Revolving-Disc Milk Pan Stands, and
other Dairy Appliances and Utensils, have been awarded
over 40 Gold and Silver Medals, including Gold Medal
and Silver Medal, Dublin, last year.
Complete illustrated Catalogue free by post.
MODEL DAIRY.
THOS. BRADFORD & Co„ LAUNDRY and DAIRY ENGINEERS,
140, 141, 142, 143. HIGH HOLBORN, LONDON.
Victoria Avenue, Manchester; Bold Street, Liverpool; and Crescent Iron Works, Salford.
STEEL.
STEEL FOR ENGINEERS’ TOOLS OP ALL KINDS.
STEEL FOR MINERS’ DRILLS (Square, Round, or Octagon.)
STEEL FOR AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES.
STEEL FOR WELDING PURPOSES.
STEEL CASTINGS of every kind.
FILES OP BEST QUALITY AND BEST WORKMANSHIP.
SPRINGS, SPRING STEEL, BLISTER STEEL.
R. MUSKET’S SPECIAL STEEL. I
R. MUSKET’S TITANIC CAST STEELS, j Mad ° ° U]y by
SAMUEL OSBORN & Co.,
CLYDE STEEL AND IRON WORKS,: SHEFFIELD.
London; Victoria Mansions, Westminster. ARNOLD PYE-SMITH, Resident Partner.
Sydney: MACBRAIR, OSBORN & CO., 249, Clarence Street.
Montreal: JOHN B. GOODE, St Paul Street.
BOSTON, U.S.; B. M. JONES A CO., Oliver Street.
Ss* dialled Advertisement Official Catalogue p, 483; and General Handbook />. i.


MERRYWEATHER & SONS,
FIRE ENGINE MAKERS.
VISITORS TO THE
INDIAN & COLONIAL
EXHIBITION
ARE INVITED TO
CALL AT
63, LONG ACRE, W.C.
Greenwich Road, S.E.
LONDON.
MANUFACTURERS OF
Land Steam Fire Engines; Floating Steam Fire Engines; Fixed Steam Fire
Engines, for Mills; Steam Tramway Locomotives; Hand-power Fire Engines oi
all kinds and sizes, and suitable for every climate; Pumps and Pumping Engines;
Hoses of Copper-riveted Leather, India-rubber, Canvas, and Rubber-lined Canvas;
Fire Escapes and Hose Reels of all kinds; Fire Cocks, Hydrants, Fire Mains ;
Firemen’s Equipments, Hand Fire Pumps, Fire Brigade Appliances, and all
Apparatus for Prevention and Extinction of Fire.
See the POWERFUL STATIONARY STEAM FIRE ENGINE, fitted up
by MERRYWEATHER & SONS, at the Colonial and Indian Exhibition,
by Order of the Executive Council.
.A.IPIPOIIN'TIMYEIN'T
To Her Majesty the Queen, H.R.H. the Prince of Wales, and other Members of the Royal Family ; the Nobility
and principal Landed Proprietors; the Emperors of Russia, Germany, and Austria; the various Governments,
Municipalities, and Fire Brigades throughout the world, including the Metropolitan (London), Manchester, Liverpool,
Belfast, Paris, Antwerp, Stockholm, St. Petersburg, Moscow, Lisbon, Pesth, Toronto, Calcutta, Singapore, Hong
Kong, Ballarat, Maryborough, Invercargill, Hokitika, Valparaiso, Rio de Janeiro, &c. &c. To the British, French,
German, Austrian, and Russian Admiralties, War and other Departments; to the India Office, Crown Agents to the
Colonies, Her Majesty’s Office of Works, Table Bay Harbour Commissioners, Cape Government Railways, the
Colonial Governments, and the leading Volunteer Fire Brigades, Insurance Companies, Railway and Dock Companies
in the United Kingdom.
AWARDS :
TWO GOLD MEDALS
“INVENTIONS,”IBBS.
PARIS, 1878.
SYDNEY, 1880.
MELBOURNE, 1881.
aND other medals
AT THE VARIOUS
EXHIBITIONS OF ALL
NATIONS.


JEW ZEALAND MEAT.
NELSON MOTHERS, Una
15, Dow gate Hill, Gannon E.G.,
LONDON.
Gentlemen' lnterested In ' the New Zealand Meat Trade, are
Invited to Inspect the
REFRIGERATING STORES
OF THIS COMPANY,
situate under Cannon Street Railway Station,
Visitors are requested to oresent their Cards at the Company’s
Offices, 15, Dowgate Hill, Cannon Street, E.C., when
every facility will be accorded,
NELSON BROTHERS, Limited,
Have already Imported
OVER
A QUARTER MILLION OF N. Z. SHEEP.


THE BROUGHTON COPPER COMPANY, Limited,
"“"I' MANUFACTURERS
DUBLIN . . . 1866. 0 - VIENNA . , . 1873.
PARIS . . . 1867. ur PARIS . . . 1878.
COPPER AND BRASS
CYLINDERS,
TUBES FOR LOCOMOTIVE & MARINE BOILERS,
CONDENSERS, &C.
RODS, SHEETS, INGOTS, &c.
HYDRAULIC BAMS &c. ELECTRO-COPPERED.
ANTI-FRIOTION METAL. PHOSPHOR BRONZE.
BROUGHTON COPPER WORKS,
London Oitioi : MANCHESTER. Glasgow Omc«
122, Cannon Street, 28, St. Enoch Square.
PASCALL ATKEY & SON,
YACHT FITTERS,
Cooking Hppavatus dfcannfactuters
'AND
NAUTICAL IRONMONGERS
TO HER MAJESTY,
H.R.H. THE PRINCE OP WALES, &c., &c!
Every requirement for a Yacht kept In Stock and to suit all
Tonnages.
See Stand No. 308. Section IV. LIVERPOOL EXHIBITION.
Illustrated Catalogues in either English or French free on application.
ISLE OF WIGHT AND SOUTH OF ENGLAND
YACHT-PITTING DEPOT,
WEST COWES.
BBTA.BUBBKD 1709


MILNERS’
SAFES
BANKERS* STRONG ROOMS,
Steel intersected, steel and wrought-Iron linings.
MILNERS’ SAFE DEPOSITS. ,
ALL Deposits in England have been built by MILNERS.
TWO MILNERS’ BULLION SAFES are placed
in the NEW SOUTH WALES COURT, for the
SAFE KEEPING of GOLD NUGGETS, PLATE,
&c., exhibited by the Colony of New South Wales.
MILNERS’ SAFE COMPANY, LIMITED,
LONDON, MANCHESTER, LIVERPOOL.
' /
BATES «8C CO.,
THE PROVIDENT TEA WAREHOUSE,
51, GRACECHURCH STREET, CITY, E.C.,
BATES & CO. being practical Tea-Tasters and Blenders, Have
every confidence in recommending the following Teas which
have stood the test of public opinion for nearly half a century.
{A useful and economical Tea for
giM “
- .. j /)j iu (Gives universal satisfaction, and
BATES & Co.’s “Favourite Blend, 2s. 64. per ID. \ is highly recommended.
This is a mixture of some of the
finest teas imported and of a
quality rarely supplied by most
dealers.
BATES & Co.’s “ Superb ” Blend, 3s. per lb.
Coffee in Its native purity fresh roasted “qSbS
fjb? Tli.‘ of"coffeeaf/Chicory a, 2s. 6d. will be found
very economical for large consumers.
CARRIAGE *£*£o


-m SHOW ROOMS»
51, HOLBORN VIADUCT^''*'"
SV^5>
London, colonial
BUYERS to view their
SPECIAL EXHIBIT
V^^Ol 1 the New Metal “Albion Silver.”
MINKS’ LAMPS.
COLONIAL & INDIAN EXHIBITION, LONDON.
VISITORS ARE INVITED TO INSPECT
SINKS AND SORT’S
Magnificent display of Newest Patterns and Latest Improvements in
DUPLEX, PUNKA AND OTHER LAMPS,
at their SHOW ROOMS:—
LONDON: 60, Holborn Viad.uct.
BIR.MITVGrBEA.IVI: Great Hampton Street.
J. C. JENNENS & SON,
MANUFACTURERS OF
Every description of BEST ENGLISH CLOCKS,
WHOLESALE AND FOR EXPORTATION.
CHIME CLOCKS—A SPECIALITY.
Chiming the Quarters, on Four, Eight, or Ten Bells, and the Westminster,
Cambridge, or Whittington Chimes, on Gongs or Bells, and Striking the
Hours on a Deep-toned Gong; in superior well-made Cases (suitable for all
Climates) of New and Chaste Design, in Oak, Walnut, Rosewood, Satin Wood,
Mahogany and Ebonized, with rich Ormolu Mounts.
Manufactory and Show Rooms :
25 and 26, GREAT SUTTON STREET, CLERKENWELL, LONDON.
gIEYERjSJVUTHft, * E)LECTRO~P;LATEI^ y &C.-2*
WHOLESALE ONLY.
EVERT MARKET IE TEE WORLD SUPPLIED TSROUGE LONDON MERCHANTS.


UNION LINE.
HOPE, NATAL,
CAPE OF GOOD
AND EAST AFRICAN ROYAL MAIL SERVICE.
The UNION STEAMSHIP COMPANY, LIMITE
ESTABLISHED 1853.
The ROYAL MAIL STEAMERS of this Line leave SOUTH-
AMPTON every alternate Thursday, and PLYMOUTH next
day, conveying Passengers and Goods to CAPE TOWN,
MOSSEL BAY, PORT ELIZABETH (Algoa Bay), PORT
ALFRED (Kowie River), EAST LONDON, NATAL,, and
ST. HELENA, and passengers only to MADEIRA.
EXPERIENCED SURGEON and STEWARDESSES CARRIED.
PASSAGE-MONEY INCLUDES RAIL FARE FROM LONDON TO SOUTHAMPTON.
For HANDBOOK, and all INFORMATION, apply to
THE UNION STEAMSHIP COMPANY, LIMITED,
ORIENTAL PLACE, SOUTHAMPTON, and
11, LEADENHALL ST R E ET, i LOND O N.
CAPE OV GOOD HOPE, RATAL, and EAST AFRICA,
The COLONIAL tea** MAIL LINE
of “CASTLE W&t PACKETS.”
CARRYING THE BRITISH AND | J PORTUGUESE ROYAL MAILS.
FLEET OF THE CASTLE MAIL PA °KETS COMPANY, LIMITED.
BanSfoSmi. . So Drummond'Castlk 3/TO5 Methvkn Castl* . 2,680 . . . 1.341
Sssr: & SSS2S: SS IS F v™ :: : «
The COMPANY’S MAIL STEAMERS leave LONDON every call
following Friday, with Paßsengers and Cargo tor all ports reSintervals REGULAR SERVICES
with the B. I. Co.’a Mail Steamers for ZANZIBAR and INDIA.
FxDorlenced Surgeon# and Stewardesses. Excellent Cuisine. Superior Accommodation.
Loudon SK Berth; —EAST INDIA DOCK B ASIN, BLAOKWALL.
Handbook of Information for Patsengers may be had gratis on application.
“ 1 SITu“sUTOIOS«aa! “Snoothfi. «• TOMOK h SON, Dutmoulli o.V, lb.
DONALD CURRIE & CO.,
LONDON: 3 & 4, FENCHURCH ST., E.C.; LIVERPOOL: 23 & 25, CASTLE ST.i
Manchester: 15, Cross Street; and Glasgow ; 40, St. Enoch Square.


(T
1/0%J
IMPORTANT to VISITORS.
ATTENTION is drawn to tho following Important Public Movement,
which is far in advance of all present systems of tracing; as upon the condi-
tions of purchasing a Privilege Ticket, private persons have the benefit
of obtaining Goods at the Wholesale Warehouse, thereby placing them on
an equality, so far as advantage is concerned, with the trade, thus
saving a considerable item.
Inspection form and full particulars can be obtained on application at the
Manager’s Office.
The Stock of Woollen goods in the order department will be found to
include every variety of pattern, woven from the finest wools. None but the
most finished cutters and workmen employed. The workshops are
constructed on the most improved sanitary arrangements.
The various other Departments for Gentlemen’s and Children’s Outfits
comprise every description of goods suitable for all climates.
The central position of the warehouse renders it conveniently accessible
from all parts of town, thus placing every facility at visitors’ disposal. The
Electric Light and all improvements are adopted.
DAVID HYAM & COMPANY,
23, HOLBORN VIADUCT,
LONDON, E.O.
Visitors to London are respectfully requested to call at
MORRELL’S, the civet cat,
60, 61, 42, BURLINGTON ARCADE, PICCADILLY,
C Established over 50 Tears,)
To inspect their Stock of SPANISH DIAMONDS.
Peari, Cut-Silver, Steel, Jet, and Oxydised Jewellery. FRENCH COMBS AND PINS in all the
newest shapes now worn for the hair.
SILVER MOUNTED BIRD-EGG SCENT BOTTLES, 2/6, 3/6, 5/6,
A large selection of FANCY GOODS suitable for PRESENTS, Quaint China Figures, Brass Candlesticks, Plush
Brackets, Olive-wood Inkstands, Crocodile Bags, Purses, Card Cases, &c.
SILVER FLORAL THIMBLES, in Case, 3/-.
Work Baskets. Work Cases fitted with English Cutlery. Desks. Blotters. Knives. FANS. FOX HOUNDS.
DEWHURSTS
SEWING COTTON
THE "THREE SHELLS” BRAND.
Agent for Canada: FRANCIS A. BAILY, 25, St. James's Street, MONTREAL.
Sole Agents for Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand: GIBBS, BRIGHT, & CO.,
MELBOURNE, 89, Flinderslane West; SYDNEY, Pitt Street; BRISBANE, Eagle Street;
ADELAIDE, Grenfell Street; DUNEDIN, N.Z.
JOHN DEWHURBT & SONS, BELLE-VUE MILLS, BKIPTON.


TRADE J MARK.
-
KANOFACTORY: 9 ijpjjRflB 4 10M)0,, ' *
OHLENDORFF’S DISSOLVED PERUVIAN GUANO
AND
SPECIAL CANE MANURE,
(WITH GUARANTEED ANALYSIS)
AREITHEIBEST4MANURES FOR THE.SUGAR CANE.
PLANTERS are invited to inspect the collection of Sugar Canes from
all parts of the World, exhibited in the West Indian
Department by this Company.
SULPHATE OF AMMONIA, NITRATE OP SODA, &0.
Prices and further Particulars on application to
Thei Anglo-Continental! (late Ollendorff's) Guano Works,
London" Agency :U6, LEADENHALL STREET, LONDON,
Importer of Peruvian Guano in the "
ADAMS & CO.,
The “ RELIANCE ”
Hammerless GUN.
Intercepting Patent
Block Safety Locks.
This Gun is abso-
lutely SAFE against
ACCIDENTAL DIS-
CHARGE ; the me-
chanism is simple and
durable, and the breech
action can be made to
open ■with either top,
side, or under lever.
Price from £22 10s.
A LARGE ASSORTMENT of GUNS. HAMMER and HAMMERLESS, with latest improvements, prepared
for this Season. Hammer Guns, from £7; and Hammerless, from £l5 15s. 10s . Top Lever, £B.
ADAMS & CO.’S “ SPECIAL GUN.” Double-Gnp Action £7 Snap Action, £7 iop
LARGE BORE RIFLES AND EXPRESS SINGLE AND DOUBLE BARREL RIFLES.
ADiMS & PO ’S MARTINI-ZELLER PATENT RIFLES.
«« si “sss
of shooting are unsurpassed. Illustrated Price List on application, I ost-J ret.
HAMILTON & CO.,


For Burning
Also with Straw-Bruising Apparatus.
RANSOMES, SIMS & JEFFERIES, L?
jECgricultural l etngineers.
“a IPSWICH AND LONDON STREET.
Stationary Engines.
¥ Vertical Engines.
Winding Engmes.
Pumping Machinery
BANSOMES’ PORTABLE ENGINES.
BANSOMES’ COMPOUND ENGINES.
FACTORY.—R. S- & J.’s Factory, established in 1789, covers 13 acres, and
employs 1200 to 1400 hands- Their productions, which are in use in every
part of the world, have been awarded the highest honours at all the
* International Exhibitions in England and abroad.
BANSOMES’ THRASHING MACHINERY.
BANSOMES’ TEA SORTER.
INVITATION TO IPSWICH.-R. S. & J. will be much pleased to see Visitors
from the Colonies and India interested in Agricultural Machinery at their
Works, and to show them the Special Machines and Implements they
manufacture. Anyone desiring to visit the Works will please communicate
direct with the Company, either at London or Ipswich.
* BANSOMES’ HORSE RAKES.
BANSOMES’ PLOUGHS OF ALL KINDS.
ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUES & PRICES POST FREE ON APPLICATION.


Portable Vertical
0 TITWTVT Q uttN VKjTUKiA STREET,
E. S. HIEDLEY, London, e.c.
Works-BOURTON, DORSET.
YEETICAL STEAM ENGINES (Portable or Fixed).
HOEIZONTAL STEAM ENGINES (with or without Vertical Boilers).
Vertical Engine & Portable Diagonal
Boiler (2 H-P. to Engine and Boiler
XBH*P.). (2 wheals).
Small Portable Vertical
Engine (3 whoela). (3 H-P. to 6 H-P.)
SAW BENCHES (Circular and Band).
Plain Circular Saw Benchei (to take Circular and Rind Saw Benches. Self-Feeding Saw Bench.
Saws fro-i.ii 22" to 48";). All sizes. _ >
Liberal Terms to Shippers. Catalogues on application. __
FREDK. N. HARDINCE’S
Uallodno Establishment,
36, GRACECHURCH STREET, E.C.
(NEXT DOOR TO CHRISTY’S.)
F N HARDINGE is now showing a large assortment of the Latest Novelties for Gentlemen s attire, and is
prepared to execute Orders for Outfits, &c., on the shortest notice.
SUPERIOR WORKMANSHIP, PERFECT FIT, AND BEST MATERIALS.
Patterns and Designs post-free on application.
Gentlemen waited upon by competent men at their own residences.
36, GRACECHURCH STREET, LONDON, E.O.
-i~ w :est ssO'O-ek.som' co.,
STANNER’S CLOSE STEEL WORKS, WOLSINGHAM.
ATTWOOD’S PATENT STEEL CASTINGS AND FOEGINQS
Up to 15 TONS, of every description, Machined and Finished.
DREDGER BUCKET CHAIN’S finished ready for Dredgers, as supplied to the Suez Canal.
ANCHORS COUPLINGS FOR BROKEN SHAFTS, which can be fixed at Sea.
GUN CARRIAGE CASTINGS UP TO 110-TON GUNS.
PHOPEMEK BIIHES. SHAFTING. PfSTO.V RODS. CTIIIWIEK COVERS.
ENGINE AND CARRIAGE WHEELS, WITH AXLES, FITTED COMPLEJE
TOOL, CHISEL, HAMMER, JUMPER AND QUARRY STEEL;^RAILWAY, C^| S INGS -®^ H g D HEEL
AND PINIONS; STEEL SHOVELS; STEEL SHOT AND SHELL TO AN\ SIZE IINIbHJtJJ.
NEWCASTLE - ON - TYNE.—OFFICE, QUAYSIDE.


°r
WsCEEW
[vulcanite ra wood IJ
SO DA "water
ICE -
rSnnt 13 ? 1 1 S/i^ D ,? z M
HIGHEST AWARDS AT MOST IMPORTANT EXHIBITIONS
Latest Awards; 3 GOLD, 2 SILVER and 2 BRONZE MEDALS, International
Health. Exhibition, London, 1884.
Send for
Descriptive
Catalogue
Accessories,
with all
Latest
Improve
ments.
Manufactured
(Forwarded
Free)
MACHINERY,
MAKING MACHINERY,
BARNETT AND FOSTER,
NIAGARA WORKS,
S4B, EAGLE WHARF ROALD,
NEW
NORTH
ROAD,
LONDON,
N.
Colonists and others visiting London are invited to call and inspect our large and varied
Stock of Soda Water Machinery , Ice Machinery and Accessories specially suited for Colonial use .


CHAMPAGNE.
bouvier frlresToiTneuchatel,
SWITZERLAND,
Direct the attention of our Colonial Visitors to their CHAMPAGNES, so well
known to all Continental Travellers. Bouvier Freres gained in
THE HEALTH EXHIBITION, 1884,
THE
OUT PRIZE MEDAI
FOR
C HA M P A G N E.
Price 42/- per dozen. Special Terms for Export.
SOLE AG-EHTS-
J. & R. McCRACKEN,
38, QUEEN STREET, CANNON STREET, LONDON, E.C.
CHUBB’S SAFES.
H.R.H. THE PRINCE OF WALES, President of the
COLONIAL and INDIAN EXHIBITION, 1886, has been
pleased to appoint CHUBB & SON’S Lock & Safe Company,
Limd., as THE MAKERS OF STRONG ROOMS, SAFES, and
LOOKS to the Royal Commission.
128, QUEEN VICTORIA STREET, LONDON, E.C.
MELBOURNE BRANCH: 3, MARKET STREET.
Sole Agent for BOMBAY :
EDULJEE PESTONJEE, 47, Parsee Bazaar Street.
Illustrated Price Lists post free.
CHUBB’S LOCKS.


F0RH.SEEGER,21 mincing LANE
LONDON.E^C.
BARBER & SMITH,
GOLDSMITHS, JEWELLERS, & SILVERSMITHS
dealers in &mmW)antr Pate.
A J_(/.RQE ft££OF(TjMENT Of THE BE£T PLATED
3poo]M£, ETC.
36, CORN HILL, E.C.
■V.A.XjXJ-A.TXO:tTS 3yC-A.X>E XTOIR/ PBOBATE, ETC.
HELLIWELL’S PATENT ROOF GLAZING WITHOUT PUTTY,
PATENT ZINC ROOFING WITHOUT EXTERNAL FASTENINGS OR SOLDER,
Adopted by H.M. GOVERNMENT,
And extensively nsed throughout the United Kingdom and abroad for every description of Roof and
Horticultural Building, Including the Midland Railway Company, the Great Northern, the Great Eastern, the
Mersey Tunnel, the Cheshire Lines, London, Brighton & South Coast Railway, Lancashire and Yorkshire, the
Caledonian, tbs Highland Railway, London, Chatham & Dover, and the Great Southern and Western Railway
Ireland, Forty London Board Schools.
Materials are easily erected by ordinary Workmen. Climate does not affect it. Full
Instructions sent with each Parcel, delivered free on board at any Port.
Correspondence solicited by ~TSPS7‘ m TF3T T! nr. ~a~- x W 3ES Xa X* ,
5 WESTMINSTER CHAMBERS, XiOHsTIDOIEsr.
Or to the Works: BRIGHOUSE. YOEKSHIBE.
Pearce & Sons,
f JnMan & Colonial XTatlots>
17, CONDUIT STREET, BOND STREET,
LONDON, W.
THE
A. V. & Co.
Universal Metal Gleaning
POMATUM
IS THE ORIGINAL ONE,
ADMITTED TO BE THE BEST.


FIELD GLASSES.
The new rapid focussing Binocular Blasses. Always ready for
use Invaluable for Tourists, Picture Galleries, Landscapes &0.,
&c' as they show, with the most exquisite brightness, objects
several miles distant, as well as those near at hand, and can
be brought into use in a quarter of the time necessary for
adjusting the old form. Price £2 25., with Sling Case
complete.
barometers. k i t
To carry in the pocket as a watch, will show the height ot
any hill or the position after a day’s Journey, within a lew
feet; also a perfect Weather Glass. Price £2 ss.
Photographic Apparatus t SclmtHc Instill Banalacliras.
WATSON BROS.,
4 u A T.T■ TKT AXmXm,
CAPE WINES.
J. H. & J. VAN RYN,
Of STRAND ST., CAPE TOWN,
Beg to inform their numerous Mends from all
parts of South Africa that they can be supplied,
at their London Address as given below, with
all kinds of CAPE WINES in Bottle.
Among others —
CONSTANTIA WINES CAPE SHERRIES
RED HERMITAGE CAPE MADEIRAS
WHITE DRAKENSTEIN PONTACS
St. DHNSTiN’S HOUSE, Idol Lane, London.


86 ADVERTISEMENTS.
—■ I " ——
“LA BRILLAHTIir
METALLIC POWDER
TS the best, cheapest, and most effective
Powder for Cleaning and Polishing Metals and
Glass (especially Brass). It is nsed by the Life, Horse,
and Dragoon Guards, the Fire Brigades, &c.
SOLD in 6d. and Is. BOXES.
Proprietors—], F. BAUMGARTNER & CO.,
22, NEWMAN ST., OXFORD STREET,
LONDON, W.
A. Catalogue of all the hest Floor Covey-
ings POST FBEK
TRELOAR and SONS,
68, 69, antt 70,
LUDGATE HILL
KINLOOHS CATALAN.
WINES ABSOLUTELY PURE.
STRENGTHENING, SIMULATING,^REFRESHING.
These pare Red and White Wines were introduced into this country by us in 1862 Thev
are strengthening, stimulating, and refreshing, without being heating, and those who prefer
Port, Sherry, and Madeira to all other Wines, but who are not allowed to drink them will
find our Catalans exactly suitable in every respect. ’
MES> CATAIiAI¥ - - - 1 5k.. 11s..
- - 155., 11s., SOs. l»er Box.
Equal to fine fruity Fort.
WHITE CATAM - - 15«., 11s., SOs.' BPer l>oac.
Equal to fine old Madeira.
SINGLE BOTTLES at the same rate as per dozen.
Those Wine* art regularly Shipped to our Colonies, more especially to India
.Export Prices on application. y zo “ aia *
STANDARD WHISKIES WITH GREAT AGE.
.trade,
UNSURPASSED EXCELLENCE OF
FOR quality;
HIGHIAID “ECH®»
f GRAND OLD SCOTCH. i
COHEJIAIU “ECU©” - ~ f , n
FRAGRANT] OLD IRISH. *
C, KINLOCH & CO., LONDON.


STEPHEN HOLMAN, Cl,
15, GREAT GEORGE STREET, WESTMINSTER,
CONSULTING AND REPRESENTATIVE ENGINEER.
Patentee of Hydraulic, Gas and Steam Specialities in
Extensive Use.
Swrfogs, plaits, Sptoftofbns, nvfo €siimaf*s far Mato, (Has
Setoag*, aitfr a%r Marks.
’Telegraphic Address: “ CORNWALL, BT. HELENS .”
Liverpool Telephone, Gt. Helens, Number 15.
HOLMAN, 11GHELL & GO.,
ST. HELENS, LANCASHIRE,
fish gtfiiwrs, gteitfarfimrs, awl) Utrcjnwrfs.
London Offices; 15, GREAT GEORGE STREET,
WESTMINSTER, S.W.
CHEMICAL SHEET LEAD
and PLUMBERS’ SHEETS
of EXTRA WIDTH,
AS EH THE ACCOMPANYING ILLUSTRATION,
Supplied to specification, at the current
■ prices for ordinary width* of Sheet.
BEST SOLID DRAWN LEAD WATER PIPE, J||||p||Sj|
OP THE SIZES 4 WEIGHTS IN GENERAL DSE KEPT IS STOCK.
It will facilitate the despatch of orders by adopting and specifying the weight per yard,
in accordance with our printed Lists.
PATENT SOLID DRAWN BLOCK TIN-
LINED LEAD PIPE.
This Pipe consist* of a continuous Tube of Pure Block Tin, of any determined
thickness, within a Tube of Lead. It possesses the flexibility of ordinary Tin and
Soft Metal Pipes, and Jfl suited for conveying PURE Drinking Water, Acids, and
other Liquid*.
LEAD BARRELLING,
From 2i to 6 in. Diameter.
I KEPT BEADY for IMMEDIATE
DELIVERY.
Shipping Orders for ordinary quantities
can generally be despatched the day
following receipt of instructions.
BEST WHITE METAL FOR BEARINGS,
INGOT TIN, ANTIMONY, SPELTER, SOLDER, ZING.


X
W. ENGLISH.
ARMY, NAVY, AND GENERAL OUTFITTER
Nos. 3, 4,10, & 11, ROYAL OPERA ARCADE
PALI MAIL, TLGGSESONT, S.W,
ESTABLISHED 1860.
HATS, HELMETS, UMBRELLAS, POSTMAN-
TEAUS, REGULATION TRUNKS, &e.
SHIRTS, HOSIERY, GLOVES, CHOLERA BELTS, PYJAMA SUITS,
JH NIGHT SHIRTS, ,j—^
HI A REGISTER KEPT OF ALL MEASURES TAKEN.
FOR ALL CLIMATES^^
ALL GOODS ARE OFFERED AT CASH PRICES. PRICE LISTS, WITH DIRECTIONS
FOR SELF-MEASUREMENT, ON APPLICATION.
P.O. Orders payable at Charles Street , £.TF. Cheques crossed Union Bank.
N.B.—The Royal Opera Arcade is a thoroughfare (for foot passengers only) leading from
5, Pall Mall to Charles Street, midway between the Haymarket and Waterloo Place.
The Charles Street end is most convenient for Carriages.
DANGERFIELD’S
CELEBRATED
Self-Lighting latch Case
Pronounced the acme of perfection. It has no equal
in Mechanical Construction, Workmanship, Quality of
Material, Neatness, Compactness, Convenience, and Low
Price. The fortunate possessor has only to push the
slide, when a match presents itself lighted. Your
clothes, walls, and furniture need no longer be injured
or defaced.
No Lady or Gentleman should bo without one.
Everyone who sees it is most anxious to use it.
The Case is made of Nickel Silver, beautifully
finished, with or without Cigar Cutter, 2s. each;
also a cheaper form iu Tin, without Cutter, Is.
each. Post-free. r; •
C. BRANDON & CO.
16, Red Lion Square, Holborn, London.
JOHN GLEN,
Hbvcrtisement I-Ujciit,
Sole Agent to the Contractors
{WM. CLOWES &* SONS,
Limited ) for the Advertisements
in this Guide and the other
Official Publications of the Co-
lonial and Indian Exhibition.
Advertising conducted in all Trade Journals
and the London and Provincial Press
MERCHANTS, MANUFACTURERS,
IMPORTERS. EXPORTERS,
AT THE LOWEST RATES.
London : 379 a, STRAND, W.C
(.Entrance in Southampton Street ,)


AIR-PROOF ARTICLES, etc.
29, SRESHMl' ST., LONDON, E.C.
Mills ; Tottenham, Middlesex.
MANUFACTURERS TO THE WAR DEPARTMENT.
WM. WARNE & Co.
gnbxa 'gfrubbcv 'Sftcmufacfmrer#.
Ipatcntccs of tbe
RED MINERALISED INDIA RUBBER, MAGNETIC CUT THREAD,
TOBACCO POUCHES, MOULDED SEAMLESS HOSE,
JUNCTION RUBBER, PRINTING ROLLERS, BRAKE BLOCKS,
MOULDED ENEMAS, etc.
TRADB MARK.
dfcanufacturett* of
SHEET, VALVES, BUFFERS, HOSE PIPES, TUBING,
WATERPROOF COATS, PIECE GOODS, MECHANICAL, SURGICAL,
CHEMICAL, SCIENTIFIC, GYMNASTIC, DOMESTIC,
MANUFACTURERS and IMPORTERS
STRINGS, & FITTINGS
Old Violins, Tenors, Cellos, & Double Basses
Copy ~ ~ »» »
Bows for „ „ „ „
Cases for,, ~ ~ ~
Comets, various
Brass Instruments, various.
Plutes, Clarionets, Drums, Banjos (English
Harps by Brat, Erard, &c
PATENTEES OF THE NEW INSTRUMENT-
QUEEN’S MODEL PIANO & AMERICAN ORGAN
CHAIRS, WITH METALLIC FRAMES.
Merchants, Shippers, and the Trade supplied.
34, RATHBOKE PLAGE, OXFORD ST., W. Manufactory, BELFAST, Ireland.


■ VENABLES’
P UNO S
•A.T Moderate Prices
LONDON, IV.
The MELBOURNE ARGUS is the Leading
DAILY PAPER in AUSTRALIA.
PRICE TWOPENCE.
The AUSTRALASIAN Weekly, Sixpence.
The SKETCHER —Monthly, Illustrated,
SIXPENCE.
PUBLISHED IN MELBOURNE.
SEE SPECIMENS IN VICTORIA COURT.
For Information respecting Advertisements , Ac., apply to London Office , 80, Fleet Street, E,C.
WILSON AND MACKINNON, Proprietors.
WATCHES FOR
THE COLONIES
AND INDIA.
KENDAL and DENT,
10*, CHEAPSIDE, E.C.,
Supply Shippers and the Trade on most
tog-eons Terms.
GOLD MEDAL PARIS EXHIBITION,
PATENTEES OF THE DOUBLE DIAL WATCH
Watches lor the Blind.
8-DAY WATCHES from 605., &c.,
106, CHEAPSIDE, LONDON, EC.
MR. MILES,
(ESTABLISHED SINCE 1800)
CELEBRATED TAILOR AND TROUSERS MAKER,
HAS REMOVED TO
21, OLD BOND STREET, W.
SPECIAL ATTENTION TO COLONIAL ORDERS.
A very large assortment of all the NEWEST GOODS for OVERCOATS,
MORNING or FROCK COATS, TROUSERINGS, &c.


, N?#St36.,
FILTER CHAMBERLAND PASTEUR.
None know better than our Colonial friends the great value of pure water. In some parts
of the British Empire it is scarce and bad. Pure water is one of the chief sanitary require-
ments of the day. Water without filtration is the cause of Marsh or remittent fevers prevalent
in many of the Colonies, of Typhoid fevers, and of Dysentery and the dreaded Cholera.
Every mode of filtration hitherto applied has the glaring defect that the pores of the
filtering material soon get foul even to loathsomeness. Without frequent renewals, and, with-
out the means of renewing the filtering material, the imaginary filter gets worst) than useless.
The invention of the CHAMBERLAND PASTEUR FILTER—a great and Tainfthle novelty-
supplies the very requirements of a Colonist. It purifies water from every germ or microbe of
disease, renders it fresh, pure, and invigorating; it does so for all time, needing only to be
washed from time to time. No impurities can possibly enter or pass through its pores.
CALL AND SEE IT AT—
-530, QIJEEiy STREET, STREET, Aowdon, F.C.
NOVEL, ELEGANT, AND USEFUL PASTIME FOR LADIES.
HOME-KNIT ORIENTAL (SMYRNA) RUGS.
(registbrbd.)
SMYRNA BOXES, with Specimen of Work, Design, all Requisites for
Trial Strip and Instructions (Copyright);
SMYRNA WOOL, Smyrna Cotton, Designs, Design Books, Colour Cards,
and all Accessories.
Retail from all the leading Berlin Wool Repositories throughout the World, and for Ewport
{WhcUeale only >
PAUL SCHULZE, 19 k 21, Greenwood St., Manchester.
Also CISIISTAX SILK, Brilliant Fancy.
Silk Wool and Worsted Yarns for Crocheting, Embroidery, Knitting 1 , &o*
Wholesale Buying Agents Wanted whbrb not Kbpbbsentbd.
Facsimile of
Tam Label.
TURKEY, PERSIAN, & INDIAN CARPETS,
IMPORTED BY THOMAS BONTOR & 00., LATE
WATSON, BONTOR, AND CO.,
CARPET MANUFACTURERS TO THE KOYAL FAMILY,
325 and 3<5, OLD BOND STREET, W.
Exhibition Medals, 1651, 1868, and Dublin, 1865. Hors Conoours, Paris, 1878.
Superior BRUSSELS, VELVET, SAXONY, and all other Carpets, on the Newest Designs.
IT STANDS AT THE HEAD.
A Single Finger-Stroke produces any
character used by the Operator.
Type Writers that fail to accomplish this are
deficient, and do not fully economise time and
labour.
Investigate this point before purchasing.
10,000 “CALIGRAPHS” ARE IN DAILY USE.
Solo Agent for the United Kingdom—
T. DAVISON,
18, Queen Victoria St., louden, E.C.


STEEL-CASED AMERICAN ORGANS, 10 GUINEAS.
NATHL. BERRY’S
PATENT “IMPERISHABLE” PIANOS,
50 CrIJOEAS Complete.
Th<j 11 IMPERISHABLE " Piano is constructed with a
STEEL CASK AND IKON FRAME, and GLUE IS NOT USED
In any part of the Case. The Instrument consequently
CANNOT BE AFFECTED in any way by HEAT OR DAMP,
as the Exterior of the Instrument is COMPOSED ENTIRELY
OF STEEL. Its suitability for the varying Tropical climates
la therefore self-evident. In structure, the Instrument is
UPRIGHT AND IRON GRAND TRICHORD THROUGHOUT.
BRASS PINPLATE, BEST IVORY KEYS, AND POSSESSES
ALL THE LATEST IMPROVEMENTS. The ornamentation
(walnut and gold or black and gold) is of the highest style,
and will not lose colour or brightness in any climate.
EXTREME DURABILITY. LIGHTNESS AND STRENGTH
FOB INLAND TRANSIT. MAGNIFICENT TONE.
NATHANIEL BERRY, Pianoforte Manufacturer,
135, CITY ROAD LONDON, E.C.
STEEL-CASED HARMONIUMS, 7* GUINEAS
| KILNER BROS.,
11l iA NS t- Manufacturers of all hinds of
U 0k) | GLASS BOTTLES
PATTI T7C £ FOR HOME AND EXPORT tr ade.
Dll I I liPi 1 , I Co,orilft! an,] Indian Visitors are cordially invited to call and
inspect samples at No. 9, Great Northern Goods Station,
■4* King’s Cross, London,
•J. Few minuter walk from King’s Gross, {Met.) Station.
N.B.—Out Bottles now take the lead in the Principal Markets in the World.
FREEMAN’S CHLORODYNE.
The ORIGINAL and ONLY TRTIB.
Greatest Medical Discovery of the Present Century, and it
T regarded as a boon to mankind.
It Is the best known remedy for Coughs, Colds, Consumption, Whooping Cough, Bronchitis, and Asthma.
r* e ? ec I?, checks an< l arrests those too-oft-n fatal diseases— Diphtheria, Diabetes, Fever, Croup Ague, Ac
It arts like a charm in Diarrhaa, and is the only known Specific in Cholera and Dysentery.
It eflectually cuts short all attacks of Epilepsy, Hysteria, Palpitation, Conmdsions, and Spasms
It is the only palliative in Rheumatism, Gout, Cancer, Toothache, Neuralgia, Ssiatica, Lumbago, Ae.
It rapidly relieves pain from whatever cause; allays the irritation of fever; soothes and strengthen* the
system under exhausting diseases, restores the deranged functions, stimulates healthy action of the secretfons of the
.“n ,r efreshln B , plee P- »“ d marvellously proloners life. It may be taken by Old and
loung at all hours and times according to the directions.
. jf extensively used by Medical Men In their official and private practice, at Home and Abroad, who have
given numerous written testimonials of its wonderful efficacy.
Sold by Chemists and Patent Medicine Dealers all over the World In bottles, Is, I+d.; 2 ox., 2s. 9d •
* ***•» 4s. 6d-; half-pints, 11s.; and pints, 20a. each; and by the Inventor—' ' ”
RICHARD FREEMAN, 70. Bennington Park Road, London, S.E. Free by Post.
CAHAD4, TASMANIA, lOVA, THU
OCCUPATION for PUPILS on Selected Stock
and Grain Farms and larger Estates in Canada,
Tasmania, and United States. Pupils receive
regular Monthly Pay. Premiums from £6O.
PAMPHLETS FREE.
FORD, RATHBOxNE & CO.,
21, FINSBURY PAVEMENT, LONDON.


INDIGESTION,
HEADACHE AND ALL LIVER AFFECTIONS.
PRICHARD’S PILLS,
COMPOSED of DANDELION, CHAMOMILE, RHUBARB, and GINGER
(Entirely Vegetable, perfectly Tasteless, no Mercury.)
They materially assist nature in the performance of some of her most Important functions, and prove the
1 greatest boon to those troubled with either of the above ailments.
Prepared only by W. PRICHARD, Apothecary, 65, Charing Cross, London.
Bold in Bottles at Is. lid., 2s. 9d-, 4s. 6d., 11s., & 21s. Free by Post. And of ail Chemists.
City Agent: E. CONSTANCE, 114, Leadenhall Street, E.G.
“AMERICAN WALTHAM WATCHES”
Are the finest Timekeepers in the World, and at half the usual cost of unreliable systems.
The exhibit of finished work, and the marvellous machinery employed in the production, was the most Interesting
feature of the Inventions Exhibition last year. . ~
The Gold Medal, the highest prize for Horologies! skill, was awarded them. They have been equally successful
at all the recent Exhibitions, having obtained at—
Philadelphia, Four Prize Medals; Paris, the Gold Medal; Sydney, the Gold Medal, with
Two Special and Four First Prizes; Melbourne, Two Gold Medals.
From their perfect reliability, simplicity of construction, and easiness of repair, they are eminently adapted for
India and the Colonies, where they are rapidly making themselves a great name.
Tim PRACTICAL AGENT is
W. CANEY, Watchmaker, 72, Regent Street, London,
(Two doors from the Cafe Royal.)
A Descriptive Essay and Price List sent free by post to every applicant.
Anglo-American Brush Electric Light Corporation
(LIMITED).
Head Offices and Works; BELVEDERE ROAD, LAMBETH, LONDON.
Patentees and Manufacturers of Apparatus for the
BRUSH System of “Arc” Lighting, S'“2
an extended and economical lighting is possible.
BRUSH-VICTORIA Compound-Wound Self-Regulating
Victoria Dynamos, Departments.
BRUSH-VICTORIA Incandescence Lamps, geneous filament.
■DUTTCII QT7T THW “ Ann ” I omVkC for outdoor and indoor lighting, to give a pure,
Dilll bll-|j]jLLUiN ATO Ldllipb, steady, and unvarying light.
VICTORIA SELF-REGULATING ELECTRIC MOTORS
Launches, Hoists, Rock Boring, Pile Driving, Ac. These Motors for the most efficient and economical
means of supplying jower in any situation not conveniently accessible to Steam Power.
The Corporation are now prepared to supply and erect Electric
Lighting Plant on the Purchase Hire System.
Information can be obtained upon application either to the Corporation’s representa-
tive at their Stall, or in the Electric Lighting Machinery Shed, or from the Secretary,
at the Head Offices at the above Address.
New and Popular Pamphlet on Electric Lighting, ,J THE ELECTRIC LIGHT IN OLE HOUSES.'
Price One Penny. May be obtained at the Corporation’s Stall


YLEY’S Established 147 Years.
CHOICE PERFUMES. ESS BOUQUET
La Reine Victoria,
Marechalle,
Snow White Blossoms,
Ceylon, Reveur, Prairie
Flowers, Old England,
Vienna, &c.
SPECIAL SOAPS.
SPERMACETI TABLET
BAYLEY’S,
Otto of Rose, Ess Bouquet, '
Palm, Sandal, ( The O ld Civet Cat, 1739.)
AmSa""Sc! 17, COOESPUE STEEET, LONDON, S.W.
Medal
Australian Wines,
Dr. Pinball writes :—“ I never realized tbe character and refinement Australian
Wines are capable of displaying till I tasted yours.”
The Gresham Lecturer on Medicine writes; —“ I believe the Health Exhibition
will open people’s eyes to the value of your wines. As a juror, though not in the
Food Department, I shall take care to make known the value of your exhibits.
When I dined at .... I called on each occasion for your wine, and Ml my friends
and neighbours who dined at the same time and who took the Hermitage were
greatly pleased with it, and will come upon you for more. If Auatralian wines
when first introduced into England had been of a similar kind, the general feeling,
still so prevalent, against them would not have existed."
Of 111 Will WEBGHIMTS ill 07011$.
Dowgate Hill Vaults, Cannon Street Stations.
JOHN GLEN,
Hbvevtteement Hoent,
Sole Agent to the Contractors (WM. CLOWES & SON'S,
Limited ) for the Advertisements in this Guide and the other
Official Publications of the Colonial and Indian Exhibition.
Advertising conducted in all Trade Journals and the London and Provincial Press
MERCHANTS, MANUFACTURERS,
IMPORTERS, EXPORTERS,
AT THE LOWEST RATES.
LONDON: 379 a, W.C.
(.Entrance in Southampton Street .)


SHAND, MASON, & C
flDanufacturers of
STEAM AND MANUAL FIRE ENGINES
To the Metropolitan Fire Bri-
gade, Her Britannic Majesty’s
War Department, Board of
Admiralty, Crown Agents for
the Colonies and Council of
India, the Insurance Offices,
Municipal, Volunteer, and
Private Fire Brigades.
OVER TWO-THIRDS
OF THE
STEAM and MANUAL
FIRE ENGINES
OF THE
METROPOLITAN
(LONDON)
FIRE BRIGADE
ABE BY
SHAND, MASON, & GO.
Fire Escapes, Portable Fire Engines, Hose, Patent Instantaneous Hose
Couplings, Firemen’s Equipments, and Fire Extinguishing Apparatus of every
description and for all Climates.
Gold Medals
FIRST AWARDS
AT THE FOLLOWING
INTERNATIONAL
EXHIBITIONS AND
COMPETITIONS,
London Exhibition 1851
London Exhibition ... ... 1862
Crystal Palace Competitions 1863
Middleburg Exhibition ... 1864
Cologne Exhibition 1865
Dublin Exhibition 1865
Paris Exhibition 18«7
Bradford Competition ... 1867 Cape
Akola,(lndia) Exhibition ... 1868 Orebr
Altona (Germany) Exhibition 1869 Chrisi
Highest Award (Gold Medal) I
ILLUSTRATED
75, UPPER GROUND
Paris Exhibition 1818
Edinburgh Exhibition ... 1869 Paris Exhibition 1878
Glasgow Competition ... 1870 Sydney Exhibition .... ... 1879
Preston Competition 1871 Melbourne Exhibition ... 1880
Moscow Exhibition ... • ... 1872 Karlskrona (Sweden) Compe-#
Vienna Exhibition 1873 tition ... ... ....-,1881
London Exhibition 1874 Special Diploma, Fisheries
Bonaon n-xniDicion ..r r Vt. IM ,
Norrkoping (Sweden) Exhih. 1876 Exhibition, London ... 1883
Cape Town Exhibition ... 1877 Special Diploma, Health Ex-
Orebro (Sweden) Competition 1877 hibition, London ... __ a. il«84
Christiania Exhibition ... 1877 AND
al) International Inventions Exhibition, London. 188S..
CATALOGUES ON APPLICATION.
STREET, BLACKPRIARS ROAD, LONDON.


; :i SEALSKIN' 'jackets
OESTLEMEX’S FUE-LTNED COATS.
TRAVELLING and HEARTH RUGS
One-Half West End Prices.
IlwTm « miPhillips,
COT t t wflWGa>SEjs,
52 & 53, NEWGATE STREET.
“PYJAMAS HOUSE,”
51, Conduit Street, W.
A. BURDEN’S noted
“PYJAMAS SUITS”
SLEfpiNG>\ SIIImTS
LOUNGING, hoiseet,
' SMOKING, ' --GLOVES.
DRESSING, \
IN THB YACHTING,
International Health BATHING
Exhibition, 1884. _ *
» z,w v • ■ r* v.-.-.w i / ’ ’.v.v-v i v:
■iiMmi
jSold inTins6 j IM^6|
Qteinway and Jeon’s
New York. PIANOS London.
GOLD MEDAL, Inventions Exhibi-
tion, 1885.
GOLD MEDAL, Society of Arts, 1885.
Steinway Hall, Lower Seymour Street,
POSTMAN SQUARE, LONDON, W.
WATCHES, CHRONOMETERS, & fl LOCKS,
By WEBSTER
(Chronometer Maher to the Royal Navy),
.t as LOW A PRICE as is consistent with.
maintaining that character for superiority of
workmanship which has distinguished this
House for nearly Two Centuries.
R. G. WEBSTER,
5, Qneen Victoria St., London, E.C.
/5 Doors from the \ /Established in \
V Mansion House./ \ Cornhill, 1711./
, Irish Poplins in all Colours, and
TSH black, from 4/6 yard. '1 able
and Household Linens
■.■. v mady for immediate use.
Jl UJrijllN b Irish Cambric Handker-
chiefs. Balbriggan
TT?TQTT Hosiery. Patterns
Irish Laces UIuDJIL and Catalogues
from the __ free,
least expensive, TT (OITTQIT: 1
by the yard and XJ.L/ <U O-CJ
in Sets, for Ladies
and Children. Irish X,X pfN! pJS.
Eomespuns.
INGLIS & TINCKLER,
• The Irish Warehouse,
147, REGENT STREET , LONDON, W.
LINNETS NEW PATENT
RIDING SHIRT.
Specially adapted for the Colonies. Will not ruck up,
but keeps the lower part of the body perfectly warm.
The most comfortable Shirt ever invented.
Sole Maker—
LINNEY,
POSIES, 6LOYEF, § SJHip TTIILG^,
99, REGENT STREET, W.
Speciality In RIDING BELTS & RIDING DRAWERS
Telegraphic Address :—“ Linnet, London.”


WATCHES FOR THE COLONIES^
CLERKED ' I
Manufacturer of Clirouoineters
WATCHES & CLOCKS.
. LATE MAKER TO JW
BLACK AUfl> n I K#
Of Calcutta, Melbourne, and Lord
Business Established 95 Years
I, ROYAL EXCHANGE, i
AH Manufacturing and EepaJr 1
Premises. Wf
1 "
THE FINEST JEWELS.
ANTIQUE SILVER PLATE.
BEST ELECTRO SILVER.
CURIOUS AND RARE COI
SPINK & SON, Goldsmiths and Silversmith
2, GRACECHURCH STREET (4 Doors from Cornhill), LONDON, E.C.
ESTABLISHED 1779.
MODERATE CASH PRICES AND 10 PER CENT. DISCOUNT.
LS, AND COINS, ACCURATELY VALUED OR PURCHASED
PLATE, JEWELS, AND COINS, ACCURATELY
CROSBYHALL,
One of the Sights of London.
THE
CELEBRATED “CLACHAHS"
In Sherborne Lane, King William-st., E.C.,
and Mitre Court, Fleet-st., E.C.,
Are the only Establishments in LONDON where all the
FINEST HIGHLAND WHISKIES
PALACE OF RICHARD 111.
LUNOJIEOIY3 4 DINNERS
FOR
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN.
(From the most Famous Distillers in Scotland)
Are to be obtained—and in their Native Purity— and
at the Same Prices as they are sold in our
“CLACHANS” at 87, Fountain Bridge, and
103, High Street, Edinburgh; and 299, Argyle
Street, Glasgow.
The attention of medical men and analysts is respect-
fully solicited to this Advertisement.
32, BISHOPSGATE WITHI
Near Railway Station.
FAMILIES SUPPLIED.
JOHN GLEN,
Advertisement
Agent, 379 A, Strand, W.C.
MILK '“-Hi
« AND
£>BULPHIIi
x\ t SjOUP
JOSEPH RODGERS & SONS’
Celebrate? Cutler?.
Tlie best-known Brand of SHEFFIELD
CUTLERY throughout the World.
LONDON (West-End) AGENTS;
WHEATON & BENNETT,
104, 106, & 108, Oxford St., W.
Unequalled for the Complexion. Invaluable
Children. Never Irritates the Skin.
Delicately Perfumed.
PARKINSON & FRODSHAM,
Match an? Chronometer
flDafcers.
Gold Hunting Keyless Half 1 £O4 IQs
Chronometer ... ••• /
CHANG-1! ALI.EY,
COENHILL (or LOMBAED STEEET),
LONDON.


P' ibJv Pv S
Produces
Soft,White
AND Beautiful Hands.
W **
S (Vnscente^^
‘iihtfully
ei/ er y^ere.
d~*Um*. l*k.‘
PEARS’ SOAP IS USED IN THE DOULTON LAVATORIES IN THE EXHIBITION.
OAP IS USED IN THE DOULTON LAVATORIES IN THE EXHIBITION.
