

OFFICIAL REPORT
OF THE
First Annual
Conference
OPENED IN SYDNEY, N.S.W.,
APRIL, 1912
AUSTRALIAN CARRIERS’
UNION
Registered under Commonwealth Conciliation
and Arbitration Act, 1904-11
The Worker Print Bathurst-st., Sydney


OFFICIAL REPORT
OF THE
First Annual
Conference
OPENED IN SYDNEY, N.S.W.,
APRIL, 1912
AUSTRALIAN CARRIERS’
UNION
Registered under Commonwealth Conciliation
and Arbitration Act, 1904-11
The Worker Print Bathurst-*!., Sydney


EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
for 1912.
President.
E. GRAYNDLER, Sydney, N.S.W.
Vice-Presidents.
JAS. NEWTON, Hay, N.S.W.
P. LEMON, Queensland.
General Secretary.
M. J. POWER, Hay, N.S.W.
Executive Officers.
E. GRAYNDLER, Sydney, N.S.W.
JAS’. NEWTON, Hay, N.S.W.
M.-POWER, Hay, N.S.W.
THOS. RICHARDS, Brewarrina, N.S.W,
F. LEMON, Queensland.
W. WILDIE, Longreach, Queensland,
T. LONSDALE, Charleville, Queensland.


AUSTRALIAN CARRIES' UNION.
First Annual Conference.
The first Annual Conference of the Australian Carriers’
Union was opened in the Trades Hall, Sydney, on Wednes-
day afternoon, April 10, 1912, with Mr. E. Grayndler, Presi-
dent, in the chair.
The following delegates were present:
Riverina: Messrs. L. E. Evans, J. Wall, Jas. Newton,
Geo. Morris, J. Press, J. Rice, T. Richards, R. Lathan, D.
Frazer.
Charleville: Messrs T. J. Lonsdale, J. Butler.
General Secretary: M. J. Power.
The President stated that the Longreach delegate, Mr.
Ahern, would not reach Sydney till the next morning.
OFFICIAL REPORTER.
It was resolved that Mr. Bates, of “ The Worker” staff,
be the official reporter of the Conference,
HOURS OF MEETING.
The following were fixed the hours of meeting of Con-
ference: —Morning, 10 to 12.30; afternoon, 2 to 5,
PRESIDENT’S OPENING ADDRESS.
The President said he had very much pleasure in
daring the Conference open. He was very pleased to think
that the organization of the Australian Carriers’ Union
had proceeded so satisfactorily that they were now in a
position to hold an annual business conference, and he was
proud to be its President. (Hear, hear.) While they had
had a Conference last year, it had really only been to fix
up the constitution and rules. This Conference was re-
presentative practically from the Gulf to the Murray of all
engaged in the carrying trade. The importance of the
Conference, not only to carriers, but to the whole Labor
movement, could not be overestimated. It was for dele-
gates to give their earnest deliberation to matters which
seriously affected their industry and the movement gener-
ally in order that the business they transacted might be
for the uplifting of the carriers of Australia, and for the


good of all the States. He hoped to see the day when the
Carriers’ Union would embrace the whole of those en-
gaged in transport throughout Australasia. He did not in-
tend at that stage to take up the time of Conference with
a speech, but would say again that he was pleased indeed
to think that after little more than twelve months, so much
organization had been brought about. When the Uong-
reach delegate was present, representing Queensland, the
Conference could claim to be Federal in its scope. He
was sure the deliberations of delegates would bring last-
ing good to the Union, and that the experience of the past
12 months would enable them to perfect the rules and
place the organization on the soundest footing. (Applause.)
GENERAL SECRETARY’S REPORT.
Mr. Power, asked by the President to give a short
verbal report, said they knew that the Union had been
formed but a short time ago with about 60 carriers, and
had soon spread until a number of districts were taken in
and the organization had grown up to about 1400 members.
There were now three branches and 120 agencies. A satis-
factory point was that in every case Union rates had been
secured. There was no case of failure to report. Wherever
the Union had asked for Union rates it had been success-
ful in obtaining them. The work of organization had been
very heavy, and that accounted for the paucity of funds; but
a great many centres did not need visiting now, and that
would relieve the finances and enable the Union to build
up a fund wherewith to go to the Arbitration Court. In
the present state of the law, as they knew, arbitration
proceedings were very costly, and, until a common rule
could be obtained, not very satisfactory. The A.W.U, were
in the happy position of being able to enforce a common
rule for themselves, but the carriers were not able to do
that yet. Perhaps when they could a common rule would
not be wanted. It was a great thing for the Carriers’ Union
to have the moral support and sympathy of the A.W.U. The
support of that great Union behind them helped them a
great deal, for in the country districts the A.W.U. was a
mighty power,' By the time the next Conference met he
trusted that the whole of the States would be linked up in
one organization, with branches everywhere. (Applause.)
ORDER OF BUSINESS.
It was resolved that all business relating to the rules
should stand over until the arrival of the Longreach dele-
gate.


AMALGAMATION WITH OTHER UNIONS.
Mr. Frazer moved resolution 4, standing in the name of
the Riverina Branch, on recommendation from the Wyalong
Sub-Branch:
That Conference consider the advisability of amal-
gamating with the Lumpers’ Union, or arranging some
scheme of co-operation between the organization and
the Australian Carriers’ Union.
He said his branch had considered it right to take some
means of bringing about an amalgamation with other
unionists engaged in the same industry. It would be of
great assistance if they could have the support of those
handling cargo after it had been drawn in. It often hap-
pened now that farmers having their own teams drew in
wheat below Union rates, and what was wanted was for
Union lumpers to refuse to handle any wheat not carried
under Union conditions. On some of the lines the lumpers
already did this, and it had the effect of enabling the Union
to keep rates up to Union level. They took no wheat except
that drawn in by Union teams.
Mr. Evans seconded the resolution, but pointed out that
there was no Lumpers’ Union in the country districts, the
workers there being in the Rural Workers’ Union, and he
had found the fact of the Rural Workers’ members being
staunch had greatly assisted him in stiffening up some
of the weak-kneed carriers, who were quite ready to hold
out their hand for the increase, but were not so ready to
put down their guinea and register their teams in the Union.
At Peak Hills, for instance, he had found the Rural Workers
very strong, and he questioned whether a non-Union car-
rier would get as far' as the weigh-bridge, let alone get
his load , into the trucks. The proposed amalgamation was
a splendid idea, and should be put on foot as soon as pos-
sible. He heartily supported the resolution. There was a
movement on foot to amalgamate the A.W.U., the Rabbit-
ters, the Rural Workers, and the Carriers, and he was
sure that if a plebiscite was taken among the members of
those organizations, every member would vote in the af-
firmative. This scheme had practically been arranged at
the last A.W.U, Conference, and the carriers should go out
to meet it.
Mr. Wall endorsed what Mr. Evans had said. He said
his visits throughout the wheat belt had convinced him that
the other unionists would stand by the carriers and not
handle any wheat pot carried under Union terms. They
would support the carrier in every place where the carrier
saw fit to demand his rights.
The President announced that in view of the import*
ance of the matter, he would allow discussion at length,
gnd would not enforce the rules of one speech only,


UNITING BUSH WORKERS.
Mr. Power moved as an amendment—
That this Conference affirms the desirability of en-
tering into negotiations with a view to amalgamating
with other bush unions.
He said the resolution passed by the A.W.U., affirming the
principle of amalgamation must commend itself to all of
them. He was informed that negotiations were to be en-
tered into at once by that Union, and if the carriers ap-
proved of the proposal they could at once appoint repre-
sentatives to meet the A.W.U. and go straight on. He did
not think there cpuld be a single member who did not be-
lieve that amalgamation would strengthen their Union and
be the right thing to do.
Mr. Lonsdale supported the resolution as it stood; a
separate motion to appoint delegates could be carried after-
wards. While thoroughly believing in the principle of
amalgamation, he would point out that it would always be
necessary for complete control to be left in the hands of
each trade organization. Their broad interests were allied,
but each had separate trade interests that their own mem-
bers understood. The amalgamation, therefore, relied for
its success on the right machinery being devised for it.
He did not want to damp delegates’ ardor on the matter,
but would like-'lo see it very thoroughly threshed out. For
instance, there was a rule in the A.W.U. that no one who
employed others should be a member. How would that
chime In with a carrier employing his own driver? He was
an employer of labor. He did not think there was a worker
who was not in favor of amalgamation as tending to make
the Union all the stronger if it could be arranged.
Mr. Rice thought there would be found some way of
arranging amalgamation. Of course there were difficul-
ties. In his district there were camels, and the Carriers’
Union did not feel satisfied to admit the Afghans to
bership, even where they got Union rates. It was felt that
the Union should stick up for White Australia as much as
possible. The Union could not take exception to their
employment, however, on account of refusing them mem-
bership of the Union. With amalgamation with other
unions this could be done —the squatter would not employ
Afghans when he knew that the lumpers would not unload
from them.
Mr. Newton thought that a definite resolution could be
carried at once instead of only one affirming the desirability
of amalgamation.
THE A.W.U. SCHEME.
The President said he would rule, if the resolution
affirming was carried, that it was competent for the Con-
ference to go on and carry another motion setting out


what should be done in consequence. He said that the
last conference of the A.W.U. had carried a resolution that
all kindred bush organizations should be approached with
a view to getting them to appoint delegates to attend a
congress for the purpose of putting the amalgamation
scheme on foot. Mr. Spence, the President of the A.W.U.,
had been endeavoring to sketch out a constitution to pro-
pose to this convention as a basis. If there was an amal-
gamation it would be necessary to have some local govern-
ment of the sections. When the A.W.U. had been first
started, the ideal had been to bring all workers into the
one Union, and the idea of sectional government had been
considered then. Something of that sort was wanted now
that this amalgamation was proposed, and it was now
exercising Mr. Spence’s mind. It was hoped that the pro-
jected convention would come off in a few months’ time,
and that every Union interested would be represented.
With regard to the matter raised by Mr. Lonsdale about
employers, not being admitted to membership of the A.W.U.,
the Union objected as a matter of policy to the contract
system, and the' cases mentioned were where a man took
contracts Tor a number of sheds and employed shearers to
work them for him. This case was not analogous with that
of a teamster employing a driver. If a man had a number
of teams and took a contract to carry all the wool from a
certain district, that would be analogous. With regard to
the possibility of obtaining Federal registration for the
amalgamation, he held the opinion that not only all those
who used the roads for hauling wool and wheat, but also all
who made the roads, whether of metal or iron, were engaged
in a kindred occupation, and could apply for registration
under the one head. Of course that went a long way, but he
believed it could be maintained, and Mr. Spence believed
with him. If the idea of amalgamation appealed to the
carriers, they should do something at once to take part
in it. It was a splendid idea, and to his mind far more
practical than the industrial workers of the world organiza-
tion dreamed of by some very good people. The grouping
of unions according to industries was a valuable idea, and
would do the cause of unionism inestimable good.
The amendment by Mr. Power was carried unanimously.
It was decided to allow the appointment of delegates
to the proposed convention to remain over until the attend-
ance of the Longreach delegate,
LOADING IN TURN.
Mr. Frazer moved resolution No. 5. He said that in his
district the loading-in-turn system was impracticable, and
if unrestricted loading was allowed, abuses came in by men
cornering all the loading and sub-letting it.
Mr. Richards said he would like to see the resolution


carried. They had been fighting against the contract sys-
tem in his district for years, and the proposal would effec-
tually put a stop to it.
Mr. Morris said that under the conditions in his dis-
trict it would be impossible to carry out the terms of
the resolution. Loading was to be restricted to £100 value.
If there were so many bags of wheat to go away totalling
£114 freight, what would become of the odd £14?
Mr. Rice said the best plan was to restrict carriers
to one load in and one out, no matter what value. Then
when that job was done the carrier could look for another,
but not before. It would not do to restrict the value of the
loading to £100. In his district a man might have three
teams, and £100 would not be enough with freight at £6
or £7 a ton and the teams carrying from 20 to 27 tons a
trip. The system his branch had adopted would work in
every other branch, and w r ork well, and do away with con-
tracting.
TRIPS ON CONTRACT.
Mr. Lonsdale said that whenever the contract system
was allowed, in however small a way, it was the cause of
trouble, and the Conference should put its foot down on the
system. He moved as an amendment —
That no carrier shall contract for more than one
trip out.
That would be fair to all teamsters. It was a rule that had
given satisfaction right throughout his district, and it
enabled all to have a fair chance of earning a living.
Mr. Butler seconded the resolution.
Mr. Press said that if a man took a contract that was
too large for him, he would have to sub-let to others, and
it did not matter to members of the Union whether they
got the work through another member as long as they re-
ceived Union rates. The price was the main thing.
Mr. Power said he was strongly against any man sub-
letting work. The average man who sub-let work did it
because he had some purpose of his own to serve. If he had
nothing to gain he did not bother with it. There were un-
scrupulous carriers as well as unscrupulous men in other
walks of life, and if such cornered a thousand bags of wheat
it was impossible to detect whether they carted it at Union
rate or not. If the Union allowed sub-letting it would be
affording Inducements for men to scab. He would support
the amendment, but at the same time thought there were
difficulties in some districts where there were short dis-
tances.
Mr. Wall said the system of one trip in and one out
would not work well in districts where a farmer who had
wheat watched the market and sold on quick delivery when
the price was up.


Mr. Morris said that in his district carriage did not
exceed more than 60 miles, and there were horse and bul-
lock teams. Some proprietors would not have horse teams
on their stations, and others would not have bullocks about.
And some carters would not be allowed on some stations.
The turn system would not work in that district, as many
of the owners could cart their own stuff.
Mr. Press suggested that Branch Committees should
each settle the matter for themselves.
Mr. Lonsdale said the matter should be settled in some
uniform way, so that they could all be governed by the
same principles. Branch Committees could be stuffed and
show an inclination to pander to the squatter. The Union
itself should take a firm stand and make a rule that could
not be departed from. With regard to Mr. Wall and the
farmer sending wheat into market to get the good price,
if the work of carrying was spread out among all the
carriers available the farmer would get his wheat in all the
quicker.
EVILS OF SECRET REBATE.
Mr. Evans said that they wanted to see where the line
of demarcation was to be drawn. If the matter was decided
by the Conference it would be for the whole of Australia;
if it was left to the Branch Committees, then a different
system might obtain in each district. In Bourke the turn
system worked well, and if it worked well there it could
work well everywhere else. If the loading-in-turn system
was abolished on long distance carriage it would be the
downfall of the Union. In the early days of the Union,
through the loading-in-turn system not being adopted, there
had been unscrupulous carriers willing to pay rebate in
order to get loads, and it had been impossible for any Union
Secretary, or any one else, to find it out. Their way-bills
had Union rates of freight on the face of them, but the
carriers were called upon to sign another document agree-
ing to give a certain rebate back. In some cases lump
sums were paid down in order to get loading, and carriers
who would not descend to doing this were victimised by
the forwarding agents. He earnestly hoped the loading-in-
turn system would be made the policy of the Union, and not
departed from, at all events, for long-distance work.
Mr. Press remarked that he was a strong believer in
the loading-in-turn sj'stem, but he was afraid that there
were some carriers who would sooner leave the Union than
adopt it.
The President said the question of loading in turn or
not was not involved in the motions before the Conference,
but if any delegate wanted Conference to fix the system,
he thought it would be open for anyone to present a
motion.


A PROPOSAL.
Mr. Power moved an amendment—
That Branch Committees shall have power to decide
whether loading-in-turn system shall be adopted in
their district or not, and also the amount carriers may
contract for.
He said he was an uncompromising supporter of the load-
ing-in-turn system as the only way to’check the crooked
carrier, but at present it could not be applied to all dis-
tricts. If they had not had the loading-Ln-turn system in
Hay they would not have a Union there. While holding to
the principle that the loading-in-turn system was the best,
it was still feasible to allow the Branch Committees to de-
cide for themselves when they would extend it to their
districts. He hoped all branches would adopt it where
possible, and he hoped that delegates would come to the
next Annual Conference instructed to vote to make it the
universal policy of the Union. There were two classes of
men who did not want loading by turn: one that thought it
impracticable and another that wanted to go crooked. Re-
bates were got from some carriers without a doubt, as Mr.
Evans had said, but no one could get the necessary evidence.
He was morally certain of several instances he could name,
but he could not give proof.
Mr. Newton said he had perhaps had more experience
of carrying than any member at the table, and he was
opposed to anything in the way of contract. He had always
found that the loading-in-turn system had worked well;
those carriers who adopted it always got on alright. The
system of contract was simply getting behind the Union.
He had known a lot of underhand work going on, but had
not been able to prove it. Loading in turn could be enforced
in every case, and if by insisting on it the Union lost a few
members, that was better than losing principle.
DIFFICULTIES OF LOADING IN TURN.
Mr. Rice said the sub-branch at Bourke had tried stick-
ing to loading in turn, and had taken a vote on it. The
first vote had been 33 to 32, but after trying it for two
months another vote had been taken, and it went 19 for and
38 against. One of the difficulties of loading in turn in the
system compelled a teamster to wait within a mile of the
Bourke district was that it was a dry district, and the
town for his load. That often meant that there was no
feed for his cattle, and when the load was got they could
not pull it. Then, again, a man had to take any road that
offered, and could not get on the road where his home was.
Again, some of the roads were fit for horse teams, while
some were only fit for bullocks; yet, under the turn system a
carrier with horses, having to take the load that offered in


his turn, ofteh found himself with horses on a road so heavy
that they could hardly pull the feed he had to carry; whereas,
to the man with bullocks, the heaviness of the road did
not matter, as there would be scrub for his animals and
he would not be under expense. Or a bullock team might
have to go on a good road fit for horses, and yet not a pay-
able one for him, because there was no feed for bullocks.
Yet, again, a mah with two teams might have to take one
load along one road and another along a different road,
and he might not have a driver for his second team whom
he could trust out of his sight.
Mr. Morris: Can’t he exchange loads?
Mr. Rice said exchange was certainly allowed in the
rules, but it was no good. He concluded that in the cir-
cumstances of the case each sub-branch should have the
right to settle what the system should be for their particu-
lar locality. They knew the best system to adopt. It was
not a fair thing to allow delegates from one district to fix
conditions for another district they knew nothing about.
Conference at this stage adjourned till 10 o’clock next
morning.
SECOND DAY.
The President mentioned the death of Mr. Dacey, the
N.S.W. Treasurer, and a resolution of sympathy to the
relatives and the Government was carried by delegates
standing.
Amendments to resolution 5 were further debated.
Mr. Lonsdale, opposed Mr. Power’s amendment. He did
not think it right for a Branch Committee of 20—or perhaps
a bare quorum of seven —deciding what an entire district
should do. It was easy to get a number of men in favor
of a course of action that the majority outside might not
agree to. The most democratic course would be for the
Committee to take a plebiscite of all the members in the
district, and decide accordingly. With regard to loading in
turn, from what he could learn the majority of carriers in
the Charleville district were absolutely opposed to that
system on account of the peculiar difficulties of working
it there. If loading in turn was adopted there it would work
out that men who now got special rates for taking loads
into rough country would have to take them for the same
rate as applied to easier roads. There would be 150 carriers
in the Youlbah, Mitchell, and Roma districts placed at the
mercy of the cattle-owners, who would say, if the turn sys-
tem was adopted, “ I want this load taken out to the cattle
country in turn, and your rates are so much,” and the car-
riers could not demand a special rate, as they now did for
that country. Again, the turn system might cause a man to


go out, on a road that would keep him 18 months away from
his family. He would support a plebiscite being taken of
the men concerned.
PRINCIPLES OR U N lON ISM.
The President said it would be well for Conference to
decide upon this question definitely. There were three
means by which the matter could be settled:—(l) By taking
a plebiscite of the Union as a whole; (2) each branch to
take its own plebiscite; and (3) leave. it to the District
Committees or general meetings of members. No authority
or guidance existed under the present rules, and Con-
ference would do well to adopt a rule on the subject.
Mr. Evans said he hoped Conference would do nothing
that would jeopardise the loading-in-turn principle. This
Conference had not all the brains of the movement. There
were men in the bush with just as much intelligence as
delegates here, and their experience should be taken into
consideration. It would be dangerous to give the power
into the hands of mere committees, which might be partially
composed of business men with an object to serve. Some
of them at times had some of the carriers in their grip finan-
cially, and might like to do away with loading in turn in
order to keep them under their thumbs.
Mr. Newton said the basic principle of unionism was
that every member should have an equal chance of all the
work going, and that could only be carried out by having
the loading-in-turn system. Let the system be universal,
and the difficulties mentioned in the course of the debate
would be got over all right. If a man got for his turn a
trip that did not suit him, he could always exchange it
with someone whom it would suit, or go down to the bot-
tom of the list. If there was a particularly bad trip that
required a special rate to make it payable, all the carriers
could go to the bottom of the list, and when their turn came
again could demand higher rates. He agreed that a few
committee members of a branch should not decide. He
advocated the adoption of the principle in its entirety, but if
there were places where it was absolutely impossible to
work it, he would not be against allowing a sub-branch to
decide for itself, but any contracts made for loading should
be made by the sub-branch, and not by individual carriers.
A PLEBISCITE SUPPORTED.
Mr. Press said many members in his district were
opposed to loading in turn, as many of them lived on cer-
tain roads and did not want to get off them. His idea was
to bring all carriers into the Union and get things going.
The Union was only a young affair to be making hard-and


fast rules as to working methods yet. Universal loading in
turn could be brought about afterwards.
Mr. Frazer, in reply on the original motion, said the in-
tention of its framers had been to put a stop to carriers
with a number of teams cornering quantities of loading un-
der contract. In the discussion that had taken place he
favored Mr. Power’s amendment.
Mr. Lonsdale’s amendment was put and lost.
Mr. Power’s amendment was also put and lost.
Mr. Evans moved a further amendment—
That a plebiscite be taken of the whole of the
Union to decide the question of loading in turn.
lie said that would allow every carrier in the organization
to have a voice in the matter, and would be the most legiti-
mate manner in which to settle it.
Mr. Lonsdale opposed the amendment for the reason
that the men in the Riverina did not understand the condi-
tions obtaining in Queensland, and therefore could not vote
intelligently on the question as it affected them. It was
not like taking a vote in the A.W.U., where the work was
the same wherever performed.
(Mr. Ahern, delegate from Longreach, took his seat and
was welcomed by the President.)
Mr. Evans in reply asked delegates not to take up a
States right attitude and say that one State should not bind
another. He was sure that there were men in N.S.W. who
were perfectly well aware of all the conditions in Queens-
land.
The amendment was carried, the voting being:—For:
Messrs. Evans, Morris, Wall, Newton, Lathan, Richards,
and Ahern. Against: Messrs. Lonsdale, Butler, Frazer, Rice,
and Press.
A further amendment by Mr. Lonsdale that the deci-
sion of each branch shall be binding on that branch only
was lost, the voting being;—For: Messrs. Lonsdale, Press,
But'.cr, Frazer, and Ahern. Against: Messrs. Morris, Evans,
Wall, Newton, Lathan, Rice and Richards.
The President said it had now been decided how the
loading-in-turn system was to be settled, but the question
of fixing the maximum for which teamsters should con-
tract for had not yet been dealt with.
Mr. Evans said his *motion had purposely left that mat-
ter out, as he was dead opposed to any contracting at all.
RULES.
Mr. Lonsdale moved resolution No. 1, standing in the
name of the Charleville Branch—


That rule 10 be amended by striking out all words
and figures after the words “ as follows,” and inserting
in place thereof the following words:—“One delegate for
from fifty members to one thousand, and for every
additional thousand or part thereof one delegate.”
He contended that under the present scheme of represen-
tation it was too costly for branches in the north to send
the requisite number of delegates to Conference. With
four hundred members the Charleville Branch would be
entitled at present to four delegates, whose expenses to
Sydney would run into some £l2O. Within the next three
months they expected to have one thousand members.
(Hear, hear.) That would entitle the branch to ten dele-
gates, and the expenses involved in sending them to Con-
ference would be out of all reason.
The amendment, upon being put to the vote, was lost.
Mr. .Lonsdale moved resolution No. 2
That rule 11 be altered by striking out the word
“ Sydney,” and by striking out the words “ March or
April,” and inserting in place thereof the words “ Feb-
ruary or March.”
He thought it would be a good thing to hold the Conference
about the time the A.W.U. held theirs, and to allow each
Conference to fix the place of next Conference, the same
as that Union did.
The resolution was carried.
Resolution 3 was discharged from the business paper
as having been dealt with by resolution 1.
Resolution No. 6 was moved by Mr. Frazer—
That where a carrier is loading for a farmer or
grazier free grass shall be supplied to the carrier by
such farmer or grazier.
This was carried, with the alteration that the words
“ and water” were added' after “ grass.”
Mr. Frazer moved resolution No. 7
That farmers shall find a man to assist in loading
their wheat on the carter’s waggon.
He said that since the new rate many farmers had said,
“ I’ll give you the rate, but in future you will have to load
yourself.” ,
Mr. Lathan moved an amendment—
That all loading be delivered to carriers on the
waggon and taken delivery of from the waggon.
That would do away with the entire question of who was
to do the loading.
This was seconded by Mr. Morris and carried.


Resolution No, 8 —
That sub-branches comprising 15 or more members
shall have the power to fix rates in their district to
suit local conditions.
The President said he could not take it in that form,
as there were no sub-branches in reality and nothing at the
present time in the constitution to permit of sub-branches
being formed. He would suggest that a resolution might
be moved to the effect that branches have the power to
form sub-branches composed of 15 or more members, who
shall have power to fix the rates, etc.
Mr. Frazer accepted the suggestion and moved the re-
solution in that form.
Seconded by Mr. Richards.
Mr. Lonsdale moved as an amendment—
That branches have power to form district com-
mittees, who shall have power to fix rates to suit local
conditions, providing such rates are not lower than those
prevailing in the branch.
WHEAT CARTAGE RATES.
The minutes of previous meeting, and the official report
were read and adopted.
Mr. Lonsdale’s amendment on resolution 8 was lost, and
the original motion was also lost.
Resolution No. 9 was moved by Mr. Frazer—
That Conference discuss the matter of fixing wheat
rates, and the following scale be suggested:
Minimum per mile.
Up to 2 miles 3s. per ton.
From 2 to 12 miles Is. per ton.
From 12 to 20 miles 9d. per ton.
From 20 to 25 miles 6d.. per ton.
From 25 to 30 miles .'. 3d. per ton.
He said the foundation of the rate was the rate the farmers
were willing to give, viz., Is. per bag for 12 miles; Is. 6d.
for 20; Is. 9d. for 30; 2s. for 40. The rates now proposed
were the bag rate per mile worked out to the rate per ton,
which was the system desired to go upon The minimum
was made 3s. per ton, because the existing minimum of 6s.
was too much in cases where a farm was within half a mile
of the railway.
Mr. Lonsdale thought the rates were too low,
Mr. Evans moved an amendment for the old rate to be
fixed, viz., 6s. per ton for the first six miles or any part
of six miles; Is. per ton per mile for six to 16 miles; lOd.
per ton per mile for 15 to 25 miles. The farmers them-
selves at Peak Hill had agreed to those rates, and he did
not see that the Union required to alter them.


Mr. Wall said he had been throughout the wheat belt,
and had found that everywhere exception was taken to the
six miles minimum. The carriers told him that they could
get 4s. 6d., but it was utterly impossible to get any more for
short distances. Where they asked it, wood-carters came
out from the towns and made £1 a day by taking it for
less.
Mr. Frazer said that teams could make handsome pay
at the rates he was moving for, and if the minimum was
not lowered members of the organization would lose a lot
of the short-distance carting.
The amendment was lost and the resolution carried.
THE LABOR DAILY SCHEME.
The President introduced Mr. Watson, who had come
to address the Conference, as per Invitation, upon the
Labor daily newspaper project.
Mr. Watson, warmly received, said the invitation had
been very grateful to himself and fellow-directors, as they
thought it highly desirable that unionists everywhere should
be made aware of what was proposed to be done. He
sketched the scheme that had been placed on foot, and
pointed out that it had been decided not to allow shares to
go into private hands, because of the danger that sooner
or later they might find their way into the control of capi-
talists who would seek to alter the policy of the paper. He
showed what a payable proposition newspaper business was.
The Sydney “ Daily Telegraph,” a public company, was
making a clear profit of £50,000 a year, while the “ Sydney
Morning Herald” was probably making twice that amount.
In order to start on a proper basis it had been determined
to secure the full amount of capital necessary to produce
a paper equal to those already published in the city, and
until that amount was actually in hand, it was not proposed
to issue the paper. That a daily paper was the strongest
weapon in the armory of any cause required no demonstrat-
ing. The capitalists recognised that by securing control of
all the Press they could. A newspaper spoke with a hund-
red thousand tongues, and was the most powerful instru-
ment of modern times in moulding public thought, and con-
sequently directing public action, that was known. If Labor
wanted to make advance and unionists wanted to have their
cause recognised by the public, and so be enabled to pass
progressive laws, a daily educative factor was imperative.
In reply to a question by Mr. Newton, Mr. Watson said
the present building was being put up out of capital, but it
was being made of such proportions that the floor space
available outside that required by the paper itself would be
enough to provide, when it was let, sufficient rent to pay
the whole of the interest bill and insurance. The paper
would have its quarters rent free; and a sum sufficient to


pay interest on a loan raised on the security of the build-
ing in order to give them the use of the capital again. It
had been necessary to secure a central site, and the land
being so valuable it would not have paid to only put up a
building just large enough for the paper. The arrange-
ment made was a sound business one, and would enable
them to bank their fires, if necessary, and wait till the whole
of the required capital was available, rather than take any
risks by making a premature start.
On the motion of Mr. Newton, a hearty vote of thanks
was accorded Mr. Watson for the information he had given.
Mr. Watson thanked the Conference and withdrew.
The standing orders were suspended and Mr. Lonsdale
moved that the Union take one £SO share in Labor Papers
Limited. He said he would be in favor of a levy on mem-
bers, only the Union was young and his branch had just
levied itself £1 per team to buy land and put up an office.
Mr. Lathan said he would be in favor of moving at
least £1 a head on all N.S.W. members: he did not know
about Queensland members.
The President said £SO on 1400 members would come
to considerably less than Is. per head.
Mr. Lonsdale was not against taking two shares, except
for the finances of a young Union with heavy organizing
expenses. He thought it best to take one now and per-
haps next Conference would take four or five.
The motion was carried, the £SO to be provided for
in the subsidy payable by branches to the head office.
MEMBERSHIP OF ALIENS.
Mr. Rice moved resolution No. 10, standing in the name
of the Riverina Branch, on recommendation from the Bourke
Sub-Branch;
That no Afghans be admitted to membership.
He said the rules at present compelled the organization to
admit all carriers into the Union, and his branch disliked
having to write out tickets for colored people when the
first plank of the Labor platform was a White Australia.
Therefore they asked Conference to alter the rule. When
the proposed amalgamation was brought about the compe-r
tition of the Afghans could do no harm to the Union, It
was most undesirable to have aliens in the organization,
however necessary it might be to have a working agree-
ment with them.
Mr. Power argued that as the Afghans were here it
would be best to admit them into the Union. They would
be better inside than outside. He did not want them at all,
but they were here, and, at any rate, many of them were
good unionists and at Broken Hill had demonstrated that
they would stick up for fair rates of pay.


Mr. Lonsdale moved—
That the rule of the Union be that no Afghans or
other aliens be admitted to membership.
He could not understand any unionists advocating their ad-
mittance —it was violating the first plank of the Labor plat-
form. As far as saying that the Afghans were here and
we had to accept them, the A.W.U. might as well have
accepted Chinese cooks because they used to be in the in-
dustry. The carriers, could not ask the A.W.U. to amal-
gamate with them if they put such a rule on their books
as suggested.
Mr. Evans: The A.W.U. have Indian hawkers in mem-
bership.
The President said if any Indian hawker had an A.W.U.
ticket it had been wrongfully issued to him and could be
cancelled.
AFGHANS BARRED.
Mr. Rice said it would be. a bad thing for the Union
to admit Afghans into their ranks now they wanted loading
in turn. That would be forcing graziers who did not like
camels to use them. He hoped the Union would not do
that.
• The President said it would be worse than bad policy
for the Union to take in Afghans, and if it were done they
need not hope to carry out any scheme of amalgamation
with either the A.W.U. or the Rural Workers, whose policy
was a White Australia. In the early days of the Shearers’
Union Chinamen had been admitted to membership, but
he would not mind saying that if that policy had not been
knocked on the head the A.W.U. would not be what it was
to-day. ’
Mr. Evans advocated the admission of the Afghans, and
said that there could be no Union at all at Wilcannia and
Broken Hill if those men were not admitted.
Mr. Rice withdrew his resolution in favor of the amend-
ment, which was then carried. Mr. Evans against.
• Mr. Lonsdale moved —
That all membership and loading fees be returned
to Afghans and their membership cancelled.
This was seconded by Mr. Lathan and carried.
Conference then adjourned till the following morning.
THIRD DAY.
All delegates were present when the President opened
the Conference on the third day.
The minutes and official report were read and adopted.


Messrs. Grayndler, Lonsdale, and Power were appointed
delegates to attend the convention re proposed absorption
in the A.W.U., Messrs. Lonsdale and Power to act in case
Mr. Grayndler should not be able to attend.
THE AMALGAMATION SCHEME.
The following letter was read from the General Sec-
retary of the A.W.U.:
“On February 8, 1912, at the A.W.U. Conference, the
following resolution was carried— 4 That in view of the ex-
pressed desire of some kindred Unions to merge into the
A.W.U., this Conference take steps to bring all kindred
Unions together in conference, and draft anew constitu-
tion to submit to members of all Unions by plebiscite for
their acceptance.’
“ The General Secretary of the Rural Workers (Mr. D. L.
McNamara), the General Secretary of the Carriers (Mr.
Power), the President of the United Laborers of South
Australia (Mr. Lundie), indicated to the A.W.U. Confer-
ence that their Unions would be agreeable to an affiliation
with the A.W.U., and to meet in conference for the pur-
pose of considering a scheme whereby the kindred Unions
should be grouped together under one head.
“ The A.W.U. Conference thought that the Amalga-
mated Workers’ Association and the Drovers’ Union might
also be.included, and Mr. McNamara, of the Rural Workers,
has since suggested that the Gardeners and Nurserymen,
Fuel and Fodder Trades, Wool, Grain, and Skin Stores,
and Millers’ Employees’ Unions be included.
“ Legal opinion has been obtained, which is favorable
to the idea that the suggested affiliation could be effected.
“Kindly reply at your earliest convenience to the
following:—
“Is your Union prepared to meet in this proposed
conference?
44 Does your Union favor the inclusion of all the Unions
suggested; or, if not, which of them you do?
44 What date and place (an early date is necessary)
would be suitable to your Union to meet?
44 1 would suggest early in May, 1912, as the latest date,
and Sydney or Melbourne as the most suitable place. On
receipt of replies I will fix the date and place on the
majority opinion. The A.W.U. appointed- Messrs. W. G.
Spence, T. White, J. Barnes, F. W. Lundie, and J. Laracy
as delegates to the proposed conference.
“Trusting you will grant an early and
reply.—Yours faithfully,
44 T. WHITE, General Secretary.


Mr. Lonsdale moved to leave out Gardeners and Nur-
serymen, Fuel and Fodder Trades, Wool, Grain, and Skin
Stores, and Millers’ Employees, as these were only State
Unions. If they were affiliated with workers in the same
callings in the other States it would be a different thing.
The President said he did not think it wise to include
them, not because they were not Interstate, but because
their interests were not identical with the A.W.U. and other
bush workers. The shearers and carriers and rural
workers helped each other, and in many ways their in-
terests were interlocked, but there could be little interest
in common between a drover in the North of Quensland
and a gardener at Potts Point. If the Unions mentioned
were taken in it might be difficult to show community of
interests, and the registration would be imperilled.
The resolution to exclude was carried.
With regard to time and place of meeting, it was re-
solved that delegates themselves make a fixture, and advise
Mr. White.
FORMATION OF SUB-BRANCHES.
Mr. Rice obtained the recommittal of clause Bon the
agenda paper, in order to deal with the creation of sub-
branches, and moved that branches have the power to form
sub-branches.
Mr. Power moved to add the words “ who shall have
power to make by-laws to suit local conditions subject to
branch regulations.”
Mr. Lonsdale thought the sub-branches should have
power to fix rates as well as make by-laws.
Mr. Power pointed out that it would never do to allow
sub-branches in adjoining districts, for instance, to fix
rates, with a view to, perhaps, diverting trade from one
place to another. The Branch Committee must all the
time be in the place of an arbitrator.
After further discussion, Mr. Lonsdale moved as an
amendment—“ That branches have power to form sub-
branches, who shall fix rates, provided that such rates are.
not lower than the prevailing minimum in the majority
of sub-branches, and make by-laws to suit local conditions.
In the event of a dispute between sub-branches matters to
be settled by the Branch Committee.”
Upon being put to the vote this was lost.
Mr. Power’s amendment—“ That branches have power
to form sub-branches, which shall have the power to fix
rates in their districts and make by-laws to suit local con-
ditions, subject to branch regulations ” —was carried.


Resolution 11—
That Rule 66 be amended to provide that each
sub-branch and agency shall have power to levy load-
ing fees and fix the amount thereof at its own dis-
cretion —
was moved by Mr. Rice and seconded by Mr. Lathan, and
carried with the, addition of the words “ provided such rate
is not less than that mentioned in the rule.”
HONORARY MEMBERS.
Mr. Rice moved—
That honoary members’ subscriptions be 10s. 6d.
per annum.
Mr. Lonsdale considered it should be made a guinea.
They did not want to build up their Union on honorary
members, who were too often merely business men, who
got into the confidence of the Union for purposes of their
own. If there were men who believed in unionism, and
were prepared to help it, they would not mind coming up
with their guinea, but it was not a good idea to encourage
all sorts to come into the organization as honorary mem-
bers by holding out the inducement of taking them at
half price.
Mr. Newton pointed out that in some places it was
very difficult to get carriers themselves to serve on the
sub-branch committee, and then it was very handy to have
a few business men who were willing to give their time
to it. It was no more than fair to only take half a guinea
from those. He hoped the motion would be passed.
Mr. Ahern said business people thought nothing of
throwing in their guinea in Queensland.
The motion was carried.
LOADING-IN-TURN PLEBISCITE.—POWER TO DECIDE
GIVEN TO SUB-BRANCHES.
Mr. Lonsdale moved that resolution 5 be recommitted,
as he thought that the matter required some further con-
sideration.
The motion was seconded by Mr, Power, and carried.
Mr. Lonsdale then moved —
That the previous resolution be rescinded calling
for a plebiscite of the whole Union on the loading-in-
turn question, and it be enacted that each sub-branch
have power to decide the question for its own district,
the same to be determined by a plebiscite of the mem-
bers in the sub-branch.


i-te said the conference, having given sub-branches poWef
to levy loading fees and make by-laws, it followed that
this other power should also be given. Any disputes be-
tween sub-branches could be decided by the Branch Com-
mittee, the same as the other matters. After the full dis-
cussion the subject had had the previous day there was
no need to go over any further ground.
The motion was carried.
GENERAL BUSINESS.
Mr. Ahern moved—
That where disputes arise with regard to mileage
the party in fault pay the cost of the measurement.
Mr. Lonsdale said that many of the roads in Queens-
land were not measured, and since the enforcement of the
new rate some of the squatters had tried to cut some of the
distances down. However, he did not think the resolution
would do any good, as it could not make the squatter
measure the roads.
Mr. Rice suggested that the Queensland men should
fix their rate from place to place, and then the exact mile-
age would not come in.
The resolution was lost.
Mr. Ahern moved—
That double rates be charged for furniture, benzine,
all explosives, and telegraph posts. ,
The President pointed out that conference had already
carried a resolution leaving the fixing of rates in the hands
of the sub-branches.
Mr. Frazer and Mr. Morris said that in their districts
double rates were already obtained for merchandise and
small loads.
The motion was lost.
DRIVERS' WAGES.
Mr. Evans moved—
That sectional tickets be printed for drivers, and
be put into operation immediately, and that conference
fix the rates for drivers’ wages *at £2 10s. per week
and found; where not found, £3 ss.
The President ruled the resolution in order. He
pointed out that the resolution would not make a rule,
and would only be binding on the loyalty of members as a
recommendation from conference.
Mr. Evans said that in going round organizing he had
found plenty of drivers who would be willing to join the
organization if something were done for them. In many


places the wages paid were very low, as little as 255. and
275. 6d. being often the ruling rate. He thought that most
of the carriers who employed drivers would be willing and
anxious to have the rate put up to a fair, thing, in order
to give them protection from the squatters who carted
their own wool when they could get cheap drivers. The
Afghans in the western part of the Darling paid their
drivers £2 a week, so surely white men could come up to
a decent figure. £2 10s. was not too much at all, and
would have the effect of bringing good men into the in-
dustry. He had heard it said that good men could not
be got. Of course not while the wages were 255. a week.
The President said the claim being made by the A.W.U.
on behalf of drivers employed by pastoralists was for £3
a week.
Mr. Rice supported the resolution, and said he did not
think there were many cases of 255. being paid. He gave
his driver £2 10s., and considered it only a fair thing.'
Mr. Lonsdale said he would not oppose the motion, but
he could not help saying that the matter had been sprung
on conference. The rate all out Charleville way averaged
30s. Very few drivers asked more than 355., and, con-
sidering the idle time the teams often had, with the driver
being paid for doing nothing, 30s. was considered a fair
thing. If the resolution was passed it would be placed
before the carriers, but that was all he could say would
be done. He did not think it would be adopted without
the branch having a say in the matter.
Mr. Press said driving was well worth £2 10s. and the
bit of rough tucker a man got.'
Mr. Frazer was very much in favor of the motion, and
thought it a splendid idea to issue drivers’ tickets; Many
drivers did not care to take general tickets, but would
willingly take drivers’ tickets.
Mr. Morris said six stations were employing drivers
for the last four years in his district, and the highest wage
paid was 30s. He had approached the drivers to come into
the organization, and they had all said they would do so
if the organization would do something for them. They
had said that if they got a rise to £2 they would take
tickets.
Mr. Evans, in reply, said that even if a Charleville
carrier had to leave his driver in idleness for several weeks,
when he was on the road the man did work worth often
£5 a week, and that evened things up. It would be a big
thing for the organization to issue sectional tickets and
have a drivers’ rate fixed.
The resolution was carried.


Mr. Evans moved—
That a set of books of a uniform character be
got for each secretary and agent, in order to establish
a uniform system of bookkeeping.
He said this would not entail much expense, and would
reduce unnecessary work on the part of the General Sec-
retary, and render the auditing more efficient.
The resolution was carried.
Mr. Evans moved —
That delegates report to conference the rates being
paid for carriage in their districts. Carried.
STORAGE FOR CHAFF.
Mr. Wall moved—
That a deputation wait on the Government, re-
questing that provision be made at. railway station
yards for the dumping of chaff.
He said that in his travels round he had seen much in-
justice done to carriers by having to wait, perhaps, several
days in a station yard with a load of chaff that they could
not take off their waggons because there was no place to
put it and no trucks available. Wheat and wool was bad
enough as far as delays went, but it could be dumped in
the yard and sheeted up, but the Railway Commissioner
would not allow chaff to be dumped. He knew of an in-
stance where one of the carriers offered to buy a vacant
piece of ground to dump chaff on instead of having to wait
about with it on his waggon, but the Commissioner would
not sell it to him.
Conference here adjourned for luncheon. Out of re-
spect to the memory of the late Mr. Dacey, who was being
buried that day, it was resolved to adjourn Conference for
an extra hour.
AFTERNOON SITTING.
Mr. Wall’s motion to appoint a deputation to the
Government on the chaff storage was carried, and Messrs.
Frazer, Rathan, Wall, and Newton were appointed to com-
pose same. The President said it would not be -possible
to arrange a deputation till Monday at the earliest.
Mr. Ahern moved—
That agents check loading inwards and outwards,
and sign for goods at the railway stations.
The resolution was lost without debate.


NON-UNION TEAMS.
Mr. Frazer moved—
That the A.C.U. ask the A.W.U. to help against
master carriers who may be tempted to take loading
at less than Union rates, and that the resolution be
inserted in “ The Worker ” newspaper.
He said that the moral assistance of the A.W.U. in mat-
ters of this kind had already been received in many places,
and had proved of great service. He wanted it extended,
and a notice inserted in “ The Worker,” so that all shearers
would know that there was such a body of unionists as
the carriers, who would be glad of their assistance.
• Mr. Lonsdale thought the motion hardly necessary in
view of the amalgamation proposed. He thought the sup-
port of the shearers for Union rates in every calling was
always to be relied upon anyhow, without any resolution
advertised.
Mr. Richards said it was simply a case of letting the
shearers know that there might be non-union teams about.
The resolution was carried.
SECRETARY'S SALARY.
Mr. Lonsdale moved for the General Secretary to be
paid a salary for Head Ofice work in addition to his
ordinary branch secretarial salary.
Mr. Evans moved for that salary to be £IOO a year.
He said Mr. Power ought to get twice as much as did for
the Branch Secretary’s work alone, and it was not right
for the Union to expect him to do Head Office work on
the top of it for nothing. '
Mr. Lonsdale said that the Branch did not pay enough,
but that was no reason why the Head Office should be
called upon to make up the deficiency. He moved as an
amendment that the Head Office pay £1 per week for its
work. This was carried.
ONE MAN ONE VOTE.
Mr. Rice moved—
That members holding more than one ticket be al-
lowed to have more than one vote.
The President ruled this out of order, as the rules
provided for one vote only, and a mere resolution of Con-
ference could not override the rules.
Mr. Rice pointed out that there was an anomaly that
should be rectified, inasmuch as when a teamster had
several teams and got a ticket for each he could have that


fiumber of' votes in a plebiscite, yet when it came to and
meeting and a show of hands was taken he could only
hold up his hand once. He himself thought no member
should have more than one vote, but if he had more than
one in a plebiscite through having more than one ticket
he ought to have more than one in a meeting.
The President said that no member ought, under any
circumstances, to have more than one ticket, issued to him.
The issue of a plurality of tickets was against the con-
stitution of the organization, and should be stopped if it
was going on. Where a member had more than one team,
and paid a guinea on each, he should receive one ticket,
and get a receipt only for the money paid in respect to the
teams. It should be made clear to all secretaries and
organizers that one ticket and one only should be issued to
one man. If it were otherwise a*big owner of,teams might
come along and control a district through his plural votes,
which would be dead against tire principles of unionism.
It was resolved, on the motion of Mr. Rice—“ That
where a small membership existed in a sub-branch the
number of the committee should be reduced to ten, with
five to form a quorum.”
WORKING WITH NON-UNIONISTS.
Mr. Rice moved—
That where Afghanis are loading for any person no
notice be taken of it,; and that loading for that place
be considered in order. ‘,V
He said he proposed this because there were three or four
stations in his district that employed the camels, but also
gave loading to European carriers: If the resolution was
not carried, now that Afghans had been refused member-
ship in the organization, loading touched by them would
become black, and a storekeeper loading goods for those
stations would be boycotted. He thought it best, therefore,
that no notice should be taken of a case such as he men-
tioned until next Conference.
There was no seconder, and the motion lapsed.
VOTING AT SUB-BRANCHES.
A good deal of discussion took place on a resolution
by Mr. Rice that only a financial member of a sub-branch
should be allowed to vote at a sub-branch meeting. Mr.
Rice said he had brought forward the motion on account
of a little difficulty that had arisen in his by
members of another sub-branch coming over and voting
on matters that concerned the local affairs of that branch,


and he would like to see the question of whether they were
in order in so doing settled.
The President said it was clear to him that it was
the right of every member of an organization to vote
wherever he happened to be working. They could not
restrict the voting powers of members to a particular
sub-branch without defining the boundaries of that sub-
branch. It was not right to restrict the privileges of
members without some very good reason. They Would
not go to a place and vote without it affected their con-
ditions of working. He did not think there was much in
the alleged stacking of branches that had been mentioned.
Mr. Lonsdale moved as an amendment—
That members have the right to vote in any sub-
branch on all matters providing they are working in
that sub-branch’s distinct at the time.
This was seconded by -Mr. Lathan, and carried.
REGISTRATION OF RULES.
It was resolved—
That an account of £32 10s. for legal advice be
referred back to the.Longreach Branch, as not having
been authorised.
The President explained that he could not see where
the expense could have been incurred in registering the
rules, as set out in the account, as the rules had never
left his hands since being received from Mr. Lonsdale
with alterations, and he himself had acted as the legal, or
illegal, adviser of the Union, and had put the registration
through without legal expense to the organization. The
lawyer mentioned in the account had never had the rules
ip his possession.
ALL MONEYS TO HEAD OFFICE.
Mr, Rice moved — *
That \vhere a branch was just starting only half
the membership fees should be sent to the Head Office
the first six months and the other half during the
six months.
This was to gllpw new sub-branches funds to work upon
until they coqld collect loading fees.
In the discussion, delegates were much against the
proposal, as it wqs a wrong principle not to send all money
for tickets direct to the Head Office, and young branches
could always levy in order to procure funds to carry on
with where any were needed outside what were paid from
heqdcjnarters. Mr, Pipe \vithdrew the motioni


Delegates’ fees for next Conference were fixed at 15s.
a day and second-class fares.
RATES OF LOADING.
Delegates handed in rates prevailing in their districts,
as called for by resolution previously carried.
Mr. Lonsdale said the Charleville rates were Is. per
ton for the first 50 miles, lOd. from 50 to 100, Bd. the
second 100 miles, and 7d. per ton per mile for all distances
over. These rates applied to the Charleville, Blackall,
Mitchell, and Cunnamulla districts, the minimum being
£ 1 per ton. The St. George rate was Is. per ton per mile
to 80 miles, and lOd. per ton thereafter. The rate pre-
vailing in Goondiwindi was 12s. 6d. per ton up to 10 miles,
20s. from 10 to 15 miles, 25s, :)v from 15 to 25, 30s. from
25 to 30, and Is. per ton per mile for all distances there-
after. He would point out that there was no feeding to
do on those routes, and therefore the rates might be a
little less than those prevailing elsewhere.
Mr. Evans said the Moree rates were 7s. 6d. for 3 and
4 miles, 11s. 5 to 7 miles, 16s. 8 to 10 miles, 20s. 11 to 15
miles, 255. 16 to 20 miles; then it rose in 5-mile stages up
to 80s. from 76 to 80 miles, and £ 5 from 96 to 100 miles.
Over 100 miles the rate was not to be less than Is. per
ton per mile. The rates in the Menindie, Broken Hill, and
"Wilcannia districts were—Up to 15 miles, Is. 6d. per ton
per mile; up to 50 miles, Is. Id.; from 50 to 100 miles,
Is.; from 100 to 150 miles, 10d.-; and over 150 miles, 9d.
Mr. Rice said in his district they got a minimum of
7s. 6d. for the first 5 miles, from 5 to 12 miles Is. 6d. per
ton, and then a place rate that worked out pretty much
the same as the Moree rate. They got £5 for 100 miles.
These rates had been arranged at a conference between
five squatters and five carriers, and there was no trouble
in the district whatever.
Mr. Power said the rates in the Hay and Hillston dis-
tricts were Is. for the first 50 miles, lOd. per ton per mile
for the second 50 miles, and Bd. for the third 50 miles, with
7d. for each additional mile.
Mr. Ahern gave the Longreach and Winton rates at
Is. per ton per mile for the first 100 miles, lOd. for the
second 100 miles, and for each additional mile 9d.
The Deniliquin rate was given at Is. for the first 50
and lOd. per mile additional.
It was resolved that the official report shoqld be
printed for distribution among members,


Conference resolved to meet in “ The Worker ” office
in the morning to hear the finish of the report and minutes
read, and to have a photograph taken of delegates.
CONCLUSION OF CONFERENCE.
Mr. Lonsdale moved a hearty vote of thanks to the
President for the particularly able manner in which he had
presided, and the same was warmly seconded by Mr. Rice,
supported by Mr. Evans, and enthusiastically carried.
Mr. Grayndler said he had derived much pleasure in
presiding over such a business-like conference as the First
Annual Conference of the Australian Carriers’ Union had
proved, and said he would always be proud to be asso-
ciated with such an important and progressive a part of
unionism. He was sure the work of the Conference would
be for the lasting good of the organization, and that the
Union would prove to be one of the strong arms of the
movement for the uplifting of Labor.
Votes of thanks were accorded the Vice-President, the
General Secretary, and the Official Reporter, and Confer-
ence adjourned.
RESOLUTIONS OF CONFERENCE.
“ That where a carrier is loading for a farmer or grazier
free grass and water shall be supplied by such farmer or
grazier.”
“ That all loading shall be delivered to the carrier on
his waggon, aTid he shall not - touch such loading on the
ground.”
“ That Conference recommend to branches that the
minimum rate for wheat-carting shall be—For 2 miles or
under, Is. per ton per mile; from 2 to 12 miles, Is. per ton
per mile; from 12 to 20 miles, 9d. per ton per mile; from
20 to 25 miles, 6d. per ton per mile; from 25 to 30 miles,
3d. per ton per mile.”
“ That the Australian Carriers’ Union apply for one
share in Labor Papers Limited, cost of same to be paid
by Head Office.”
’• That all members’ subscriptions and loading fees be
returned to Afghans, and their tickets cancelled.”
“ That delegates from the Australian Carriers’ Union
bo appointed to meet representatives of the A.W.U. and
other bush workers’ Unions for the purpose of drafting some
scheme of amalgamation.”
“ That the President, the General Secretary, and Mr.


T. J. Lonsdale represent the A.C.U. at the abovementioned
conference.”
“ That the Australian Carriers’ Union object to the in-
clusion of the following industries in the scheme of amal-
gamation, inasmuch as workers engaged in these indus-
tries are not bushworkers:—The Gardeners and Nursery-
men, the Fuel and Fodder Workers’ Union, the Wool, Grain,
and Skin Stores Employees, and Millers’ Employees.”
“ That the sub-branches have power to decide whether
loading in turn shall be adopted in the districts controlled
by them, such question to be decided by a plebiscite of the
members on the roll of such sub-branch.”
“ That the General Secretary be paid a salary of £52
per annum for the work of Head Office, such salary to be
in addition to his salary as Branch Secretary.”
“ That where only a small number of members are en-
rolled in a sub-branch the committee shall consist of ten
members, and five shall form a quorum at meetings of the
committee.”
“ Members of one sub-branch shall be allowed the right
to vote in any other sub-branch, provided he is working
in the sub-branch at the time the vote is taken.”
“ That Mr. Geo. Lobb, Riverina Branch Chairman, be
Returning Officer for 1912.”
“ That Conference for 1913 meet in Sydney.”
“ That subsidy to Head Office be based on the member-
ship enrolled at December 31, 1911.”
“ That subsidy to Head Office be ss. member for
1912.”
“ That the amount of guarantee bonds fixed under rule
34 be £IOO for each officer.”
“ That delegates’ fees to Conference for 1913 be 15s,
per day and second-class fares.”
“ That sectional tickets be. printed for drivers, and a
scale of wages fixed for drivers, such wage to be £2 10s.
per week and found, or £3 ss. per week where the driver
finds himself.”
“ That a uniform system of bookkeeping be adopted
where Branch Secretaries and Agents are appointed, and
books for same be supplied by Branch Office.”
“ That the color of tickets for the financial year 1912
be green.”
“ That Conference ask the assistance of the A.W.U.
in dealing with non-Union carriers, and if such assistance


is granted a notice to that effect be inserted in ‘ The
Worker’ during the wool season.”
“ That a deputation wait on the Minister for Railways
to request that the Government will build sheds or allot
space in railway yards for the dumping of chaff, such de-
putation to consist of the President, General Secretary, and
Messrs. Frazer, Lathan, Wall, and Newton.”
Workwr Print, Bathurst St., Sydney.


