

I RON BARK.
Author of "SOUTHERLY BUSTERS."
PRICE OME £HILLINQ,
SYDNEY:
TURNER' & HENDERSON.
16 & 18 Honxee Sthbet


f^oo‘
•• -


I- f
\4.v y^
C '^■' M '- (yjt
iTV*
C U/v^a (y*Jt
Wj , irt-?' 1 ; •
lnc^ :il ' J
La Mb




OPINIONS OF THE PRESS
“SOUTHERLY BUSTERS.”
Extract from the Melbourne Punch, January 2nd, 1879.
This is the title of a handsome little quarto volume, arrayed in
a garment of gold and azure, and printed and illustrated in a
style suitable for a gift book. The writer adopts the pseudonym
of “ Ironbark,” and he flirts with the comic muse in the spirit
of a literary Lothario who has no misgivings as to his ability
to win her favour. Truth to say, he woos her in a pleasant
fashion ; and his humorous pictures of life in the bush, more
particularly, are not merely true to nature, but cleverly
portrayed. He is a fluent versifier, with a lively sense of the
grotesque elements of human character and conduct, which h
seems to have had the best opportunities of studying while
he was, as he tells us in the preface, “ a homeless wanderer
among the saltbush plains and arid sand-hills of Australia;
and the kaurie and pouriri forests of New Zealand; ”
associating for seven years with stockmen, boundary riders
swagmen, shearers, sundowners, shepherds, splitters, and free
selectors. Many of the poems now collected have appeared,
it seems, in Sydney Punch, the Town and Country Journal, and
in other publications : and most of them are worth republishing
in their present form. Mr. Alfred Clint has embellished the
work with upwards of fifty characteristic illustrations, which
are full of fun, and against which the only objection we have to


urge is the disproportionately large size of the heads which he
places on some of the figures. Mr. Montague Scott has also
contributed a few appropriately fantastic tail pieces. Altogether
the book is a very seasonable one, and creditable to all persons
concerned in its production, not forgetting the printer and the
book-binder.
Extract from the Echo, Sydney, Monday, 23rd December, 1878.
We have received from the printers and publishers, Messrs.
John Sands & Co., of George Street, an extremely neat
brochure entitled “ Southerly Busters,” by Ironbark. The
author has directed his talents principally to the production of
rhymes, and in respect to these he has been successful, the
measure of his lines being fairly perfect, and his verses potential.
Some of the scraps have already appeared in local publications,
but many are new, and the whole form a collection the quality
of which is much superior to that of most works of the kind
produced here. The author has followed the steps of Tom
Hood to a large degree, and his versification, where he indulges
in play on words, is nearly as effective as that writer’s; and
having colonial application it possesses much interest for
Australians. The book is very humourously illustrated by
Messrs. A Clint and M. Scott, and is bound in a very artistic
manner. Its appearance is appropriate to the current festive
season.
Extract from The Town and Country Journal, Saturday, 11th
January, 1879.
That very popular versifier, “ Ironbark,” has placed before the
public, in an elegant and most acceptable shape, his principal
contributions to the Australian Press, and to these are added


some excellent and amusing sketches of colonial life and events,
that now, for the first time, see the light. The work is
beautifully bound, and well printed, and ought to find a
welcome place in any library or on any table. It is profusely
illustrated by Mr. Clint, in his best style, and altogether a
more entertaining or creditable production has not been issued
from the Sydney Press. The incidents of country life are fully
dealt with, making it peculiarly attractive to provincial
readers.
Extract from the Australian Magazine, Sydney, January, 1879 .
We have to thank “Ironbark” for “Southerly Busters.”
When it was placed in our hands we felt something of the old
sensation that touched us w r hen we first opened “ Bon Gaultier”
in the days of our youth, and we welcome “ Ironbark ” as the
“ Bon Gaultier ”of Australia. The reader will find “ Bush-
land ” and “ Town Life ” all sketched in merry rhyme and
most capitally illustrated; the squatting swell and the free
selector’s daughter; an ancient shepherd like our friend Smiggs ;
the city peeler in many a varied form; some fearful ghostly
revelations touching Black-wattle Swamp-
The ghost explained the shrieks which rose
From out the inky tides
Were made by disembodied coves
With pains in their insides.
If we are to criticise we would say that “ Ironbark ” has got his
muse too hard held ; let her go and no fear of her. We predict
more fun from “ Ironbark ” yet.




OLD FRIENDS
UNDER
NEW ASPECTS.
IRONBARK.
Author or “ Southerly Busters.”
TURNER & HENDERSON,
16 & 18 Hunter Street.




The Psalmist
Jonah
Hosea
Moses
Daniel
Elijah
CONTENTS.




PID jpJ^IENDS
UNDER
Hew
JOB.
Job was the most patient man that ever lived;
and he had need to be, for the afflictions that he
was, from time to time, called upon to endure
were more varied, complicated, numerous, and
enduring than any human being ever experienced
before or since. Cutaneous disorders were his
specialty, and he used to sit out on the ash-heap
in the long cool summer evenings, when the set-
ting sun was bathing all the land of Uz in a
flood of golden glory, and scratch himself with


broken .bottles, rusty nails, anything that was
sharp and uncomfortable, and that would have cut
any other human cuticle to shreds in five minutes ;
but Job’s cuticle wasn’t like anybody elso’s, and
broken bottles only tickled him agreeably.
Job had three friends—Eliphaz the Temanite,
Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite
—who used to drop in often of an evening and
converse pleasantly with him and help him
scratch ; but they didn’t seem to be much comfort
to him—always harping on his troubles, and tak-
ing a gloomy view of things, which they shouldn’t
have done, as gloom was -Job’s own particular-
forte. What Job wanted was somebody to come
and read the paper to him, and talk on cheerful
subjects, and take his thoughts out of the cuta-
neous channel; but this, Job’s friends never-
seemed to do.
Job had a large farm at one time, and Hocks
and herds in vast numbers, and a magnificent


house with four corners to it, and any amount of
bed-rooms and sitting-rooms ; but, somehow, he
always seemed to prefer the ash-heap as a place
to lounge, and study, and scratch in; and none
of his servants, or sons or daughters ever dreamt
of interfering with the old man’s whim on this
point.
Job’s afflictions succeeded each other with such
rapidity, and his favourite occupation of applying
broken crockeryware to his cuticle as a counter
irritant was of so absorbing a nature, that he
really can have had very little time to devote to
any other pursuit; and however he managed to
find leisure to write all the beautiful things that
are contained in the book which bears his name,
always has been, and probably always will be, a
mystery. The history of the patriarch Job is well
worthy of being studied with care and attention,
and his leading characteristic of patience has
been a proverb and a bye-word for centuries.


As tlie owner of flocks and herds, and before
his cuticle became troublesome, he was one of
the leading men, and largest stock-owners in the
land of Uz, and we cannot help being struck
with the simplicity of his bearing, and the absence
of anything like “ side ” in his manner when con-
trasted with the magnificence of his possessions.
Latterly he was chiefly to be admired for his
patience under extreme suffering, and his indus-
trious manipulation of fragments of crockery.
In his intervals of leisure he took an interest
in politics and trade, patronised agricultural
meetings and cattle-shows, and gave an impetus
to the ash-sifting industry which has been lasting.
Altogether, the world has been better and wiser
for his example, and bottles were a penny a
dozen more in Job’s time than they have ever
been since.


THE PSALMIST.
Whatever may be tlie prevailing opinion about
the Psalmist, he certainly deserves credit for not
being a prophet. It was something to have escaped
the gift of prophecy in those days, when it was as
prevalent as the gift of share-broking is in these.
Prophets were as plentiful in Judgea then as
counts are in Poland now, and in electing to be
a psalmist instead of a prophet, when the tempta-
tions towards the latter course were so great, he
exhibits an amount of originality and firmness
not unworthy of commendation. The worst fault
of the Psalmist was his habit of making wild
and irrelevant statements, unsupported by any
satisfactory evidence of their correctness. For


instance, he remarks, apropos of nothing in par-
ticular, “ a horse is a vain thing for safety.” Wo
rather incline to the opinion that a “safety”
would be a very vain thing without a horse. Of
course he couldn’t be expected to know much
about “safetys,” as he lived some years before
Hansom’s patent had been generally adopted ;
but then he shouldn’t have gone around writing
about subjects he wasn’t thoroughly conversant
with. Harps and slings were his specialty. He
was good on a symphony in five flats, and could
charm the tail off an evil spirit with a sonata in
B, in a manner that made evil spirits particularly
chary about showing up when the Psalmist and
his harp were in the vicinity. He was a pretty
shot with “gibbers,”* and could knock warts oh
a giant’s nose, at short range, with chunks of
Gallilee road-metal, in a manner that did infinite
credit to his early training ; but, when it comes
* Irish for stones.


to writing about liorses and vehicles, then this
old party gets completely “off his pannikin,”
and is more out of his natural sphere than a
Trappist monk at a Clontarf picnic.
Personally, we have an immense respect for
the Psalmist, and should like to have heard him
play.
As a musician and a stone-sliuger, he was,
perhaps, the hottest property the Philistines ever
saw, and might have been entered against any-
thing of his age and weight in Philistia or Judaea,
from Dan to Beersheba. We have also every
reason to believe that, as a shepherd, he was an
unqualified success : light of foot, and able to
“ tail ” a flock of a couple of thousand “ weaners ”
with any Chinaman on the Barcoo.
Possessing these accomplishments ; living in
a country where wire-fencing was entirely un-
known, and a shepherd’s life one long, unruffled,
and sorrowless calm—a pure Arcadian existence


of earning cheques and knocking them down —
we think it a pity that he did not confine his
attention to those matters, instead of allowing
his playful but erring fancy to betray him into
making erroneous statements like the one we
have taken exception to at the commencement of
this chapter.


JONAH.
Most people have their strong point, and Jonah’s
was denunciation. He had long been known as
the most fluent anathematiser on the Gallilean
coast, and it was not destined to be much longer
’ere his talents would be called into request t}
curse the inhabitants of the city of Nineveh.
This was a mission of considerable importanc ■,
and not to be lightly entrusted to a mere tyro in
expletive.
The people of Nineveh had been for a long
time carrying on in a perfectly scandalous


manner ; going in big licks for graven images,
worshipping a Deity with, four wings, and a beak
like a bird, and behaving in every way like the
incorrigible heathens they were. A state of
things like this could not possibly be allowed to
go on. The time came for their denunciation,
and Jonah’s pretty taste for invective was to be
no longer hidden under a bushel, or known only
to a select circle of admiring friends. The
experiences of the prophet Jonah were many
and varied; and the decision with which he
acted under circumstances of trying emergency,
show him to have been a man, or rather a
prophet, of more than ordinary resources.
On one occasion during a terrific storm in the
Mediterranean, it was found necessary to throw
something overboard, to lighten the ship in
which Jonah was being conveyed to Tarshish.
The rest of the cargo was considered too
valuable to be sacrificed, and the prophet was


selected for the purpose, as being more portable,
and less liable to injury by damp.
Jonah was pressed for time. He was under
engagement to go to Nineveh, and curse the
people, and the terms of his contract required
him to be on hand with punctuality, and to curse
with fluency.
It was under these trying circumstances that
the energy and decision of character we have
alluded to were displayed iu a marked degree.
Treated with a want of consideration bordering
on inhumanity by the sailors, summarily ejected
from the vessel in which he was a passenger,
troubled in mind, and probably wet, instead of
giving way to idle regret, or abandoning
the Nineveh project altogether, he, without
hesitation, and without considering expense where
duty was concerned, took a saloon passage in the
first whale that was going that way, and was
fortunate enough to make terms which insured


Iris being the only passenger, to the entire
exclusion of all mails, merchandise, and
Chinese.
There being no one to throw him overboard
this time, he accomplished his journey in safety.
Having been spared all the annoyances and
inconveniences attendant on inspections by health
officers, and custom house officials, he was in
first rate form on the morning of his arrival, and
his cursing of the Ninevites was a triumphant
success.
If ever the prophet laid himself out for a
brilliant display of his abilities, he did so on that
occasion, and there wasn’t a Ninevite, from the
infant of tender years, to the boss priest of the
four-winged deity, who didn’t wish that the
whale had sprung a-leak, and gone down in
five hundred fathoms of water before bringing
Jonah to embitter their existence, and loosen
the foundations of their city with blood-


curdling, central-fire, six chambered expletives,
and elaborate diagonal chefs d’oeuvres in the way
of fancy-cursing, invented expressly for those
unregenerate idolaters.
One of Jonah’s curses would lame a priest,
and splinter up a four-winged deity, at what
would now be considered long range for a
Chassepot rifle ; and so solid were his anathemas
that many of them, after being embedded for
centuries in the masonry of heathen temples,
have been excavated by Mr. Layard, and
presented to the British Museum .
From this it will be seen that Jonah’s talents
as a denouncer were above the average. There
are no prophets like Jonah at the present day.
Perhaps, its as well their ain’t. Times have
materially altered since then, and, as people now-
a-days mostly do their own cursing, the services
of an expert are seldom required. Whales, too,
have almost ceased to be used as public


conveyances. Mail-steamers, hansom-cabs, and
tram-cars, have superceded these time-honoured
modes o£ transit, and the man who would now
propose to put on a line o£ whales to convey
passengers and mails from Sydney to San
Francisco, would be looked upon as old fashioned
and prejudiced, and not be greatly respected.


HOSEA, JOEL, AMOS,
In treating of our friends, the minor prophets,
we have thought it best to lump them together in
lots or groups.
Their lives appear to have been so very
similar that we have deemed it advisable to
confine ourselves to a few general remarks
concerning them, instead of fatiguing the reader
with the monotony of a detailed account of
each.
Hosea attempts denunciation, but with in-
different success, falling far short of the very


crudest efforts of tlie great master of anathema,
Jonah.
Joel had less to say than either of them, but
evidently intends to be somewhat severe, at
times, on some person or persons unknown.
The obscurity of his style renders the object of
his indignation, and the exact meaning of his
threats, alike uncertain.
Amos appears to have been the most amiable,
and is usually more metaphorical than denun-
ciatory, his writings being crowded throughout
with similes taken from things connected with
his every-day employment, which was that of
a husbandman.
They all had the gift of prophecy in a virulent
form 3 and their writings all have the same
characteristic of being so clothed in imagery and
metaphor that it is next to impossible to con-
ceive, in most instances, what they were driving
at. The best plan to pursue in reading them is to


get a good firm grip on the passages where they
are accidentally intelligible, and, by averaging
the rest, yon probably get about as clear a notion
of what they meant as they had themselves.
They appear to have lived, for the most part,
very quiet, uneventful lives—tame, compared
with the experiences of Moses, Daniel, Jonah,
and the prophets of heavier calibre and,
judging by the MSS. they left behind them,
they do not appear to have been nearly as flush
of ideas as Isaiah, Jeremiah, or even Ezekiel.
They came before the curtain, tooted their little
horns of prophecy, poured forth their limited
quota of unintelligible imagery, and then retired
into that seclusion from which they had never
more than partially emerged.
it doesn’t appear that any of them were ever
swallowed by whales, troubled with cutaneous
disorders, or eaten by lions. Their avoidance of
these things, and the peaceful immunity they en-


joyed from any persecutions or afflictions worth
writing about was almost culpable, considering
the age in which they lived. Their calm,
unruffled existences, flowed on, undisturbed by
exciting events, unrelieved by even occasional
imprisonment or torture, and, if they suffered from
anything, it must have been ennui, occasioned
by the paucity of incident in their lives.
Under these circumstances what can we find
to say about them ? Evidently not much that
would possess an absorbing interest for our
readers, we therefore hasten to bring the little
that we have already said about them to a con-
clusion, and turn with pleasure to the more stir-
ring experiences of Moses, who will form the
subject of the next sketch.


MOSES.
In writing of the life and times of Moses, we
are conscious that we are dealing with no ordinary
subject, and describing events in the history of
no ordinary man.
Even as a child he exhibited a precocity which
was truly marvellous, and an indication of the
power and genius so wonderfully developed in
his maturer manhood. He attempted the navi-
gation of a vessel at an earlier age than such
a responsibility has ever, been undertaken at
before, and might have discovered the source of
the Nile if he had not been discovered himself.


and taken possession of by tbe daughter of
Pharaoh, the Egyptian king. When we say
Pharaoh, we feel confident that we have made
things quite plain, because as there wer’n’t more
than four or five hundred of them, nobody is
likely to make mistakes as to who we are talking
about.
Moses was very carefully brought up at the
court of Pharaoh, and instructed in all the arts
and branches of learning known to the Egyptians,
and when he grew up he showed that all the
pains taken with his education had not been
thrown away. His accomplishments were nu-
merous, and his genius sparkling and versatile.
He could do more tricks with cards, threepenny
pieces, eggs, rings, watches, and hats, than any
one at the court of Pharaoh, or in the camp of
the Israelites, and, when it came to the higher
branches of advanced prestidigitation and magic,
he could take the shine out of any one of


Pharaoh’s enchanters, to say nothing of Pharaoh
himself.
Moses and Pharaoh’s enchanters used to have
regular conjuring tournaments, open to all comers.
Any one with a rod and a pack of marked cards
could enter for these contests, and at first Pharaoh
and his courtiers used to sit around, and look on
and make books on the result; but it soon began
to be noticed that Moses always got about six to
four the best of the enchanters; and after a time
nobody could be got to put any money on them,
and the betting was anything to one against the
magicians, and no takers. Moses generally
started first favourite for any event in the
conjuring line, and invariably pulled it off in a
canter, with the enchanters nowhere.
It may be supposed that Pharaoh was anything
but enchanted at this, but he still continued to
back his magicians, more out of obstinacy than
anything else, and, as he never paid when he lost.


lie didn’t make any over-draughts on his banker.
The most that the enchanters could do was to
imitate Moses in his least striking feats of leger-
demain. For instance, if Moses made frogs and
locusts, they made more frogs, and more locusts,
and between them they made the country of
Pharaoh a perfect Paradise for a student of
natural history, who didn’t mind frogs in his
boots, and locusts in his flannel waistcoat, for
they were all pretty handy at making things
which were only an insufferable nuisance to every-
body after they were made; and Moses could
create more flies in ten minutes than all the treacle-
pots in the land of Egypt could catch in a year.
Moses seemed to be able to create almost any-
thing in the way of insects and reptiles. He
didn’t get as far as ornithology and the larger
mammalia; but there is no doubt that if Pharaoh
had held on to the Israelites a little longer, and
allowed him to get his hand properly in, he would


have created a new world, and stocked it with
everything necessary in the way of living creatures
including alligators, ourang-outangs, and milking-
cows. Pharaoh at last concluded to let the people
go. His enchanters were knocked up, and
wouldn’t do any more miracles unless they had a
spell; and he, himself, was about worn out with
hunting parasites and frogs, catching flies, and
groping around in thick impenetrable darkness,
and knocking his head against things, so he sent
for Moses and told him to let up on the miracle
business; that he was quite satisfied with his
proficiency in legerdemain, which was sufficient
to ensure him a favourable reception anywhere if
he liked to follow it up as a profession, and that
he'd better go on a starring tour in the provinces
at once, and take the children of Israel with him.
You may suppose Moses didn’t require to have a
hint of this kind driven into him with a caulking-
mallet ; he started off to the Israelites’ quarters


as fleet as a deer, ordered them to pack up every-
thing, made a forced march through the silent
watches of the night, and had them on the coast
before dawn. At first there was a little difficulty
with the Red Sea, which wasn’t exactly ford-
able about there, but Moses stretched out his
rod, and pretty soon made it so. He wasn’t in a
mood to let trifles get the upper hand of him just
then, particularly as Pharaoh had changed his
mind, and was coming after him with his horse-
men and footmen, militia, volunteers, and per-
manent artillery, and all the available rolling
stock, in the way of chariots, in the land of Egypt.
It was lucky he hadn’t forgotten his rod in the
hurry of starting. Moses could do almost any-
thing with that rod. He stood the Red Sea up
edgewise, and then, not liking the look of it, he
doubled it down the middle and started folding
it into fancy shapes like hotel-waiters do napkins,
and then suddenly spread it out like a table-cloth,


and clapped it over Pharaoh and his host before
yon could say “ knife,” and destroyed their
chances of entering their names in the next
census paper utterly. Certainly Pharaoh was
nowhere against Moses when it came to conjuring.
If we were to follow Moses and the children of
Israel through all their tedious wanderings in the
Arabian desert we should be as long getting to
the end of this chapter as they were in reaching
the land of Canaan. It is not our intention to
do so. We shall merely pause for a moment
before bringing this account of the life and times
of Moses to a close, to protest against a notion
which has got abroad respecting the origin of the
Pyramids, said to have been built by the children
of Israel during their captivity. The theory that
the Pyramids were erected as rubbing-posts for
Pharaoh and his host after Moses had performed
his crowning miracle of covering them with para-
sites, is one to which we cannot give our unquali-


fied assent. The fact of their being much worn
in places is not conclusive evidence that they were
even occasionally used for this purpose, and then-
immense size, entirely disproportioned to the
requirements of the Egyptians in this respect,
would appear to negative the supposition that
their origin was in any way connected with the
miracle referred to.


DANIEL.
Ip there is anyone in Bible history who has
engrossed as large a share of our sympathies as
the Patriarch Job, and, by his quiet fortitude and
self-denial, won our warmest admiration and
respect, it is the Prophet Daniel. The patience
with which he endured the society of those lions,
during a trying time of fasting and privation, and
never once offered to eat one of them, is as
worthy of remark as any instance of self-
abnegation related in the Book of Job.
The picture with which we have all of us been
familiar from infancy, of the prophet seated in
the lions’ den, with a paucity of clothing, and a
troubled aspect —the wild glare of hunger and


religious enthusiasm in his eye—and tears of
gratitude streaming down those lions’ faces at
his forbearance, is striking and dramatic, and
cannot fail to awaken the dormant admiration
of the most indifferent beholder.
Daniel, who was of Jewish parentage and kingly
descent, a scion of the ancient royal race of Judah,
first makes his appearance in Biblical history as
a captive at the court of Nebuchadnezzar, King
of Babylon, where he first got taken notice of,
and earned the undying hatred of the Chaldeans
and wise men, in consequence of his being able
to see further through a mill-stone than they
could. Without being quite so much addicted to
seeing visions as Ezekiel, lie was about the best
hand at interpreting them for other people in the
City of Babylon and its outlying suburbs. There
wasn’t anything in the way of night-mares that
Daniel couldn’t account for satisfactorily, if he
only knew what the dreamer had for supper, and how


many pounds o£ it lie ate, and tlie most unintel-
ligible hieroglyphics were as plain to him as a
school-boy’s large-hand copy-slip, or the straw-
berry-mark on the arm of a long-lost brother.
He rose to considerable rank and importance
under Nebuchadnezzar, and might have continued
to enjoy both wealth and honor for a lengthened
period had not his patron, the King, unfortunately
developed a latent taste for graven images, which
ultimately led to his own ruin and the downfall
of his 'protege the prophet.
We have never been able to understand wherein
the particular attraction of graven images con-
sisted ; but they appear to have possessed a fas-
cination for the kings and leaders of those days,
which few of them could resist, and, however
well they might conduct themselves for a time, a
graven image could always lure them from the
paths of virtue, and woo them to its pedestal with
one enticing leer of its goggling optics. As for


Nebuchadnezzar, having once decided on going
in for idols, he judged he might just as well have
one worth talking about, and he accordingly made
one of stupendous size, fitted with all the latest
improvements; and, to ensure proper respect being
paid to it, he prepared a “ fiery furnace,” or huge
lime-kiln, hot enough to smelt platinum, and,
when people were asked which they preferred—
making obeisance to the idol, or taking half-an-
hour’s siesta in the lime-kiln —they usually trotted
out their best bow for the graven image without
making any further trouble about it. No one
ever made converts to religion quicker than
Nebuchadnezzer; but then he knew the right
chord to strike to rouse people's sympathies.
There were only three persons, besides the subject
of this sketch, who refused to pay Nebuchadnezzar’s
graven image the respect which its size and im-
proved mechanism entitled it to. They were Shad-
rach, Meshach, and Abednego, three fire-proof


Israelites, and when they were dropped into the fiery
furnace, the destroying element had no more effect
on them than if they had been three of Milner’s
patent safes. Nebuchadnezzar was rather stag-
gered at this, but Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-
nego, were not surprised in the least; and, after
three hours in the lime-kiln, there wasn’t any more
perspiration on them than there is on the summit of
Mont Blanc. This ought to have been a warning to
Nebuchadnezzar; but it wasn’t. He still con-
tinued to be nuts on graven images until, at
length, as a punishment for his insufferable vain-
glory, and hardness of heart, he was changed
into a four-footed ruminating animal, and was
turned out to grass, where he behaved very much
as any other head of horned-stock would have
done under similar circumstances. He used to
eat a great quantity of grass, and trample down
a good deal more than he ate; he would stand
for hours in a meditative attitude, whisking the


flies off with his tail, and gazing fixedly at nothing
in particular. He would jump fences, and was
on several occasions taken to the pound for tres-
passing on the neighbour’s allotments, but was
invariably discharged on his identity with the
afflicted King being established.
We forget exactly what it was that first
brought Daniel into disgrace —whether it was
letting down the slip-rails of the paddock where
Nebuchadnezzar was grazing, and forgetting to
put them up again, or some other equally trifling
indiscretion —but it is certain that he was
degraded from his bigh office and compelled to
occupy a comparatively ignoble position in the
kingdom until after the commencement of the
reign of Belshazzar, when his interpretation of
some hieroglyphics which had puzzled all the
Chaldeans, astrologers, and soothsayers, brought
him again into notice. For this service Daniel
was presented with a scarlet robe and a gold


chain {lie usually stuck them for a new suit of clothes
after any successful interpretation), and was again
raised to a position of trust and importance. It is
not clear what his position was, but the scarlet robe
and gold chain are suggestive of civic dignity, and
it is probable that the office he tilled was that of
Mayor of Babylon. He continued to have a peaceful
time until the accession of Darius to the throne of
Babylon, made vacant by the death of Belshazzar,
when he was unfortunate enough to incur the
jealous animosity of the nobles of the court, and,
at their instance, the King, unwillingly, subjected
the prophet to the roughest treatment he had yet
received. He was confined, without anything to
eat, in a den of lions. We have seen how nobly
he withstood this crucial test, for, when the King
visited the place early in the morning he found
the prophet in his usual health and spirits, and
the lions totally uninjured. We hope that we
have said enough about Daniel to show that he


was in every way worthy of the trust and con-
fidence that were from time to time reposed in
him by the Babylonish Kings.
The worst that can be said of him is that he
was a prophet. This, however, he probably could
not avoid, for the gift of prophecy was a disease
which raged in the East, through all the early
period of Bible history, with the malignant per-
sistence of an epidemic, and it was next to impos-
sible to occupy a prominent position in those
days and escape it. It was a malady which did
not spare even royalty itself. Many of the Jewish
Kings suffered from it, more or less. Saul had it
badly, and Joash would have had it only he died
young of measles, or some other infantile com-
plaint, and thus escaped a disorder which usually
fastened its deadly fangs upon adults. With the
exception of this one failing, which was more a
misfortune than a fault, Daniel was as nearly perfect
as it is permitted to erring humanity to be.


ELIJAH THE TISHBITE.
We don’t know what a Tishbite was, or whether
it was worse than a snake-bite; probably not
as bad as a scorpion-bite, for it doesn’t appear
to have hurt Elijah seriously : at any rate he
got over it, and, as soon he was old enough,
developed prophetic symptoms, which soon
became chronic, and left no doubt in the minds
of his friends as to his ultimate fate. Elijah
became a prophet without even a struggle
against his destiny, and this is scarcely surprising,
for if ever there was a period in Bible history
when prophets literally swarmed, it was when that
tyrannical oppressor Ahab was king over Israel.


They went about in droves, and would
prophecy about anything, from the overthrow of
a dynasty, to the advent of a shower of rain.
So plentiful were they, that when Jezebel, the
wife of Ahab—who hated prophets like a black
gin hates soap —wanted to make a clean sweep of
them, that worthy old soul Obadiah took a
hundred of them, and hid them, as he tells
Elijah, “by fifties in a cave.” Whether he
means that there were two caves, and that he put
fifty prophets in each, or whether he put them
all in one cave, and divided it in two, or how
many fifties went to the hundred in Obadiah’s
time are points which ain’t made particularly
clear, but Obadiah was so scared at Ahab and
Jezebel all the time he was doing it, that it’s a
wonder he was able to count them at all—even
approximately.
When Elijah is first introduced to us, he was
just about as much down upon his luck as it is


possible to be, without losing all interest in
worldly affairs.
He resided in a damp cave, was a martyr to
rheumatism, and was boarded by ravens on
strictly economical and antibilious principles.
After a time the ravens got full of carrying
slices of bread and butter, and pannikins of
coffee to the prophet, and the prophet got tired
of the monotony of the bill of fare supplied by
the ravens—who never appeared to strike out
anything original in the way of a hash or made-
dish—so he decided on shifting his quarters, and
went to live with a widow in Zarephath, where he
performed his first recorded miracle, and came
prominently forward in his prophetic character.
Elijah had a wonderful overcoat, or mantle,
which possessed many miraculous qualities, and
was, perhaps, the most durable garment ever
turned out of any establishment. It accompanied
Elijah through all his wanderings, was ever his


reliable friend and companion, and, when lie
underwent bis extremely literal translation to a
climate where overcoats are not required, it was
about the only property he had to leave. His
effects were sworn considerably under any sum
worth taking out letters of administration for,
and his servant Elishah appropriated the mantle
without any opposition from the intestate estates
court. It didn’t fit him, and it wasn’t the
fashionable shape, having been made for Elijah
years before, but he got it altered and lined, and
it seems to have lasted him through the
remainder of his life.
They don’t make mantles of that kind now.
No tailoring firm could do it, and keep clear of
the insolvent court, for it has been estimated
that three suits like Elijah’s mantle would have
lasted Methuselah for every-day wear through
his natural life, and for second best, and wet
weather during the endless cycles of eternity.


What tlie rod of Moses was to the great law-
giver, the mantle of Elijah was to him, and with
it he could control most of the laws of Nature,
and do anything in hydraulics from staying the
course of the river Jordan to making thunder-
storms.
For power, fearlessness, and versatility of genius
ho trod closely on the heels of Moses himself,
and his prowess as a pedestrian was very far
from inconsiderable, though it is not brought
prominently forward in his biography. On one
occasion, when, as the account says, “he girded
up his loins and ran before Ahab’s chariot,” his
time from Mount Carmel to Jezreel was the
quickest recorded up to date.
Elijah’s chief strength, however, undoubtedly
lay in satire ; and his chaffing of the prophets of
Baal transcends everything for scathing irony
and grim humour, veiled under apparent sincerity,
and imperturable gravity. Elijah pokes the most


deliciously disguised fun at Baal for Ms
inattention to business, and exhibits depths of
jocosity which might have rendered him an
immense success in light comedy had the
worship of Thespis been as prevalent at that time
as the worship of Baal. But, if he was good
in comedy, the sequel to the memorable drama
enacted on Mount Carmel shows us that his
genius for tragedy, and his power of making the
horror culminate at the right moment, were even
more startling, for the account tells us that,
after thoroughly exposing their deceit and
imposture, he took the prophets of Baal, four
hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the groves
four hundred (who ate at Jezebel’s table), he let
not one of them escape, and he brought them
down to the brook Kedron, and slew them
there.
There were eight hundred and fifty vacant
seats at Jezebel’s table at dinner that day, and


eight hundred and fifty dinner napkins were
disposed of at a ridiculously low figure the fol-
lowing week.
We cannot do better than close our account of
Elijah at this point. The interest of the drama
centres in the scene on Carmel, and it is a
singular instance of the weakness to which even
the strongest human natures succumb when once
the strain by which they have been sustained
is relaxed, that Elijah, after utterly confounding
the followers of Baal, destroying his prophets,
and winning even the stubborn and idolatrous,
Ahab to the side of right, is terrified, well-nigh
to despair, by the malicious threat of an
abandoned woman.
If the annihilation of the prophets of Baal
was taken with comparative calmness by Ahab,
it was not an offence to be lightly passed over by
his idol-worshipping queen. ,
The account says : —“ Then Jezebel sent a


messenger unto Elijah, saying, 'so let the gods
do to me and more also, if I make not thy
life as the life of one of them by to-morrow,
about this time.’ ” This was the message which
was sufficient to throw the audacious iconoclast
into a condition of absolute fear.
Where are now the proud bearing, the
uncompromising firmness with which he first
announced to the terrified Obadiah his apparently
rash resolve of showing himself to the king on a
particular day, and the bold defiance with which
he afterwards confronted the tyrannical and
unscrupulous monarch, and laughed to scorn a
whole army of pagan enthusiasts ? Gone—utterly
gone, and a tremulous weakness, worthy of the
pusillanimous Obadiah himself, makes the once
intrepid Elijah arise, flee into the wilderness, and
fling himself, in a paroxysm of terror and despair,
under a juniper tree.
It is painful at all times to observe the


strong in tlieir seasons of weakness, even when
we know, as in Elijah’s case, that they are but
momentary, and we gladly turn from the
contemplation of this one transient blemish on the
bright and glorious scroll of Elijah’s history, to
address a few concluding remarks to anyone who
may have been indulgent enough to accompany
us thus far.
If the reader imagines that we wish to bring
into ridicule or contempt this beautiful story, in
which the elements of simplicity, pathos, and
dramatic force are so perfectly united, he is
mistaken. It is merely our desire to exhibit
aspects and phases of the various subjects of
which we have treated, that have either been
overlooked by commentators or imperfectly
understood and explained by them.
The story of Elijah is the one, of all the Old
Testament records, which made the deepest
impression on us in boyhood, and appealed most


powerfully to our sense of the poetical, and
the sublime ; and if we have robbed it of the
poetical imagery, the touching simplicity, the
thrilling garb of romance with which the original
account is clothed, and translated it into
the hard uncompromising English of the
nineteenth century, it has been done more as an
experiment to show how completely the
sublimity of the subject defies our puny assault,
than with any intention of lessening the reader’s
admiration of it, or diminishing our own.
TUKWW6 and hehdkbson, hdnteb street


BULLETIN HOTEL
(Late Wangenheiiws),
CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY,
Nearly opposite the Theatre Eotal,
RICHMOND THATCHER & JOHN SIDNEY MOORE,
PEOPEIETOES,
TS NOW, BAB EXCELLENCE, THE MOST
POPULAR HOUSE OE CALL
IN SYDNEY.
Everybody about town drops in during the day, and
one meets there, at some time or another, all the leading
lights of the learned and literary professions.
The Bars—two in number—are elegantly appointed,
and supplied with everything of the very best quality.
SUPERIOR BILLIARD TABLE
AND A FEW
doofr Hooms for §<rarhrs.


THOMAS KEAEY,
“WOOLLOOMOOLOO INN,”
Goan of WILLIAM & BEOUSIAI SIS.
WOOLLOOMOOLOO,
WHOLESALE -A-ESTD BETAIL
ippiuc ami Jpjjirit |||cjirliaitt.
MOTTO—” Quick Sales and Light Profits.”
Thk large Stock consists of
THE BEST AND CAREFULLY SELECTED
WINES, SPIRITS, BEERS, &c.
BBT T. jEC. 7
One of the most experienced and competent Judges, with 26 years’
consecutive training, Seven of which were an Apprenticeship in the
United Kingdom.
No Short-Measuring Bottles Tolerated.
No Low-Strength Spirits Recognised.
No Adulturation Perpetrated. WHY ?
Because T. K. buys to arrive, and pays Customs Duties!
Families always supplied tvifh the Choicest Brands at
Reasonable Brices, by the Proprietor,
THOS. KEABY.


Mr James Lugg,
tlcntist,
43 BLIGH STIRABIBT
Off Hunter Street,
SYDNEY.
Hours of Attendance from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.


113 KING STREET,
SVIDItTEIV.
IMPORTER OP
HAVANNAH, MANILLA & FOREIGN
©SirASi,
BEST
AMERICAN TOBACCOS.
AND GENUINE VIENNA
Pipes Mounted and Eepaired.
CUT TOBACCOS PACKET) IN TINFOIL.


Awarded Silver Medal at Pans,
Seven Prizes at the Garden Palace, &c.
Vineyard Depot,
13 Bridge Street, Syiiey.
DINNER WINES- - - - 10/- per Dozen
In Jars or Kegs - - - - 3/8 per Gallon
Eruity Shiraz )
Madeira j - I*l- per Dozen
Choice Wines up to - - - - 35/ per Dozen
Sample Dozen - 20/-
All the above delivered Free in Sydney and Suburbs.
G. H. STEPHEN & CO.
Wine Growers,


“ We ought to seek the truth which is before us, and forsake
the errors of the past.”
J. 8. ABRAHAM’S
DANDELION PILLS
THE GREAT
Q¥lR REMEDY,
A Successful Substitute for Calomel or Mercury,
Podophyllum, and all Noxious Drugs.
Famous as a Restorative to Health,
Famous as an Invigorator of the System.
Famous for the Cure of all Disorders of the Liver and
Stomach.
Most Famous as the only Tonic Aperient that never
gives Cold.
«r The most Delicate of either Sex, in all Conditions, can
take them.
Be careful not to get Imitations.
IN BOXES, ONE SHILLING.
INVENTED AND PBEPAEED ONLY BY
d. S.
AT THE LABORATORY,
434 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.


WHITLEY & CO.
Tailors & Professed Tleasers Mates,
444 GEOK.G-E ST.
Opposite Lassetteb’s.
First-class and Choice Goods, in UlacTe Jiroads, Doeskins, and
Fancy Woollens, regularly Imported.
F. ALLERDING & SON,
Okcicmate Watchmakers & JsweUns,
IMPORTERS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION OF
OPTICAL GOODS.
The “PEIUCE”
OPERA AND RACE GLASS COMBINED.
Price 855,, 055., & 755. each. With Sling, Case, & Strap
complete.
25 HUNTER STREET, SYDNEY.
JACKSON & MORTON,
T-A-lIDO-R/S,
MEN’S MERCERS, HATTERS, & GENERAL
OUTFITTERS,
102 KING STREET, SYDNEY.


To Squatters, Selectors
AND OTHERS.
Desires to intimate that, after twenty-one years’ service
as a Draftsman in the Office of the Surveyor General
of New South Wales, he is about to commence business
LAND AGENT.
His long experience as Eirst-class Draftsman, and Head
of the Conditional Purchase, and other Branches in the
Sydney Office of the
DEPARTMENT OE LANDS,
Renders him peculiarly qualified to advise intending pur-
chasers of Crown Lauds, and to conduct all Business
Matters in connection with their applications.
Run Plans, Surveyors’ Plans, Pre-Lease,
and other Tracings Supplied.
SURVEYORS’ ACCOUNTS EXPEDITED.
Oppioe: 14a EXCHANGE.


COPY OF LETTER
TEOM THE
IF 1 . W. RTJTTBB,
On Resignation op his Q-oveknment Appointment.
In reply to your letter of the l\th instant,
apprising rue of your intention to resign shortly,
as you purpose commencing business on the first
proximo.
1 beg to inform you that the Secretary for Lands
has been pleased to approve of your resignation being
accepted ; at the same time, I regret the loss of valuable
services which you have rendered for twenty-one years
to this Department.
I am,
Your obedient Servant,
(Signed) P. F. ADAMS.
Mr. Frederick Wm. Putter,
Office.


THE PEOPLE’S TAILOB,
s*
%
H
S
«
S 3
I 1
M
£ s
i £
s
BEAUTIFUL *€&
ALLWOOL^krWEED
Pi
5
o
$
"cc
Rs
%
cj H
ffi m
M <
U m
33
0 r*
S >
in
1> ij
H Z
P o
AT WHOLESALE PRICES.
sooofatterns'°choose from
H.L.SUMMERFIEID
PITTSTSYDNEY
a =
0 <
H rn
$ m
a 5
y
,® CD
C"
235 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.


THE SUBSCRIPTION TO
STD HEY OTOH
IS NOW
ONE GUINEA PER ANNUM,
Or, ss. 6d. per Quarter (in advance);
AND OTHERWISE,
6s. G>jd. XX _A_ lirw t JL I IB Xj "X”.
ITS LARGE AND
RAPIDLY INCREASING CIRCULATION
BENDERS IT A VALUABLE
MEDIUM FOR ADVERTISERS
AS A MATTER OF FACT, ITS
CIBCTJLATIOIT
HAS CONSIDERABLY
MORE THAN DOUBLED
SINCE JULY Ist.
107 € ASTI.BREACH STREET,
August 31, 1881.


FOSTER’S
BOOK, STATIONERY,
PERIODICAL,
NEWSPAPER DEPOT,
144 •wiXjXjl.a.im: stkebt,
WOOLLOOMOOLOO.
'Bits mi f&mj Stall; neiyv lijtMaj, Widiinf, Ibtq,
Mtatloa, and O@ipiliMioi Cuds.
Boohs and Periodicals received regularly by every
Orient Steamer.
MORNING PAPERS RUN OUT AT DAYLIGHT.
EVENING PAPERS immediately they are issued from the Machines.
CIRCULATING LIBRARY ALWAYS OPEN:
Latest Looks and Pebiodicaxs Kept.


■
,
.
■* ■
. *
*
'' . .
.
i
■
• m
■
«
.
♦


I lough & man
AMERICAN
