

OLD
PIONEERING
DAYS
IN THE
SUNNY SOUTH
BY
CHAS. MaCALISTER, Senr.


J(*^ZPu


OLD PIONEERING DAYS
IN THE
SUNNY SOUTH.
BY
CHAS. MacALISTER.
GOULBURN:
Published by the Chas. Mac Alister Book Publication Committee
1907.


DEDICATION.
To the grey Pioneers—the Planners, Toilers,
Pastors, of the dim formative years—the founders
of Australian Nationhood, this book is reverently
dedicated by their appreciative compatriot . . .
... The Author.


PREFACE.
When the immortal Bobby Burns remarked in hia
famous “Address” to a young comrade:
“Aye free off-hand your story tell when wi’ a bosom
crony;
But keep a somethin’ to yoursel’ you’ll scarcely tell
to ony,”—
he seems to me to have struck the real genesis both of
story-telling and common-sense.
However, though the reservation of what I will “keep”
to myself without these pages, relative to the scope
of the book, will scarcely add another cubit to the height
of the Australian Alps, or reduce by a hair-breadth
the volume of the Murray, I would that what I have
to say might be told more fittingly.
This, however, pretends to be but a plain and simple
narrative of events and experiences in which the Author
has been an active participant, or an interested observer
during a strenuous lifetime, the greater part of which
has been spent in country pursuits, and amongst one of
the best and kindliest communities in the world —the
warm-hearted people of the Australian bush.
It may be in place here to say that during the fore-
part of the period of over three score years and ten em-
braced in this story, the Author met, in the hey-day of
their exertions, many of the original pastoral pioneers
of the Twenties and Thirties, who led the first advance
of civilization and enterprise across the Great Divide;
that he had dealings with some of the more prominent
men of old times, such as John H. Hume, Terence
Aubrey Murray, Thos. Holt, Hannibal McArthur,
Major Antill, Dr. Nicholson, William Bradley, etc., and
that he (the Author) was personally known (though in
a humble way) to every member of the first Australian
Ministry (Donaldson’s).
III


There are yet, no doubt, remaining, a score or two of
“Old Hands,” who, like the Author, will remember
those rugged, ragged years —that griping-time of the
small free settlers, between the dark and the daylight
of our history —when the clang of the convict's fetters and
the lash of the Penal Tyrant, were sombre “furnishings”
of the gloomy days of yore. Those venerable confreres
can bear testimony, if such were needed, to much that
appears in this narrative relative to that time. Reference
is also made to several of the leading polticians of the
early epochs; for though it is generally accepted as a
good axiom to “let the dead past bury its dead,” yet
there is so much of the Living Past still existent, that
we cannot—if we would —forget the men who made it;
who moulded the stepping-stones by which we have
reached so much of what is best and most enduring in
Australia’s present. And those men —the leaders, toilers,
pastors, of the dim formative years—from the humblest
to the highest—we would seek to honour herein.
If, however, this volume will touch, as we hope it may,
a chord of appreciation in the public thought for the
toils and perils, the songs and sympathies of the pio-
neers, we will feel that our rambling story has not been
told in vain.
And if, moreover, these pages will meet the notice of
those, viz. : the graziers, farmers, miners, and bush-
workers —who have ever stood by the interior interests
of the country, through good and ill, the Author will
rest content that his poor effort has found a fitting
audience —an audience to which he is bound by eveiy
tie of country, home, and memory.
And now, in launching our little barque on the waters
of the reading world, we have, as a last word, to ex-
press our best thanks to the many good friends, who, by
their personal interest and sympathy, have assisted in
forwarding the publication of this volume.
CHARLES MACALTSTER.
Goulburn, October, 1907.


CONTENTS.
Page.
Introductory Chapter.—John Hamilton Hume and
Early Southern Pioneers 1-7
PART I. —THE FORMATIVE PERIOD
Chapter I. —In 1833 (Author’s Arrival in Australia;
State of Country, Ac.) 8-14
Chapter II. —At Strathaird (The Estate; Convicts,
Ac.) 14-19
Chapter 111. —Dog Days of the Thirties (Author’s
Schooldays; “Ancient Statistics,” Ac.) 20-30
Chapter IV. —The Early Carrying Days; First Trip
to Sydney 31-35
Chapter V. —Carrying Days (continued) : Old Com-
rades and Incidents of the Roads 36-46
Chapter Vl.—Old Sydney in the Forties 47-58
Chapter VII. —The Penal Period (The Towrang
Stockade, Ac.) 58-66
Chapter VIII. —Some Episodes of the Convict Days
(The Soldier-bushrangers; “Red-rovers,” Ac.) ... 66-73
Chapter IX. —Old-time Bushrangers (Capt. McAlis-
ter’s Experiences; “Scotchy;” Whitton; “Jacky
Jacky,” Ac.) 73-81
Chapter X. —(a) The Aborigines; (b) The Infamous
Lynch 82-96
Chapter XL —Goulburn in the Forties 96-103
Chapter Xll.—Goulburn in the Forties (continued). 103-111
Chapter XIII. —Currabungla (some tragic and merry
incidents) 112-120
Chapter XIV. —Memories of Early Droughts and
Floods (Hard Times and Strange Experiences) . . 120-130
Chapter XV. —Some Old Sporting Annals (Races at
Homebush, Ac.; Boxing Notes, Ac.) 131-137
Chapter XVI.- —(a) Author’s First Droving Trips (to
Burrowa, Gundagai, Ac.) ; (b) Old Coaching Mem-
ories 137-148
Chapter XVII. —(a) Reflections on Land-laws of Old
Times (b) Some Long Rides by Old Timers 148-160
V


PART lI—SOME LEADING MEN OF OLD TIMES.
Chapter XVIII. —William Chas. Wentworth 161-165
Chapter XIX. —Robert Lowe 166-167
Chapter XX. —John Dunmore Lang, D.D 167-170
Chapter XXI. —(a) Daniel H. Deneihy 171-176
Chapter XXI. —(b) John Bailey Darvall 177-178
John Hubert Plunkett 178-179
Sir S. A. Donaldson ISO
Thomas Sutcliffe Mort, &c 180-181
The Anti-transportation Move-
ment 182-184
PART HI.—THE ROARING FIFTIES
Chapter XXII. —(a) The Turon Rush in ’5l 185-190
(b) Major’s Creek and Araluen . . . 190-194
Chapter XXIII. —The Ovens (Beechvvorth, <fec.) .... 194-206
Chapter XXIV. —On the Ovens Track Again (The
Eureka Stockade Riot; and other exciting inci-
dents of the Diggings) 203-215
Chapter XXV.—The Early Overlanding Days 215-222
Chapter XXVI. —Dealing and Overlanding Days
(continued) 222-261
Chapter XXVII. —First Trip to Melbourne with
Horses 232-239
PART IV.—N.S.W. GOLDFIELDS AND BUSHRANGERS
OF THE SIXTIES.
Chapter XXVlll.—Kiandra ' 240-246
Chapter XXIX. —Lambing Flat and the Chinese
Riots 247-254
Chapter XXX.—The Forbes Rush 254-261
Chapter XXXI. —The Bushranging Days —Gardiner 262-271
Chapter XXXII.—Ben Hall, Gilbert, & Co 271-277
Chapter XXXlll.—Goulburn District Bushranging
Incidents (Shooting of Constable Nelson; Attack
on the Faithfulls; Sticking up of Binda, &c 277-285
Chapter XXXIV. —The Bushrangers —Morgan, Peis-
ley, Lowry, Crookwell, the Clarkes, the Kelly
Gang, &c 285-294


PART V.-FROM THE SIXTIES, ONWARD
Chapter XXXV.—(a) Sir John Robertson and Free
Selection 294-301
(b) Sir Chas. Cowper and the
N.S.W. Railways 301-308
Chapter XXXVI. —A Chapter of Anecdotes (includ-
ing Memories of the Scottish Celts of Old Argyle) 308-320
Chapter XXXVII.—Back at Strathaird (1863-75),
Varied Reminiscences 320-327
Chapter XXXVIII.—On the Droving Trail Again.. 328-338
Chapter XXXIX. —Some Lawsuits, and Political In-
cidents (Old Argyle Elections, &c.) 338-343
Chapter XL.—Some Later Sporting Annals (South-
ern Turfites, Athletes, and Cricketers) 343-354
Chapter XLl.—(a) Southern Wool-growers and
Sheepmen; (b) Dairy-Farmers’ Co-operative Move-
ment ; (c) Some Notes on Forestry; (d) Reference
to Hawthorne, &c 354-362
Chapter XLII.—(a) Some References to Schools and
Clerics; (b) A Word on our Bards and Singers. . . . 362-370
Chapter XLIII.—(a) McDonalds’ Overlanding Trip
to W.A., 1883; (b) Duracks’ Overlanding Venture
to the N.T.; (c) Some Exciting Droving Experi-
ences 371-380
Chapter XLIV.—(a) The Rt. Hon. W. B. Dailey and
the Soudan Expedition; (b) Sir Henry Parkes and
the other side of the Argument; (c) The Centennial
Celebrations, 1888 380-385
Chapter XLV.—Retrospective—(A Glimpse at Mo-
dern Annals) 385-389
Finis 389-390


ILLUSTRATIONS.
POSITIONS OF GROUPS —(Photos.)
FRONTISPIECE.—AUTHOR.
Group I. —Early Southern Pioneers: Messrs. J. H.
Hume, Dr. Gibson, Captain L. McAlister, W. P.
Faithfull, H. Badgery, and Jas. Styles
Facing page 8
Plate.— Fac-similes of Signatures of Southern Pioneers
Facing page lb
Group II. —Four Early Comrades of the Author
Facing page 48
Groun III.—Some Prominent Southerners of the Fifties
Facing page 104
Group IV. —Some Famous Pastoral ists of Old Times :
Messrs. Jas. Tyson, Jas. Maiden, Andrew Tobin,
Patrick Leslie, A. G. Finlay, and A. B. Chisholm.
Facing page 216
Group V. —Some Noted Southern Athletes. Facing page 344
Sir John Robertson, K.C.M.G 294
Superintendent T. 0. Milne, Southern Railways 305
(Also see Index and Letterpress.)


Introductory Chapter.
John Hamilton Hume and Early Southern
Pioneers.
TN the Author’s green youth at Strathaird—a place,
by the way, which will be a chief port of call and
departure in this narrative —there was an old
aboriginal called Budyong, who, in his boyhood, had
lived and hunted with his tribe in the Sydney district
years before Captain Cook and the first white mariners
had set foot on the shores of Port Jackson, or Botany
Bay. Budyong used to say, "Baal white fellow longa
Sydney when me piccanniny”; and told a story of an
alleged caba-wunda (white man), who after the arrival
of the First Fleet gave "leg-bail” to his ship, and came
inland with Budyong’s tribe on one of their migrations
from the coast. But whatever the fact or fiction of this
story of the runaway sailor, it was a man of very difr
ferent mould who was the first Authentic white to dis-
cover the Southern Tablelands. We refer, of course, to
John Hamilton Hume—the intrepid native born bushman
and explorer—who away back in the year 1817 (accom-
panied by Surveyor Meehan) first bore the white man’s
burden across the Great Divide, and in the autumn of
that year "discovered” the Goulburn Plains. Hume’s
first camping-place in the vicinity of Goulburn was,
according to "Billy” Wade, an old stockman of the
twenties, in a little "dip” at the foot of the Rocky Hill,


which overlooks the city, just below the site of Lawless's
stockyard of eighty years ago. In passing, we would
suggest that it would be patriotic to nationalise that now
historic camp. Barely eighteen months before, Hume
had guided the late Dr. Throsby, one of the Pioneer
settlers of Bong Bong, through that “terrible turnpike"
of the early teamsters, the Bargo Brush, into the Ber-
rima country; and at Governor MacQuarie's request he
undertook that second journey which first made enter-
prise acquainted with the then virgin pastures of the
Tablelands. The accounts given by Messrs. Hume, Dr.
Throsby, and the other Originals of the “New Country,"
as it was then called —we more particularly refer to the
Bong Bong district—induced a few of the settlers nearer
the coast to shift their cattle to the new pastures, and
one of the first herds to arrive was a mob belonging to
Mr. Oakes, of Parramatta, whose sons, Rowland and
John, later stocked country in the Binda and Crook well
districts. The cattle referred to were in charge of
Charles Wright, who was probably the first permanent
resident of the Bong Bong district. This was in 1817.
At that time Dr. Throsby had, with his sons, a station
which embraced the site of the present town of Woollon-
gong, on the south coast, and in 1821 they also sent
a lot of their cattle to the new country, as the coast
district, in its then unimproved state, was no good for
fattening stock. The Badgerys, who had a run at the
same period on the Munnamurra River, near Kiama,
followed the Throsbys inland, and were amongst the
“Furthest Out” settlers in the twenties. A fine English
-oak, which grew from an acorn planted by that cheery
2
INTRODUCTORY.


old Pioneer the late Mr. Henry Badgery, now o’ershades
the scene of Mr. Badgery’s first camping place in the
“new country/’ Still earlier, however (in 1819); the
late Mr. James Styles, the Pioneer Pastoralist of Bun-
gonia, had settled in that district, after cutting his way
through the Bargo brush, and making the first practi-
cable wheel route through that thorny scrub. Mr.
Styles was, in fact, the pioneer magistrate of Argyle,
and before the coming of his early neighbours, Dr. Reid
and Mr. Putter, he presided alone over the hearings of
matters connected with the convict set clement at Bun-
gonia. About the time of Mr. Styles’ arrival at Bun-
gonia, Governor MacQuarie had started on a pioneer-
ing trip for the south, and in March, 1819, the valiant
roadmaking Governor first set eyes on the broken plains
and uplands now the site of Goulburn city. The
Governor’s initials and date of his visit were cut on a big
stringy bark tree growing on the Cookbundoon hills, some
12 miles, as the crow flies, from Goulburn. The tree so
marked was often noticed by the Author and other Bush-
men. That tree has been long since cut down, but the
block showing the Governor’s initials, etc., is (allegedly)
lying at the Sydney Museum, beyond the ravages of both
bush-fires and of curio-hunters, as the latter may find on
seeking it at the Museum. However, as the old saying
goes, “It never rains but it pours.” While yet Messrs.
Throsby, Badgery, Oakes, Styles and Co. were marking
out their new territories, a band of resolute Pioneers
were making their way across the Abercrombie ranges
towards the newly-discovered region of Argyle. This
party, which • comprised Messrs. Oxley (later Solicitor-
General), John McArthur, John Jamieson, Lachlan
3
INTRODUCTORY.


McAlister, John Hillas, and Thomas Howe, had origi-
nally crossed the Blue Mountains with the intention of
taking up land in the western district. They had with
them two men-servants (ticket-of-leave men), named
Michael Henry and James Davis, who, like their masters,
were well-known to the Author in later years. On
reaching the Bathurst country the party found “the
promised land” already occupied by the flocks and herds
of the early Bathurst settlers, viz., the Suttors, Iceleys,
Kites, McPhillamys, etc., and so, after a consultation,
they resolved to come southward. They were in all
probability the first whites to cross the Paling Yards and
Abercrombie into the Argyle country. They ran a
blazed line all the way across, and traces of their route
are yet in evidence. At what is now called Richlands,
Mr. Howe decided to settle. A few miles further on, at
the now pretty township of Taralga, Capt. McAlister
chose his country, and Mr. McArthur selected a block
which, he said, would make him McAlister’s next neigh-
bour. But the two Macs shortly afterwards exchanged
their places, McArthur taking the Taralga estate, and
McAlister taking Strathaird (so called after the old
patrimony of the clan in Scotland). Mr. Howe subse-
quently sold out his block at Richlands to the McArthurs,
and the latter, by virtue of grants dated from 1828,
obtained, later, a great area of land surrounding their
first purchase. Mr. Hillas settled at Bannaby, Mr.
Oxley at Sutton Forest, while Mr. Jamieson took up
country at Greenwich Park, having for a near neigh-
bour Hannibal McArthur, who a few months before (in
October, 1822) had been assigned a grant of some 2000
acres, this being issued under the hand of Governor Bris


bane. Mr. H. McArthur gave to this property the name
“Arthursleigh,” and it was on this estate, we believe,
that the first wheat was grown in Argyle. The Pioneers
mentioned and a “round dozen” of others, including
Dr. Gribson (Tirranna), Wm. Faithfull (Springfield),
Moore (Baw Baw), W. Broughton (Goulburn Plains),
Jas. Chisholm and Capt. Edinborough (Wollogorang),
Lithgow (Kenmore), Win. Bradley (Lansdowne), Major
Lockyer (Lockersleigh), etc., had, by 1830, “knocked the
corners off” the hitherto unreclaimed wilderness, and
were laying the early foundations of settlement and pas-
toral growth with no laggard hand. With John H.
Hume, who, in later years, was himself a large station-
holder in the Yass and Burrowa districts, the Author
had several transactions in the sixties, and we well re-
member the massive frame and direct manner of the
brave and kindly explorer. It is evident that Hume's
great services in inspiring the opening up of the country
did not meet with that recognition his work deserved
from the early Authorities; but his name and achieve-
ments will be perpetuated by future generations of his
countrymen as those of an indomitable and unselfish
Pioneer—who, through good and evil report, strove, as
he himself said, in his “vindication,” written in con-
nection with his expedition to Victoria with
Captain Hovell in 1824, to consider, first and last,
the glory and progress of his country: “For the sake of
those who bear my name, I should wish it to be held in
remembrance as that of one, who, with small oppor-
tunities and with limited resources, did what he could
for his native land.”
The great self-reliance and stern fortitude exhibited
5
INTRODUCTORY.


by Hume were, however, common attributes of the
Pioneers of his time. And, as if by Nature selected for
their strenuous tasks, and the surmounting of frequent
perils, either at the hands of the lurking savage, the old-
time bushranger, the roaring winter flood, or primeval
bushfires of their time, the Pioneers were usually men
of immense physical energy and of gigantic bulk and
stature, such as Hume, William Bradley, William Pitt
Faith full, and Major Lockyer, etc.; or, if cast in smaller
physical mould, had a hardihood and a courage no less
enduring than their Anak-like comrades. Peril, as we
have said, was the daily lot, as it was the salt or life, to
such men. An incident in the life of the late William
Bradley, as related to the Author, may be noted as
exemplifying an experience of frequent occurrence in
those da} 7 s. During one of his visits to Monaro, where
Mr. Bradley founded Bibbenluke and other stations, one
afternoon, near sundown, he was riding quietly along in
the vicinity of the Bredbo River. Deeply cogitating,
Bradley had ridden almost on top of a Blackfellows’
camp—several of whose members were notorious cattle-
spearers and thieves—before he was aware of the fact.
Not apprehending trouble, Bradley was surprised to hear
an unmistakably hostile greeting from the aborigines :
“Yunna-bawn-gee” (“Go back, stranger’'), they shout-
ed, brandishing their weapons; and the next moment
a tall Savage, more venturesome, or in greater authority
than the others, came out into the open, and after a
few wild antics hurled his spear at barely fifty yards’
distance from the horseman. Bradley “ducked” to his
kneepads, and quickly drawing his revolver, brought the
daring chief howling to mother-earth with a shot which
shattered his “spear-arm.” He (Bradley) got into cover
6
INTRODUCTORY.


as quickly as possible, and though another volley of
spears followed, he dispersed the hostile camp with a
few more shots. But the first spear needed only “a
coat of paint” to have sent Bradley to eternity, or to
have crippled him for life. Such adventures steadied
the nerves and perhaps some what roughened the
manners of the early settlers.
But what though the methods of a few of the Pioneers
were, allegedly, arbitrary and severe towards the
aborigines or to those unfortunate vassals of the law,
the early convicts ; or that their manners borrowed a
colour of abruptness from the rugged period in which
they lived; it was surely no time for kid-gloved diplo-
macy, or dove-like gentility of demeanour. And none
can gainsay the fact that the brave and rude Evangels
of our early history spared neither their energies or
means, in nurturing, through the weird dark years, the
feeble tendrils of our Nationhood; in achievements, for
instance, such as those of Capt. John McArthur and
his contemporaries, which have to-day made Australia
the Arcadia of the Golden Fleece; the Atlantis, and the
granary of the Southern Hemisphere; have established
a grander, freer Britain ’mid the wild “expanse of
Southern Seas”; and which, we hope, will preserve
Australia’s shores as the heritage and homeland of a
truer civilization, a more humanitarian Democracy than
the world has ever known.
7
INTRODUCTORY.


CHAPTER I.
In 1833.
“Search we the springs.
And backward trace the origin of things.”
Four and seventy years ago, in the dim and distant
spring of 1833, when I first set foot on Australian soil—
a toddling three-year-old —Settlement and Civilisation,
in the Colony, were, like myself, very much in their
infancy. I have only a very faint recollection of the
voyage out from Britain in the good ship “Caboosha,”
which brought my father and mother and a family of
three sons and two daughters, with some five hundred
other immigrants, to the shores of Sunny New South
Wales; but on that long voyage of five months’ duration,
a circumstance happened which probably in no small
degree affected the subsequent fortunes of the Author
and the family. During a wild storm my father, in
helping the sailors to steady the ship, received injuries
which rendered him partially paralysed throughout the
rest of his life.
My father had been in early manhood a contractor
and speculator in a fairly large way in Scotland —having
carried out some important undertakings on the “bonnie
banks of Clyde” (Glasgow); had also built a big bridge
over the River Dee; and, amongst other works, had the
contract for bringing the water from Crawley Springs


John Hamilton Hume.
William Pitt Faithfull.
Henry Badgery.
Dr. A Gibson.
Captain L. McAlister.
James Styles.
Some Early Southern Pioneers.




into Edinburgh, in which ancient and historic city the
Author first saw light of day on the 4th of October,
1830.
Soon after landing in Sydney my father fell in with
his kinsman, the late Captain Lachlan McAlister (of the
17th Regiment), then owner of the Strathaird estate,
Argyle; and within a few weeks he (the Author’s father)
came to Strathaird, fully authorised to act as the first
general superintendent and manager of the estate.
My Australian recollections and experiences, which
are those of my life, and my life’s work, date from that
period. At that time the state of affairs, outside the
city of Sydney, and even in Sydney itself, was very
primitive. Of the white population of the colony nearly
half (some 30,000 persons) were convicts —many of
whom, however, had been more sinned against than
sinning.
Except in little patches here and there, the roads were
unformed; there were no signs of bridges beyond the
Sydney district; and the traveller had to pay for his
right to the road at the tollbars near the settlements.
The first steamboat—the “Surprise,” a small coasting
vessel—had entered Port Jackson but a few months pre-
viously ; and the whole Press of Australia was comprised
in the New South Wales “Government Gazette,” “The
Monitor,” “The Australian,” and “The Sydney
Herald,” the first issue of which (“The Herald”) was
published in April, 1831. The aborigines yet in their
thousands roamed in savage freedom through the wild
scrubs and pastures of the country, and the interior was,
literally, a howling wilderness. In fact, one of my
first vague recollections of the journey inland was seeing
9
IN 1833.


some 300 blacks and gins around their little camp fires
one night near Camden. Those aborigines were holding
a Corrobboree in the locality, and very fierce I thought
they looked in their glaring warpaint; the faces of the
men being streaked with pigments of red-ochre and pipe-
clay.
Calling at Clifton, near Picton, then owned by Cap-
tain McAlister, my father got his written instructions
as to the management of Strathaird, and we continued
our route up-country, by the old unformed Southern
Road, across Chalkers Flat and the Mittagong Range,
through Bong Bong, and on by Paddy’s River and
Arthursleigh. We camped one night at Joe Peters’
house, which old hands will remember was the first hos-
telry between Berrima and Goulburn Plains. This Joe
Peters was in 1828 over the Irongang at Penrith, and
was one of the first ticket-of-leave men to obtain a grant
of land in the County of Argyle. In late years (1839)
he had a public house at Marulan.
We found a penal camp, or lockup, where an officer
and a few soldiers guarded a gang of convicts, at nearly
every second day’s stage of the journey.
In reference to those penal stations, a word or two
here may not be out of place, so that the present genera-
tion of readers may clearly understand the nature of
conditions existing in the thirties.
From the old Hyde Park Barracks, Sydney —then the
chief depot of the male convicts, while the Parramatta
factory was the prison of the females —batches of
“Government men” (i.e., convicts) were sent under the
escort of Mounted Police (who in those days were drafted
from the foot regiments sent out from England in charge
10
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


of the prisoners) to their allotted destinations up-
country. The short-sentence prisoners (seven years’
men) were either sent to the road-gangs, or assigned to
squatters and settlers in the inland districts; but the
worst type of convicts were always sent to the “Iron-
gangs,” about which I will have something to say later
on. It will be sufficient to remark here that they
(the Iron-gangs) were often treated with inhuman
cruelty for the least offence, and were compelled to work
in their fetters by day, and to sleep, chained two by two,
in their prison-boxes by night.
After a journey of three weeks, per bullock-dray, we
reached the Goulburn Plains, then the scene of the Chief
Police Station in the Southern district, and therefore
a place to be religiously avoided by the escaped convicts
and desperadoes of the time.
The situation of the locality, jointly recommended in
1828 by Mr. Lithgow (then owner of the Kenmore
Estate, and Auditor-General of New South Wales) and
Captain McAlister, as suitable for a central penal sta-
tion, had early found favour in the eyes of the Authori-
ties, and in 1833, the late Mr. James Hoddle (the
Pioneer Surveyor of Argyle) made a survey of the
locality for a village reserve. This survey included a
large area of what is now called the Old Township, and
several blocks of the present City of Goulburn, and the
first town lots in the new settlement were sold by Govern-
ment order in 1833.
At the time of our arrival the existing landmarks had
nothing of urban beauty or grandeur about them. They
were simply a small shingled gaol or lockup of four cells
(built in 1830) ; a little rough-hewn courthouse, where
11
IN 1833.


the chief magistrates of the time—viz., Dr. Gibson (of
Tirranna), Lachlan McAlister (of Strathaird), and later
old Captain Rossi \ Mr. Stewart (of Stewarts, now Grun-
sells Gardens), and Mr. Allman, sat in stern judgment
on the hapless culprits brought before them; and near by
were the bark-roofed quarters of the officers and the
humpies of the Mounted Police. Captain Christie and
Lieutenant Darley, both sporting characters, were the
head officers in the thirties at the Goulburn Station; and
the troopers were chiefly men of the 28th Regiment: the
non-commissioned officers were Sergeant Prosser and
Corporals Rose and Chapman.
Within a stonethrow of the Courthouse, Mat Healy —
the pioneer publican of Goulburn—ran his licensed
shanty, and dispensed the Colonial “Jamaica” and
“barley bree,” that old hands used to say helped to
build up their cast-iron constitutions. I might mention,
in passing, that Mr. Healey’s daughter (viz., Mrs.
Byrnes, of Spring Valley) is about the oldest early Goul-
burnite living, being in her 86th year. Close by Mat
Healey’s hotel, Messrs. Moses and Benjamin—Goul-
burn’s earliest firm of storekeepers —had just started a
flourishing store, where you could get a pound of tea for
fi/-, a pound of tobacco for 8/-, black sugar (few settlers
over saw white in those days) from 9d to 1/- per lb., and
other necessaries at similar rates. The tea for which
we paid 6/- per lb. was known as “posts and rails,” be-
cause it was generally retailed mixed with small chips or
shavings to add to the grocer’s weight. It was the
coarsest tea ever sent from China, and required careful
sifting before being used.
Touching on those high rates for everyday require


merits, I remember being sent to Goulburn when about
eight years old with a five-pound note for a bag of flour
(lOOlbs.), carrying the bag home before me on my pony’s
saddle.
A few hundred yards from the store stood a black-
smith’s shop, where the horses of the police were shod and
medicined; while a good mile away from the or. ginal
settlement one Jack Cole—a good type of the old endur-
ing breed of sawyers —was building another public-house
on the present site of Mandelson’s Hotel. But we must
not forget Mat Healey’s famous stable —the first stone
building ever erected in Goulburn, and which is yet
standing in all its “pristine beauty” as one of the out-
buildings on Mr. Twynam’s property. This old stable
should have a little of the odour of sanctity, or, at least,
the “odour of baptism,” attached to it, as it was used
several times as a christening “font” by some of the
Visiting clergy of the early days.
The half dozen buildings referred to formed the
nucleus of Goulburn in 1833, and sheltered its two score
of citizens. The humble “mansions” of law and order
have long disappeared; the store and the smithy; the
inns and their owners are now no more; but the old stone
stable still stands firm—an enduring witness of the
solidity of the “pre-historic” masonry of Goulburn.
And in concluding this first chapter of those memories,
looking back through the vista of the past, to those
vanished days whose rude joys and callous wrongs were
the events of our long lost youth; those days that
vibrated to the clang of the convicts’ irons, and to the
thud of the' axes and the ring of the rifles of the Pio-
neers • when I light my pipe with a lucifer match, won


dering what has become of the flint and steel and tinder-
box of our boyhood—when I see how much has been
achieved, how much forgotten, I feel indeed that:
“It is time to be old;
To take in sail.”
CHAPTER II.
At Strathaird.
“The greenest spot in memory’s waste
Is home, sweet home.”
On taking charge of the Strathaird Estate, on the sth
December, 1833, my father found a stiff, uphill job in
front of him. For the information of the uninitiated,
we would here point out that the Estate is about 25
miles south-east from Goulburn; and in its “broken”
panorama of rolling, green-clad hills, and open clovered
vales and meadows, is one of the prettiest tracts of
country on the Tablelands. Like most of the other
early stations of Argyle, Strathaird had been taken
possession by virtue of grants issued in 1826 and
later—but owing to the owner’s long absences,
masters had been greatly neglected; not even
a stockyard being up, or a home paddock fenced
in, or the least sign of cultivation. It will be
remembered that all the old (then new) pastoral estates
of Argyle were being founded, so to speak, at the time
by the enslaved energies of the transported prisoners of
the Crown, who were engaged in clearing the soil, build-
ing the rough-hewn homesteads, forming the first station
roads, and shepherding the flocks and herds of the early


squatters. There were some thirty convicts at Strath-
aird ; and, previous to our arrival, something like a
reign of terror existed in regard to their treatment, as
it had been the custom to send the men to be flogged at
the Goulburn or “Trial-gang” (now Taralga) triangles
for the most trivial offences. Consequently they seemed
a morose and mutinous set of fellows when we first came
into contact with them in 1833. My father, however,
speedily adopted a more humane system, and under the
new management much better results were obtained.
Several of those Government men had been transported
for most insignificant “misdeeds.” Two of them, for
instance, viz., Mat Bell and George Kinnair, had been
sent out for the heinous (?) offence of trespassing on
Lord Roseberry’s park in Scotland, on their way to
work; two others —Bill Summers and Joe Metcalfe, to
wit—for (allegedly) taking part in the riots at Man-
chester (England) in connection with the starting
of new cotton-trade machinery, though they were
only onlookers; and another man —one Tom Davis, an
ex-soldier —for inadvertently forgetting to salute one of
the officers of his regiment. As regards callings, those
men were a much mixed community, there being amongst
them a wheelwright, blacksmith, tailor, several shoe-
makers, carpenters, bricklayers, and brickmakers. The
tailor (one Joe Flegg), who used to do a bit of rough
mending for the men between whiles, was generally em-
ployed as a night-watchman on one of the Strathaird
sheep stations, and “Joe the Tailor’s Gully” is called
after him to this day. Mat Bell, the wheelwright,
assisted by Tom Gurney, the blacksmith, made the first
bullock-dray constructed in Argyle, which was built


from the timber of swamp-oak and mountain ash’ grow-
ing on the Strathaird Estate.
This same Strathaird blacksmith (Tom Gurney) also
turned out a number of iron picks, bars, and pitchforks,
and one of those forks (made in 1833) is yet, after
seventy years, in good working order, being in the pos-
session of the Author’s brother (W. T. McAlister), who
is still residing at Strathaird.
The “farm-constables” in charge of the prisoners were
often impudent ruffians who caused more evil than they
suppi essed; but the farm-constable at Strathaird in the
thirties was one of the straightest and kindliest men that
ever walked the earth. He had been one of King
William IV. ’s bodyguard, and was sent out for a trivial
breach of discipline. This man (W.M.) was a splendid
type of the gallant “Taffy” (Welshman), standing 6ft.
Sins, high, and having great activity and endurance.
As showing Morgan’s great physical powers, I remember
on several occasions he left Strathaird on foot, at three
o’clock, of a Saturday afternoon, to visit his friend,
Billy Wade (Overseer for Broughton on Goulburn
Plains), and, after five or six hours’ kangaroo hunting,
would return to the station, early on Sunday morning,
having covered 80 miles, or over, in 15 hours. Having
discovered limestone and good brick-clay on the estate,
my father started a kiln, had the bricks made, and
erected the first two brick-houses in Argyle. He alsc
put up a shearing shed, with room to house 2000 sheep
and pens for eight shearers, and had several paddocks
fenced and cleared for cultivation. There were, in 1835,
about 250 head of cattle and some 8000 sheep on the
property. The sheep were run 800 in a flock, two such


Facsimiles of Signatures of some early Southern Pioneers.




flocks running on each small sheep station; eacn flock
watched by its own shepherd, so thus two shepherds and
a watchman were on each station. As the dingoes in
those days were very troublesome, and as there were
no paddocks, the sheep at night were shut up in hurdles,
and the watchman’s business was to see that they were
not molested through the night by the wild-dogs or other
vermin. No doubt there may be yet one or two of those
shepherd’s watchboxes to be seen in the Abercrombie
district. Coming near the “lamb-marking,” my father
offered a bonus of £2 to the two men whose flock showed
the biggest increase of lambs, and the announced reward
led to some keen rivalry among the men. It leaked out
that the flocks shepherded by one Bill Brentall and Jack
Morton were leading, and some of the other candidates
resolved to give the leaders a bit of a shock. So one
morning just before the marking—or “docking,” as it
was then called —Brentnall and his mate found they were
six or seven lambs short of their tally the day previous,
and to even up matters they went that night, and, from
a flock on another part of the run, took the same number
of lambs as those they had missed. Unwittingly, how-
ever, they had taken the lambs from a flock already
docked. Next morning the sheep overseer, unexpected-
ly, began the marking, and, of course, discovered the
half-dozen docked lambs in Brentnall’s flock. The over-
seer reported the occurrence, and under a less reasonable
superintendent the two shepherds would have been
awarded 50 or 100 lashes apiece; but my father saw no
great harm had been done, and overlooked the matter.
One of those shepherds, who died only the other day, was
a magistrate in after years.
17
AT STRATHAIRD.


A travelling magistrate, attended by a policeman and
a Government flogger, visited the stations, each once a
month, and, on the complaint of the master or overseer,
the men were generally awarded so many lashes —never
less than twenty-five —from the cat-o’-nine tails, accord-
ing to the magistrate’s idea of the enormity of the of-
fence. lam pleased to say, however, that in our time
at Strathaird no bloody holocaust was offered up to the
brutal law, as my father sternly objected to flogging men
on any account. But I, many times, saw the poor vic-
tims undergoing the terrible ordeal (as will be fully ex-
plained later on), and have seen men tied up to trees
and flogged —in lieu of triangles—as at Taralga and Yal-
braith and other places, in the thirties. Speaking of
the Yalbraith “Flogging-tree” reminds the Author that
one day, in ’47, he saw one of its former “customers” —
under the lash —one “Cranky Tom” (an identity who
will yet be remembered by old Taralga residents), invok-
ing the curses of all the saints —and devils—on the old
tree. The poor fellow was down on his knees, with
clenched fist upraised, threatening the tree as if it
were responsible for his former sufferings. But we will
leave the subject of the lash and the tyrants for the time
being.
The two adjoining stations to Strathaird were Rich-
lands (McArthur’s) and Chatsbury, belonging to Sir
Charles Cowper. From the Chatsbury homestead,
but three miles distant, southward from Strathaird,
across the gum-girt hills, in frosty weather, we
could hear the bell calling the station hands
up in the morning, and “tolling the knell of parting
day” as night came on. My lifelong friend, Mr. Charles


Cowper (son of Sir Charles), who was long ago M.L.A.
for Tumut, and Sheriff of New South Wales, was for
some time in charge of Chatsbury. I remember “Young
Charlie” Cowper, as he was then, proposing to ringbark
the big trees on the property, but it was objected to by
his father; hence there was no “ringing” done on Chats-
bury for some years.
But this Second Chapter of my reminiscences must
not, like Tennyson’s famous brook, go on for ever;
though I am somewhat loth to leave it, for my child-
hood’s friends and visions lingered, in those dim forma-
tive years, about the vernal landmarks of breezy
old Strathaird. For, rude as were those annals,
when the woods were yet the haunts of the primal savage,
and when the no less barbarous penal shadow overhung
the white man’s destinies, yet Home’s sacred altar-fires
were gleaming amid those scenes; and thinking to-night,
in the twilight of our years, over the retrospect of faded
joys and sorrows, we can re-echo the exile’s lament—
“ Dear home of my youth I may see thee no more,
But memory treasures the bright days of yore.”
For truly is it written: “The man is but the boy full-
grown,” and “The thoughts of youth are long, long
thoughts.”


CHAPTER III.
The Dog Days of the Thirties.
“11l fares the land to hastening ills a prey,
Where wealth accumulates and men decay.”
Goldsmith.
In 1836 the Author’s father resigned his post as Super-
intendent of Strathaird, having differed with Captain
McAlister on the question of flogging, and other matters.
The Captain had been twelve months away, forming a
station, in partnership with the McFarlanes (then of
Inveralochy), in Gippsland; and on his return to Strath-
aird he was surprised to find no record of floggings
against the convicts. Now when two Celts have a warm
argument on a sultry summer’s day, a few sparks begin
to fly. My father bluntly told the Captain what he
thought of the brutal flogging system and its supporters,
and forthwith threw up his office. “I’ve had hundreds
of men under my charge in Scotland,” he said, “and I
know that the more fairly men are treated, the fairer
they will treat their employer.” In justice to the
Captain, however, it must be admitted, his faults were
rather those of the head than the heart, and after his
passion was spent, he “would kill you with kindness.
He pressed my father to resume the management, but
the latter, when he liked, was the very soul of obstinacy,
and declined to have further transactions with a man
“who (he said) seemed to want a flogger instead of a


manager.” So leaving Strathaird, we took up our resi-
dence on Government land (as we thought) at “the
Gap,” some five miles from Goulburn. But we were not
long destined to live unmolested at “the Gap.” One
fine day a policeman came out, and served a “notice”
cn my father which required him to show cause for
‘ 'having trespassed and dwelt on the lands rented by the
Crown to Mr. Lithgow, of ‘Kenmore’ station, without
the said runholder's permission.” It is necessary to
explain here that Governor Bourke in 1835 brought in
regulations which gave runholders a commonage right
up to three (3) sections of the waste lands adjoining their
grants, a rental being assessed for same based on the
number of stock that it was estimated the land could
carry. Those regulations were shamefully abused, as
the Big Land-grabbers, backed up by the Class magis-
trates of the time, read them as giving a legal right to
exploit the whole country; and so the well-meant pro-
vision was used as a weapon against the efforts of the
poorer class of settlers to make homes for themselves
anywhere near the old Grantees. Our dwelling, as it
happened, was well outside the sacred radius of the Ken-
more lands, but those two magisterial tyrants of old
times—Captain Rossi and Mr. Stewart—soon settled the
matter according to class law, by fining my father £lO
and costs of court, with the option of four months'
imprisonment. The “culprit,” on the matter of prin-
ciple, elected to “take it out,” but happily a good
Samaritan was at hand in Dr. Reid, for many years
owner of “Inverary” station, Bungonia district, and who
was one of the first medico-squatters to come south. The
Doctor's exertions soon won the day for our side of the


argument, and the case had the effect of obliging the
Grantees to give the less affluent settlers more elbow-
room in future on that side of the country. The late
David Reid, the well-known Victorian pastoralist, who
died recently at the age of 85, at Moorawatha, Vic., and
who was one of the first natives of the Bungonia district,
and was a grand type of the Australian bushman, was
a son of Dr. Reid.
Quite a host of people were punished in those days for
the “heinous” offence of settling on Crown lands. The
offenders were generally ignorant of the alleged right of
the squatters, who, for that matter, did not know their
own boundaries. The golden rule of the Authorities
seemed to be to recognise the supremacy of the Auto-
cratic Few, who chiefly acted on Rob Roy’s axiom, “Let
him take who has the power, and let him keep who can.”
But we have perhaps said enough to show that the poor
settler in the early days was little better in the eyes of
the Ruling Caste than a pariah and an outlaw—the
Ishmael of Colonial society.
The position of the masses, as then dictated by the
Big Landed Order, could have been summarised by the
lines,
“God bless the Squire and his relations,
And keep us all in our proper stations.”
To remedy this unbearable state of things an agitation
was started in Argyle amongst the farming class of small
settlers, in which the late David Ross, of “Glenlea,”
Richlands, was the leading figure. This movement led
to the portioning off on Crown lands of a number of
100, 40, and 30 acre agricultural blocks, the first recog-
nition of the just requirements of the small settlers. The


upset price of the blocks so allotted was JEl per acre.
Under a previous Act of the Imperial Parliament, passed
in 1842, small lots of 20 and 25 acres had been set apart
in special districts at an upset price of £2 per acre, but
there was no provision made for small farms. We are
indebted to Mr. Lachlan Ross, of “Rossville,” Strath-
aird, for an interesting account of the part taken in the
agitation mentioned, by his worthy kinsman, the late
Mr. D. Ross, whose memory is held in high regard by
the Author. As we have seen, there were amongst the
small settlers men of resource, and some of them, such
as the late Mr. J. Roberts (father of Mr. C. J. Roberts,
of “Kincora,” Goulburn), did not hesitate in their efforts
to obtain a bit of land in face of the exclusive policy of
the time, even to the point of personally approaching
the Governor and Executive. On his first arrival in
New South Wales, Mr. Roberts came up country, and
thought he would settle at Boro, Argyle district. Though
plenty of unoccupied land was apparently available, Mr.
Roberts was told that the Grantees owned it all, but he
soon discovered otherwise. He went to Sydney and told
the Governor (then, in 1838, Sir Richard Bourke) that
he knew of 100 acres of Crown land that he (Roberts)
was prepared to buy at Boro, and the Governor took it
upon himself to sell the 100 acres to Mr. R. at £1 per
acre. The land thus sold by the Governor, without wait-
ing on Legislative delay, was, we believe, the first 100-
acre block sold in New South Wales.
The Author's '* School Days*"
In my seventh year I was sent down the country to
attend the Primary School at Campbelltown, then the


only school between Sydney and Melbourne. The
arrangement was that I should board in Campbelltown
with the children of one Matthew Sawyer—then Over-
seer at Clifton for Captain McAlister—and attend school
with them. But I regret to say Mr. Matthew Sawyer
did not perform his part bf the contract, for on coming
to Clifton, instead of being sent to school, I was put to
mind the station, milking cows out on the breezy Razor-
back hills and so only received some three weeks’ school-
ing in my life. But as someone has well said, “Every
person receives two educations—one which he receives
from others, and one more important, which he gives
himself,” and for the next nine or ten years, the educa-
tion of the Author—though it included very little book-
learning, was severe enough in all conscience.
During my sojourn at Clifton, Major Mitchell’s ex-
pedition, which “discovered” Australia Felix (Upper
Victoria), passed through the district. The party was
joined at the “Bull-bed,” a small cattle-run of Captain
McAlister’s, by Major (afterwards Sir Thomas) Mitchell,
who had a station at the time called “The Pass,” near
Appin. On this exploring trip Mitchell blazed a line of
road right through to the Murray, and many years later,
I (the Author) followed Mitchell’s line (made in 1837),
from the Billabong towards the Murray, being in pursuit
of a mob of horses that had stampeded one night from a
camp while we were on the road for Melbourne. I dis-
tinctly remember the intrepid Major Mitchell (whose
son, Livingstone, by the way, married the sister of my
kinsman, Captain McAlister), and was acquainted with
several of the men of that historic expedition. Being left
much to my own resources at Clifton, once or twice in


my rambles I came across some of the progeny of the
famous "wild cattle” of the Cowpastures, from which
that district took its name. Those cattle were of the
stock of the first herd brought from England, by the
First Fleet, in 1838. Some of them strayed away from
their original pastures (in the Hawkesbury district), and
in course of time their progeny greatly increased. One
of the first Overseers over those "Government” cattle was
Wm. Tyson, father of the millionaire; and I remember
that Mr. Tyson, Senr., and his two sons, James and
William, used, when passing through Liverpool, to gen-
erally stay the night at the house of my brother-in-law r
Sergeant Doyle, as Tyson and Doyle were formerly com-
rades in the 17th Regiment.
44 Down the Country in the Thirties."
In passing we would set down a few other
ancient memories of down the country in the-
thirties. That fine old Briton, Major Antill, was
then the chief squire of the Picton side, and Messrs.
Buckland and Darriater owned the adjoining properties.
The squatters then surrounding Picton had the full run
of the Razorback country to the edge of the town, "free
gratis for nothing,” so it cannot be said they did not get
a fair start. It was said that Mr. Darriater had been
sent out with old Captain Rossi from England to escape
the popular clamour over their alleged complicity in the
persecution of Queen Caroline. This may have been
only a baseless rumour, however. Early in the fifties
Buckland's, Darriater’s, and L. McAlister’s stations
about Picton were bought by the late Dr. Jenkins, of


“Nepean Towers,” and formed into one large property.
Dr. Jenkins was a great authority on the raising, etc., of
purebred stock, and his writings were esteemed as text-
books on the subject. The herds of many Southern
owners were improved by intermixture with the Nepean
blood at an early period. The landholders of the Camp-
belltown district included Captain Bloomfield, of
MacQuarie Fields, Judge Cheeke (a famous racing man),
Messrs. Lintott, Throsby, the Hurleys, and Fieldhouses,
etc. Mr. Carolan, the Campbelltown pedagogue of those
days, was a first-class teacher, who certainly did not aim
at raising
“Bookful blockheads ignorantly read,
With loads of learned lumber in their head”;
and our scholastic acquaintance with him was all too
short. The historic Byrnes family was then amongst
the “oldest names” about Appin. In later years the
Author was acquainted with that notable figure, the late
William Byrne, of Appin, and his half-brother, George
Sykes, Senr., of “Spring Valley,” Argyle, two remark-
able members of that famous family, who died recently
within a few months of. each other —Mr. Byrne being 98
and Mr. Sykes 95 years old at their demise. The memo-
ries of those two fine old natives went back to the days
of Governor MacQuarie; to the very dawn almost of
Australian history. Mr. Byrne’s father was one of the
soldiers present at the celebrated deposition of Governor
Bligh in January, 1808. At Liverpool the chief citizens
in the thirties and forties were the Grahams, Tindalls,
Whitemans, Bull and McDonald (the wheelwrights),
“Bobby” Welland (the publican), and Munro (the
builder). The Author’s sister (Mrs. Doyle) wasl for some


years organist of a church choir at Liverpool attd during
the winter months a number of the young folks con-
nected with the choir, and other juveniles, used to meet
o’ nights to trip the “light fantastic,” etc., at my sister’s
house. One of those was a Miss G n, who lit the first
spark of the “divine passion” in the Author’s breast.
On the occasion of our last meeting I lost a handker-
chief bearing my initials, which would be a very trivial
matter not worth recording but for the sequel which
followed some eight years afterwards, as told in a later
chapter.
But to return to ’3B. On hearing of my neglected
school history, my father lost no time in bringing me
home again from the green hills of Clifton, and a few
weeks later I had my first coach trip, this being in one
of Doyle and Levy’s coaches to Campbelltown. The
cause of that rib-racking journey was my sister’s mar-
riage to Sergeant Doyle, before mentioned, and I went
along as a kind of country page, or “pannikin overseer,”
on the journey. But my holiday was very brief, as six
weeks later I was home again, and was henceforth
struggling, as few boys, happily, have to struggle in
these times, to help in “keeping the wolf from the door.”
And that wolf was a really ferocious animal in the
thirties. But it was the age of the Pioneers, when the
darkest adversities but whetted the courage and fore-
sight of the men who were laying the foundations of our
nationhood. Such men as Wm. Broughton, who origi-
nally held most of the plain now the site of Goulburn;
Major Lockyer, of “Lockersleigh” (now the property of
the Author’s esteemed friends, Wm. Andrew and L.
Rankin), William Bradley, W. P. Faithfull (founder of


“Springfield), and many others of our early Southern
Pioneers well knew the perils and discomforts of pastoral
life in the early years. How often in their quest for
country or kine beyond the Great Divide did such
men make the saddle their pillow and brave the winter
night with a topcoat or blanket their only shelter be-
neath the stars of heaven. But we need not dwell on
the hazards they encountered.
For, “with the valiant Joy the Gods revere,
They danger hailed—the Savage spear ;
The felon's fire, nor failed our fathers brave
When keels were nolt, to breast the rolling wave."
Some Ancient u Statistics.”
The Pioneers gave their attention to agriculture at a
very early period in Argyle; for seventy years, viz., in
1836, Argyle held the second place amongst the wheat
growing districts of New South Wales. In that year, as
we glean from almost “extinct” records, there were
under cultivation in the district 3,828 acres, which re-
turned a yield of 90,300 bushels of wheat. There were
249 acres under oats with a return of 2012 bushels. In
the same year 122 tons of potatoes were got from 117
acres, and a ton and a-half of tobacco were also pro-
duced. Tobacco culture has been for 50 years an almost
“lost art” in Argyle. It is apparent that, judging from
current yields, agricultural production has not kept up
at anything like the ratio of '36, when it was encouraged
by the big land holders. Chatsbury and Eichlands, as
also Gurrundah (Dr. Turner's), and the Bungonia sta-
tions grew large quantities of grain and cereals. During


the time that my esteemed friend the late Mr. P. Manion
(father of Messrs. John and Thomas Manion, of Middle
Arm) was overseer on Chatsbury, yields of 30 bushels to
the acre were frequent. In 1838, we remember,
an offer of £1 per bushel was made for the Richlands
wheat crop. This was refused, and the wheat sent to
Sydney. A great cargo of flour had arrived, however,
just before the Richlands wheat came in, and the carriers
were glad at last to get a paltry ly 6 per bushel, which
was a great shock to the Richlands Farm overseer. To
finish those “arable items,” the Author would remark
that in his boyhood at “The Gap,” in ’39, he “turned
up” an acre of land with a spade from which over fifty
bushels of wheat were raised. It may interest some
readers to know that the population of Argyle (as testified
from old records in the Author’s possession), in 1836, was
1,929, of whom no less than 1,106 were convicts.
In 1833 there were scarcely more than a dozen white
females in the Argyle district, or even between the Goul-
burn and Bathurst Settlements. The first white woman
to sight the district was probably “Kitty” Wade, the
wife of “Billy” Wade, who was stockman for Howe, and
later for Broughton, in the twenties and thirties. Kitty
came to Goulburn in 1828, and the other white women
folk who were her early contemporaries were Mrs. Healey
(Mat Healey’s wife) and her two daughters, Mrs. Taylor
(Tarlo), Mrs. Hamilton (Chatsbury), Mrs. Davis and
Mrs. Chapman (wives of two Goulburn troopers), and
the Author’s mother and two sisters. It may be also
noted in those “statistics” that the first born native of
Tarlo (viz., Mr. Thomas Taylor) is still on the “Planet,”
hale and hearty in his 80th year.


The first Goulburn races were run at the “Old Town-
ship” course (now covered by shops and houses) in 1839.
The “Big Money”—a XlO prize—was won by Mat
Healey’s stockhorse, “Paddy Two-sticks,” with Lieu-
tenant Waddy’s “Little John” a close second, and
“Brewer” (Burrowa) White’s “Mystery” third. I re-
member Captain Christie showed his agility at the races
by mounting his horse at a flying leap without seeking
assistance from mane or bridle. The Aborigines out-
numbered the white spectators by ten to one or more.
By the end of ’39, the Goulburn settlement (named, by
the way, in honour of the Hon. Mr. Goulburn, Colonial
Secretary in the British Government of Earl Grey) had
grown into a township of some respectability; for we
had a resident doctor, viz., Dr. Emly, who was, however,
more attached to squatting pursuits than the healing art,
and owned, with his brothers, several stations in Manaro
and Gippsland in the thirties. The new mansions, as
they were then, of Wm. Bradley and Francis McArthur,
were nearly completed, and others under way. But
perhaps the surest sign of our advance was the starting
of a crockery shop by a Mr. Brownlow, whose ware,
though the cups were as big as small pumpkins and the
dishes deep enough to have a bath in, added a more
civilised element to the tin kitchen-gods of the house-
holders. And so we emerged from the “dog-days” of the
thirties, and with our primitive instincts sharpened by
our extremities rushed valiantly into the forties.


CHAPTER IV.
The Early Carrying Days.
The six or seven years from 1839 to 1845-46 were, per-
haps, in a physical sense, the “hardest winters” the
Author has known in his career. At that period (and,
in fact, from the thirties to the sixties) carrying on the
reads, either with horses or bullock teams, was one of the
chief pursuits of the struggling inland settlers. Aus-
tralia was just beginning to make its name as a wool-
producing and wool-exporting country, and the small
towns—the squatters’ towns —on the tablelands were
starting to grow, though very gradually, with the growth
of the trade and intercourse created by the big stations
and small holdings in the interior. Those latter were
yet, however, very much under the ban of the privileged
class—the magnates of city and country —whose repre-
sentatives were both the makers and the administrators
of the Land-laws, and so far as it concerned the small
landworker settlement was very much handicapped. The
country boys and youths of the time began their “ap-
prenticeship” to the “Sanguinary Science” at a very
early age, and so the Author—even before he was in his-
teens—was learning how to pilot the ship of the desert
(i.e., the bullock-team) over the old Southern roads —
down to Sydney with wool and country produce, or back
again to the-bush with loading for the up-country stores,
and settlers. Piloting a sluggish bvMock-team over a


boggy plain, in the depth of winter, with the snow ankle-
deep and a chill Nor’-easter blowing its icy breath, is not
a holiday for a growing boy of ten or twelve years,
but in the merry days of old I had many such experi-
ences. The Author in another chapter has described the
incident of his first trip on the roads to Lithgow's sheep
station, and his starting for Sydney with the wool. My
father was riding to Sydney ahead of the team; and
from our previous experience, I looked for a somewhat
stirring trip with my new-chum mate; but, luckily, on
the first day on the road, we fell in with a sturdy old
■carrier, long deceased, to whose memory the Author
must here record his sincerest tribute of respect and
gratitude. I refer to the late Mr. Richard Siggs—
father of my good friend, R. F. Siggs, grazier, of Wood-
houselee—who during my early carrying trips helped me
out of many ugly corners, and ever proved himself one
of the best of the old brigade of Southern carriers. Mr.
Siggs, also bound to Sydney with a cargo of wool, showed
us a better way of running our team than by “Scotch
navigation” (i.e., brute strength and stupidity). After
a trip of twelve days we reached Sydney, and duly un-
loaded our freight at Campbell's Wharf, Circular Quay.
Having unyoked the teams and left the drays at 'the
“Bald-faced Stag” Hotel, Brickfield Hill, we drove the
bullocks out for pasture to the Blackwattle Swamp —the
locality (now built over) about St. Benedict's Church
and Blackfriars.
The Author has touched on his initial carrying trip
at some length by way of showng the sort of school in
which country boys of the time were obliged to learn the
ABC of practical experience. The next day I went
along with my father to see the sights of the City, and
in King Street —which then, like parts of George and


Pitt Streets, was mostly “full of open spaces,” as Paddy
says —we were witnesses of an incident worth recording.
An old ticket-of-leave man was trundling a barrow-
load of fresh fish along the street, and crying out “Fish,
oh !” as he went along. Near by there was a little “All
Sorts” shop, kept by a wooden-legged man, who had a
“talking” cockatoo in a big cage hanging up over the
door. The cockatoo took up the cry of “Fish, oh !” jus't
at the time that well-known officer of old times. Major
D tt, happened to be passing the shop. The old fish-
hawker thought the Major had called “Fish, oh!” and,
going over to the officer, he said, “Yes, sir, how many
fish do you want to buy ?” The Major flew into a ter-
rible rage. “Fish, be d d, you scoundrel!” he
thundered, and then, calling a policeman, gave the old
man in charge for using insulting language to an officer
of the Queen’s Army. We learned afterwards that the
man had his ticket-of-leave cancelled for twelve months,
and was sentenced to work on a road-gang for that term.
My father desired to give evidence on his behalf, but was
ndt permitted.
Though it is over fifty years since I last handled a
bullock-whip with “malice aforethought,” or addressed
“Brindle” and “Spanker,”and “Jolly”and “Blackbird”
in language that is not found in any self-respecting
prayer-book, the ancient tracks and camps are still as
near to my memory as when I first began the strenuous
work of carrying to Sydney. The old Southern road of
the early thirties, which ran through Lockyersleigh,
Paddy’s River, and Wombat Brush, had no acquaint-
ance with metalling in any shape or form till we reached
Lansdowne bridge, over Orphan School Creek, three
miles on the Sydney side of Liverpool; and the only
piece of macadamising there was over what might be.


called the approaches to the bridge. There was a toll-
bar at the bridge, where we paid 2d. per head as road-
dues for the bullocks, and 4d. for the dray. For driven
horses and cattle the rate was Id. per head. A
man named Bob Bridle kept this toll-bar, and it was
about as easy to drive a camel through the eye of a
needle as to try to dodge Mr. Bridle’s dues at the toll-
bar. This impossiblity was never tried that I know of.
In bad weather there were some real “solid” quagmires
on this old line of road, and in some stretches, as, for
instance, from Liverpool to the foot of Razorback, we
often thought we did well to makeitwo miles a day. But
the track through Bargo Brush in bad weather was a
terror to saints and angels and evildoers alike. But, of
course, this was in the winter of our discontent. When
the sky was bright and the roads fair, the carriers, like
the drovers in “Clancy of the Overflow,” “had pleasures
in their keeping that the townsmen never know.” How
the old camps come back to one! Lockyersleigh;
Paddy’s River; Black Bob’s Creek; the head of Mitta-
gong Range; Chalker’s Flat; the Bargo Hotel (which in
the forties was kept by Mr. Horne, father of Alfred
Horne, of Taralga); the foot of Razorback; then on to
the Cowpasture bridge (outside Oxley’s fence at Kirk-
ham), which was afterwards owned by that well-known
racing man, the late Hon. James White. Our ninth
night’s camp would often be a l t the Crossroads —some
four miles from Liverpool. The publican at the Cross-
roads was a Mr. Martin, whose better-half was alleged to
be the prettiest woman in all Australia —that is to say,
the carriers thought so; for though we had other work
to do than that of forming mutual admiration societies,
we had the true Australian appreciation of Beauty’s


form divine. And though our musical education had
been neglected, there were amongst the old carriers
singers who, metaphorically, could move the “soul of a
crocodile.” Such songs as “The Old Bark Hut”; “The
Old Bullock-dray”; “The Stockman’s Last Bed”;
“Black-eyed Susan”; and “The Wild Colonial Boy”
were the chief “classics” known to the platform of the
camp-fire; and in concluding this first chapter on the
“Carrying Times,” we will submit a verse of that early
Australian song, “The Old Bullock-dray,” as sung in
the formative years.
‘Oh, the shearing all is over, and the wool is coming
down.
And I will get a wife, boys, when I go up to town;
Everything that has two legs has got a mate in view,
Erom the little paddymelon to the old-man kangaroo.
Chorus:
So it’s roll up your blankets, and let us make a push,
I’ll take you up the country, and show you round the
bush;
I’ll take you round the stations, and learn you how to
ride,
And I’ll show you how to muster when we cross th’
great Divide.”


CHAPTER V.
“Should auld acquaintance be forgot
And never brought to min’;
Should auld acquaintance be forgot,
And the days of Auld Lang Syne.”
It is a far cry, judged by the milestones of the past,
back to the youthful zone of the Ancient Carriers, and
after all the havoc and changes of the years, it is a great
pleasure to the Author to see that there are yet in the
flesh a small regiment of the men who were amongst his
best comrades in the early days. To begin with, there
is Mr. Richard Lamb, of Mummel, who may justly claim
the mantle of Patriarch amongst the old-time carriers.
Mr. Lamb at ninety-two is a living proof of the virtues
of hard delving and plain living in the pioneering days.
Others of the enduring type of early teamsters are
Messrs. John Kelly (Tarlo), John Willoughby (Wood-
houselee), Jeremiah Leary (Gundagai), Thomas Bottom
(Kiandra), William Barry, J. Putland, and B.
Donnelly, Senr. (Goulburn), and last, but not
least, Mr. Nixon Fyfe, of Gundary, as thorough a white
man as ever yoked a team. But he whom I considered
the noblest Roman of them all, viz., the late George
Murray, of Golspie, has recently passed away at the age
of 88 years. Mention of my esteemed old friend, the
late Mr. Murray, recalls a somewhat amusing incident.
One day in the summer of ’47, Mr. Murray and the
Author were returning homewards from Goul-
burn, and at the old crossing place over the Wollon


dilly, at Kenmore, we met the late Francis McArthur,
then owner of Norwood. Mr. Me Arthur, as old
hands will remember, was of a very genial disposition,
and as we had some spirits with us, we asked “Black
Francis,” as McArthur was called, to have a “nip.”
But neither of us at the moment could find a pannikin
handy. Mr. Murray, however, taking the Author’s
bullock-bell, rinsed it in the river, and, handing it
to Mr. McArthur, he said, “We’ve lost the run
of the pannikins; but, never mind, here’s the bullock-
bell—try a drop out of that.”
“Well,” said McArthur, “that’s a better tumbler
than the one I had the other day. I was out on the
plains with one of my men looking for horses, and we
had a bottle of rum with us,but no tumbler or pannikin.
But there was a blackfellow’s skull handy—so we drank
out of that. Here’s luck,” he said, “and I hope when
you want a drink, if you cannot find a blackfellow’s
skull, you’ll never go short of a bullock-bell.” “Alas!
poor Yorick”; and his sable pate.
A brush with the Law.
It is often said ‘ 'the law is an Ass” ) but the law’s
operations are at times unjust as well as asinine, as we
found on several occasions during our early years on the
road. In the summer of 1845, the Author, on his way to
deliver some loading to Henry O’Brien, of Douro, Yass,
camped one night at a roadside inn, called the “Halfway
House,” about fifteen miles on the Sydney side of Yass.
This hotel was then kept by one Jim Gardiner. As
there was a good accommodation paddock at the place,
the Author drove his team into the inn-yard, and


turned the bullocks into the paddock. Shortly after
tea a sheriff’s officer (or bailiff) —one “Kerry Dick
came out from Yass to levy on the publican for a debt
due to a large creditor. His warrant gave authority
to distrain on everything on the premises—in the yard
as well as the house—and thus the Author’s dray and
contents were under the thrall of the bailiff.
On the advice of the kindly bailiff, I went to Yass next
morning, and signed an affidavit before Mr. O Brien as
to my property and his (O’Brien’s) being impounded at
the hotel; and with the consent of the bailiff got away
from the hotel near nightfall. If the bailiff so desired
my could have been detained and levied upon
till the amount of the execution was satisfied. This
strange proviso in the Law of “Levy and Distress, giv-
ing the Authorities power to seize goods on a debtor s
premises, other than the debtor s own property, is, to the
Author’s idea, a quite unnecessary relic of the barbaric
ages. There should be a radical amendment of tl
law, according to reasonable and commonsense ideas.
Some Tragic Items,
Amongst many memorable incidents of the carrying
days, I remember that in 1844 two mounted police
were burned to death in a bush fire at Bottle
Forest, near Liverpool. The two constables, whose names
were Luke Dunne and William Kirk (two ex-soldiers)
were sent out to try and capture some bushrangers who
were troublesome about the Liverpool district. The
outlaws started the fires to delay pursuit, and the two
unfortunate policemen somehow got into the thick of
the flames, meeting a terrible death. Another time,
38
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


when staying the night at the house of my brother-in-
law—the late Sergeant M. Doyle, then in charge of the
Police Station at Liverpool—word was brought in that
a swagman had been all but killed by some bloodhounds,
belonging to a man living at the “Bark Huts,” between
Liverpool and Sydney. Those beasts were generally
kept fast in an enclosure at the place, as irt> was known
that they were very savage, but they managed to escape
from their quarters, on the day mentioned, and fero-
ciously attacked the old sundowner. He was brought
to Liverpool, and died in the hospital next afternoon.
Sergeant Doyle, I remember, went out to shoot the
hounds at sight, but I believe the owner destroyed them.
Speaking of bloodhounds recalls that in the early penal
days those savage brutes were often let loose on the trail
of desperate convicts, who had taken to the bush, an
many a time scenes were enacted, in the hounds
figured, every bit as terrible as the fate that sometimes
overtook runaway slaves in the United States before the
Civil War of the sixties.
Carrying in the thirties and the forties could not be
said to have been a lucrative pursuit, and old comrades
will no doubt agree with me that we thought £5 per ton
a good rate, between Goulburn and Sydney, a very dif-
ferent state of things to that of the roaring fifties when
the Carriers' Mecca loomed in sight, and we got our
£75 to £IOO, or more per ton, for carrying over a similar
distance. Many of the roadmen of those days had a
great dislike to sleeping under any other roof than that
of their own dray or waggon, and were great believers
in an “al fresco” state of existence. For instance, Jack
Wright—a veteran carrier even in the Author’s early
days; Josh. Boaby (Fish River), William Sidwell, and
several other well known teamsters, could be said to have
39
THE EARLY CARRYING DAYS.


lived, moved, and had their being on the road. Jack
Wright’s horse team were always in great heart, and he
seemed to flourish at the business.
A Fright from a Comet.
But to come from the practical to the mystic: One
night in April, 1844, I remember getting a great fright
from the big meteor that appeared in the sky at that
time. In company with a hired mate, the Author was
returning up-country from Sydney, and on the night
referred to we camped with five or six other teamsters
at a spot near the Berrima Bridge. Early in the
evening my comrades tapped a cask of rum, and began a
glorious spree, in which my mate joined for “all he was
worth.” As thiy continued the “drunk” next morn-
ing, I determined, though only a boy of 14 summers at
that time, to yoke up my bullocks, and make tracks
homewards, and this I did in spite of much drunken
opposition.
Creeping along, I got within a few miles of Paddy’s
River about dusk, but as it did not seem to grow any
darker, as we approached the crossing-place, I began to
wonder why (as it seemed) the daylight was so long
fading. Involuntarily looking up, I saw the great comet
shining above in all its splendour, with a fiery tail that
might have been a thousand miles long. It seemed to
be making straight for me and the bullock team, and in
a terrible funk I got them over the water, unyoked in
frenzied haste, and rushed into my bunk under the dray
without waiting to boil the billy, or even look at a
“doughboy,” though I was as hungry as the champion
fasting man after a forty days’ performance.
40
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


On rising next morning I put up a fervent prayer
when I found that the “Cobbawn fire longa sky,” as the
blacks called it, had passed away without even singeing
the back of my hand.
I had many such lonely journeys in youth, but got to
have more confidence in comets and meteors as
time wore on. A meteor or fireball of some
sort, however, fell very close to our camp one night near
Bargo, and was unearthed, I believe, some months later,
and placed in the Sydney Museum. But for the moment
I made sure it was “UP” with us on that occasion.
The Author and several mates (amongst them the
late Jas. Carter, of Longreach) were camped at the
Crossroads Hotel (Ireland’s), near Petersham, the night
the great riot occurred, in ’41, between the men-o’wars-
men from H.M.S. “Favourite” and the police.
It arose over a row between the sailors and some
larrikins at the old Victoria Theatre, and two or three
of the seamen were arrested. This incensed many of
the men-o’wars-men, and, coming up in a body, they
smashed the old lockup in Cumberland Street, and
liberated the prisoners. They got the upper hand of
the police, and were going so strong that some companies
of soldiers were brought out, and before the Jack-tars
were quietened one man was killed and a dozen or more
badly wounded.
How we “Euchered ” the Bushrangers.
The devices adopted by the carriers and teamsters to
keep (their cash and valuable “heirlooms” from dis-
covery by -Bushrangers and such parasites were some-
times nearly as “slim” as any plan favoured by the late
41
THE EARLY CARRYING DAYS.


President Kruger or General Joubert. Sometimes, for
instance, we “planted” our surplus cash in the grease
horn, i.e., the horn wherein we kept the mixed tar and
grease used for greasing the axles of the dray. Some-
times we made a hole in one of the horse collars (if
driving horses), and, after putting the money in, would
sew the place up tightly. Or we cut a “safe”
in the pole of the dray, which would be covered up in a
way that would have baffled the wit of even a Thunder-
bolt to discover.
On one occasion when the Author and his brother
(W. T. Me A.) were returning from Albury—with over
£1000 in our possession—we made such a “safe” as that
mentioned, in the base of the pole, and put £700 of the
money 'therein, and hid the rest of the swag in a piece
of punk or fungus.
How we Crossed the Rivers*
To float the drays over the big rivers, we first un-
shipped the loading, and then fixed an empty hogshead
in the body of the dray and lashed a smaller cask on the
point of the pole. Those kegs acted as “life-buoys,”
always floating the drays over safely. We tied a long
rope—or two or three ropes’ lengths spliced—to the pole,
and generally got a blackfellow in a canoe to tow the
slack end of the rope across to the other bank, where
someone waiting would take hold and guide the dray
over to shallow water.
On occasions good swimmers in the company volun
teered, in the absence of a canoe or punt, to swim across
with the guiding rope; but generally the obliging darkie
was there with the canoe. We used to make rough rafts


to carry the cargo across, and in this way navigated
such streams as the Murray and Murrumbidgee in the
days before punts and high-level bridges.
The " Admiral" and the “Gin Cure"
Amongst the old-time carriers of our acquaintance
was an ex-man-o’wars-man whom, because of his naval
history, we nicknamed “The Admiral.” We were once
proceeding, along with several other teamsters, one of
them being the “Admiral,” with loading for a town up-
country, and one evening a mare belonging to one of the
teams got a bad attack of the “gripes.” Everyone in
the party tendered the usual kind of advice—applica-
tions of salt-petre, hot fomentations, etc., but when
“The Admiral” came up he laughed at our efforts. “I’ll
tell y’ what’ll bring her round agin in no time,” he said ;
“th’ best thing out.” “What is that, Admiral?” we
asked. “Why,” said the old chap, “give her a dose of
gin—about half a pint ’ll straighten her up in no time.”
“All right,” said the owner of the mare, “but where will
we get the gin?” “Oh, leave that to me,” said the
Admiral; ‘ ‘there’s a shanty three miles up the road;
give me a few bob an’ I’ll bring a quart bottle back
inside an hour.” The silver was duly produced, and
off “The Admiral” started for the grog. About three
o’clock in the morning (the mare having in the mean-
time almost recovered), we were awakened, those who
were slumbering, by the stentorian voice of the now
drunken Admiral, who was roaring a wild sea-song at
the top of his vocal powers. Suddenly ending his ditty
as he reached the camp—“Here y’ are!” he bellowed,
holding out a quart bottle, “here’s the (crimson) gin;


give th’ boss a bellyful—a good b bellyful,” and
with the last word he lurched forward, and fell by the
smouldering fire in a drunken stupor, and there he lay,
dead to the world,” until we had all yoked up and
were about to start next day. As we discovered later,
the old “sinner,” after buying the gin at the shanty,
also procured an empty quart bottle, which he filled
nearly to the brim with water, putting in just a “colour-
ing” of gin. This he reserved for “curing” the sick
mare, and then he set to and “guzzled” three-fourths of
the spirit in the other bottle, and after giving it plenty
of time to “circulate,” he thought it was time to come
back to his too trustful comrades at the camp. But
we might have forgiven the old scamp at once if he had
only poisoned himself with the “gin-cure.” The mare
was slowly recovering, but her owner (one George Raw-
lings), thinking the “Admiral” had brought the gin
intact, took the bottle, which contained nine-tenths
water, and forced the mare to drink the swash, with
lamentable results—the poor beast got rapidly worse
under this cold water treattnent, and died before day-
light. No doubt if horses poisoned to death have the
power to accuse those who have been “accessory before
the fact” in causing their demise, at the last Day, the
“Admiral” will possibly have a few tough questions to
answer from Rawlings’ mare at that eventful time.
Though it is customary in some quarters to speak in a
supercilious spirit of the epoch of the old Bullock-dray,
and to review with something like scorn the stringy-bark
beginnings of the carriers of old times, those who can
estimate affairs truly know there was a time in our his-
tory when the “swish” of the bullock whips spoke to
commerce and intercourse a similar message to that con-
veyed by the whistle of the “goods” locomotive ot to-day.


In those olden times the bullock-dray was not only
the “goods-train” of the country, but also at times the
Jaunting-car or “Family Sociable” of the common peo-
ple, as well. It was no uncommon sight 40 or 50 years ago
to see a country couple on their way to church, to get
married, sitting in a light dray or spring cart drawn
by a pair of lively oxen (shafters), and the Author has
more than once driven such a pair.
This chapter has pretty well “outran the constable,”
blit as several old friends have desired to see in print
an effusion of the Author’s on the carrying-days, the
lines are appended below ;
The Old Hands Review.
'Oh, Bill, I’m pleased to see you; now tell me where
you’ve been —
iJow many of the old brigade this five years back you’ve
seen —
Our mates who drove the bullock-teams: how well they
knew the ground,
And marked the tracks out through th’ back before the
roads were found;
When Curly Bill and Lanky Bob, Red Mick, myself, and
you
Took up that cattle station on the creek they called
“Meroo.”
No bridges spanned the rivers then, but, Lord, we didn’t
care —
The way we’d float the drays across would make a
Cockney stare —
The sidling hills no cuttings had, nor metals laid for
years;


Our draywheels made the early tracks—we were the
Pioneers.
And when-we camped at night, Bill, how happy we
would be
On “Junk ’ and sodden damper, black sugar, and black
tea.
Way back in ’46, Bill—the date was cut I know
Upon an ancient gumtree, some sixty years ago
Upon that second trip. Bill, close on six months away,
We formed that little station on the river Castlereagh:
I see again the dingoes and bronzewings thick as bees,
The Emus and the Kangaroos among the myall trees;
I remember at the musters how we cut the scrubbers out,
And our shindies with the darkies that were lurking
round about;
And when we camped at night, Bill, how happy we
would be
Feeding on our damper, black sugar, and black tea;
For then we had no banker’s bills, or lawyer’s fees to
pay,
And life was worth the living on the river Castlereagh.


CHAPTER VI.
Old Sydney in the Forties.
IN speaking of the Carrying Days, one is naturally
reminded of those old familiar sights of ours the one-
storied, shingled “pubs” and low, rambling stories; the
weatherboard houses, and “wattle and daub” huts of
ancient Sydney. Those grand arteries of the roaring
traffic of to-day—George and Pity Streets—were, in
parts, only being cleared of growing timber as I remem-
ber them in 1838-39. It might be said that Sydney
ended at Blackwattle Swamp—now the locality aboi
St. Benedict’s Church, George Street West, not far from
Darling Harbour. But, notwithstanding the semi-
rustic stage of Sydney in the ’forties, it’s citizens, even
then, guided by those great men —Wentworth, Lowe,
Wardell and Bland —were patrons of Art and Learning;
and though the foundations of the Sydney University
had not been laid, a system of public denominational
education was in operationand I think a grant was
made about the same time (1840-41) by the old Legisla-
tive Council (there was no Legislative Assembly till
years after) for the purpose of educating children whose
parents objected to the denominational system. It can
be affirmed that from Cooper’s distillery (the only impor-
tant building I remember about the swamp) the open
bush began, and from there to Liverpool the houses were
few and far between. The Johnttones, of Annandale,
who later owned Jeir and other runs in the Murrum-
bidgee district, had a mansion and farm at Camperdown,


but otherwise this now populous suburb was a swampy
wilderness of ti-tree, stringy-bark, and spotted gum.
One of the creeks running into Darling Harbour came
through Blackwattle Swamp; and I remember the chil-
dren used to paddle about in the water at high tide.
This arm of the Harbour has been long filled-in, and
shops and dwellings now are standing on the scene of
the filled-up channel. Gibbons Bros., who had the
first contract for the formation of Darling Harbour, had
an immense task, and made a splendid job of it. Men-
tion of Darling Harbour reminds of other waterside
localities. On the western side of Circular Quay was
Campbell’s Wharf—owned by Messrs. Charles and
Robert Campbell, who were two of the “whitest” busi-
ness men of ancient Sydney; both of whom entered,
heart and soul, into the great Anti-Transportation move-
ment of 1848-50 (of which more anon). Going east, we
found Jones and Walker’s Wharf, at the foot of George
Street, at all of which, in the ’4o’s and ’so’s, I helped to
deliver loading, either on my father’s, or my own
account, or for settlers and firms up-country. Sydney
was a very “countrified” seaport in those days. Juber-
ries, blackberries, and wild flowers grew all over the
suburbs, and there were pickers in plenty amongst the
young and old folks of the long ago. There was no
Pyrmont Bridge, or any daily service steam-trips to
Manly, or any talk of building a North Shore railway
over the harbour in the early ’forties. But the city
pioneers of old Sydney found plenty of occupation for
their energies, even without the “pressure” of steam
or electricity. To name a few of those ancients; The
original John Sands, stationer, was in 1842, we remem-
ber, running a small “paper” shop in George Street;


William T. McAlister (Author’s brother.)
Charles McLean.
George Murray.
Walter Bradbury.
Four Early Comrades of the Author




Robert Campbell, Junr., & Co. were going strong as
general merchants in Bligh Street; while “Davy” Jones
was then (as now) one of the leading drapers of Sydney.
The late Hon. E. Vickery was then in the morning of
his career as a “soler and healer”—his bootshop being
nearly next door to the firslt clothing establishment of
Anthony Hordern & Co., Brickfield Hill; but we doubt
if the Co. was included in the Hordern “personnel”
of that era.
Another shop of some note was Mr. Donovan’s iron-
mongery store, which stood close to where Casey's Hotel-
bar now confronts the thirsty (and the teetotal) multi-
tude. Dr. Donovan, K.C., the well-known barrister,,
is the son of that keen Hibernian merchant of the ’4o’s.
Old Mr. Donovan was very short tempered, and was apt
to “explode” if you chanced to question his hard and
fast prices for goods. One day the Author and two*
other carriers (viz., Jas. Ritchie and “Ikey” Owens)
called into Donovan’s shop to buy some articles we re-
quired. Mr. Ritchie wanted a bullock-bell, but he
thought the price asked was too high. “Why, he said,
“I could buy a silver bell for that money; you’re a bit
too hot to-day altogether.” At this Mr. Donovan “lost
his block” completely. “Clear out of my sight, ye
skunks!” he screamed. “A set of beggarly oush-rats
to come in, if you plaze, out o’ th’ scrub, an’ tell me I
don’t know my bizness—what next, I wondher ? Divil
a bit if I think ye’ve got a bad penny among the lot o’
ye, let alone a bullock-team.” The “bush-rats,” thus
abjured, lost no time in putting daylight between them-
selves and the sweet (?) Mr. Donovan’s shop. Those
were the times when the grandfathers of many magnates
of modern Sydney acquired hundreds of acres of the
49
OLD SYDNEY IN THE FORTIES.


foreshores of Port Jackson, and others the title-deeds to
rich blocks in the heart of the city, for the consideration
■of a few gallons of rum, or such trifling “equivalent,”
from the original Grantees, the latter often being old
soldeirs, or “Emancipationists”—some of them so fond
of rum that they would have “bartered” the whole con-
tinent for a few hogsheads of the “enemy.” Aye! truly
the Burdekins, Terrys, Lambs, Walkers, Harrises, Holts,
and Coopers, etc., had then golden chances of acquir-
ing immense windfalls in landed property—and, as we
can see, the chances were not neglected. Some of the
blocks obtained so cheaply would now bring their hun-
dreds per foot. Surely “an unearned increment” law
is badly needed ? A Mr. Berry was said to hold pos-
session in a sort of Baronial sway over the lands around
North Shore, and up the Parramaltta River for miles
and miles; and as it was the epoch of dominion for the
“Colonial Aristocracy,” no mere toiler dared dispute
the feudal claims of Mr. Berry or any other magnate
whose interest at Headquarters was powerful enough to
enforce his claim.
I remember the Harbour Master in 1845 was a
man nicknamed “Billy Blue,” a worthy who is men-
tioned in one of Thatcher’s (an early Australian poet)
songs. This verse ran as follows:
I think of the walks in the bright Sydney gardens,
Arm in arm with the nursemaids to hear the band
play;
And the rows in the pleasure-boats round by Goat
Island,
And the larks and the picnics at old Hobson’s Bay;
■The races at Homebush, the annual Regatta,
And the old Harbour Master they called “Billy Blue,”
50
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


And the trips by the “Emu’’ to see Parramatta,
Where we pulled the ripe plums off the trees as they
grew.
A chief house of call for us country-folk then was the
old Blackboy Hotel, at the corner of George and King
Streets. A kind of theatre or people’s music-hall was
kept in connection with this hotel, where the leading
comedians and singers were Jim Brown and “Micky”
Drew; but as the platform of the Blackboy “theatre”
was somewhat free and easy, sometimes a strong sailor-
man, just off a six months’ cruise, would favour us with
“Nancy Lee” or other jolly sea-song; or an ambitious
carrier or drover would ‘ ‘rouse the ’possum” by giving
some long-winded ditty of the time. But a superior
class of artistes played at the old Victoria Theatre.
Three good actors I remember seeing at the Victoria
were Messrs. Torning, Barrett, and Griffin; and also
Miss Hart, a very clever burlesque actress and dancer,
who seemed to have captivated both the baldheads and
the young bloods of the time. Reference to theatricals
recalls the memory of the concerts given by that famous
singer, Kate Hayes, and I can add my humble endorse-
ment to the claim that she was a vocal star of the first
magnitude. At the old theatre, which stood on the
present site of “Her Majesty’s,” I saw perform several
times a clever actress in one Maggie Moore, and have
-often wondered if that lady is identical with the Maggie
Moore since so prominent on the Australian stage.
“The Dog and Duck” Hotel, near the Haymarket,
was another resort of the “jolly waggoners” and bush-
men from the tablelands. This house was kept by Mr.
Peter Onslow, father of that respected Goulburnite,
Mrs. H. Mitchell, Sent. Another old landmark was


the Woolpack Hotel, run by a sturdy Scot named
Stewart, and not far away was the “Square and Com-
pass,” kept by a Mr. Landers, and patronised by many
of the Turfites of the period. Near the site of Hordern’s
new premises stood the “Black Swan,” kept by Reuban,
a Jew, who, incidentally, might have possessed more of
the virtues of the great Hebrew race, so many of whom
have contributed to our political and commercial pros-
perity.
It was owing to an action of Mr. Reuban that the
Author experienced one of his most painful deprivations
in boyhood. My father had gone surety to Reuban on
a certain debtor’s behalf for a fairly large amounlt. By
and bye, Mr. Reuban pressed his claim, which, as the
debtor could not meet, fell on the surety, viz., the
Author’s father. The biggest part of the bill was
promptly paid, but Mr. Reuban declined to give us time
to pay the residue (about £6O). My father had at the
time some paddocks under lease at Irishtown, near Syd-
ney, and in our trips to the city we were in the habit of
camping for three or four days at times at the Irishtown
paddocks. On one Wednesday-afternoon, while resting
the cattle at Irishtown, we were surprised by the arrival
of two bailiffs, who had authority, per Mr. Reuban’s
warrant, to seize on our teams, etc., in satisfaction of
another man’s debt. The bailiffs took two of our teams
and drays away with them, saying their instructions
were to leave them in the charge of Mr. Lackey, head
bailiff at Parramatta. The teams were worth at least
£9O, and knowing the bullocks would be put up at a
“Sheriff’s auction,” we were naturally anxious to know
when the sale woiild be held. Accordingly, at my
father’s desire next morning, I jumped on my pony—a


fine little cob—and rode over to see the great Mr.
Lackey, who lived on the Dogtrap road, near Parra-
matJba.
On reaching the bailiff’s (Lackey’s) house that indi-
vidual declined to give the date of the sale, and I was
just about remounting my pony when the bailiff sud-
denly caught my stirrup-foot with one hand, grasped
me by the collar with the other, and threw me violently
to the ground. I was half-stunned by the fall, and
when I got up Lackey had the pony in his possession.
“Now, my shaver,” he said, “you go about your busi-
ness; I’ll hold the pony as well as the bullocks.” In
■vain I pleaded, with boyish fervor, and threatened the
cowardly Lackey with Celtic heat; my brave little steed
was confiscated —wrongfully as I heard in after years.
It was months before I forgot the loss of my pony —but
to this day I have never forgotten the mean deed of the
miserable bully who took the boy unawares on the Dog-
trap road. I heard later that Mr. Lackey received
some honours. If he deserved the honours, the “leopard
must surely have changed his spots.” But to end this
reference to the bailiff—after the officials of the court
had sold the teams and pony, we received the sum of £9
as a balance; so the property was pretty well given
away.
But passing on to pleasanter themes, I have vivid
memories of three centres of life and “spirituality” out-
side the city’s boundaries, viz., John Ireland’s Hotel at
the Cross-roads—that is, the junction of the Parramatta
and Liverpool roads; Coutts’ Hotel, at Homebush
(Johnny Coutts, or Cutts, the famous jockey, was a son
of the publican, and a droving comrade of the writer),
and Taverner’s Hotel, a mile or so nearer Sydney than


Ireland’s. Mr. Ireland was a colossal specimen of the
old Australian brand of Boniface, and easily turned the
scales at 23 stone. There was a standing wager for
some time between this prodigy of beef and muscle and
one “Lumpy” Dean, of Penrith, as to which was the
heavier, and I believe that on coming together, to the
surprise of the spectators, Dean won easily. Taverner’s
inn, however, was much more of a sporting resort than
most other country “pubs,” as Mr. Taverner, who, by
the way, was a wooden-legged man, was a very genial
character. Among the habitues of this old wayside inn
were the famous Bill Sparkes (who afterwards fought
Johnny Broome, and Nat Langham in England), Tom
Sparkes (Bill’s brother), Johnny Gorrick (better known
as “Bungaree,” a red-hot ’tin in the “magic circle,” and
who, like Bill Sparkes, also went to England, and
fought, but was defeated, by the great Broome), Ike
Reid, Jim and Charlie Haddigaddi (two Fishriver na-
tives, who could take and give with most “welter-
weights” of the time), Ned and Dan Chalker, George
Huff, and last, but not least, that long-winded wonder,
the “Flying Pieman,” whose running feats against the
coaches I can vouch for from personal experience.
George Hough (or Huff), who posed as the heavy-
weight champion of New South Wales at the time, hav-
ing by a fluke defeated Ned Chalker (a much better
man) for the belt near Parramatta, in 1847, was a bit
inclined to act the bully, perhaps to show his credentials
as a leading member of the lower strata of the “Cabbage-
tree Hat” mob, which corresponded to some extent to
the hooligans and larrikins of to-day; but it was not
long before Mr. Huff was taught better manners by a
quite unexpected instructor. One day while the Author


and others were having a refresher in the old Crown
Hotel, George Street, who should come in but the famous
Huff and another of his gang. At the other end of the
bar Ike Reid, a ticket-of-leave man, was also having a
drink, and on Reid turning round to speak to someone,
Huff took up his (Reid’s) beer, to the indig-
nation of the whole company. This was -a common
trick of the roughs of those days, and Huff, no doubt,
thought that Reid, being yet under the ban of the law,
would be a safe victim on whom to try the “beer-jump-
ing” act. But he made one of the biggest mistakes of his
life. As soon as Huff put the “pewter” down after
drinking the beer, Reid hit him a terrible blow, which
sent the great bully reeling towards the door, and
another “right” on the jaw sent him head over heels
into the street. Huff talked very loud about what he
would do with Reid, and the latter had to let Mr. H.
“blow” as hard as he liked for a while; but Reid shortly
got his freedom, and challenged Huff to fight for £SO
aside. This battle duly came off in a ring near George’s
River, and Reid won easily after a battle of eight
rounds. But with the coming of “Black Perry” (or
Parry), the Irish nigger, as he was called (having been
born in Dublin, I believe), the best Australians of the
time were compelled to throw up the sponge. Like that
famous black of the last decade, Peter Jackson, Parry
had marvellous science, and simply made fools of his
opponents. Huff, who, to give him his due, was no
coward, thought he could stop the black’s victorious
march, but was outed in no time. After playing with
his opponent for six rounds, Parry timed one of Huff’s
“round-armers” so cleverly that, jumping round, he re-
ceived it on his posterior. As this was “below the belt,”


the referee had to award the fight to Parry on a foul.
Mr. George Taylor, of Goulburn, no mean exponent of
the noble art himself, and a pupil of “Black Parry,"
will bear out the statement that in point of skill, agility,
and hitting power, Black Parry had no competitor in
his day.
But, passing on from memories of the “gladiators" to
the still more exciting arena of the Turf, I see again
in my visions of youth’s halcyon days the great struggle
between old Jorrocks and that fleet-footed colt, The
Snake, on the Homebush course. The race we refer to
was for the Australian Plate, ran at Homebush in May,
1848. It was a neck and neck finish, Jorrocks winning
on the post. Mr. Butts, a Cowpasture farmer, owned
“The Snake,” and Mr. Downes owned or entered “Jor-
rocks” at that meeting. But in ’4B “Jorrocks”—ls
years old —was past his prime. Ten months previously
he had met his “Waterloo,” when he was beaten by that
famous mare “Cassandra," in a race over two mile heats
at Maitland, which marked the decline of “Jorrocks’”
great career. Amongst the chief racing men of the ’4o’s
and ’so’s 1 particularly remember Nat Lawson, a Penrith
squatter, who afterwards had a station, viz., “Lawson’s
Folly,” out on the Bogan. Mr. Lawson owned “The
Rake," a good grey horse, which, ridden by Johnnie
Coutts, I saw win the Maiden Plate at the Homebush
races in 1848. Then there was Jones, of Bargo, who
had several flyers; Warby, the George’s River sporting-
man; John Tait, Judge Cheek, the Badgerys, Towns,
Tom Ivory, and others whose names are now household
words in Australian racing annals. Nor must we omit
Merritt (owner of “Razorback”), who had an hotel on
the Liverpool road; and the sturdy Gorrick, who also


sported silk at Homebush, Campbelltown, Liverpool,
Penrith, and other meetings. To an earlier period be-
longed Charlie Smith, and Bayley —two men who did
a big part towards the starting of the sport of Britons in
the olden days. Mr. Smith it was who bred “Chan-
cellor” and “Steeltrap,” and Bayley imported
“Whisker” and “Emigrant,” he latter being the sire of
the mighty “Jorrocks,” the “Carbine” of old-time race-
horses. There are, no doubt, many old hands who were
more deeply interested in the Turf than my humble self
at the time, and whose memories would make livelier
reading; but I will yield to none in my appreciation
of that noble sport of Britons; which in spite of the
modern Pharisees, and in spite of the degraded instincts
of some few “Balancers,” etc., who sometimes infest
meetings, will ever, I trust, maintain its high position.
The leading jockeys in those glorious days of the ’4o’s
and ’so’s were John Higgerson, J. Coutts, Healy, Sam
Holmes, Driscoll, Dunne, Tom Willis, Noah Beale
(Tait’s trainer), and Dargin, rider of “Cassandra.”
Most events at those old meetings were run as mile or
two-mile heats, which was the custom in most events up
to the seventies. In other pages, however, we will
speak more fully of our recollections of the Turf, but
ere finishing this reference to ancient owners, riders,
and racers, the Author must not forget to pay his
tribute —the earnest and fervent tribute of an old horse-
man—to the memory of that great and incorruptible
jockey, Johnnie Higgerson, who was ever the best type
of the sterling riders of his day. And now to bring this
chapter to an end, I will ask the forbearance of readers
in scanning this, needless to say, original version of—


The Homebush Races of 1848*
It was at the Homebush races in the year of ’48,
That I saw the famous “Jorricks” win th’ big Australian
Plate ;
Young Healy, best of riders, then bestrode the grand
old bay,
He led from start to finish, boys, and won it all the way.
Real sport we had at Homebush, then, in sunshine, or in
rain,
When will I see such galloping and jollity again ?
The horses then could race all day; the jocks knew how
to steer,
Racing round the old course in the Maytime of the year.
Then here’s to all the steeds that ran, and to the men
that rode,
To Jorricks, Snake, and Razorback, and Warrigal and
Toad,
To Johnnie Coutts and Higgerson, and Healy, and the
Browns,
To Warby, Butts, and Merrick, and Gorrick, Tait, and
Towns.
For honest owners all they were who ever ran ’em
straight—
At the ancient Homebush races in 1848.
58
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


CHAPTER VII.
The Penal Period.
‘O thou great Wrong, that, through the slowpaced
years
Didst hold thy thousands fettered.”
Bryant.
When the British Government—owing to the results
of the war of American Independence, 130 years ago
(viz., in 1777) —was obliged to cease transporting con-
victs to Virginia (U.S.), Captain Cook had just annexed
Australia, as a dependency of the British Crown.
The new territory seems to have been considered by
the authorities, as set apart, by a special dispensation
of Providence—or as a New Penal Virginia in the South-
ern Seas, and in 1788, the "First Fleet,” under Gov-
ernor Phillip, brought the original batch of convicts to
our shores. For a time Penal stations were confined to
the coast districts; but as settlement extended inland,
convict camps and stockades were established up-country
—and some of those inland camps are our chief concern
in this chapter.
From 1833 to 1846, or thereabouts, the Towrang
Stockade—some six miles north-easit of Goulburn, was
the chief Penal establishment in the Southern district.
During the period there were hardly ever less than two
hundred and- fifty prisoners at Towrang—men of all
degrees of crime; truly a motley group of criminals;


not a few of whom had been “sent out” for offences
which at the present time could have been met under
the First Offenders Act, or with “the rising” at a police
court. The first Head Officer in charge over the prisoners
was Lieutenant Darley; who was succeded in 1836 by
Waddy —a very smart officer, and a keen
racing man. Lieutenant Waddy, in fact, often raced,
(and rode) his own horses and those of other owners at
the early meetings on the old Botany and Homebush
courses; and riding his horse “Frederick,” he won the
very first hurdle-race at Homebush in 1841. This officer
(Waddy) was sent to India at the-time of the Sikh War
in the early Forties, before the Indian Mutiny; and I
remember him saying on his return, to Sergeant Doyle
(the author’s brother-in-law), tha/b he had been in “the
frying-pan of Hell.” This was in the year 1845. The
Towrang convicts were, by regulation, classified into
two parties; the “light-sentence” (or seven years’ men)
being engaged on the lighter (tasks, such as looking after
the officers’ horses, and quarters; driving the Stockade
hullock teams; felling the trees along the road-line; and
so on; while the Iron-gang (comprising the fourteen-
years’ men and “lifers”) were hard at it, packing and
rolling (i.e., building) different sections of the main
Southern road between Marulan and Goulburn; making
the massive stone culverts, which have so well withstood
the ravages of time, and at such-like heavier orders of
labour. The prisoners wore a yellow-and-black uniform
of rough material, and marched in files to their work to
the rattle and jingle of their irons. A guard of soldiers
with fixed bayonets escorted the men to their allotted
toil, and stood over them at work. At day-break in the
summer, an hour later in the winter, the prisoners were
60
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


out and toiled all day like beasts of burden; their food
being generally of the coarsest—often barely enough to
keep body and soul At five in the afternoon
they were marched back to camp, and after a supper of
salt junk, damper and “posts-and-rails” tea, they were
sent to their sleeping-boxes for the night—members of
the Iron-gangs often having to sleep with their fetters
on like so many chained dogs. The convicts at Towrang
slept on the bare boards with a blanket apiece; ten men
being locked up in each box or cell. These cells were
about twelve feet square, so that the Fresh Air League,
if then in existence, might have justly protested against
the over-crowding policy of the Towrang Stockade. Of
course, the treatment of the men at those stockades
depended much on the humanity of the officers in charge,
but generally the scourge of “ discipline'' fell heavily
on a prisoner for the slightest breach of the rules. Some
of the Towrang convicts had been well brought up,
amongst them being a doctor, chemist, and ex-military
officer; while others, as stated, were doing time for trivial
lapses. But the law recognised no degrees in the free-
masonry of crime; —the coarsest moral lepers with men
of a gentler type, and raw country youths sent out for
poaching their first (and last) rabbit in the Old Country,
were herded together in a way that would have made
such men as Captain Neitenstein—controller of New
South Wales prisons—lift up their hands in holy horror.
It seemed to be the chief object of the penal system to
increase the depravity it pretended to check, and to
permit the wholesale contamination of the minds of the
prisoners. I have known men to get their twenty-five
of fifty lashes for such “terrible” (?) offences as having
a smoke, or speaking to a traveller passing by, and for


the least neglect of duty. For instance, one Charles
Preston, who had been detailed to watch the Stockade
working-bullocks at night, once got a heavy flogging for
a very small thing. Coming on daybreak one morning,
he came running into the Stockade at the risk of being
shot by the sentries, saying that he had seen the devil in
the scrub and had only escaped by a miracle. It was
only an old white pony he had mistaken for the Father
of Evil, but in his superstitious fear the poor fellow
never stopped to enquire. Charged next day with
neglect of duty he got fifty lashes as an antidote for his
“fear of the devil.”
Absconding from a road-gang or from an employer,
was one of the worst lapses, and woe betide the escapee
who was retaken. His sentence —even if he had not
committed any crime during his “furlough”—would
read much as follows, viz. :—Joseph Green, charged
with absconding from “Captain Mankiller’s Station (or,
say, from No. 9 Iron-gang); Guilty, sentenced to receive
100 lashes at Goulburn triangles —the first fifty lashes
on 10th instant; the remainder after expiration of two
days. The prisoner to be then sent back to his gang (or
.employer) ; or (sometimes), to the office, Head Super-
intendent of Convicts, Sydney. Many men preferred
having the whole of their flogging at once, as it was par-
ticular torture, they said, to receive an additional 50
lashes just as the raw wounds were beginning to heal.
If men were thought to be shamming illness (malinger-
ing)—though frequently they were really very sick—
they often received 25 lashes or more from the cat-o’-
nine-tails as soothing medicine.
On one occasion a man came in from a station on the
Fish River to report himself on the overseer’s instruc


tions, to the Goulburn bench (Captain Rossia, sen., and
Mr. Stewart) for being unable to do his work through
an internal injury. The magistrates decided he was
feigning illness, and awarded him twenty-five lashes.
In a few days the man crawled back to the station and
died there. His name was William G****r. There are
old hands yet living who can verify this matter and
others mentioned herein. I knew of several men who
got their fifty lashes for being off the premises for only
one night. One such man was Charles Smith, assigned
in 1836 to Captain Edwards, run-holder of Argyle. He
(Smith) was sent for letters to the P. 0., and did not
return to the farm till next morning. Brought before
Captain Allman, J.P., he was awarded fifty lashes for
his one night’s absence, though the man pleaded illness.
No doubt the old records, if unearthed, would show
scores of such cases. It is not too much to say, that the
word of the convict had no value whatever in the view
of the magistrates, not even if backed by a St. Peter.
The accused very seldom got the benefit of the doubt in
the Penal days. The Government floggers at the Penal
Stations were generally wretches who volunteered for
this brutal work, so as to escape the penalties of the
Iron-gang, of which they were often originally members.
The author particularly remembers two such callous
fellows, viz. : —Billy O’Rourke (the Towrang flogger),
and Black Francis —a negro —the Goulburn castigator,
from 1838 to 1841. Billy O’Rourke was a small,
wizened-looking object, but muscular, and he revelled
in his work. Before he began flogging, he would often
say to the man chained up for punishment: “Heavy
weather, byes (boys) ; heavy weather; but aisy now, sure
it might be worse.” Black Francis used to lay the cat


on with savage ferocity. He met with a sudden and
tragic end —being found one morning “as dead as a
door-nail,” in the bush near the Run of Water, with
three leaden slugs in his carcase. He used to make it
his business to inform on some “ticket-o’-leave” men
(after sometimes sharing their plunder), who were in
the habit of robbing teams of spirits, that carriers were
taking up-country. On several occasions he had “treed”
and flogged his man for the offence referred to. But at
last Nemesis overtook him, as stated, and Francis re-
signed the gentle art of flogging and everything else on
this side of the Jordan. Some of the convicts, as may be
imagined, were made of the sternest human stuff possible,
and men of'that type never flinched under the lash. On
two occasions I saw men—after undergoing, one a flog-
ging of fifty, and the other, seventy-five lashes, bleeding
as they were, deliberately spit, after the punishment, in
the flogger’s face. One of them told Black Francis “he
flog hard enough to kill a butterfly.” Old Tim
Lane—the “Receiver” of Convicts—who took the par-
ticulars of men sent down from the country to the Head
Depot in Sydney, etc., was a man of savage temper. One
of the stories told of him was that he marked his
daughter’s face with a red-hot branding-iron for an act
of trivial disobedience.
The rude cemetery where deceased convicts and soldiers
were buried at the Stockade (Towrang) is quite within
view of travellers passing along the Old Sydney-Goul-
burn Road. We remember that some 55 or 56 years after
burial, the body of one of the deceased soldiers (he had
been a cadet of a “noble” house at Home) was exhumed
and sent to England for permanent interment. Through
some property of the ground, the body was found to have
64
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


become partly mummified, and the features were intact.
Mention has been made of the term “Ticket-of-leave,”
and on this matter some explanation may be required.
Some idea of the “Writings” on a “Ticket-of-leave” may
be gained by quoting from one such document, taken
from an old record formerly in the author’s possession.
Holder of ticket: Thos. Footer; Number of ticket,
27/110; Sentence, 11 years; Date of arrival, 1830; Date
of ticket, July, 1839. Thus indicating that, under
ordinary circumstances the said Thos. Footer should be
liberated in July, 1839. His liberty, however, was
limited to the police district in which he was placed.
The “Ticket-of-Leavers” had to attend “muster” at
stated periods. A ticket was liable to forfeiture if the
holder was shown to have broken the law, or even to have
left the assigned district. The emancipists (so called in
old times) were men whose pardons, or tickets, allowed
them to settle anywhere in Australia; but they were not
permitted to leave the Country.
There was a story that Charlie S , an opulent
carcase butcher of Old Sydney (an Emancipist), offered
to build a golden gate-way at Buckingham Palace, if
Queen Victoria would grant hm unconditional liberty.
Billy N h (another Emancipist), it is said, offered
to build a golden coach, and to equip a four-in-hand
with harness, the buckles and metal of which would be
pure gold, on getting a like patent of liberty as that
sought by S . But, apparently, Walpole, in framing
his famous maxim, “Every man has his price,” should
have added the proviso, “excepting the King in Coun-
cil, and the Guardians of the Realm,” as the Golden
bribes offered by the two Australian Emancipists gave
no concern to the quarters to which they were addressed.
65
THE PENAL PERIOD.


In the next chapter we will treat of some episodes of
the convict days which came under our notice, and which
were typical instances of the Penal Epoch.
CHAPTER VIII.
Some Episodes of the Convict Times.
If some of the doings of the Penal days were properly
dramatised, as in “Robbery Under Arms, etc., they
would, no doubt, form a series of thrilling plays in
which the tragic and dramatic incidents would altogether
overwhelm the comic. But sometimes comedy, though
of a crude and sombre hue, entered into the arena of
convict life. I remember that early in the Forties, two
young soldiers at a Southern Station were coaxed by
some of the convicts in their charge to stick up some
carriers coming from Sydney. At the time, an indi-
vidual known as the “Old-man Bushranger” was giving
some trouble to the travelling public on that side of the
country. When the carriers came along they were
promptly bailed up by the soldiers, who had altered their
coats and blackened their faces, by way of a disguise.
They stood guard over the teamsters, while the convicts
robbed the drays of spirits, tabacco, sugar, etc.; and on
leaving the scene the soldiers told the carriers that they
were the twin sons of the “Old-man Bushranger.” “He
was too sick to come himself,” they said jokingly, “and
told us to take his place and give the convicts a treat.”
The carriers, of course, reported the robbery, and said
that, by the military carriage of the men who stood over
them, and by their bright arms, they believed the ring-
66
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


leaders were two soldiers. On an inquiry being held, the
complicity of the two young soldiers was successfully
proven. They were duly tried, convicted, and sentenced
to be hung. But the Regiment to which they belonged
protested against the sentence being carried out, saying
it would be a terrible disgrace to the whole Regiment if
the men —both young and inexperienced—were hanged.
So the pair were turned over to the officers of the Regi-
ment to be dealt with. After getting 100 lashes each,
and a week on bread and water, they were finally
drummed out of the service. As one of the Non-Coms,
of the Regiment remarked, The next time the Old-man
Bushranger’s sons went robbing, they did not wear the
Queen’s uniform.
The soldiers at the Southern Stockades were chiefly
men of the 28th Regiment, originally sent out from
England in charge of convicts; and I might say here,
that the soldiers, generally, disliked the occupation. In
the firdt place they thought that in being sent out to the
wilds of Australia with convicts, they were punished
equally with their prisoners. And it is scarcely to be
wondered at, that being thus separated from friends and
home, and country, many a weak-minded soldier should
have sought to drown his sorrow and discontent in the
cup that brings oblivion, at the pubs, and grog-shanties
of the early days. Soldiers, in consequence of their being
over the convicts, were unpopular in the country, and the
author has heard many an old soldier strongly deny tha/fc
he once wore the Army uniform, or had anything to do
with convicts. A similar prejudice existed on the part of
convicts and ticket-of-leave men (and women) against
free immigranlts. Some amusing “shifts” were adopted
by “Government men” to obtain removal from the severe
67
SOME EPISODES OF THE CONVICT TIMES.


Western to the Southern Stations. Hearing that Mr.
McArthur, of Camden, required shearers, several con-
victs at Pennant Hills Stockade told the Head Officer
that they had been great shearers in the Old Country;
and on this description of themselves they were sent to
Camden, for the shearing. As a matter of fact not one
of those men —several well known to the author in later
years —had ever before handled a sheep or a shears, and
at their first attempt they mangled the poor ‘ ‘jumbucks”
badly. One of them, the late Tom C ,an old Goul-
burn identity, told me that when the overseer
remarked on his (C ’s) awful bungling he replied:
“Faith, sir, the skhins of the sheep in this country are
a lot thinner than those at home/’ “Oh, well,” said the
overseer, “If you cut another sheep we’ll see if your
skhin is as hard as it was at Home.”
In spite of their bad shearing, however, all of those
men were retained at Camden, and some of them “gob
their freedom” afterwards while at Richlands (Argyle).
Mention of the Western Stockades reminds us that in
the Thirties and Forties there were Penal Stations at
Bathurst, Penrith, Bowenfels, Emu Plains, Hassan’s
Walls, Black Heath, Pennant Hills, and other places on
or near the Blue Mountains, as far as Wellington. Many
old “lags” were sent from those places to Towrang,
Wingello, and other Southern Stations, some of whom
in their “unrestricted” days became good and honourable
citizens of those districts. I have seen as many as 500
men working in irons at Pennant Hills Stockade, which
was a very large establishment. Some of the convicts at
the Western Stations were of an adventurous type of
character as the following little story may indicate: —
One day, while the Iron-gang was working in the
68
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


mountain-side near Penrith, quarrying stone for the
road, a mob of cattle came along. In running the stone
from 'the quarry, the men had made a gangway from the
mouth of the pit to the road, and, as the cattle came
along they rushed two of the last of the bullocks into
the gangway, unknown to the drovers. Two raw recruits
(soldiers) just out from England, were in charge of the
gang that day, and after a little persuasion, the new-
chum soldiers shot the bullocks. The prisoners then
went to work briskly, cut them up and salted the beef
in the hide. So, unknown to the authorities, the men
for a time had better fare than the “dog’s-meat” and
hominy they had generally to put up with. It will thus
be seen that the soldiers were not always as rigid as the
Duke of Wellington’s veterans. One of the prisoners
who had been concerned in the incident was shortly
afterwards reported for some serious breach by one of the
soldiers who had shot the bullocks. The convict in a
spirit of revenge, informed on the soldiers and men who
had been implicated; but the Head Officer was rather
amused than incensed over the story. He ignored the
man’s accusation against his fellow-prisoners, and
ordered ten more strokes to be given the informer,
saying, “the additional flogging will be for your delay
in telling about the matter.”
There were, of course, amongst the convicts, men of
the worst possible type; men who would halt at nothing
from ‘ ‘pitch-and-toss to manslaughter”; who were
capable, so to speak, of stealing the “cross of an ass.”
Of such a type was written the couplet: —
“True patriots they, for be it understood
They left their country for their country’s good.”
But there is no doubt that the oft-times inhuman treat-
69
SOME EPISODES OF THE CONVICT TIMES.


ment meted out to the unfortunate convicts was,
generally, out of all proportion to the deserts of the
great majority of the victims. Some of the tyrants of
the Penal era would have richly merited the abrupt and
summary treatment which has lately overtaken so many
merciless tyrants in Russia. Unintentional mis-
takes of trifling consequence were often assessed
as the worst of premeditated offences; and un-
fortunate men were cruelly flogged for having in some
way unaccountable to themselves, roused the ire of the
despots over them. Nor were some of the early
Governors the most lenient of rulers. For instance,
during the visit of a certain Governor, to the homestead
of a western squatter, an incident occurred which shows
how very unreasonable Caesar himself can sometimes be.
One warm day during the Yice-Regal visit, two of the
“Government men” on the place were having a swim in
a creek near the station road-way, when suddenly the
squatter and the Governor, accompanied by two ladies,
drove by in a four-in-hand. The men, taken by surprise,
thought the best thing they could do would be to remain
in the water till the visitors passed. The Governor,
however, made no allowance for the men whatever. It
was enough that they should have appeared “a la Adam”
in the water to the shocked vision of the ladies. The
culprits were brought up, and each awarded fifty lashes
for what he (the Governor) called “their infamous ex-
hibition.”
Very few of the transported female convicts were sent
to the Argyle District—though there were about a score
of those interesting voyagers, known as “The Red
Rovers” (viz. : a batch of lively females who came out in
the ship “Red Rover”), assigned out to several run-
70
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


holders and settlers on the Southern side of the country.
Some of those scarcely deserved transportation for their
small lapses; but of course there were exceptions, and
some of those exceptions at times “painted the town
red,” and gave the citizens a, proper taste of their
quality. The author once saw a batch of half-a-dozen
Red Rovers perform in Sydney, and they knocked the
police about like ninepins before they were “run in.”
It is well, however, to draw the veil of oblivion over the
blacker aspects of the convict system—the cess-pool of
immorality of which it was the cause, both amongst its
administrators (in many places) and its victims, its
brutalities, its infamous catalogue of wretchedness and
defilement. Happily that sombre epoch of our history
has passed away; passed —let us say again—to the
Inferno of the “accursed humanities.”
So, let the dead past bury its dead.
In passing, however, from this brief review of the
Penal days, we can, perhaps, realise how and why it was
that, goaded by the tyranny and tyrants of the system,
vengeance should have become the ruling passion in the
mind and soul of many a wretched prisoner; that
frenzied men made desperate by the atrocious methods
of the Penal Law, would, breaking their chains, “take
to the bush,” and deport themselves as only desperate
creatures —maddened, and soul-tortured —may.
Nor does it seem strange, moreover, that whatever
attempts were made by the convicts to express their
feelings in song, or verse, should have been generally of
a doleful character, such as the typical song of the con-
vict days which ends this chapter, viz. :
71
SOME EPISODES OF THE CONVICT TIMES.


Jim Jones at Botany Bay.
(Air —“Irish Mollie, Oh!”)
O, listen for a moment lads, and hear me tell my tale—
How, o’er th' sea from England’s shore I was com-
pelled to sail.
The jury says “he’s guilty, sir,” and says the judge,
says, he—
“For life, Jim Jones, I’m sending you across the
stormy sea;
And take my tip before you ship to join the Iron-gang,
DonU be too gay at Botany Bay, or else you’ll surely
hang—
Or else you’ll hang,” he says, says he—“and after
that, Jim Jones,
High up upon the gallow-tree th’ crows will pick your
bones—
You’ll have no chance for mischief then; remember
what I say,
They’ll flog th' poachin’ out of you, out there at
Botany Bay.”
The winds blew high upon th’ sea, and th’ pirates came
along,
But the soldiers on our convict ship were full five
hundred strong.
They opened fire and somehow drove that pirate ship
away.
I’d have rather joined that pirate ship than come to
Botany Bay:
For night and day the irons clang, and like poor galley
slaves,


We toil, and toil, and when we die must fill dis-
honoured graves.
But bye-and-bye I’ll break my chains: into the bush
I’ll go,
And join th’ brave bushrangers there—Jack Donohoo
and Co.;
And some dark night when everything is silent in the
town
I’ll kill the tyrants, one and all; and shoot th’ floggers
down:
I’ll give th’ Law a little shock; remember what I say,
They’ll yet regret they sent Jim Jones in chains to
Botany Bay.
We may take many of the stories told of the convict
system cum grano salis. But, nevertheless, some of them
were vouched for by men who were the victims of those
barbarities. Such, for instance, was the story related of
the lady of one of the early Governors. It was said this
lady, during the flogging, would send the nurse-girl in
charge of the baby, with a note to the officer to tell the
flogger to give the culprit another dozen strokes “to
please the baby.”
CHAPTER IX.
Old-Time Bushrangers.
It can be said with absolute truth that the first bush-
rangers in New South Wales were born of the convict
system. In 1830 a “Bushranging Act” was passed by
one of the old Legislative Councils to cope with the bush
73
SOME EPISODES OF THE CONVICT TIMES.


robbers and outlaws of that time. Under this Act, any-
one carrying arms might be arrested without a warrant,
and robbers and housebreakers were adjudged to suffer
death three days after conviction. The law gave no
quarter, and the bushrangers always tried their
best to reciprocate and waged war to the death.
But the law won in the end. No less than
thirty-four (34) of those marauders were hanged
in Sydney in one year, viz. : 1822, and several of
them fought as well as their manacles allowed them,
with the executioner on the scaffold. Some of those
unfortunates were humorous wretches, though the day
of their execution would scarcely seem to have been a
fitting occasion for looking at matters in the lighter vein.
One of them, kicking his boots off, said he’d “make a
liar of his mother,” as she always said he’d die with his
boots on (i.e., be shot down in the bush for his mis-
deeds). The notorious “Jew-boy” (Davis), who was
executed With four others at Darlinghurst in the Forties
for highway robberies and outrage in the Murrirundi
and Maitland districts, asked the hangman for a smoke
before his “send-off,” saying he’d like to have a whiff
before he left for Kingdom Come. Those men were
generally escaped convicts of the most desperate type;
and after forming large gangs, they raided the early
settlements, plundering and burning the homesteads,
driving off the stock, and often shooting the settlers.
One such gang —over fifty in number —were attacked at
a place near Campbell’s River, not far from Rockley, by
a company of settlers and soldiers who had banded to-
gether for the purpose. The convicts were worsted in
this encounter, but most of them managed to escape, and
soon carried on their depredations again. To cope with


those outlaws, a party of soldiers and police were sent
out from the old Goulburn Station, in 1831, under the
command of Captain L. McAlister, then Chief Officer of
the Southern District, and who was the author’s in-
formant of several of those episodes. Captain
McAlister’s party comprised Sergt. Doyle, and Privates
Mclndoe, Mugglestone, Graham, and another soldier of
the 28th Regiment, and they were to co-operate with
the Bathurst forces. The outlaws had now broken up
into small gangs of three or four each, the better to
elude capture. The Goulburn party came up with one of
those gangs at Shooter’s Hill, near Oberon, and in the
fight that followed, a shot from one of the bushrangers
wounded Captain McAlister in the thigh, and on hearing
the officer groan, the outlaw sang out “Ah! I believe
I got you that time, Officer,” unguardedly putting his
head out of the cover at the same time, to note the effect
of the shot. The Captain immediately fired at the
exposed “mark,” shooting the convict through the head.
Then going up to the slain man, he said, “Yes, you hit
me, old man, but not half as hard as I’ve hit you.” The
other two men of the gang surrendered.
On another occasion the Goulburn police party men-
tioned attacked a gang of desperadoes near the Fish
River (Jenolan) caves. It was growing dark —this was
after some two hours’ firing—and one of the police and
one of the bushrangers had been badly wounded. The
ringleader of the outlaws shouted out, asking the soldiers
to put the fight off till next morning. To this, strange
to say. Captain McAlister assented, as their (police)
ammunition was running short. A messenger was sent
for a fresh supply, and when it came, one of the party
suggested that they should go and surprise the bush


rangers in their camp. The Captain said, “No; he had
passed his word, and would keep it, even with the out-
laws.” Early next day, two more of the convicts were
shot down, another was mortally wounded as stated, but
the last man refused to surrender. He was soon disabled,
however, and on Sergeant Doyle going up to secure him,
the outlaw begged that Doyle would shoot him. “Oh,
no!” said Doyle, “I’ll never kill a brave man in cold
blood.” “Well, if you won’t,” said the bushranger, “I
suppose the weight of my hind-quarters will break my
neck,” alluding to the belief that he would be hanged.
The fierce Bathurst gang were at last “wiped out.”
Several were shot, others returned to the Iron-gangs, and
eight executed one morning at the old Bathurst Gaol,
before breakfast. The cold-blooded murder of John
Kennedy Hume (brother of the explorer) in 1840, was
one of the most atrocious deeds committed by the old
order of bushrangers. Three outlaws, viz. : Whitton,
“Scotchy,” and Reynolds, had attacked Mr. Grovenor’s
homestead near Gunning, but were beaten off, having
met with a resolute resistance from Mr. Grovenor and
his station-hands; and from Grovenor’s the robbers came
into the town of Gunning. At the sound of the firing,
Mr. Hume hurried over to Gunning from his home some
three miles distant. He went into the store of a man
named Cooper, at the township (Gunning) to get some
ammunition, and as he was coming out, was accosted by
Whitton, and told to put down his gun. This Hume
refused to do, and Whitton immediately fired; and as
Hume, badly wounded, ran for cover, the miscreant fired
again, and poor Hume fell in his tracks. This was a
most tragic and terrible affair, the more mournful as
i;he murdered gentleman was of a most genial and


benevolent nature, deservedly liked and esteemed, alike
by rich and poor. It will be remembered that J. K.
Hume, as recorded in our annals, accompanied his
brother, John Hamilton Hume, on the second exploring
trip inland in 1817. On leaving Gunning the three
bushrangers went to Narrawa, or Fish River Station
(Gibson’s). Here a man named Fry was overseer, and he
(Fry) was working outside the premises when the outlaws
rode up. Whitton, hailing Fry, asked, “Is your name
Fry 1 ?” “Yes, it is,” said the overseer. “Well, then,”
said Whitton, “we’ve come to fry you in your own fat,”
and with the words fired. Happily the shot missed its
intended billet, and Fry rushed into the house and
barred the door. Luckily there were a couple of double-
barrelled guns and plenty of ammunition on the
premises, and those guns were loaded by one “Dorney
Jack” (an old shepherd), the only other hand on the
place, while Fry kept firing. Presently a shot from one
of the outlaws knocked a splinter off one of the slabs of
the hut, and as the flying splinter struck “Dorney Jack,”
the latter, in distress, cried out, “My God, I’m shot.”
At this exclamation, “Scotchy,” one of the outlaws,
thinking Fry had been hit, rushed up to the house to
investigate, and Fry promptly fired and hit “Scotchy”
so hard that he begged his companions to put him out
of misery, which they did by putting a bullet into his
brain. Reynolds then “raised the siege,” leaving their
dead comrade in crime, where he had fallen. Several
parties of police and civilians were soon hot on the track
of the scoundrels, and Sergeant Frier of Yass, with
another trooper and Mr. Rawdon Hume, came up with
them at “Grabine” on the Abercrombie, some thirty
miles from Narrawa. In the shooting that ensued.


Reynolds was killed, and Whitton, seeing no chance of
escape, surrendered. The body of Reynolds was strapped
on a pack-horse, the police intending to bury the dead
bushranger at a place near William Tranter’s, at Bigga;
but as they were coming along in the dark, through the
bush, the jolting of the journey loosened the straps, and
Reynold’s corpse rolled off the horse. The police,
returning on their tracks, found the body half a mile
back at the foot of a small hill. A gruesome joke was
made of the circumstances, it being said that Reynolds
could escape, dead or alive. Whitton was taken to
Sydney, tried there and sentenced to be hanged at Goul-
burn Gaol. The author and his brother (W. McAlister)
were in Liverpool at the time, and saw Whitton and the
hangman sitting in a one-horse cart driven by a police-
man. Whitton, in fact, was sitting on his coffin, and was
heavily chained and leg-ironed, and two mounted
troopers guarded the cart. Green, the hangman, was a
bad-looking old fellow,all pockmarked and knock-kneed.
Whitton was duly hanged in the yard of the Goulburn
Gaol, and thus perished a vile monster in human form.
At the outset of their career, Whifcton’s gang numbered
nearly a dozen, but several of them were shot or other-
wise accounted for by parties led by Mr. Henry O’Brien,
of Douro, and others. The noted “Jacky Jacky” (or
John Westwood) was another escaped convict who left
his mark on our criminal records. One night in the
summer of 1842, the author, in company with the late
James Ritchie and Charles Calver were camped near
Berrima. We were just about to have tea, when a
thickset fellow came over from the shadow of the scrub,
with a gun on his shoulder. He very soon let us know
he was “Jacky Jacky,” and, of course, we made him


very welcome, having no alternative, as we were un-
armed. On learning the author's name, he hoped I was
not related to one Colin McAlister, whom he described
as a sanguinary tyrant, and said if he ever caught this
individual, he (J.J.) would “skin him alive” for his
(Colin’s) alleged ill-treatment of convicts. Jacky asked
us for some tobacco and provisions, and decamped
after about two hours’ interview, and that’s the first and
last the author saw of the great “Jacky Jacky.” Jacky
had been first assigned to Mr. King, of Gidleigh, in the
Thirties, and we believe was later with Sir T. A. Murray
at Winderadeen. On absconding from his employer,
'Jacky’ tookupwith one Paddy Curran (or Britt), and on
this villain objecting to the sticking-up of Mr. Chisholm’s
at Kippilaw, which Jacky proposed, a great row ensued.
Curran said Mr. Chisholm did him a good turn and he
would never stick up his benefactor. One word begot
another, and Jacky shot his comrade, and the latter
soon afterwards was obliged to give himself up through
the pain of the wound. He was tried and hanged at
Berrima. “Jacky,” as oft related, was taken at Grey’s
Inn at the “Ploughed Ground,” some ten miles from
Berrima. A carpenter, an ex-convict named Waters,
seizing his opportunity, knocked the outlaw senseless
with a blow from a shingling hammer, and Jacky was
taken to Sydney, tried, and sent to Port Arthur (Tas-
mania) for life. He escaped from the chain-gang at
Port Arthur, and at the head of a number of “choice
associates perpetrated many robberies and outrages in
Tasmania. Two Goulburn Blacktrackers, viz. : Jimmy
Hamilton, and Burra Burra Jimmy—the former a
Strathaird naltive—were taken over to Tasmania to help
in the hunt after Jacky and Co. After great difficulty


tiif* outlaws were re-taken and Jacky Jacky and eighteen
other criminals were hanged at Hobart Town Gaol in
1846. Jacky was, no doubt, a desperate reprobate, but
one thing stands to his credit, viz.: that he never
molested a woman, nor would he see one insulted; and
he several times prevented Curran from insulting
females. Ere concluding these references to some Old-
time Bushrangers, we will refer to another incident
in which Captain McAlister took part, and
which had nearly escaped recountal. While near
Berrima, looking for bushrangers, in 1832, the Captain,
one night, quietly left his party, and made his way
to the camp of a teamster—one of Lithgow’s ticket-
of-leave men. The bushrangers in those early days
very often came to the carriers’ camps at night,
and Captain McAlister was well aware of the
fact. He told the teamster that he was very sleepy,
having been up two nights, and said he would lie down
under the dray for an hour or two. If, in the mean-
while, the bushrangers came around, the Captain told
the man to make tea for them, and when they were
having it, to give the tarpaulin over the dray two or
three shakes as a signal, and he would come out and
arrest the robbers. The bushrangers came to the camp
as expected, and at the carrier’s invitation were having
p feed (having stacked their guns at the foot of a big
gum tree), when, at the signal agreed on, Captain
McAlister came from his hiding-place, and got between
the outlaws and their firearms. Presenting his pistols
he said he would shoot the first man that moved, and
then ordered the teamster to handcuff the prisoners.
That night the Captain marched the captured brigands
away to Picton, and they were duly dealt with.


Walmsey, Webber, and "Bold” Jack Donoboo were
three more of the desperate old-time convicts who "took
to the bnsh,” and played havoc with life and property.
Donohoo made up in ferocity what he lacked in size, as
he was only a "handful,” some sft. 4in. in height. He
was shot at Bringelly, in 1833, by Sergeant Gumbleton.
The author's brother-in-law (Sergeant Doyle), and
Private Mugglestone already referred to, were members
of the party that were out on Donohoo’s track. While,
no doubt, the Bushrangers of the early days out-rivalled
the Gardiners, Gilberts, and Ben Halls of modern times
in the attributes of pure animal passion and ferocity,
they lacked the mobility (to use a military term) and
horsemanship, and alert intelligence of the modern
gangs. But of course the old-timers’ opportunities of
learning bushcraft and riding-science were very limited
compared with their successors in crime. Both m com-
mon, however, had the one grand essential bushranging
trait —a contempt for any principle that ran counter to
unbridled rapine, plunder, violence, and revenge. Still
there is something in the view that the early outlaws
(the convicts) were driven by the ill usage of their mas-
ters and gaolers to take to the bush, and under kindlier
treatment there would have been a greatly reduced roll-
call in the number of those unhappy creatures, who went
to their doom as the condemned outlaws of old times.


CHAPTER X.
The Aborigines.
The ethnic age has passed away—
The primal race is with the dead.
And, visitants of yesterday,
The White “invaders” rule instead.
The aborigines of the Tablelands are now almost an
extinct race, and it is the general opinion that their de-
cay has been hastened by contact with the white man’s
mode of life, and more especially with the white man’s
liquor. In the Author’s boyhood three fairly numerous
tribes roved the Argyle district, and sometimes bands of
Lachlan blacks visited the Goulburn side. Those visits
sometimes resulted in a pitched battle, which started
over the abduction of one or two young gins from the
Argyle natives, who were generally the victors in
a fight—either on their own ground or inland. The
three local tribes referred to were the Mulwarrie (Long
Water), Tarlo, and Burra Burra tribes. The Burras
the most war-like of the three tribes—had their “Maer-
ing, or country, from the Abercrombie to Taralga and
Carrabungla. In the early days those blacks were very
troublesome to the settlers, and often attacked isolated
s epherds, and speared cattle and horses on remote parts
of the runs. But when they became acquainted with the
speedy and deadly effects of the “Caba-wunda’s” (white
man s) firearms, they grew much less venturesome. The
82
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


author remembers seeing many great corroborees (big
meetings —either war dances or festivals) in youth.
Once, in the Abercrombie district, I came across a great
camp of 'the Burra Burras when they were getting ready
to go on the warpath. They were running about from
one gunyah to another, exchanging boomerangs, trying
their skill at throwing spears, and so on. As, boylike,
I was curious about such matters, I offered some tobacco
and a few pennies for a spear and a boomerang but it
was no use. “No! sell 'em nothing; sit down alonga
Burrowa —steel 'em gin away.
It happened that some predatory Lachlan Blacks
had surprised the gins’ camp in the early morning (a M
was their custom) and had stolen the lubras.
Next morning I saw them start for the Lachlan after the
enemy —to fight the foe, and retaliate by annexing
two Burrowa “damsels” —(ugh!) and, perhaps, retake
the abducted “beauties” (?) There was no fear of the
Lachlan blacks attacking the Burras on their own (B’s>
ground. The Abercrombie country was too rough for
the inlanders, and “the wild Blackfellows” (as the
Argyle men called their enemies) would be speared in no
time from the hills and rocks. Those of the aborigines
who obtained the “half-moon' brass plates issued to
some of the more noted chiefs, were very proud of those
marks of favour from the “big pfella guberment.
Yarraginny, Kugolgong, Mulwarrie Tommy, and
Miranda (Chief of the Burra Burras) were all possessors
of those famous plates. We believe Mr. McKenzie, of
Taralga, is in possession of the plate owned by Mulwarrie
Tommy (Chief of the Cookmai or Mulwarrie tribe).
Old Miranda, chief of the Burra Burras, was in his
younger days a great warrior, and was said to have been
83
THE ABORIGINES.


one of the fierce aborigines who committed several mur-
ders and burnt out several settlers in the Bathurst
district in 1831-32. On Miranda’s death in 1849, there
was a great “wake” and burial service by the tribe. As
this event was a typical aborigine “wake” and obsequies,
we will describe Miranda’s burial, etc., as being fairly
illustrative of their funeral customs. The blacks, first
of all, made a round ring or circle—ploughing the
ground up with sharp sticks, and they then made little
fires around the ring, so as to keep away the “Debbil-
debbill, they said. The dead king’s body was put in a
sitting posture in the centre of the circle—the arms, with
the palms of the hands pressed close to the head, being
bound to the body with cords of stringy-bark. The gins
had their faces smeared with pipeclay; knots of white
pipeclay like balls in their long, snaky hair, and several
had made little cuts in their heads with their stone
hatchets. Their lamentations were enough, one would
think, to wake the dead in reality, if that were possible.
After the “wake” had lasted a day and a night, prepara-
tions were made for the burial. Large antheaps, as old
bushmen will remember, were the favorite “cemeteries”
of the blacks, and in such a cemetery old Miranda was
buried. The last time the Author saw this grave it was
nearly level with the surrounding country, but it was
originally a “sugar-loaf” shaped antbed. It is about a
mile and a half from the Paling-yards, Abercrombie.
The blacks made a round hole in the antbed, and put
Miranda s body into this grave in a sitting posture.
This practice is best explained in their own words—viz.,
“Sit down, blackfellow, jump up white fellow,” this
idea, or superstition, being, apparently, a spiritual
impression of ancient origin. The dead king’s body was


wrapped in his ’possum-rug, and his weapons (spears,
etc.) were buried with him. We were often cautioned
by old aborigines not to go near the blacks when they
were burying their dead, as they objected to the attend-
ance either of strangers of their own race or of whites at
those solemn rites. The Burras fenced old Miranda’s
grave in roughly with forks and long saplings for rails,
and then on all the big trees around they cut the old
fellow’s native “coat of arms” ; and some of them marked
the trees with a representation of the tattoo marks they
bore on their arms and breasts. This, I suppose, was to
proclaim the fact that they were present at the (to them)
historic burial. A great burial place of the Wollon-
dilly tribe was the hill above Lansdowne House (Brad-
ley’s), near Goulburn, where old Kugolgong and others
were buried after the fashion just described. Near the
Kenmore Hospital there is a little red hill, where the oft-
described man-making ceremony (or “bora”) was per-
formed. The prospective adults had to undergo a very
severe ordeal before being admitted, by native law, to
man’s estate. Like the hermits of old, they observed a
long period of solitude, during which their food was
very coarse and scanty ", they had, particularly, to avoid
the sight or company of females, and had to submit with
stoic fortitude to a very severe “birching” by several
elders of the tribe. But their chief torture was the
knocking out of one of their front teeth, in the case of
each individual. To effect this, a sharpened kangaroo
bone was held firmly against the “doomed” tooth, and a
strong Marra (black) would punch the molar out by
repeated blows on the kangaroo bone, with a stone
hatchet. ‘Within a few days of this event, the young
hermits were brought into the camp, and a big “bap


tismal” fire was lighted. The young men just “created”
were allotted places one side of this fire, and the other
Side was sacred to the gins. But the day after the fire,
the new men were eligible to seek sweethearts, and, if
they could do so, had full liberty from their own tribe
to steal a bride from another clan. But, as we have
seen, the other tribe generally resented this kind of
sweethearting. The aborigines were often the first mes-
sengers to the early Penal stations of deeds of blood
committed by some convict or other in the lonely bush.
The bad tidings would be carried by native “runners”
from camp to camp, till it reached the authorities. It
was in this way that the murder of Roach, the overseer
at Clifford’s Creek in 1830, was first notified to the Goul-
burn police. Two men, named White and Mooney, were
found guilty of having committed this crime, and were
gibbetted (hanged in irons) at Goulburn the same year.
They remained hanging, bleaching in sun and rain, until
Governor Bourke on visiting the settlement, in 1833,
ordered the burial of the skeletons. The gins, by way of
lamentation at the death of their husbands, used to cut
their heads, and then rub a mixture of pipeclay and ant-
hill clay into the wounds.
It is evident that prior to the coming of the whites,
their moral laws, both as regards criminal and social
offences, were very strict, and, in domestic matters,
humane. It was the custom of both the Wollondillys
and Burras to bring an accused blackfellow before the
whole assembled tribe of men for trial. If found guilty
of a grievous offence , the culprit was painted white, and
“boondied” (clubbed) to death. If an accused refused
to appear before the tribal court, he was outlawed, and
could be killed by anyone. If the criminal escaped, his


nearest male relative—brother or cousin—would be
punished instead ; and thus it is clear the blacks answered
Cain’s question, “Am I my brother’s keeper?” in the
affirmative. The “darkies” were great believers in the
natural remedy of “bleeding” in many forms of illness,
and were acquainted with the medicinal qualities of
eucalypti leaves, and other plants and herbs. The
Australian aborigines differed, so far as the Author is
aware, from other savages, in their treatment of the
insane. While the Red Indians, Maoris, etc., treated
insane people with the utmost kindness, our blacks
generally killed such creatures as soon as they saw
symptoms of insanity.
As to the native weapons —the fighting and hunting
spears were barbed at the end with pieces of iron-bark,
tipped to a point. Those pieces were glued on with
wattle and other gum, and the gum grew as hard as
Portland cement. The Author has known a spear to
penetrate the stiff bark of a gumtree at 150 yards’ dis-
tance, and further. The spear-thrower (or Woomerah)
was much used by the Argyle tribes. As all Australians
know, the blacks use two different boomerangs one in
war and attack, and the other in play. I believe it was
from conning over the shape and “properties” of the
boomerang (a piece of originally green ironbark, myrtle,
or myall, curved and formed by the natives’ ingenuity)
that Sir Thomas Mitchell got the idea of making his
famous propeller for seagoing vessels. In starting to
shape a boomerang, the piece of timber selected was first
drawn through the warm ashes of a smouldering fire, so
as to draw the sap out of the wood, and when drying
was scraped to the required article. I knew only one
white man capable of making a serviceable boomerang.


The Knulla Knullas,” or "Boondies,” were ironbark
sticks, with a heavy nob on the end, used in killing
’possums, etc., and sometimes in tribal warfare. At
stalking game, such as wallabies, emus, wild turkeys,
etc., the “yabbas” were in their element. A hunter
would creep on his quarry—if, say, a turkey, under covfer
of a large bush, which he had fixed around himself in
such a way as to make it seem the bush was the bush
and nothing more. The bush-clad hunter would
patiently creep on the bird till within striking distance
and then a boomerang would hiss through the air, and a
lot of blackfellows and their gins and piccaninnies would
have supper on half "grilled’” turkey. But do not
imagine the ladies” were allowed to sit down with their
lords and masters at the same time. No \ the gins
feasted on the scraps the men threw to them over their
shoulders as a drover sometimes feeds his dog.' The gins
were the slaves and drudges of blackfellow life. The
blacks were very clever in the water, and sometimes
caught wild duck in a singular way. One or two young
blacks, as I have often seen them, would hide as dusk
came on, among the rushes along the river bank, at
likely "duck” reaches of the stream. While the shoal
of birds were swimming about near the blacks’ hiding-
place, one of the men would dive silently, and keep below
the surface of the water for a little while, holding a reed
or straw in view of the game. If a bird came within
reach of the trapper’s hand, it was snapped immediately.
As many bushmen, besides the Author, have seen this
performance, we would have no dearth of "corrobora-
tors” if they were needed.
The tribes, prior to the coming of the whites, had most
of them clearly marked dialects, and inland people found


it hard to understand the Tablelanders or the Coast
tribes. But the greater communication brought by the
invasion of Europeans caused a wider currency and
general adoption of various words and phrases. For
example, such words as Baal (no or wicked), Budgeree
(good), Cobbawn (large), Yabber (food), Waddy (wood),
Boori (thunder), Kerang (gumtree), Nerang (small),
Cowra (feathers), Nangery (to camp), etc., were common
expressions to the Lachlan, Coast, and Argyle abori-
gines. The blacks had, apparently, a musical ear for
nomenclature. Take, for instance, such words as Cobba-
dong (Moon in the water) ; Wombeyan (big kangaroo);
Wollondilly (water trickling over rocks) 3 Durran Durra
(a messenger) 3 Currabungla (stone in the water)3
Wingecarribee (flight of birds) 3 Mulwarrie (long water) 3
Gullen (a swamp) j Uabba (go fast) 3 Yulong (a timbered
hill), etc. Many of the blacks were of a humorous turn,
and one or two of our acquaintance even made attempts
to manufacture Blackfellow “poetry” out of pidgin
English. Mr. Charles Styles (son of the Bungonia Pio-
neer) has favoured us with a few verses of semi-aboriginal
style, strung together by a lively darkie. It is, seem-
ingly, a love-ballad, and runs as follows: —
Me went out t’ other day aloonga bush with Missus,
Met Cobbawn fellow there; cover her with kisses—
Say him lips like honey 3 say him lub her well 3
Pyalla, you come down: Baal, you Debbil Debbil
I say Murri country this —everybody civil:
No one chance to do amiss 3 only Debbil Debbil.
She say, "No, baal 3 Marra gon’ away 3 never want
to meet you 3
Just bin think it go an’ see someone like to beat you 3


Baal, you Marra very bad—gammon love me well,
But when Debbil Debbil comes take you down t 7 h —ll ;
But when Debbil Debbil comes you go out to fight him.
Then I run into your arms when you say you sight him” :
Murri—big fine country this—every body civil ;
No one ever do amiss—only Debbil Debbil.
The spiritual affairs of the aborigines in the early days,
as now, gave considerable anxiety to the devoted mis-
sionaries, as may be seen from a perusal of church
records. As far back as 1842 that pioneer cleric, the
Revd. Benjamin Hurst (then stationed at Goulburn)
reported as follows to the Methodist “District Meeting”
held in Sydney:—“The past year has been one of great
“anxiety to the Missionaries on this station, in conae-
“ quence of the apparent fruitlessness of their labours.
• • • • So inveterate are the prejudices of one
tribe against the other .... so powerful their
“ superstitions, and so frequent their quarrels, that until
‘ the Gospel shall be brought to bear upon their hearts
‘ ‘ there can be but little hope that any attempts to induce
“ them to associate peaceably for any length of time
“will be successful. But, perhaps, the most formidable
obstacle in the way of their conversion is their connec-
“ t'ion with the worst class of Europeans.” Alas ! simi-
lar causes as those deplored by that truly Christian
minister (Revd. B. Hurst) have continued to hasten the
decay of our once virile and athletic aborigines.
Many of the Blacks were models of human symmetry,
and in this connection we remember that the late Dr.
Waugh, after taking the measurements of “Yarraginny”
(chief of the Wollondilly tribe), in 1848, expressed the
opinion that such another perfectly formed man would
90
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


scarcely be found in the British Army. Yarraginny
was a sable Apollo.
As elsewhere mentioned two of the Argyle natives
viz., Jimmy Hamilton and Burra Burra Jimmy, assisted
in tracking the notorious “Jacky Jacky (Westwood)
and other escaped convicts in Tasmania, in 1844.
We might devote many chapters to the Aborigines and
their annals, which seem to connect with the stone age,
their ethnic tragedies, humours and customs, their wea-
pons and their wars. But the Aborigines of the Table-
lands have departed, and a cairn or pillar might fitly be
built to their memory marked with the inscription
“WE, the Australian Aborigines, are no more. Civili-
zation killed us, and dug our grave: may a kindlier
Civilization flourish o'er our bones.”
The Infamous Lynch.
The series of atrocious murders committed by the
infamous Lynch, who was hanged at Berrima Gaol in
1844, form about the most blood-curdling chapter of
horrors in our history. It is said, to begin with, that
Lynch murdered his own father (a convict like himself),
though of this no absolute proof was tendered. But the
crimes Lynch admitted perpetrating were enough for a
myriad of demons to have consummated. He confessed
to having killed at least nine persons —most terrible,
cold-blooded crimes. His victims were the whole family
of the Mulligans —father, mother, son, and daughter —
all well known to the Author; a man named Fraser and
his son ; one Ireland (better known as “Cobbawn Jack”);
a black boy; and one Landrigan, his last victim, a new-
91
THE ABORIGINES.


chum labourer; a record against which the fratracidal
deed of Cain, the first murderer, is but a fleabite. The
weapon generally used by Lynch in his murders was a
shingler’s tomahawk, and it was his boast that he could
kill a man with a single blow. In the Author’s boy-
hood, he saw Lynch (in 1842), on several occasions, when
the murderer (a wiry, muscular fellow, about sft. 6in.
in height and lOst. in weight), was employed at a job of
fencing, along with an old ticket-of-leave man, one Mat
Redmond, at Mr. Hillas’s “Bunnaby” Station; and, by
the way, we have often thought that Mat Redmond must
have been born under a lucky star to have escaped the
murderous attentions of Mr. Lynch. Before coming to
Bunnaby, Lynch had finished his period of assignment at
Mr. Atkinson’s, near Berrima. There he had for mate
a youthful convict, one “Boy Tom,” whom it was alleged
Lynch murdered. At all events, Lynch and “Tom”
left Berrima in company one day, and “Boy Tom” was
never afterwards heard of. But we hope, though the
chances are all the other way about, that “Tom” didn’t
fall, like so many other unfortunates, a victim to the
Monster under review. This was some six weeks before
Lynch came to “Bunnaby.” After finishing his con-
tract there, Lynch took the track for Sydney. On ! the
road he fell in with “Cobbawn Jack” (Ireland) and a
blackbdy, who were in charge of a horse team belonging
to the late Mr. Thomas Cowper (brother of Sir Charles
Cowper), which was bound for Sydney with a freight of
cheese and bacon, etc., for sale. Lynch journeyed along
in their company, and one night at their camp at Razor-
back, near Picton, under the pretence of looking for the
straying horses of the team, he took the blackboy with
him, and at the first opportunity killed the lad with a
92
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


single blow of his deadly tomahawk. Returning to the
camp, he induced “Cobbawn Jack” to also join in the
“search” for the horses, and at a favorable moment gave
the man his deathblow. He then burned the two bodies,
and, yoking the team, the miscreant made tracks for
Sydney, intending to sell the property and pocket the
proceeds. Near Liverpool, however, to Lynch’s sur-
prise, he was met by Mr. Cowper, the owner of the team.
To Cowper’s inquiry, Lynch said that Ireland and the
boy had gone into the bush after whip-handles, and he
was only driving the team until they overtook him. Mr.
Cowper, strange to say, accetped this story, and on
leaving, told Lynch that he would expect the team at a
certain place in Sydney on an appointed day. Lynch,
however, travelling day and night, got to Sydney long
before the date appointed, and having quickly disposed
of the team and produce, he started up country again.
At Bargo Brush he fell in with a teamster named Fraser,
and his (Fraser’s) son, and on the second night of their
acquaintance, the miscreant killed both father and son,
the lad in the scrub, and the father while sleeping; and,
as in Cowper’s case, Lynch then appropriated the
bullock-dray and freight of which he had so dreadfully
deprived poor Fraser. A few weeks after his last terrible
crime Lynch made his way to the Berrima district, going
to Mulligan’s farm at “The Ploughed Ground.” The
Mulligans, though previously acquainted with Lynch,
had no idea what sort of a fiend they were entertaining;
but, alas, they were not to remain long deluded, for
Lynch, in one night, killed every member of the family;
but we will not dwell on the horrible details of those
diabolical crimes. The murderer collected the bodies of
his four victims, and burned them in one heap, giving
93
THE ABORIGINES.


them a dreadful mid-night funereal-pyre. The ashes of
the bodies thus cremated were scattered by Lynch over
the vegetable garden adjoining the premises, and, hor-
rible to relate, when Lynch was arrested some eight weeks
later, a crop of potatoes was springing from the soil
manured by the bones of the slaughtered Mulligans. The
Author was well acquainted with those ill-fated people,
the Mulligans, during their residence in Taralga, some
two years before the date of the murders. The owner
of the farm at the “Ploughed Ground,” was told by
Lynch that the Mulligans had left on a trip for Ireland,
and believing the tale, he agreed to transfer the lease of
the place to Lynch, never imagining that he was dealing
with their murderer. Lynch fell in with his last victim
(Landrigan) at the Woolpack Hotel, Sydney, and en-
gaged him ostensibly to work at the farm at the
“Ploughed Ground.” The bloody deed was done at a
place since called, in memory of the crime, “Murdering
Creek,” about a mile south of Mittagong. Landrigan
was sitting on a log smoking before their camp fire (they
had just had the evening meal), when Lynch, on some
pretext, went behind him, and the next moment poor
Landrigan was weltering in his gore, having received
two crushing blows per medium of the tomahawk.
Lynch said that Landrigan was the only man to whom
he dealt two blows of the weapon, and this was because
Landrigan, who was a clever wrestler, had that evening
challenged Lynch to a friendly tussle. On the day of the
murder, however, the two men had called at John
Chalker’s public-house, about four miles from Murdering
Creek, on their way to Berrima, and some incidents that
occurred at Chalker’s helped, later, to bring home the
crime to the perpetrator. Landrigan had worn a cab-
94
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


bage-tree hat, the rim of which was broken, and the
housemaid at Mr. Chalker’s remarked jokingly to
Landrigan, “I see the cockatoos have been picking holes
in your hat”; and it was the identification of this hat
for one thing which helped to incriminate Lynch. We
might state that we received several of those details from
our late esteemed friend, Mr. Chalker, the then licensee
of the hotel. Lynch, contrary to his usual custom, for-
got or neglected to “cremate” Landrigan’s body, and so
left direct evidence of his crime to be found by those who
were fated to seek it. Some weeks after the tragedy a
carrier, on his way with a freight of wool to Sydney,
camped one night close by “Murdering Creek.” As his
dog was barking furiously about a heap of bushes down
the Creek, the man was led to investigate the cause of
the dog’s excitement, and to his horror discovered the
battered remains of the murdered Landrigan. Sergeant
Frier (the officer by the way concerned in the capture of
Whitton, the old-time outlaw), then stationed at
Berrima, was notified of the finding of the body, and
accompanied by Mr. Chalker, went to Mulligan’s farm,
and there arrested Lynch on the charge of murder.
Lynch, when arrested, was wearing Landrigan’s hat and
belt—the latter having its late owner’s name woven in
it—and this in itself made out a strong case against the
miscreant. After a fair trial —too fair for such an in-
human monster —Lynch was found guilty, and sentenced
to death by His Honour, the late Sir Roger Therry, and,
to the great relief of the community, was hanged on the
Berrima Green, in 1844. But in thinking over the
terrible doings of such monsters as Lynch we cannot
refrain from expressing the view that a dis-
criminating method of detecting, and consequently of
95
THE ABORIGINES.


segregating “Born” or instinctive murderers, should be
made an element of instruction in our medical, and, if
possible, in our juvenile schools.
CHAPTER XI.
Goulburn in the Forties.
“Strange to me now are the folk I meet
When I visit the dear old town;
But the native air is pure and sweet
And the trees that o ershadow each well-known street,
As they “balance” up and down,
Are singing the same old songs.”
(Longfellow)
In conning over the early history of the town and cities
of the Tablelands, it will be seen that, like many other
centres, Goulburn owed much in the formative years to
the commercial genius of members of the Hebrew race.
In fact, the term “as solid as a Goulburn Jew” almost
threatened at one time to pass into a proverb, but that
is long ago, and it is well nigh thirty years since the last
Jewish funeral wended its solemn way to the pretty
(Hebrews') cemetery at the foot of the Governor’s Hill.
In the early ’4o’s, Goulburn had grown to be, if not the
loveliest, ’ at all events, one of the liveliest “villages of
the plain,” and boasted several hotels, about a dozen
stores (mostly run by Jews), a branch of the Commercial
Bank, managed by a most kindly and worthy citizen—


the late John O’Sullivan, sundry blacksmiths, butchers,
and cobblers, a nailmaker in one Donald McAllister, a
braw namesake of the Author; and began to have a
practical acquaintance with primary education and re-
ligious knowledge. The late Rev. Dean Sower by (E.C.),
Father Brennan (R.C.), William Hamilton (Presby-
terian), B. Hurst and H. Boyce (Wesleyan), were
resident Christian Ministers, and the Jewish
community had purchased a block of land for the
building of a synagogue. The synagogue was not erected,
however, and the land bought for the purpose is now
covered by the South Goulburn Public School. A small
boarding and day school had been opened in 1842 by a
Mr. Sandon, in Grafton Street, North Goulburn, and
soon afterwards a Church of England denominational
school was established by Dean Sowerby the first
teacher being a Mr. Riley. The old township had by
this time (1840-45) lost its grip of the situation: the
Head Quarters of the Penal Police had been removed,
and as Mat Healy had also left to start a hotel in Sdyney,
the glory of the first settlement had departed with its
oldest inhabitants, and now the New Town, a mile dis-
tant across the plain, was springing up in a position
more convenient to the trend of the traffic —then making
south. There was no such thing as kerbed footpaths, or
any real attempt at street-forming in those days; and as
for Progress Committees, each man was his own organiser
and committee. Goulburn in the earlier Forties was
simply a little bark-roofed frontier-town, a tablelander s
outpost —midway between the wild and woolly inland
and the “Big Smoke” by the sea. A few wandering
Arabs had come and gone, but there was no lack of
permanent newcomers. Moses and Benjamin, the pioneer


storekeepers, on the decline of the old township had
opened new premises, later called the Old Argyle Store,
on the site of the present Imperial Hotel. Another
sturdy Jew, viz., Sam Davis, shortly before the starting
of the Argyle Store, had erected an establishment where
now stands Beegling's butchering premises, and Mr.
Davis had for book-keeper, and later, partner, one Phil.
Dignam, who afterwards became somewhat famous as
the “John Norton" of early Goulburn, and member for
Argyle. In 1843, Solomon Moses—another of the early
Goulburn Jews—opened the Royal Hotel, and the
Author in that year (1843) brought from Sydney a load
of dressed timber for the doors and architraves of the
hotel. One of the cutest citizens of that time was a
hustling Hebrew named Joe Collins, who ran a “Cheap-
Jack" shop in Auburn Street, and made it pay. Joe
Collins seemed to act on the axiom that money makes
money, as he once charged a friend of the Author £l2
for the loan of £2O for twelve months—6o per cent,
interest ; but, of course, there are always two parties to
a deal. The original John Collins, of Goulburn (saddler),
started about the same time as his namesake Joe. Other
interesting shopkeepers were “Old" Jacob, the Jew, as
this good Hebrew was irreverently called to distinguish
him from Tommy Jacobs—the cordial-maker; Dan
Duggan, whose bootshop stood on the site of the present
popular “Ollie" Pursehouse’s barber’s shop; and
speaking of barbers, there was Siikman (another Jew)
who trimmed the long beards of the bushmen in artistic
style. He seldom troubled our hair, however, as that
was worn as long as it would grow, adding much to the
“Texan Jack” appearance of the bush dandies of the
time. Another energetic storekeeper of Old Goulburn


was Solomon Cohen, whose place stood where Mr. Sevan’s
store is now situated. Sol. Emanuel and Sons, one of
the best mercantile firms of bygone years, were opening
their first stores m 1845, next door to Sam. Davis’
premises on the site of Meyer’s Arcade, nearly opposite
the Hibernian Hotel. Yet another Hebrew merchant
was David Davis, whose shop was nearly opposite the
stationmaster’s present residence in Sloane Street. It
will thus be seen that the “Wandering Jew” was well
represented in Goulburn’s early mercantile affairs.
Amongst the Gentiles then running stores, Messrs. Bull
and Woodward were the chief representatives. Mr.
Woodward, a few years later, built and opened the Com-
mercial Hotel, Market Street. In 1843, Jack Cole—the
ex-sawyer Boniface—“took up his blanket,” and de-
parted, having sold out to Mr. Mandellson, who set
about building the large hotel at the corner of Sloane
and Clinton Streets. This hotel, which rivalled the
Royal, had for many years the first call on the Braidwood
and Monaro traffic. ' Other old landmarks were Andy
Newman’s “Tom and Jerry” shop—where only colonial
wine and beer were retailed; Brodies and McKellar’s
“Salutation” Hotel; Alick Long’s “Caledonian,” part of
which premises is Mr. Hollis’ present dispensary; Charlie
Payne’s “Horse and Jockey,” on the site of the present
Bank of New South Wales; Simon’s “The Chequer’s”
Inn; Moran’s “Coach and Horses,” opposite Topham’s
“The Woolpack Hotel,” Grafton Street; Duggan’s (now
O’Halloran’s) Hibernian Hotel, and O’Brien’s “Harp
Inn,” now kept by Mrs. O’Leary. Several of those
houses—erected, some of them, over 60 years ago—are
yet standing as good as new, but not so their original
owners and builders. Time has dealt more hardly with


those brave mortals than with the monuments of their
handiwork. Longs Caledonian, later kept by Owen
Boyle, and James Summergreene, was a great resort of
the sporting men of those days. In 'the long room in
the Caledonian, which did duty as a boxing hall, the
redoubtable Black Parry, the Haddigaddis, Dave White,
and Jim Donnelly, erstwhile light-weight champion of
New South Wales, were amongst the men who “put the
gloves on” as the Author remembers, whilst the O’Don-
nells (John, Terry, and Ben) were noted wrestlers.
On a rough estimate, there were probably 1200 in-
habitants in Goulburn in 1848, and the number was
being almost weekly added to by newcomers from down
the country, and by liberated ticket-of-leave men, who
were now fairly numerous in the town. Bradley’s
Brewery, which, with Bradley’s Mill, had been erected
in 1836, had now a competitor in Thorne’s Brewery, built
by George and Dan Thorne, on the banks of the Mul-
warie, in 1843. Bradley’s Brewery, in 1845, was being
run by the late Mr. N. C. Phillips—a gentleman much
esteemed by the citizens of town and country—and Mr.
Phillips had for his brewer the late Mr. Blackshaw—
(father of the late Major Henry Blackshaw), a good man
at the business. The beer was then brewed from malt
which was supplied by the surrounding farmers at 1/3
per bushel. It took two months for the beer to brew fit
to drink, but it was then very good quality. The town
could now also boast a small hospital, and the nucleus
of a library the latter being “housed” on premises near
the Royal Hotel, lent by Peter McCann (tailor). This
library was a kind of mutual literary interchange—sub-
scribers each putting so many books into the common
collection. And it will be seen that such co-operation


was greatly required when we remember that in those
times it often took six months for the latest work of
science, poetry, or fiction, etc., to arrive from Europe
per sailing vessel. Mr. W. R. Riley and Mr. D.
Kennedy, sen., are, we believe, the only surviving mem-
bers of that first Goulburn Library and Reading Room.
There were four Medicos then practising —Drs. Yarnold,
McDonald, Hanford, and Waugh—the founder of the
famous baking-powder. Of Dr. Hanford and Dr.
Waugh, rhe Author, like all Goulburn and Argyle folk,
never heard aught but pleasant tidings. They were two
honest, clever doctors —a credit to their high profession;
and two more benevolent citizens never healed a broken
head, or consoled a broken heart. We have had many
able medical men in Goulburn since, and have also had a
few charlatans with whose course of treatment some of
the regular practitioners strongly disagreed. The late
H. B. Watts (an old Goulburn identity, and schoolmate
of George A. Sala and Alexr. Dumas, Junr.), comment-
ing on a dispute between two local doctors, quoted:
“Who shall decide when doctors disagree
And soundest casuists doubt, like you and me.
But happily Goulburn doctors of the “kill-or-cure order
have been few and far between.
The First Goulburn Dramatic Society*
The first dramatic company started on life’s mimic
stage in 1844. Their theatre was sometimes a room at
the Commercial Hotel (Woodward’s), and sometimes the
plays were held in an up-stairs hall at O’Brien’s Harp


Hotel—so it will be seen that the “poor publican” was
allowed more elbow-room in his own house then than
nowadays, and was a kind of public godfather to the
poor player.” Amongst those early Thespians were
Messrs. Jack Holland, Bob McGowan, Lachey Todd (or
Lachlan McGowan), Jerry Webster, and Louis Jones—
all now we believe deceased; and last, but not least, a
gentleman yet very much alive, viz. : Mr. J. T. Walker
(saddler). Messrs. Holland and Robert McGowan were
the leading comedians, with Mr. Walker and Mr.
Lachlan McGowan as their “understudies.” Mr. L.
McGowan, in after years, played many roles in the best
of theatrical company in some of the leading theatres
of Europe and America, and before audiences much
more critical than his original Goulburn “houses.” Mr.
Holland painted the scenery of the first plays on rough
canvas bagging. They were men of resource, those early
players, and well understood the twin axioms that
“Necessity is the Mother of Invention,” and “All the
World s a stage, and all the men and women merely
players.” They believed in the adage:
Laugh and the world laughs with you ;
Weep, and you weep alone:
For the sad old earth has little of mirth
But plenty of grief of its own.”
A few years later the late James J. Kennedy, and
Sydney McGowan came before the footlights, and those
two gentlemen made their mark, like several others of
the early Goulburn actors, on the dramatic stage in
various parts of the world. Mr. Kennedy will be re-
membered in the leading roles of “Con the Shaughraun” j
O Callaghan on his last legs,” and other dramas.* In


the next chapter we refer to some of the men who may be
justly considered the leading characters of Old Goulburn.
CHAPTER XII
Goulburn in the Forties —(Continued).
The “Boiling Down” Works.
Moses and Benjamin started the first Boiling-down
works in Goulburn in 1844, and in reference thereto it
may be interesting to review the causes which led to the
starting of the business at Yass, Goulburn, Bathurst,
Annandale, Bark Huts, and other places. Before the
great drought of 1838 to 1843, there had been an inflated
state of prosperity, land and stock being at boom prices,
and labour —owing to the convict supply very cheap,
and thus big employers were able to obtain large returns
and to work their properties at small cost. The up-set
value put on the land was altogether too high for the
needs and monetary position of most of the community,
and this was clearly shown when the country faced its
first real industrial crisis during the drought. Every-
one’s property was mortgaged up to the last bramble, so
to speak, and penury and ruin were knocking at every-
body’s gate. Several of the leading Banks closed their
doors, and the failure of the Bank of Australia —an un-
limited liability concern —added the last straw to the
people’s distress. The fall of this institution involved a
great many of the largest property-owners in the country,


and at the time no money-lender in England, or out of
it, would lend a brass farthing to the New South Wales
Government, so desperate did our position seem in the
eyes of the world. The great W. C. Wentworth sought
to stem the tide with a Bill legalising liens on wool and
mortgages which gave some relief, and a Lottery Bill
(also at Wentworth's suggestion) was passed to help the
distressed shareholders of the Bank of Australia—the
lottery tickets being £4 each, and the prize a big station,
well stocked—the winner’s name of which we have for-
gotten. But the real saviour of the country was Henry
O’Brien, of Douro Station, Yass (already referred to),
who, inspired by wha/t he had read of results in Russia
and elsewhere, hit on the boiling-down idea, and started
the country on its legs again. This was about eighteen
months after the breakup of the drought, and as stock
were again rapidly increasing, and the market glutted,
a Henry O’Brien was badly needed to find a way of
making money out of the surplus stock, and to restore
the credit of the country. There were generally from
fifty to a hundred men employed at the Goulburn works
gust below the Governor’s Hill), and from 100 to 200
bullocks and 1500 sheep were killed and treated weekty.
These were cut up and put into the huge boiling vats,
steam being the reducing agent. The tallow from those
Boiling-Downs was sold in Sydney from £2O to £25 per
ton. The firm charged the stock-owners £1 per head for
reducing the stock to tallow, or otherwise took the hides,
tongues, and oifal as commission. A Mr. Myers was the
Goulburn manager for Moses and Benjamin, and that
firm made a big fortune out of the business. Pastoral
affairs as we have seen, were soon bounding along merrily
again, till in 1846 there were over eight million sheep
104
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


Rev. Dean Sowerby.
Rev, Dr. McAlroy. Rev. Wm.Ross,MA
John O'Sullivan (Banker.)
N. C. Phillip. Charles H. Walsh.
Some Prominent Southern Citizens of the Fifties.




and 1,400,000 horned cattle in the colony, and Mr. Joe
Bull, the first Southern auctioneer of any fame, soon
found plenty of clients in the merry ranks of the busy
buyers and sellers of the informative class. “Joe”
was only a rough and ready knight of the hammer, but
he suited the times, and the times reciprocated so well
that Joe very soon made his fortune.
Some Orthodox Anecdotes.
As was to be naturally expected in the formative years,
the clergy of the early days could sometimes chronicle
strange surprises.
One day, on a country tour, the late Dean Sowerby
called at the house of Mrs. F s,at P r, and stated
that with the lady’s permission, he would hold divine
service at the place on the following day. “Divine Ser-
vice !” said the woman, “What’s that at all?” “Oh,”
said the Dean, amazed, “Divine Service is simply giving
homage to God, and to offer prayer to Christ who died
on the cross for sinners.” “He died, did He?” said
Mrs. F s, “Why, half the world might die, and we
wouldn’t know anything about it out here. What did
He die of ?” There were many in those times, who, like
Mrs. F s, had little acquaintance with Christianity;
and others whose Church experience was not as agreeable
as it might have been. By way of emphasising the latter
remark we will render here another little incident.
While residing at the Gap in 1839, the Author’s people
had a visit one day from the Rev. Father Therry, whose
name and work will ever hold a high place as that of one
of the chief pioneering clerics of our history. On the


day his Reverence called, there happened to be on the
premises an old ticket-of-leave man, named Patterson—
who had formerly been in the Iron-gang at Windsor and
Pennant Hills. Father Therry said he was going to hold
service at the settlement in the course of a few days, and
hoped all would attend. “Well, Mister,” said Patterson
gruffly, “I’m not going to trouble Church again if I can
help it. When I was in the Iron-gang down the country
we had a bellyful of Church, I can tell you. Old Sam
Marsden (Rev. Samuel Marsden) used to preach at us
a hurricane one day, and the next used to get us fifty
lashes for sneezing or coughing while he was talking.”
It is hardly remarkable in view of such alleged ex-
periences that many of the old “lags” should have no
friendship for such services when fifty lashes was '
penalty for sneezing in Church. “But,” said Patterson,
as a kind of set-off, “I believe Church, mind yer, is a
good thing for kids and wimmin, an’ I might go some
day again when I'have time.”
But a word on the pioneer pastors of Australia. What
praise from human lips ? What monument wrought by
human hands can do their hallowed memories justice ?
The names and deeds of those great and good men—the
Ministers of Truth and Hope, in the days of stress and
darkness—should be lisped by the children in their
school days in reverent regard for those heroic early
pastors. For
“To ever relieve the wretched was their pride
And e’en their failings leaned to virtue’s side.”


The First Goulburn Show*
This —if Show it could be called—was held at Dan
Thorne’s —now called “The Towers” —in 1846. Francis
McArthur’s fine draught horse “Jangler” got the ribbon
in his section ; and the same owner’s blood stallion “Gold-
finder” won in his class, the only other competitor being
a horse of Captain Turner’s (Gurrundah). Tommy
Wade, and Ben Stephenson, of Crookwell side, whose
brands were respectively, “WADE,” and “BEN, ’ were
also horse exhibitors. Those brands were in very large
letters along the ribs, and once seen could never be
forgotten. Tom and Joe Erby, of Darby Murray’s
Flats, had also some heavy draughts at that first show.
George and Dan Thorne showed some splendid buffaloes
of an imported strain. Messrs. Chisholm (Wollogorang),
N. C. Phillips (Bradley’s Estate), Thos. Gibson (Bland)
and Broadribb —the Kenmore overseer (Lithgow’s) were
the main cattle and sheep exhibitors. I remember that
Dean Sowerby was much interested in an exhibit of
saltbush from the Billabong district, Murray Kiver.
Andy Newman had the publican’s booth, and did a fair
trade throughout the day—for people were not all total
abstainers in 1846. Proceedings were enlivened during
the afternoon by a bit of a free fight, started by an old
ticket-of-leave man named Carney Mulligan, from Rich-
lands. In good old Donnybrook style he pulled off his
coat and dragged it along in the dust, challenging any-
one who “darred” (dared) to tread on the tail of it.
The challenge Was promptly accepted, and soon stirrup-
leathers (with stirrups attached) were pulled out, and


fists, whips, and sticks flying with great impartiality.
The police and some of the more sober citizens Quelled
the row, and that’s all I remember of the first Goulburn
Show. In fact, I was only an intermittent visitor to the
town in those years, but generally managed to attend the
races, shows, and big sales when opportunity offered.
The second Show was a more pretentious affair. This,
including the first ploughing match, was held on Brad-
ley’s ground, Garroorigang. The Nosworthy Brothers
of Merrilla proved themselves the champion ploughmen
on that and other occasions. Arising out of
the first ploughing contest, several Braid wood
men competing, challenged the Nosworthys and
Nicholls, another Argyle ploughman, to a match. This
was for £15 aside, each of the Braidwood ploughmen
being allowed £3 expenses to Goulburn. The two Nos-
worthys—William and Philip—and their mate, Nicholls,
won easily, and no more was heard of the champion
ploughboys of Braidwood. We think it would be in the
interests of agriculture, and of rustic sociability to renew
ploughing matches at Goulburn, adding an axeman’s
carnival, and other rustic contests.
Some Court Reminiscences
No doubt the few remaining early birds of Old Goul-
burn will yet recollect the time when the Court was held
in the present Argyle Inn, before it was opened as an
hotel by Mr. McKellar. The first brick gaol was built
by Mr. Sinclair, in 1845, and the triangles were in the
courtyard of the old prison; and there “Black rrancis,”
elsewhere spoken of, exercised his muscles by laying the


cat on the white law-breakers. What a short shrift
would this negro flogger have had in such a State as
North Carolina (U.S.), for instance, and, without going
to extremes, we think it is not conducive to racial re-
ciprocity to allow the black to whip the white, either in
a corrective or other sense. Often in full view of the
public executions of condemned culprits were carried out
within the old gaol’s precincts. One of the last of those
public or semi-public “send-offs” to eternity was the
execution of Talbot, for the murder of a man near
Binalong. The Author witnessed Talbot's execution.
The culprit and hangman were dressed in white, and the
snowy surplice of Dean Sowerby—Talbot’s clerical ad-
viser—added another chaste tint to the sombre tragedy
being consummated by the law.
Some “ Skylarking ” Memories.
But we prefer to dwell on the comic rather than the
tragic elements of Old Goulburn. We had, for instance,
some famous battles, town versus country for possession
of the blazing tar-barrel on the Queen’s birth-night.
Next day, like the veterans of Waterloo, we could show
our raw wounds, which we boasted as marks of high in-
trepidity. Both sides generally claimed the victory, but
we think, with due respect to the townsmen, that the
“fire-fighters” from the country had a bit the best of it
on the whole. Grinning through a horse-collar we con-
sidered the last thing in joviality. So it may be seen
that our ideas of humour, like the black sugar of the
Forties, and the manners of the Sydney hoodlums,
needed a bit of refining. Black Simon, a half-caste


nigger, was the champion grinner. He had a mouth
nearly big enough to hide the National Debt in—if it
could be hidden—and thus “laughed to scorn” the other
competitors, who could only grin from ear to ear.
A Memory of the Races of J848.
The Races of 1848 produced much hilarity, and a good
edition of rough-and-tumble pugilism as was usual at
old-time meetings. Speaking from memory, I recollect
Hurley’s “Tommy Tittle” got away with the big money.
Henry Badgery had two good horses, viz. ; “Wait-
awhile” and “Lady Morgan”; and another winner was
a Burrowa horse called “Jimalong Joe,” that, ridden
by a blackboy, pulled off two races. Captain Edin-
borough, of Wollogorang, was another good sportsman of
those days, and his horse “Artful Dodger” was a good
performer in mile heats. The “watercart” horse “Baw-
ley,” belonging to the late William Simons, sen., won
two hack races at that meeting. This old stager (Bawley)
deserved to have his mortal semblance mummified at
death if that were any honour—to celebrate his equine
feats at the Races. Bawley was used in the watercart or
at other heavy work, often on the morning of his race
After a brisk rub down he was sent on to the course, and
I doubt if in a hack race, or hurryskurry he was ever
beaten. A row started after the second race. The side
of the publican’s booth was carried away in the conflict,
the boards and canvas spattered with blood and hair, as
the thick of the battle raged around the drink depot.
To quell the melee, a trooper rode at the fighting crowd
with drawn sword. He was quickly unhorsed, and one of


the mob galloped away with the fallen hero s sword and
threw it behind a stump. Old Corney Mulligan was
again in the thick of the "scrimmage,” and that night
he was hardly recognisable through the sticking-plaster
that covered his hard old nxug. But he gloated over his
doings in the fray. "I nearly kilt two or era, he said,
"before they downed me. I loike t’ be in it. Who
the two were, and whether friends or enemies, Corney
neither knew nor cared.
Such in patches, was Goulburn in the Forties. Rude
and rough may have been our building up of the social
superstructure of the city that was to be. Horse-play
and semi-aboriginal humour marked our jokes, and
pastimes —but we were free from the false-pride and
hypocrisy of modern "Mrs. Grundy” j and had no use
for the impoverished ideals of a later period and scene.
Now, though
"New forms arise, and different views engage,
And superfluous lags th’ veteran on the stage,”
in spirit I see again the rollicking boys and merry girls
of the Forties, and
"Were Atlas I, then I or he
Would lift th’ callous Past and be
Again a boy in reckless glee
In the halycon days that used to be”
—ln the budding Spring of Goulburn town.


CHAPTER XIII.
Currabungla.
It is an old saying that three shifts are as bad as a
fire; but m spite of the proverb, the Author, with other
members of the family, in 1846, made their third essay
at home-building, having shifted in that year to the old
•cattle-station of Currabungla, Laggan district, residing
there from 1846 to 1850. Currabungla—which is the
aboriginal term for “big stone in the water”—is some
thirty miles northward as the crow flies from Goulburn,
and at the time belonged to Captain McAlister. It was
at the Captain’s wish, in fact, that we moved over—on
the understanding that the Author and his brother
William would purchase the property when circum-
stances permitted. Nearly twenty years passed, however,
before events so shaped themselves— not, in fact, till
1864, in which year we purchased some 2500 acres of
Currabungla, and two sections of the adjoining run of
Redbank. I was now (1846), in my sixteenth year, and
like other hard-delving country youths, could build a
rough-hewn house, do my day’s ploughing or reaping,
kill and dress a sheep or a bullock, tackle a buck-jumper ■
and could ride as straight through timber in a brumby
or kangaroo-hunt, as most bush younkers of my day.
As regards social “affiinities” I could make a rude
attempt at a bush song, get in the road of the “gal-
lopers” at country dances, to which we would often ride
20 miles or more twice a week; or if a “wake” was on


which happily was not often, as few people died in those
days, would be found one of the most serious and sym-
pathetic of juvenile mourners. And though country
wakes are naturally sad occasions, yet it would sur-
prise townsfolk to know the number of weddings which
directly sprung from the meetings of amorous youths
and maidens at those country wakes. Perhaps if an
“unco’-guid” Parliament had existed in those days, it
would have taught Cupid better manners, and made it
a capital offence for his “victims” to be found within a
mile of the death-chamber. There were not many people
then residing in the Currabungla district, but each was
a host in himself, possessing the best qualities of the
Australian bushman. For they were the Hogans, the
Rankins, the Warnes, the McLeans—names synonymous
with friendship, hardihood, bushcraft, and hospitality.
They were the hard-riding comrades of my youth-hood’s
halycon days —
“When we stalked the tallegalla, and brought tIT
dingo down,
And moonlighted through th’ forest and the glen,
Till it makes my old blood tingle, and I weary of the
town
Recalling shades departed—those joys and dangers
then” —
Till I almost feel indeed that I’m something of a
renegade to have so long foresworn the old pur-
suits and places.
Hospitality ? How vividly that sacred term brings
back again across the vista of sixty years the memory of
our next-door neighbours —the Hogans, of Currabungla.
Old Mrs. Hogan (later Yardy)—the very embodiment of


kindness, seemed to constitute herself the foster-mother
of all “the way-farers that came along. Unlike the old
Scotswoman, who as a hint to “longwinded” visitors, we
are told, used to say, “You had better make a good
breakfast, Archie, as the Lord only knows where ye’ll
get yer dinner th’ day”—no one was ever known “to
wear their welcome out at Hogan’s. With Mrs. Hogan
it was dinner-time for the public at large all the year
round, and at any hour of the day or night “the stranger
found a welcome and the grasp of friendship’s hand.”
But there’s generally a fly of some kind in the “oint-
ment” of life.
A Story of Cattle Duffing*
The good people of Currabungla were several times
troubled by the attention of cattle-duffers, and just
previous to our arrival an episode happened in which
the criminal resources of those gentry were shown.
Several of the neighbours had mysteriously lost some
of their cattle, amongst them being the late Mr.
Archibald McDonald (grandfather to the McDonald
Bros., of Argyle, and W. A., well-known in pastoral
circles) who was then residing at Clifford’s Creek, some
three miles from the Author’s abode. Within a quarter
of a mile of our house there was a small roughly-built
stockyard, or rather a killing-yard, used by neighbours
named Fox—two ticket-of-leave-men, who had a small
holding near by. After losing eight or nine head of his
stock, which I remember were all black cattle, and of a
very quiet breed, Mr. McDonald grew suspicious of the
Foxes, and made it his business to watch their move


ments. One night, the Foxes, as McDonald suspected,
came to his run, and drove five or six of his bullocks,
being all the time watched by McDonald (who was a
very old man) from a respectful distance. At last,
however, his feelings overcame him, and going up to the
yard, he sang out, “Good-night, boys, don’t be
frightened, it’s only old Archie; but what are ye about
with my cattle ?”
Caught in the act, one of the Foxes took up his gun
intending to kill the old man, then and there, but the
other interposed, and said he knew a better plan. That
was to make a prisoner of McDonald, and charge him
before a magistrate with having killed their (Fox’s)
cattle in their own yard—the yard being used at times
by the neighbours with Fox’s consent. With this aim
in view they took their prisoner to the hut of one Alfred
Morrell —watchman for Mr. George Hillas, who then
owned the adjoining station—and told Morrell their
cock-and-bull story of finding McDonald in their yard
skinning a beast of theirs (Fox’s).
Morrell knew something of the capabilities of the
Foxes; and, on the robbers saying they intended to take
McDonald to Goulburn for trial, Morrell said he would
accompany them —his real object being to apprise the
magistrates and police of his view of the matter. This
was the more necessary, as McDonald was a Highlander
speaking very little English. At daybreak the Foxes
got their horse and cart, and started with their prisoner
for Goulburn, Morrell riding along with them. Thafc
night they reached Rhyanna station, then owned by
Captain Chatfield; and Morrell lost no time in com-
municating- with Mr. Carey, the overseer in charge.
Carey, who understood Irish, spoke in that tongue to


McDonald, and the latter related the true facts in
Gaelic—the languages being almost identical. Carey
sent for the police, ostensibly to give McDonald in
charge, but when the officers arrived, the Foxes —the
real culprits —were handed over. They were duly tried
at the Berrima Assizes, and were found guilty ot stealing
McDonald’s cattle. One got “life” at Port Arthur, the
other was sentenced to fifteen years at Norfolk Island.
So it will be seen that the robbers got a proper “Roland
for their Oliver.” The carcase of the bullock mentioned
was hanging up on the gallows in the small yard when
the Author’s people came to Currabungla a fortnight
after the event.
A Rascally Watchman.
At that time Mark Hillas owned “Tyrl Tyrl,” and the
late John Warne—so many of whose posterity are now
flourishing citizens of Argyle —had “the Springs,” a run
which embraced the site of the present Crookwell town.
Another early settler of Crookwell district was old
Philip Longworthy, who used to drive his cattle on foot
through Swallowtail and the Mittagong Hills, down to
Campbelltown for sale. At the same time John Hillas,
part owner of Tyrl Tyrl and Bunnaby, had another run
at Myangle Creek, where he had in his employ one John
R d, engaged as night watchman over a flock of
sheep. As this man was considered trustworthy, he was
also given the duty of storing, and portioning out the
rations to the men employed both at Tyrl Tyrl and
Myangle, and he embraced the opportunity to “feather
his nesfc” by docking the supplies, and pilfering sheep


skins, which he in part sold, and exchanged for goods
with a travelling hawker. At last a Scotch
shepherd named Ferguson, who camped with
R d, grew suspicious of the latter’s honesty.
One day, Ferguson shammed illness, and asked R d
to mind his (F.’s) sheep, while he went to the head
station (Bannaby) ostensibly for medicine. Ferguson
apprised the Bannaby Overseer, a man named Rabbit,
of his suspicions of R d, and they concocted a plat
which would surprise R d and his accomplice, the
hawker. As the hut at Tyrl Tyrl had a loft, it was
arranged that at the hawker’s next visit Rabbit should
come over and hide in the loft, while Ferguson again
feigned illness, and so they would together catch the
robbers in the act. As the signal for action, the phrase
“The man above knows all” was agreed upon, and at the
third repetition of the word by Ferguson, the Overseer
was to come down from the loft and arrest the robbers.
Accordingly, Ferguson again fell sick on the eventful
morning, and the watchman (R d) agreed to take the
sheep out, saying as he went, “I’ll return early to see
how you’re getting on.” Rabbit duly arrived, and took
up his post in the loft, and about noon the hawker made
his appearance with his cartload of boots, knives, etc.
Seeing Ferguson lying down, the hawker inquired about
his sickness. “Ah, Mon,” said Ferguson, “I dinna ken
wha’s wrang wi’ me —but The Man Above Knows All.”
Soon afterwards R d came in, and to his inquiry
Ferguson gave the same answer —“The Man Above
Knows All.” Bye-and-bye the watchman and the
hawker went to a hollow tree some 200 yards from the
hut, where, the wheat and skins were “planted,” and a
bag of wheat, and bundle of sheepskins were given to


the hawker, R d getting a few shillings and some
tobacco and knives in exchange. The pair came back
to the hut to load the hawker’s cart with the plunder
when Ferguson called out the warning for the third
time, and down came Rabbit from the loft armed with a
double-barrelled pistol. Under the Overseer’s charge
the two conspirators were taken to the Goulburn Lockup,
and finally R d was sentenced to a term of seven
years’ penal servitude at Norfolk Island, and the
hawker got five years on the roads.
A Bush Tragedy.
Some four miles from Currabungla there is a place
known as “The Irishmen’s Station,” which, in the
Forties was owned by two brothers—north of Ireland
men—named Barclay. A Strathaird convict—one Joe
Green—had “taken to the bush,” as it was called, and
it was reported that he was prowling in the vicinity of
the “Irishmen’s Station.” One night the Barclays were
awakened by a great clamour made by their dogs, and
thinking that Joe Green was about to make a “descent”
on the place, the brothers armed themselves and came
out to investigate matters. They - presently saw the
figure of a man standing by the stockyard, threatening
the dogs with what they thought was a gun, and one of
the brothers immediately fired. The shot was fatal, as
the man died within a few minutes. Instead of being
the redoubtable Joe Green, the victim turned out to
be an old shepherd who had lost his way in coming from
an out-station of Hillas’s. This sad event preyed so
much upon the feelings of the Barclays that they soon


left the country, and it was twenty-five years before the
4 ‘Irishmen’s Station” was again occupied. In another
chapter the Author describes his meeting with Joe
Green (the unwitting cause of the tragedy referred to)
under peculiar circumstances, many years after the time
of the sad occurrence.
William Mount joy.
Amongst the more interesting order of wayfarers
whose acquaintance the Author made while at Curra-
bungla was William Mountjoy, a travelling tinker—the
maker of the rivets and bolts that fastened the two con-
victs to the rock at Pinchgut, as will be remembered by
readers of our convict history, for the alleged murder of
the wife of a soldier. A loaf of bread and a bucket of
water were left just beyond the reach of each man, prc
bably to tantalise them the more when the pangs of
hunger and thirst consumed them. The poor fellows
slowly wasted away, literally starved to death in their
irons, and the carrion-crows bye-and-bye picked their
bones.
As will be seen from such examples, the New South
Wales penal authorities of those days had little to learn
in the way of atrocious devices for the punishment of
criminals; for, allowing for the enormity of the crime
committed by the two convicts, the law should have been
above the commission of unnecessary tortures. Mount-
joy, though then (in 1847) over eighty years of age,
was a wonderful man physically. He was 6ft. Gin. in
height, and as straight as a gun-barrel, and able to do
a good day’s work. He claimed to be the heir to some


earldom, which we believe was a fact, but as the Author
was always very democratic in his leanings, he never
took the trouble to verify the claim. Indeed, since the
inglorious fate which overwhelmed Wentworth’s bill to
create an Hereditary Legislature in 1856, Australians
have grown more democratic with the passing years, and
the vast majority of our people have little friendship for
Lord Manners’ famous “exhortation” —
“Let Laws and Commerce, Art and Learning die,
But leave us still our old Nobility.
The Currabungla of to-day with its smiling home-
steads, its sporting clubs and social graces, is a very
different Arcadia to the wild, scrub-girt and dingo-in-
fested country of our boyhood.
CHAPTER XIV.
Some Memories of Early Droughts and Floods
We suppose everyone is more or less susceptible—
according to the amount of electrical energy or response
possessed by the individual—to the influence of atmo-
spheric changes: at all events the earth is full of self-
created “Human Barometers,” who allege they can fore-
tell weather changes by their pains and aches and the
state of their liver, just as consistently as the Wragges,
Lenehans, and Nobles, and the other professional
weather “prophets”; and many will recall the amusing
skit once published to the effect that the Misses R


(daughters of a late distinguished scientist of U.S.A.)
said: “They could always tell when it was going to rain
by the way Pa’s corns were aching, and on those days we
never let him go to the Observatory without his
umbrella.” But we had no Meteorological Bureau in
’39-43, when the first drought of which the Author had
any experience was raging; and we think that visitation
held its own in point of injury done to production, enter-
prise, and general progress against any other of the sub-
sequent “worsts on record.” But as a set-off in favour
of the bad drought of the ’3o’s, it may be noted that
there were very few inhabitants then in the far West;
consequently we escaped the harrowing tale of distress
which was recounted in the drought of 1899-1903 of the
outback region.
In ’39 the drought was at its very worst. All the
way down the Wollondilly to its junction with Paddy’s
River, it would have been almost impossible to find
water enough to drown a rabbit in—there being only a
few muddy waterholes here and there. Cowpasture and
Bargo Rivers, and the creeks abodt Picton and Liver-
pool, etc., were lower than I have ever since seen them.
The water for domestic use, in fact, was brought from
Cataract Creek to Picton —some seven miles —on the old-
fashioned slides drawn by a horse, or two bullocks, and
“Adam’s Ale” was really at a premium. Stock and all
sorts of bush animals, kangaroos, wallabies, dingoes,
opossums, wild cats, “gohannas,” etc., perished whole-
sale on the Tablelands. We had good cause to remem-
ber the drought of ’39, for amongst other assets, the
Author’s father lost two teams of working bullocks—a
considerable loss in those days, as carrying was the main-
stay of many up-country settlers. I had my first taste


of the ancient business of “bullock-punching” in the
dead of the drought, in February, ’39, when I went
along with the driver of my father’s team (one Mick
Brennan) to Lithgow’s sheep station, Willough-gum
Hill, Argyle, whence we were to take a load of wool to
Sydney. I will never forget that first journey with
“the Ship of the Desert.” The face of the country was
almost as bare as a billiard-ball, and the sun glaring
down as hot as the first batch out of the “devil’s oven.”
People were indeed put to the hardest straits during
those black years. “Valparaiso Flour,” I remember,
was in considerable demand on account of its cheapness.
This was a compound of bad flour, ground rice, and corn-
meal sent over from South America, as ship’s ballast, or
little better; and it made the local flour go a bit further
from the standpoint of domestic economy. Bread was
then 4/- (the double loaf) in Goulburn and up-country,
and 2/6 per loaf in Sydney. Previous to the starting of
Bradley’s mill at Goulburn in the ’30 s, Kinghorn’s wind-
mill at Maxton was the chief motive power for grinding
the wheat; and the Author on several occasions brought
quantities of wheat there, to be ground into flour for
home use. As the windmill depended on the wind to
make it “go,” we were often obliged to wait for weeks
at a stretch, before the gale blew hard enough to put
the works in operation. The windmill was, therefore,
at times like a sailing vessel becalmed in the Tropics,
and we deserved our flour when we got it.
Bunging the Mill* etc.
At that time, “Bunging the Mill,” as it was called,
was largely practised on the stations. This was simply


the grinding of wheat in a little steel grinding machine
(or mill), shaped something like an old-fashioned sausage
machine. The mill had two handles, and the convicts
and labourers ground their week’s supply of flour,
generally on Saturday afternoons, by “Bunging the
mill.” Several of those little grinding mills were always
on the farms or at the convicts’ quarters, and though the
men were supposed to grind enough for a week’s supply
at one time, it often happened that the lazy or improvi-
dent would find themselves short at the dinner hour,
and would then have to grind enough for a meal, and
mix and cook it within the hour. During the drought
those of the squatters who could do so, sent their cattle
to Monaro, and other favoured parts, but as there were
no railroads then, numbers of the shock perished on the
road. I recollect that Dr. Gibson (Tirranna) sent sev-
eral mobs of cattle to Monaro in ’39, and I believe many
of those were frozen during the following winter, which
was very severe. The country where those cattle were
running, near Kiandra, a place well known to the
Author, is called “Gibson’s Plain” to this day. Speak-
ing of Kiandra and cold winters reminds the Author
that he was one of a party that, in the ’60’s, drove a mob
of 150 cattle over an “ice-bridge” across the Gungahleen
River —the ice being from six inches to two feet thick.
No doubt such experiences are common in the snow
country every winter.
The Massacre on the Broken River.
It was during the drought while the Author’s people
were living at Mate’s Flat, near Tarlo, that the sad news
was brought over of the massacre of Faithful’s men by


the blacks on the Mitta Mitta (Victoria). Those men
had been sent by Mr. Faithfull, of Springfield Estate,
to assist in forming a station on the Mitta Mitta, or
Broken River, and were treacherously attacked by the
aborigines. The men had arms with them, but, not
anticipating an attack, they had left their guns and
ammunition in the drays, and the flints of the guns—
old flintlocks—being out of reach, they were thus de-
fenceless. They were mercilessly speared and “boondied”
(beaten to death with nullas) by the blacks, only one of
the company—a youth—escaping. Though badly hurt,
the survivor managed to outrun his wild enemies, and
he swam the Mitta Mitta hard pressed by his savage
pursuers. This individual brought details of the affair
to Goulburn. He was one Joe Trainor, who will be well
remembered by old citizens as having been groom at
Thomas’ Hotel in the ’7o’s. In recounting some par-
ticulars of this tragic event, Mr. George Faithful, of
Inveralochy, says that for several years within recent
times, he has been interviewed at intervals, by various
swagmen, each of whom claimed a full supply of rations,
free gratis, on the ground that he (the swagman) was
the veritable sole survivor referred to. It is only re-
cently that the supply of those “cases of mistaken iden-
tity” began, like the veterans of Waterloo, to run short.
However, as emulation is the sincerest form of flattery,
the survivor aforesaid, must have been considered a
special heaven-sent hero by the ration-hunters.


The Floods of *43-44.
But after the drought came the deluge. The drought
broke up towards the end of ’43, its departure being
celebrated by a storm of rain that, as one of the old
hands said, might “have put the fires out in Purgatory
if it kept on for another day.” The Tarlo River rose
higher than at any time known to the oldest blackfellow,
according to his (Yarraginny’s) affirmation. An old
pair named Goodwin —the man was storekeeper at
Rhyanna (Thompson's) —lived in a hut about a quarter
of a mile from the river bank, and about a mile from
our place. Thinking the old people might be in danger,
the Author and his brother, William, went to see if they
needed assistance. We found the house submerged, and
the old couple had spent two nights out on the hillside,
in a damp tent. We brought them to our residence,
and helped Goodwin and others who had been flooded
out to repair their cabins, and get under weigh again.
A few days afterwards I was at Veterans' Flats (now
part of Tiranna), where some old pensioners (ex-soldiers)
were living in small huts. It may be interesting to
recall their names, viz., Martin Kellick (who formerly
owned part of “Bois Chere, ’ now occupied by my
esteemed friends, William and Robert Lees), J.
McGeorge, R. Stevenson, and others. The flood swept
away some of the portable property of those veterans,
and their dearly-won farm produce as well. Small hay-
stacks, and shoals of melons and pumpkins, and two or
three dead calves were floating down \the flat, and a big
cedar box, holding some groceries, brought up the rear.


This, I remember, was rescued by one Tom Bingham, a
ticket-of-leave man, who, with his brother, Bill, was an
adept at making hurdles and watch-boxes in the convict
days. The Goulburn Flats (now Eastgrove) was a swirl-
ing sea of water. Tom Gurney, who was the first con-
vict blacksmith at Strathaird, was drowned in the same
flood, while he was shepherding at Yalbraith. The
poor fellow took refuge beneath the overhanging bank
of a creek, and the waters rose so quickly that Gurnet
was suffocated in his lair.
A trip to the Lachlan just after the Drought*
In September, ’44, I went out to the Lachlan country
to search for some strayed bullocks, being accompanied
by one Tom Curry, then in our employ. As the bullocks
had been bred on Dwyer’s Station, near Grenfell, we
thought they would make back there again, and so pro-
ceeded in that direction to look for them. Our horses
were too poor to ride, so we had to take "the wallaby”
for it. After a six days’ journey we reached Neville’s
station, about a mile from where now stands the town
of Cowra. There was no sign of a town at that period,
the only house near the present town site being that
occupied by the district poundkeeper, a Mr. Best. We
campd at Neville’s for the night—lodging in the men’s
quarters. The great flood out in that part was then
subsiding, and coming along by the river (Lachlan) we
saw several carcases of horses and cattle high up in the
branches of the trees. About two miles from Neville’s,
we saw the tree where two men belonging to Lees’ Sta-
tion had taken refuge from the flood, staying there a


day and night before they were rescued by blacks in
their canoes. Hundreds of drowned sheep were lying
on the flats, and the late Mr. James Butler, of Merri-
ganowrie Station, lost over 1000 fat sheep in the back-
wash of the river, which, of course, had overflowed its
banks for miles. It was the greatest flood ever known
on the Lachlan side. The evening we reached Neville’s,
two police troopers arrived, and also stayed the night
at the station. They were looking for two escaped con-
victs —a man and a youth, who had cleared out from
Kite’s Station, near Bathurst. We were about to start
in the morning, when the two troopers detained us, and,
when in reply to their questioning, we said we had come
from the Goulburn side, after strayed cattle, one of them
said, “That will do ; you’re the two fellows we want,
right enough.” As we were on foot, our story did not
seem credible, and they took us back to the house. Mr.
Neville said he believed our account, and at last the two
stupid officers let us go, promising to keep a sharp look-
out on our movements. However, we saw no more of
the troopers, nor did we see or hear anything of the
missing bullocks, so after a fruitless search of three
weeks we returned to Goulburn. We afterwards learned
the two runaways spoken of were apprehended, and one
of them was subsequently shot while bushranging.
Journey to Bombala in '43.
Towards the end of the long drought of 1838-43, the
Author took a load of mixed goods from Sydney to Bom-
bala, to the order of Wm. Hamilton, a publican and
storekeeper at the latter place. In fact, Mr. Hamilton


opened the first hotel on the present site of Bombala
town, and he contracted with the Author, at the Wool-
shed Hotel, Sydney, for the carriage of the goods—two
tons —at the rate of £l6 per ton from Sydney. Mr.
Hamilton had been overseer for ‘ ‘Ready-money” Boyd
on the “Woolway” Station, Monaro; but as the runs
were being taken up towards Twofold Bay, and the
Whale-Fishery station starting at that part of the coast,
he (Hamilton) thought he would make a bit of a pile by
opening as a publican and universal provider. On the
journey, the Author and his old mate, Charles Calver—
already mentioned—skirted the shores of Lake George,
travelling by Geary’s Gap, and on by Gundaroo. At that
time the Lake was as dry as a bone all over its area, and
the “Fat-hen” (lake herbage—a plant something like
dandelion) was as high as the pony I was riding, and up
to the backs of the bullocks. The only landmark on
Gundaroo plain was Guise’s Homestead, about half-a-
mile from the present town’s position ; for it will be
remembered this was many years before Mr. Affleck
brought the “pole” of commercial gravity to the “centre
of the earth” (Gundaroo), or started as a publican in
Dan Leahy’s rustic village. Bungendore, too, where we
called on the return journey, was very much in embryo
at the time, the only sign of civilization being a small
public-house kept by a Mr. Carroll. Passing on we
found Queanbeyan to be a busy litttle depot, with two
hotels and Wright’s store, a blacksmith’s shop, and five
or six small houses close by the river bank. At Rob Roy
(18 miles from Queanbeyan) there was an hotel kept by
a Mr. Murray, and, halting there one afternoon we were
witnesses of a great pulling match. Two teamsters, one
from Cooma, and the other from Queanbeyan, got “blow


ing” over the merits of their horses. The Queanbeyan
man wagered £5 at even money that two of his team
could pull any other two horses on the road. The other
teamster took him up at once, and each taking his two
best horses from the team, they arranged a novel way of
testing the matter. A line was marked on the level
ground before the hotel, and on either side of this line
the competing pair of horses were placed, being hitched
tail to tail—the Queanbeyan man’s pair heading north,
and the other man’s south. They were hitched together
by the opposing trace-chains, each man urging his own
pullers. At the word “Go” they set to work, and the
Queanbeyan horses very soon pulled the others over the
line and held them there —the Cooma pair, though they
strained to the utmost, not being able to stir their oppo-
nents an inch. The Queanbeyan driver thus won the
wager, bulb, sportsmanlike, consented to take only £2 if
the defeated man shouted for all hands. This ivas the
first time I saw a pull so decided. There was no sign of
a township either at Michelago or Bredbo then —Mich el-
ago being a sheep-station belonging to the Eyiies —a
name which has ever been one of the mos: esteemed
amongst Monaro squatters. I remember a stockman’s hut
stood on the long green plain. Cooma was such another
sprouting village as Queanbeyan, there being one hotel
kept by a Mr. Curwin (whose son Jim was afterwards
shot in a tragic way a: the time of the Koandra Rush in
1861) ; Mr. Montgomery s store, a police station, and the
residence of Mr. Lambie (Lands Commissioner), who
then lived at Cooma. We went through a sheep-station
(now Ninntybelle) belonging to :he McDonald’s of
“Square Range” (relatives of the Grants Flat Mc-
Donalds), v/here one Pat Stanton had a “rib” rrd small


store; and I remember that at the “Jew’s Flat,” there
was an hotel run by a Jew named Solomon Cohen. We
crossed the McLaughlin River —a very rocky river it is—
having a cold drink at the Rock Flat Soda Springs by
the way. This Soda Spring of which much has been
said and sung, had been discovered years before I first
tasted its waters. Finally, after a trip of three weeks,
we reached Bombala, and delivered the loading; and I
recollect that Mr. Hamilton paid me in 5/- and 10/-
“orders” issued by Ben Boyd, the squatter. Old hands
will remember those “orders.” Ben Boyd was a big man
in the squatting world both on the south coast and in
Queensland in those years. Mr. Boyd’s tragic fate,
murdered as he was by a savage tribe in one of the
South Sea Islands, forms one of the darkest chapters in
the history of Southern adventure, but the story is out-
side the scope of our work. But in concluding these
references to early droughts and floods we would remark
that, though so little is known of meteorological influence
in its bearings upon the earth’s weather, we have suffici-
ent data (per favour of Mr. Wragge, etc.) to assume that
the suns and planets of the great spaces, or those within
ken of the earth’s atmosphere, have a big influence in
determining the recurrence of droughts—if not of floods
—and we think our best reply to the alleged terrestrial
interferences with our weather would be to conserve our
rain supplies, to canal our inland waters, and to irrigate
where possible, both “within and without.”


CHAPTER XV.
Some old Sporting Memories.
As far back as 1805 our early compatriots held race-
meetings on the “Officers’ Racecourse,'’ now better
known as Hyde Park, Sydney; but the first meeting of
any consequence was promoted by Sir John Jamieson, of
Regentsville, near Penrith, in 1824; and the fine old
sportsman who promoted the meeting, found refresh-
ments on a most liberal scale for the large gathering of
5000 people that attended. An old ticket-of-leave man
who was present at the races gave us a vivid account of
the great riot which took place at the end of the day’s
sport, between the “Currency Lads” (as native-born
Australians were then called), and Sir John Jamieson’s
servants. The servants, who were nearly all convicts,
were disappointed at the defeat of their master’s horse
“Benalong” in the Big Race, and they started a great
row with the “Currencys,” who were supporters of Lane’s
“Hector,” the winner. The battle of fists and sticks
lasted well into the night, and both sides claimed the
victory. We have spoken of Charlie Smith, the owner of
“Chancellor,” and of Bailey, the importer of “Emi-
grant” and breeder of “ Jorrocks” and other great horses ;
and there were many such studmasters in our annals in
the merry days : old. The names of those men and the
most famous of their stock are as well known as the first
of the month to most Australians. Amongst them were


Robert Towns, the owner and breeder of “Maribynong”
and Tarragon” ; Henry Cox of Mulgoa, who bred “Yat-
tendon,” and whose “Gold-finder” colts, as the Author
can testify, were a very speedy strain; R. Rouse of
Mudgee, who bred “Emigrant” (the Australian horse
of the name); Reynolds, of Tocal, the breeder of “New
Warrior” and “Cossack,” etc., and amongst the ruck,
Mr. Roberts, who owned “Archer,” winner of the first
and second Melbourne Cups, and the famous “Tim
Whiffler,” the great rival of that still more famous horse
“The Barb” (John Tait’s “Black Demon”). The Author
saw most of those Giants of the Turf compete at Home-
bush or at Rand wick in their day. The late John J.
(Ginger) Roberts, formerly of Goulburn, was also a keen
sportsman in those days, and had, we remember, four
first-class horses, viz. ; Waverley, Troubadour, Corona-
tion. and Peter Simple—in the Forties. Coronation
was the favorite for the Maiden Plate at Homebush in
1847, at a meeting we attended, but owing to his rider’s
(Billy Ford) illness, Coronation lost the race. Johnny
Coutts, knowing Ford was unwell, offered to ride Coro-
nation and generously said he would make Ford a
present of the riding fees if he won; but Ford declined,
and Mr. Roberts would not deprive his favorite jockey
(Ford) of his seat. Coutts, howmver, secured the mount
on De Mestre’s horse “Mariner,” who was a bit of an
outlaw, but his new rider gave him no chance to perform,
and kept “Mariner” in the lead all the way, winning
easily. Coronation could have won, but Ford was too
weak to bring the horse out at the critical time. Mr.
Dc Mestre had four winners that day, viz. : Mariner,
Greenrnantle, Red Clover, and Sailor, and J. Coutts was
the pilot in each event. Like Mariner, The Barb was


inclined as a colt to “play up” before the start; in fact,
he threw his rider and bolted in his first race, a Nursery
Handicap at Homebush. Mr. Tait, The Barb's owner,
so informed the Author on the occasion of his (Tait's)
buying some store cattle at Strathaird, in 1868. In the
month of February, 1860, the Author took a mob of
saddle horses to Sydney (though this is a slight digres-
sion) which were sold at Kiss’ Bazaar, later kept by my
late esteemed friend, Michael Fennelly, the well-known
horse-buyer and trainer. Several of our hacks were
bought by the late Peter Faucett (brother of Judge Fau-
cett), who owned “Sampson” and “Sportsman,”two good
performers, both on the Sydney and up-country courses.
Our old mate, Peter McAlister, of Wagga, afterwards
had those steeds, and they won a heap of money running
in his colours. Goulburn was a lively racing centre in
those days, and had merry meetings twice a year. For
instance, we recall the Three Days’ Meeting in the au-
tumn of 1863, when the prize money ran to nearly £SOO
—not bad for a little township as Goulburn was then.
Some of the competitors at that meeting were fit at their
weights for any company, such as P. and John Mc-
Alister’s “Despatch” and “Mavourneen” ; Davoren’s
“Dan O’Connell,” Thorne’s “Sly Boots” ; W.F. Gibson’s
“Jim Crow” and Simon’s famous miler “Charley Pork.”
The big money —The County Stakes —was won by “Dan
O’Connell,” a horse which was later stolen and taken to
New Zealand. P. McAlister’s speedy gelding “Des-
patch” won several good races at Randwick in the Six-
ties, beating such great horses as “Lauristina, ’ “Tar-
ragon,’ Miss Dixon’s chestnut filly “Zenobia,” and
other flyers. Mr. A. G. Finlay subsequently owned
“Despatch,” and with him Mr. Finlay pulled off several


events at the Tirranna Picnic races of those years. Old
southern sportsmen will remember the story of the paint-
ing of Miss Dixon’s horses “Kildare” and “Zenobia.”
These two racers won several events up country at light
weights under assumed names before the fraud was dis-
covered, and “atoned for.” The “Painter” (one Tom
C n) did twelve months in Berrima gaol as a result of
his artistic skill.
A few Boxing Notes. —Bill Sparkes.
While of course condemning anything in the nature of
vicious brutality in sport, nevertheless, in the Author’s
opinion, there has been much unnecessary nonsense
uttered against “The Noble Art.” The boxers of the
old Australian school, for all their hard-hitting, were
no worse than the rest of their fellows. One of the best
battles seen by the Author was that between Paddy
Sinclair (the Irish Londoner) and Bill Sparkes, fought
near Cook’s River in the autumn of 1848. We saw only
a part of this combat (having missed the first four
rounds), in company of Charlie Haddigaddi and Ikey
Owens, who could both give and take a bit. Sparkes
was a younger and bigger man than Sinclair, but the
latter was much the cleverer, and “got all over” the
Australian, but Sparkes stuck to it with grim determina-
tion, being knocked off his pins frequently. The battle
went on with Sparkes as “Receiver-general,” for 17 or 18
rounds, when Sparkes sprained his ankle in one of his
head-down rushes, and was soon after obliged to give in.
Bill Sparkes was, however, a greatly improved man,
when, a few years later, he fought Broome for the cham-
134
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


pionship of England, going “Home” for that purpose.
Sparkes had his left arm broken in this battle, and was
compelled to strike his colours after fighting nearly three
hours. Our last meeting with that hardy old warhorse,
Bill Sparkes, was at Tilba, on the South Coast, in 1884.
Though then over eighty years old he could ride thirty or
forty miles without feeling undue fatigue. The police
seldom interrupted prizefights in old times, but with the
coming of a more “polished” generation, the hue and
cry was raised and there were no more open-air fights in
New South Wales. There was an end to all the stern
excitement, and
“The fights ’tween Sparkes and Paddy,
And the battles on the square
With Hough and Haddigaddi
Or some such famed affair.”
We will say something later about “Larry” Foley and
the modern boxers.
Liverpool Races in the Fifties*
Liverpool was a lively sporting centre in the days gone
by. There were two good courses near the town, viz:
Anlezark’s, about a mile away, and Martin’s at the
Crossroads Hotel—the junction of Liverpool and Camp-
belltown roads—some four miles out of town on the
Sydney side. Some of the chief owners and jockeys in
the country attended the Liverpool races. I was present
at a meeting at which Higgerson and Dunne were riding,
and one or two real champion horses competed. A merry
135
SOME OLD SPORTING MEMORIES.


party of us were together that day, among them George
and Bill Tindall —good cricketers and all round sports-
men ; Clarrie Brown, Fred Hughes, Wat. Bradbury
(now of Argyle), Joe Hatfield, etc., who were ready to
take or give the odds as their fancy dictated. The
famous mare, Lauristina, ridden by “Dicky” Snell, and
Ben Bolt, steered by John Higgerson, ran in the big
money that day; and old Johnny Dunne rode a horse
called “Touchstone.” Dunne got tangled up somehow
in the ruck as they came into the running the first time
round, and was unseated, as the men named will remem-
ber. Several of us galloped over to help the fallen
jockey, but on going to lift Dunne off the course, the
latter, who was quite unhurt, resented our action. It
seems there was bad blood between Dunne and Snell,
and as “Lauristina” was leading, it was Dunne’s inten-
tion, so we gathered, to jump up suddenly and frighten
“Lauristina” off the course, as she (Lauristina) came
near. However, our arrival baulked Mr. Dunne’s in-
tention, and perhaps saved Snell from sudden death,
and Dunne from “Jack Ketch.” But the mare didn’t
w;n, as Higgerson brought that great-hearted horse,
“Ben Bolt,” along with a great run, and won by a length.
The recountal of racing incidents are like the formation
of bubbles—one creates a hundred. But only one more
racing memory must suffice here. That refers to the
most exciting match race the Author ever witnessed,
viz. : the great Half-mile at Homebush, between Bad-
gery’s chestnut mare “Our Nell,” and that great horse,
“Cooramin.” There was great finessing at the start be-
tween the two jockeys—Dunne, on “Our Nell,”
and Coutts, on “Cooramin” —as in so short a
race an advantage at the start was half the
136
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


battle. “Cooramin” got away with a slight lead, but
gained hardly a foot from start to finish. As they flashed
down the straight, I recollect Dunne singing out to
Coutts to come back—that it was a false start; but
Coutts was too cute a bird to be caught by chaff of that
kind. The Campbelltown Hurleys were also good racing
men, and one of their horses, viz. : “Tommy Tittle” won
the double on several occasions at Goulburn.
CHAPTER XVI.
My First Droving Experience.
“The old dogs lie a-sleeping,
And since our hair is white,
We’ll go no more a-droving
So late into the night.
In the spring of 1848 I had my first driving trip of
any consequence. That was with a mob of 100 head of
mixed cattle —which had been bought from my brother-
in-law (Sergeant Doyle), and myself (in partnership) by
Mr. Granville Collins, of Kimo, Gundagai. My route
with those cattle was by Gurrundah (Captain Turner’s),
from there to Burrowa, and thence by Jugiong Creek to
Kimo. Theßurrowa of those dayscomprised Mr. Hurley’s
public-house and store, a blacksmith’s shop, and a few
bark huts near by, and along the creek the gunyahs of a
tribe of aboriginals. Messrs. Roger Corcoran and James
Ryan lived close to the settlement, and Mr. Dwyer’s
homestead was not far distant. The old ioke that a
137
MY FIRST DROVING EXPERIENCE.


stone thrown down a Burrowa street would surely hit
a RYAN or a DWYER if it missed a HURLEY or a
CORCORAN had some traditional grounds for its origin
as the families mentioned were, with the Humes, Han-
cocks and Prestons, the pioneers of Burrowa district.
Gundagai, in 1848, was a brisk little township. Two
hotels were on the north side of the river (Murrumbid-
gee), kept, respectively, by Mr. Luke Riley, and a Mr.
Morley ; while Tom Lindley had the pub on the south
side of the water. Turnbull and Spencer were the
chief storekeepers. Everything about the “Big Flood”
town, except the business men, was as “green as a leek” ;
trade was good, and the cattle in rare order. Mr.
Collins, who kept most of the stock I had brought from
Carrabunga for some time, sold them at great profit
when the diggings broke out and prices went up in 1851.
He had bought the cattle at only 19/- per head, and
obtained from £4 upwards —some bringing as high as
£lO. It was not long till the Author again visited Gun-
dagai, as about eight months later (in July, 1849) I met
Henry Turnbull—a Gundagai storekeeper —at the Wool-
pack Hotel, Sydney, and agreed with him to take up two
tons of loading at £lO per ton. Our contract was that,
bar accidents, the goods should be delivered at Gunda-
gai within twenty-one days. However, owing to heavy
weather it was twenty-four days before we (the Author
and his old “second-mate,” C. Calver) reached the town.
In our cargo there was a consignment of saddles and
bridles, etc., required for the Gundagai Races, and as
the meeting was just over, Mr. Turnbull, though he took
delivery of the goods, refused to pay a penny for the
carriage from Sydney. He said our delay had lost him
fully £SO, and the race-goods would be left on his hands


for a long time. He also said that as we were four days
behind time, he had no liability in the matter. On
reaching home I put my case before the late Charles
Hamilton Walsh (the lawyer), and Mr. Walsh simply
said, “Well, Charlie, before fourteen days go by he’ll be
glad to pay you every penny, and find my costs, too.”
As Mr. Walsh promised, I got the money due within the
time stated, and took care not to “rush” any more of
Mr. Turnbull’s contracts. Upon this Gundagai incident
I composed an effusion entitled, “The Road to Gunda-
gai,” which, I believe, had a slight “vogue” among the
carriers on the main southern road for some years. It
ran as follows :—
The Way to Gundagai*
Oh, boys, you’ve heard of Gundagai—to see that town
I meant;
And so, upon the southern road to’ards Gundagai I
went.
At Sydney town with merchandise I loaded up my
dray,
And signed to get to Gundagai in three weeks to a day :
But keep to that agreement it was in vain to try,
When in the rains of ’49 I left for Gundagai.
To view the Murrumbidgee banks I had made up my
mind,
So bid good-bye to all my friends, and left them far
behind;
And bye-and-bye I camped a night at Jugiong so
green:


“A pretty place —but Gundagai’s a far more pretty
scene” —
That was what the people said as they came passing
by,
When we camped at “Sugar” O’Brien’s Creek, iwo
miles from Gundagai.
But when I got to Gundagai, so far, and far away,
My Mr. Henry Turnbull he just refused to pay —
He said, “I’ve missed the races here, and all because
of you,
I will not pay a half-penny, you’re three days over-
due” ;
“Well, then, Mr. Turnbull, you’re a paltry rogue,”
said I,
As homeward bound I started from the town of
Gundagai.
When next the spires of Goulburn town most joyfully
I hailed,
To Mr. Walsh, the lawyer there: the man who never
failed,
I took my tale of injury, and Mr. Walsh full soon
Made Mr. Henry Turnbull sing quite another tune:
For Mr. Walsh “adduced the Law,” and thus the
foe at bay
Alias Henry Turnbull made haste his debt to pay.
And now a moral I would add—Let Trader never try
To “sharp” an honest teamster on the road to Gunda-
gai.
While referring to Gundagai matters, though my dates
just now scarcely follow in regular sequence, I will here


touch upon that terrible visitation, the Gundagai Flood
of 1852, which in the winter of that year overswept the
town and country, and did no end of damage. Over
eighty persons perished, either through drowning or ex-
posure, and many had hair-breadth escapes amid the
swirling waters. People had to swim for their lives in
many instances, and to take refuge in the dripping trees
for days and nights together, as can be vouched for by
my esteemed friends, the Hon. Jas Gormley, M.L.C.,
Jeremiah Leary, and other citizens of that t.me, who,
like Mr. Gormley, had a very hard battle for life against
the raging elements. Through the wholesale devasta-
tion wrought by the flood, many of the people were on
the brink of starvation ] and as there were no railways
running inland at the time, the sending of supplies was a
matter of very slow process. At the request of my name-
sake, the late John McAlister, then Head-Constable of
Goulburn (and who was ever a good straight man and
a faithful public servant), the Author, with his brother
(the late Thos. McAlister, of Yalbraith), took to Gunda-
gai two waggon-loads of provisions, supplied by Govern-
ment order in July, 1852. We found that the accounts
of the flood had not been exaggerated in the least. The
Murrumbidgee was still at a banker, and the carcase of
drowned horses and cattle were —several of them—re-
posing high up among the branches of the oak-trees along
the river-banks. The brick flour-mill (Hayes') that I
had seen working some three years before on the banks
of the lagoon about a quarter of a mile from the river,
had a big hole right through its walls, caused by the
force of the flood waters. We left the goods at the
North Gundagai Police Station, and after a day’s spell
returned homewards. The Gundagai flood with its great


destruction of life and property was the worst thing of
the kind ever known in New South Wales. However,
the lessons taught by the flood were not ignored —for the
present town is high and dry, and well above the flood
level. The Gundagai of to-day is a smart, progressive
town; the mineral resources of the district are vast and
varied, ranging from rich gold deposits to asbestos and
other mineral fibres. The great iron bridge over the
Murrumbidgee, at Gundagai, nearly a mile in length,
is a great boon to travellers, and a great advance on the
time when the bullock drays had to “swim" the river.
The £40,000 spent on the bridge was not wasted.
We will now refer to our second droving trip, which
was in connection with a mob of 250 mixed cattle, in-
tended by the Author (accompanied by T. McAlister—
before spoken of), for the Port Phillip market, as Vic-
toria was then called. We started with this little mob
in February, 1849, and undertook the venture as we had
heard that stock were selling well across the Murray, and
also at Adelaide. On reaching Wheeo Station, then the
property of Mr. Isaac Shepherd, we heard that bush-
flres were raging ahead through the Fish River and
Burrowa country, and that there was hardly a blade of
grass or a waterhole for thirty miles. Not caring to
face the flame-swept country, we sold the cattle to Mr.
Shepherd, making barely £SO on the transaction; and
I think, in view of the high prices Mr. Shepherd ob-
tained for those Abercrombie steers, he will admit that
he made a good bargain at his yards that day in 1849.
It was some four years later (in 1853) that I made my
first cattle trip into Victorian territory. But mention of
Adelaide in this chapter recalls some reminiscences of
the Burra Burra (S.A.) copper mines which began to


boom in 1848. Some of the stockmen and carriers of
New South Wales thought it would be a good idea to
try their luck in the new mining region. Amongst those
who took horses over were the Toole Bros., of Berrima
side; and the Author had contracted to make one of the
party, having to find a certain number of horses. But
owing to my father’s illness I had to abandon the trip
at the eleventh hour, and so never saw the spires of
“Holy” Adelaide. The stockdealers had plenty of ad-
venture on the road, including serious encounters with
the wild blacks, but they did well with the first con-
signment of horses and cattle. Not so, however, the
carriers, as my honest old friend, James Beattie, can
testify. For we remember Messrs. Skinner and Beattie,
and other Argyle teamsters had their long journey of
four months across the plains and deserts and rivers for
little better than the cost of their axle-grease. For when
they arrived at the field they found that the carriers and
horse-drivers were already in legions. It was estimated
that by 1850 fully 800 bullock teams were daily on the
roads between Adelaide and the mines. So the Goulburn
men came back only the richer by hard-bought ex-
perience. But thousands made fortunes at the Burra
mines in the Forties. This will be realised when we
state that it was estimated that the output from this
famous copperfield during the first four years of its
history reached nearly one million pounds sterling. We
are aware that this chapter has travelled by several more
or less different tracks to its last line, but our destinies
were, like those references, rather varied and irregular
in the Forties. Then again, one who “deals” in remin-
iscences must naturally follow the “fortunes” of a roving


Some Old Coaching Memories.
Old hands will remember the strange partnership of
Doyle and Levy (Doyle, the Sydney Irishman, and Levy,
the wide-awake Berrima Jew), the pioneer coaching
firm on the great Southern Road. The Author’s first
coach journey (as recounted) was in one of D. and L.’s
coaches, away back in 1838, from Goulburn to Camp-
belltown, and it “shook me up” as badly as my first
sea-sickness experience many years after. Jones and
Lupton, who succeeded Doyle and Levy, ran the business
smartly, but early in the Fifties forage was very dear,
and to assist Mrs. Jones and her sons (who were then the
firm), as they had the great mail delivery contract from
Sydney to Melbourne, the New South Wales and Vic-
torian Governments agreed, in view of the forage diffi-
culty, to pay a subsidy to the firm. Th.s subsidy was to
have been £10,000, but it was many years before the
Victorian authorities made good their part of the money.
In the later Fifties, that born “traffic-manager” and
sportsman—J. J. (“Ginger”) Roberts, in partnership with
W. Crane, took over several of Jones and Lupton’s lines.
Roberts and Co. built up a great business, and till the
arrival of Cobb and Co., ran the chief lines all over the
Southern roads. “Ginger” Roberts was truly a man
of wonderful grit, resource, and energy, and made the
wheels of life fly round at a merry pace in the good old
coaching times. We saw regretfully, with a sigh for
the lights of other days, an account of Mr. Robert’s
death in North Queensland, some months ago, at the age
of 86 years.


Many of the roads we speak of were then little better
than rough unformed bush-tracks, and between the
chances of the “danger trap” roads and meeting the bush-
rangers, the passengers had need of an especial “Mas-
cotte” in those parlous times. But the dangers and dis-
comforts of the coach-journey were much “discounted”
by the presence on the box-seat of such renowned drivers
as “Brummy,” Ted Armfield, Johnny Patrick, Long
Jim,” John Curran (now, we believe, a railway in-
spector), and Jim Pettingall, etc. The coaches in those
days, however, were the chief medium of rapid communi-
cation between city and country, and the hazards of the
route were part and parcel of the contract. Coach-running
i:i the South was a “rattling” business for such lively
contractors and speculators as the Pooleys, Malones,
Morans, Elliotts, Barrys, etc., till the advent of the
famous Cobb and Co., on the scene of operations. To
fight Cobb and Co., some of the smaller proprietors com-
bined their forces, and reduced freights and fares to a
fine point, in some cases, almost to zero. Pooley and
Malone’s coaches, for instance, ran passengers from
Goulburn to Cooma at a return fare of 10/- per head
(a distance of 280 miles), and on short journeys took
people for next to nothing. Cobb and Co. were, of
course, obliged to follow suit ] and at last, to try and
end the cut-throat policy, Mr. James Rutherford (Cobb
and Co.’s manager), came over from Bathurst, and
agreed to draw his teams off some of the Southern roads
for a time. By dint of judicious and up-to-date man-
agement, the Irelands held their own against Cobb and
Co. on the Western roads, but the latter ultimately
agement, the Irelands held their own against Cobb and
Ireland, referred to in an earlier chapter, was, we be


lieve, a member of the old (Ireland’s) coaching firm.
One morning, in an up-country town, I witnessed a
fierce brawl between an aggressive bagman and a tipsy
shearer, for the right to the box-seat next the driver.
The “drummer” got the worst of the fistic argument
which ensued, and was badly knocked about. As the
old prescription on home-made medicine required, he
wa;? “well shaken before taken,” and he was glad at
last to hide his bruises and vexation in the dark interior
of the coach. One of the most amusing of the Author’s
coach-trips was a run from Moruya to Bateman’s Bay,
cvsr twenty years ago. Old Ned Corrigan was the pro-
prietor, and I remember one of our “coach-horses” on
that trip was a small black poley bullock which travelled
along in fine style, and his performance reminded us of
the shatters (bullocks) down in the Hawkesbury
country, many years agone. But the railways have, of
course, “paralysed” the coaches; and present-day mil-
lionaires are not, we are inclined to think, in the ranks
of the coach-owners. But as in the past the breaking
out of a big rush means a special harvest-time for coach-
men, especially if the rush is well away from the railroad.
We have yet a “tender” memory of the time we had to
pay at the rate of 10/- per mile (£lO for the trip) from
Mudgee to G-ulgong, at the outset of the G-ulgong rush,
and other luxuries” in the goldfever days of a similar
expensive nature on the box-seat, or among “the in-
sides,” when we paid “through the nose” at the fiat of
the coach-rings.
The Author had several essays at coach and mail run-
ning at a remote period. On one of those contracts my
mril-man was Dan Grotty, for whose alleged murder,
■ai stated elsewhere, Eobardy was hanged in 1863. Mr.


John Slocombe, now a leading butcher and cattle specu-
lator, of 4 Goulburn, was my partner in another mail con-
tract, in 1868. There was a kind of poetic justice in
appointing men who had been retired from the coaches
with the coming of the railways, to the post of guard on
the “goods” or other trains. Pettingall, Daley, Perry,
and Curran, were amongst the southern drivers who
found their way from the “box” to the breakvan. But
there are those amongst the scientists who tell us that,
like the coaches they have superseded, the railways are
in their turn doomed to also disappear before a more
progressive means of transit, viz. : aerial locomotion.
And those hopeful prophets, some of them, go so far as
to say that bye and bye a “trip to Mars” will be within
the province of the earth-made aeroplane, but they don’t
seem to guarantee that the passengers who may be ven-
turesome enough to start on the trip to Mars will be
alive and kicking when they get to that fiery planet.
But the great “Evolution” so bravely promised is yet
“in the air” a long way this side of Mars, and the wrong
side tip. When it is righted —then —well, then we’ll go
no more on wheels. But with deep regret for the famous
times that were we will have to say “pass on to the
coaches, which, like their cousins, the ancient bullock-
drays, were before the flood j before the first train
rumbled, or the first motor killed its first man so
“Vale! the days gone over: the days of life and din,
When the four-in-hand mail-coaches pulled up before
the Inn;
When the winter night was looming, and in a shiver-
ing swarm
The travellers faced the barman for something piping
warm;


Yalel the merry coaches we never more shall see,
And the songs, and sights, and perils of the days
that used to be. 5 '
CHAPTER XVII.
Some Reflections on the Land Laws of old
Times.
Some time ago, a learned judge, in the course of a law-
suit, expressed the opinion that much of our modern
land legislation was so complicated as to preclude any
lucid idea of its real meaning being attainable by even
the ablest lawyer in the country. But the landlaws of
old times had at least the merit of clearness. Their
harsh clearness and simplicity was in fact their chief
demerit—that is in the view of the landless, who, com-
pared to the land-grabbers, were legion. We hate to
tell again an oft-told tale, but it is obvious that the
authorities, while, of course, justified in doing their
best to promote pastoral occupation—made a grievous
mistake in the early years, in having, practically, given
away immense tracts of country, as a perpetual gift, or
grant, to a few score of favoured individuals. We say
tlr giving away of the lands advisedly, for though the
Crown made some pretence at apology for its onesided
generosity, in charging a (so-called) quit-rent, etc., it
is clear that the early grantees got their “Principalities”
for next to nothing. Of course it was necessary to offer
particular inducements to settlement, in days when it
was bordering on the heroic to venture inland, and


brave peril, and all sorts of discomfort; but those in-
ducements were sternly withheld from the humbler ord6r
of settlers, and conferred only on men (and companies)
who, to speak plainly, had the authority of Government
co exploit, and monopolise the country. The quit-rents
were at a peppercorn per acre, or at the rate of one
shilling for every fifty acres, and so on; while in some
cases, land was awarded to settlers to encourage the
maintenance of convicts, at the rate of 100 acres for
every convict so maintained. The quit-rents of the
early days were seldom collected, but now and then a
fierce spasm of zeal would overtake the Lands Depart-
ment, and an attempt be made to recover some of the
long overdue rents. Such an instance happened, we
remember, at Rhyanna, in 1844, when Mr. Thompson
(then Police Magistrate at Berrima) owned the property.
As the notices issued some months before were apparent-
ly ignored by the runholder —perhaps never received by
him—two of the Court Bailiffs were sent out from Goul-
burn to seize Thompson’s sheep. Having, as they
thought, two flocks of sheep (1600) together, the bailiffs
camped for the night with the Rhyanna stockman. That
individual treated them to so many "nips” of strong
rum during the night, that they overslept themselves;
next morning there was no such thing as a sheep to be
seen within ten miles of the camp. So the bailiffs re-
turned without the sheep, and, we think Mr. Thompson
got off scot-free as regards the quit-rent. As before
stated, two of our early Governors, viz. : Sir Richard
Burke, and Sir George Gipps—tried hard to encourage
the settlement of a farming community on the soil.
Governor Burke, who in our opinion was the greatest
statesman who ever occupied the Vice-Regal position


in any Australian State, in 1835 had a law introduced
which required land-holders to pay rentals in proportion
to the number of sheep the runs could support. During
his term, Governor Gipps took action to restrain the
unauthorised occupation of Crown lands over a certain
area. Gipps also proposed a yearly assessment of
per head on sheep; 1 £d. on cattle; and 3d. on horses as
the grazing rights on Crown lands. This law was opposed
tooth and nail by the capitalists of the early days, and
after being in force some twelve months was rescinded by
the old Legislative Council —W. C. Wentworth, Dr.
Bland, and Hannibal McArthur being amongst the chief
opponents of the democratic Governor.
An Argyle Movement.
The exclusive land policy of the early days was no-
where felt more acutely than in Argyle ; and following
on “The Pre-emptive Rights Act, of 1847” (which gave
a commonage right»free of charge to runholders to three
sections of the Crown lands adjoining their holdings),
up rose the farmers’ agitation of 1848-49, to which we
briefly referred in a former chapter. The original
movers in this matter were Messrs. David Ross, of
“Glen Lea,” and Donald McDonald, of “Mddle-arm,”
Argyle, and on their initiative a public meeting was
held at the Royal Hotel, Goulburn, in May, 1849. The
late Rev. Wm. Ross presided, and speeches in favour of
progressive land-legislation were made by the late Rev.
Dean Walsh, Charles H. Walsh (solicitor), David Ross,
Colin McAlister, and others. It was resolved, on the
suggestion of Mr. D. Ross, to petition the Imperial


Government directly, in respect of the necessary amend-
ment in our New South Wales land-laws.
As the outcome of the movement a law was passed by
the Home authorities, which provided for the portioning
cut of farmers’ blocks in the settled districts. The worst
feature in the new law was that the blocks so surveyed
had to go to auction, and thus the capitalist frequently
came in again. But on the whole, the regulation of the
30. 40, and 100 acre farming blocks worked well, and
gave agriculture its first real foothold on the Tablelands.
All honour to Messrs. Ross and McDonald for their ener-
getic movement—for it was directly owing to their
public spirit that the rights of the small settlers were
thus recognised.
We refer elsewhere to Free Selection, under Robert-
son’s Act, of 1861, which, whatever may be said by its
detractors, gave agriculture a great “leg-up,” and was
an advance on the class-made land-policy which pre-
ceded it. Under the Volunteer land orders, or regula-
tions, of 1867, over 60,000 acres of good, bad, and in-
different land was portioned out to members of the early
Volunteer force in various parts of the country. Each
Volunteer was allotted 40 acres conditional on perform-
ing a certain number of drills, etc. But as there was
no residence clause in the Act, and as the owners were
allowed to immediately sell, or transfer their right to the
land, it happened, ultimately, that most of those allot-
ments fell into the hands of speculators at a nominal
cost. They obtained as high as £2OO and over for blocks,
many of which were bought for less than £lO. We cite
this matter as another instance of the tendency of our
land-laws to throw the lands into the maw of the specu-
lator and monopolist. But, no doubt the ranks of the
151
OLD-TIME LAND LAWS.


old Volunteer force were swelled by the bait of the
“land-orders.”
It was, we believe, as a kind of satire on the awful
land-laws (?) of long ago that one of the early farmers
of Argyle, who shifted to the Maitland district, wrote
the old song, “Upon the Hunter's River,” two verses of
which ran—
“lt’s twenty years, or nearly so, since first I started
farming,
And many curious things I’ve seen, and changes quite
alarming—
For then, as gay as any lark I worked from early
dawning,
Till night came on—and with the sun I rose again
next morning.
So if the truth you'd understand,
And wisdom you’d discover,
Just listen to the oldest hand
Upon the Hunter’s River,
“But land was very hard to get, and interest very
high, Sir;
They sold my farm the other day to pay the mort-
gagee, Sir.
So after twenty years have passed, with all my con
stant toiling,
I’m left without a stick at last to keep the pot a
boiling.
The landlord was too much for me,
The lawyers were too clever;
They’ve rooted out the oldest hand
Upon the Hunter’s River.”
152
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


But happily there are signs on the horizon of affairs
that the people are at length awakening to the necessity
of vindicating their rights to the land, and under the
new regime of bonafide land settlement which is, we
feel, about to dawn, we are sure that “the oldest hand
upon the Hunter River,” if still existent, will be in-
spired to write a happier sequel to his early song.
Some Long Rides by Old-Timers*
“We were merry younkers then—good hands and
fearless eye,
And we’d break and ride buck-jumpers by the
score;
But age has cooled our courage, and the scrubber
we’d defy
Our feeble hands will saddle him no more.”
G. McA.
Such a “text” as the above naturally occurs to one in
thinking over memories of great riding feats of long
ago —the times before the railways, when the bushman
HAD to know how to RIDE and to handle his horse.
One of the first feats in this line that we recall was the
ride of the late Donald McDonald, who, as old hands will
remember, was a big man —over six feet high and 16 stone
weight. He left his home at Clifford’s Creek, on a chest-
nut colt at about 7 o’clock in the morning, and arrived at
Young, 90 miles distant, at half-past 7 in the evening,
thus being, including stoppages, hours on the way.
The steed of this journey was afterwards owned by the
Author. Shortly after the trip it (the colt) shed its
153
OLD-TIME LAND LAWS.


hoofs, and it was fully 12 months before they grew again.
But a record ride was that done by W. Hazlewood, from
Petersham (Sydney) to Thorn’s (now called “The
Towers”), two miles from Goulburn. Leaving Peter-
sham at 6.30 in the morning, Hazlewood got to the home
of his employer (the late George Thorne) at 8.30 p.m.,
the journey ridden being 135 miles, in 14 hours. The
Author on several occasions rode the horse mentioned—
a big grey stock-horse—and is well acquainted with the
rider, and has no doubt of the facts of this ride. The
Thornes had some wonderful horses, and the one refer-
red to was thirty-eight years old before “senile decay”
counted him out. The Author, though never a “star”
performer, has some fairly long rides to his credit. On
one occasion, riding my Gippsland horse, “Socks,” else-
where mentioned, I rode from a camp eight miles on the
Melbourne side of the Ovens to Dixon 's Swamp, near the
border a distance of about 96 miles, in the day, and
stayed an hour on the road with some carriers, near the
Black-Dog Ranges. Next day we did a further journey
of 72 miles, camping the night with old “Dick Teece”
(uncle of the late William Teece, M.L.A.), near Gunda-
gai. One morning, riding “Socks,” I left Burrowa at
9 o’clock, and reached Goulburn before 5 o’clock the
same afternoon—a distance of 80 miles, the horse being
none the worse. “Socks” was worth his weight in gold,
both as a stock-horse and a roadster. McArthur’s (Rich-
lands) “Satellite” breed—steelgreys—produced some of
the best horses ever saddled. On a “Satellite” colt I
started at 11 o’clock one morning from Eugowra station
(Oakes’), near Binda, on my way to Picton. That night
we camped at Swallowtail, 60 miles from Eugowra.
Next morning we started at daybreak, and arrived at


"Clifton” near Picton—our destination—at 3 o’clock, a
journey of 78 miles, under 9 hours. This was not a great
performance, but the colt, if permitted, could have
shortened the time by an hour or more.
Mr. Charles McLean is another of the old brigade of
long-distance roughriders of the past. One of Mr. Mc-
Lean’s long rides was from Sugarloaf (Tarlo) to Cowra —
about 90 miles in the day —that is, from 7 a.m. to 9 p.m.
Mr. McLean, a very big man, fully tested his horse on
that and other journeys; and he was also in the same
class as "Billy” Waite and Professor Skuthorpe as a
buck-jumper rider. The worst "outlaw” would have
had to get out of the saddle before he could shift Charlie
McLean; and even the great "Bobs” would find that
there were two in the fight if he had been performing
in C. McLean’s young days. Mr. Harry Hartley of
Chatsbury is another clever rider of the old colonial type,
and if we had a sovereign for every brumby broken in by
Mr. Hartley we would not be far short of a cool thousand
or so. Another well-known identity, viz. ; Mr. B.
Donnelly, sen., can tell of several big doings in the
saddle. One of Mr. Donnelly’s longest trips was from
Goulburn to Gundagai —a distance by the road followed
of 120 miles. This journey was from sun to sun, as,
starting at daybreak, Mr. Donnelly reached Gundagai
a few minutes before the sun went down. H:s errand
was in connection with the apprehension of a horse
stealer; and on reaching Gundagai at sundown, he
(Donnelly) was just in time to hurry to the punt; from
information received, and stop his man before the latter
crossed the river and got away. And it will not be
denied that’ after his long ride on that summer’s day,
Mr. Donnelly deserved his luck in (with police assistance)


regaining possession of his horses. In talking over feats
in the saddle we recall the match made in 1864 between
Messrs. Healy and Lawson, for a wager of £SO a side, to
ride from Mudgee to Coolah—a distance of 72 miles.
Mr. Lawson also backed himself to ride the return trip —
Coolah to Mudgee, under 18 hours. This was for a bet of
£3O. The two competitors (Messrs. Healy and Lawson)
left Mudgee at 10 minutes to 7in the morning. The
first ten miles were done in 35 minutes, and from that
out Mr. Lawson's horse took the lead and kept it. The
winner (Lawson) did the whole distance in six hours,
having arrived at Coolah at 10 minutes to 1 o'clock.
After a short spell Lawson again mounted, and started
back to Mudgee to win the other wager. He accom-
plished the trip in 30 minutes under the time specified,
thus doing a total journey of 144 miles in 13£ hours.
This record seems almost incredible to some people, but
the Author was assured by a number of western men of
the correctness of the feat.
On the old Goulburn Racecourse, Blackshaw’s pad-
dock, in 1875, the late Mr. W. Jobson, the well-known
dealer, as the outcome of a wager at level money (viz. :
£SO a side) between Mr. Jobson and the late Mr. Sam
Ferguson, undertook to ride 80 miles in 10 hours—Job-
son's riding weight without the saddle being 16 stone.
Mr. Jobson won comfortably, doing the 80 ‘Taps” at a
mile a lap in 20 minutes under the 10 hours. A cattle
dog, I remember, trotted after the rider for a long part
of the journey. Mr. Skillicorn’s famous ride from
Bathurst to Sydney over the Blue Mountains in 20 hours
is another memorable feat of this nature. The Author
was acquainted with Mr. Skillicorn at Forbes in 1862-
63, and remembers him as a keen sporting character.


The Author’s last long ride of any consequence was from
Moss Vale to Burragorang and back —36 miles either
way —in 1903. This ride of 72 miles, undertaken in the.
Author’s 72nd year on a cattle-buying venture, was only
a trifle as regards distance, but as we had to “work our
passage” on a jaded horse for the last twenty miles of
the return trip to Moss Vale, it is one of the rides that
will live longest in the memory.
Yet another rugged veteran of the “pigskin” is Mr.
John Slocombe, the well-known Goulburn butcher. Like
many another Bushman in the overlanding days (includ-
ing the Author himself), the saddle was often Mr.
Slocombe’s armchair by day and his pillow by night.
In November, ’6B, Mr. Slocombe did a day's ride from
the vicinity of Burrawang Station, on the Lachlan, to
beyond Dubbo, on the Macquarie. This journey of 110
miles across the plains (and not all unbroken plains
either) was done on a grassfed stock horse, from 7 in the
morning till about Bat night. Neither horse or rider
(says Mr. Slocombe) were quite as lively as at the start,
but were ready for another long trip next day if re-
quired. Such a trip on the plains would equal one of
from 85 to 90 miles on the Tablelands. The late Wm.
Simons, of the well-known Argyle family, rode the
famous old racehorse “Charley Pork” from Goulburn to
Parramatta, in the day, on the occasion of his brother’s
(Dick) death in 1865. This was a bit over 100 miles.
The old breed of equine grassfed travellers, which, most-
ly, were the heroes of those long journeys, went as long
as their riders kept the saddle; but the riders were
generally as enduring as their mounts. They had
need to be, for the stockmen of those days were often
obliged to travel on an “empty breadbasket” for days.


at a stretch. The Author remembers that his sole
provender for two days on one occasion was a small hunk
of boiled mutton and the memory of our last square
meal. This was on the Riverina while we had lost the
track of the cook’s cart, through the result of a bad
break with horses, which took us anywhere but the way
the commissariat chose to go.
Several times in the sixties —sometimes two or three
times a year —Messrs. Hugh and Jas. Kenny (deceased),
both men of solid weight (16st. or over), rode from Goul-
burn to Bathurst, across the Abercrombie, in splendid
time. They usually left Goulburn about dusk —6.30 or
7 o’clock—and, riding through the night, reached the
Tally Yards before break of day in the morning. From
the Tally Yards they got to Bathurst by 11 p.m., and
this 100 miles, or over, inside 16 hours, when we remem-
ber the bulk of the riders, is as good a record as we know
for ordinary horses over hilly country.
The Story of Toby the Night-Bird.
Another noted long-distance rider of the sixties was
a man who we will call "Toby” W., alias "The Night-
turd,” with which title he will no doubt be yet remem-
bered by a few old Southern Bushmen. Toby, who
was no batch of a horse stealer as well as roughrider,
got away on one occasion with ten or twelve head of good
saddle horses from off Longreach and Arthursleigh. He
sold the stolen steeds quickly, and then disguised, per
aid of a greyish wig and shaven face, made his way
as a wandering bush missionary to Monaro. At Cooma
he fell in with a showman who had a "profound” know-
ledge of talent medicine and the credulity of humanity,


and Toby, after a course of quackery at the hands of
the showman, started business as a chemist and druggist
in one of the best towns on Monaro. Though almost
illiterate, his native impudence and belief in the gulli-
bility of humanity, stood him in such good stead that
he soon began to do a leading trade, and was looked
up to by the simpler order of citizens as a kind of sacred
medicine-man with almost unlimited powers to check all
the ills to which the flesh is heir. But on an unlucky
day, Mr. “Toby” (the great chemist and charlatan)
chanced to be without his wig at the time a keen police-
man, who had had some slight acquaintance with him
at an earlier period, was in the vicinity. A few perti-
nent inquiries convinced the policeman that “Toby” had
performed in other roles than that of chemist—one of
them being the Duffer, for instance—in which capacity
he was required to explain himself by the law. As a
consequence of the astute constable’s activity the self-
created chemist, alias “The Nightbird,” was soon sen-
tenced to a term of imprisonment at Berrima for
the old Australian crime of horse lifting. So the
wig, which in one of its forms is a badge of honour and
is allied to the privileges of the Woolsack, was the down-
fall of poor Toby, before the be-wigged interpreters of
the Law.
Moral: Every wight cannot don or doff a wig with
impunity.
The Author was once informed by a certain bush-tele-
graph of Ben Hall’s Gang that, soon after Hall and
Gilbert appropriated Captain Rossi’s little racehorse
“Snip” he (The Telegraph) rode the horse from the
Weddin Mountains to Young and back again in a day.
From the description given this ride would have been a


journey of over 90 miles. Captain Rossi offered £IOO
for “Snip’s” recovery, but it was a long time before the.
horse was restored to his owner. One day at the “pound-
sale at Hay, a horse was bought in by the pound-keeper.
This animal was the missing “Snip.” The horse was
lent to a mounted trooper for a few days, and it struck
the trooper that he had seen the horses brand in the
police books. He soon verified the matter, and so “Snip”
was sent back to Rossiville. But his racing career was
over. But m concluding these few remarks on Austro-
lian horsemen of the past we trust that the day will
never dawn when the genuine buck-jumper and the
breakers of the bush will no longer be living and
fighting realities on the sunny landscape—when the horse
will be as dead as the dodo, and the riders only thought
of as we now review the “pictured” Romans who, cen-
turies ago run the chariot races over the classic tracks of
the Eternal City. Perish the thought! while an Aus-
tralian worthy of the name exists so long will the horse,
find a rider and a friend.


CHAPTER XVIII.
Some Leading Men of old Times.
Wentworth.
“The giants of the past have fled,
But aye they wrought, nor wrought in vain;
The ancient Titans all are dead,
But living fruits their gifts remain/ 7
G. M cA.
Of all the notable men of mark, who helped to make
history in the early days, there was one, viz. : William
Charles Wentworth, who, in the view of old-time Aus-
tralians will be ever recognised as the central figure ;he
great directing genius of his day. To Wentworth Aus-
tralia is largely indebted for its first constitution 5 for -he
movement which initiated the Sydney University and
other measures of great value. It is said that amongst
the blind the one-eyed is a king,” but Wentworth v as
an intellectual king, even amongst compeers of the
clearest political sight and sagacity; he was, indeed, the
supreme force in those remarkable early Assemblies,
which in point of political acumen and debat.ve power
(if not in democratic spirit) compare more than favour-
ably with the ablest of our modern Parliaments. As far
back as 1827, Mr. Wentworth was one of the foremost
of the early agitators who memorialised the King, and
the Lords and Commons of England on the subject of
a semi-elective Assembly, which they suggested should
consist of one hundred members; basing their pet tion


on the demand that the principle of taxation by repre-
sentation should be recognised. Mr. Wentworth was,
in fact, the proposer of the chief resolution, and Sir
John Jamieson, the seconder. It is said that the twenty -
four gentlemen signing the memorial represented capital
to the value of over a million sterling. The Home
authorities were very dilatory, however, over the con-
sideration of the matter, but the pioneers of Australian
politics were a resolute and persistent body, as real
pioneers always are; and under the leadership of Went-
worth and his able Lieutenants (Drs. Bland and War-
dell; Robert Lowe, Sir Charles Cowper, Dr. Lang,
Robert Campbell, etc.), was formed the “Patriotic Asso-
ciation,” which ardently pressed onward with the high
purpose in view. In January, 1843—16 years from the
beginning of the agitation—word came across the seas
from England, that the British Government had enacted
a constitution for Australia. How patronising this
seems to the independent Australians of to-day ! The
Assembly thus created was to consist of one house of 54
members; eighteen to be nominated by the Crown, and
thirty-six by the people—this being the nearest approach
towards autonomy the British Government was prepared
to grant at the period. The Author was in Sydney dur-
ing the election for the City electorate in 1843, and,
boy-like, was more interested in the riots and fighting
between the Wentworth and O'Connell factions than in
the real business of the Election. In fact, the latter was
little better than Greek to my conceptions at that period.
There were five candidates, viz. : Messrs. Wentworth and
Bland (who were returned), and Sir Maurice (then Cap-
tain) O'Connell, Robert Cooper, of the Camperdown
Distillery, and Mr. Hustler—who had been Sheriff of


the Colony. A great fight took place between the rival
parties in Lower George Street, about what is now called,
I believe, Nolan’s Corner, and the windows in Sam
Lyons’ (the auctioneer’s) buildings were broken by some
of the O’Connell crowd. Mr. Lyons was a strong sup-
porter of Wentworth and Bland, and to avert injury to
His windows in future, he sent over to England for some
very thick plate-glass, which was solid enough to resist
the weapons (blue metal) of the stone-throwers. Fight-
ing in fact was the order of the day. I remember the
mounted troopers charging the mob with drawn swords.
In the struggle at the hustings in Macquarie Place the
structure was smashed to “smithereens,’’ and Dr. Bland
got a nasty fall, and was unable to attend the declaia-
tion of the poll. It was the most willing election that I
ever witnessed. AVentworth passed his opinion on the
fighting proclivities of friends and foes alike, saying that
the conduct of the rioters would have disgraced the most
bloodthirsty of savage nations. He (Wentworth) later
described his constituents as “the most misled, vacillat-
ing and ignorant body of men in the country.” But
most of the political leaders of those days had, or pro-
fessed to have, a very poor opinion of the intelligence
and consistency of the electors 5 so Mr. Wentworth did
not stand alone in his depreciation. But it might be
said as a “set-off” that superfine knowledge could
scarcely be expected of people, many of whom were quite
illiterate, and others but only recently freed from their
Penal chains. Indeed at a time when rum was a chief
element of exchange, and the potent influence of that
beverage had to be reckoned with at elections; and when
the real value of political institutions was not under-
stood by half of those with the voting power, the marvel


was that Government was as liberalised as it happened.
One thing is, we think, certain, viz.: that the early Par-
liaments were not a reflex of the intelligence of the
electors, but of a degree far above the early electors’
standard. As to the purchasing power of rum, any old
hand of the Wentworth days, could, no doubt, tell of
scores of blocks of land in Sydney, Parramatta, Goul-
burn, etc., to-day worth thousands of pounds, which
changed owners for the consideration of a few gallons
of fire-water. ’ The Author knows of a good many such
“rummy” transactions. But to return to Mr. Went-
worth. It came as a severe shock to many of his erst-
while staunchest, followers to find that the great Tribune
saw fit to run counter to the popular desire in the Anti-
transportation movement of 1848-50. In the interests
of cheap labour for the big pastoralists, Wentworth
desired to keep one way open for a limited supply of con-
victs, but the people had decreed that the blight of the
convict supply must cease; and cease it did. But it
would appear that from this time onward the bugbear
of extreme conservatism had marked Wentworth for its
own. In the Constitution Bill of 1853, he sought to
introduce a measure which provided for the creation
(subject to the Royal favour) of an Australian “House
of Peers, ’ to be selected from the wealthier and more
cultured class of citizens. This idea, however, received
but very scant support in Parliament, and was merci-
lessly criticised and ridiculed by Deneihy, John Bailey
Darvell, and other great democrats of the time. Went-
worth was a fine orator, but in no cause was his
eloquence less worthily employed than in pursuance of
his pet notion, viz. : The “Cornstalk House of Lordsl”
Addressing his fellow-legislators on the subject, Mr..


Wentworth said, “When a generation having this
hereditary right arises here, I predict that it will be
found a good and stable bulwark necessary for the de-
fence of good government and Conservative institutions.
A powerful body will be formed of men of wealth, pro-
perty, and education —men not raised from any par-
ticular section of the community, but from every class
that has the energy to aspire to rank and honour. It
was said that the humblest soldier in Napoleon s armies
carried, prospectively, a Field-Marshal's baton in his
knapsack, but Mr. Wentworth, as will be seen, went
“one better." He desired to tempt every man of wealth
and culture with the prospective Golden Spurs of
Knight-hood as an incentive to ambition and effort.
But happily most of the legislators were democrats to the
core, and held, with Burns, that
“For a’ that and a’ that
Our toils obscure and a' that
The rank is but the guinea-stamp,
The man’s the gowd for a’ that.”
And so the proposed “House of Peers” was laughed out
of Court. But to sum up this little epitome on Went-
worth —the splendid achievements of his “green leaf ’ so
far outweigh the political errors of the day, that we for-
get Wentworth the would-be autocrat, in Wentworth
the patriot, the illustrious Tribune, and leading Aus-
tralian of his day.


CHAPTER XIX.
Other Famous Tribunes of the Past.
Robert Lowe.
The name of Robert Lowe, later known as the famous
Lord Sherbrooke, Chancellor of the British Exchequer,
will be remembered by old Australians as that of a man
of great intellect, and strong character. During the
Author s boyhood he had a few interviews with Mr.
Lowe, who was one of the most approachable of the
big-wigs of the time, but his (Lowe’s) personal appear-
ance somewhat belied his abilities: his watery eyes,
whitish eyelashes, and ‘‘pasty” complexion, giving him
anything but an impressive air as regards facial effect.
He was, however, besides being a great statesman, one
of the best advocates that ever “took silk.” In his de-
fence of the infamous Knatchbull, the murderer, Mr.
Lowe (as he was then) set up the theory of temporary
infinity on behalf of the prisoner, it being the first
occasion, we believe, that such a line of defence was
argued in an Australian criminal court, but notwith-
standing Lowe’s great effort, Knatchbull was found
guilty and sentenced to death. As far back as 1857,
Lowe advocated Federation of the Australian colonies
in a series of remarkable speeches, and gave Dr. Lang
great assistance in the Dr.’s agitation to form the Port
Phillip (Victoria) district into a separate colony. But


on declining to fight a duel, to which he was challenged
by a Mr. McDermott, Mr. Lowe incurred the ridicule
of the “Cabbage-tree hat” mob of Sydney, and some
rough lines went the rounds, which thus commented on
his want of courage, viz. :
“I can always skite a lot, you know,
But to stand and fight —Oh, no ! Oh, no!
I’ll fight no duels —says Bobby Lowe.”
But Mr. Lowe, finding the arena of Australian public
life too small an orbit for his powers took up his residence
in England. He was elected to the House of Commons
wherein he made several notable speeches, Speaking,
for instance, on the Bill for “The Disestablishment of
the State Church in Ireland,” Mr Lowe said, ‘ The Irish
Church is founded on injustice. . . on the dominant
rights of the few over those of the many. it has
no leaves; no fruit. ... no blossom. Cut it down ;
why encumbereth it the ground?” For his eminent
services Robert Rowe was, as we have seen, raised to the
Peerage, and passed away from the earthly scenes of his
toils and triumphs as Lord Sherbrooke.
CHAPTER XX.
Dr. Lang.
Of the famous Dr. Lang—the “Stormy Petrel” of our
early political struggles —volumes have been written;
and perhaps no figure in our history has made a bigger
mark in the pages of public controversy than this rest


less and forcible divine of the Presbyterian Church.
Dr. Lang was, we believe, positively the first of our
public men to initiate an immigration policy for Aus-
tralia an “All-Scotch" scheme—as the first lot of
immigrants brought out under Dr. Lang’s auspices com-
prised about sixty Scotch families. Those people
arrived, per the sailing ship “Stirling Castle," in Octo-
ber, 1831. They included mechanics of many trades,
and were employed on the erection of a College, designed
by Dr. Lang for the education of young men for the
Presbyterian Church, and this College was the nucleus
of St. Andrew’s, now affiliated to the Sydney University.
The Doctor received no encouragement m this matter
from the then Governor of New South Wales (Sir
Thomas Brisbane), or any of the leading colonists; but,
nothing daunted, he voyaged to England, and laid his
scheme before Lord Goderich (then Secretary of State
for the Colonies), and obtained a grant of £l5OO,
towards the cost of the immigrants’ passages to Aus-
tralia. This money, however, was to be refunded to
the Government by deductions from the wages of the
mechanics. Dr. Lang as an editor and newspaper pro-
prietor—chiefly in connection with “The Colonist,’’
started in 1835—was a considerable thorn in the side of
the official caste and tyranny of old times, Through his
scathing condemnation and criticism of certain public
men and affairs, Dr. Lang was called upon to defend
many libel actions; and it is a graphic testimonial to the
belief of the people in his honesty of purpose that in
nearly every case, his fines and legal expenses were met
by public subscription. Dr. Lang was the first member
of the old Legislative Council to move a motion in favour
of the separation of Port Phillip from New South Wales,


in which he was supported by Robert Lowe. This was
in 1846, but it was not until 1851 that Port Phillip was
proclaimed a separate Colony under the title of Victoria.
On being elected to represent the City of Sydney, m
1850, Dr. Lang said : “Some comments had appeared in
the ‘London Daily News,’ stating that his last election
had been accidental, and that the electors took no part
in the extreme views he held, as to the right of a Colony
to entire freedom and independence. . . • God for-
bid that he should feel disrespect for the Authorities of
the old Fatherland ... but he would never hesi-
tate to express his conviction of the right of any Colony
of the Crown, as soon as it could stand on its own legs,
to entire freedom and independence . • • and when-
ever the-day came that they should have a flag of their
own floating over Australia, he felt confident that Great
Britain would rejoice with them, and say, Many daugh-
ters have done virtuously, but thou, Australia, hast
excelled them all.’ ”
It will be seen from this and many other such deliver-
ances that the fiery Churchman held very strong Repub-
lican tendencies. I well remember the sturdy, thick-set
figure of Dr. Lang, and heard him speak on several occa-
sions, notably at the big Anti-Transportation meeting,
in 1850, elsewhere spoken of. He was a very forcible
speaker, a master of invective, and his speech was sea-
soned with the dry wit and pungent satire which so often
characterise the public utterances of many Scottish
speakers. Dr. Lang died in August, 1878, and, speak-
ing at the first anniversary of the Doctor’s death, Sir
Henry Parkes said, in the course of an oration: “There
appeared in this country in its early days, a group of
men who certainly were eminently fitted to struggle with


tlie dark times. Amongst them was John Dunmore
Lang, who, perhaps, excelled them all in the combina-
tion of those qualities which form real human greatness
that is, his bravery, his grasp of intellect, his untiring
capacity for work, and, above all, that tenderness of
spirit without which it has been said, and I believe truly
said, that no man can be truly great.” Dr. Lang has
been variously estimated by his critics. One school has
represented him as a connecting-rod between the two
extremes of rigid fanaticism and red-raw Socialism \
while another view is that he was a true humanist whose
mistakes were unpremeditated impulses. But all must
agree, whatever their estimate of Lang’s influence on
affairs in his day, that he was a born Leader, a man of
great intellectual gifts and of unquestionable moral
courage. No doubt his extreme dogmatism was a blot
on his otherwise benevolent spirit, and his anti-Irish
impulses sometimes carried him away into regions
beyond the pale of modern common sense ; but, all in all,
John Dunmore Lang was one of the greatest Commoners
of his time. Australians remembering his patriotism,
his faith in the great destinies of their country, and the
grand efforts that this great clerico-statesman put forth
in the work of forwarding Higher Education in the
early days, will assuredly in the National Pantheon, or
Australian Westminster Abbey of the future, reserve ;
high place for an inscription to John Dunmore Lang’s
fame and memory.


CHAPTER XXI
Daniel Henry Deneihy.
Amongst other leading men of the Forties and Fifties
a period prolific in notable speakers, writers, jur-sts,
and business men —were Sir James Martin, Archdeacon
McEnroe, William Macleay, John H. Plunkett, Dr.
Lang, William Forster, Eobert Nicholls, T. S. Mort,
Sir S. A. Donaldson (our first Premier), W. B. Dailey,
Sir H. Parkes, and Daniel Henry Deneihy—the two
latter then being rather young politicians.
Both Deneihy and Parkes, as also J. W. Plunkett, in
after years, represented Argyle in the New South Wales
Parliament. A few of the earlier generation of South-
ern folk yet living will, no doubt, remember something
of “little” Dan Deneihy, the famous orator and lawyer,
for he spent some three years in the Fifties practising in
Goulburn.
In stature and avoirdupois, Deneihy was one of the
smallest of men, but his utterances and the energy
of his spirit were large enough to make a truly
deep and lasting impression on his time. The
Author’s first interview with Mr. Deneihy waa
at Goulburn in 1856, when he accompanied a neigh-
bour (viz., the late Donald McDonald, of Middle Arm),
to seek Deneihy’s legal advice about the impounding
of some cattle from Government land by the Chatsbury
Overseer (a Mr. Patterson). On hearing our explana-
171
FAMOUS TRIBUNES OF THE PAST.


prettv d S “ d: '‘ We ' U ffiake » ,
pretty dear impounding for Mr. Patterson if he don't
take notice of this.” handing us a “lawyer's letter” he
fu a tur:'‘“ e H “ Tha ‘ W 1" be ‘ ter “ »
tuture. However, we found that the Overseer on
earning we had gone to seethe “new lawyer” (Deneihvi
eZnllfLt: 1 tte ma “ er ’ a “ d th. catji’
lands Lt, d ! Plm ° ua y off Crown
lands in the district, but Deneihy's letter, which we
took care to publ'sh f flr j i n we
illegal tax-’no- of i-f-i • w^e , put an end to the
eonitlv T, 1T 7 S St ° Ck “ th3t ? art ° f
selection bef ™ reference to the question of Free-
ze G h ::; b d ur y n t f; s r >-
delivered from the Commercial Hotel the“™
f his election for Argyle County.
Land tbal ' ° CCas on ’ Deneihy spoke as follows : “The
Land question is the cardinal subject for Australian
statesmanship, and it is one ‘ i "
imperatively demand the genius of a statesman oT^e
questhn th ° rd6r ' 1 claJm such a settlement of the
the State as , ska, i' everywhere the necessities of
CoL:tt? Ulr ; 1 ° pe “ Up the P ublic of the
with■ y the lndustna C,asses l as shall place laud easily
within every man's reach, not in theory,Vt in poilt M
r .ey; -h,::ttrt:::Lrtrm N arr
building up of a Nation the end and aim ’of go ve m
i*would fair f g tUS SP6eCh ’ Said
tnTw l , Wn ” ore ° f “ a ukiud ere I under
took to legislate for them. . Yet .
nal-fires are reddening the hills at The
fierce invitation of the trumpet is abroad" is it fm th e
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


recruit to plead that his drill is incomplete ? No; I
hope to be able in my poor way to touch to great and
beneficent issues the destinies of this land of the free
whose kingdom is to come.”
Speaking at a later period on the land question,
Deneihy said; “Our Governments had hitherto dealt
with this question not as the instrument by which a
great Nation was to spring into being on their shores,
but as the stock-in-trade of gigantic land-jobbers and
real-property auctioneers, , who, m their fervour for
fancy prices had lost sight of their duty and their trust.”
This speech was made at the time when Robertson’s Act
of ’6l was being matured and drafted. iDeneihy was
one of the most effective opponents of the proposed
hereditary Australian House of Peers, favoured by
Wentworth and a few others, and his scornful speeches
and virile pen, helped to kill the notion oi (to use
Deneihy’s words), “the shoddy Aristocracy of Botany
Bay,” before that high-toned idea had got beyond the
embryo stage. In one of his scathing addresses on this
subject, Mr. Deneihy remarked: “The stately Aris-
tocracy of England was founded on the sword. The
men who came over with the conquering Normans were
the masters of the Saxons, and so became the Aris-
tocracy. But he would enquire by what process Mr.
Wentworth and his satellites had conquered the people
of New South Wales, except by the artful dodgery of
cooking up a Franchise Bill. ... If this Bill were
made law, it would later come about that the meanest
man who walked the streets would fling his jibe at the
Aristocrats of Botany Bay.”
But as we have seen, the Wentworth proposals were
defeated. It would be a congenial labour, did our space


permit, to reproduce extracts from other of Deneihy’s
stirring and eloquent addresses. We would very briefly
refer, however, to his touching address on “The Patriots
of Ireland/ 7 delivered at the St. Patrick's Day Banquet
in Sydney, 1860. After referring to famous Irish
statesmen and their compatriots eminent in the Arts
and Sciences, Mr. Deneihy went on to say: “But of all
those of her many gifted children, those whom Ireland
loved best were neither her artists, her painters, her
poets, or sculptors, but her own dear patriot sons who
had struggled for her in her hour of need, and now sleep
in their unhonoured graves. . . . The Englishman
was proud of his Hampden, and the other great names
which adorn his History; the Frenchman of those who
had achieved so much for the freedom and greatness of
his nation; but in lands such as Italy, Hungary, and
Ireland, there was a deeper and tenderer feeling con-
nected with the memory of their patriots. 77
And the allusion to the word “Patriot 77 reminds us
that no truer Patriot, no more whole-hearted supporter
of the White Australian policy, for instance, ever con-
demned the intrusion of alien races to our shores than
Daniel Henry Deneihy. This was shown in his strenuous
fight in favour of Cowper’s Alien Restriction Bill of
1858. He said: “He saw no more injustice in prevent-
ing the landing of this degraded race (the Chinese) than
he saw in stopping the running of a cargo of contraband
opium or brandy. 77 During his residence at Goulburn,
in the Fifties, Mr. Deneihy was the victim of a forger;
his (Denehy s) name was signed to a cheque for the sum
of £l7O drawn on the Commercial Bank, of which the
Author's honoured friend, John O'Sullivan, was the
manager. The incident is referred to in a letter written


by Deneiby to bis wife, and as this epistle became, in a
sense, public property, through its inclusion amongst
"Memoirs of D. H. Deneihy,’’ edited by Miss E. M.
Martin, we will here quote a few excerpts from it, which
will, no doubt, interest many. The letter is dated July
16th, 1856, and is addressed to "My ever beloved Ada,"
and runs: "When your loving missive reached me, I
had only returned from Springfield, the princely seat
of W. P. Faithfull, Esq. . . - Very pleasantly I
spent the time; nevertheless, so intensely do I detest
visiting, that when the white front of Mandelson s Hotel
came in sight, as Mr. Faithfull brought me back to
Goulburn, I felt almost as if I saw home. Faithfull is
a grand specimen of an Australian, built on a scale of
giant proportions, but with a mind honest, simple, and
gentle as a child's." (Everyone who were intimately
acquainted with the late Mr. Faithfull will endorse the
opinion expressed by Mr. Deneihy.)
The writer then refers to having found on his return
to Goulburn that his name had been forged as above
related. As Mr. Faithfull and he (Deneihy) were
driving down the street to the lodgings of the latter,
they met Mr. Francis McArthur (Norwood), who joined
them at dinner. "At dinner, Mr. McArthur said
(the letter goes on), "looking very grave and uneasy,
‘Have you seen O’Sullivan? If you have not, go, my
deir fellow at once; somebody has been trying to play
a very serious trick with you.’ ’’ Deneihy obtained the
cheque from O’Sullivan, into whose hands it had been
c elivered, and everyone expected that proceedings would
taken against the forger. But in the evening the
culprit (one K n, whom Deneihy had befriended)
c;me to Deneihy beseeching him not to take action; and


it is a tribute to D. H D VirwJr.* . ,
telling u kindness of heart that, after
telling the man he regretted his want of principle -'I
Tapertt 7 e h 'dT P ° Cke *’ “ d
hteraiW f 0 „ 0 TtT* Bireds before He thus
hterahy (ollowed the example of g;>
who forgave sinners and urged them "to sin no more.”
e et er, which ends with some loving expressions
shows the unfathomable good nature of this unfortunate
son of genius, who said of himself that "in his coTn fw
was no adhesiveness ” t x
■ ~ , lesiveness. For unfortunate, surely he was
n the twilight of his career. A fanrlv
laid heaw tnli n- • ramjy bereavement
other m f !“ BeMltlve B P irit - “d monetary and
other misfortunes dogged his steps in his declining years
The closing scenes of Deneihy’s life at TWi, , ,
he dmd at th* “t *■ „ at Batimrs t> where
e cLed at the fatal age” (as verified by the oassW
away many men Qf gen . us) Qf th . rty
Hevf H “th moUrnfuL Heneihy’s relics rest, we bef
tra!i;-ftTeft m w *-*" (A*
J iyric P oet )> m the historic Waverley
Cemetery by "the wide expanse of Southern Seas”
bXf h 6 W an<i S “ fe ° f the ° ity ’ S tu “ ult ’ the’
of rest f T BB - SUre,y * is 8 P l^
and the Bard ffl, * “ aneS of the tra nscendent orator
of the waves and mountains. The eternal
requiem of hoary Ocean is surely more appropriate Tn
lemoriaT; of
wherever L D e ,, WaVering tongUes ° f men ' B “‘
erever be Deneihy s resting-place, the gifts he left
behind him the noble thoughts of a noble mind he
SeTnd A 1 t^ SOUl6d ge “
prese f ’them A ” d 80 B >-« «
176
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


CHAPTER XXI.
Other Men of the Past.
John Bailey Darvall.
John Bailey Darvall, Solicitor-General in the first
Australian Ministry, like Cowper, Deneihy, Parkes, and
Lang, strongly opposed the Conservative proposals of
the Wentworth party, and helped to put a few big na'
in the coffin of early Colonial Toryism.
The Author first heard Mr. Darvall speak in public
at Parramatta, in September, 1851. On my return
journey to Bathurst and the Turon (after the trip to
Sydney with Webbe’s loading), I called at Parramatta
with some freight for Messrs. Pinchcombe and Watkin,
an old firm of storekeepers in that town. The election
for the County of Cumberland was on at the time, and
Wentworth, Darvall, and other great guns were at it
“hammer and tongs.” In the course of his speech, I
remember Darvall said —referring to the curse of In-
tolerance that some misguided individuals were wor 1 :
up against one of the candidates —“You might as well
ask a candidate the colour of his coat as the church
wherein he worshipped. In this Colony we have no
State Church, and it was infamous to t"?!! r".yone here
that he was unfit for any particular station because of
his creed.” But it was a Mr. Kendall who made the
most amusing speech that day. He gave Parkes and
Dr. Lang—then the chief democratic leaders —several


“nasty jars.” He said those sort of people, if they tried
their (alleged) spoliation policy on the Australian com-
munity, would soon find it safe to set out for California,
“with their Eeverend demagogue (Dr. Lang) at their
head." He further said—to the best of our recollection
that there were Chartists and Communists in Sydney
“who made long speeches with their right arms, and
threw them over the shoulders with their left." This
feat, even to the Author’s defective political understand-
ing at the time, seemed “a stunner," but the idea vastly
amused the gathering. We have heard of political
acrobats since, but we doubt if the smartest “juggler”
of them all could perform such antics as the one re-
counted by Mr. Kendall. But to hark back to Darvall.
In reply to Wentworth on the Hereditary House motion,
he (Darvall) said, “When vindicating the representative
principle I feel that I am vindicating the principle
which has maintained the British Constitution in peace
and security when all the Governments of Europe were
shaken. But for the representative principle the British
Constitution would have been long since in ruins.” The
whole tenor of Mr. (afterwards Sir) J. B. Darvall’s
public life shows that he was ever a true advocate of
popular liberties.
John Hubert Plunkett*
John Hubert Plunkett is remembered by the Author
as one of the old school—slow and sure; not a brilliant
speaker, but of great political weight and courage. He
earned the enmity of the “Cabbage-tree Hat" mob on
account of the part he took in securing the conviction of
the perpetrators of the Myall Creek (Aborigines) mas-
acre in 1838. At the first trial (there were two) the


accused men were acquitted, and Mr. Plunkett (then
Crown Prosecutor) was twitted on his failure. There s
your Irish law," said the Sydney mob and papers in
derision. “All r.ght,” said Plunkett, “Wait awhile,
and ITI give you English law.” And he did; for the
men were re-tried and found guilty on a charge of
killing the gins and picanninies (as they had been ac-
quitted on the grounds of justifiable homicide for killing
the adult blackfellows) and were finally executed in
Sydney; Mr. Plunkett was returned for two constitu-
encies, viz. : Bathurst and Argyle. At the first division
in Parliament he had “the hide' to claim a dual vote,
which was promptly disallowed by the Speaker. Mr.
Plunkett thereupon elected to sit for Argyle. His op-
ponents in the Argyle contest in 1856 were the late John
W. Chisholm and Daniel Thorne. The Author, then
residing at Strathaird, was in Goulburn for a few hours
on polling-day, and remembers the Rev. Mr. Hurst
(Wesleyan), a strong supporter of Plunkett, bringing
the poll in from Bungonia with the news that Plunkett
was leading.
The allusion to the Myall Creek Massacre reminds the
Author that he camped one night at the scene of the
tragedy, while on a cattle-buying trip to the Reedy
Creek Station, New England, some thirty years ago.
The Myall Creek Station was then owned by Messrs.,
Danger and McDonald; and from the head stockman we
bought a saddle-horse which turned out to be one of the
worst buck-jumpers we ever mounted. He threw the
Author and several drovers, one after the other within
an hour. The ill-famed stock-yard wherein the blacks
were yarded and despatched by the murderers was then
(1867) rapidly falling to decay.


Sir Stuart A. Donaldson.
Sir Stuart A. Donaldson, first Premier of New South
Wales, was a fine, openhearted gentleman, and was pro-
bably the most personally popular man amongst all
creeds and classes in the Forties and Fifties. In 1844,
the Author’s father leased a block of land from Henry
Stuckey, of Hungry Hill, near Longreach, for the pur-
pose of raising and trading in the rough marble deposits
there. Mr. Donaldson (as he was then) bought several
tons of this marble (or superior limestone), which we
delivered at ins Pitt Street stores, and he declared his
intention of coming up country to have a look at the
“marble” quarries. But we do not think he ever found
time to visit the Hungry Hill district for the purpose;
and it would seem that for many years the Longreach
marble has been a drug in the market. The famous
duel fought between Sir Stuart Donaldson and Sir
Thomas Mitchell (Surveyor-General) in 1852, was a
theme of considerable interest at the time it was fought.
One shot penetrated Donaldson’s hat, and another just
grazed Mitchell s ear; but happily the seconds stopped
the combat before any damage was done. The pistols
used in this duel once belonged to the Rev. Henry Ful-
ton (Anglican Minister), who was sent out to Australia
for Having been concerned in the 1898 Irish rebellion.
Thomas Sutcliffe Mort.
The name of Thomas Sutcliffe Mort is inseparably
linked with the invention of the freezing chamber and


appliances, which have been of such value in making
possible the Australian frozen meat trade with the
world. Mort’s Dock and the Bodalla dairy-farms will
further perpetuate to future generations the memory,
and testify to the commercial genius of that far-sighted
and genial patriot and business-man, T. S. Mort. Such
men as Mort, Dymock, and Sandford (Lithgow Iron-
works) are the founders of true national self-reliance
and enterprise. We had several dealings with Mr. Mort
in youth, and he was always one of the most kindly and
considerate of employers.
We will refer elsewhere to Sir Charles Cowper (the
“Father” of our railway system); Sir John Robertson
(the founder of Free Selection); Sir Henry Parkes, and
the Right Hon. W. B. Dailey, and, in closing this little
“Gallery” of some of the celebrities of the past, would
respectfully submit that we have but spoken of our sub-
jects simply as they appeared to our conceptions, and as
their speeches, etc., impressed the Author’s early read-
ing and memory. Though many of those giants of the
past were of differing moulds of political thought, and,
as party men, would have strongly discounted Pope’s
axiom—
“ For forms of government let fools contest
Whatever is best administered is best,”
it can be said of them, both in the aggregate and indi-
vidually, that they acted up to the poet’s ideal, viz.:—
“Worth makes the man, and want of it the fellow —
The rest is only leather or prunella.”
In concluding those references to the giants of the
past, we will briefly refer, however, to the anti-trans-
portation movement of 1848-50.


The Anti-Transportation Agitation.
The late Forties had indeed a full cargo of able men
and large affairs, but all other matters political were
overshadowed by the great Agitation in 1848-50, which
aimed at the repeal—or rather, termination— of the
transportation system. In the Author’s opinion, that
grand, humane statesman, Sir Richard Bourke, Gov-
ernor of New South Wales from 1832-38, deserves our
imperishable regard for being the first high personage
in authority to exert himself to put an end to trans-
portation. This heinous system was nothing, more or
less, than a hideous travesty on civilized ideas as to the
salutary government of offenders, and succeeded as far
as any vile system ever did, in brutalising both its in-
struments and its victims. In previous chapters, how-
ever, the system has been reviewed and its baleful sur-
roundings referred to. The Author happened to be one
of the vast audience at the great anti-transportation
meeting held in the old Barrack Square, Sydney, in
September, 1850. That meeting was addressed by,
amongst other men of note, Dr. Lang, Archdeacon
McEncroe, Sir Charles Cowper, and Robert Campbell
the latter being one of the “noblest Romans” of them
all. The meeting was also “held” by a young man of
vigorous mien and style, named Henry Parkes, whose
fame in after years was destined to be trumpetted far
and wide, as that of our greatest statesman. Dr. Lang’s
fiery eloquence roused the meeting to the highest pitch
of enthusiasm. He told us he “would not hesitate for
a moment, if the alternative were forced upon Irm, of


choosing between more convicts or an Australian Re-
public." It really seems almost beyond credence, at the
present day to find that such great men as W. C. Went-
worth and Sir James Martin were in favour of con-
tinuing the transportation to Australia of British con-
victs under certain conditions. Goulburn, Bathurst,
and Queanbeyan, like the other chief inland centres,
also gave forth their sternest protest against the evil,
and amongst those prominent at Goulburn and Argyle
Anti-transportation meetings were Messrs. W. P. Faith-
full, Major Lockyer, Dr. Gibson, Charles Hamilton
Walsh, John O’Sullivan, A. G. De Lauret, R. Craig,
John Hillas, and the Revs. Dean Sowerby, Dean Walsh,
and Parson Ross. And in mentioning the three good,
kindly clerics named, it is only their due to say —I would
it were set down in letters of gold —that each of them
was a man venerated for his simple goodness for the
broad spirit of human charity and fellowship, that they
practised, both in and out of the pulpit. However, the
resolve of the Australian Government and people could
no longer be ignored by the British Authorities, and,
as every schoolboy knows, Penal Transportation ceased
in 1852. Thinking over this great agitation of 1850, one
of the verses of the time recurs to me, viz. : a song en-
titled “Australia Shall Be Free.” It ran thus;—
“Sons of the soil arise; let this your anthem be —
Shout till it rend the skies: Australia shall be free;
Be not deceived, but deem that man your enemy
Who says that gold, with guilt and crime, can make
Australia free.”
It was indeed high kme that the people rose in their
wrath, and determined to cast from their sight for ever


the evil spectre of the barbaric Penal System. High
time that they resolved to say of convictism, as was
finely said by Bryant, in voicing his feelings on the
death-knell of slavery in the United States, in the
Sixties— '
“Go now, accursed of God, and take thy place
With hateful memories of the older time.”
* * *
Lo ! the foul phantoms silent in the gloom
Of the foetid ages part to yield thee room. ’
There seems to have been something very fitting,
almost prophetic, one might think, in the cessation of
the convict supply, and its relations just before the era
of the goldfields.
It were as if the good genius of our National affairs,
heralding the dawn of a brighter day, had, at the
psychological moment, cleared away the foul excresences
of the past, ere the advent of the grand and stirring
evolution that was to be. In the chapters which form
the next part of this narrative, we will treat of this
roseate epoch—the Golden Age of the “Roaring Fifties”
in New South Wales and Victoria, and the parts the
Author played therein.


CHAPTER XXII.
The Turon Rush in 1851.
The rush that set in was a terror,
In eight or nine mid-winter days,
A highroad was run to the diggings
And cut into bogs by the drays.
As every schoolboy knows, the Turon Rush broke out
in 1851, and it was a “hummer”; truly an epoch-mark-
ing event which set the world a-blaze with excitement,,
and made Australia’s name known from pole to pole.
I first heard of the Turon gold discovery while home-
ward-bound from Sydney, in May, 1851, accompanied
by my late brother (Thos. McAlister), and other carriers.
A horseman leading a “packer” overtook us one after-
noon at the Bargo River crossing. He said, “I suppose
you chaps have heard of gold being found over on the
Turon?” We answered “No,” and naturally asked
who had discovered it. Our informant said, “Oh, a
man named Hargreaves —not long back from California
—struck it at Summer Hill Creek —good and rich, too.
I’m making for there now,” he added as he rode away.
On reaching Goulburn we found a few had already
started for the rush, and more making ready, and I
quickly resolved to join in the hunt. I was just about
starting with a pack-horse, when I chanced one day to
meet Mr. Clements, of Summer Hill, Oberon (not the
Summer Hill Creek of the Rush) and contracted to take
over a load of 150 bushels of wheat, and a supply of other
goods. On starting I was joined by a company com


prising Harry Antill (son of Major Anti 11, of Picton),
Mr. Hatch (ex-Chief Constable of Goulburn), and one
or two other gold-seekers. Our route was across the
Abercrombie, out by Ballerou and Bingham's crossing-
place, near where stands Mr. Francis’ homestead, where
we were most hospitably treated by that fine old settler
(Mr. Francis). At Buckburragee Hill (on the Aber-
crombie) I lost two bullocks of my team by a somewhat
curious accident. To pull each dray up the hill—a very
steep pinch —we yoked another relay of bullocks to those
already “on the job." The first dray was pulled up
safely, and the two polers left on top of the ridge yoked
to it, while we returned for the second dray. Something
caused the two bullocks to swerve off the narrow path,
and the weight of the dray ran them headlong over the
precipice. They came a terrible crash, and both had
their necks broken. Some time previously I had two
bullocks killed at the Swallowtail ridge, Arthursleigh,
through a similar accident. On the primitive roads such
misadventures were much more frequent than nowadays.
For often the “highways" were little better than
“Lucky gaps in the blue-wreathed hills,
Or marked-tree lines by the grass-girt rills."
It took us five weeks to reach the Western El Dorado,
and on the road we tried our “prentice-hand" at pro-
specting. One afternoon, while camped on Gilmandyke
Creek, we got about 15 dwts. of gold after a few hours'
rough work with the dish, but as we were making for
the head-quarters of the diggings we hurried on (slowly)
and so left a fortune behind us at the creek, for the
place we tried and adjoining country was afterwards
turned up from end to end, and thousands of ozs. taken
out. The other members of the party went direct to the


field ; and the Author, after delivering Mr. Clements’
loading, made his way to Big Oakey Creek, where the
chief rush had set in. Along this creek and throughout
the locality—at Golden Point, Wallaby Rocks, Neale’s
Point, Little Oakey, on to Wattle-flat, there were, by
the end of August, some 12,000 or 15,000 gold seekers,
Men of every nationality, calling, and shade of society—
from some of the “colonial aristocrasy” to the humblest
kind ever born of woman; from the noblest types of
humanity, to the meanest sneakthief that ever pinched
a pair of bootlaces. And they came in almost every sort
of vehicle known to earthly ingenuity, from a four-in-
hand to a gincase on wheels. There were donkey-carts
and curricles; springcarts and wheelbarrows; and as we
well remember, the road over the Blue Mountains grew
black for months with the traffic of the thousands daily
coming to join the human beehives already at Calico-
town. A great many came on “shank’s pony” too : some
amongst them that at the start hadn’t a feather to fly
with. Many of those soldiers of fortune, however, left
the field on “golden wings,” so to speak, as they made
their thousands at the diggings and went away rich men.
But nof so the Author. I soon found that like many
another j field the Turon was much of a lottery—it had
plenty y6 f “duffers, and stringers” as well as jewellers’
I gave £3O for a tenth share in a half-worked
claim, out of which the party took £l2O per man in five
weeks. But leaving this we struck a couple of
“stringers” which blunted the tools, and soured the tem-
pers of the party to no purpose. So, getting disgusted
with my poor luck while many were piling riches, I got
my cattle in from their place of agistment, and was
about starting for home aga : u, when I heard that Webbe


and Co. —the Bathurst storekeepers—required carriers
to take loading between Bathurst and Sydney, and from
Bathurst to the fields, at high rates. Thinking this
would suit me better than sinking “duffers,” I went to
Bathurst, and was soon on the road for Sydney, having
contracted with Mr. Webbe to take tons of wool and
skins to Sydney at £25 per ton. I also agreed to do a
return trip over the mountains at the same rates. We
duly got under weigh (another carrier—one “Tom”
Minchin, accompanying the Author) and delivered our
cargoes in Sydney—at Lamb and Parbury’s wharf,
within ten days. There was now, however, a real
epidemic of gold-fields all over the country, and hearing
of the Major’s Creek Rush, I resolved that on returning
to Bathurst I would leave the western side, and try my
luck in the sunny south. It was on this return journey
to Bathurst that, as elsewhere recorded, I heard Went-
worth, Darvall, and other leading politicians of old
times speak on “the situation” as it then appeared, to
the opposing parties. But having a small interest still
on the Turon, I visited the field again, and found that
in the meantime some of my mates had struck it rich at
Golden Point—so rich, indeed, that it was beyond me to
buy even a twentieth share in the show. Near by I
came across an old Goulburn identity in “Jimmie”
Beattie (before referred to), whose party had struck a
real Bonanza, which had brought them over £I2OO a
man. For this block they had paid £250 to another
party, and as they probably made another £IOOO apiece
before the claim “shut-up,” Beattie and Co. cleared a
nice penny. But there were thousands of losers to
hundreds of winners, and the latter were often preyed
upon by the gamblers and Fakirs that infested the dig


gings. A favourite pastime of one school of gamblers
was a game of euchre or “two-up” for a few dwts. or
ozs. of gold-dust. The shanties were full at night till
the early hours of the morning; and speaking of
“pub” and shanties, the authorities, I thought, acted
somewhat strangely at the outset of the Rush. For
instance, a big accommodation house was put up by two
men named Jones and Branch, which the proprietors
wished to open as an hotel. It was roofed with canvas,
and on that account the bench refused to grant a license.
This was pretty severe, as several grog-shops near by—
flimsy structures —were, as the authorities must have
known, doing a roaring trade without a license. As
my friends, Messrs. J. Chard, Jas. Beattie and “Sandy”
Cameron (of Golspie) —all old Turon men, will remember
the famous Dr. Lang was one of the earliest “sky-pilots”
on the Turon. It was said the Rev. Dr. netted over
£IOOO as the result of a fortnight’s services. We do not
think this would be over-shooting the mark, knowing
that lucky diggers are a most generous tribe, and ap-
preciate novelty—even in orthodox matters. Several
times I saw open-air religious services interrupted by a
wild rough-up between inebriated diggers, to which the
crowd rushed as one man, while the preacher wasted his
eloquence on the desert air. Some of the most notab’e
men in the country made their way, like Dr. Lang, to
the first great Australian gold-field —amongst them
being Sir Thos. Mitchell; “Almanac” Baker; Harry
Hilliard (the cricketer); W. H. Suttor; Jimmy McLen-
nan—later known as “the Dove of Ararat” (Victoria),
and others of high repute; but with the exception of Mr.
McLennan we. do not think any of those gentlemen
experimented seriously with a pick and shovel. Regard


ing the big nugget of over 130 lbs. weight, which was
found by a blackfellow, near Louisa Creek, soon after
the Rush started, many strange stories have been related.
The Author once heard Mr. Hardy (first Warden and
Commissioner on the Turon) relate how an old white
shepherd in his (Hardy’s) employ used to sit and smoke
his pipe on this £5000 golden seat while shepherding,
long before Hargreaves and the Toms brothers discovered
gold on the banks of Summer Hill Creek. Neither the
darkie or the shepherd had any idea that the shining
blocks of stone meant a solid fortune, and truly “where
ignorance is bliss ’tis folly to be wise.” Amongst the
great army of prime rascals who flourished on the field
was one B , a gold buyer, who, by the aid of a
magnet sewn or hidden in the sleeve of his coat, de-
frauded the diggers of many a grain (which grew to
many an ounce) at the weighings. I heard that this
tricky Shylock met his deserts some eight or nine months
after my departure from the Turon, in October, 1851.
Twenty years elapsed ere I again saw the scenes of that
stirring period; and in the interval, Australia had be-
come the most wonderful El Dorado of modern times.
Majors Creek and Raluen.
On leaving the Turon, the Author had designed to
proceed to the Braidwood Rush without delay; but on
reaching home I found that my brother (W. T. Mc-
Alister), on learning of the demand for horses at the
new diggings, had set about getting a mob together,
and it was a good month before we started with a mixed
lot of 40 head, chiefly light draughts, with a few saddle
hacks among them. As Major Creek was then the best


end of the new field, we quickly made for that locality.
Hundreds of men were cradling or sluicing with “long
Toms” all along Major’s and Bell’s Creeks; but they
were not all digging on the day of our arrival. Some of
them were, for instance, ardent followers of the “three-
up school,” and at such a game I discovered a man who
had been recommended as a likely buyer for one of our
light draughts. My prospective buyer was so intent on
“heading ’em” that it was some time before he con-
descended to look at the horse. Agreeing to buy the
animal at £ls, he told me to “take th (sanguinary)
colt over to Tommy Creigan’s shed, or hitch him to a
(gory) tree.” I gently hinted that I was waiting for a
deposit, and then, fiercely scowling, my client pulled
out three fivers from his pocket, and, throwing them on
the ground, said, “There’s your (crimson) money, you
d d youk; go an’ take the (coloured) prad to
Creigan’s, where I told y’.” However, as we came away
a few weeks later with over £2OO in pocket, after selling
the horses, I could afford to “pocket” the insult too.
The Wet Deep leads, which later gave such great yields,
were at that time only imagined by the “early birds”
of Major’s Creek and Araluen, etc., and dredging was
then, as regards gold-getting, a very new idea in that
part of the country. Several Argyle men were amongst
the first speculators and storekeepers on the field, viz. :
the late Wm. Davies, Wm. Connelly, Owen Furner,
Jimmy Marsden, J. Kingsell, etc. After a few weeks’
sluicing, just to keep our hands in as diggers, we left
for home again, Mr. Davies having commissioned the
Author to bring up a freight of mixed goods from his
Goulburn stores. I duly delivered this loading, and v
after a subsequent trip to Araluen, did not visit the dis


trict again till 1872, soon after the date of the great
election dispute between Kelly and Greville. This was
really one of the wildest “political” (and racial) strug-
gles ever known in Australia. It is a very remote affair
now, but no doubt some of the actors at that election will
yet clearly recall the battle. For battle it was, not so
much between Greville and Kelly as to who was the most
“fit and proper” man to represent the electors in the
New South Wales Assembly, but which “faction,” viz. :
the Irish or “Geordies” (West of England diggers)
should prevail. The political progress of the country
held no place in the contest worth speaking of, and the
great question was whether Celt or “Tyke” had the hard-
est heads. The polling booths in some places were taken
possession of by the strongest faction, and any attempt
on the part of the weaker side to record their votes was
the signal for War a la Waddy or “Shillalegh,” as the
case might be, and the “free and independent” elector,
unless he stood on the side of the biggest battalions,
might as well have tried “to take China” as to register
his vote. After several days’ “hullabulloo,” during
which firearms were brought into play, so we were in-
formed, the poll was closed and Kelly was “returned.”
But it was so clearly a case of intimidation that another
election was ordered, and as the police this time took a
hand in the proceedings, the rattlin’ boys from Tipper-
ary, and the trim wrestlers from Cornwall, could only
give a very moderate “colour” to the event, and talk of
what would have been if the strong arm of the law had
been absent. Years afterwards the Braidwood Election
was forcibly recalled by our meeting with a man who had
lost a good part of his skull through a blow from a long-
handled shovel, wielded by an opposing partisan during


that stirring time. But, happily, the days when pick-
handles and diggers’ shovels were the convincing “argu-
ments” at elections have passed away, like a lot of the
other primitive notions of the good old times. The
Araluen and Major’s Creek country was truly a wild
and rugged El Dorado when I first beheld it; the pepper-
mint and stringy bark scrubs were full of old man
kangaroos, wallabies and bandicoots, and the hills along
Bell’s Creek were pretty well tunnelled in places by our
Australian “pig” or “Peccary,” the wombat. My first
trip to Araluen was a real bit of mountaineering on
horseback. There was no sign of a road, beyond a bit
of a bridle path, and the pioneer carriers found it a
tough and thorny problem from the top of the hill to the
bottom, before the first surveyor came along. We re-
member that the first engines and pumping plant sent to
the diggings were lowered down the mountain-side by
a “service” of ropes and tackle from tree to tree; but a
road was soon formed —there’s nothing like a gold-field
to create good roads and bridges —and it was a pleasure
ever after to bowl down the long hill behind a lively pair,
or even to pilot a horse-team as the Author has done,
often within an ace of tumbling over the corners into
the abyss. We did not see the height of the Araluen
Rush, but it was a very promising field at our second
survey. There were then twenty-seven hotels, and a
“grasshopper plague” of shanties, so the “Cousin Jacks”
and Hibernians and the colonial diggers, had their
choice of “saloons” and publicans, in any quantity. The
Clarke Gang gave a vivid dramatic tint to the history
of the Araluen side, and they waylaid a good many
diggers and carriers on the road to the diggings. The
Author’s chief connection, however, with Braidwood


and Araluen, etc., was in the pursuit of cattle-dealing,
to which we refer elsewhere. With the Royds, Hassells,
Maddrells, Geelans, O’Brien (Jembaicumbene), and
many other Pastoralists around that part, we bought or
sold in the days of merry diggers, and highways “paved”
with gold. There is room for another Major’s Creek or
Araluen to-day, to absorb the overplus of immigrants,
and to give us another “leg-up” on the ladder of pro-
gression.
CHAPTER XXIII.
The Ovens.
It would be only in keeping with the glorious mem-
ories of the “Roaring Fifties” that the simplest personal
recollections of the early Ophirs of Victoria should be
written in letters of gold with the priceless pen of genius ;
but we must perforce do our best with the prosaic, if
less appropriate literary weapons at hand.
The grandfathers and grandmothers of the present
generation will yet vividly remember —this we say by
way of preface to our tale of the golden epoch—that
terrible time of drought and ruin, fire and famine, that
preceded the first discovery of the precious metal in
Victoria.
“Black Thursday” (6th February, 1851) was truly a
day of doom and disaster—a day that brought desolation
and penury to many a home in Victoria, and the dark
shadow of bereavement to many a sorrowing family.
We have had many a drought since, but Victoria’s
“Black Thursday” of 1851, yet holds the inevitable
record as having been the worst perpetrator of “drought
favours” within the memory of man.


Accounts of the time describe the heat as insufferable ]
the air which blew from the north was like the blast of
a furnace —worse than the Sirocco of the Arabian Desert.
“By some inexplicable means the whole country was
wrapped in a sheet of flame —fierce, awful and irresisti-
ble Farmhouses, crops, fences, haystacks,
bridges, woolsheds —everything in its path —were swept
away by the fierce onrush of the flames.” Many lives
were lost, and the amount of devastation done on “Black
Thursday” can be only vaguely estimated. But after
the fierce storm comes the rift in the clouds, and the
sun shines out brighter than ever. And so it was after
“Black Thursday.” Four months after the passing of
that terrible day came the splendid solatium of the gold-
fields ; and it is not too much to say that within a year or
two the heaviest losers by the drought were either better
off than ever, or in a fair way to recoup their losses, per
favour of the diggings, while thousands of newcomers
were gathering riches beyond their wildest dreams of
fortune.
In July, 1851, during our sojourn at the Turon, came
the news of the first great Rush in Victoria, viz. ; to
Cameron’s Station at “Clunes,” on the Loddon; but it
was not till the end of September, 1852, that the Author
left Argyle with a party of some ten comrades intent on
making for Mount Alexander, then reputed to be one of
the most promising of the Victorian diggings.
The members of this party were Messrs. John Stor-
rier, sen., John Storrier, jun. (now of Hillston district),
William Storrier, Peter McAlister (late of Australian
Hotel, Wagga), Wm. Gardiner, Charles Calver (my old
road-mate), M.. Stapleton, Fred Ingram, Thos. Gough-
ian, and William Quinlan (afterwards killed in the


Eureka Stockade riots). Only three members of that
party now survive, viz.; John Storrier, jun., Peter Mc-
Alister, and the Author. From previous experience on
the Turon and Major’s Creek, I thought it would be
good policy to take up a freight of provisions, tools, and
materials generally required on a rush, and so got a load
together of about two and a half tons of forage: bacon,
butter, cheese, picks, and shovels, etc.
Another of the party, viz. : Bill Gardiner—taking the
Author’s advice, also loaded up his “old bullock dray,”
and thus equipped as rough and ready traders, as well as
prospective diggers, we started on the road for fortune.
But 1852 was a year of phenomenal floods; conse-
quently of bogs and breakdowns, and we soon found,
through the delays on the road, that there’s “many a
slip ’twixt the cup and the lip,” or rather between for-
tune and its ardent followers. Before we reached the
Murray we could have heartily endorsed Bracken’s lines,
viz. :
“Faith, boys,” said big Mick Riley, as th’ axles bedded
low,
“There’s plenty of deep sinkin’ on the road to Bendi-
go.”
We were nearly a week at the Murrumbidgee (Gunda-
gaji), making a raft on which to take the cargoes over,
having first floated the drays across by the assistance of
the empty barrels, as before explained. We navigated
the Murray in the same way, crossing opposite Humes’s
marked tree, which, I might say in passing, should be
ever a historic bole, to all Australians. Albury was then
a small village of only some 150 or 200 inhabitants, but
it was vibrating with the tramp and tread of thousands
that were hurrying to the diggings day and night.


Hearing at Wodonga that some great finds had just
been made at Spring Creek, Beechworth, in the valley
of the Ovens, we resolved to make for the new fields
straight away, as it was much nearer than Mount Alex-
ander.
Our tents made the fifth camp on the field, and there
were not more than twenty-five diggers on Beechworth
when we arrived in the second week of October, 1852.
But within a fortnight the population had grown to
thousands, and then in real earnest began the golden
tug-of-war. Around Spring Creek —on Reid's sheep-
station (belonging then, by the way, to the late Mr.
David Reid, son of Dr. Reid, who, as before mentioned
was one of the first squatters of Argyle) —the chief rush
centred. But from Spring Creek to the Woolshed, and
on to Yackandandah, through the Indigo gullies (a clean
granite bottom it was there), the hills and valleys,
heights and hollows, were dotted white with the myriad
tents and calico shops and dwellings of the eager diggers.
Holes were sunk everywhere —few, however, over seven
or eight feet to the “bottom”; anvils were ringing, and
shanties springing up like mushrooms after an Autumn
shower.
Within a fortnight or three weeks, the quiet sheep-
station had changed into a tumultuous hive of human
beings. It is well over half a century since I washed
my first rich dish at Spring Creek, but it seems only
yesterday, so strongly have the glorious annals of those
“roaring days” burned themselves on the camera of
memory. Getting quickly to work, our party made £2O
a man the first week, over £3O the second, and the third
and fourth weeks, nearly £IOO per man. Then with the
gold-fever running riot with our senses, a trumpery


quarrel divided the party, and we moved our first claim
—giving it up for nothing to a party of Tasmanians,
who made, so I was credibly informed, over £18,000 in
a few months, as it will be seen our giving up the claim
free gratis was the very height of lavish generosity on
our part. In the meantime, the Author had sold on the
field the commodities brought from Goulburn —on which
I netted nearly £200 altogether, which in itself was not
a bad little nest egg to begin the diggings with.
An Abortive Lynching.
A few weeks after the starting of the field, stories of
highway robberies, and reports of foul play were brought
in from the outskirts of the diggings. One day the
body of a man named Marks, a hawker, was found in
the Indigo Range, the indications pointing to murder,
and several diggers were reported missing without due
cause. Amongst those was Mr. Sinclair, the contractor
for the first brick gaol at Goulburn, erected in 1847-48.
It was suspected that Sinclair and others had, like
Marks, been murdered in cold blood, and naturally an
uneasy feeling began to pervade people. There were
several suspicious characters lurking about, and one
afternoon Peter McAlister, of the Author’s party, came
into camp with news that he had been fired on by two
armed men, about an hour earlier. He had been out
looking for some of our working bullocks that had
strayed away, and had got off his horse to let down a
slip-rail in one of Reid’s paddocks, when he caught sight
of two horsemen riding towards him. They ordered
him to “stand” as they came on, and were near enough
for Peter to recognise both if occasion demanded. In


stead of heeding their “command,” Peter hurriedly put
up the rail and galloped towards “home and mother”
as hard as his pony could carry him. The miscreants—
for such they were—fired several shots after him, with-
out effect. This is by way of leading up to what fol-
lowed.
On the hillside near our camp there was a tent stand-
ing by itself, some twenty yards or so from its nearest
neighbour. The day after Peter McAlister’s interview
with the bushrangers, the police—a sergeant and two
troopers paid a visit to our camp, “from information
received”; and incidentally, I (the Author) told them
that I had seen a man enter the tent spoken of, a few
minutes prior to their arrival. This man was a tall,
hangdog sort of fellow, whose habits seemed to be very
irregular. He never appeared to do any work on the
field, and held aloof from everyone ; and his goings and
comings at all hours of the day and night seemed to be
shrouded in suspicion. The police found the man asleep
in his tent, and on bringing him into daylight, he was
identified by Peter McAlister as one of the pair who had
fired on him the previous day. As the police deemed the
man’s account unsatisfactory they were about to take
him to Wangaratta lock-up, previous to trial at the
court, when some of the diggers standing by sang out,
“No, don’t give him a trial; lynch the d cut-throat!
Ask him what he did with Marks and Sinclair. String
him up! Bring a rope!” etc. In about twenty minutes
an excited throng of fully five hundred diggers had
gathered around the three officers and their prisoner.
A rope was thrown over the leaning branch of a big
apple-tree (the same tree being called into requisition
some six months afterwards, when the Commissioner


had a narrow escape of being lynched as later referred
to), and matters looked desperate. However, a big sec-
tion of the more law-abiding diggers sided with the con-
stables, and prevailed over the fiercer spirits of the mob;
and so the shuddering (and bleeding) wretch was later,
as I afterwards learned, reserved for the more orthodox
attentions of the regulation hangman at Melbourne.
My friends Peter McAlister and William Storrier were
amongst the Crown witnesses on this case at Melbourne.
As will be seen from above, and a number of such in-
cidents, the population on the diggings was quite pre-
pared to clean out the riff-raff, and the human vultures
that sought to prey on society at the goldfields, if the law
failed in the contract.
At the Woolshed.
Prom Spring Creek the Author, with several mates,
shifted camp to the Woolshed Rush, some three miles
distant, where we struck some nice shallow patches,
making £90 per man in three weeks. But the Woolshed
was leagues behind Spring Creek in the matter of rich-
ness. On the Ovens, Bendigo, Ballarat, etc., many
made huge fortunes, who, in mental or business capacity
under normal conditions, would have barely made
tucker. For instance, near our claim on the Woolshed
was a party of “green” counter-jumpers, just out from
London. Someone advised them to bale out a water-
hole on their block, and, hey presto ! From that hole,
within a fortnight they took over £1000 per man. On
the other hand, scores of practical men left the fields
disgusted after months of comparatively unavailing
work as diggers. But as Shamus O’Brien said, “If they


missed in the Judges, they’d meet a dragoon. If they
failed with the pick and shovel —which few did—they
scooped the pool, either teaming, raising bin
chering, or in a thousand other ways. Some shanty-
keepers made fortunes in a few months ; carriers, ditto,
and here and there the same could be said of men in
every calling. We knew of a certain publican at Bal-
larat, who, in 1854, controlled over twenty shanties, and
who employed from fifteen to thirty carriers constantly
on the roads. For some years he paid over £I2OO per
week for cost of carriage alone from Melbourne and
other parts to Ballarat and Bendigo.
But I will speak in the next chapter of personal carry-
ing memories to and from the fields.
Within a fortnight of Christmas, 1852, having, be it
said shame-facedly, grown a bit homesick, I resolved to
join some friends, viz. : the late M. and Phil. Hogan,
who were returning home to Argyle. On Christmas
Eve we reached Charlie Edgehill’s station, “Mundiwa-
dra,” adjoining Broughton’s “Pound-hills," and at
Mundiwadra we spent a glorious Yuletide. Mrs. Edge-
hill was a sister of my friends, the Hogans, and, like her
relations, her watchword was “hospitality.” So, during
our week’s spell at Mundiwadra,
“There was a sound of revelry by night;”
When “The cares that infested the day
Folded their tents like the Arabs and as silently
vanished away.”
But as life and hope was speeding then on golden wings,
and the future was a sparkling panorama opening fair,
the aforesaid “cares of the day” suspended operations
in the sunlight as well as when the sun went down. But


our road lay northward, and enterprise was beckoning
ahead, so we bid a reluctant “good-bye” to Mundiwadra
just after New Year’s Day.
A Memory of the Homeward Route*
On the homeward bound we camped for a few days
at Nanny Byrne’s public-house, Reedy Creek, near
Jugiong, and here, for the only time in my career on the
roads, I lost a sum of money by medium of that most
despicable of robbers, a sneak thief. As open confession
is good for the soul, I have to admit having been on the
spree at Reedy Creek, and so, indirectly, was a sort of
accessory before the fact. The people at the place,
knowing we were returning from the diggings, advised
us to keep a sharp eye on a certain ex-gaolbird—one
K.—who had been loafing about the house for some days
before our arrival. Old Nanny Byrne herself assured
us that “he would stheal a feather from an angel’s wing
if he got the chance” ; but during our corrobboree we for-
got all about the old lag and his proclivities; and he
feasted and drank at our expense, and robbed us, too.
I had amassed nearly £900 on Beechworth, but before
leaving had taken the precaution of sending £600 of this
amount in two lots of half-notes to O’Sullivan’s Bank
at Goulburn. I had the complement of those half-
notes, and some full notes besides, planted in a “safe,”
as before described, made in the pole of the dray, the
money being in parcels of 100 notes in each, and the
residue in fives and ones. Going to the dray to get a
pound, I foolishly took out one of the small bags con-
taining a roll of £100, and after taking the note I left
the bag secure as I thought between two bales of wool


under the tarpaulin of the dray. The “expert” re~
ferred to had, however, keenly watched the whole per-
formance, and as soon as the coast was clear, he snapped
the bag with £99, thus proving the old adage, “There’s
more ways of killing a cat than by choking it with
butter.” Though I taxed the fellow with the robbery,
and tried by several more or less ingenious ways to
recover at least some of the money, it was of no avail.
He had covered his tracks too well, and as, moreover,
I hadn’t the numbers of the notes stolen, I had to grin
and bear it. But it was hard lines to lose the cash in
such a miserable fashion. To hand over one’s hard-
earned money when a Gardiner or Ben Hall holds a six-
shooter against your “frontispiece” is an act possessing
the virtue of mitigating circumstances ; but to be taken
down by a sneak-thief! Words fail to express a victim’s
self-contempt at such a happening.
CHAPTER XXIV.
On the Ovens' Track Again.
Within six weeks from the Reedy Creek episode, the
Author, accompanied by his brother (W. T.), Peter
McAlister, and John Willoughby (Pejar), was again
under weigh for the Victorian diggings. On this trip
we carried three tons of loading (spirits and other goods)
for Dan Roads (or Rhodes), hotel-keeper at Alhury, and
had besides a supply of eggs, cheese, bacon, and oranges
—our own speculation —for the fields.
On this journey we had a bit of an accident which cost
us over £SO to rectify. In rounding a washaway creek,
near Mundoonan’s Gap, my brother’s dray came into


collision somehow with a big gum-tree. The force of the
contact broke the pole of the dray clean off near the
butt. Strange to say, the dray fell forwards instead
of hindwards (to use road language), and the “bump'’
sent the two casks of spirits on the dray—a hogshead of
rum and a keg of wine—out over the side. The top
“chimes” of both kegs were broken, and the escaping
liquor tinted the creek water a dirty red at our expense.
Peter McA. hurried to Yass, some 14 miles away, and
brought some more grog to make up for the deficiency
of the “spilt milk.” We were to receive £SO per ton
to Albury, but this loss took a bit of the gilt off our ex-
pectations. At the border town we found things very
lively and extravagant. Lucky diggers, and traders
passing through, were shouting for all hands, and many
of them not bothering about the “change.” For in-
stance, one noisy individual threw down a sovereign to
treat about a dozen of us at Rhode's Hotel, and on the
publican giving him bis change in silver and coppers,
the “philanthropist” swept it up, and making the re-
mark, Are there any fowls about ?” threw the money
into the street. We then adjourned to the yard of the
“pub,” and had a game of skittles with bottles of cham-
pagne for ninepins. The wine was £1 per bottle at
Albury, and ultra temperance folk might say it was
better wasted after that fashion than down the throat of
the “boosing” public.
On making Beech worth, we found that in the interval
of about ten weeks since our last view of the scene, the
area of gold discovery had greatly increased, and the
people were coming in droves by land and sea. This
will be fully understood when it is remembered that
500,000 immigrants came from Europe alone in five


years, and a horde of 50,000 Chinese, to the goldfields.
Everybody seemed to be on gold, and honest endeavour
was turning the “rind” off the earth, in the eager search
after what some preachers say is “the root of all evil.”
Within three days we sold all our stock of provender,
getting at the rate of a shilling apiece (12/- a dozen) for
the eggs and oranges, and clearing over £100 on the
cheese and bacon. The potatoes we sold at £5 10s. and
£6 per bag (about £60 per ton) to a man running a store
for Mr. Wallace, who afterwards, known as the “golden
king,” became famous in Australian mining circles. At
the time one of our early mates, viz., Tom Coughlin, was
employed in one of Wallace’s claims at the rate of £9
per week, which was then considered a fair wage for
working miners. Tom Coughlin, by the way, had by
this time proved himself the best “heavy-weight” on
the field. Unlike most Hibernians, Tom C. was a man
of few words; but what he lacked in loquacity he sup-
plied with his trip-hammer fists as occasion offered.
A Fight at the Diggings.
On leaving our party in November, ’52, Tom fell in
with a man named Peacock, and they took up a block,
their right to which was disputed by another party. One
of those was a big Tasmanian “bruiser, versed in all
the tricks and science of “the ring,” then in its palmiest
days. After a bit of arguing, the Tassie said to Tom:
“Here, we’ll soon settle it. Can you box?” he aggres-
sively asked. “No, I cannot,” said Coughlin. Well,
can you fight?” asked the other. “I can, said Tom,
“an’ I’ll take all the fighting out of you.” Tom had all
the worst of the first two or three rounds, as he had little


or no “science,” which the Tasmanian soon discovered.
But Tom kept boring in, waiting for a chance to get
home his “favourite hit wid the left,” as he called it.
This opportunity came in the fourth round. The “left
caught the opponent hard on the neck, and as he was
falling, a right on the “point” put the Tasmanian out
of business. It was several minutes before he recovered
consciousness, and he had little fighting appetite for a
week or two. Coughlin, in recounting his part of this
brief battle, used to say: “I was cowld whin I cum up
at fursht, an’ I let him war-rum me, and thin I war-
rumed him.” He “war-rumed” a few more afterwards,
and then the cry went up to “keep off that big freckled
Irishman from Goulburn side.”
Some Absurdities*
People nowadays will no doubt find it hard to realise
some of the wild and queer things done on the diggings.
The Author on several occasions saw half-intoxicated
fellows light their pipes with pound-notes, and so from
personal knowledge can vouch for the fact. Near our
camp there was a party of Yankees, and one of those
men owned a big Newfoundland dog. He used to some-
times get a pound or two of butter from my friend, the
late Mrs. Martin (Chatsbury), who was then running
a store at the rush, and, spreading the butter between
two pound-notes, would give the “sandwich” to the dog.
I remember an old chap, who seemed a bit crazy, going
about the field carrying two buckets of rum—Chinese
fashion—on a light pole across his shoulders. He used
to halt at every group he came to, and invite them to
have a nip of the old hands’ medicine. There were


plenty of generous diggers on the Ovens, but the great
majority generally shouted at the pubs and shanties,
where the grog was a shilling a nobbier, or at an upset
price of £1 per bottle; so the open-air rum carrier had
his own particular field of benevolence all to himself.
The Fate of a Chinese 4< Jumper/'
Old diggers will remember that rough and ready
methods were frequently adopted against jumpers
(viz., persons who worked claims in the owner’s absence
without authority). We remember several of those
tragic episodes, one of which concerns a man-o -war s-
man and a Chinaman. The ex-man-o’-war’s-man had
struck a fine patch on Bendigo (it was during our second
visit there), and he was in the habit of going away on a
big spree every week-end. During one of his absences,
a new-chum Chinaman was led to believe that the claim
was vacated altogether, so he (the Chinese) started to
work it. On the man-o’-war’s-man being informed that
a heathen had “jumped” his show, he said: “I will soon
settle the long-haired, slant-eyed son of a robbing mon-
key,” and filled with this amiable resolve he hurried
to the shaft, and ordered the interloper to depart at
once. As the poor Chinaman was trying to comply with
the sailor’s command, and had nearly reached the sur-
face, the drunken “Tar” caught him by the leg and
arm, and flung him down the shaft again head first.
The fall broke the poor “pigtail’s” neck, and the same
night the sailorman was arrested and charged with the
murder. About a month afterwards he was brought
before Judge Skinner and a jury, and was found guilty
of causing the Chinaman’s death. The Judge, before


passing sentence, asked him what he had to say for him-
self. “Well, yer Honour,” said the man, “I was in the
China war in ’47, and killed dozens of the pigtails then
for Queen Victoria; and it’s pretty hard lines if I can’t
kill one of them for myself here.” His sentence, we
heard, was commuted, and eventually he got off with 12
months’ imprisonment.
The Eureka Stockade Riot in 1854.
On the day of the great fight at the Eureka stockade,
Ballarat—to be precise, Sunday morning, 3rd Decem-
ber, 1854 —the Author was at Bendigo, and I well re-
member the fierce agitation which prevailed at both
Bendigo and Beechworth, as well as Ballarat, over the
impost of the exorbitant Mining Tax, or fee, which was
the direct cause of the great Riot. The license fee was
bad enough at 30/-, but when it was increased to £3 per
man, the thing grew to monstrous proportions. The
license had to be produced whenever a policeman de-
manded it, and then it was only available for use within
a mile of the Police Office from which it had been issued.
The first “Diggers’ League” formed to resist the official
tyranny was at Bendigo in ’53, but Ballarat was the
scene of the first revolt which preceded the more serious
riot. The diggers refusing to pay the fees demanded,
a detachment of soldiers was sent up from Melbourne
to assist the police in collecting the unjust impost, and
in maintaining order. The diggers attacked this force
on the day of its arrival, but after a savage encounter—
bayonets and clubbed rifles v. shovels and pick handles,
and a little “gun” practice—the miners were beaten off.
But the place was now rapidly merging into an armed


camp, and on a digger hut being made in force by the
police and military, the diggers organised themselves
into a Fighting Battalion, and built a stockade in
Eureka Street, from where they proposed to wait the
attack of the “enemy.” Thinking to frustrate the
movements of the military, however, a body of the dig-
gers set out to either meet the forces on the road, or
make a flank movement; but knowledge was conveyed of
the expedition to the Authorities, and while the “in-
tercepting” diggers were looking for the soldiers, the
latter by another track were marching on the camp. So
the soldiers were before “Eureka” at daybreak on that
calm summer Sabbath morning. The diggers taken by
surprise made a gallant fight for nearly an hour, during
which they lost over thirty men killed and a great num-
ber wounded, some of whom later died of their wounds.
Over a hundred of the men were made prisoners. On
the part of the military, Captain Wise and three soldiers
were killed, and over a score were wounded by the dig-
gers’ fire. The Author’s old mate, W. Quinlan, who
had joined us on our first trip to the diggings, was one
of the slain diggers. Public opinion grew so strong
against the methods of the Authorities that no jury
could be found to convict the “Rioters,” and the Vic-
torian Executive, recognising that the popular sympathy
was with the illused diggers, appointed a Commission to
inquire into the causes of the riot. On the report oi
this body an amnesty was granted to all the diggers con-
cerned, and the mining tax reduced to a fair basis.
Peter Lalor, the diggers’ “general,” escaped from the
fray, in a vegetable cart, we believe. He led the men
with great bravery, and lost his left arm in the combat.
Messrs. Vern, Black, and Humfray, on account of their


former military training, were Mr. Lalor’s lieutenants
at the Eureka “rebellion,” and Mr. Humfray was, after-
wards with Lalor, himself a member of the Legislative
Assembly of Victoria. The Author was at Ballarat
within a week of the fight; the stockade and camp of the
diggers had been burnt by the military, and the charred
and blackened remains were eloquent of the defeat of
the miners. But was it a defeat ? Surely never was
a defeat so like victory. Eureka laid one of the biggest
planks in the grand framework of the New Era : t made
the old bureaucratic governing system of Victoria’s
penal period “put up the shutters,” and cast the =:eed
of free institutions upon the political “soil” of the
Fifties. We would like to know what became of the
“Rebel” flag—“The Southern Cross.” It should be
preserved as the sacred banner of those true Patriots —
the Martyrs of the Eureka Stockade.
The Golden Horseshoes.
The tale of the golden horseshoes has been told in
divers tongues, and has become somewhat garbled
in the process. The Author was acquainted
with Mr. “Sandy” Cameron, the hero of the event, and
with several members of the Committee, who were
behind Cameron when the latter was returned as mem-
ber for the Ovens to the Victorian Parliament ; and from
those reliable sources learned the chief points of the
“Horseshoes” episode over fifty years ago. Mr. Wal-
lace, the “Golden King,” as he was then called, was
first asked by the diggers to stand for election as their
(Ovens) candidate, but Wallace declined, and suggested
Mr. Cameron (then acting as Wallace’s clerk and store


keeper) ’instead. Cameron was a pretty good speaker,
and a shrewd Scotchman, and the diggers rallied around
Km almost to a man. I think a £IOO qualification fee
was required of candidates in Victoria at that time, but
the diggers promptly rose a sum ten times the amount
needed, which met all the expense incurred, and left a
good margin over. Mr. Cameron was duly returned by
a great majority, and it was decided to celebrate the
event on the day of the poll by holding a grand holiday.
It was freely circulated that the new member would
ride from the Woolshed into Beechworth on “Declara-
tion Day,” on a horse shod with shoes of gold, and every-
one was on the tiptoe of excitement. Meanwhile,
“those in the know” had obtained four bright brass
shoes belonging to a circus then performing at the Wool-
shed rush. Those shoes were used at times on one of
the circus horses, and were only lightly tacked on. Well,
I (the Author) was often assured that the same set of
brass shoes were fastened on to Cameron’s horse on the
ride to Beechworth. Not a grain of gold was used in
the business, though, figuratively, it could have been
said that Mr. Cameron’s return was shod with gold, as
the contributions were very substantial. The first item
was one for £2OO, and several £IOO subscriptions fol-
lowed. The row and revelry of the procession that fol-
lowed Cameron’s triumphant entry into Beechworth could
have been heard almost at Melbourne, and the “per-
sonnel” of the “prosesh” was the most varied and
comical company that ever assembled on the Ovens.
Tip-drays attached to claim horses as slow as turtles and
heavy as elephants, vied with smart four-in-hand wag-
gonettes and dogcarts, etc., and the dust was “deafen-
ing.” The Committee and a good assortment of the


rest of Mr. Cameron’s supporters wound up with a
glorious spree, which accounted for many a dozen of
champagne and an ocean of other liquors. We have
heard stories of the alleged golden shoes having been
exhibited in hotel-bars in Melbourne, Wagga, and else-
where under lock and key ; but we are of the opinion that
such shoes, if of the true "Gilt,” were manufactured
after Cameron’s ride from the Woolshed to Beechworth.
We were told that a set of golden "slippers” (of course,
alloyed with firmer metal) were made by a blacksmith
at Honeysuckle, not far from Beechworth, but the brass
shoes lent by the circus were, we fully believe, the only
sort of footwear sported by Cameron’s steed on that
eventful day. Mr. Cameron did not again woo the
electors, and was afterwards heard of in New Zealand,
where, like most d.ggers there and elsewhere, he had
many ups and downs.
The Great Riot on the Ovens.
It was during our second visit to Beechworth that the
great riot occurred which nearly resulted in the lynch-
ing of the Commissioner. The quarrel arose through
the digger-hunting practices of the police. The license-
fee of 30/- per month, as old diggers will remember,
was considered extortionate and unfair, and many de-
clined to obtain a license. The authorities began a
systematic hunt or persecution of diggers who' evaded
payment, and the methods adopted were often harsh
and provoking. For instance, besides those diggers who
purposely evaded the law, those who lost or mislaid
their licenses were also liable to arrest. It was no unusual
sight to observe from ten to thirty men cha ned to logs


and trees, before the lock-up was built, and guarded as
if they were felons. Many of the early Beechworth
police were Germans, which was another bone of conten-
tion, as the diggers resented being under the control of
“foreigners.” Within 50 yards or so of the Author’s
party’s camp there was a “paddock” (a large open claim)
worked by some eight or nine diggers—one being an
Irishman named Finnegan, or Flannigan (I forget
which), who openly boasted of his resolve to evade pay-
ing the license fee; or to allow the “Sour-krouters” —as
he called the German troopers —to take him prisoner.
On the day of the riot, however, Finnegan’s party was
destined to be the first troubled by the Police, led by
Captain Browne, the Commissioner. Now, to give warn-
ing of the coming of the Police (and, in fact, of anything
unusual), the diggers had adopted a common signal or
watchword. This signal was the word “Joe, and as
soon as the Police appeared on the day stated, the warn-
ing note “Joe, Joe, Joe,” —repeated from claim to
claim, rang out all over the field. It was amusing to sea
the diggers’ heads popping up out of the shafts, as they
rose to see the meaning of the call which was carried on
for two miles or more. The Warden (or Commissioner)
made straight for Finnegan’s claim, and soon made it
clear that Finnegan was, particularly, the man wanted.
Finnegan dared the policemen to arrest him, etc. ; and
at last one of the troopers was ordered to descend the
shaft, and “take” the alleged license-dotrger unless he
could show his “clearance.” By some untoward acci-
dent, as the trooper descended, his carbine, the barrel
of which pointed upwards, went off, and the charge hit
a man who was on the surface, the poor fellow falling
mortally wounded. This was a most unfortunate event


as the diggers were already incensed against the Warden
and police, and it needed only such a spark to inflame
them to extremities. The news spread, with exaggera-
tions, that a man had been shot dead by the Police; and
within a short time fully 5000 diggers had gathered
around the claim, and the Warden and his men began
to get a very rough handling. A mock trial was held
by some of the more determined spirits, and it was pro-
posed to “lynch" the Commissioner and the trooper
whose misadventure had caused the man’s death. A
rush was made to the leaning apple-tree, before men-
tioned, and the rope was dangling from the limb, and
things looked very black for the two “condemned" men
for a few minutes. At this critical moment, however,
while the noose was actually around Captain Browne's
neck, some of the leaders of the mob, backed up by the
majority of the diggers, suggested kindlier counsels,
viz. : that on the police agreeing to leave the field, Cap-
tain Browne’s and the trooper’s lives would be spared.
The five or six turbulent “lynchers" were very much
opposed to such a course, but as the men knew that if
the Commissioner were lynched, reprisals would un-
doubtedly follow on the part of the authorities, a less
sanguinary course was eventually adopted, and the
troopers were ordered to leave the diggings. This they
were, no doubt, glad to do, as every man of them re-
ceived severe maltreatment, and the lynching proposal
was really within an ace of being carried out. After the
departure of the discomfited police, a Vigilance Com-
mittee was formed, but as we left within a fortn ght
after the riot, we had not a long experience of “im-
promptu" democratic government at Beechworth. Seven
weeks later we were back at the diggings again w:th a


freight of cedar, viz. ; 2000 feet of planks and dressed
boards. This timber we had bought at 4d. per foot, and
sold it at 2y6 per foot to one Jim Way, at Albury, thus
clearing £2OO odd on the timber, and on other com-
modities in our freight we cleared another £IBO, which
was better than carrying under contract. But tnis third
trip was the Author’s last carrying venture to the Vic-
torian side.
For the next six or seven years on the overlanding
trail, we gleaned something of experiences which can be
summed up in the lines: —
“Black nights on th’ Cooper, and breaks on th’ plains
In the heart of the hurricane years,
When Fortune and Peril and Hope held the reins,
And the road was the pride of careers.’
CHAPTER XXV.
Early Overlanding Days.
It was merry in the glowing morn, among th’ gleam-
ing grass,
To wander as we’ve wandered many a mile;
To blow th’ cool tobacco cloud, and watch th’ white
wreaths pass,
Sitting loosely in the saddle all the while.
Gordon.
From Beechworth the Author rode over to Bendigo,
and on that great field met the late James Maiden, of
Maiden’s Punt, who was then the largest carcase butcher
on Bendigo—often killing a hundred head of cattle and
six hundred sheep per night. At Mr. Maiden’s sugges-
tion I resolved to set about buying cattle for the Vic


torian market, and on returning to Argyle termed a
partnership with the late Ronald McDonald, of Middle
Arm, and bought 250 head of big Richlands bullocks
from the Superintendent then at Richlands (the late
Mr. George Martyn). Those cattle were large-framed
Pikers from seven to fourteen years old, and as wild
as March hares. The age of a beast was known from the
fact that year of the branding —that is to say, the last
two figures of the year- -was marked below the owner’s
brand on every beast. On most large runs this practice
still continues. Those cattle which crossed the Murray
in September, 1853, were the first lot taken to Victoria
from the Abercrombie side, though not perhaps the first
from Argyle, as we believe Captain Turner of the Gur-
rundah Estate had taken over a mob of mixed cattle
some eighteen months previously. 1852 was a wet year,
and the tracks of Captain Turner’s draywheels ploughed
the unformed road all the way from Old Byalla station
to the Murray. Five weeks after, Mr. McDonald and
the Author left Richlands with the 250 bullocks, we sold
them to Dr. Rowe, who had a station on the Campaspe,
about twenty miles from Maiden’s Punt. We were lucky
not to lose a beast on the trip, as we had several bad
breaks, but wild cattle, as all bushmen know, stick to-
gether much closer than homebreds in a stampede, and
once headed, can be more easily turned. We sold the
cattle at £5 15s. per head, clearing nearly £9OO. Dr.
Rowe (M.D.), our buyer, was a somewhat eccentric
character, as we were apprised one night, at our camp
on the Redbank Run, near Deniliquin, by the late
“Mick” Keighran (a noted Victorian Bushman). “Now
you’ll find Dr. Rowe a very queer sort of cuss,” said
Keighran, “He’ll pretend at first that he’s just travel-


James Tyson
Patrick Leslie (Darling Downs)
James Maiden
Andrew G. Finlay
Andrew Tobin
Arthur B. Chisholm
A Group of Famous Pastoralists in the Fifties.




ling past, and will let you go almost right through his
run before he’ll buy. But take my word he’ll buy on
your terms, if you will only hold out two or three days.’’
Mr. Keighran’s words turned out true in almost every
particular. After three days’ parleying, the Dr. took
the cattle at our price, and gave us a cheque at his stock-
yards for the amount, £I4OO odd. 1 was now properly
seized with the dealing mania, and, as on commg
through the “Sandhills” station I had had a parley about
buying cattle with the late Mr. Jas. Tyson, who was
then owner of the “Sandhills,” I hastened over (as Mr.
McDonald had returned home) to try and strike a deal
with “Hungry Jimmy,” as Mr. Tyson was irreverently
called by sundowners at one time. Mr. Tyson declined
to take ray offer for the stock I wished to buy, but ad-
vised me to take up a block near his station, ottering to
partly stock the country under easy conditions. In de-
clining the proposal, the Author lost the chance of
acquiring 100,000 acres of some of the finest grass
country in New South Wales, at a nominal rental per
annum, with right of purchase on easy terms. On
leaving Mr. Tyson I went down to McLaurin Bros.’
station on the Edwards River, and here bought 35 head
of fat bullocks at £8 per head, intending to take them
to Bendigo, if Mr. Maiden did not buy them at the
Punt, which would have been a most unlikely event.
But near the Redbank public-house I chanced to meet
the late Andy Tobin, and after some little bargaining,
Mr. Tobin bought the bullocks, giving 15/- per head on
the Author’s price to the McLaurins. We had several
transactions, subsequently with the late Mr. Tobin, who
was one of the straightest and most genial squatters that
ever cracked a stockwhip, and whose fame, long years


ago, reached high-water mark in pastoral circles. The
Author’s last meeting with Mr. Tobin was in 1860, at
an hotel on the Campaspe, kept by one Kennedy. He
(Tobin) was then accompanied by a ship-captain of his
acquaintance, who was going out with Mr. Tobin on a
land-lubbers’ ” holiday. The Author had a mob of
horses in hand, en route for Melbourne,• and before
leaving the hotel, where we had camped the night before,
we obtained two or three armfulls of green barley for
our saddle horses, and a couple of loaves of bread for our
mid-day lunch on the road. For this the publican
charged 25/-, and the captain before referred to, who
was standing by with Mr. Tobin, was so astonished at
the publican s charges, that he nearly had an apoplectic
fit. "Don’t hand him the money, McAlister,” said the
captain, "throw it at the scoundrel’s feet, and then I’ll
tell the extortioner what I think of him.” I did as the
captain ordered, and then the irate sailor turned on the
hotelkeeper like a bulldog. "Do you know what I think
of you, Sir, ’ he said, "you’re a d d lowdown ex-
tortioner, and if you were aboard my ship for five min-
utes I’d have you ropes-ended within an inch of your
life.” The captain was still fuming against the "extor-
tioner” as we rode away. After selling the little lot of
fats to Mr. Tobin at the end of 1853, the Author re-
turned home to Argyle again, and, after several minor
transactions, started in September, 1853, with 660 head
of mixed cattle to Victoria. We (that is to say, C. and
W. McAlister) were accompanied on this trip by the
late John McDonald, and John McKenzie, of Tyrl Tyrl,
and two good bushmen and agreeable comrades they
were. The cattle referred to were chiefly of the rough
mountain-bred sort, then native to the Oberon and


Abercrombie Districts. I well remember the hard
riding through the snowbound hills, and the many
breakaways from the “impromptu” stockyards, hastily
put up at the head of the gullies, before all those cattle
were mustered and fairly on the road. Amongst our
clients on those occasions were folk bearing such well-
known names as McColl, North, Stevenson, Hogan,
Francis, Foran, and Stilwell (Abercrombie), and Mur-
ray and Mahoney (Porter’s Retreat) —good and true
bushmen the whole of them. We sold this mob to Mr.
Jas. Maiden, at the Punt, at an average of £4 per head
—clearing close on £llOO, which we thought fair in view
of the low condition of the cattle. The Author next
delivered several lots of fat cattle at the slaughtering
paddocks, Bendigo, to Mr. Maiden’s order, and hap-
pened to be at Bendigo after delivering one such lot, at
the time of the Eureka Stockade riot,in December, 1854.
But a word in passing on “Jimmy” Maiden —that real
Bayard of the drovers and diggers of the past. Mr.
Maiden, in boyhood lived at Darby’s, Murray’s Flats,
near Goulburn; but on early youth he settled on
Morago, on the Edwards River. When we first made
his acquaintance, he owned, amongst other properties,
Collyer’s Station, twenty miles down the Murray, from
Echuca and Moama, besides the store and hotel at the
Punt, where he paid over his cheques—in the “big par-
lour” —for thousands to the folk to whom they were
due; and a merry manner had Jimmy Maiden. The
bigger the cheque, the greater seemed his pleasure in
paying it over. Subsequently we delivered several mobs
of stores at Collyer’s, to Mr. Maiden’s order, most of
which cattle the Author bought about the Forbes, Cowra,
and Burrowa districts. Those lots were afterwards fat


tened on the Riverina stations to supply Mr. Maiden’s
butchering establishments at Bendigo.
Cattle Rush on a Night Camp.
We had almost forgotten to mention the bad break
we had with the 660 head of Abercrombie cattle off a
camp near the Colombo Creek, not far from Urana
The night was very wild and stormy—
"A night a child might understand
The de’ill had business on his hand,” —
and in the absence of a “Banjo” or Lawson, on the spot,
I tried my ’prentice hand on the following:—
Lines on a Cattle-Break.
“Look out on your left,” said McKenzie, “the cattle
are off like a streak!—
Rouse up the camp as you’re passing.” —His words
seemed to end in a shriek.
And instantly into th’ saddle and out in th’ teeth of
the rain,
We followed like fiends demented out o’er the soft
Boree plain;—
The splash of th’ hoofs through the gilgais, and snap-
ping of horns far in front,
As the mad cattle raced helter-skelter, solely our guide
in the hunt.
“H— -11 take it. I’m down,” said the darkie, “ ‘walla
walla' make terrible hole.”
But no time had I to stay nursing, or think of a body
or soul,


But get to the head ’ere they scattered out thro’ the
scrubs on th’ right —
go, on, with the dogs racing after, we rode thro’ the
depths of the night;
Till, presently, down went my charger, hard o’er a log
in the mud —
And when I arose shortly after, all shaken and drip-
ping with blood;
And my brave stockhorse “Taffy’’ bespattered; I
knew as I mounted again,
There’s many a game more alluring than a break on
the Billabong plain.
But the maddest of breaks has an ending—and after
a twenty-mile run,
We headed th’ badly-blown leaders, and with the first
tint of the sun.
While the mists of the night were departing, we lei-
surely counted the cost—
The Black had a leg badly broken—our young British
drover was “lost,” —
McKenzie was battered all over, and Nicholls as sore
as myself,
And if hospitals there were availing we’d all have
been laid on the shelf;
But only six pikers were missing, and scarcely a dozen
were maimed —
Some minus eyes, others horns, and others a little
lamed—
So we reckoned we’d call ourselves lucky, and on thro-
the rest of the bush,
It was plain that the cattle conceded we had beaten
them bad in the “rush.”


No old bushman, who followed the fortunes of those
by-gone days, will deny that since the advent of the
railways, when every market-town has its rail-side truck-
ing yards at hand, the personality of the drover has be-
come much less typical, at all events on the Tablelands,
than in the breezy annals we write of; when “the men
behind the cattle” had little in common with cities or
city life; the men who instinctively swore by the cult
of the bush—for as “pulse of the Bushland’s pulses, ’
they to the Bushland’s heart belonged. The drovers and
cattlemen of the Fifties and Sixties were believers in the
philosophy of the old song, viz. :
I’m in the bush, I’m in the bush—for Sydney I don’t
care a rush;
Out where things are green and lush, and folk are
blithe and free;
Back in the bush; out in the bush—that’s where I
long to be.
CHAPTER XXVI.
Dealing and Overlanding in the Fifties.
In musing thus over the camp fires of the past one
naturally recalls the personalities and memories of the
men who played a chief part in building up the pastoral
growth of the southern districts in those years.
Amongst the many pastoralists with whom the Author
did business, from the Fifties to the Eighties, were
Messrs. John Jenkins (Nangus), Henry Gordan (Boram-
bola), De Salis (Wantabadgery, John and Andrew Bad-
gery (Sutton Forest), Windeyer (Murrumbidgee), A
Bloomfield, Jardine, Cosgrove, and George and Dave


Kiss (Monaro), Pearce (Quat Quat), Foster &t*tl£clg*
(Carwoola), Patrick Mooney (Taralga), Cooper Cl os
(Willeroo), Matthew Hillas (Bunnaby), and a host of
others whose names are household words in the pastoral
history of New South Wales.
A number of the gentlemen named, and others, or-
iginally Goulburn and Sydney-side squatters, took up
country in the Riverina and Murrumbidgee country at
an early period. Some of these were George and Dan
Thorne, of the Fish River, who formed Gobbagombolin,
over sixty years ago; the Woodhouses, from Camden,
who formed a run next to Chapmans, at Urana ; Peter
Stucky, who moved from Hungry Hill to "Willie Ploraa”
Station, Gundagai; John Hillas, who took up Yabtree,
on the Murrumbidgee; George Hillas, who shifted from
"Tyrl Tyrl” to Corowa; the Hylands, of Boro, who hrst
formed Quat Quat, Murray River, and the Camden and
Richlands; McArthurs, who formed Nangus, which,
verging on the Fifties, was sold to "Johnny” Jenkins,
so widely known in later years. When Mr. Jenkins
bought "Nangus” as stated, he also contracted to buy
the Richlands cattle, about 1500 head altogether; and
the Author was one of those who helped to muster and
start this mob —a collection of all sorts and conditions
of cattle; amongst them many that had never before
been within five miles of a stockyard.
It was in the waning autumn of 1856 that New South
Wales made its first appearance, as theatrical agents
say, on the stage of responsible government. Affairs,
then in the full flush of the Golden Age, were in a
highly prosperous condition, and the first representative
Parliament and Ministry began their political career
under most promising auspices in regard to the indus


trial and commercial outlook. But the Author had little
leisure for politics at the time, for during the first week
of the elections, we were busily engaged in mustering
and drafting cattle and horses at Strathaird, in view of
the visit of a company of Southern speculators. This was
in April, 1856, at which time we first made the ac-
quaintance of a gentleman since known far and wide
throughout Australia, and esteemed both for his sterling
worth and force of character, as for his great business
acumen and ability. We refer to Mr. A. G. Finlay
then but newly arrived from Scotland, and with the
scent of the heather and caller-herrin’ fresh in his
memory.
Mr r A, G. Finlay and other good Men,
The older strain of Southerners will not need to be re-
minded that Mr. Finlay was the first Knight of the
hammer to reduce auctioneering to a science on the
Tablelands. He was the fore-runner of such first-class
modern salesmen as the genial William Wood, of Wood
& Co., and W. H. Wheatley, who, like Mr. Finlay, are
not only splendid auctioneers, but also first-class judges
of stock, and good energetic citizens. The gentleman
who accompanied Mr. Finlay on the occasion stated
were the late Messrs. Charles Church, William Chisholm
(Kippilaw), and Fred. of Breadalbane. To
Messrs. Church and Shadforth, the Strathaird firm (C.
W. McAlister) sold some eighty head of broken and un-
broken saddle and harness horses, averaging £18 per
head , and to M!r. Chisholm some 300 head of mixed
cattle. A good many of those were “circle M” cattle
(McArthur s Richlands brand), and at Chisholm’s


request we re-marked the cattle in our yards with his
brand (a single M), the brands having been sent from
Kippilaw. Several of the horses bought by Mr. Church
were of McDonald’s (“The Range”) breed, and one of
that sort, afterwards sold to Mr. A. F Gibson (Tirrana)
by the Author, was considered by Mr. Gibson to be the
best hack he ever rode.
It was in the same year (1856) that the Author first
met that sterling pastoralist —John Badgery, of Sutton
Forest—a bushman of the old colonial school, and a real
white man without a streak. Mr, Badgery was then a
lusty youth, making through Goulburn, on h-S first
droving trip to the Murray with a mob of horses. Since
then we’ve had many a deal together —thousands of
cattle, and thousands of pounds have passed between us
—we have seen the stock-boom at its best, and the slump
at its worst, and though now beyond youth’s red-let'er
years, yet in the autumn of life—
“lt will do no harm, I reckon, to ruminate awhile,
To pledge a cup in memory of the things we’ve seen
and done
In th’ old days when we flourished, and counted by the
mile,
Without going far for nothing from the Durran
Durra run.”
An incident connected with Mr. Badgery’s dealing ex-
periences was the burning of his drovers’ saddles by acci-
dent, one night in 1859, while camped at Strathaird.
The men were in charge of a big mob (2000 head of
inixed cattle) and were camped in one of the rtatron
paddocks. The drovers left the saddles on a log near a
burning stump. Sparks from the stump caught the log,


and the saddles were burnt to cinders. Amongst the
transactions of 1856 were 250 head of store cattle sold to
the late Mr. Hassall, of Braidwood, for which the buyer
paid his bill, viz. : £750, in sovereigns. This was at
Hyland’s Hotel, Boro, at which place the cattle were
delivered.
Mr. Hassell, obtaining a big milk-dish from the pub-
lican, counted the “thick-uns” one by one into the dish.
The Author assured Mr. Hassall that we would take his
cheque for anything short of a million, but he answered,
“No, I won’t ask you men to wait till the bank verifies
my cheque—the sovereigns will be heavier to carry, but
they’ll be handy in your pockets.” He added, “I’m glad
to be rid of them, anyhow.”
Some Episodes on the Road.
Towards the end of the year (1856), the Author and
his brother again visited the Melbourne markets, this
time taking over a mob of eighty head of horses. On
reaching Deniliquin—then a small village boasting one
hotel (Taylor’s), an accident occurred which somewhat
ruffled our feathers. One Kelly, who had been promoted
from the office of gauger, at Albury, to the post of
resident Magistrate of Deniliquin, seemed to think that
he was invested with the powers of a Caesar, and had the
Author’s brother hailed before him for “furious riding”
through the unaligned streets of the embryo city. As
the furious riding’ was little better than an ordinary
cancer, sue as thereby tne horses were prevented from
getting into a growing crop, we thought the Magistrate
was a bit of a Turk to fine the offender £5, under the cir*
umstances.


Mr. Taylor —the Deniliquin publican —was a very dif-
ferent man to the Gauger-Magistrate, and was always
ready to help anyone at a critical moment. He was
often waiting at the river-bank (Edwards) to give
drovers a hand if required with their stock, after leaving
the punt.
On this journey occurred the sequel to the handker-
chief episode related in Chapter 111. Nearing the Mia
Mia Hotel, some fifteen miles from Bendigo, the Author
sent a black-boy with the party ahead with a message
to the publican, or landlady, to have dinner ready for
four. The landlady, on being told that we were travel-
ling with horses, inquired to whom they belonged. The
boy said, “To Charlie McAlister, of Goulburn,” “Oh/’
said the lady, “was he ever in Liverpool?” and on the
lad saying he thought so, “Well,” she said, point out
McAlister when they arrive.” The boy did so, and when
we sat down to dinner I was surprised to recognise in
my table-serviette the cambric handkerchief I had lost
sight of, with my name done in silk thread in the corner
—some eight years before. It turned out that the land-
lady —now wife of Mr. Sweeney, the Mia Mia publican
was identical with the Miss G——, whose acquaintance
the Author had made many years back at Liverpool.
She had apparently preserved the handkerchief as a
memento of our boy and girl infatuation. As a parting
joke the husband said he would have to get my name
plucked out and his own sewn in instead, on that “his-
toric” handkerchief. It seems the course of “calf love”
any more than “true love” never did run smooth. On
this trip to Melbourne another noteworthy little inci-
dent occurred. Some twelve months before, while taking
a mob of cattle over, we had camped one night on the


edge of a little scrub near the Murray. That night,
on going off watch, my brother (W. McAlister) had
taken off his spurs, and hung them on a Myall bush close
by. He forgot all about the spurs at the time, but as
we were now passing through the same scrub with the
horses, we found the spurs hanging on the bush where
they had been left twelve months before. We believe
the owner still keeps one of those spurs to commemorate
the honesty of the Blacks and Bilbies of old times. Lke
Caesar’s wife, they were above suspicion. The last time
the Author saw one—or rather two —of those almost ex-
tinct Marsupials—the Bilbies—was out near Condobolin,
in 1866. We sold the eighty horses referred to at Do-
herty’s Yards, Melbourne, averaging £25 per head.
There were some fine up-standing colts among them—
and every one as sound as the proverbial bell. At the
same time the Author bought a saddle-horse, bred in
Gippsland, which was the best roadster he ever bestrode.
He was a compact, dark-brown cob, with four white feet,
and on that account we christened him “Socks.” Socks
was as easy as an arm-chair as regards his moving, and
he had extraordinary “bottom” as elsewhere recorded.
On those by-gone droving journeys we had great oppor-
tunities of noting the splendid grazing qualities of the
Murrumbidgee and Riverina Country. From Kimo
(Collins’) to Buckinbong (Jenkins’), in the Mur-
rumbidgee Country, as from Table-top, then
owned by Mr. Warby, to Chapman’s Urana
Station, in the Murray side—the country in the
blue-eyed seasons of the later Fifties was worth the
ransom of a thousand kings. The rich trefoil and clover
—the lush grasses along the river-banks; the green,
open-hearted look of the country; the cattle rolling fat;


the unfenced “ panorama’ ’ of the sunny landscape, was
all a grand tonic to the heart and the vision of the drover
after the murky, frost-bitten hills of the Tablelands.
Riverina was then purely a pastoral paradise. There
were no rail-side wheat-depots or elevators; no signs of
model farms or state nurseries ; and very little farming
“on the whole or on the halves,” along the banks of the
Mighty Murrumbidgee, or the Lord Murray. The bluff
pioneer squatters were Monarchs of all they surveyed;
and were worthy of the best treatment the seasons and
the gods could give them. For many of them, like
Tyson, John Jenkins, Jimmy Maiden, and Mick Keigh-
ran, started long before they reached man’s estate, with
little better stock-in-trade than their innate knowledge
of stock and bushcraft, and a stern determination to
succeed. Johnny Jenkins was barely fifteen, and Tyson
about three years older when they began life as Riverina
squatters. The Author, from Mr. Tyson himself, heard
the story of his first start in life, and as the matter has
been somewhat garbled, it may be interesting to set it
down here in cold print. After acting as stockmen for
some years on stations down the country, James Tyson
and his brother William took into their heads to try
their fortunes on Riverina, and took up a small run on
the Billabong. A runholder at Burrogorang had agreed
to let the Tysons have a small draft of cattle, and after
they had put up a hut and fenced in a stockyard, James
started to bring up the Burragorang cattle. All the
cash he had on setting out was one shilling; and the
puntman at Gundagai wanted half-a-crown to ferry
Tyson and his horse across the Murrumbidgee. But Mr.
Tyson did not like the idea of parting with the shilling;
so, to make a long story short, he swam the river at


great risk, and saved the silver. After returning to the
Billabong with the cattle, the Tysons had to abandon
their run in consequence of a severe drought, and soon
afterwards the Bendigo rush broke out; and at the be-
ginning of the rush Jimmy Tyson started business as a
butcher. He acted as his own slaughterman and “cut-
ter-up,” and made a lot of money. In the early Fifties
Mr. Tyson bought Wentworth’s Station, Lake Taipa
(Murray District), with 12,000 cattle, at £8 per head—
a transaction which will show there was plenty of money
in the country then. Mr. Tyson’s aversion to the fair
sex was one of the most peculiar traits of his character.
A yarn was told of a Sydney barmaid who won a wager
of £20 by kissing the lonely pastoralist, when he was
looking the other way, one morning. Tyson was terribly
scandalised, it is said, at this “sacriligious” occurrence,
and vowed vengeance on the daring barmaid.
When Burke and Wills went Out*
In the autumn of 1860, the Author made his third trip
with horses to Melbourne. This mob numbered seventy
head—all Argyle-bred colts and fillies, with a few
draught and light harness animals; and they sold readily
at Doherty’s yards. We got £680, net value, on this
consignment, clearing £200. This was a somewhat
memorable trip, as we witnessed the departure of the
Burke and Wills exploring party, the leaders of which
met with such a sad fate. We distinctly remember
Burke riding a big grey horse at the head of the party,
and the unusual sight of Camels in the Melbourne streets,
and the great cheering from the fifty thousand people,
or more, that assembled to see the heroes of the hour set


out from the Royal Park. Though the leaders of the
party were wanting in bushcraft, they accomplished a
great piece of work, having traversed a wide area of
Queensland from Cooper's Creek to the Flinders River ;
but on the return journey the fates were against them—
their provisions gave out, and the rest of the tale belongs
to the mournful pages of Australian exploration, as
Burke and Wills died of privation within a few days of
each other, in the heart of the sun-baked waterless
desert. King, who stood by Burke and Wills last, was
a fine, manly, young fellow, and his self-sacrificing care
of his weaker comrades, as they perished one by one,
amid such lonely surroundings, is one of the most not-
able instances of unselfish heroism in our exploration
annals. King’s rescue, when almost at his last gasp, by
the search-party sent out by the Victorian Government,
was a most pathetic incident, as the poor fellow was worn
almost to a shadow, and delirious through his privations.
It is pleasing to note that the Victorian authorities re-
cognised the great achievements of Burke and Wills by
voting a sum of money to their next of kin, and by erect-
ing a fine statue in Melbourne; and an annuity was
settled on King. The gallant leaders of the expedition
who yielded up their lives in the pursuit of their object,
did not die in vain, for, like Hume, Mitchell, Stuart,
Gregory, and the host of other brave explorers, and men
of science, who braved the terrors of the interior, the
names of Burke and Wills will ever shine on the roll-call
of men who have grandly striven in the interests of their
Country and their Kind. Our return to Argyle was
without any incident worth recording.


CHAPTER XXVII.
“Oh! don’t you remember Old Melbourne, Ben Bolt,
When gold nuggets first were found out?
When, mid five feet of mud on the wharves and the
streets,
And all night, ‘stickers-up’ roamed about.”
Old Parody.
The Author’s first trip to Melbourne with horses for
sale was in the Spring of 1855. In this venture my
partner was the late Michael Ryan, of Mutbilly (Argyle).
a first-class judge of horse-flesh of any quality. Some
twelve months previously, Mr. Ryan had taken over a
mob of hacks and harness horses, which had sold like
hot cakes, as the saying goes; and meeting with him
one day at Duggan’s (now O’Halloran’s) Hotel, Goul-
burn, he (Ryan) wagered £5 to a meerschaum pipe that
horses would prove a better spec than anything the
Author had done in cattle. Mr. Ryan won his wager
easily, and it was gladly paid over, as on our mob of 150
horses (mostly unbroken colts, which we had bought at
an average price of £8 per head) we averaged over £3O
per head at Doherty’s yards, corner of Queen and Bourke
Streets, Melbourne. Some of the best buyers that ever
sat on a fence then frequented Doherty’s, as also Bourke
and Kemp’s yards opposite; and anything that stood on
four legs in the shape of a horse had a good value.
Kemp’s yards were first opened by “Dalmahoy” Camp-
bell, who was one of the best known men of early Mel-
bourne. Mr. Campbell, with whom the Author had
several dealings, was one of the keenest agents and pas


toralists of the Fifties. It was on his suggestion that
Allan Cameron, the first cheese-maker in Argyle (New
South Wales), removed from Tarlo in 1847 or 1848 to
Victoria, as the two Scots (Campbell and Cameron) were
from the same “clachan” in “The Highlands,” and, with
the usual fraternity of the Celtic Caledonian, Campbell
gave his “bosom cronie” the lay of the land in the
“Cabbage Garden.” Mr. Campbell, in after years, had
a station on the Loddon, which, if we do not mistake,
was the scene of the first (Clunes) rush. Though Mel-
bourne, in 1855, was a youthful city compared to Sydney,
the enormous traffic brought to and fro by the Diggings
was rapidly taking the Victorian capital to the top of the
poll amongst Australian cities. But, as I remember
Melbourne in 1855, many parts of what are now busy,
populous arteries, had not been cleared of timber.
Stumps of trees recently cut down were standing in
several streets. The Flemington Road, to wit, was a
real bushy neighbourhood. A number of tents, in-
habited by recently arrived immigrants, stood around
the site of the present Railway Station at Prince’s
Bridge, ’ere the owners departed for Bendigo, Ballarat,
or other rushes. But Melbourne was simply reeking with
money. At Bourke’s “Western Port” Hotel, where Mr.
Ryan and the Author put up, lucky diggers of a better
class made the welkin ring, and “unlimited shouting”
was the order of the day. But Caution’s “Bull and
Mouth” in Bourke Street was the real hive of the wide
democracy—the horney-handed, who, for the time being
were celebrating their victory over Fortune in their own
breezy manner. At places like the “Bull and Mouth”
it was customary for some to attend meals—Jewish
fashion —with hat- on, and with pipes handy by the


plates. Speaking of those rough fashions, I remember
that “Jimmy” Maiden, on several occasions, sharply
laid down the law to folks who at the public dining-table
began the smoking act, and very rightly, for there are
many who, though following rough occupations, natur-
ally adopt good manners, and resent “rudeness unde-
filed.”
On the Trail of a Lost Horse.
On the journey homewards, we camped one night at
Durban Creek, near Kilmore, and next morning, I
missed one of my stockhorses (I was riding one and lead-
ing the other) —a splendid animal which had been bred
on the Abercrombie, and was a “born drover.” A num-
ber of new settlers had lately taken up land near Dur-
ban Creek, viz. : the Lloyds, Quinns, Kellys, and others,
who were farming and digging between times. Some of
those people told us of a “Pound”—nominally kept
under the regulations of the Victorian Government, but
really used as a blind by the pound-keeper and certain
associates for “duffing” purposes—which was situated
near a bend of the Goulburn River, some twenty miles
distant. Leaving Mr. Ryan, I started to look for the
missing horse in the alleged direction of the “pound,”
thinking that by some mistake he might have “discov-
ered” the place—both against his owner’s will, and to
our detriment. Presently, near a bush track leading
towards the Plenty River ranges, I came across a rough
slab hut, near which two sturdy boys were clearing and
stacking timber for a man named Gleeson, so they said.
I have ever believed the younger of those two boys to
have been the afterwards notorious outlaw, Ned Kelly,
and so referred to him in reminiscences published in


1901, he being at the time I speak of (1885) about eight
or nine years old. I had previously seen this boy at
Kelly’s place, and he was one of the family and answered
to the name of Ned. We thus lengthily refer to this
episode as some accounts purport to make Ned Kelly a
younger man than we think he was at his execution.
My esteemed friend, Mr. John O’Brien, wool-merchant,
Goulburn, who knew Ned Kelly at Wangaratta, in boy-
hood, confirms my view of the matter. By the direction
of the two boys I shortly struck a track which led to the
Ovens. I camped that night in the scrub, and next day
came to a small public-house on the Kilmore-Murchison
Road. I there learned that the mysterious “pound”
was fifteen miles further away on the Murchison. Soon
after night-fall, following the gleam of a camp fire, I
arrived at a shearing shed about 200 yards away from
the river-bank (the Murchison.) Two men were sitting
by the fire after supper. In answer to my greeting, one
of them, a sturdy, bearded man, well up in years, sang
out, “Hello, Mac ! How are they all over on the Goul-
burn side ?” Surprised at this unexpected recognition
I sought to learn the name of my unknown acquaintance,
but without avail. “Oh, never mind that,” he said,
roughly; ‘ 'but you’ll camp here to-night; there’s some
tucker in the box near the fire; and you’ll find a bunk
in that tent over there,” and at the words my good
Samaritan, after saying something in a low voice to his
mate, walked away to his camp. The other man, who
remained smoking at the fire, surprised me by saying
that the horse I was after was “in the pound up the
creek,” and gave me the bearings of the locality. But
he was as close as his mate regarding their identities, and
the'r interest in myself; and seven years passed by ere


I discovered the “lineage" of my good friends of that
night. One of them was Joe Green, the convict who
ran away from Strathaird in 1845, before spoken of, and
the other was an escaped Tasmanian convict, so they
both had cause for secrecy. When I reached the pound
next morning, a slatternly woman came from a Dark hut
near the yard, and told me nothing had been impounded
for a week. But I decided to take a survey of the
“premises,” and with success, as in a long gully a mile
away I came across a blackboy minding several horses —
my good hack amongst them. After a “yabber” with
the darkie, and the “bribe” of a pound-note, the horse
was again in the hands of its proper owner. The black-
fellow stipulated that I should “go longa pound, and gib
it money to Missus, too, or the Boss plurry well beat ’em
both.” But I took care to give the lady of the pound a
wide berth, as she deserved no reward for her lying
assertions. I also blessed my lucky stars that the
pound-keeper and his tougher associates were absent on
the occasion. In those days a searcher after stolen
property often stood in peril of his life in the vicinity
of those lawless stock-exploiters. Branded horses were
in the first place taken, when “lifted,” to such a pound
as that described, where the brands were defaced, and
the horses then sold a good distance away from the
raided district. If the police or owners followed quickly
on the heels of the robbers—which was once in a blue
moon—then the pound, as it were, seemed to supply its
orthodox purpose. The “keeper” then pretended to
show that the animals were “yarded” for trespassing on
“So-and-So’s” run, and so on. The Strathbogie ranges
in Victoria corresponded to the Weddin mountains, in
New South Wales, as the chief centres of the “Duffing”


industry, but the game had a very wide “electorate” in
the Fifties and Sixties. And we are here reminded
of the tricks once played on drovers by a pound-keeper
whose yards were on the old Sydney road, not a hundred
miles outside the city. This rascal, besides looking
after the pound, had several “agistment” paddocks,”
and we sometimes left our travelling stock there for a
day or two, prior to going to Homebush for the sales.
If we put our cattle or horses in the pound-keeper’s pad-
docks at a certain rate, all was well; but if we patronised
other owners in the vicinity, it often happened that next
morning we would find our stock impounded, with Is.
per head damages on them. The “explanation” was
that the stock had got into the pound-keeper’s enclosed
pastures, and we had to pay the penalty. But it in-
variably happened that by the rascally pound-keeper’s
connivance the fences were broken, and the “trespassers”
driven into the paddocks. By and bye the tricky
practitioner found it diplomatic to resign his billet, as a
certain person gave him the option of so doing or of
facing the brunt of a police court inquiry.
New Zealand, in those times, was a great horse mar-
ket, and thousands of stolen horses were shipped away
to that country from New South Wales and Victoria.
Many a poor man was looking in vain for his lost horse
through the bush, while the animal was in the hold of a
ship sailing across the seas bound with a freight of 500
or 600 equines, for Auckland, or some other port of
Maoriland. Little weeds of “scrubbers” that couldn’t
be given away for boiling down in New South Wales
were shipped and sold to the Maoris at prices ranging
from £5 up ho £SO. But, by the way, New Zealand
now produces better horses—both draughts and racers —


than New South Wales. In proof of the assertion (as
regards racing blood), we may point to the famous Mus-
ket, sire of the more famous Carbine; to that speedy
mare Zoe, and others of Mr. Redwood's breeding; to
Maniapoto, Solution, and other great horses.
But in talking over our horse-selling crusade to Mel-
bourne, we had almost forgotten to touch on other little
incidents of that trip. While in Melbourne on that
occasion, the Author made the acquaintance of that
famous Irishman, Sir Charles Gavan Duffy, later Pre-
mier of Victoria. Through Duffy’s good offices I dis-
covered the whereabouts of some land, which ten or
eleven years before had been purchased by my friend,
the late Murdoch McKay, of Yalbraith. This land
had been bought by Mr. McKay long before the dig-
gings broke out—the buyer thinking he would settle in
Victoria (having only recently landed in the country) ;
but some months later he came to New South Wales,
without troubling about selling the land. But on hear-
ing I was going to Melbourne (in ’55), Mr. McKay asked
me to make inquiries. We found that a weatherboard
house had been built on the lot by a man who claimed it
as his property. But, assisted by Mr. Duffy (as he was
then), we soon convinced him to the contrary, and suc-
ceeded in selling the land for nearly £3OO, which was
about twelve times the price paid by Mr. McKay. We
refer to this matter as it was one of the by no means
usual cases, in early Melbourne, where the rightful
owner got back his own, with interest added, by a bit of
luck—as in the changes and mischances brought around
in those lively times it was often difficult to find both
the agents of other years, and the necessary identifying
documents. But how often were the original owners


either cheated out of their rights, or let their property
drift into the hands of people who based the claim on
that “possession” which is 99 points of the law. On
that trip, we (Mr. Ryan and the Author) had a few
days’ sightseeing in Melbourne, and one thing that inte-
rested us was a fac-simile (or copy) of the deeds of the
100,000 acres of land near Geelong, which John Bat-
man —about the earliest Victorian Pioneer—obtained
from the Aboriginal Chiefs. This conveyance was made
out in 1835, and was signed in the native “marks,” or
hieroglyphics, by eight chiefs—viz., by three brothers
named Jagajaga, and by Cooloolock, Bungarie, Yanyan,
Moowhip, and Mommamalar. Another relic of interest
we saw was the first plough used on Victorian soil, made
by Faulkner, the founder of Melbourne. Batman
sought to obtain another block of 50,000 acres from the
blacks, but the Home Government declined to endorse
this gigantic “steal.” Batman had the earth hunger
as bad as Wentworth, who, only for Governor Gipps,
might have obtained a million acres from the Maoris in
the early days for a few pounds’ worth of trinkets. And
when we come to think of it, it was lucky there were a
few good patriots in the olden days, or Posterity would
have to carry its blanket a bit further than it does at
present—and that is quite far enough in many cases —
owing to the greed of the Fat Man and the drowsiness of
the “lawmakers.” But we must now leave the Mel-
bourne of ’55, with its varied panorama of the past—
we have somewhere else to go.


CHAPTER XXVIII.
New South Wales Goldfields and Bushrangers
of the Sixties.
Kiandra.
Ive worked on th nine-mile; likewise on the river,
And out at the New-chum, and rocky plains too;
At each of those places I did my endeavour,
But I’ve lately struck ‘duffers,’ with nothing in view;
And just now I’m longing to see the old places, ~~
I’m longing to visit old Sydney again—
For I m full of the Snowy’s white hills and wild graces;
I’m a broken-down digger on Kiandra plain.”
Old Song.
When the Author’s party left Goulburn for the
Kiandra rush at the end of January, 1861, the new
field some six months in operation, had, according to all
accounts, a mighty future before it. In the party were
several who had been on Beechworth and Bendigo, viz. ;
the late Donald McDonald, of Grant’s Plat; William
Evans, Willian Hollis, sen., and Thos. McAlister, of
Yalbraith (the Author’s brother)—all of whom have
since passed away to the world of shades. Following
his usual practice the Author, before leaving himself,
started two bullock-teams loaded to the brim with com-
modities, for the new Ophir. The freight included four
tons of flour, bought at £35 per ton at Bradley’s Mill,
Goulburn; and I paid another £35 per ton for the car-
nage of the goods to Kiandra. When the teams got to


the field, Mr. Charles Cowper, who was about to start
a store, offered £BO per ton for the flour, but I held out
for £IOO per ton, foolishly as it turned out. For when
the great news came from Lambing Flat, some months
later, many of the Kiandra diggers went there, and,
following suit, I sacrificed the flour to one F r, a
storekeeper, for an alleged £3O per ton. I use the
words “sacrificed” and “alleged” pointedly, for the
storekeeper mysteriously disappeared, and i was ielt
lamenting, as I never received a cent of the money;
and in fact I lost some £SOO on Kiandra altogether.
In reading over, from time to time, accounts of the
great Klondyke goldfield, away in the frozen regions of
the United States, I am reminded of similar phases
which gold-seekers experienced on snow-bound Kiandra.
For a time it was impossible with our appliances of
those days, to attempt to dig through the deep snow-
drifts—from ten to twenty feet in depth—or to work in
the “blinding swarm” of the fast-falling snow, and I
have often thought since that the gold won by the
Kiandra diggers was a reward well-earned indeed. For
three weeks, nine of us, mates together, never left the
hut we were camped in except to get a bit of wood, or
provender, and were obliged to shovel the piled snow
from the door of the hut every time we opened it. By
the way, I gave £25 for this humpy, and in it we stored
the loading brought from Goulburn. When the thaw
came on and the snow melted, the stumps of the trees
we had felled for firewood were seen to be eight or ten
feet high, thus showing the depth of the snow, as we
had cut the trees at the snow level during the big fall.
The difficulties of transit to the field had at the out-
set a big effect in keeping up prices. A few days after


our arrival I remember a big raw-boned fellow coming
out of Pollock’s store (a calico and canvas tent, by the
way), pretending to munch a raw potato. “Look here,
boys,” he said, alluding to the high price of potatoes
(then £3 per cwt.), “See me eating sovereigns”; and a
few days afterwards I was amused at the remark of
another digger who had just bought some writing paper.
Holding up an envelope and a sheet of notepaper, he
exclaimed, “Just fancy having to pay a bob (1/-) for a
bit of paper whenever you want to send a line or two
to your wife. My oath, a man would want to strike a
‘nine-mile’ nugget every day if he’s going to write many
letters here.” (A big nugget had only a few days before
been found at the “nine-mile” diggings, some distance
from the main rush).
In company with several mates the Author did some
prospecting on the Five-mile Creek, and afterwards at
New-chum Hill, and several times got as much as an
ounce to the bucket, but it didn’t last long at that rate.
There was a good deal of ironstone in the granitic
Kiandra wash, and it was a very different sort of field
to Beechworth or Bendigo—much more irregular and
uncertain, and of course not to be compared to those
historic fields in the matter of output. The Pollocks,
the first storekeepers on Kiandra, had things pretty
well their own way till the arrival of Mr. C. Cowper
(afterwards Sheriff of New South Wales, and member
for Tumut), who had his cargo brought by mules and
pack-horses by Buckley’s Crossing—a locality now em-
braced within the proposed Dalgety Federal Capital
area. To most Australians it was a novel sight to see
loading brought in by mules, but several of the Kiandra


stores had their supplies so carried across the snow-cap-
ped ranges, from Cooma and Tumut to the field.
But a yet more peculiar event was the bringing in by
Chinese, after the fashion of their country, of the first
newspaper plant (we believe it was called the “Kiandra
Chronicle.”) Cases each containing about a cwt. of
machinery, etc., were slung on hickory poles, and the
“Chows” trotted along carrying the freight in parties
of two carriers to each load. We gave the pig-tails a
rousing Australian cheer as they ambled along over the
snow, carrying the raw material of the organ of public
opinion. Mr. Cowper, who, like the Author and others,
had brought his goods on spec to the diggings, was ap-
proached by the head man of the Pollock firm, who
wanted to buy Cowper’s sugar, but Cowper refused to
sell unless Pollock bought the whole of his goods.
Mr. Pollock, disappointed at his failure to get the
sugar, turned to a knot of diggers standing near, and
said with great scorn, “Here’s the son of your Premier
(Sir Charles Cowper was then Premier of New South
Wales) acting like the dog in the manger —he cannot
eat his sugar himself, but won’t let you have it at a
reasonable rate when there’s hardly a pound on the field
outside his stores.” The Author had previously told
Mr. Cowper of the digger’s remark about the High cost
of Pollock’s stationery, and, remembering this, Mr.
Cowper aptly replied, “Never mind, boys, I’ll start a
store myself; and I’ll not charge you a shilling for a
sheet of note-paper when you want to write home.” Mr.
Cowper very soon ran the biggest store on the field, and,
we remember, was one of the largest gold-buyers on
Kiandra, having Mr. Goulston (an ex-bank-manager) as
partner.


Though in the Author’s opinion there were not more
than 10,000 men at the most, within a radius of ten
miles of Kiandra, there was amongst them a large
leaven of born diggers, men, who, from the Nine-mile
to Rocky Plain; from Five-mile to New-chum Hill, pro-
spected every gully, dammed and turned the creeks,
and left abiding marks of their labours amid the wildest
scenes of that hitherto almost untrodden region.
A party of Americans got the notion that large de-
posits of gold were lodged behind some rocky “bars” in
the river bed; and to get at these supposed “pockets”
they dammed the river at a certain point above the bars,
and then proceeded to divert the stream by building a
fluming-race or channel, through which the diverted
water was again run into the river below the scene of
operations. The “fluming” in this case consisted of
overhead “boxes” about twelve feet in length, two feet
wide, and twelve inches deep, and the race was some
600 yards in length. It is mentioned here by way of
describing such operations to those who may not have
had mining experience.
Eight parties—some 50 men altogether—were inter-
ested in the scheme, which we believe gave a splendid
return, over £25,000 worth of gold being recovered, so
we were later informed by a member of the party. The
work of getting the timber required for the fluming from
the surrounding hills was a tough little job, as the
Author can verify, as his teams brought down a couple
of loads from the sawpits. Two working bullocks were
killed before we got through with the contract, and we
were very glad to have it over.
The late Mr. Douglas, of Inveralochy, was one of the
first to bring a mob of fat cattle to Kiandra, and the


chief butchers then were Messrs. Pollock and Riley.
This latter individual should not be confounded with
Luke Riley, the publican, in whose hotel I remember a
number of “political” diggers one night drank success —
several times repeating the performance —to Robertson’s
land legislation of 1861. This was before the Act be-
came law, and while it was getting a hostile reception
from the Legislative Council,
Another leading light of old Kiandra was a French-
man named Victor Frank, who was the god-father of
several “long-winded” claims, and another “leading arti-
cle” was Jim Carmichael —an Irish-American, who ran
a hotel and a billiard saloon, patronised by some of the
rowdiest individuals ever let loose on a gold field. Luke
Riley had a dancing hall attached to his hotel, and as
the ladies at that stage on Kiandra were few and far
between, those who attended the dances had no chance of
acting the part of lay-sisters or “wall-flowers.” Shanties
were numerous, but as those places were part of the
landscape at every diggings of those days, no one seemed
scandalised by their existence. But as happens on every
field, a few shady characters were hanging round some of
the shanties, pilfering as opportunity offered, and it was
customary for the storekeepers to employ armed watch-
men at night. Mr. Cowper was, I remember, much
against his will, created a sort of “al fresco” magistrate
by the diggers, and his judgments on matters were never
questioned. As on the Ovens, and later at Lambing
Flat, the diggers did not seem to hit it with the police.
Kiandra in 1886.
Kiandra was a much quieter scene when I revisited it
in 1866, on that occasion giving delivery to the late Mr.


Arthur Bloomfield, of 600 head of mixed cattle, which
Mr. Bloomfield had bought from the Author and his
brother (W. McAlister) at Strathaird. Though, per-
haps, this topic of the cattle is a slight digression, it may
not be thought superfluous at the end of this chapter,
as it is another of my personal memories of Kiandra and
the snowy river. Mr. M. Zouch (now of Richlands)
will no doubt remember having taken delivery of those
cattle on Mr. Bloomfield’s behalf, at Buckley’s Crossing
in 1866.
The river was nearly a banker, but at the imminent
risk of his life, Mr. Zouch dashed into the swirling
flood, and headed the cattle—as they were swimming
down the stream—to the bank. Mr. Bloomfield was a
splendid type of the sunny-hearted Australian pastor-
alist, and his tragic end some years ago—when he was
killed by a fall from his horse—was regretted all over the
southern districts.
In concluding those memories, it is a real pleasure
to see that yet answering the roll-call above terra firma,
there is a numerous band of the old Kiandra diggers,
carriers, and business men, who, though showing signs
of the sere and yellow leaf, are yet, like the Author,
ready to tackle another Kiandra if the fates ordained.
Amongst those personal friends of the Author are
Messrs. Charles Cowper, Charles Gillespie, Daniel Leahy
(Gundaroo), J. Leary (Gundagai), Charles McLean
(Goulburn), Harry Hartley, Barney Donnelly, J.
Chard, and Thos. and Mick Fitzgibbons (Taralga), and
others of that sturdy brigade, who, nearly half-a-cen-
tury ago, experienced the exhilarations and hardships
which attended gold-digging and enterprise beneath the
shadow of the snow ranges.


CHAPTER XXIX.
Lambing Flat and the Chinese Riots.
At the time of the Author's arrival at the Lambing
Elat rush in the winter of 1861, the Chinese Riots which
made such a stir all over the country, in a political
sense, were quietening, though the ferment and indigna-
tion amongst the diggers at the sending of the military
from Sydney were yet at fever heat. A few days before
I left Goulburn for the Flat (after returning from
Kiandra) the men with the big guns passed through,
and at the wish of Captain Zouch, I sold to the Lieu-
tenant of the detachment a big draught horse (a very
powerful animal), which was one of the relay which
hauled the cannon into Lambing Flat. The evening the
military arrived at the diggings, the Author, in com-
pany with the late William Evans, and others, was
camped at Watt’s dam —some five miles from the field.
On going in next day we found the soldiers and police
holding the place under martial law, and knots of the
diggers were talking “Eureka.” Several men had been
taken prisoners, and the mob resenting this, had at-
tacked the lock-up, and liberated their comrades, and
were making things “sultry” for some alleged Chinese
sympathisers. One of these was Mr. Greig—a Goulburn
man —who was running a store on the rush. The crowd
were going to burn down Greig’s place, after looting the
premises, but Greig, who was a quick-witted fellow,
tapped a cask of rum and another of wine, and treated
the rioters to the best in the house. Thus mollified, the
“Democracy” forgot to burn Greig out, and went away


vowing he was the whitest man on Lambing Flat. As
to the riots, there was much justification for the attitude
of the white diggers. The Chinese adopted all sorts of
slim tricks to avoid paying of the license fee (then 30/-
per annum for each miner), which in itself was a real
grievance on the part of the whites. But the chief
annoyance was the filthy habits of the “Chows”: they
polluted the then limited water-supply, performing their
ablutions, and washing their dungarees in the places
which should have been reserved for drinking and cook-
ing purposes, and on being remonstrated with took no
notice whatever. The evil of the presence of thousands
of dirty Asiatic coolies needs no explanation to those
who know what a filthy blot on the landscape even a few
lowcaste Chinaman can be. To every protest it was “no
savee, or welly good,” but welly bad all the same.
This sort of thing will never be tolerated by whites
worthy of their race and colour; so at last “John” got
notice to quit in a way more forcible than polite. The
diggers rolled up one morning and drove the yellow
agony in a body to Wombat, some five miles from the
main camp. The Mongolians were obliged to run for
their lives. Hundreds of them were victualled for some
weeks by runholders of the district at very low cost, on
condition that they kept away from the white camp;
but they soon began to return to twos and threes to the
field, and were soon as thick as ever. Then the big
trouble began. The “pig-tails” were again banished:
many were maltreated as they showed fight, some few
had limbs broken, and about half a dozen of the poor
heathens were forcibly thrust down old shafts, etc., by
the more cruel and hasty section of the diggers; but the
Author never heard of one authentic case of a Chinese


being killed during the riot. And so Lambing Flat in
1861 literally struck the first blow for the supremacy of
an industrial white Australia. Many of the heathens
lost their pig-tails, and the Author, like others, had a
whip-lash made from some Chinaman’s pig-tail. As the
officers acted tactfully the thing soon fizzled out without
having stopped the pendulum to any extent worth speak-
ing of. But it gave the diggers’ ultimatum to the Gov-
ernment in regard to the Asiatic invasion; and to-day,
the Chinaman is only tolerated as a fossicker and pariah
on old worked-out fields. Amongst the Police Officers
present at the Riot were Superintendent Saunderson,
and Sergeants Smith, M. Brennan (Yass), and R. Fen-
ton (Goulburn), the latter of whom has recently passed
away. I remember Mr. Brennan having a warm five
minutes with a furious digger who was armed with a
long-handled shovel; but the Sergeant wielding a rifle
to which a bayonet was fixed, met the “shoveller” at
every point; and it was clear he had the man at his
mercy, as the latter soon discovered.
Sergeant (afterwards Superintendent) Saunderson,
who was at Forbes in 1863, was instrumental in arresting
the Frenchman, Rebardy, who was hanged for the
alleged murder of a man named Daniel Crotty, near
Lambing Flat, some eighteen months before. As I
knew both men I felt some concern over this matter at
the time. Crotty, in fact, was my mailboy between
Reid’s Flat and Goulburn in 1859; and Rebardy was
cook during my occupancy of the old Bazaar Hotel,
Goulburn, in 1859-60. I could not imagine Rebardy as
a murderer: he seemed a most inoffensive, good-natured
fellow at ail times. Sergeant Smith was a very big,
kindly Irishman, about 6ft. Sin. high. In 1864 he went


out with a police party after the notorious Morgan, the
bushranger; and met his death at the hands of ’that
dastardly criminal. Smith and his men were about to
pitch their tents at a camp in the Galore scrub, about
20 miles from Urana. Suddenly, from the shadows of
the bush a shot rang out, and then another, and Smith
fell. Morgan, kept in touch with the police movements
by a smart “telegraph,” had lain in waiting, and at the
first chance shot the unfortunate officer. Then, before
the police recovered from their surprise, Morgan
mounting his horse, was well outside the range of their
carbines. Smith lived only a few hours, for Morgan
generally shot to kill. Messrs. Torphy and Spicer, the
two chief leaders of the Lambing Flat diggers could
have, if they desired, created a sanguinary conflict be-
tween the military and the mob; but when the bone of
contention (the Chinese) was removed the war fever
subsided.
A Meeting with Gardiner.
At the Young (Lambing Flat) saleyards in February,
1862, I again met Frank Gardiner, the great bush-
ranger. He had been running a butchering business at
the rush in alleged partnership with one F gg; but
under pressure from the police, the business had been
broken up, and Gardiner was now "an outlaw under
ban. Big rewards were offered for his capture, both
for cattle-stealing and for the affray and escape from
Sergeant Middleton and Trooper Hosie, at Fogg’s house,
near the Fish River, some weeks previously. But in
spite of the prospective terrors of the law, the "Darkie”
(Gardiner) was at the saleyards on the day mentioned,
and was a party with another individual to the purchase


of ten head of steers, sold by the Author privately.
Those cattle were part of a small lot I had bought from
Mr. Jas. Warren, of Bong Bong, who had brought them
on spec to the diggings. Knowing something of Gar-
diner’s past, and also of certain lapses of the other
buyer, I was a bit chary of dealing with them, but must
say they acted the “clean potato” on that occasion. My
third and last interview with Gardiner was at Walla
Walla, some two months later, when returning from
Grenfell to Forbes, as related in the next chapter. But
in referring to Gardiner we are reminded of the smart
rogues who made a practice of lifting the horses of the
miners and traders on the diggings, and holding them
for the purpose of obtaining blackmail, or we should
say, a “reward” for their “kindness” in restoring lost
property.
A Bushranger's “Go-Between.”
The Author, in fact, lost a saddle-horse per the
agency of those robbers, and as the sequel is somewhat
amusing, it may as well be related here. On the advice
of friends, it was put about that I would pay £3 reward
for the animal’s restoration. Near sundown next day,
a tall, raw-boned fellow, with a fierce, red beard, came
to our camp at the “Five-mile, where Mr. Evans and
the Author were sinking a shaft, and after a while said
he knew where my lost horse could be found. “But,”
he said, “it’s worth a fiver to fetch him: a man might
get a slug in him if they found him out.” We pretended
to agree to this idea of the fiver, as “they,” whoever they
were, were so clever with the gun; and the fellow said
he would fetch the horse —“by th’ holy sailor, he would,
to-morror evenin’.” That night we (Mr. Evans and I)


laid a plan to circumvent our friend, the enemy. Late
next day the discoverer (?) duly appeared, with the
missing animal. According to our plan Evans went to
meet him, and in a few minutes called out to me—“come
on, McAlister, here’s your horse, bring the fiver.” I
had, seemingly, been doing something at the camp,
while of course, waiting developments. The man had,
unsuspectingly, handed the horse over to Evans, and the
latter said, “Have you all the money?” “Yes,” I said,
handing Evans a bit of waste paper, at the same time
taking the horse. Evans put the supposed fiver into his
pocket, and at this the “finder,” with an ugly look,
made as if to pick up a stick, and advanced on Evans.
But the latter promptly pulled a burning stick from our
camp fire and thrust it in the “duffer's” face, singeing
his red beard, and making him howl with pain. As I
also produced an old horse pistol which we had borrowed,
the enemy” saw that we had the best of the argument,
and he decamped with a seared face, and leaving half
his beard in the fire. I threw him half a sovereign to
show there was no malice on my part, and though he
threatened us with dire retribution, that was the last
we saw of him. The Weddin Mountains were then the
head-quarters of the most villainous gang of horse and
cattle duffers in the country, and our acquaintance was
no doubt one or their number; ■ a go-between for the
ringleaders.
An Hotel Incident,
I chanced one day to pass by the “Great Eastern”
Hotel (Brotherton’s, and later Carlo Marina’s), when
a great shindy was raging. The barmaid was shying
empty bottles andjDewters at the head of a young fellow


who, she said, had insulted her, and the air was full of
smash and frenzy. The great Sir F. Pottinger (then
head of the police) was riding by at the time with one
of his troopers, and he and his subordinate rushed into
the bar, leaving their horses tethered to a tree near by.
While the police were inside quelling the row, someone
made off with their horses, and we doubt if they were
ever recovered. Johnny Gilbert, it was said, had a hand
in the business; but whoever took them reduced the
awful Pottinger to the level of an old vituperative fish-
fag and he threatened several bystanders with summary
punishment if the “prads” were not returned. It was
the same terrible Pottinger that Gardiner challenged
to a duel, the outlaw saying that he was ready to stake
his life and chances on the issue of a single combat with
the bumptious officer. But Sir Frederick, perhaps
luckily for himself, ignored the outlaw s challenge.
At the Author’s departure from the Lambing Flat,
there were fully 10,000 diggers on the field—at Burron-
gong Creek, Big and Little Wombat, Five-mile, etc.;
and one might say that the country was being pro-
spected for a hundred miles around. It was fairly easy
even for new chums to follow the wash along the soft
granitic, or diorite “bottom”—that is, when the gold
was there, which was not always. Still, as on Forbes
and Grenfell, a lot of diggers made (and lost) fortunes
on Lambing Flat. So did a number of “spielers,”
shanty-keepers, and “decoy ducks,” who, as usual, im-
posed on the good nature of the diggers. But what
would a rush be without its gathering of the “lost
tribes?” Worse, surely, than the playing of Hamlet
without the Ghost. Many conflicting opinions were
tendered re the alleged shooting of a man named Lup


ton, during the riots, but according to our view, it was
a pure accident. One evening, at the height of the
disturbance, some wild spirits amongst the diggers fired
a few shots, it was said to intimidate the officers. Lup-
ton, unfortunately, at the time, happened to be chop-
ping a limb off a gum-tree, and had, in fact, climbed
the tree for the purpose of lopping off the branch. He
was hit by one of the bullets and tumbled down—a
corpse. There was a lot of excitement over this sad
event, which was, really, the only casuality amongst
the whites. With the coming of Forbes, Ironbarks, and
other western fields, I left the Lambing Flat side, and,
“rolling up my blankets, next made a push” for the
golden banks of the lazy Lachlan. The present lively
town of Young is, however, brave testimony of the
stability of the diggings, and the name of Lambing Flat
shall live as the scene of incidents, which, like the
Eureka stockade fight, have made dramatic history, and
altered for the better the trend of legislation in New
South Wales.
CHAPTER XXX.
The Forbes Rush.
When the Author reached the Lachlan rush a few
days after the “Red Hill” party had first “struck oil”
at 150 feet, fully 5000 people were on the scene. Seeing
that demand was outrunning supply in commodities,
as well as gold-finding—flour being £SO and chaff £4O
per ton, and other goods proportionately high, I soon
began to take a hand in the supply business. Within
three weeks I had several teams on the road bound for


the new rush. Mr. Charles Selmes, of Wheeo, and Ma
father, had charge of one of the teams, and the other
carriers were three Mummell men, viz.: Tom Kilfoyle,
Con McNamara and Darby Durack. Thinking my
cargo would reach Forbes in time to take the rush by
storm, I left for the “front” in high feather. That
staunch friend of my early days, John O'Sullivan,
Manager of the Commercial Bank, Goulburn, had placed
illooo to my credit for the purpose of goldbuy!ing at
Forbes and gave me letters of introduction, which were
as good as gold, to the Managers at Forbes and Lambing
Flat. But man proposes and God intervenes; heavy
weather, snowstorms, and rain delayed my teams; the
western farmers and carriers from Bathurst and Orange
etc., got in weeks before us and “scooped the pool.”
Prices came down to a normal level and remained there.
However I determined to start a hay and corn store
with my surplus stock, and, as I also intended to run a
hotel, bought a corner block with a frontage to Spring
and Lachlan streets, paying £IOO for the “right, title
and interest” under a business license. The building
sites on Forbes, as old diggers will remember, were held
under “business licenses” —but a good many sharp peo-
ple got possession of blocks without any authority but
their own cast-iron impudence. My “hotel,” viz. : “The
Great Eastern” —was a grand one-story, weatherboard
palace of eight rooms, put up at a cost of £6OO. Shortly
after the opening of the hotel a Government appraiser
assessed my building block at £l3, so the land cost £ll3
altogether. Meanwhile I had got the hay and produce
store going, and had hired one O’H eto look after
it, which he did to his own satisfaction if not to mine;
and of Mr. O’H e I will have a word to say later.


To obtain building material for the “Pub,” I visited
Grenfell, and, as before stated, had an interview with
Gardiner and Co., on the road, near the Walla Walla
waterholes. Gardiner’s mates that day were Johnny
O’Malley, and Dick T r, a Fish River native, the
smartest “bush-telegraph” of Gardiner’s gang. They
came on us (the Author and his mate, one Bob Cadden)
as we were having a noonday snack, and over a billy of
tea I had the “honour” of my third yarn with the great
outlaw. “We thought it might have been someone with
a swag, Charlie,” said Gardiner, jocularly—a remark
that in one sense was hardly complimentary. But my
previous acquaintance with both Gardiner and T r
was, I knew, as good as a passport if I had been as rich
as Croesus. A few days after this meeting news was
brought in of the sticking up of Mr. Horsington, the
Lambing Flat storekeeper, at Big Wombat, by Gardiner
and his gang, Horsington having to part with £SOO odd
in money, and over 200 ozs. in gold dust. Up to that
time this was the biggest coup the “Darkie” (Gardiner)
had made. Ben Hall, Gilbert, Fordyce, C s, and
others of the bushrangers had drinks on many occasions
at the Author’s Hotel on Forbes, and in broad daylight,
too. This was prior to the Eugowra affair, and up to
that event, Ben Hall and Gilbert were only suspected
of a bushranging “kinship” with Gardiner. For though
several of them had been before the Forbes Bench on
suspicion (Ben Hall and O’Malley were repeatedly
brought up), the law had failed to sheet the guilt home
to them to the satisfaction of the local J.’sP. But we will
speak of the rangers again. By the end of May, 1862,
there were fully 50,000 people on the field. The Warden
Captain Brown, himself informed me that up to that


date over 25,000 miners licenses had been issued and
scores were applied for every day, and truly the Forbes
rush at its height was a pandemonium, but a bigger
lottery than even was the Turon ; for the blanks on
Forbes far outnumbered the prizes. The Author had a
sleeping share in the Lagoon claim which returned the
Company close on £20,000, which was not a great prize
either, for the immense amount of labour and the big
expense involved. There was an ocean of slush and
water to be pumped and worked through in getting
down 250 feet or more, to the old river-bed where the
gold—the good, red gold—had been lying hidden
through the centuries. Amongst the brave soldiers of
fortune who visited the rush were Messrs. Torphy and
Spicer (the leaders of the diggers in the Lambing Flat
riots), the late “Toby” Ryan, Thomas Brothers, then,
as now, the leading merchants of Forbes; Shackleton
and Stevens, and other ex-Bendigo men, “Scrammy
Jack” Minahan (a one-armed man wonderfully smart
both at billiards and as a coach-driver and trader), Dan
Mayne, later famed as the proprietor of the Bathurst
“Sentinel”; Skillicorn, the Bathurst butcher, who did
the famous ride on horseback from Bathurst to Sydney
over the Blue Mountains; and amongst others, Alfred
Stokes, late M.L.A. for Forbes. Mr. Stokes indeed
made his “debut” at the rush as the Author’s agent, and
in that capacity he put out many tons of forage and farm
produce to the diggers on the South lead, Victoria lead,
and other parts of the field. And I am reminded here
of my promise re the doings of my manager, Mr.
O’H— e. On hearing that I was about to sell out and
go elsewhere—this was in September, 1863— O’H e
suddenly vanished, and for 38 years I heard neither tale


nor tidings of him. Before leaving the diggings, 1 sent
bills out to a number of, as I thought, “long-winded”
customers, but in nearly every case, a receipt was pro-
duced, showing the account had been paid to O’H e
weeks before. In this way a shortage of nearly £4OO
was shown, which, clearly had been appropriated by
® e - Making the best of a bad bargain, I col-
lected the relics” of the debts, and left for other scenes.
One day in July, 1901, however, a seedy-looking creature
came to the Author's house in Goulburn, and he turned
out to be no other than the long-lost O’H e, my ras-
cally Forbes manager. He said that remorse had dogged
Jinn night and day, in gaol and out, for his dishonesty,
and wound up by “borrowing” half a sovereign as a
memento of his contrition. He explained that a co.
suming impulse to stake my money on the gaming table
at billiards, etc., was the cause of his perfidy. Someone
has said, “All men are liars, and every man is at heart
a gambler (as every woman is at heart a rake)” —but we
believed O’H e’s story as to his gambling mania,
while quite discounting the alleged fervour of his “sor-
row.” The morals of the O’H e’s of the world are
much as the lines of Adam Lindsay Gordon suggest, viz. :
“It’s little use to trouble: this I know
We d live the same life over if we had to live again,
And the chances are we’ll go where most men go.”
The publicans and business men of Forbes, like their
confreres on other fields, stood by a number of unlucky
diggers as long as they could, and the faith of those
diggers in apparently hopeless shows was, in some cases,
pathetic. My esteemed friend, John Fraser (now of
Hose Valley Station, New England), will remember such


an episode. Mr. Fraser, with the late Dick Wilcox (an.
old Goulburn identity), and nine others stuck to a claim
on the Victoria Lead for eighteen months. They were
down 400 feet, and had “driven” and crosscut without
the least sign. I remember Wilcox coming in one morn-
ing saying they had resolved to try one day more. The
men were very weak, but after getting a supply of ra-
tions from the Author, they again went to work, and,
as by a miracle, within 15 minutes of resuming, they
were on the gold. The Company took a nice little
“scoop” of £BOO per man out of that long-expected
pocket. The Author keeps as a memento of tliat claim
al2 dwt. nugget —one of the first bits of wash to come
to the surface on the eventful day. While at Foxbes I
did a little stock dealing in the district, buying from
Rosethorn’s, Cropper’s, Stricklands’ (Bundabarra), and
Campbell's (Goimbla) stations, which all had frontages
to the river. The “Tom and Bill” station, a few miles
from Forbes, supplied a great deal of the butchers beef
on the field. For a big rush there was little crime be-
yond the bushranging doings, and in reference to that
it was the opinion of the diggers that if such a man as
Superintendent Saunderson had had supreme charge,
instead of Sir Fred. Pottinger, who was considered a
feeble officer, the outlaws would have been mastered
long before they were. Sir Fred. Pottinger’s effigy,
worked in straw, was burned in the street one night
amid the execrations of 5000 citizens, to mark the low
state into which Pottinger had fallen in the opinion of
the community.
I remember —how strongly those little recollections
hang to one—leaving a photograph of Forbes, as it was
then, with my successor, Mr. E. Bray, showing the town


and the surrounding claims, the puddling machines,
“whips” and whims (some under horse-power ), and a
few diggers “cradling” along the river-side. Old Forbes
men will, no doubt, recollect the great babel of cries
and sounds which shook the air at knock-off time —the
ringing of bullock bells, beating on kerosene tins, and
the cooeeing, etc., from suirounding camps. Then the
rush as night closed, for the shanties and bush-built
eating-houses, the big dances at the Empire and other
halls to the music of the German band—l’ve otten seen
200 couples on the floor at the Empire ; and will also
recall the crowded billiard-rooms—the Empire, Albion
(Mitchell’s), the Courthouse (Vandenberg's), etc., where
Fred Lancaster, then champion cueist of New South
Wales, and other noted fellows performed. All those
merry scenes and most of their actors are now but
silent memories—the scenes are not as they were, and
the men—as, for instance, “Hoppy” Jones, the keen
and comical storekeeper; Vandenberg, the merry Ger-
man publican; Wilmot, the old quack doctor—a good
medicine-man, for all that; Toler, the jolly Irish under-
taker ; Torpby and Spicer, the patriotic agitators, and
Skillicorn’s old bell man, Joe Mclntosh, frae Dundee,
whose warcry—“Mind ye go tae Skillicorn’s th’ nicht
an’ get ten poond o’ beef for saxpence”—so nettled one
of the other butchers; all, and not the least the iron-
thewed, golden-hearted diggers of old Forbes, have
passed the meridian; not a few, indeed, are sleeping the
long sleep beyond a gold-field’s fretful fever, and beyond
the mad excitement of “bottoming” on even an ounce
to the bucket. Some rather unorthodox things hap-
pened in the more domestic annals of the diggings. A
prosperous merchant, for instance, acquired a female


partner, as he fondly imagined, for life, by making the
girl’s father a present of a bullock-team and new wag-
gon, and £5O to boot. In a few months the merchant
grew so infatuated with his lady-love that he made over
the whole of his land and goods to her. He soon after
went away on a business trip, leaving the young lady in
charge of the store. She had already taken a fancy to
a young digger on the Southlead, and within a week of
her “purchaser’s” departure, she married the lucky
digger. When Mr. J returned to the Forbes store
he was crazy with vexation and astonishment at the un-
expected rebuff. But his curses and prayers were alike
useless —the newly-married “traitress” owned every-
thing: the new husband was in possession “ex-officio,”
and finally the deceived party who had “loved not wisely
but too well” was glad to take the position of storeman
in what should have been his own establishment. We
believe the too trustful merchant discovered that one
mistake of the kind is enough in a lifetime, and made
no more property over to wheedling damsels.
We could, if we listed, tell of several similar episodes
in which “woman, fickle, coy, and hard to please made
some of the too confiding swains look very foolish, in
those quick pulsing days on the rush. But we prefer to
draw a veil over those little foibles, and at the same
time ring down the curtain on this story of old Forbes.


CHAPTER XXXI.
The Bushranging Days.
Gardiner.
Much has been said deservedly in condemnation of
the bushrangers, and much omitted that might have
tinted in softer hues the memories of even some of the
worst of the outlaws—though we cannot view the bush-
ranging outbreak of the sixties otherwise than as a dark
blot on the social aspects of the time. But brigands and
marauders as they were, it may be said, as a slight set-
off, that the doings of the outlaws opened to the novelist
and playwright (though at the expense of the public
peace an'd order) a field rich in stirring incidents and
characters and gave a savour of wild romance and
tragedy—to at least one epoch of our history. “The
chance to do ill deeds makes ill deeds done,” and the
“chance” of a lifetime came to those of a bushranging
turn of mind on the.discovery of the goldfields. So many
squatters and bushmen hurried to the diggings, that
flocks and herds were left untended, and the open con-
dition of the country greatly favoured the designs of the
exploiters that infested many inland districts. From
cattle-thief to highwayman is an easy transition—the
stock-duffer being often the “chrysalis” of the bush-
ranger—and so it generally happened that at the first
pressure by the police, the “duffer” defied the law, and
became a full-blown outlaw. The notorious Frank Gar-
diner the King-pin of Australian bushrangers—so be-
gan his stirring career. Gardiner was a native of Boro,


near Goulburn, and was in fact an “illegitimate” visit-
ant to this “vale of tears”; and he had a natural right
to the name Christie, officially allotted to him as an
alias. The Author’s first meeting with Gardiner was at
Dignam’s saleyards, Goulburn, in 1852. He was then
a sturdy, dark-complectioned youth, not more than
twenty years old, and was offering a light harness mare
for sale; and I remember the auctioneer (the late Phil.
Dignam), like others present, knew that the vendor
(Gardiner) had already tasted the pleasures (?) of a
term in Pentridge Stockade, Melbourne, and had in him
the makings of a red-hot outlaw. But Gardiner found
a man who needed such a beast as the mare, and who
bought her privately. This was Mr. D. Kennedy, sen.;
and despite the opinions of several bystanders, he found
the mare to be all that Gardiner represented. Those
wiseacres forgot that even Satan himself is said to some-
times have a relapse to virtue —so why not Gardiner ?
After escaping from Pentridge in 1850, Gardiner made
back to his native haunts, and “lifted” stock, here and
there, as opportunity offered, varying this congenial
pursuit with intermittent jobs, at horse-breaking and
droving, as the fancy seized him. Subsequently he
again visited Victoria, and, in fact, as he personally told
the Author, was butchering on the Bendigo rush, while
“Jimmy” Tyson, the millionaire, was also in the trade
there. The outlaw, however, found it convenient to
forsake Bendigo at a moment’s notice, leaving behind
him a mob of fat bullocks, which had been taken from
their owner’s run* without the said owner’s consent or
knowledge. These bullocks, Gardiner said, fell into the
hands of other firms we have heard of, who, perhaps —
perhaps not —paid for them. Some three months prior


to the Author’s arrival at Lambing Flat (in July, 1861),
Gardiner, who had been running a butchering business
there, was suspected of getting most of his supplies by
what is commonly known as “on the nod”; and one
Sunday morning (so the story goes), two troopers in
plain clothes suddenly visited the shop, just at the time
Gardiner was in the act of cutting up some steak for a
customer. On the officers presenting their warrant,
Gardiner said resignedly (?) “All right; just wait till
I take my apron off” going, as he spoke, into a little
lean-to attached to the shop—this lean-to being his
sleeping quarters. On coming out, Gardiner suddenly
confronted the constables with a pair of loaded revolvers
—one in each hand (the troopers, it is said, had come un-
armed, thinking they would cause Gardiner no alarm),
and so turned the tables on his “natural” enemies. He
ordered the men to divest themselves of their clothing,
and bade them walk, a la Adam, back to their quarters.
We do not vouch for all the details of this story, but we
had it from several informants. Gardiner, however,
quickly abandoned the shop, but was soon arrested on
a charge of cattle-stealing. Friends found him bail,
however, and on being released, he set out properly on
his notorious career. By force of his natural astuteness
and courage, Gardiner was soon the acknowledged
“General” of the most desperate gang of outlaws that
ever raided their country. It was hazardous to venture
without police protection, and even with it, outside the
cities. The inland townships, the mail-coaches, carriers,
diggers on the road, squatters and settlers at their
homesteads; everyone, high and low, were, as occasion
offered, waylaid and robbed, often in broad daylight,
by the great marauding firm of Frank Gardiner and Co.


Gardiner’s chief associates were Ben Hall, Johnny Gil-
bert, John O’Malley, and in several early adventures,
Jack Peisley; but Dunne, one of the worst of those
outlaws, was only slightly acquainted with Gard.ner at
the period of his chief doings. After some four months
depredations in the Lachlan and Lambing Flat side,
Gardiner suddenly left the gold-country, and for some
weeks his “address” was a profound mystery to the
police, and his absence a welcome interlude to the public.
One day in July, 1861, however, Sergeant Middleton, of
the Tuena Police, heard of Gardiner’s alleged where-
abouts, and proceeded, with Trooper Hosie, to F gg’s
place on the Fish River. The officers found Gardiner
there as expected, and also found that he was in grand
fighting form. In the desperate struggle that ensued
between the outlaw and the policemen, all three were
severely wounded, Middleton, in fact, being hit three
times by Gardiner’s fire. The outlaw was at last mas-
tered, however, and the Sergeant (Middleton), leaving
him in Hosie’s charge, started for McGuinness’ station
(Bigga), to obtain a horse for Gardiner’s conveyance to
Tuena lock-up, as F gg, in whose house the prisoner
had been found, said he had no horses handy. Middle-
ton, growing weak on the road, However, lost his way,
and as F gg had, meanwhile procured horses, Hosie
resolved to start for the lock-up with his prisoner. It
is alleged that on the way, they fell in with the notorious
Jack Peisley, who it is said, overcame the wounded
Hosie, and helped Gardiner to escape. It is due to
Peisley, however, to say that even on the gallows, he
denied having taken any part in aiding Gardiner’s
escape. But whoever assisted or connived at the escape,
the great fact was that the outlaw was again scot-free,


though with painful memories of the fight on the Fish
River. (In passing we would re-count that Sergeant
Middleton was awarded one of the silver medals issued
by the Cowper Government for distinguished bravery
on the part of the police against the outlaws. Super-
intendent Walker, now, 1907, in charge of the Southern
Police district, is another gallant officer who received
such a medal for his shooting down of “Thunderbolt,”
near XJralla, in 1870 ; and it is our opinion those were
inadequate rewards in such instances as those men-
tioned). We have elsewhere related our interviews with
Gardiner at the Lambing Flat saleyards, and later at the
Walla Walla waterholes, and so will pass on to note our
recollections of Gardiner’s chief feat in highway rob-
bery, viz. ; the Eugowra affair. I well remember the
excitement at Forbes over this event, and the outcry at
the alleged lethargy of the police. The coach belonged
to Mr. Greig (before mentioned), and it had a precious
cargo, viz. : some £7OOO worth of gold dust, and as much
more in cash, besides a number of money-orders and
private bills that diggers were sending to their families.
The coach was expected at the Eugowra rocks (on the
Forbes-Orange Road) about three o’clock in the after-
noon of Sunday, June 15th, 1862; and early in the day,
Gardiner ordered some teamsters who were passing
along, to halt their teams at the place he had selected
to ambush” the escort. Those teams blocked the road-
way, leaving barely sufficient room for the escort to get
through at a walk. Presently the coach came along with
its burden of human lives, &c., the sergeant on the box-
seat with the driver, and the three constables Moran
Haviland and Graham cooped up, as if for slaughter,
in the body of the vehicle. The bushrangers, hidden


behind the huge rocks on the hillside, after firing a few
sharp volleys which wounded two of the escort and killed
one of the coach-horses, rushed down to secure their
booty. The coach had overturned, and the kicking,
screaming horses were freed by the robbers, as the driver
and police had fled the danger zone at the first alarm.
The night of the robbery the plunder was taken to a
meeting-place agreed upon, where it was divided on a
pro rata basis, Gardiner taking the lion’s share. Load-
ing a packhorse with a “swag” of over 1200 ounces of
gold, Gardiner made for a secluded spot in the Weddin
Mountains —but the gold and Gardiner parted company
on the way to the “Bank,” for Sergt. Saunderson and
his party, getting on the outlaw’s tracks, made tbe hunt
so hot that the bandit had to abandon the packhorse
with the golden freight, and only by dint of the best
bushcraft managed to escape from his pursuers. On
the evidence of Daniel C , who had turned Queen s
evidence,” several men, viz., Fordyce, Bow, McGuire,
Manns, and O’Malley, were placed upon trial, charged
with complicity in the Eugowra robbery, and ultimately
Fordyce, Bow, and Manns were found guilty and
O’Malley and McGuire acquitted. By the way, Mr.
McGuire’s reminiscences of the bushrangers make very
interesting reading. No doubt Mr. John Fagan or my
esteemed friend, Mr. Chas. Cooper, who took part in
the pursuit after the outlaws, could give a graphic per-
sonal account of this, the most sensational highway rob-
bery in our annals } but in leaving “Eugowra, ’ we will
submit a few rough lines attributed to Gardiner him-
self, viz. :


The Morning of the Fray.
‘Come on, boys,” says the Darkie, with the devil in his
eye;
“Come, blacken up: get ready: for ere the fall o’
night,
We’ve merry work before us—we’ve got to do or die ;
At Eugowra rocks ere sundown, we’ve to fall or fight,
We’ll stop th’ Orange escort with powder and with ball,
Lift the diggers’ money, and collar all the gold,
Smash the coach to pieces, and down th’ ‘peelers” all—
So mind your guns are ‘killers,’ my comrades, brave
and bold:
There’s only four policemen and ten of us all told.”
Bang, bang ! go off the rifles: the battle has begun;
Ah! see the escort running; and now the robbers
bold
Seize upon the plunder, and with the setting sun
They’re riding from Eugowra encumbered with the
gold;
And as with savage laughter they leave the fated place,
Gardiner—that’s “the Darkie”—is shouting loud
“Hooray!
Hooray; we’ve struck Bonanza : we’ve won the steeple-
chase—
I think we’ve made our fortunes at Eugowra rocks
to-day.”
And so with wicked jesting the outlaws rode away.
Gardiner s usual luck attended him in escaping from
the police again, though he lost his “whack” of the pur-
loined gold. For two months after Eugowra he and his


gang terrorised the travelling public on the southern
roads; till moved by the wishes (it was said) of ins para-
mour (Mrs. Brown), the outlaw quietly left the country.
He left literally like a thief in the night, with his lady
love disguised as a boy riding behind him on Gardiner's
favorite mare. After some ups and downs, the outlaw
and Mrs. B. settled down at Aphis Creek, near Rock-
hampton (Q.), where, under another name, Gardiner
started as a storekeeper without anyone suspecting his
identity. But how often the storm breaks after the
bright morning. Detective McGlone, one of the keenest
thief-takers New South Wales has known, got wind
somehow of the outlaw's address, and took steps to “trap
the badger.” One day a party of police, disguised as
diggers, came to Gardiner’s store, and took stock of
things. Next morning as the “storekeeper” was chop-
ping up some firewood, the “diggers” suddenly sur-
rounded him. As a man with an axe is no match for
four well-armed opponents, the great “King of the
Road” surrendered with the best grace possible. The
Sydney detective (McGlone) and his aids duly brought
the outlaw to Sydney, and at the Darlinghurst Criminal
Court he was ultimately sentenced to periods aggregat-
ing 32 years’ imprisonment. As many will recall,
strong petitions were presented, after Gardiner had
passed some years of his sentence, praying for the con-
ditional release of the prisoner; and finally, through the
influence of Sir Henry Parkes and other “big men,”
Gardiner was again let out of durance-vile, but was de-
nied the right to remain in the native land he had so
disgraced. He was banished to Japan, from which
country he was soon further exiled to the United States.
For several years he kept the “Twilight” Saloon, corner


of Kearney and Broadway Streets, San Francisco, where
he was often seen and patronised by Australian visitors
to the city. Messrs. John Badgery, J. V. de Lamb,
and Edward Kennedy (late of Goulburn) were amongst
the Australians who patronised Gardiner’s saloon.
Messrs. Badgery and Lamb, it will be recollected, were
Commissioners to the International Exhibition held at
Frisco in the Seventies, and Mr. Kennedy was for
several years a resident of that city. Though it is per-
haps a digression here, we might remark that the men-
tion of Mr. Edward Kennedy, above noted, reminds us
that Mr. K., as an infant, had rather more fame than at-
tends most folk in their swaddling clothes. He was, in
short, the first white infant seen in one of the Fiji
islands, this being in 1849, when the ship in which Mr.
K.’s parents were passengers called at the island. As
Mr. K. is now 6ft. in height and 20st. weight, the
Fijians of the Fifties would hardly recognise in the
'infant terrible” of the Camperdown Hotel, the crow-
ing baby of ’49.
Gardiner felt very strongly his enforced banishment
from his native land, and it was his wont to go down
to the wharf at the departure of each mail-boat bound
for Australia, and he was often seen mournfully weep-
ing as the vessel put off, probably bewailing the fate
which had parted him from home and country and the
well-known scenes of his dramatic career. And, nc
doubt, with all his lapses, Gardiner had all the
lian bushman’s love of his country, and with the reflec
tion which comes with mature years to men of sensi-
bility, he regretted his crimes and the "waste” of hi?
youthhood s days. For we do not think Gardiner was
an instinctive criminal, and he, certainly, was not


naturally bloodthirsty; but his strong fighting instinct
and love of notoriety—together with the want of healthy
influences in youth —made him the Terror of the Roads
for years, and brought him, at last, to the very shadow
of the scaffold. In succeeding pages we will give our
recollections of other bushrangers of Gardiner’s time.
CHAPTER XXXII.
Ben Hall, Gilbert and Co,
For three months before my departure from Forbes I
had seen nothing of the outlaws (by the way, they weie
not outlawed at that date), and to tell the truth, I had
no particular desire to renew their acquaintance. But
I was destined, nevertheless, to meet some of the gang
again. This was at “Yorkshire Jack’s” shanty, Five-
mile Creek (now known as Rugby), in September, ’63.
I was returning from Forbes to Goulburn, having sold
out of "The Great Eastern” to Mr. Bray—before re-
ferred to —and was driving a spring-cart loaded with
some personal "household goods.” W. T. the Tele-
graph”—and Gilbert were playing euchre with "York-
shire” and another man, as I appeared on the scene, and
according to bush "ettiquette” I "shouted for the com-
pany. Presently Gilbert said, "Tell the chaps outside
that Charley McAlister’s here, T r.” And thus
bidden the "telegraph” brought in Ben Hall, Dunne,
O’Malley, and a fourth individual well known to the
Author, but who was never an active bushranger. But
with the exception of standing about £1 worth of drinks
I was none the worse for that meeting with the bush-
rangers. Hall said they intended to give Mr. Prosser—


Gibson s super on the Fish River station—a surprise
visit, to annex some of the best saddle-horses on the
run; and that as I was going to Goulburn I could tell
Captain Rossi that Hall and Gilbert were coming to
burn his house down over his head, on account of Rossi’s
*^ A ®S®d statement that the outlaws should be shot down
at Sight.
We do not know how Mr. Prosser and the Fish River
station fared, but fully twelve months went by before
the gang carried out their threat to stick up Kossiville.
At the time Captain Rossi was away from home—but
we will defer references to this episode for a while. Some
three weeks prior to our interview at Rugby, Hall, Gil-
bert, and O’Malley had made a determined attack on
the Carcoar prisoners’ escort, at a locality near that
town; and Gilbert said that they '‘wouldn’t have left
one of the b peelers alive, only our ammunition
was giving out.” Opinions will differ about this matter,
however. The prisoners under escort were being taken
to Bathurst, in charge o p Inspector Morrisett and three
policemen—one only (Constable Sutton) being mounted.
The outlaws kept up a running fire against the escort
for an hour—Gilbert and O Malley racing on either
side of the coach, and firing while going at full tilt,
while Ben Hall engaged the mounted trooper. But the
police stuck grimly to their colours, and at last beat
the bushrangers off. Gilbert’s horse was badly hit; and
O’Malley’s watch probably saved his (O’Malley’s) life
by turning the course of a carbine slug. Sutton, the
trooper, was wounded, not seriously, however. O’Mal-
ley kept the relics of the watch as a kind of “charm” or
amulet against police bullets, and swore fiercely that


the first time he saw Morrisett the latter would bite the
dust.
Late in October, 1863, the bushrangers made their
sensational visit to Bathurst. This was chiefly, it was
said, at the desire of Gilbert, who wished to pay off some
real or imaginary “old scores” on Mr. De Cloute, a
Bathurst hotelkeeper, and racing man, well known to
the Author. De Cloute had several fine horses, and
Gilbert, who had been formerly employed by De Cloute
as a horse-breaker, determined to take the best of these
animals—a horse called “Pasha”—-a very fast and pretty
gelding. The bushrangers came to De Cloute’s in broad
daylight, and Gilbert demanded the key of Pasha s
box. At this Mrs. De Cloute, with whom “Pasha” was
a favorite, begged Gilbert to leave the horse, and take
any other he fancied and Gilbert, at Ben Hall s re-
quest, said he would leave “Pasha” out of respect for
the lady, as he had no quarrel with her. After a few
minor acts in the western districts, the gang, viz.: Ben
Hall, Gilbert, O’Malley, Burke, and Vane, made their
famous attack on Mr. Keightly’s house at Dunne s
plains. It was a Sunday afternoon in November, 1863.
Mr. Keightly, who was Gold-Commissioner of the Camp-
bell’s River district, was a marked man, because he was
suspected of having given the police information of the
outlaws’ movements; and, so the story ran, had pro-
mised the outlaws a warm “welcome” if they came his
way. It was said, moreover, that Mr. Keightly had,
unknowingly, those about him who were in the good
graces of the outlaws. Keightly, as if in expectation of
an attack, had put some bullet-proof shutters to the
windows of his house. He had, also, a look-out on the
roof, from where, as it happened, he returned the fire


when the bushrangers attacked the place. The outlaws,
as if by a concerted plan, made for the stables at the
back of the house, and began firing. Keightly, as al-
ready noted, made for the “look-out” at the first alarms
and replied as best he could to the enemy’s fusilade.
Presently Burke, who was firing from the cover of a
watercask near the house, fell, having been hit badly
in the abdomen—but whether shot by Keightly or by
one or other of his mates, was never discovered. After
Burke’s fall, the others rushed the house, and finding
Mrs. Keightly and Dr. Pechey (a visitor) within, they
demanded Keightly, and threatened to fire the house
unless he was surrendered. Mr. Keightly, to avoid ex-
tremes on the part of the ruffians, gave himself up, and
he was ordered to make ready for instant death—for his
alleged shooting of Burke. To the credit of Ben Hall,
however (always the most humane of the bushrangers),
this savage sentence was not carried out. “You all must
see,” said Ben, “that it was impossible for Keightly to
have shot him from where he was firing.” The rest of
the incidents of that terrible night are well known to
readers of Australian annals. The outlaws agreed to
spare Keightly’s life on condition that a “ransom” of
£SOO would be paid them at day-break next morning.
Mrs. Keightly’s memorable ride to the residence of her
father, Mr. Henry Rotten, at Blacktown, for the money,
the bitter hours of suspense endured by Mr. Keightly
under the stern surveillance of the gang, and the whole
story of that stirring event has been, as the public
knows, splendidly dramatised in “Robbery Under
Arms.” In that play, Mrs. Keightly, an actual figure
in the startling life drama enacted at Dunne’s Plains,
played her part on the histrionic stage as well. The


ransom was obtained, and Keightly s life was spared.
He was, later, awarded one of the gold medals issued by
the Cowper Ministry to civilians for distinguished
bravery against the outlaws. The ransom was paid in
five and ten pound notes, the numbers of which were
kept by Mr. Rotten. This precaution resulted in the
conviction of some individuals who tried to pass some
of the notes in Bathurst. Some weeks after the Dunne's
Plains affair, Vane, who had detached himself from the
other outlaws, chanced to meet with the late Rev.
Father McCarthy, of Bathurst, at the house of a settler
on the Abercrombie, and was induced by the good priest
to surrender himself to the authorities. No doubt the
circumstances surrounding Vane’s surrender weighed
with the judiciary in mitigating his sentence. Ben
Hall, with Gilbert and O’Malley, helped themselves to
some of Mr. Iceley's good horses, and being thus well
mounted, soon left the Bathurst district behind them.
As proof of their great “mobility,” throughout Decem-
ber, 1863, they were committing robberies wholesale in
the Burrowa, Yass, and Goulburn districts. Amongst
a number of carriers “held up” on the Bowning Road,
in December, 1863, was Mr. Lake, sen., of Goulburn.
Mr. Lake stoutly declined to hand over his hard-earned
money, or to part with his employers’ goods to profes-
sional highwaymen. But Gilbert, with the usual polite-
ness (?) of his calling, roughly thrust his revolver in
Lake’s face, saying, “if you don’t turn out your (gory)
pockets at once I’ll send a bullet down your (crimson)
throat.” Thus overawed, Lake and his comrades had
no alternative but to give up their cash and anything
else demanded. On the sticking up of the Burrowa-
Binalong mail, near Christmas, 1863, Gilbert was asked


by one of the defrauded passengers if he ever felt in-
clined to surrender, as Vane had quietly done to Father
McCarthy. “No, mate," said Gilbert, showing the re-
volvers in his belt, “No, I’ll never surrender to priest,
parson, or devil while I have one of those barkers about
me.” Early in 1864 the Gilbert gang lost one of
their most trusty members, viz. : O’Malley, who was
shot by Mr. Campbell, of Goimbla station, near Forbes.
Mr. Campbell’s defence of his homestead was a very
courageous act. Being well-armed, and firing from a
good point of vantage, his shooting got too hot to be
comfortable for the outlaws. Presently they set fire to
the woolshed and haystack, and by the light of the blaze,
Campbell drew a bead on O’Malley, and dropped that
misguided youth in his tracks. The others, at O’Malley’s
fall, “raised the siege," but in their fiendish work they
had done damage to the extent of over £IOOO. Mr.
Campbell got one of the Government gold medals for his
plucky conduct of that night. O’Malley’s tragic end
was, of course, a natural sequel to his evil doings. This
unfortunate outlaw grew to be the most violent and
blood-thirsty of the gang; and we believe Ben Hall, on
several occasions, prevented O’Malley taking life while
in the heat of passion. His shooting of Mr. Barnes, near
Wallenbeen, in 1863, was a terrible affair, equalling any-
thing in the bloody annals of outlawry in any part of
the world. The Author, like other citizens of the bush-
ranging days, was several times “under fire," and once
or twice the bullets only missed their intended billet by
a narrow margin. One such memory we never recall
without involuntarily “ducking" our head at the im-
aginary ping of a “leaden messenger” whizzing very
near n u ? anatomy, as we are, figuratively, racing from


the danger zone at dead of night. This, in fact and
substance, was at a certain place in the Fish River,
which we incautiously visited at a very late (or early)
hour one wintry night of 1867, to recover a horse which
had been stolen from the Author. We recovered the
horse, per the asistance of a certain individual who was
at enmity with the “lifter”—one Bill W , who had
been an associate of Jack Peisley, and other outlaws;
but we only got away by what now seems little short of
a miracle. “Bilks” dogs, aroused by the noise we made
in catching the horse, made such a clamour that they
disturbed the redoubtable Bill himself, and a colleague
on the premises ; and though we were hundreds of yards
from the house, they “favoured” us with a volley, one
shot of which was, as stated, near enough to leave an
ugly impression on the nerves of the Author for some
time afterwards. Another close call from a random
bullet occurred at Beech worth during our first visit to
the rush. Some one, whether in frolic or evil intent we
never learned, fired a shot which passed through the
tent occupied by the Author and his brother. However,
having escaped an untimely “rubbing out” through
those incidents, we will gratefully refrain from a fur-
ther pursuit of those occurrences, and will pass on to
the next chapter.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
Goulburn District Incidents.
Throughout 1864 Ben Hall, Gilbert, and Dunne car-
ried out a veritable reign of terror in the Goulburn
district. It was not, however, till November of that


year (shortly after the sticking up of the Gundagai
mail in defence of which Sergeant Parry was shot dead
by Gilbert) that they paid their promised visit to Cap-
tain Rossi’s estate, Rossiville, near Goulburn. The
Captain and Mrs. Rossi were away from home, so the
gallant Captain escaped the threatened flogging, at the
hands of the outlaws. It was shearing time, and the
rangers waited till everything was quiet, and the night
well advanced, before they began operations. Leaving
their horses in the shelter of the hawthorn hedge near
the house, they quickly bailed up those on the premises,
and locked up the only two male domestics. They soon
ransacked the place, and sampled Captain Rossi’s best
liquors, and smoked his best cigars. Gilbert had some
little idea of music, and he banged the piano, while
Dunne and Hall danced jigs and hornpipes. According
to one of the (then) female domestics on the place, viz. :
Mrs. Guymer, now of Goulburn, the robbers did not
molest any of the inmates or yet the shearers. Towards
midnight they loaded a pack-horse with a “cargo” of
Captain Rossi’s effects, purloined clothes, jewellery and
eatables, and appropriated Mrs. Rossi’s riding mare,
“Jenny Lind.” days later they had stolen
several good horses from district owners, some of those
steeds being in training for the races. Amongst them
were Simon’s “Charley Pork,” Thos. Croke’s “Robin
Hood,” and John Willoughby’s fleet racing pony,
“Jerrawong.” After sundry robberies, the three re-
doubtable outlaws, on Boxing Day, 1864, suddenly
made a descent on the township of Binda. Everybody
that came along were ordered to attend the bushrangers’
“levee” at Hall’s public-house; and soon nearly the
whole population of Binda were bailed-up in the hotel.


While one of the trinity kept watch over the folks
already in duress, the other two ruffians proceeded to the
'‘Flagstaff” store, kept by a man named Morris, who
had been a trooper. After relieving Morris of about
£IOO in cheques and cash, the outlaws marched the
storekeeper and his wife to the hotel. They elected to
have a dance, and ordered the publican to supply re-
freshments for all hands. The three ruffians joined in
the dancing, and Morris, thinking the bushrangers
could be taken —as they were drinking rather freely —
proposed a plan to several of the company. This was
to suddenly rush the outlaws at a concerted signal.
Gilbert, however, got an inkling of the proposal, and
covered Morris with a revolver. Morris was near an
open window, and he got outside as fast as his legs
could carry him. He had a miraculous escape, several
shots grazing his head. Incensed at his behaviour, the
outlaws burned Morris’s store and contents, valued at
over £IOOO, and after wreaking this cowardly revenge,
cleared out from Binda with their ill-gotten plunder.
Soon after the Binda episode, the bushrangers stuck up
the Sydney mail, helping themselves to a wedding
breakfast which, already cooked, was being conyeyed to
the home of the bride’s parents by the coach. The un-
gallant highwaymen divided the “commandeered” vic-
tuals between the passengers and themselves, and the
wedding party had, it was said, to consequently post-
pone the festivities.
One morning in January, 1865, one of the Wollogo-
rang station-hands, after paddocking some sheep, was
returning to the homestead, when he suddenly heard
someone cry out sharply “bail-up,” and looking back,
he saw the bushrangers (Gilbert and Dunne) riding


after him. Being well-mounted the stockman would
have out-ran his pursuers, but after a few minutes chase
one of the trio fired, and finding himself slightly
wounded and growing faint, the hunted man pulled up.
They took possession of the stockman’s horse (a well-
bred colt), and told him he was lucky to escape with
his life. The man limped home to the station and had
his wound attended to. Three weeks afterwards he was
a spectator of the tragic shooting of Constable Nelson
by Dunne, at Collector. The bushrangers were looting
Kimberley's hotel at the time, and, according to the
eyewitness mentioned (W. Hazlewood, now of Goul-
burn), the luckless constable, instead of making a
tactical advance on the house, came boldly towards the
front of the inn. Dunne was keeping watch outside,
while Hall and Gilbert were ransacking upstairs; and
when the constable came within 25 or 30 yards of the
place, Dunne fired. As Nelson was falling, mortally
wounded, the miscreant (Dunne) fired a second shot—
his weapon being a double-barrelled gun that the out-
laws had found in a hut near Lake George, where it
had been left inadvertently by a shooting party. One
barrel, we believe, was loaded with ball, and the other
with a wire cartridge, and poor Nelson received both—
the bullet in the head and the slugs in the body. Gil-
bert rushed down-stairs at the report, and on telling him
that he had “just rubbed out another d policeman,"
Gilbert said, “Hooray—a d good job, too,” and
fired several revolver shots into the air by way of cele-
brating the dastardly deed. Ben Hall, however, bitterly
regretted the sad event, and told Dunne he was a
treacherous cur not to give the man a chance. Hall
told the people he was very sorry the terrible tragedy


happened. This tragic affair took place on Anniversary-
Day, 1865.
A few days after their shedding of blood at Collector,
they attacked the Faithfull brothers, on the Goul-
burn-Braidwood Hoad, within a half-mile of the Spring-
field Homestead. As the Author heard several conflict-
ing accounts of this incident, he obtained the true ver-
sion from one of the participants in the affray, viz.;
Mr. George Faithfull, of Inveralochy. The three
Faithfull brothers —then schoolboys, viz. : Messrs.
H.M., G., and the late Reginald Faithfull, were pro-
ceeding in a four-in-hand to Goulburn, en route for
Sydney, accompanied by their elder brother, Mr. W. P.
Faithfull. The latter (W.P.), luckily, had with him
a Kerr rifle which he had brought along thinking he
would get a shot at some eaglehawks that were then
troublesome about Springfield; and Mr. G. Faithfull
had with him a small revolver, which, however, was
anything but a formidable weapon. Only the western
side of the road was then fenced, and out on the un-
fenced plain to the east, some 400 yards distant, the
Faithfulls noticed two horsemen who seemed to be
waiting for something. They (the Faithfulls) had only
reached the first fall in the road towards Goulburn,
when, to quote Mr. G. Faithfull’s words, <! a man rode
up, and putting a weapon about two feet from my head,
told me (as I was driving) to stop; but instead of obey-
ing this order, I struck at him with the double of the
four-in-hand whip, but missed him. He then said, 'l’ll
d well knock you off the box,’ but his weapon
missed fire, or I would have been a dead man there and
then, as I could see straight down the barrel—it was
dead on. This man was Ben Hall; and seeing my


brother (W.P.) was riding up with his rifle he (Hall)
then galloped over to the other horsemen, viz. : Dunne
and Gilbert.” The outlaws, presently, came up at a
gallop, and, according to their usual custom when op-
posed by folks with a vehicle, kept galloping backwards
and forwards, firing with great rapidity. The Faith-
fulls, from the cover of the brake, returned the fire
bravely with their rifle and revolver, but were of course,
at a big disadvantage, and behaved with great courage
in their “baptism of fire.” Presently one of the horses
of the drag was hit, and he played up so badly that the
team bolted, and were only got in hand again with
difficulty. The bolt, however, brought the defenders
nearer the homestead : and thinking the outlaws would
attack the house, the Faithfulls resolved to return, so
as to give the “enemy” a proper “greeting.” All the
while the bushrangers had kept up their firing; but
Gilbert’s horse got a bit refractory, and rearing just
as that outlaw was in the act of firing, the horse got the
bullet intended for Mr. W. P. Faithfull in the back
of the head, and this event practically ended the pur-
suit. Gilbert, being dismounted, took cover behind a
post of the fence; and as if by mutual arrangement, he
(Gilbert) and W. P. Faithfull, taking careful aim at
each other, fired simultaneously. Mr. Faithfull’s ball
hit the post behind which Gilbert was crouching ; and
Gilbert’s hit the ground about a foot from where Faith-
full stood. The post with its famous bullet-mark re-
mained by the roadside for many years after the event.
Gilbert mounted behind Dunne, and those two retired
from the fray; but Ben Hall followed the Faithfulls to
within 100 yards of the Homestead, firing without
effect. Messrs. W. P. and George Faithfull were de


servedly presented with gold medals similar to the
awards issued by the New South Wales Government to
civilians who exhibited valour against the outlaws. Mr.
George Faithfull modestly says he could not understand
why the medals were awarded, as they shot none of the
bushrangers; but the discriminating will, we think,
come to a very different conclusion, viz.: that the Faith-
fulls proved themselves by their gallant battle with the
bushrangers to be possessed of a full share of the pluck
and determination of the British race. To note in de-
tail the subsequent career of those ill-starred outlaws
would make too great a “call” on the space of our work.
The police sometimes made funny mistakes in follow-
ing false trails in the bushranger days. On one occasion
my friend, Mr. J. McKenzie, sen., of Wild's Meadow,
Mossvale, and two others were on a visit to Mr. Mur-
doch McKay, of Yalbraith; and the Goulburn police,
having formed the idea that McKenzie and his mates
were Ben Hall and Co., in disguise, followed them
right to Mr. McKay’s door before they were satisfied
that is was “a case of mistaken identity.” Mr. McKen-
zie will no doubt recall this incident, as he stayed at the
Author's hotel (The Bazaar) going and returning, and
we had a great laugh over that wild-goose adventure of
the police. At the end, each of the three outlaws under
review was betrayed by alleged “friends” —Gilbert and
Hall being shot down in a most tragic manner. Hall,
we believe, after the shooting of Gilbert and the escape
of Dunne, at Binalong, intended to try and leave the
country, but the unfortunate fellow’s days were num-
bered. The “friends” who, it was said, promised to
bring the outlaw his (Hall’s) accumulated swag of
stolen money, brought the police instead. While the


bushranger was sleeping in the dark shadow of the
scrub, it is said that a Blacktracker with the police
crept treacherously upon the sleeping bandit, and shot
him mortally. Hall struggled to his feet, and, accord-
ing to the popular report, was riddled by no less than
thirty-two bullets —so it will be at least admitted that
the police made sure of their victim. It can be said,
however, that his domestic unhappiness, and espionage
by the police (which does not seem to have been de-
served) in Hall’s earlier history, were strong contribu-
tory causes to the downward career of the misguided
and unfortunate Ben Hall. It has to be, moreover,
recorded in his favour, that he checked the blood-thirsty
tendencies of his comrades, and probably he saved
several persons from sudden death at the ruthless hands
of other members of the gang. The spot where Gilbert
fell at Binalong is a somewhat notable place for those
of a morbid fancy in such matters. Dunne was hanged
at Darlinghurst, in 1865, having been taken “quite by
accident” in a far western town. The “wiping-out” of
the three desperadoes mentioned may be said to have
broken the back of the great bushranging boom ; and
in closing these notes on Gilbert, Hall, and Dunne, we
will recall an old verse on those outlaws, viz. : ■ —
The Bushrangers' Boast.
“We've just stuck up the escort, and we’ve seen the
troopers fall.
And we’ve got the gold and money,” says Dunne,
Gilbert, and Ben Hall ;
“And next we’ll go to Bathurst, and clean the banks
out there,
284
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


So if you see the "peelers” just tell them to take care;
And next to Sydney City we mean to make a call,
For we’re going to take the country” says Dunne,
Gilbert, and Ben Hall.
CHAPTER XXXIY.
The Bushrangers—Morgan, Peisley, Lowry,
Crookwell etc.
That notorious outlaw, Daniel Morgan, who ran his evil
career in the sixties, is known to have killed at least
four persons (some say twice that number) and maimed
several others. Morgan’s chief hunting-grounds were in
the Murray and Albury country and his chief retreat
in the big Galore Scrub in Upper Riverina, and for
several years he stuck up travellers, and raided stations
and townships with an impudence and impunity that
has never been excelled in our darkest annals. One
summer evening in 1865, Morgan made his unwelcome
appearance at McPherson’s station, "Peechelba,” near
Wangaratta, Vic., and acted in what he conceived to be
a pleasant way. He ordered Mrs. McPherson to play the
piano, called on others of the beleagured company to
sing, and seemed to behave in a more agreeable manner
than Mr. Morgan—the blackhearted bandit and
murderer generally observed. But while Morgan sang
and feasted his Nemesis was at hand. One of the maid
servants at the "Peechelba” homestead managed to
escape from the house, and conveyed the news of
Morgan’s whereabouts to Mr. Rutherford, McPherson’s
nearest neighbour. That gentleman notified the


Wangaratta Police, and towards dawn the officers, with
some civilians, surrounded the “Peechelba” premises
with a view of taking Morgan, dead or alive. Intelligence
of the arrangements of the police was somehow conveyed
to Mr. McPherson, and when Morgan was thinking of
starting in the morning, McPherson told him of a fine
blood filly in the House paddock, and accompanied Mor-
gan (three other men also going with them) down the
paddock, ostensibly to get the filly. As the party neared
a tree, behind which a man named John Quinlan was
stationed, Quinlan fired, and Morgan fell, mortally
wounded. He died, we believe, without expressing any
remorse for his crimes, or without confessing anything.
Nevertheless, who may affirm that, great criminal as he
was, Morgan, though, he confessed no remorse, may not
have felt it. Morgan’s shooting of Sergeant Smith in
the Galore scrub, as elsewhere related, was a most atro-
cious affair, but it served to show that no half measures
would suit in the case of this crafty desperado. The
“Morgan War,” as it was called, cost the country some
£10,000, and several valuable lives. This outlaw seemed
to have been born without any moral sense whatever,
and the history of such men points to the impression
that the only way they can be disciplined is through
their “hide.” This discipline would have taken some
time in Morgan’s case for Morgan had “hide enough”
(as the boys say) “to stock a tanyard.”
Jack Peisley.
The notorious Jack Peisley, though one of the most
determined of the bushrangers, had, unlike Morgan,
some little idea of chivalry and gratitude. My friend.


the late John Coutts, the once-famous jockey —when on
his way from the Abercrombie to Sydney in the winter
of 1861, fell in with a stalwart stranger at “Irish Ann's,”
near Bunnaby, on his first day's journey. Old residents
will recollect that remarkable lady “Irish Ann," and the
funny “prejudice" she had against immigrants and
soldiers. At heart, however, she was one of the very
best, and had a ready welcome for all wayfarers, whether
immigrants or not. Coutts and the stranger travelled
together down the country, having, as it was a very wet
season, to swim three flooded rivers on their way; and
to quote Coutts’ account, he was saved from drowning
on two occasions by the agility and swimming powers of
the red-bearded stranger. The stranger seemed a bit
nervous on approaching Berrima, and he made a detour
to avoid the Berrima Bridge, which in those times was
generally patrolled by a mounted trooper (so as to be
ready to intercept suspicious characters who might hap-
pen to come along). Coutts thought the action strange,
but as he found him a good mate, they kept together
till finally, the stranger left him (Coutts) in the vicinity
of Narellan. As they parted company, the stranger
said, “If you come across a policeman any time inquiring
for a man answering to my description, you’ll do me a
favour if you’ll say, ‘I know not the man.’ ” One morn-
ing, some two and a-half years later, Coutts happened
to be in Bathurst, attending the races in that town,
when, much to his surprise, a warder from the gaol told
him that the bushranger Peisley, then lying under sen-
tence of death for the murder of Mr. Benyon, at Bigga,
wished to see him particularly. Wondering why Peisley
should wish' to see him, Coutts proceeded to the gaol,
and in the condemned Peisley recognised the stranger


who had accompanied him down the country over two
years before. Peisley told Coutts much of his history,
and said that his acquaintance with the great jockey
(Coutts) had prevented him from sticking up several
homesteads on the Abercrombie, as he knew the people
were Coutts’ friends, and, said Peisley, "I never held
up any man who did me a turn, or robbed such a man’s
relations.” But whatever may have been Peisley’s
ascribed “virtues” they were all annulled, we think, by
that ferocious act he committed in shooting Mr. Benyon,
at the threshing at Benyon’s place in 1863. Peisley
said that he received great provocation, but he seems to
have been the instigator of the quarrel, and shot his
victim in a most cowardly manner. The Author met
Peisley on an occasion when we were buying some cattle
from Abercrombie settlers. Peisley was one of the men
who helped us with the cattle out of the “Paling-yards.”
He was then reckoned a smart horse-breaker, but it was
years before he started as “under-study” to Gardiner,
and as a matter of fact, Peisley had in him the material
of better things, but it was as well that having elected
to prey on society, he was as soon as possible placed be-
yond the pale of wrong-doing.
Lowry.
Lowry, the strapping and brave young native, who
was shot down in a hand-to-hand encounter with Ser-
geant Stephenson, at the Limerick Hotel, in 1864, was
another victim of environment. The Author was in-
formed that Lowry started bushranging at the result
of a practical joke, like Vane and a few others—a joke
which developed into a career of crime. The Mudgee
288
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


mail robbery was Lowry’s greatest feat by which he and
his mate Foley and a few other “abettors” enriched
themselves unlawfully at the expense of the community
to the tune of about £SOOO. The late William Evans
(several times spoken of) suspected Lowry of having
stolen his (Evan’s) Waverley colt—a very fast horse —
and which was inquired for, as we have seen, by Ben
Hall and Gilbert one day. A certain friend of Lowry’s
undertook to get the colt from the outlaw, and informed
Evans that the colt could be had for a consideration,
and would be at a certain place on a stipulated date.
On the appointed day, Evans went out to L kas ar-
ranged, and after getting his colt (much the worse of
wear) went up to the house to see the famous outlaw
whom he had heard was on the premises. Evans, with
some audacity, went up to the bushranger and tapping
him on the shoulder, said he wished to have a word
with him. Lowry turned round like a flash, and point-
ing his revolver at Evans, he said, “Do you want to see
me or this ? When you come to a man of my description
you must remember not to be too—familiar. Lowry
soon cooled down, however, and told Evans that his colt
was about the best traveller he (Lowry) had ever ridden.
He said that starting from Binda one morning at 5
o’clock, he rode to a point near Marulan, where he
stuck up the Sydney mail coach, and incidentally, some
travellers (amongst them Captain Morphy, C.P.S., at
Marulan) ; and thence returned to Binda (or near that
town), from which place the same night he reached
Narrawa on the Fish River, at 8 o’clock. This meant,
as Lowry told it, a journey of about 140 miles in about
14 hours. So no wonder Lowry should describe the colt
as a good traveller. Lowry’s terrible fate, shot down


as he was in the bloom of life, was, of course, most re-
grettable, but was provoked by his own reckless hardi-
hood. Sergeant Stephenson, whose shot it was killed
Lowry, was himself wounded in the encounter with the
outlaw, who came out of the hotel armed with two
revolvers, and rashly challenged the police to a duel to
the death. While it was, no doubt, a relief to the public
to see and hear the last of Lowry as a ’ranger, it is to be
regretted that a man of such great courage and natural
intelligence should have so rashly wasted his energies.
Crookwell.
Another Abercrombie bushranger of some repute was
James Crookwell, who, being a clever horse-lifter, was
a terror to travellers and settlers in the Abercrombie
and Taralga districts for some two years. Om' day in
December, 1866, word was brought to Sergeant Simpson
(then in charge of Taralga Police Station) that Crook-
well and his mate Jack the Man”—a half-witted sort
of fellow—were going to spend Christmas Day at the
house of a certain person near the Abercrombie. This
word was brought by a man who was suspected as acting
aj “telegraph” (or accessory) of Crookwell, and as the
police had received much false information previously
from the same source, the Sergeant greatly doubted the
alleged information. Consequently he pretended to dis-
credit the “telegraph’s” yarn, while resolv.ng to hasten
a? soon as possible to the place named. So he said to
the messenger, I do not believe you, John; we’ve gone
so often on your false information, as we did last Xmas
lay, that this time we’ll stay and have our Christmas
dinner at home.” The bushranger’s spy, of course, com


municated this avowed intention of the police to Crook-
well, telling him that he could spend the dag? as ha-
desired. But on the early morning of Christmas Day,
1866, the Sergeant, accompanied by Mr. Henry Zouch
(son of the late Captain Zouch), and Constables John
Chalker and Wiles, started for the place where it was
believed the bushranger would be discovered. Con-
stable Chalker, one of the best bushmen in the country,
guided the party, through the grey hours of the night, to
within a mile of the house. It was now daybreak, and
as the police were going around the point of a scrubby
hill, a horseman coming at a fast pace from the opposite
direction ran right into them. This was Jack the
Man.” He was about to turn and ride back with the
alarm when one of the police rode at him, and, revolver
at head, made him a prisoner. Crookwell, surprised in
bed, made a fierce attempt to get at his arms, and fight
it out before he was secured. About six weeks later,
while Crookwell and other prisoners were being taken to
Darlinghurst, one night they made a determined effort
to escape, at a spot near Bargo, and in the scuffle, Crook-
well somehow got possession of one of the guard s car-
bines, and shot a trooper (Raymond) dead. For this
crime Crookwell was hanged at Darlinghurst, and so
ended the reckless career of a most unfortunate and
ill-governed creature. His foolish comrade Jack the
Man” escaped with L.C., (elsewhere noted), through
the sewers of Berrima Gaol, but both were soon re-taken
and got "rough on sewer rats” for their gallant attempt
to again mingle with the "elect’ outside the walls of
the Iron Jug.
The notorious Clarkes, who held up so many diggers
and traders, and played havoc with human life in the


Sixties, on the Braidwood and Araluen side of the
country, and also through the Queanbeyan district were
as lawless and ruthless as Morgan, and some of their
deeds almost make us wonder if demons in the form of
human beings yet rove upon the earth as in the days of
the early Cains. Their massacre of a police party sent
to try and ‘‘account for them” had about it something
fearfully original in its mode, as the gang (Clarkes)
picked off the policemen from perches in the branches
of trees which overlooked the road taken by the victims.
It was a happy day for peace and security when the
Clarkes were swung “high and dry” off the gaol gallows
at Darlinghurst.
As the exploits of the Kelly gang, Thunderbolt, Cap-
tain Moonlight, etc., are of comparatively modern
periods, we will not touch upon them here at any length,
the more especially as we have only designed to treat of
such outlaws with whom we ourselves or our confreres
had some acquaintance. But the Author’s early meeting
with Ned Kelly (in 1855) gave him a rather greater
interest in the doings of that gang (the Kellys) than he
would otherwise have conceived. In point of energy
and in the systematic way they went to work, the Kelly
gang could give points in outlawry to most of the other
“celebrities” who upset the balance of safety and har-
mony in society. We were, however, as were other pas-
sengers by the Melbourne train, a witness of the ruin
wrought at Glenrowan during the attack on the Kelly
gang in 1884, and which resulted in the final extirpation
of those outlaws. We passed through Glenrowan two
days after that fierce conflict, and there heard enough
of the doings to fill a warehouse with a garbled story of
yellowback atrocity. But we believe that the Kellys


themselves were not naturally ill-designing members of
society, and that they had a certain provocation from the
society, and that they had a certain provocation from the
guardians of the law, as also from their bad environment
in some respects. But who can nnd excuse for their
cruel deeds of blood; their wanton slaying in cold blood
of the police force, led by Sergeant Kennedy, and their
ctatlogue of evil doings.
In parting, however, from those annals of the desper-
ate days of old outlawry, we must say a word in appre-
ciation of the gallant police officers, such as brave old
Captain Zouch, Superintendents Morrissett, Saunder-
son, Brennan (Michael and Martin), Hanley, Walker,
Fenton, etc., for the strenuous efforts they made towards
ridding the country of the bushranger plague. It must
be remembered that the lack of rail or telegraph com-
munication then existent in many parts of the interior,
and the unsettled state of the country in the gold-find-
ing days, were factors that hampered the police, while
the same factors assisted the bushrangers. The “bush
telegraphs” were invaluable as “the eyes” of the out-
laws. Several such men were known to the Author,
every one of whom had one or two “trick horses’ which
were trained at a word to lie down behind a tree or a
log in the bush at the first sign of danger. We came
across a noted “telegraph” of Ben Hall’s, one day, at
a place on the Fish River, when he had a pillowslip full
of Bank-notes in his possession. We had our own ideas
as to how those notes had been collected. It is the
opinion of a good many old timers that several of those
officers who were amongst the most keen and courageous
hunters of the outlaws, were badly treated by the State
authorities. Such a man is John Chalker, earlier alluded


to, who was highly rated by the late Captain Zouch, and
for his work should have received better treatemnt from
the New South Wales Government.
But in conclusion it is to be hoped that whatever may
be the “kinks" of civilization, we will never again have
to encounter with the fell resources of the law such a
terrible outbreak of lawlessness as that wild period of
rapine and robbery which has claimed our attention in
those chapters.
But our next subject, viz. : the Free-selection Epoch,
if less exciting than the foregoing, is of a far happier
cast, and indeed the very antithesis of bushranging.
CHAPTER XXXV.
Sir John Robertson and Free Selection.
When Sir John Robertson (then plain Mr. Robertson)
was elected as a member of the Legislative Assembly
of 1856, few there were who believed that the shrewd,
but outspoken squatter, who had been hitherto regarded
as an absolute type of his class, would, within a few
years, become the most trusted democratic leader of his
time. For, when 16 years before, Governor Gipps had
set himself the weighty task of curbing the land-mono-
polising designs of certain big squatters, Robertson
championed the claims of the north-western pastoralists
so forcibly and reasonably that ihc stringent regulations
favoured by Sir George Gipps (then Governor) were
waived in the case of Robertson and K s neighbours.
But John Robertson, the very soul of honesty, and fair


dealing, was never the sycophant, of any class, or the
mere go-between of any party. The Author remembers
perusing Robertson’s address to the electors of 1856.
What a manly, democratic manifesto it was ! Its four
chief planks, viz. : land-law reform, a State education
Sir John Robertson, K.C.M.G
system, electoral reform, and abolition of State aid to-
any “established'’ Church, couched the first political
death-warrant, so to speak, of privilege and autocracy
in this country.
Perhaps there are few beyond our older politician*
and those land-workers of a former generation, who now
recall the intense and prolonged opposition shown to the
passage of Robertson’s famous land-bill of 1861. That


bill, viz.: “Free Selection before Survey,” sought to
settle people on the soil; to establish all over the country
communities of small graziers and farmers—the type of
men (and women) which, given fair chances are ever the
mam factors in building up a nation’s prosperity. But
when Robertson first brought his bill forward, only nine
members in an Assembly of 78 supported him. On the
rejection of the measure by the Upper House (the
Legislative Council), in 1860, Parliament was dissolved,
and Robertson, then Premier, appealed to the country
on the bill, and nothing but the bill; and came back
with a large majority pledged to Free Selection.
Amongst those members so pledged were Sir T. A.
Murray, and Charles H. Walsh, while another of Rob-
ertson’s chief lieutenants was Daniel H. Deneihy, of
whom we have previously spoken. The bill was at
length passed, but not before the Antagonistic Council
was “swamped” by the addition of a number of more
progressive members than the men who so disliked the
new enactment. Most of those “irreconcilables” were
men of either the large landholding or land-agency class,
and some idea of the feeling many of those gentlemen
had towards the bill may be gathered from the remark
made by one of them after the measure became law. He
said, “All these fellows want now is a Salter’s cask and
a bullet mould to set them up properly,”—thus assum-
ing that the selectors would “lift” the squatters' cattle
to supply themselves with beef. We now know that a
better measure might have been drafted—the 9d. per
acre perpetual payment, for instance, was a millstone
around the neck of many selectors: “dummying” like
a noxious weed grew through the loopholes of the Act;
the first appraisements were too high, etc. : but, notwith


standing its imperfections, Robertson’s Act was the most
democratic land-bill of its day and generation. Amongst
the very first free-selectors of Argyle, were Mr. Michael
Broderick, of Gurmndah, and Mr. Thos. Emerton, sen.,
of Greenwich Park; who took up their blocks as soon as
the law allowed. But if those two fine old settlers were
the first selectors of Argyle, the multitude were a very
close “second.” Within a few weeks hundreds of little
rough-hewn cabins were standing on the selected blocks ;
“cockatoo” and “chock and log” fences erected around
each small holding; clearing and burning off going on
by night and day ; and soon the ploughs of the selectors
were tearing up the virgin soil, and the tinkling bells of
farmers’ cattle were heard in rustic places but lately
under the ban of the big landlord’s boundary rider. A
new era had begun, and the ploughshare of Australian
industry had turned another furrow. The Author was
surprised on his return from Forbes in 1863, to see the
number of settlers who had been planted on the soil
within less than two years. Wherever land nad been
thrown open the selectors were building new homes, and
beginning to make hay. We might be permitted here
to digress a little so as to say a word or two in praise
of the early selectors and their posterity. For they
have been truly the architects of their own fortunes ;
have been the stand-by of the country in ill-omened
seasons; and in the stress of their toils have shown the
best kind of self-reliance, acting as their own artisans,
and teamsters, fencers, and veterinaries. At the same
time those pioneer selectors and their sons have never
been stinted employers of labour, and with better en-
couragement of such producers the unemployed problem
would soon be on the road to a rapid solution. Now


cdcng the well-kept roads around Goulburn, to
ffarlo, Taralga, Crookweli, Wheeo, etc., and through
other districts of the country, one does not
regret the contrast between the stagnation of the early
days and the improved conditions now existing as re-
gards highways, farming affairs, and home comfort in
the rural districts. Sixty years ago the poor man in
many parts of the country knew scarcely where to rest
his head; for if we gained access to Crown land and were
“reckless” enough to put in a bit of a crop in the hope
that the powers of the time would let us reap it in peace,
we were as likely as not to have the crop burnt or des-
troyed by Government order at the instance of the near-
est big land-holder. Still we had our rude compensa-
tions even in those rough and ready annals, and when we
think again,—
“Contrast mourns the Retrospect—the good old times,
the bounding games;
The ignorance of clique made sect; the reckless rides
and careless aims;
The days of sturdy pioneers who strove and played, un-
challenged by
The paltry hates of later years, and th’ brokers’ sense
of charity.”
But to hark back to Sir John Robertson and Free
Selection ; from the log-huts and stringybark beginnings
of the first selectors the country ’s hopes have sprung;
and so the scions of those who were the poor pioneers
should remember Robertson. Sir John was the head of
the Government on five occasions, and no leader was ever
more trusted or more esteemed. He was a fierce hater
of shams, and hypocrisy; a man of the kindliest sym-
pathies—off-handed to a fault, and, be it added, of the


convivial habits of the old colonial school, in fact,
because of his oft-expressed jocular condemnation of
'‘cold-water” fanatics, Robertson sometimes found him-
self in “hot-water” amongst temperance folk. For
instance, when Sir John was banquetted at Gouiburn
in 1886, we remember that he was asked (as he was then
Premier), to reserve or dedicate a certain block of land
for the building of a Temperance Hall thereon. “No;
don’t ask me,” said Robertson, in his peculiar nasal
drawl, “I believe in having a ‘nip’ you know ; so you’d
better wait till a ‘cold-water’ crew comes into power.”
This seemed a shocking kind of blasphemy to the view
of the ultra-temperance people present; but they later
knew that “Old Jack” was only joking at the time.
Robertson was about the most unconventional public
man who ever held office, and it was his pleasure at times
to express his opinion of affairs in the most direct and
“lurid” way. His eccentric distrust of Victoria and
Victorians was a peculiar and amusing trait in his men-
talities. He vented this idea of the “Cabbage Garden,”
as he scornfully called Victoria, at the “Commemorative
dinner” tendered by Sir Henry Parkes, to the surviving
members of the first Legislative Assembly, of New South
Wales, on 23rd May, 1887, at Sydney. Replying to one
of the toasts submitted at that historic dinner, Sir John
said, “When he looked back to the old days,
when we had a Governor ruling us without seeking the
consent or opinions of the people, he recognised a great
change. . . . But he would sooner have a Governor
controlling us than submit to the control of a certain
‘Progressive’ colony (viz. ; Victoria). We could not
stand that colony; they were rather too insolent.
That ‘Progressive’ colony now desired, impotent as it


was, to dictate to all Australia, and to proclaim by the
voice of one of its men what Australasia would do
thirty years hence. . . , He thought it was to be
deplored that all this humbug went on.” We have often
thought since that the very white heat of fury would
have overwhelmed Sir John if he had lived to see Fed-
eration, which he ever cordially opposed, an abiding
fact; and the seat of Government placed at the outset,
of all places abhorred—in Melbourne! But the brave
old warrior died before the consummation of those (to
his idea) detestable occurrences—the date of his death
being Bth May, 1891.
Shortly after Sir John Robertson’s death, a striking
tribute was paid to his worth and character by his
Eminence, Cardinal Moran, in the following words: —
“During his long public life, the distinguished States-
man, who had recently passed away, recognised and res-
pected both the political and religious rights of all
classes in the community, and it was a cheering thing,
now that he was no more, to be able to say of him, as
one of their representative statesmen, that he had never
used his high position and great opportunities save for
the public good : that he had never lent his aid to the
creation of discord in the community. None had more
faithfully served the country than he, none had been
more jealous of the guardianship, and none more cour-
ageous in the defence of the liberties he had helped to
win for the people of this fair land.”
And in closing this brief summary of our references
to Sir John Robertson, we can but heartily re-echo the
appreciative tribute so truthfully and feelingly ex-
pressed in memory and in honour of the great-hearted


and clear-headed old ‘‘Knight of Clovelly,” who,—
“Slave to no sect, took no private road.
But looked from Nature up to Nature’s God.”
No Australian politician better deserves the patriot’s
epitaph than this unselfish, earnest democrat, of whom
it can be truly affirmed that he left an example of fidelity
to principle ,and of regard for the larger interests of the
whole of the people over those of an autocratic class
which the politicians of the future, we trust, will take
to heart.
Some Reminiscences of the Railways*
As every schoolboy knows, the first sod of the Pioneer
Railway line of New South Wales, viz. : from Sydney
to Parramatta, was “turned” by the Hon. Mrs. Keith
Stewart —daughter of Governor Fitzroy —on the 3rd
July, 1850. A few days after the starting of the line,
the Author was in Sydney, and, having some business
to do with Dr. Nicholson, in reference to selling some
cattle in which the Doctor (later Sir Charles Nicholson)
was interested with Capt. McAlister, I went to the Doc-
tor’s office in Elizabeth Street. In course of a chat,
Dr. Nicholson remarked, jokingly; “You carriers up-
country had better try and make hay while the sun
shines; for by-and-bye the railways will take the shine
out of you. The lines will soon be running all over the
country.” But the breaking out of the goldfields, by
increasing the rates of wages enormously, caused a long
delay in the building of that short line to Parramatta,
and at last the company originally formed to carry the
work through were obliged to retire from the contract,
and handed the affair over to the Government. Thus


began our semi-socialistic railway system, which is to-day
the largest national asset on wheels that we possess. It
will be seen, however, that the carriers had a few more
years’ grace before Dr. Nicholson’s prophecy bore fruit.
The first meeting on railway extension, held in Goul-
burn, took place at the old Police Office in December,
1848. Capt. Rossi, Senr., was Chairman, and the meet-
ing was attended by Sir T. A. Murray, Dr. Nicholson,
Hon. Jas. Chisholm, Dr. Waugh, and other prominent
men. Sir Chas. Cowper, justly described as “The
Father” of our railway movement, wrote an encouraging
letter, promising all the assistance in his power —and his
power at the time was very great, and be it said, to the
honour of Sir Charles, was ever devoted to the best inte-
rests of the people as a whole. Like other politicians
of sagacity, Cowper saw from the first the great need
and utility of railroads. He was a member of the first
rail and steam company formed in New South Wales,
and in and out of Parliament strongly urged pushing on
with the lines already surveyed to the settled districts.
Speaking on Nomination Day for the City (Sydney)
elections, September, 1851, Cowper, referring to the
railways, spoke as follows:—“We must push on as
speedily as possible with the extension of the railroads ;
for the railway, as the best means of internal communi-
cation, should run wherever the population and traffic
would justify it. The gold discoveries ren-
dered it imperative that more attention should be paid
to this question than hitherto. . but where they
could not have railways, let them have good roads.” Sir
Charles Cowper’s great interest in railway matters was
once happily satirised by Sir S. A. Donaldson in a
phrase that became somewhat famous, viz.: “I can only


compare the lion. Member (Cowper) and his Ministry to
a Railway Government of which the Hon. Member is the
Permanent Way and his colleagues the ‘rolling stock.’ ”
We would digress here for a moment to say a word in re-
lation to Sir Chas. Cowper’s connection with other pub-
lic questions besides railway extension. He was head of
the Government on four occasions, and it was said that
no one had a greater faculty for making friends and
keeping them. His deep interest in the anti-transporta-
tion movement, in improving the Postal Service, in land
law reform, etc., greatly influenced the pubbc attitude
on those matters during the period. We remember that
Sir Chas. Cowper was the Chairman of the great meeting
held at the old Barrack Square, Sydney, in 1849, to pro-
test against any further transportation of convicts to our
shores. To mark Cowper’s work in connection with the
railway extension movement, he was presented with a
number of “evidences of esteem” from the representative
citizens of New South Wales. In passing we would
refer to the recognised fact as to the “absorbing danger”
of politics on the private concerns of many of our best
public men. Parkes, Robertson, Dibbs, and Cowper
are cited as instances of leaders who found that business
success was not always compatible with political su-
premacy. “No man can serve two masters” seems to
have been especially framed as a proverb to apply to the
“unmixable” natures of commercial and large political
success in the same person. The first great section of
the Main Southern Railway Line (Sydney to Goulburn)
took fifteen years to build, and it was not till May, ’69,
that the first “through” passenger train arrived in Goul-
burn from the Metropolis. The passengers included a
team of cricketers from Sydney (members of the old


Warwick Club), and those players defeated the Goul-
burn First Eleven after a close game. The Governor
(then Lord Belmore) and his lady came up at the same
time to attend the opening ceremony, and a host of coun-
try folk came to town, to see a real live Governor and to
note what sort of “an animal” the mysterious railway
was. It was a great day, that May morn of '69—a date
which marked the “parting of the ways” between the old
and new order of locomotion, that was to say, between
the old and new order of progress. We might digress
slightly here to say that amongst the “curiosities” of
railway travelling in our experiences, a train on which
we (the Author) was a passenger was once nearly brought
to a halt by meeting with a swarm of grasshoppers at a
part of the line near Dubbo. Lady Belmore planted an
oak cutting in Belmore Park to commemorate her visit
to Goulburn on the occasion referred to. That “sucker”
is now a lordly tree. And likewise the railway system of
New South Wales has grown from a small “sapling” to a
grand National Tree of many branches. Taking a brief
retrospect for the fifty years from 1855 to 1905, we will
find that from a starting point of 16 miles in 1855, the
mileage had increased in 1905 to 3280 miles, with all the
lines converging from the interior on Sydney as a focus
and grand centre. In fact, it seems to be a well-
grounded complaint of the country folks that the cen-
tralising policy of the railway system and management
has unduly penalised the country interests to buttress
the commercial strength of Sydney. For instance, in-
land traders and producers can never understand why
the Department should, in good times and bad, continue
the harassing policy of “differential” rates at such an
alleged disadvantage to inland requirements. It would


seem to have been “an article of faith” m the beginning,
of our railway administration that “Sydney is New
South Wales.” Twenty years ago the Author was on:
a deputation which placed certa;n views of the matter
before the then Minister for Railways, “Honest John
Sutherland. The late Sol. Meyer, A. M. Betts, Chas.
Rogers, and W. A. Bartlett, amongst others, severally.
Superintendent T. O. Milne, Western Railways.
made out a strong case for reduction of the excessive
rates, but in spite of the Minister’s sympathy (then, as
since), we are still getting the same old stereotyped
treatment in many respects from the Railway Depart-
ment. We ask for bread, but get back the same old
stone. The zone system, or some modification of that


idea, could, we think, be adopted with advantage to our
interests on the railroads. In reference to the wonder-
ful growth of this great asset within the past 00 years,
we may point out that the capital expended on lines had
sprung from £515,347, in 1855, to £43,062,550 in 1905.
Happily, we have had, at all times, men with an un-
common genius for railway affairs—first-class pilots at
the helm to look after this great adjunct of business and
enterprise. Such an officer—far-sighted, alert, cour-
teous, patriotic—is Capt. T. O. Milne, who was tor many
years chief traffic manager of the Southern lines. Mr.
Milne is now superintendent of the Western lines,
where, no doubt, his extraordinary energy, foresight,
and common-sense will be as highly appreciated as by
the people who were so well served by this splendid
officer in the Sunny South. Another worthy ‘‘hench-
man of the Railway Department is Mr. James Cuzner,
about the oldest railway man in the Southern district.
Of the late Mr. Goodchap, Mr. Eddy, Mr. Howe, etc.,
and of the present Commissioners, we can only say that
"By their works we have known them.” All, according
to their lights, have done good work, and have honestly
striven to extend the scope and improve the traffic and
revenue of the railways. Each unit of chief railway
management referred to had to control a business of
enormous importance, entailing great responsibility.
That the system has been ever honestly and capably
superintended, and, in the case of Mr. Eddy, ran with
something like genius in organisation, will not be denied
by the public. But the railways, like other "ways,” no
doubt, oft require the stimulus of new measures and
new men. Before concluding these remarks, we must
not forget to recognise the great part played by Colonel
306
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


Holborrow and Mr. Thos. Rose (both formerly M.sL.A.
for Argyle) in forcing the construction of the Crookwell
line on the notice of Parliament. When Col. Holborrow
retired from the representation of Argyle, Mr. Rose
worked with the energy of a Japanese admiral to achieve
the building of that long-promised line. And assisted
by the patriotic interest of the Hon. E. W. O’Sullivan,
then Minister for Works, Mr. Rose at last saw the
Crookwell line an accomplished fact; and we think that
if the Crookwellites are wise in their generation they
will keep their town the terminus of that little line for
a few years yet, for all things come to the terminus be-
fore they terminate themselves. But we must now board
another train (of thought), and bid good-bye to this
brief summary on the railways: must leave
“The ‘Goods,’ the ‘Mixed,’ the ‘Passenger,’ the ‘Paper,’
and ‘Express’;
The men upon the engine—‘Baldwin’ or ‘Black Bess,
The brave Australian drivers —the stalwarts of the
land —
The firemen, guards, and porters, and the noisy Tram-
way band;
May their runs be merry, through Traffic’s storm or
shine,
Their ‘attitude’ be jolly, though on or off the line:
And may Australia’s railways as the winds of progress
blow
Remain the People’s Asset, and grow stronger as they
grow.”
As a last word, we would add our little acknowledg-
ment to that of the whole populace of the immense
ability of the Hon. E. W. O’Sullivan in carrying
through Parliament the Bill authorising the building of
307
FREE SELECTION, ETC.


the new Central Railway Station, Sydney-the noblest
in the Southern Hemisphere— a work which stands
(though yet uncompleted) as a grand memorial to the
political genius of Mr. O’Sullivan, and to the architec-
tural skill of the officers who designed it.
CHAPTER XXXVI.
A Chapter of Anecdotes.
Country weddings in old times had nothing of the un-
sociable straight-jacket about them, and the Author is
proud to say that the occasion of his marriage, away back
m May, 1858, saw gathered together a host of whole-
hearted friends who proved their good-will in the most
jovial fashion, and for six days and nights we made the
“welkin ring” within and without the old homestead at
Strathaird. Shortly after the Author’s marriage, he
entered upon the business of hotelkeeping, having’ ob-
tained a lease of the old “Bazaar” Hotel (now the “Odd-
fellow’s Arms”), Goulburn, from the late William
Evans. The premises had, in fact, been just newly
erected, on the understanding that we should open it as
an hotel so both the “pub” and the publican were, so
to speak, "new chums” to the business. In my four
years’ experience at the “Bazaar,” I found that inn-
keeping was not “all beer and skittles,” and if I might
point a moral to young publicans I would say that one
of the first things to remember, when starting as a
licensed victualler, is the old but weighty motto, “Trust
is a good dog, but Holdfast is a better.” To parody an
old quatrain, we might say of the hotel business


“You’ve a comfortable hostel to live in,
To lend, or to buy, or to give in ;
But to cure discontent, or get a man’s own,
It’s the very worst place that ever was known.”
Goulburn, now the recognised capital of the South,
was growing apace —getting too big altogether for a Pro-
gress Committee to handle, though the citizens included
such men as Capt. Hovell (assistant to John H. Hume
in that memorable exploration trip of 1824 to Port
Phillip), Chas. H. Walsh, Phil Dignam, “Ginger”
Roberts, W. Clarke (jeweller), Deans, Walsh and
Sowerby, George Thorne, and that irrepressible Cock-
ney, the late “Nipper” Evans, whose quaint manner and
sayings always drew the attention of the gaping throng
at the sales or the races. The town was proclaimed a
municipality in ’59 (it was later discovered that the
document “proclaimed” too much or too little), and this
was not a day too soon. For though the people greatly
disliked their first taste of civic rates and taxes, the sight
of bullock teams bogging to the axles in the main street
of the town (then a place of 3000 inhabitants) was quite
enough to impel local government in smaller places than
Goulburn. So we set to work and elected our first
Borough Council —the Aldermen being Messrs. Chas. H.
Walsh (Mayor), J. J. Woodward, D. H. Thorne, P.
Dignam, J. Greig, W. Davis, D. Kennedy, J. McGovern
and Wm. Chatfield. Mr. Daniel Kennedy, Senr., now
in his 79th year, is the sole survivor of that original
Goulburn Council. The Author was one of the com-
pany at the first mayoral dinner held at Mandellsohn s
Hotel in ’59. The dinner was also attended, amongst
others, by the town undertaker, the late Columbus Fitz-
patrick, and Phil Dignam made a grim joke on the cir


cumstance. He was glad, he said, “to see one under,
taker who could wish long life to a young Mayor, but he
thought that Mr. Fitzpatrick would not be so useful at
a Mayor’s birth as at his death.” The late William
Connelly (miller) made a good speech, we remember, and
suggested that the leading citizens would remodel their
old style of (often) acrimonious debate, and act more in
keeping with the new dignity of the town. The first
Goulburn newspaper, viz.: the “Herald,” founded in
1848, also found reason in its early issues to lecture our
leading magnates on their alleged lack of knowledge or
of courtesy in regard to their conduct of public meet-
ings; so there was some “precedent” for criticising cer-
tain of our “big-wigs” on their alleged want of fine
manners.
A Civic Episode of the Sixties*
In thus referring to the first Goulburn Borough Coun-
cil, we recall a circumstance, bearing thereon, which
harks back to the American Civil War of the Sixties.
During that memorable struggle between the North and
South, it will be remembered that the Southern States
(Confederates) had several privateers built and equipped
y English firms, and those vessels did no end of damage
to Union (Northern) shipping, on the high seas, for
several years. The two most famous of those privateers
were the “Alabama” and “Shenandoah,” and with the
latter we are chiefly concerned just now. Ultimately,
all those privateers were either sunk or disabled by
Northern vessels, but in several instances their com-
manders escaped the vengeance of the United States
authorities. One of those lucky “Corsairs” was Cap


tain Waddell, of the “Shenandoah.” Soon after the
war, Captain Waddell visited Australia as commander
of an American trading vessel, the name of which we
have forgotten. In Melbourne and Sydney certain
individuals, who had sympathised with the Southern
“argument” during the war, got up festivities in honour
of Captain Waddell, and, so as to be in the fashion, it
was proposed in the Goulburn Council that an address
of welcome should be tendered the Captain (then in
Melbourne) as coming from the citizens of Goulburn.
This proposal was strongly opposed by Mr. D. Kennedy,
Senr., then one of the Councillors. Alderman Ken-
nedy, who had lived some years in the States, said that
by such a motion they were simply applauding the deeds
of a buccaneer —an ocean outlaw—and upholding an
unlawful act on the part of Great Britain. I know the
spirit of the American people,” said Mr. Kennedy, “and
by-and-bye they will demand pretty heavy damages
from Great Britain for the injury done by such priva-
teers as the ‘Shenandoah.’ For, like several others, the
‘Shenandoah’ was built in an English dockyard
(Laird’s), was manned by British sailors, and flew the
British flag. Therefore, it seems to me that ‘Uncle
Sam’ has good grounds for denominating the Shenan-
doah’ a British vessel, fighting without valid right
against the interests of the United States. Captain
Waddell’s deeds have proved him to be a traitor to his
country, and I, for one, will take no part in sending to
such a man address of welcome to Australia’s shores.”
Those outspoken utterances did Mr. Kennedy consider-
able harm in his business affairs, as he was boycotted in
his trade for several years, Goulburn being a very “Jin-
goistic” borough at the time. But the sense of his


attitude was admitted, when in 1872, at the Geneva
Convention, Great Britain was required to pay the
United States an indemnity of over £3,000,000 for the
damage done to American commerce and shipping by the
piracies and doings of the “Shenandoah” and its sister
privateers, under the British flag. Of course, every-
thing depends on the point of view, but it would seem
the Geneva Convetion could honestly arrive at no other
conclusion.
Various Memories.
We could relate one or two incidents which suggested
a leaven of the barbaric in those “expanding” days. Old
hands will recall how a certain merchant distrained on
a dead body (viz. : that of the late George E s) in
’59. The deceased, it appeared, had owed P. D
(the distrainer) some money, and the corpse was levied
upon so as to force the relatives to pay the debt. The
creditor expressed his determination to obstruct the
burial until his writ was satisfied. The relatives were
obliged to settle matters, but Id!r. D was a very
unpopular person for years after. It was alleged that
about this time a female was sold one day by her hus-
band to another customer,” for a certain consideration.
Apparently the “selling” husband thought he was act-
ing within the law when he fixed a halter around the
woman’s neck as he handed her over to the new “owner,”
this being no doubt a relic of the old feudal custom by
which some of the early British Churls disposed of their
wives, as somewhere stated in history. But if some-
times such happenings did transpire, it was not because
of the want of activity of the local police. Some of


those officers, though of smaller stature and bulk than
present-day policemen, possessed a courage greater than
their inches might indicate. One day one of those con-
stables (viz.: a Mr. Paget), a man of some sft. 6in. or
so, tried to arrest a very big carrier, a man fully 6ft.
high and 16st. in weight. This individual was carrying
on in real old Colonial style, and the row he was making
got on the little constable’s nerves. But he might as
well have tried to arrest a mountain; the carrier took
him up in his arms as a nursegirl takes a baby, to the
great amusement of the crowd which gathered. It was
funny to hear the constable crying out as the big
“drunk” held him in the air, “If you don’t let me down,
I’ll take you up: let me down at once, or it will be bad
for you,” and those expressions were the schoolboys’
catchwords for many a day afterwards.
The election for the “Southern Boroughs” in 1859
was a bit lively. Sir T. A. Murray was opposed by
Mr. Hardy, of Yass, and the electors of that town made
no secret of their dislike of the politics of Murray. Goul-
burn, however, stood loyally by the “Duke of Windra-
deen,” as someone called Sir T. A. Murray, and gave
him a majority which paralysed the well meant efforts
of the Yass faction. It may be interesting to here
quote the polling, viz.:—Goulburn: Murray, IdO;
Hardy, 54. Braidwood: Murray, 40; Hardy, 14.
Queanbeyan: Murray, 34; Hardy, 54. Yass, however,
did not record a single vote for Murray, while it gave
90 to Mr. Hardy. The totals were thus: —Murray,
204; Hardy, 166. To commemorate Murray’s return,
a bullock was roasted whole in the public square, and
amid a scene of wild hilarity, “Roast beef, underdone,
was the order of the night. Mr. Charles Cowper (ex-


M L.A. for Tumut, etc.) and Mr. C. H. Walsh took a
prominent part in that election on behalf of Sir Terence
Aubrey Murray, and we believe it was owing to the
heavy exertions of Mr. Cowper that the vote at Braid -
wood turned in Murray’s favour. We are tempted to
extend our biographical notice of Chas. H. Walsh, for
it can be said that he was not only a clever lawyer and
a thorough gentleman, but his history is, largely, the
history of the Goulburn of his time. He was the soul
of any and every local movement of importance, and
was the guide, philosopher, and friend of the humbler
order of citizens who sought the assistance of litigation
in adjusting their affairs. Sir Alfred Stephen, then
Chief Justice, congratulated Mr. Welsh on several occa-
sions on his clever defence of accused persons, as also on
his masterly conduct in sheeting home the guilt of the
prisoners in certain cases. As is widely known, attor-
neys were not in those days admitted to plead at the
criminal courts on the same level with barristers as they
are now, but the privilege of pleading at the Assizes was
granted to Mr. Walsh on several occasions. As may be
imagined, a citizen of Mr. Walsh’s calibre had many
experiences of a humorous as well as of a serious nature,
both without and within the precincts of the courts.
From time to time he related amusing anecdotes of a
personal character to the Author. One day while Mr.
Walsh was returning from Collector, he was “stuck-up”
on the Breadalbaue plain by two armed bushrangers.
They did not treat him too badly, however, only taking
his cravat (a large square of silk) to make a pair of
masks, and also relieved him of a few shillings of loose
change and —a pair of trousers. Mr. Walsh was in the
hab-t of wearing two pairs of “unmentionables” when on


a. journey, putting on an old pair to keep the other clean
while travelling. The robbers, however, rejected the
outside pair to Mr. Walsh’s disgust. Some time after-
wards one of those outlaws was put on his trial on a
capital charge, when Mr. Walsh succeeded in obtaining;
the man’s acquittal. The “trousers” incident, however,
led to an amusing anecdote. As previously stated, Tal-
bot, who was executed for the perpetration of a revolt-
ing murder in 1868, tried to escape from Goulburn Gaol
a few days before his execution. He was recaptured by
a Mr. Jacobs, a German Jew, who had a store at the
time in the town. At the inquiry over Talbot’s at-
tempted escape, Mr. Walsh thought he would have a
bit of fun with Jacobs, and so he asked him how he felt
when he saw Talbot coming towards him. “Veil,” said
Jacobs in broken English, “Mr. Balsh, I vill answer the
question if vou tell the Court how you felt when the
robbers took de breeches off you on Breadalbane plains.
The tables were thus turned on Mr. Walsh, who joined
heartily in the laugh against himself. Another story
recounted by Mr. Walsh very much tickled our “risible
faculties” when he first related it. Staying one night
at a country hotel, he was shown into a room having two
beds. He selected one of the couches, and then went
into a sitting-room to write some letters. Meanwhile
another traveller came along, and was shown into the
same room. He retired before Mr. Walsh, and took
the bed that gentleman had selected a few hours before.
This was too much for Mr. W.’s patience, and he re-
solved to oust “the interloper” at all hazards. Putting
on his riding spurs, he got into bed as quietly as pos-
sible, and began to apply the spurs to the legs of the
snoring stranger at high pressure. This very soon had


the effect desired. The sleeper woke up with a start,
and at the next “rip” of the spurs he jumped out of bed,
saying: “I'm not in the habit of sleeping with a man
who doesn't cut his toenails,” and forthwith he retreated
to the other bed. As soon as the coast was clear, the
“spurring” lawyer took off his “uncut toenails,” and
Morpheus claimed his own.
Old Goulburnites will remember a political tailor
named Sibley, who had a kind of harmless mania to see
himself in Parliament. On Mr. Walsh consenting to
stand for Goulburn on a certain occasion, the tailor
aforesaid announced his resolve to run, as usual. Sonm
of Walsh’s supporters, incensed at this, proposed to give
Mr. Sibley a “ducking ’ in the Mulwarrie, but Mr.
Walsh, with all an Irishman’s relish for a joke, said
they could have a bit of fun with Mr. Sibley that would
frighten him just as much as a ducking. Amongst Mr.
Walsh s articled clerks at the time was a gentleman who
has since become a leading attorney of Goulburn. Mr.
Walsh had an alleged summons made out for this (then)
embryo lawyer in which he was charged with having
assaulted Mr. Sibley, the date and hearing of the charge
being, however, fixed for a Sunday in each case—a dies
non in law. The summons was duly served, but neither
of the parties supposed to be interested seemed to notice
anything peculiar in the proceedings—Mr. Sibley,
especially, as of course, he knew nothing whatever about
the alleged assault. The clerk referred to resided with
the Rev. Dean Sowerby, who employed Mr. Sibley as
his tailor. The worthy Dean was very indignant that
his young friend should have been summoned by Sibley,
and, going to the supposed defendant (Sibley), he told
the tailor that he (the Dean) should withdraw his cua


tom unless the ca.se should be withdrawn. The irate
Dean also hinted at the possibility of a horse-whipping
if the “charge” should be persevered with. Naturally
poor Silbey was terribly non-plussed, as he was quite
in the dark, and having a wholesome fear of the Dean
(who was a man of mighty girth, as old hands will agree),
he spent a few very anxious hours before the joke was ex-
plained, and the atmosphere cleared again. But in
future the tailor seemed to have little political ambition,
thinking, perhaps, that a seat in “the House” would be
too dearly purchased at the price of a ducking, or at the
prospective loss of the Dean’s custom. Since Mr. Siibey’s
time, however, we have known gentlemen of the tailor.ng
profession who would have been a credit to the electorate
if returned —such a one being Mr. Arthur Barrett, v. ho
has valiantly contested the Goulburn seat on several
occasions, and also stood for the Federal constituency of
Werriwa at the polls of 1903. Mr. Barrett, by the way,
has also been Mayor of Goulburn, but his “affinities”
are of more recent history than the “taproots” of this
chapter. But to conclude our references to Mr. Charles
H. Walsh ; that gentleman sat as member for Goulburn
for a short period in 18G0-61, his chief object in taking
a, seat in Parliament being to assist in the passing of the
Robertson land-policy at that time. He (Mr. Walsh)
later—in 1872 —contested the Queanbeyan seat against
Mr. De Salis, only suffering defeat by the narrow margin
of 16 votes—De Salis polling 305, and Walsh 289. There
have been many clever attorneys practising in Goulburn
since the hey-dey of Charles Hamilton Walsh; and a
multitude of men with a large capacity for public affairs,
but with all due respect to all such individuals, we make
bold to say that there has been amongst them no keener


oj more versatile lawyer, and no more benevolent and
public-spirited a citizen than that brave, broad-minded
pleader—Charles Hamilton Walsh.
Some Memories of the Scottish Celts o I
Old Argyle.
One of the most noted places of Goulburn in the
Fifties and Sixties was the old “Argyle Hotel," kept
for many years by the late “Sandy” MacDonneil—a
braw Highland-man of great spirit and agility. The
“Argyle” was the chief port of call of the big (and
little) Scotchmen of the district, whose annals set my
thoughts tingling as to the vibrations of an old Gaelic
air replayed. For instance, there was Big John Mac-
Donnell—“the Boomer”—Sandy’s brother—a gigantic
Scot, to whose feats of strength and hardihood the great
Donald Dinnie could scarcely hold a candle. One of the
boomer’s” simplest performances was to put his shoulder
under a loaded dray and lift it by main strength (and
“Scotch navigation”) to allow of the greasing of the
axle. I once saw the boomer ’ lift a dray (the pole
being on the ground) which was loaded with six bags of
wheat (about 1080 lbs.) • and 1 have known him, and
also his brother “Sandy” to take a three-bushel bag of
wheat under each arm, and carry them from the barn
at Strathaird, to the dray in waiting some 12 or 15 yards
off. ‘ Black Sandy” McDonald was another of those
brawny clansmen of Aulcl Scotia. On several occasions
I saw him lift a 28-gallon cask of spirits from the dray
or waggon, and carry it 20 yards or more into the bar
of the Argyle Hotel. And “the March of the Cameron
Men took some stopping, too, in those days. I remem


ber it was a common occurrence with the late “Sandy”
Cameron of the “Head of the River” (Tarlo) to throw
two and three-year-old bulls and steers at the brandings
by seizing them by the horns, and tossing them over by
main strength. Mention of Sandy Cameron reminds me
that in my boyhood (in 1845) I bought one of the best
ponies I ever owned from old Hughie Cameron Sandy s
father—at “Dead Lamb Flat,” a property which I
might mention I bought in 1867, and sold in 1875 to
Messrs. John and Hugh Ross, of Melbourne. The
McLeans—Charles, John, Allen, and others of that
clan —were also very powerful men, possessing the best
qualities of the Celtic Scot which is no small testimonial.
I remember that while we were out running in some
brumbies in the scrub, “Jack” McLean, a dead shot,
brought down two of the scrubbers running abreast with
one ball. But I recall another feat of the “boomer’s,’
worth noting. One night at the old Salutation
two noisy fellows quarrelling over a game of cards, dis-
turbed the people in the next room, so the boomer,
to stop the row, took the brawlers, one under each arm,
and threw them out on to the pavement with as little
effort as Sergeant McHardy would to-day put up two
56’s. We have elsewhere referred to the inauguration
of the Argyle Highland Gatherings. Those merry meet-
ings are the red-letter days of the year to the trans-
planted Caledonians, and when the skirl o’ the pipes
sounds on the morning air, the Macs of every tartan,
including those of the Author’s ancient Scottish name,
are within hearing. But the “deathless Celt were
surely degenerate if he could only recount his doings
in the physical arena, or on the merry sward. So if only
to show a little g’impse of the other fide of the Aus


tralian-Scotch ideals we have great pleasure in pointing
out that Mrs. Mary Gilmore—the poetess—is a daughter
of the late Mr. Alexander (“Sandy”) Cameron, of “the
Head of the River”; and she is both a bright and loyal
scion of the clan and a credit to old Argyle—her natal
home.
Such gifted folk as Mrs. Gilmore remind us by their
writings, from time to time, of “the Scotland of heroes,
and chieftains, and Bards”—of those famous times,
“When Chivalry sacred in th' days of romance
‘ Her exploits recounted ’mid waits of the dance;
When famed Caledonia’s brave clans made endeavor,
Whose glowing traditions will flourish for ever.”
But, the curtain of this chapter of “varieties ” is des-
cending; so we must get ready for another “change of
scene.”
CHAPTER XXXVII.
Back at Strathaird (1863-75)
To old Strathaird’s beloved scenes and vernal nooks
and bowers,
I turn my retrospective thoughts in kind and quiet
hours ;
To dwell upon that old grey house—that “monu-
ment” of signs—
For aspects solemn, sad and strange, are written in
its lines.”
C. M cA.
Soon after the author’s return from Forbes, in Novem


her 1863, he opened the “Strathaird Arms” Hotel,
situated some five miles from Taralga, on the main
Goulburn road. To that old stone house by the way-
side for the next twelve or thirteen years, there came
and went all sorts and conditions of wayfarers —from
bishops to bushrangers; from loafers to legislators —
the grave and the reckless; the trivial and the wise.
Learning from the late J. T. Gannon (solicitor), then
agent for the Richlands estate, that the McArthurs had
decided to discontinue working the station, and proposed
to lease the land to tenants in small farms, I contracted
to buy the stock and working plant of the property; also
the right to the Richlands brands, taking the stock, etc.,
at a valuation mutually agreed upon, having three
months to clear the run. In explanation of the run-
holder’s action, as noted, we would point out that on the
stoppage of transportation, many squatters found it
difficult to meet the altered conditions.
Free labour was a costly article compared to the
trivial cost of working the stations during the convict
days, and so the owners either sold out altogether, as in
the case of Leighwood, Rhyanna, Kenmore, etc.; or as
at Richlands, the land was cut up into farming areas.
The new occupiers, in many instances, soon became what
can be described as a really rackrented tenantry, and
found they had no chance to make even “a ragged
fortune” in face of the heavy rents and ungenerous treat-
ment of the landlords.
We soon began mustering, and drafting the stock—
cattle and horses —at the Richlands yards, and for three
months it was hard-riding from cock-crow to sunset after
brumbies and scrubbers, heifers and pikers, through the


scrubs and gullies for twenty miles around. But a gang
of cattle-duffers bad been on the scene before us, and
those pests of the bush had made away with scores of un-
branded colts and fillies, and hundreds of cattle, which
they sold at markets down the country, without asking
leave or license of the rightful owners. Thus, though we
cleared some £1500 on the Richlands spec, it may be set
down as a fair estimate that the value of the stock
taken by the thieves was fully as much more; so there
was a big leak in the ship, and pirates were aboard as
well. But several of those gentry came to grief at last—
among them being the notorious bushranger Crookweil
(who was hanged at Darlinghurst in 1867), “Flash Dan/'
and one J.C., who, like
“Falconer, the Super of lonely Murder Vale, ' was
“The cleverest horse-stealer that ever dodged a gaol.”
“Flash Dan” (whose name we cannot recall just now)
did some three years in either Berrima or Darlinghurst
gaol for “lifting” Hillas’s racehorse “Mulison,” as old
residents will recollect.
In 1865 the Author sold the right to the Richlands
brands and residue of the stock to the McKay Brothers,
of Yalbraith. Mr. Duncan McKay is now the sole sur-
vivor of those sturdy Scots—the McKays—as my good
friends Murdoch, James, and Roderick of that ilk have
recently passed away. Peace to their ashes! for they
were amongst the best Highlanders that ever wore the
plaid, and what more need be said.
A Visit from the Bushrangers.
On the morning following my return to Strathaird,
after selling the second lot of Richlands horses in Sydney,


I was awakened by a thundering knock at the front
door. On answering I was confronted by a youth armed
with a rifle which was pointed straight at my head. Two
other armed men were at his back, and I saw at once
that the callers belonged to the h.ghly respectable ?)'
fraternity of bushrangers. Recognising one of the trio
as one T H , a previous acquaintance, I said,
in affected surprise, “Why, surely you've not come to
stick me up, T—m” ?—and turning to the youth who
held his gun in dangerous proximity to my “brainbox,
I said, “Here, give that to me before you do some
damage with it” ; and, as if under my orders, the simple
fellow gave me the gun, which I stuck behind the bar.
Meanwhile, the ringleader (L.C.) assured me that he
was not aware that I lived in the neighbourhood, etc.,
or they would never have dreamt of visiting the place,
and so on. But the chances are that if I had met the
men angrily there would have been a different tale to
tell. As matters stood, they were content with the
“loan” of a couple of sovereigns; and, having had break-
fast, the “terrible” bushrangers departed without any-
one being any the worse for their appearance. But
quite unbidden by the Author, a lad (one Tom Parker),
employed at the inn, ran over to a neighbour’s place
with the news that L C and his gang were in
possession of the Strathaird Hotel, and were sticking
up everyone who came along. A horseman rode post
haste to the Taralga police station with this terrible (?)
news, and the bushrangers had only left the premises a
few minutes when the Police came galloping after them.
The two troopers (Constables John Chalker and W.
Wiles) were very brave officers —Chalker, as we have
noted earlier, having been in the hunt after Morgan and


other outlaws. Finding that the “enemy” had departed,
the police put their horses at their utmost speed, and
got within shooting distance of their quarry, near Chats-
bury. Chalker shot one of the bushrangers’ dorses at
long range; and the discomfitted outlaw (the youth be-
fore spoken of) tried to escape on foot through the open
bush beside the road. He was soon “winged,” however,
and taken prisoner. He did some three years in Berrima
gaol for his maiden adventure in bushranging, so paid
dearly for his “enjoyment,” as he was lamed for life,
besides his term in durance vile. The horse shot in the
melee was a well-bred racehorse which the bushrangers
had stolen from the late Mr. D. O’Brien, of Laggan,
amd was valued at £200. The other two men were
shortly afterwards captured and sent up for long terms.
One of them once escaped from Berrima gaol through
the underground sewer at that establishment. But the
whole three members of that little gang have long since
seen the error of their early days, and have atoned for
their youthful lapses. It would be only fair to say that
T H ascribed his reckless youthful career to the
undue suspicion and persecution of certain guardians of
the law. The fatality of being misunderstood by in-
terested parties seems to be one of the cruellest “kinks”
of so-called civilization.
Some Horse-Droving Reminiscences.
On several trips to Sydney with the Richlands horses
(in 1864-65) the Author was accompanied by three first-
class mates, viz. : John Mooney, now of Sydney Ex-
change, Walter Bradbury (Curraweela), and the late
John Coutts, the famous jockey, who was doing a bit of


droving and speculating at the time. The Southern
Railway, at the time of our first trip, had reached only
to a point some few miles on the Goulburn side of Mitta-
gong; and Mr. Bradbury—quite a “green” youth at the
time —had never seen a train before, and seemed very
much puzzled over the “manners and customs” of the
railways. As we neared Mittagong, a train was ap-
proaching, and by way of a joke we asked “Wat” to go
ahead, and tell the engine-driver to stop tfie train.
“Tell him,” 1 said, “that we are coming with a mob of
wild horses, and they’ll have to stop till we get past.
That’s the law of the land down this way, and it has to
be obeyed.” Off raced Wat, in obedience to “orders.”
As he approached the engine he shouted his “solemn”
warning at the top of his voice—“ Hey, Stop! Pull up
till we’re past with the horses.” But the driver took
no more notice of Wat’s “command” than he would of
the cry of a mopoke; and on sped the train (a con-
tractors’ “goods”) as if Wat and his horses had no place
in the landscape at all. But as the engine passed, the
resolute “messenger” turned his horse and came gallop-
ing after it, distractedly shouting his orders and waving
his hat. “Stop the (carnation) train” he kept bawling.
“Don’t you see the (gory) horses coming; pull up or
we’ll have the law of you, etc.” But the railway men
simply laughed in derision of the excited horseman, and
in a few minutes the iron horse was out of sight. Pre-
sently Mr. Bradbury came back to us in great disgust,
and said with evident alarm, “I believe the (condemned)
thing has bolted with ’em; I reckon they’ll get an ugly
spill if they don’t stop her before they reach the foot
of that hill back there.” At the camp that night; “Look
here, Wat,” said the Author, “you should have thrown


some salt on the tail of that engine if you wanted to
stop it; or be sure you put the break on before she
starts.” No one laughs more heartily now over this
incident; and over the attempted stopping of a sawmill
near Bargo for the same “reason” (?) than my genial
old mate—W.B. And when we meet, the first question
is, “Well, Wat, why didn’t you scatter some salt on the
tail of the train that day near Rush’s Platform.” But
the Railway was only entering on it’s “teens” in those
distant times, and had such a long journey before it that
it couldn’t afford to wait till Wat and Co. came along
with their horses. Truly we were a guileless generation
in those merry seasons in the Sixties.
In the winter of 1868, while on my way to Shelly’s
station, Tumut, to take delivery of a mob of cattle, 1
had a rather narrow escape of drowning in the Canberra
Creek. The Author and a drover (one “Billy” Munoz)
had crossed the Murrumbidgee a few hours before,
swimming our horses over behind the boat in which we
were piloted across by the puntman (something being
wrong with the punt at the time). Knowing that the
Canberra Crossing was a bit dangerous in flood time, on
coming to that stream we pulled off our spurs, boots,
and overcoats, and strapped them before us on the sad-
dles. I was riding a young colt, newly broken, and
leading the pack-horse; and about the middle of the
stream, the old packer stumbled over a boulder, and
went right under water. In the struggle I was partly
swept and partly dragged off my seat, and, being an
indifferent swimmer, had a very hard battle to gain a
little belt of rocks some 15 or 16 yards down stream,
and five or six yards from the bank. With the welcome
help of my comrade, I managed to get again to terra


firma, resembling a half-drowned rat more than any-
thing else. But that night, at the warm fireside of Mr.
McDonald, Uriarra, we found balm for our bruises, and
laughed over the impromptu ducking in the Canberra
Creek, Speaking of that incident, however, reminds us
of several bygone cattle trips through Tumut side of the
Murrumbidgee, by Uriarra, and Brindabella, etc, in
seasons when the hills were often white with snow for
miles around. It was then a pretty picture of mystic
and rustic beauty—the green eucalypti trees on the hill-
sides flecked with ermine, and the snow-roofed home-
steads in the Goodradigbee Yalley; and a typical Brin-
dabella snow scene would assuredly be worthy of the
brush of a Julian Ashton, or Sydney Long. But perheps
a passing verse may better “translate” our memories:
On snow-bound Brindabella in the glory of
the year.
I think of Brindabella in a springtide ’mid the snow,
A season of September that is now so long ago;
And as through fancy’s lenses I see God’s people there,
And hear the children singing on memory’s mellowed
air,—
I fain the fates that love me would bridge the years
between,
And “resurrect” the joyance of that season and that
scene;
Recall again those mornings, when oft in wild career
We chased the mountain cattle by the Goodradigbee
near,
’Mid the wild haunts breaking cover of the pheasant
and the plover,
On snow-bound Brindabella in the glory of the year.


CHAPTER XXXVIII.
On the Drover's Trail Again.
Stockraising and dealing, despite the irregular seasons
of the Sixties and Seventies, were at high tide. The
boom in stock matters brought some clever dealers to
the south—such as Tom Argent, Harry Pitt, Neale, and
others, and some of those buyers were very keen cus-
tomers indeed. One morning in May, 1869, the Author,
while on his way to Hillas’s “Bunnaby” station, to in-
spect some fat cattle, was overtaken by a cute-
looking, middle-aged horseman, riding a nice irongrey
horse. Learning that he was a “book-agent,” I frankly
exchanged confidences, telling him that I was bound for
Bunnaby after stock. “Well,” he said, “I camped over
there at Crea’s last night, and I believe he has some fats
for sale—about thirty head. It might be worth your
while to see him.” Crea’s place was only about a mile
away, and, acting on the “book-agent’s” hint, I turned
back and saw Mr. Crea. To my inquiry, he said, “Well,
you’re just too late, Mac. Tom A came last night,
and bought all I had to sell. It’s a wonder you didn’t
see him, as he left only about half an hour ago for
Bunnaby.” Mention of A was enough. I bid Mr.
Crea good-bye, and took the track for Bunnaby like
greased lightning, as I saw that the “book-agent” would
try and cut me out in regard to Hillas’s bullocks, if he
possibly could. A , with his long start got to
Bunnaby before myself, and, as a matter of fact, I met
him close to the homestead. “Well,” I said, “Mr.
328
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


A , you’re a nice cup of tea to impersonate a book-
agent. But how did you get on with Mr. Hilla "? ‘O .
go ahead, Mac,” was the reply, “everything’s fair in
love and war, you know—and dealing. Hillas said he
wouldn’t do anything with me till he had settled with
you; so you can go in and try your luck.” This I did,
buying 100 bullocks at £7 per head—not by many my
first or last transaction with the genial Mat Hillas, of
Bunnaby. But in future I took care to look closely
into the credentials of “book-agents” —those who resem-
bled Mr. A in particular. Mr. Hillas’s next neigh-
bour —Mr. Thos. Holt, jun., of Arthursleigh, though
the most straight-forward and hospitable of squatters—
was of a very different temperament to the cheery Squire
of Bunnaby. My first experience of Mr. Holt’s com-
bustible temper was in the autumn of 1871, when I
bought 150 store bullocks, through A. G. Finlay, from
Mr. Holt. On the morning of delivery, Mr. Hillas
happened to come to Arthursleigh, and his appearance
seemed to have a similar effect on Mr. Holt as that of
the proverbial red rag on a mad bull. Seeing us talking
together, Mr. Holt (who was helping his overseer, Mr.
Jas. Ritchie, now of Moss Vale, count the cattle from
the paddock to the road) came over and opened fire at
once. “Look here, McAlister,” he said, “What sort of
a game is this ?—selling my cattle to Hillas before you’ve
got delivery of them.” Then turning to Mr. Hillas, he
said, “And you’re just as bad, Hillas, to come here and
start buying right at my back door.” Just then two of
the bullocks broke away, and, as Mr. Holt raced to
round them up again, a gust of wind blew his hat off.
Springing from his horse, he jumped on the hat, and,
kicking it about, swore like a trooper, classifiying Hillas;


and myself as two of the worst of frauds and scow-
bankers. Then suddenly turning his horse he galloped
away to the homestead in a terrible passion, all because,
on the impulse of the moment, he thought that we weie
making his paddock the locality of a business transaction.
But as we had no intention of such a thing, Holt “lost
his hair” without rhyme or reason. An aboriginal
drover with us, on seeing Mr. Holt’s display, said, “Bin
think it a plurry good dose of salts best thing for that
pfella.”
We had several subsequent deals with Mr. Holt, how-
ever, and though he was liable at times to go off suddenly
like an over-charged bomb, one soon saw it was only
surf ace-wash, and that the man was real white be-
neath. Mr. W. S. Dunlop, who, in the Eighties was
superintendent of the Arthursleigh Estate, will no doubt
recall the memory (unfortunately we cannot recall the
substance) of the thousands that passed between us in
the merry dealing days, “when the bloom was on the
rye, viz. : plenty of money in the country as well as in
the bank.
Westward, Ho!
Overlanding got another great spurt after the Vic-
torian supply began to run short in the Seventies, and
the Author took another turn at overlanding to the
Cabbage-Garden. In the hunt for cattle we moved,
in fact, all over the country—to Queensland, the Rivers,
the West, and elsewhere. Good stores were in great de-
mand, and from 1871-75 we bought fully 5000 bullocks
through agents at Walgett, Myngan, Dubbo, and other
far western centres, at an average of £4 per head, then


considered a fair price for lean pikers. Most of those,
cattle were sold in the southern and Victorian markets,
and though in the time we had only one serious break,
viz. : oft a camp at Molong, where one night 300 bullocks
stampeded, four being killed in the rush, we had a
varied run of droving experiences in the “Black-soil
Country.” The western side, in those seasons, was
generally on its best behaviour —the native grasses, wild
oats, carrot, rye, etc., were knee-high; the salt bush and
lignum flourishing, and some parts as gay as a Japanese
garden. Emus, brolgas, plain turkeys, pigeons, etc.,
were legion. The country from Moree via Millie and
Narrabri, through to the Liverpool plains, was then a
rare field for a sportsman; and our drover’s larder was
oft replenished by a broiled turkey or “bronzewing” as
we passed through on the long overland. But in a wet
time what of the Black-soil Country? We had several
lovely trips, driving with agents in buggy and pair to
stations out back, while the rain rained down benignly
(?) and the gluey soil, fathoms deep, “got its back up” ;
and we can safely say that if you desire to break records
out west in a bad winter, you’ll have to wait till your
hurry’s over. We had only two coach trips in the west—
the first trip being the deadliest in our experience. On
my way to “Jew’s Lagoon,” near Millie, I took passage
by one of Charteris’ coaches from Narrabri. That was
years before the Narrabri-Moree train was running. We
were two and a-half days doing the 38 miles to Millie,
but had lots of “diversions” shovelling off the tons of soil
that accumulated every few minutes for most of the
track. I’ll not forget that trip while the wheels of life
revolve. The driver, one George L , was a man
with a “Silver” jaw—but was “all gold” with the rib


bons. A kick from a horse had shattered his jaw in
youth, and surgical skill had mended matters by fixing
a silver plate in lieu of the broken jaw bone. On visiting
Moree during the drought, some five years ago, I was
sorry to see that the story of the havoc made by the dry
seasons was such an appalling fact. The losses and
privations of the people cannot be described in words
of mine; but the aspect of the parched country with
even that last hope of the West—the salt-bush plant
almost vanished ; the famishing stock, and the other
visible calamities, made indeed a desolate picture of
nature in one of its cruellest phases. Even the “Twelve
Apostles”—those constant feathered denizens of western
skies and orchards, were seldom seen, and game seemed
tr have been almost exterminated. On first visiting the
western plains, I thought that surely gate-making was a
leading occupation of the boundary-rider. For most of
the tracks across the big runs— roads conditionally
granted for the use of the public by special favour of the
landholder—were locked by gates at each sub-division
of the property, and “Close this gate” was as familiar
an admonition out back as “Keep off the Grass” in the
parks of the city.
I remember that on a trip to the “Mole” station, on
the Macquarie, going by the River road from Warren,
through “Raby,” “Mumblebone” (Rater’s), “Butter-
bone (Hill’s), etc., we had to open some 18 or 20 gates
on the way. Amongst the pioneers of that side of the
country were Henry Campbell, Thos. Egan (Mount
Harris), John Antill (formerly manager Bradley’s
Estate, Goulburn), Hon. Edward Flood (“Quambone”),
the Hills, Hughes, etc. It was said of Mr. Flood that he
would ride ten miles or more to get a shot at a cockatoo,


<is lie greatly esteemed cockatoo soup —which, we might
aay in passing, many others also consider a luxury. And
here must we say a word or two in eulogy of the Western
pastoralists. The West, in our opinion, is radically, a
country for big-hearted, “well-lined” pioneers. Some
people say that it is more accurately described as a land
set apart by fate or Providence, for strong pastoral
companies, and that the man of moderate means, how-
ever he may be equipped in high courage, and know-
ledge of stock, etc., will find his energies powerless
against the destructiveness of one or two real Western
droughts, in the course of fourteen or fifteen years. But
all honour to the men who have gone west depending on
their own resources to make the desert a white-man’s
land. A reference to the Western country calls up
notice of some burning topics at the present day. Light
“tapping” railway lines, for instance, an extended ir-
rigation system which will reach “further-out” areas
in the west ; grain depots and elevators at inland centres,
greater Departmental consideration to outback teachers,
etc.; but we hope that all anomalies now retarding
western progress will soon disappear under the improved
system of Government for which we yearn. But while
we make no claim whatever of any capacity to solve the
problems of the west, yet in respect of settlement we
would hazard the remark that a Closer Settlement
system, applicable to the eastern division, will not be
suitable to the Far West. For one thing the areas must
be larger, and regard given to the grazing extent of the
Plain and Central land district.
In passing we might record that, whatever may be the
trend of city opinion, many westerners consider that Mr.
W. P. Crick (Lands Minister in the See-O’Sullivan


Government) was the first politician in office who under-
stood the Land question from the Western point of view.
Droving on the Bathurst Side.
In the seventies and eighties we had numerous trans-
actions with runholders and settlers in the Bathurst,
Oberon, and Mountain districts —amongst others with
Messrs. Kite ("Woolstone”), Durack (Bathurst), Mut-
ton ("Mutton’s Falls), Keenan ("Medlow”), the Hogans
(Abercrombie), McPhillamys, Lees, and others. In
taking over a mob to "Woolstone” (Kite’s), we had a
break one night near a mining camp, some fifteen miles
from Bathurst. Before we could head them, the cattle
rushed among the tents, and gave some of the sleeping
diggers a bit of a fright. I remember the storm of
"lurid” language, the threats for damages, and so on,
that shocked our frost-bitten ears ; but I believe 30/-
covered the cost of the whole disaster. On another
occasion, while driving a number of young cattle bought
from Oberon and Abercrombie settlers (amongst them
80 head from the late John Hogan), we were overtaken
by a great snowstorm near Tuglow, on the mountains.
We got the cattle into a rough horse-yard at that his-
toric bushranging locality, “Shooter’s Hill,” and for
some days the Author and drovers spent the snowbound
hours at Mrs. Hearne’s hospitable homestead, in the
neighbourhood. My friend, Mr. Phil Green, of
Oberon, will no doubt recall this "snowy” episode, as he
gave us a helping hand with the cattle that day. Many
such instances could we relate of delays and accidents
amid the mountains; but, happily, the hearts of the
"mountaineers” were as warm as the snowy air was
334
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


piercing, and who thinks of the cold whiW heArte and
hearths are warm! Times out of number have rte found
snowbound travellers, like ourselves, welcomed for days
together at some humble cabin in the Abercrombie hills,
“Till the sun looked on the ice-locked door,
And all the world was ours once more.”
The cold-country cattle sold well, but in some of the
Western lots we were on the wrong side of the ledger
at the end of the year. On a mob of mixed Queensland
cattle, bought in 73, we dropped over £IOOO, chiefly at
auction sales, after keeping them 12 months in expecta-
tion of a rise in the market. Of course, like many other
cattle dealers, we had even larger losses, but instance
the above by way of showing the ups and downs of the
business. But no narrative of the old droving days
should omit some reference to that right-hand mate of
the stockman —the genuine cattle-dog. We have heard
of famous “show-dogs” in plenty—some of them credited
with fabulous powers, such as running a hogget through
a keyhole almost, or something equally magical. But,
of course, such canine curiosities are never met with
outside the limits of fiction —or the show. The Author
had a few really good dogs in his time. Two of them
were almost human in sagacity. They—either of them—
seemed to always anticipate a “rush,” and could be de-
pended on to give the alarm at any true sign of unrest
among the cattle. They would “cut-out” or bring along
a straggler as well as the best of drovers. But—
“ Those days and forms are vanished, and now well-nigh
bereft -
Of friends we used to cherish, old relics we remain


Of the ups and downs of drovers; for little else is left
When you call to mind lost chances and calculate the
gain.”
Some Coastal Cattle Trips,
During those "droving” years the Author had numer-
ous cattle trips along the South Coast: to Wollongong,
Nowra, Bega, etc., his clients numbering hundreds,
amongst them Messrs. Clynch, Vidler, Price, Swan,
Bermingham, Brown, etc.—names well known along the
coast and at the inland stock markets. Our chief
"mates” on those "forays” were two merry, free-man-
nered Australian bushmen, viz.: "Jim” Jeffrey (now a
flourishing homestead lessee up Nyngan way) and “Gus”
Nicholls, as good a sample of human native "ironbark”
as is to be found in the droving family. Another assistant
was T. R. Me A. (the Author’s nephew), then in his
’teens, and who has since become one of the "liveliest” of
typical Australian Bushmen. We had several partner-
ships during the period with the late George Adams
("Tattersall”), who for some time, like the Author him-
self, was a Goulburn butcher, and we ever found the pro-
moter of the famous "Sweeps” (G. Adams aforesaid) to
be a man of rugged honesty, as he was a good sportsman
and boon companion. And (in passing) in regard to
those "Tattersall” Sweeps on racing events, etc., while
we believe that unrestricted gambling is likely to sap the
moral strength of the community, still we think modera-
tion in betting, etc., is the natural right of the indi-
vidual, and to put our views briefly in rhyme, we hold—


“They are slaves who dare not be
In a sweep with two or three,
And bigots they who will not dare
To bet a “bob” at a Fancy Fair.”
But to briefly resume our coastal references : I remember
that we first crossed the South Coast Kange and invaded
the Cambewarra valley in the radiance and beauty of
the coastal springtide. The tangled, blooming hills and
gullies, alive with pheasants and “wongas” (“whirring”
in thousands”), awoke even the dormant idealism of the
prosaic dealer of that time. The waratah—the “Rose,
Shamrock, and Thistle” of Australian sentiment —was
-aflame with lustre; and, literally, in that gay month, as
Kendall sang, of “laughing October with bright, yellow
tresses”:
“Softer than slumber and sweeter than singing
The notes of the bellbirds were running and ringing.”
But though the notes of the bellbirds were “pulsed with
delight,” a more practical music was the rustle of the
auctioneer's cheques after the coast cattle were sold at
the Goulburn and Mossvale yards. But of the coast
country, like the Wombeyan caves, should be seen, to be
appreciated, in the glory of the spring. Conning over
those coastal speculations, however, reminds us of the
fall, in 1872, of the old Goulburn Meat Preserving
Works, as, but a week before, we sold the company 150
Bega-bred bullocks at £6 per head. We were lucky in
getting a deposit of £2OO, on those cattle, going “to the
wall,” like several others, for the residue of our money.
The company’s failure was probably due to the fall in the
London market, together with the bad tinning of the
meat here. The Meat Preserving Company’s failure
337
ON THE DROVER’S TRAIL AGAIN.


was a bit of a “staggerer,” as we thought it was, rela-
tively, as permanently based as the Blue Mountains.
But by comparison with the rabbit plague and other
“tares” of later years, our ancient “jars” were passing
scratches, and were ever outweighed by our good for-
tunes, so that now —
E’en “when our hearts are feeling heavy,
And our friends are looking sad.
We think not of our sombre sorrows,
But of the joys we’ve had.”
CHAPTER XXXIX.
Some Lawsuits and Electioneering' Memories
Like a multitude of other folks, the Author has been
on a few occasions obliged to become a litigant under
the civil law of the land. Perhaps the most important
suit in which we figured was that of Marsden v. C. and
W. McAlister, heard before the Full Court (viz., their
Honours the Chief Justice and Judges Innes and
Stephen), in 1887. This case was, in its way, a cause
celebre, being, we believe, the first occasion in our courts
on which a certificate of title under the Real Property
Act (viz., Torrens’ Act) was invalidated by a title held
in virtue of purchase of portion of a grant from the
Crown. It involved the right of possession of 200 acres
adjoining Mr. Marsden’s boundaries, the said land hav-
ing been surveyed on the purchase of the property by the
Author and his brother in 1853. Mr. Marsden had
obtained a certificate under Torrens’ Title for this land
in 1870, but as soon as the same was notified we objected.


hence the proceedings. The verdict was in favour of the
defendants (C. and W. McAlister), and involved the
plaintiff in heavy costs. But “the spoils were not for
the victor” in this case, as our costs amounted to nearly
<£800. Particulars of the case will be found by those
interested in such matters in Vol. viii., “Cases at Law,”
N.S.W. Calendar, 1887. That the case was of some im-
portance may be gauged from the fact that the report
of same was included in the “Sydney Morning Herald’s”
budget of news for England in the ensuing mail for
Europe.
The Argyle Election of ’64.
The Argyle Election of ’64, between Phil. Dignam and
Sydney Emanuel, was a notable event. The candidates
were men of strong opinions, and each spent a lot pf
money and had vigorous factions behind him. The
atmosphere was very heated on election day—the Jew
versus Gentile cry (Mr. Emanuel was a Hebrew) being
improperly raised, and when the poll was declared,
“There was tumult in the city,
In the good old Quaker town,”
and several free-fights and lots of free liquor marked the
result. The figures were : —Dignam, 575 ; Emanuel,
515. Some of the proceedings at the nomination de-
serve notice, as thereby the names are recalled of several
men who were prominent locally at the period. Mr,
J. F. Kenny (Lake George) moved, and Mr. J. W.
Chisholm (Wollogorang), seconded Mr. Emanuel’s can-
didature, while Mr. Dignam’s sponsors were Mr. John
O’Neill (Bungonia) and Mr. Rayner (Goulburn). Mr.
339
LAWSUIT MEMORIES, ETC.


Rayner, in seconding Mr. Dignam’s nomination, boldly
described himself as “No Democrat.” He said the
United States (America) was “being ruined by De-
mocracy,” and asked the electors “to conceive if possible
the horrors of the terrible rapine and murder then going
on under Democratic rule in America.” He thus al-
luded to the Civil War over slavery, etc., then raging
between the North and the South. Democratic Govern-
ment was, he said, a grievous failure, and should be torn
up by the roots. The candidate himself (Mr. Dignam)
was at the best only a make-believe democrat. For in-
stance, he said: “He would fight to the death against
paying members of Parliament.” But Mr. Dignam
went the whole hog on Free Selection. Addressing the
electors on nomination day, he asked, “What would be
the consequence to Goulburn if the free-selectors left the
neighbourhood ? Why, the grass would grow in the
streets. . . . Mr. Chisholm, with all his wealth, did
not pay any more to the revenue than Paddy Leonard,
the selector, there, in his drab coat.” Paddy Leonard
was a well-known Mummell man, and a strong supporter
of “Old Phil” (Dignam). Several hotels kept open
house for comers till midnight at Dignam’s expense.
Some, of the clerics in those days were acute politicians—
though they never sought to inflame sectarian feeling—
and the late Revd. Dr. McAlroy strongly supported
Dignam on public grounds. Dr. McAlroy was an up-
country parallel of Dr. Lang as a clerico-politician. Mr.
Dignam proved himself to be a somewhat rough diamond
in the Legislature, and Dr. McAlroy did not long con-
gratulate himself on the part he played in forwarding
Dignam’s return. But “Phil” sat in good company in
the Assembly. For during the Sixties some very able
340
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


and witty legislators were before the limelight of public
opinion. Amongst them were Parkes, Martin, Robert-
son, Cowper, and Dailey—five great Tribunes; Davy
Buchanan (the fiery Scotch barrister), Michael Fitz-
patrick, Richard Hill, William Forster (Premier of New-
South Wales, 1858-60), “Toby” Ryan, J. G. O’Connor,
and others. Mr. O’Connor (now of Newcastle) is, I
think, the one link left alive of the strong men men-
tioned, and the sterling J. G. O’Connor—he of the “old
white hat”—is one of the very best of the “young” old
men remaining on this mundane planet. The vanguard
of the first Protectionist party was just appearing on the
political horizon at the time, and Sir James (then Mr.)
Martin, in 1863, had formed a Ministry which sought
to make Protection the question of the hour. The
Ministerial proposals were, however, rejected by the
Legislative Council after being passed in the Lower
House, and the Premier (Martin) appealed to the coun-
try. Speaking in Sydney during the elections, he (the
Premier) said : “I think this magnificent territory, teem-
ing with the elements of every kind of wealth, was in-
tended for other purposes than a sheep-walk, like a vast
Asiatic steppe, or a mere commercial emporium, like
some small city of the Middle Ages. There is
a limit to the number of shepherds and bullock-drivers,
dock labourers, porters, and mercantile clerks required,
and there are many other occupations equally desirable
and equally ennobling. . The coal, iron, copper,
lead, wool, and the fertile soil which constitute the
foundation of England’s greatness are here as well as
there, and in a larger measure; but while the British
Islands support thirty millions, the colony is unable to
maintain, in comfort, four hundred thousand. I know


that such a state of things is most unnatural.” In spite
of the force and ability of the Premier, however, the
Protectionist policy was scorned by the electors of that
day, and the Martin Ministry resigned.
The late William T eece, M.L.A., to whose energy and
political tact was largely due the erection of many of the
elegant public offices of Goulburn, was first elected mem-
ber for the city in 1872. His opponent in the contest
was the previous member, Mr. M. Alexander. The
“Cornstalks” making the cause of Teece and Nativeland
their rallying cry, worked to such purpose that though
Mr. Alexander had the support of Sir Henry Parkes, he
was badly beaten, Teece polling 372 to Alexander’s 202.
The “Natives,” most of whom were Teece men, had a
great “huliabooloo” over the victory. The member-
elect was driven around the town, halting at several
pubs, in a four-in-hand decked with blue ribbon; and
the human “Cornstalks” (that is to say, natives of New
South Wales) waved cereal dittos, and exhibited rolls of
leather (brought from Teece’s tannery) to “symbolise”
the real meaning of the return of another Young Aus
tralian. The Teece committee were as lively a party as
ever stood by Australia’s flag and fame upon the elec-
toral battlefield. Amongst them were the late George
and “Billy” McConnell, William Evans, Tom Brodie,
John and Ben O’Donnell, Fred Horne, and others assist-
ing in the fight were John Slocorabe, John Simons,
Christie Smith, Dick Davis, W. Clarke (jeweller),
“Scotty” Noble, “Old” Jack Pooley (a smart old buffer,
too), John Craig, etc., with the Author and other coun-
trymen as “whippers-in.” Mr. Teece held the fort as
Member for Goulburn (and Whip for the Parkes Minis-
tries) for a period of seventeen years, during the life of


eight Parliaments. He was, in fact, the sitting member
up to the time of his death in 1890. At elections of
those times the personality of the candidates was a great
factor in the contest. But the war-cry of “Men before
Measures” was sometimes done to deaths and recoiled on
the electorates, because so many brainy men of diverse
opinions confronted each other that the “balanc ng and
see-saw” game grew to be something of a fine art. This
may be acknowledged by reviewing the rapid succession
of Governments during the Sixties and Seventies.
“Party” seems, however, to be an inherent element of
the politician; and under the more machine-like system
of to-day, as under the old order, “Party” covers a mul-
titude of sins, and “whitewashes” the surface of many
an aspect that conscience would otherwise find foul.
What is one man’s meat is another man’s poison under
Party government, and the system seems to ever ask
itself —
“Why should not conscience have vacation
As well as other courts o’ the nation ?”
CHAPTER XL.
Some Later Sporting Memories (the Turf).
When Goldsboro’ put up his two-mile record of 3 m n.
31 2-sths. sec. in the Metropolitan Stakes, of 1875,
carrying 9st. 11b., in a good field, those seemed un-
beaten figures at the time, —but Carbine was not yet.
When Carbine won his historic Melbourne Cup of 1891,
in 3 min. 28£ sec., with lOst. 51b. up, Goldsboro’ seemed
comparatively a carthorse. We believe that Carbine
would have beaten “the world” in a long race, such as
the Wagga ten-mile event, for a purse of 1000 sovereigns


and a sweepstake, run in 1872. This race, won by Mr.
H. J. Bowler’s bay horse, “Australian,” with Mr.
Grovenor’s “Comet” second, no doubt fell to the steed
who could last the best, but such hard races cannot be
recommended in those days of the Government stroke
and eight hours.
It was a good thing that the long two and three-mile
heats of old times were ended, for it was nothing better
than cruelty to animals. During the Eighties the old
Salutation Hotel, Goulburn (then kept by the Author)
was something of a “hermitage” for metropolitan owners
and trainers, as well as local men. Amongst that bri-
gade were Honest John Tait, Thos. Ivory, W. Forrester,
the Royd’s, and the Jamieson’s, and a straighter lot of
men it would be impossible to find. Many Southerners
will recall the close finishes at the meetings of 1875 and
1876, between Miller’s great little horse “Uabba,” and
Hetherington’s speedy mare, “Crazy Jane,” for the big
Handicap (£150) over the old course in Blackshaw’s
paddock. Other fliers of the time were “Panic”; Fred
Gibson’s fine horse “Marathon,” Captain Rossi’s “Sala-
din” and “Lord Burleigh”; and Rankin’s “Prodigal,”
which, like Hillas’s “Mulison,” Hannaberry’s “Bare-
bones,” and the great “Dagworth,” was originally a
stockhorse. A few years later came Ivory’s “Sweet-
meat,” Royds’ “The Prior,” and Tom McAlister’s game
little horse “Thackambau,” the winner of the double
at the big meeting of 1888. But the late Captain Rossi,
jun., was the Kingpin of Argyle turfites in those years.
The bushrangers purloined (and ruined) some fine horses
of the Captain’s, and he lost more than he gained on the
turf; but the Squire of Rossiville was true grit, and
raced till the Nemesis of dark days overtook him in his
old age. And now the Captain is gone, and Rossiville
but stands as the Mausoleum of the social pleasures that
once ran riot within its walls.
We attended the race for the Wagga Cup, 1874, when
Rossi’s “Saladin” was made a hot favorite. But the
day before the race “Saladin” got a severe chill, and
could only flog into fourth place, the winner being


Robert Ferguson and Chas. Baxter.
A. L. McAlister. Charles McHardy.
Some Noted Southern Athletes.




Ivory’s “Sterling,” with Tait’s “Melbourne” second,,
and Bowler’s “Killarney” third.
Though we may never again see a Carbine (whose win-
nings reached the magnificent sum of £29,450), we will
hope for another racing millenium. But a word on
the Taits and De Mestres of the bush—they who bred
the Barbs and Carbines of the Tablelands, who never
wore sackcloth and ashes over defeat, or went into hys-
terics over their victories. But how many of our sterling,
comrades have gone over to the Mystic “Course 1 ’ beyond
our ken ? And we who remain are not quite so nimble*
as we were forty years ago, for—
“Ah, there’s a courser, a racer c’ercast,
Fleeter at length than the speediest horse;
Old Age is his title: his Jockey—the Past;
And though a slow starter, he’s certain at last
To leave at the distance the best on the course.”
The Runners.
The elders of to-day, looking back to the beginning
of the red-letter days of pedestrianism, cannot
help regretting the cast-iron betting (or, rather,
anti-betting) laws which have practically killed interest
in modern professional running, and other forms of
athletics. But, evidently, we are passing through a
veritable “cyclone” of hypocritical holiness, and the
runners will have to wear sack-cloth and ashes instead of
racing trunks, until the storm blows over. The seventies,
gave us a famous group of runners, viz. : “Scone” Wat-
son, “Jack” Applitt, Frank Hewitt, Charlie Baxter, and
“Bob” Ferguson (the two Argyle runners), and many
other fleet-footed travellers. Those were the days of
even-time on the rough bush running-tracks; and many
of the “peds” laid the foundation of their careers by
yarding-in, on foot, the bush cattle and saddle horses
“for exercise.” One day in the later Sixties, the Author
went out to Yorkboro’, near Taralga, to take delivery of
some steers bought from Mr. Baxter, grazier of that dis-
trict. In driving the cattle to the yards, to cull out


some of the weakest, some of the steers broke away. A
young boy, on foot, took after the breakaways, and
headed them like a streak of lightning. “My word,”
said the Author, “that boy will be a champion: he can
run like a racehorse.” And a few years later the boy
of that day (Charlie Baxter) proved that he could run
a bit faster than the best. We recount a few of
Charlie Baxter’s feats. On June 13th, 1872, he beat
“Bob” Ferguson, of Wingello, over 150 yards, at Goul-
burn, for £25 a side. Time 15sec. ; and on 26th Decem-
ber, same year, Baxter, running in the Sydney Cup race
(three distances), won the 150 yards event in even time
■(ls secs.); the 440 yards in 50| secs., and after falling
in the 300 yards event, finished in the second place.
Those performances were against the best men in Aus-
tralia at that time. Going to New Zealand, Baxter de-
feated Digby for the 100 yards championship of that
colony (£IOO a side), on 9th November, 1875 —the win-
ners’ time being secs. ; and on May 3rd, 1876, he won
a 150 yards race “against time” at Dunedin, running
the event in 14| secs. This was for a wager of £SO.
Robert Ferguson—brother of our genial friend, Thos.
Ferguson, of Wingello—though a very speedy man, was
never Baxter’s equal over 150 or 200 yards. Both
athletes (Ferguson and Baxter) were good horsemen,
“buckjumper” riders, and smart men at pole vaulting,
and other doings. “Tom” Ferguson has always been a
noted figure at the Goulburn Highland Gatherings—of
which Association the Author was one of the
first Vice-Presidents, and which deserves a “pat on the
back” for the great push it gave athletics in the Argyle
district. By the way, the first Highland Gathering was
a “braw” affair, and no mistake; the transplanted Cale-
donians and their Australian scions started to get ready
for the “Gathering” days before the event, and between
the crowds of brawny Gaels, and merry Lowlanders
coming in to the sports, a Saxon or a foreigner had
scarcely room enough to turn his toes on the morning of
Anniversary Day, 1888.
The Author’s youngest son—then a “laddie” of some
seven summers—won the boys’ “Highland Fling” and


“Shean Truis” that day, dancing in the McAlister tar-
tans, which we considered a great victory for the clan.
The late Mr. A. G. Finlay, called by the unanimous
wish of the members to the position of President of the
Association in 1888, was long the right man m the right
place. Another noted performer at Goulburn Gather-
ings in bygone years was that respected police-officer.
Sergeant Chas. McHardy, who, at one of those fixtures,
defeated the renowned Scottish athletes, Donald Dinnie
and Duncan C. Ross—much to the surprise and chagrin
of the last named. We append a list of Mr. McHardy’s
chief performances. On June 6th, 1885, he defeated S.
Smith, at Goulburn, in a match for £SO a s de, throwing
the 141 b. hammer (fair stand, no follow) 130 feet, 6
inches. On March 17th, 1885, at Goulburn, he “put'’
the 561 b. weight feet run), 32 feet 10 inches. At
the Sydney Highland Gatherings from 1885 to 1888,
Mr. McHardy beat all comers at hammer and weight
throwing, and at Cumberland wrestling; while in 1889,
at Melbourne, in a match against E. Kneebone, Mc-
Hardy threw from the shoulder a 161 b. weight 50 feet
3 inches. But perhaps his most notable feat was that
performed at the Goulburn Highland Sports, on Jan-
uary 27th, 1890, when he threw a 141 b. shot 63 feet 11
inches, beating all records, and gaining the Sydney
Highland Society’s gold medal. On the same day, to the
great delight of the spectators, he defeated Donald
Dinnie, and Duncan C. Ross at hammer and weight
throwing. Mr. McHardy has also to his credit some
very good running and other performances, to wit, his
win in the high jump event at Cootamundra, on Dec-
ember 26th, 1885, when he (McHardy) cleared 5 feet
81 inches. In thus reviewing Mr. McHardy’s feats we
recall Scott’s lines upon the doings of the Douglas at the
Scottish sports attended by James IV., at Perth, 350
years ago, when
“Pride of the wrestling match, the King
To Douglas gave a golden ring” —
and rather fancy the Douglas would have come off only
“second-best” if Mr. McHardy had been born centuries


earlier, and had competed on that historic occasion.
It is obvious that amateur athletics should i eceiv&
more encouragement in our inland centres. There is
plenty of good material going to waste, athletically, for
want of a few strong Harriers or sporting clubs in the
larger country towns. A son of the Author (viz.: A. L.
McAlister) obtained some kudos in recent years as an
all-round amateur athlete, and holds many trophies for
good performances in several fields, amongst them being
the award for the High-jumping Championship of Aus-
tralia, at the Commonwealth Celebrations, 1901, etc.
Cricket.
One of the champion early cricketers was Mount
Clarkson —a brother, by the way, of the late Mrs.
Simons, of Goulburn—who kept “the Cricketers' Arms”
Hotel, corner of Park and Elizabeth Streets, Sydney,
in the Forties. The pitches then were nothing like the
“billiard table” wickets now laid down, and as the
bowling was generally underarm “grasscutters,” the
scoring was often as slow as a funeral. The first ‘inter-
colonial (played in March, 1856) came about through
a challenge from the Victorians to play for a wager of
.£500. But a meeting of leading New South Wales
players, held at the “Currency Lass” Hotel, Sydney,
decided to decline the monetary gauge of the Victorians*
and only to play for the “love of the game.”
The New South Wales team went to Melbourne per
the old paddle-steamer “Telegraph,” and Mr. J. T.
Walker, an old Argyle identity, accompanied the
cricketers to see them play for the honour of New South
Wales.
The scoring was anything but sensational—the win-
ning team, New South Wales—making only 76 and 16
for 7 wickets, against the Victorians’ 63, and 28. New
South Wales won with 3 wickets to spare, but in view
of the scores, they had nothing to boast about.
The visit of the first English team (Stephenson’s) to
Australia, in 1862, created great enthusiasm in the
cricket world, south of the equator, and the tour of


eleven matches, all against odds, resulted in six wins,
four draws, and one defeat—this being the match
against 22 of New South Wales and Victoria combined —
the combined team winning by 12 wickets.
The famous George Parr’s All-England XI, 1864,
were even more successful than their predecessors, as
they were never defeated on Australian soil. "Ihe third
team to visit Australia came out in 1873, led by the
immortal W. G. Grace, himself. Nine years had
elapsed since the visit of Parr’s brigade, and cricket had
greatly improved in the meantime, as W. G. and Co.
discovered : for in the first match a Victorian 18 defeated
the Englishmen in an innings with 21 runs to spare, the
latter winning by four wickets.
But though Grace's team of 1873-/4 was not so uni-
formly victorious as previous teams, it gave a great
impetus to the noble game; and three years later, James
Lilly white’s team discovered that a combined Austra-
lian XI were able to defeat them on level terms. The
cricket fever, by the time of Lillywhite’s visit had taken
a strong hold of the country, and a match was played
at Goulburn between the English XI, and 22 of the
town and district. The Author has yet a vivid recollec-
tion of this game, for he left the ground in disgust
during the partnership of Ulyett and Selby, thinking
the locals would never get them out till the day of
judgment. But the Englishmen were eventually dis-
posed of for (first innings) 125, to which Goulburn re-
plied with 60 and 51. Ulyett made 48, Selby 24, and
Poolty 20 for England, and for “us” Tom Armstrong,
of Bungonia, made 18 by hard hitting, in the fir t
innings. It may interest the present generation to recall
the names of that old Goulburn 22, viz.: Messrs. Belcher,
H. M. Faithfull, Banks, E. Gillespie, Throsby, W.
Poidevin, Lord, H. Payten, Rush, Brodie. Pop l1 "’
Armstrong, Donaldson, Hall, Fletcher, Roberts, Cough-
lin, Oddy, Simpson, Fitzgerald, F. Shepherd, and H.
Gannon. Alfred Shaw and old Jim Southerton were the
chief destroying angels against our boys on that occasion
—the 18th and 19th December, 1876.


We might here cite, as a matter of what may be now
considered of curious interest, the following resolution
passed at a meeting of the first Intercolonial (N.S.W.)
Eleven, held in Sydney, in 1856, viz.: “That Mr. E.
Driver be requested to deliver up the ball which he
received in Melbourne from the Victorian players, as.
Secretary to the Sydney Eleven, for the purpose of de-
positing same, with a suitable inscription, in some suit-
able place in the colony.” Whoever has possesson of
that historic cricket ball—if same is yet extant—owns a.
national heir-loom from the cricketing point of view.
All true cricketers would like to know its destination.
Mr. W. Davis, late of the “Gininderra” Estate, was
a great supporter of cricket in the sunny south, thirty
years ago. The Davis team played an annual series of
matches, meeting Queanbeyan, Braidwood, Gundaroo,
Yass, Collector, Goulburn, and Berrima, in turn. Joe
Hatfield, of the old Berrima Club, scored the only cen-
tury made in those contests, making 106 for Berrima,
in 1863. The leading Goulburn players in the Seventies
were Messrs. Chas. Chisholm, Chas. Gillespie, S. H.
Belcher, H. Payten, W. Poidevin, and Fred Shepherd;
and the last named, as an evergreen exponent of the
game, and a born wicket-keeper, deserves a column to
himself did our space permit. Being on a trip to Kite’s,
station (“Woolstone”) near Bathurst, in March, 1872,
the Author was an onlooker at a match played between-
teams from the rival cities of the West and South. It.
was a close game, Goulburn winning by only ten or
twelve runs. At the same time a team of Goulburn
riflemen visited Bathurst, led by that splendid rifle-shot.
Captain Blackshaw, lately deceased. The Southerners
won the shoot, also but only by a narrow margin. We
hope those once annual contests between South and
West will be resumed, m the spirit of friendly rivalry,,
which marked the games of yore. Though All-England
Elevens have, generally, quite overwhelmed Southern
18 s and 22 s, it is a feather in the caps of Goulburn’a-
representatives of the past that a Goulburn district
team “outed an English XI. for the smallest score ever
made by such a team in Australia. This game was.


played on the 24th and 25th February, 1889, and the
Englishmen were put out for the small total oi 37 runs
in the first innings. The Goulburn Eighteen made 124
in their first “knock,” and the visitors got 157 in the
second innings, the match resulting in a draw. The two
chief Goulburn bowlers of that period, Messrs. J. Knopp
and A. Denniss, were in great form, and for once in a
while the Britons found a country team particularly
hot property. In concluding these rambling leierences
to cricket and cricketers, we must record our personal
appreciation of the great assistance ever tendered to the
progress of cricket, football, and other sports by that
sterling citizen, Mr. A. B. Chisholm, who so worthily
occupies the post of President of the Goulburn Cricket
Association. But country cricket will no doubt remain
at a disadvantage, as compared to city ditto, until made
turf pitches are laid down, and properly looked after.
It is hardly credible that the “giants of the game” —the
Nobles, Trumpers, Bannermans, Horans, Turners, Gre-
gorys, and Spofforths —who at different periods estab-
lished the cricketing fame of the Kangaroo, would have
attained their prowess had their experience been limited
to the sort of pitches known in most up-country centres.
There are yet “extant” no doubt, not a few old timers,
who, like the Author, will recollect the famous Aborigi-
nal cricketers who played several matches in Australia,
and then voyaged to England in 1868, under the cap-
taincy of Charlie Lawrence, a member of the first All-
England XI. which visited Australia. This “All-Black”
combination played no less than 47 matches in England,
of which they won 14, and lost 14 j while 19 were drawn.
As they had undergone only some 18 months training,
it will be conceded that the Aborigines showed remark-
able aptitude for the white man’s king of games. The
names of those sable “Graces and Spofforths were, viz. :
Mullagh, Twopenny, Cozens, Tiger, Dick-a-Dick, Mos-
quito, King Cole, Redcap, Henry Rose, Bullocky, Jim
Crow, Peter, and Sundown.


Some Boxing Notes—Larry Foley, etc.
Mr. “Larry” Foley—the hero of a hundred fights—
belonged to a somewhat modern time, but no one who
■ aw o ey ght can doubt that he would have held his
A]f hl r T ght Wit i the best timers. After beat-
S 4! f i Jackson at Gulgong rush, nearly thirty years
67 WaS Pltte ? against the best welter-weigMs of
Atterr h ‘ h r ( , bdng s ™p
Foley 3 rZ **
m going out of his class to meet a man so much supe^or
the early stages of the contest, but Miller’s huge weight
told m the end, and he gradually wore the hglte™® *
end « r S g WM rUShed - we belie ™. towards the flnTsh
fo/“Larrf* “ onclluded . was probably lucky
■Rnf ‘f be Was S®t in g the worst of the deal
Jl T 1 . 1 h ® d ? uttcd tha * Foley stuck to his opponent
ttZtiS* “ °V ‘ b -odet y A m uSra.U U^
pugilist Peter U r nd t r hls r , tuikl0n the famous coloured
P f ’ Pet ?f J ac kson, G. Dawson, the clever Griffo
broughtZt The‘S t^f d b ?? erS a “ d athletes - wer s
orougnt out. The Southern district has produced a few
boxers of note-one of those was WilK Sha^^
Maher, who once fought George Dawson for the 1 I
weight supremacy of Australia and £100 a side Thl'
5888 The l d f^ ed in DaWSOn ' S *«0». i* Sydney t
inPm iP aSt b °f ng match of an y importance fought
w“ I NoTa:n Wa ho?i, a ‘ be d Ween " JaCk ” Ha J es and “ Pr °-
For fVl ».,d b n h g00d seco “d-rate “heavy-weights"
MrSfJSns S",;;-!"/ i-
kn°cked out” himself. The winner earned great an®
NoUn who aTmg administered a good hiding to Mr. (?)
olan, who was an aggressive and insolent bully. { '
352
OLD PIONEERING DAYS.


The Oarsmen.
The Author's first view of a sculling match was that
between Richard Green and Cardlish (in fixed seats) in
1897, when Green won easily. When Trickett defeated
Sadler on the Thames in 1879, that noted sculler
(Trickett) was thought by many in his native land to
be invincible, but in so thinking we reckoned without
our host —and Edward Hanlan. We will never forget
the day that brought the news of Trickett’s defeat by
the Canadian. Blue ribbon had been selling at a
premium the day before, —but nary a bit of that blue
ribbon flaunted in the breeze —for Trickett was out-
classed by his great opponent, who was we think for his
weight the best man who ever pulled a wager-boat.
He°was, admittedly, the Pioneer of the “sliding-seat”
modern school of sculling. As a good critic once said
of Hanlan “The old heroes of the oar may be only com-
pared to Hanlan as the old stage coach may be compared
to the railway system.' But great oarsman as Hanlan
undoubtedly was, there was a greater waiting for him
—a man of iron nerve and muscle —viz. : William Beach,
at whose hands the Canadian met his Waterloo, on the
Parramatta, in 1884. The period of the Hanlan-Beach
race may be described as the GoldenAge of aquatics
in Australian waters ; for it was the heyday of a gioup
of scullers whose doughty deeds kept the world agape
with wonder. Elias Laycock, Peter Kemp, Trickett,
Michael Rush, etc., to be shortly followed by those sen-
sational pullers, Stansbury and H. Searle—the pheno-
menon (whose sad death in the bloom of his youth and
fame all Australia mourned), made surely a famous
array of high-class scullers. But there were a few pro-
saic people, even in those glorious days, who had no
sympathy with the sport. “Davy” Buchanan, the fiery
no' tician, was one of them. He described the sup-
porters of sculling as “a poor, weak, frivolous multitude
madly bent on seeing whether a man named Beach could
pull a bit of elongated wood through the water faster
than a man named Hanlan.” But, happily, the bla-
tant David stood almost alone. Like the drawer of the


first prize in Tattersall’s” sweeps, lie was one in a
million. Mention of “Tattersall’s” reminds the Author
thaii in company with the late George Adams (promoter
of the sweeps), he attended a meeting in honour of sev-
eral prominent scullers at Deeble’s Hotel, Sydney, in
March, 1885. Some n.ce “testimonials” were presented
to leading oarsmen at that meeting, Beach getting £650,
Hanlan £6OO, Messenger £250, and Laycock £IOO, and
there were lesser amounts of which we have notes some-
where mislaid. But ere conclud ng these references we
must recall the memory of the lively regattas organised
by the Lake Bathurst Rowing Club in the 80’s. It was
at the Lake Bathurst Regatta of ’B7 that Stansbury won
his first big race —a £IOO handicap. And so we will end
these references, hoping that honest sport will ever
flourish on Australia’s fields.
CHAPTER XLI.
A Few Notes on Southern Wool-Growers
and Sheep Men.
Referring more directly to the sheep men of
the Southern Tablelands, it will be admitted
that there are here a body of pastoralists wto
rank amongst the lead.ng wool-growers of the world.
Of seme of the Southern sheep breeders (whose properties
passed into the hands of their sons and others) it
wnl be necessary to speak in the past tense, since many
of the original owners are no more. Chiefly amongst
those noted names were the late W. P. Faithfull, Esq.,
of Springfield; the late Hon. Carr, Esq., of “Funny
Hill” and “Chatsbury”; the late Andrew Rankin, Esq.,
of “Lockersleigh”; the late W. J. Chapman, Esq., of
“Lumley Park,” Burgonia; the late Matthew and John
Hillas, Esqs., of “Bunnaby” and “Belong” Estates; the
late S. F. Gibson, Esq., of “Narrawa” station (later of
“Kenmore,” which formerly owned by the Bradley


family); the late Thos. Rutledge, Esq., of “Carwoola, ; ' ,
and many others.
Amongst the elder generation of large sheepowners
still on “terra-firma” are such fine types of the Aus-
tralian squatter as Messrs. A. B. Chisholm, of “Lerida”
station (a gentleman, by the way, whose name appears
elsewhere in this narrative); G. D. Hay, of “Goonoon-
gla,” Bigga; R. C. Cooper, late of “Willeroo”; Andrew
F. Gibson, of “Burrungurralong” ; John H. Hume, of
“Collingwood”; Nat. Powell, “Turralo”; Sid. Shana-
han, “The Briars,” Molonglo; W. Foster Rutledge, of
“Gidleigh”; the Osbornes, of “Currandooley,” etc.;
A. B. Triggs, of Yass district; C. K. Ch.sholm, of
“Raeburn”; and a number of other gentlemen whose
names are equally well-known in the wool-markets of
London and Australia. The various Merino breeders
named, needless to say, have improved their flocks
materially from time to time, by the introduction of
fresh blood, both as regards size of carcase, and quality
and quantity, and value of staple—this reference apply-
ing notably to such as the Springfield flocks, which,
under the judicious management of that great sheep
man, A. Lucian Faithfull, Esq., have made such a name
for the progeny that they are eagerly sought after by
other flock-masters of the country. The Chisholm sheep
are also highly thought of, for their splendid quality
wool, as also are the Cooper breed—the rams of R. C.
Cooper, Esq., being readily bought up by district and
other breeders. The high-class rams and ewes of G. D.
Hay have also been keenly competed for on many occa-
sions. Some Arg}de sheep men have introduced
Tasmanian stud sheep; others have introduced Mudgee
bred; others Collaroy; while other breeders have fancied
the “Moppity” (Carlo Marina), or the Hazeldean
(Leitchfield’s) blood. The Lockersleigh Estate breed
and still stock some splendid crossbred sheep, as also do
McCallum Bros., of the “Forest” and “Rhyanna”
estates; while Messrs. Nixon Bros., of “Woodhouse-
lee,” and Manion Bros., of Middle-Arm, have some
really good long-wool animals.


Latterly other breeds have come into favor in the
Argyle District, including Shropshires; and the progeny
of “Shrops” are considered very marketable—the lambs
maturing early (as also do the progeny of the Lincoln,
or Leicester rams joined with Merino ewes). Messrs’
George Faithfull. of “Inveralochy,” A. K. Maple-
Brown, of “Gundary,” W. Wood, of “Charlton,” and
A. G. DeLauret, of “Wynella,” have, severally, some
fine specimens of the Shropshire breed. The Romney
Marsh is another breed becoming popular with a good
many of our pastoralists. However, the Author’s hum-
ble opinion is that the Merino sheep will give a better
return, and more satisfaction all round to the owner,
especially in the Tablelands Districts, being hardy,
and a great wool-producer. In our (tne
Author’s) butchering experience we found that, as a
rule, the crossbred sheep weigh much better than the
Merino, and are, no doubt, a better carcase sheep, ako
ior export purposes. At the same time some of our
larger men are breeding Merinos for freezing.
A great improvement on our old early day methods is
the present paddocking system; and referring to the
old-time system of shepherding flocks, hurdling or yard-
ing them together at night in the days when the prowl-
ing dingo was the “Tantaloola Tiger” of the bush; no
one nowadays will say such a system was conducive to the
condition of the sheep, or made for the improvement of
wool-producing qualities.
The Author’s first sheep purchase was in 1856, being
a small lot of 1000 wethers bought at Full James’ auction
yards, Goulburn, at 10/- per head. It was a wet season,
and the sheep took the foot-rot badly. We exchanged
the survivors (about 250) with the late John Jordan, of
Golspie, for twenty-two colts, which we afterwards sold
at good profit in Melbourne; and that was the only
consolation we received over our losses in that first
sheep-deal.
The immense growth of the wool trade during the past
seventy years may be partly estimated by a comparison
or contrast of wool exportation from our shores in the
years 1836, and 1906, respectively. In 1836, New South


Wales, which then included the Moreton Bay and Port
Phillip Districts, exported to Europe 3,700,000 lbs. of
wool —all, of course, per sailing ships. Per Dalgety’s
figures for 1906 (70 years after), we learn that the wool
exported from New South Wales (including a few con-
signments from Queensland), approximated 741,200
bales, which, if we allow, say, 300 lbs. to an average
bale, would run to 222,236,000 lbs.; and we have no
doubt that we are then under-rating the mark. Truly
wool may well be described as the superlative staple of
Australia, a result for which we are indebted to
John McArthur, who will be ever remembered as one of
the greatest benefactors of his country. For he is surely
not Australian-bred who does not know that it was Cap-
tain John McArthur of Camden (and Richlands), who
first showed the world that the Australian wool was
superior to the European product, and proved that the
then (1805-10) new land of the Sunny South was
destined to become the El Dorado of the pastoralist and
the shearer in the years that were to be. And as regards
the shearer, all we can say is that while fortunes are
made from wool—and may the shadows (and substance)
of those fortunes never grow less —so long will the
shearer be worthy of his hire; and so long, we believe,
will the A.W.U. and the shed “Rep.” be absolute
necessities of the shearer’s “plan of campaign” for his
just rights. And so, of course, also, must we have at the
other end of the pole “The Employers’ Association
for verily this is an era of organisation, my masters!
But we have no mandate to trespass on the rim of the
future; so we will turn instead to a brief notice of
another matter, of some kinship with sheep. We remem-
ber —it must be all but 40 years ago—the introduction
of the Alpacas and Angoras to Arthursleigh by our old
fvierd the late Mr. Charles Ledger. The removal of
those animals from their native land was an undertaking
little short of heroic, as Mr. Ledger, through the em-
bargo placed upon the animals by the Government of
Peru, had to. brave many perils and discomforts before
he got the “sheep” safely on board a vessel bound for
sunny New South Wales. The animals did not acclim


atlse well in this country, seeming to fret and grow dis-
contented. To mark the enterprising action of Mr.
Ledger, a number of prominent men tendered him a
banquet, whereat great things were prophesied of the
results which were to accrue from the intermingling of
the Alpacas and the Australian merino. But those
anticipations were not realised. Philip Avalow, the
Peruvian who attended Mr. Ledger throughout his work
with the animals—both in bringing them from Peru,
and in looking after them at Arthursleigh—died a few
years ago near Marulan. He could tell many thrilling
stories of the dangers encountered, and the difficulties
met with in escaping from Government agents at the
time. In referring to woolly matters, we must add a
word in favour of the three progres ive wool-buying
firms of modern Goulburn, viz. : Messrs. William Gale,
John Lilias and Co., and John O’Erien —the latter o r
whom is a sturdy Celtic-Australian with the heart of a
Hannibal, the word of a king, and the soul of a hero;
and like his genial comrades (Messrs. Lil'as a:d Gale),
knows the difference between a strand of Merino wool
and a block of granite, as well as any expert in or out
of Australia.
A Glance at the Dairy Farmers' Co-operative
Movement.
The Co-operative movement amongst the dairy
farmers of New South Wales may be said to have had
its origin on the day which witnessed (in 1881) the
registration (under the Limited Companys’ section of
the Companies Act) of the South Coast and West Cam-
den Co-operative Co., Ltd. In that year the company’s
operations were started in premises situated on the
western side of Sussex Street, a few doors south of King
Street, Sydney.
The first Chairman of Directors was D. L. Dymock,
Esq., auctioneer, then of Jamberoo and Kiama; the fust
Manager, Mr. John Graham, now a resident of Bex-
ley. It was largely to Mr. Dymock’s energy and strong


personality the company owed its start, but behind the
men publicly pushing the venture, as is now generally
known, stood Mr. Jos. Weston, first proprietor and editor
of the “Kiama Independent.” In 1886 or 'B7 the com-
pany commenced building extensive premises in Sussex
Street, gradually, at the same tune, producing an en-
larged debit account with the obliging bankers, touching
at one time the large figure of £45,000. While laboring
under this financial burden, the Co-operative Company,
unable to give money aid to their friends, found that a
reconstruction scheme was unavoidable, Messrs. Mac-
Arthur and Co., Ltd., coming into the matter with Sir
William McMillan as Managing Director. Thus was
established, in 1900, the present Coastal Farmers’ Co-
operative Society, Limited, with registered head-quarters
in Sydney. The chief points in the constitution and
methods of this society may be noted briefly as un-’er :
1. Shareholders must be of the farming or dairying
class.
2. Moneys received are banked to a trust account.
3. The Society handles produce, solely on commission,
charging 4 per cent, rate on butter factories’ accounts,
and 5 per cent, on all other lines.
The actual results of the business—yet practically in
its infancy—have been to secure for producers a con-
trolling influence in fixing and maintaining pr ces on
the Metropolitan market, and to reduce cost of distri-
buting to a minimum.
The extent of the business may be gauged by last
year’s turnover, which totalled the large figure of
£556,160.
The principle of direct control of business by pro-
ducers has been actively fostered by the C. F. S., and
representatives meet at regular periods, and in conclave
assembled arrange an annual resume of business. Last
year (1906) the Goulburn and Crookwell Districts were
represented at the Conference of the Dairy Farmers’
Association, by Mr. E. Cunningham, J.P., of Tarlo, a
Director of the Argyle Central Co-operative Dairy Com-
pany, Goulburn. For the current year the chairman of


the Crookwell Co-operative Butter Factory Company,
Limited, Mr. W. J. Leary, is the representative. Con-
cluding this summary, we draw attention to the fact
that the Coastal Farmers’ Co-operativeuSociety, Limited,
has established in Goulburn, a branch of their business,
which, from figures shown the Author, appears to be
emulating the example of its Metropolitan Head Office.
Seme Notes on Forestry.
The Royal Commission recently appointed to inquire
into the question of State administration of certain of
our great timber belts, did not set about its labours a day
too soon, for the attitude of many Parliaments to the
question may have been summed up in the sentencej
“Stupid, unpatriotic neglect and want of political fore-
sight.” Surely it is obvious that the working and re-
clothing of our forests should go hand in hand with
agriculture, and for that matter, with urban settlement.
But whole belts of cedar, ironbark, box, etc., and other
hardwoods and tallow-woods have frequently been al-
most destroyed in the great forests of the North and
South Coast, and inland, to procure half-a-dozen sleepers
or bridge-planks, to satisfy the ultra critical eye of some
Government inspector, or private contractor. We can-
not afford space to treat this matter properly from its
hygienic or national standpoints; but we believe Aus-
tralia might do worse than follow the example of coun-
tries where Sylvaculture has been made a national ques-
tion. To quote a phrase of that Napoleon of Southern
traders—Mr. Charles Rogers, of the Goulburn Em-
porium—“The evolution of Australian timber is only
beginning, in the furniture and wheelwright trades,”
and it would surely be a national misfortune if that
“evolution” should come to an early end through lack
of material. We would suggest in conclusion that from
the standpoint of conserving our timber resources for
both commercial and fuel supplies, that several forests
should be worked—or sub-leased, etc., to individuals—
under Government control; and forestry made a national
problem.


Some Modern Monsters —Hawthorne,
Having inadvertently omitted eailier reference there-
to, we will touch briefly the career of the infamous
Hawthorne, who, for a series of murders, was hanged at
Goulburn Goal in 1874. Hawthorne’s “happy despatch r
was brought about by his happily abortive attempt on
the life of the late Mr. James Slocombe, then a Goulburn
butcher, who, as old residents will recollect, was over-
taken by Hawthorne one January day of ’74, while he
(Slocombe) was proceeding along the Wheeo Road on a
cattle buying excursion. At the point of his revolver
Hawthorne compelled Slocombe to leave the road, and
then bound him hand and foot to a wattle tree, out of
sight of the highway. The ruffian then proceeded to
“slaughter” Slocombe by cutting the man’s throat, but
the latter, making a superhuman effort, broke his bonds
and was lucky enough to escape—bleeding and frenzied
as he was—as if by a miracle. Hawthorne was run to
earth some six weeks later, being arrested by Sergeant
Cotter, of Tuena, at the head of a party of civilians, on
Kangaloola Creek, near Peelwood ; and, as related, Haw-
thorne duly expiated his crimes on the scaffold. One
of this fiend’s victims was William Baxter—a well known
and respected young fellow—a native of Taralga district.
Happily such beings as Hawthorne are abnormal in the
human family; otherwise, if they numbered even one in
ten thousand, surely the reign of “Diabolus” On Earth
would be in full blast; or at least there would be scarcely
need for war to decimate the “overplus” of humanity.
Another reprobate of the Hawthorne genus was W.
Moore, who, mainly through the exertions of Mrs. G.
D. Hay—now owner of Goonoongla Station—was
brought to book, and ultimately punished for the foul
murder of an old Mexican drover in the Bland Country,
in 1864. Moore had been, formerly, overseer on the
Hon. Jas. Chisholm’s “Kenn” Station, while Mr. Hay
was manager of Chisholm’s properties on the Bland; and
it was during that period that certain incidents, brought
to Mr. Hay’s knowledge, led to Moore’s arrest. The same


clever officer (viz., Sergeant Cotter) who took part in
Hawthorne’s capture, was also the chief figure at the
“bagging” of Moore and several other noted reprobates.
As the careers of tho 3 ferocious monsters—Butier,
Deeming, the Governors, etc., are distinctly “modern,”
we will gladly pass them over; and in the hope that, at
length, society will be freed from the homicidal instinct,
we will depart with great relief from our little “Chamber
of Horrors.”
CHAPTER XLII.
Some References to Schools and Clerics.
Such specialised subjects as theology and the higher
education are of course beyond our scope, but, though
not a theologian, the Author numbered amongst his
best friends, several esteemed pastors, who were pioneers
of the churches in the southern districts.
Of those revered clerics, the late Right Rev. Dr.
Lanigan (practically the first R.C. bishop of the Goul-
burn diocese) was to us both the most faithful of spiritual
advisers and the truest of friends.
Amongst the many edifices that attest to both the
religious zeal and building genius of the bishop are St.
Peter’s and St. Paul’s Cathedral, Goulburn, the Orphan-
ages at Goulburn and Albury, St. Patrick’s College, and
numerous churches and convents of the diocese, some of
them structures of great beauty and solidity. When
Dr. Lanigan first visited the Taralga district in 1872,
he had to pass the “Strathaird Arms” on his way; and
we resolved to give the new bishop a rural welcome. We
therefore erected a green arch across the road in front
of the hotel; and as His Lordship was expected to arrive
early in the afternoon, we resolved that no one should
be allowed to pass under the archway immediately before
the bishop s arrival, though this was rather an impudent
“mortgage” of the right of the road on our part. Two
valiant Scottish compatriots of the Author—(both good


Presbyterians, by the way) —named Fraser and Dunbar,
volunteered to “stand guard” over the archway, and
warn off “disfranchised” travellers. It was a cold day,
however, and presently the two Gaelic “warders” came
into the hotel to solace themselves with something warm ;
and while they were away, the Rev Canon Leigh (E.C.)
came along. He was just passing under the arch when
Fraser and Dunbar caught sight of him. “Hoot, Mon,”
shouted Dunbar, running after the parson, “let yer
ainsel just come back again ; do ye no ken the arch is up
for the Bushup th’ day.” Mr. Leigh came back, gcod
humoredly, and on his pleading ignorance, the-scandal-
ised Scots “condoned” the “offence.” Canon Leigh was
ever one of the most genial and benevolent of ministers:
the sort of man of whom the world has always too small
a supply. But to conclude this all too brief reference
to Bishop Lanigan's many works: The Orpin nag s
which the good Bishop founded and nurtured surely
proclaim the loving quality of his spirit towards the
helpless, and the poor; and how fervently he took to
heart the Divine Saviour’s exhortation, “Suffer the
little children to come unto Me.” In regard to the
Orphanages, it were unpardonable did we forget that
under the direction of the late Dr. Lanigan, as more
recently, of Bishop Gallagher, the noble, self-sacrificing
Sisters of Mercy have ever since the starting of the
Homes, conducted the internal arrangements with that
assiduous care, and that spiritual devotion to duty which
are ever present characteristics of the devoted S’.ster-
hood. The Author can do no more herein than pay his
reverence to the memory of the good Bishop, who made
the spirit of self-sacrifice his rule of life, who, either as
churchman or citizen was ever a true guide of humanity;
one of the men —
“Whom the lust of office does not kill;
Whom the spoils of office cannot buy:
Who possess opinions and a will ;
Men who have honor, men who cannot lie.”
The Very Rev. Dr. McAlroy, a clergyman of s'rong
personality, as of wide benevolence, left his mark as


Vicar-general under Dr. Lanigan, throughout the Goul-
burn Diocese. The Rev. Dr. was very business-like in
his methods and politics, as elsewhere noted, and didn’t
believe in doing things by halves. Dr. McAlroy
once paid the Author the kind compliment a
bushman likes to remember. One wintry night in 1866,
a settler on the Abercrombie was taken very ill, and
word was sent post-haste to Gruiburn for the priest
and doctor (Dr Waugh). Just on sundown. Dr. Mc-
Alroy, on his way to the sick-call, galloped up to “The
Strathaird Arms.” It was snowing heavily, and in-
tensely cold. As I knew the bush like a book
at the time, I offered to accompany his Reverence,
and presently we started off through the snow. Mean-
while, Dr. Waugh had passed by; but we took the
scrubs for it, and after a twer.ty-u:i]e ride through (and
over) timber, reached the house a good hour before the
doctor. On our return, Dr. McAlrcy said, in his cheery
way, “Well, Charlie, I’ve had a good many guides in
the bush, but I’ve found you the best of the lot.” We
reciprocated by informing the doctor that we thought
he was the best clerical horseman of the day. With those
two high-minded, zealou? Prelates of the Anglican
Church, the late Right Rev. Drs. Messac Thomas, and
William Chalmers, D.D. (who are both eternally sleep-
ing in the shade of St. Saviour’s Cathedral, Goulburn),
the Author was on terms of personal friendship. To
the great exertions of that pioneer, Bishop Dr. Thomas,
the building of that massive pile—St. Saviour’s was
largely due. Those pioneer clerics required, surely, the
highest fortitude, for the hard formative work was
theirs of founding the spiritual city in the wild inte/ior,
oft at the hazard of personal danger, and amidst sur-
roundings discouraging to an y but tre bo n missionary
and evangelist.
The Theological College, established by the Right
Rev. Dr. Barlow, for the framing of Australian-born
clerics (E.C.), is, we believe the first institution of the
kind founded on the Tablelands. Such a patriotic eccle-
siastical seminary, while calculated to promote the spread-
ing of the Gospel, cannrt, serial y ccnsidered. do other


than add immensely to the dignity of our citizenship, as
it grows in importance. And, similarly, we feel that
the Diocese is fortunate in possessing a Pre.ate and
citizen, so scholarly, kindly, and pubac-spirited, as
Bishop Barlow.
The Right Rev t Dr* Gallagher and St*
Patrick's College.
We would fain that the sprite of a Shakespeare were
at our elbow to help us convey in proper terms our high
estimation of the noble work of his Lordship, the Rignt
Rev. Jonn Gallagher, present Roman Catholic Bishop of
Goulburn. Dr. Gallagher’s wide attainments as a
scholar, and his deep interest in education, aided to an
intensely earnest and kindly spirit, eminently fitted him
to watch over the destinies of such an institution as St.
Patrick’s College, of which Goulburn Academy, founded
in 1874, he was the first President. The College has
achieved a famous record. Barely thirty-three years
have passed since its foundation, yet judged by the test
of the number of its "alumni” who have attained places
in the learned professions, St. Patrick’s College stands in
the foremost rank of our great public schools. When
Dr.Gallagher retired from the Pies.dency m 1887, after
14 years of strenuous management, the opportunity
was seized by the patrons of the school to mark their
sense of the retiring President’s great worth, and ro
express in some degree their appreciation of his merits
as a Cleric, Teacher, and high-minded Gentleman. On
the occasion referred to, Dr. Gallagher spoke in optimistic
vein of the future of Goulburn and the College. "I can
look forward to the time,” he said, "when your city w.il
have vastly extended its present limits; when from oriel
window.... the spectator will overlook rich fields of wav-
ing grain girdling the confines of the city : will be
heard anear the hum of hundreds of busy factories
shaping the arts of commerce; when tramcars after a
new plan will carry visitors to majestic warehouses and
beautiful villas far beyond this College reserve; and


when Chairs of Art and Medicine will be established at
this College These things I say will come.” Those
who were students at the College during Bishop Gallag-
her’s Presidency retain the most t mgard for toe
faithful preceptor of their youth, and ever keep a warm
corner in their hearts and memories for their old “gum-
girt” Alma Mater, of whom one of those ex-students
wrote the other day—
Ye kind old walls who’ve harboured us in golden years,
gone by,
You’re grey, ye walls, and cumbered now, and sternly
meet the eye;
Yet speak to us who long and well your haTowed
lines have known,
Of mellowed joys and sacred things in language of
your own.
Reference to St. Patrick’s College reminds us of
another prominent high-school of modern Goulburn,
viz. : King’s College, which has been fully twenty years in
being, and bids fair to live according to present signs,
(and “co-sines”) as many centuries. As evidencing the
high standard of King’s, it is recorded that during those
twenty years only two candidates failed to ‘matriculate”
of the hundreds sent up by the School. The high prestige
of King’s is due mainly to its founder and late Principal,
Mr. E. W. Kelso, M.A., whose progressive views on edu-
cation have been applied to make the School one of the
best on the continent. The annual reunion of the
“alumni” of King’s —past and present —is a chief social
function in the scholastic world of Goulburn. But the
modern schools have the world before them, so we will
hark back to the fields of retrospect again.
“And again we remember the gleams that dart
Across the schoolboy’s brain —
The song and silence in the heart
That in part are prophecies, and in part
Are longings wild and vain.”
Mr. S. H. Belcher’s Grammar School, which stood on
the site of the present Superior State School, Bourke
Street, Goulburn, was the leading Southern School of


the Sixties. Mr. Belcher’s ex-pupils included the late
William Teece, M.L.A., C. E. May bury (Sherifi of New
South Wales), Chas. Walsh (Prothonotory), Richard
Teece (actuary A.M.P. Society), and many others who
have climbed life’s ladder to some purpose. The chief
classic Goulburn school of the Seventies was Mr. Met-
calfe’s. The Hon. J. H. Carruthers was a pupil of Mr.
Metcalfe, and some of the now leading pastoralists of the
South were his schoolmates. In the Author’s youth, as
before stated, there was but one school between Sydney
and the Murray, and that was of a very primary charac-
ter. Now, however, like the modern policeman, there’s
a school at every corner, and no doubt the schools, ulti-
mately, render it easier for the “boys in blue’’ to keep
society on an “even keel” and keep the young raea in
order. But with all deference to the Educational
authorities, we rather think there has been a tendency
to make book-learning too exclusively the aim of the
State system; and we, for one, hail the advent of a more
varied and practical curriculum with real satisfaction.
In concluding this little “treatise,” the Author must
note his high regard for the respected masters of the
Goulburn Superior State Schools —Messrs. W. C. Tay-
lor, John Lumsden, and Jacob Knopp, who are amongst
his closest personal friends. A notable divine of the
Eighties was the Revd. David Allen (Pres.), who, by
the way, was a per-fervid Home Ruler, and whose fiery
addresses, quaintly coloured by references to “Bannock-
burn,” etc., brought “down the house” at several Home
Rule meetings. Mr. Allen was also, we remember, an
enthusiastic supporter of the Land Nationalisation
League, of which Mr. T. J. Hebblewhite was the leading
spirit, in the later Eighties. It were a pleasant labour,
could we perform the task appropriately, to extend these
“eulogies” to a host of other revered mmisters and
teachers of our acquaintance ; and we must apologise for
this meagre, passing reference to such clerics as the
Revd. Canon Pritchard (E.C.), the late Revd. A. M.
Tait (Pres.) - , the Revds. John O’Donoghue and John
Leonard (R.C.), two of the kindliest and most unselfish
of men ; and last, but not least, to that jovial, sunny


hearted “Soggarth,” the Revd. M. O'Sullivan (now in
Ireland) —“the noblest Roman of them all.” And, in
conclusion, we are sure ail Australians will join in giv-
ing three cheers for Tolerance and Charity—the true
hallmarks of human brotherhood.
A Word on our Bards and Singers*
It would be, perhaps, considered unnaturally “pre-
cocious that a community with scarce a hundred years
of written history should have produced a Dante or a
Shakespeare, and as regards that k.nd of extreme poetic
precocity Australia can look the whole world in the face
and say “Not guilty” ; but, withal, it will surely be ad-
mitted that in “evolving” a Kendall, a Gordon, a Law-
son, and a Quinn, etc.—each a true poet of a varied
note—we have not done too badly. That sensitive, ill-
fated son of genius, Henry Kendall, yet stands, though
many years have passed since his death, head and
shoulders, figuratively, above all confreres as our chief
lyric poet. He (Kendall) was, assuredly, a poetic high
priest of Nature's virgin temples; her elemental storms,
her shy and secret phases: he is the Archdruid amongst
our poets. He was, as Kendall himself said of Adam
Lindsay Gordon, “a shining soul with syllables of fire.”
He touched the innate lyre” of the Australian woods
and mountain ways, and caught the “moods” poetic of
the coastal rivers • and, in short, sang of Arcadian places,
“Made green with the running of rivers,
And gracious with temperate airs,”
in a way that no Australian poet has sang before or since
his advent. How hauntingly sweet, for instance, is his
little “pastoral”—“The River in the Range”—(the
Author s favourite amongst Kendall's poems)—a few
lines of which we quote, viz. :—
“There is a river in the range I love to think about;
Perhaps the searching feet of change have never found
it out ;
Ah ! oftentimes I used to look upon its banks, and long
To steal the beauty of that brook, and put it in a song.”


But Kendall surely succeeded, as far as genius assisted
his desire, in “stealing the beauty” of that brook, and
many another of grander compass.
Adam L. Gordon was a bard much more to the liking
of the young Australian Idea. He was a poetic Cen-
taur, so to speak, whose muse tingled to the music and
thunder of both imaginary and Realistic hoofbeats: he
is, par excellence, the poet of the cattle camps, the
rough-rider, and the race-course. But Gordon was more:
his realm embraced the legendary, the tragic, the lyrical;
though, of course, his “bush ballads,” etc., form his
chief halo in the popular review. Gordon’s “philoso-
phy” was surely simple and manly. He says; —
“Life is mostly froth and bubble; two things stand like
stone—
Kindness in another’s trouble; courage in your own.”
This text was, however, “foresworn’ by the ill-fated
poet, as he died by his own hand at the “fatal age” of
thirty-seven. But his deathless work remains.
Henry Lawson is the Proletariat of our bards. As
someone remarked the other day, the “Sundowner’ is
fated to disappear as Settlement advances, but he will
live long as a vagrant of Literature in the vigorous verses
of Henry Lawson. Mr. Lawson’s humor has, however,
a sardonic tinge which is rather un-Australian, for we
are nationally fusing into a light-hearted, if strenuous,
people, who do not seek to “meet trouble halfway,” or
dream darkly over our difficulties. And after all, “the
worst troubles are those that never come.”
This is surely a crude review; but “Banjo” Patterson,
bright interpreter of the rollicking spirit of the Bush-
man, at his best, as also of the sporting nature of present-
day Australians; Victor Daley, whose Celtic imagery
and quaint epigrammatic style enthralled so wide a circle
of readers; and Roderick Quinn, whose rustic and oft-
times mystical note permeates the poetic air so sweetly—
those and the other half-hundred true Australian poets
of our day—present or departed —will no doubt laugh-
ingly forgive our omissions, and at the same time over-
look this dense “criticism” of that glorious clan —the
Poets of Australia.


To the sister spheres of Music, Australia, within the
last quarter of a century, has contributed not a few
stars of the first degree: In Melba, Ada Crossley, Marie
Narelle, etc., we have shown the world that the broad
sea-girt isle beneath the “Southern Cross” is a natal
home of song and beauty, while in the personality of
Miss Florence Taylor (a Goulburn native, by the way)
has been discovered a pianiste of rare genius. Amongst
promising musical prodigies of the Southern district are
Misses Ella Caspers, Kate McConnell, and Muriel Casey
(vocalists), and Miss Doris Furner, a violiniste of high
verve and prowess. 6
Miss Ella Caspers, yet in her teens, bids fair indeed
to become one of the world's great Queens of Song, and
as music is in her case an hereditary gift, she has thus
tiie happy affinity” of temperament to pulse her vocal
powers We presage with enthusiasm a glorious future
not only for Miss Caspers, but for several other young
vocalists of the Sunny South. To such excellent societies
as the Goulburn Liedertafel, and the more recently-
formed Operatic Society, is due the hearty support of all
citizens who desire to see the world's “rough manners”
softened by the dulcet magic of music and of song. We
have here another word for Mr. A. B. Chisholm who
has so consistently supported our musical associations
etc.—and here also we award our belated “wreath” to
Messrs. Lee Hunt, W. S. Foxall (one of the kindliest of
a hnTnf PerCy h olB ' ?’ Atkinson . p Thorman, and
host of co-operators whose efforts may yet make Goul-
™ the Bou^ h t i he Home of Grand Opera and the
City of Harmony in the musical world of Australia


CHAPTER XLIII.
Big Droving Trips.
Charles McDonald and Co.’s trip to Western
Australia, etc.
In 1882 the late Mr. Chas. McDonald, formerly of Clif-
ford's Creek, Argyle, formed a partnership with McKen-
zie Bros., of Peelwood district, for the purpose of taking
up country, suitable for pastoral settlement, in West
Australia or the Northern Territory. With this end in
view, Mr. McDonald took a “prospecting” trip over to
West Australia, and on his return the firm resolved to
take up two large blocks between the junction of the
Margaret and Fitzroy Rivers, this being the locality
most favoured by Mr. McDonald. Part of this property
was later known as “Fossil Downs.” On deciding to go
out and stock the country, a party of seasoned bushmen
was got together, viz. : Messrs. Chas. and William Mc-
Donald, Donald McKenzie, Peter Thompson, James
McGorge, and Jas. Pickles. The party set out from
Tuena on their great overland trip across the continent,
in March, 1883. They took along 400 head of cattle,,
30 horses, and two bullock waggon teams, the waggons
holding the food supply, camp gear, etc., of the party.
At Nevertire (in Northwestern New South Wales) they
stocked the waggons with enough provisions, as they
thought, to last them the end of the journey, and thence
taking a northerly course, arrived at Cooper's Creek,
Queensland, with the stock and horses in fair condition
and prospects hopeful. They were joined at Cooper’s
Creek by Messrs. Plumb and Marsden, of Blayney,
N.S.W., who added 500 heifers to the mob, as they were
sending those cattle to some country taken up by them
in the West, not far from the part to where the Me


donalds and their mates were bound. But about one
hundred miles from Cooper’s Creek the overlanders had
their first foretaste of coming trouble. A severe drought
was raging in Central Queensland, and as the stockmen
steered the cattle across the drought-swept country the
herbage grew more scanty day by day, aqd further on
water had to be “prospected” for—often in vain. To
add to the increasing troubles of the expedition, parties
of wild blacks made nightly forays both on the stock and
on the camp, and the stockmen had at times to fight a
kind of pitched battle with the savage marauders. We
were assured that the outlook at times seemed as gloomy
and perilous as ever confronted the early explorers in
those (then) arid regions. With all their fortitude and
bushcraft, the McDonalds and their comrades almost
found the elements too many for them, for
“It was a season dreary, ’mid solitudes accursed,
When th’ stockman’s soul was weary, and the mirage
mocked his thirst,
And oft the wily savage—keen of hate and sight,
Harried camp and cattle ’neath the shadows of th’
night.”
They were forced at last to give over, and camp for
several months, owing to the incessant drought, and
before a change came in the weather, they had lost about
half the cattle, and twenty head of horses. When the
drought broke up, the party moved on again through
spinifex country, having purchased a number of horses
and cattle on out-back Queensland stations, to make
good their losses. But it was not till the summer of
1886, we believe, that the party, or some of them, since
all the original starters did not go right through, ar-
rived at the far-off destination in the northern belt of
West Australia. But through all the privations and
worries and dangers of that trying journey, “Charlie”
McDonald was the sheet-anchor of the expedition; and
on gaining the “Promised Land,” the party found that
it was everything that their brave pilot (C. McDonald)
believed it to be on his first pioneering trip in 1882.
The McDonald Brothers continued (as main promoters


of the venture) to manage the properties, until the year
1900, when the McKenzies sold out their interest to the
McDonalds, so the latter are now, we believe, sole
owners of the “Fossil Downs” properties. And surely
never did pioneers deserve good luck more. To brave
all the rigors of drought, bush-fires, and privations; to
endure the stealthy midnight attacks of prowling blood-
thirsty savages; to suffer long periods of illness as did
several men of the party, and to have come through in
spite of all sorts of difficulties after a three years’ jour-
ney, forms a story of heroic overlanding as remarkable
as any pioneering feat in Australia’s annals. It is a
theme worth talking over at a festive gathering of real
proven pioneers, when the pipes are lighted and “ream-
ing swats that drink divinely” are available before a
roaring winter fire in a snug old wayside inn. In s;ich
a scene, at such a time, McDonald’s famous trip across
the continent in the Eighties will hold a foremost place
amongst other graphic stories of great annals of the
bush —the more graphic because the more true. But,
alas ! the lion-hearted pioneer who was the heart and
soul of that sturdy party —Charlie McDonald—is no
more. He has gone to that bourne from which no
traveller returns; but he has left behind him a story
of achievement—a memory of courage and of endeavour,
far nobler than the acclaimed deeds of many a famous
statesman.
The Duracks* Trip to the NT,
Like the McDonalds, the Jardines and a few others,
the Duracks, who were originally residents of the Mum-
mell district, near Goulburn, were amongst the earliest
pioneers to stock country in the far West, and were
the first to take up runs in the Kimberley district,
W.A. On June 6th, 1883, Michael Durack and his
two brothers (all well known to the Author) started
from Mount Marlow, near Isisford, Queensland, with
2200 head of' cattle. They were bound for a certain
block of country on the Ord River, which had been pre-
viously taken up, and had to depend alone on their


bushcraft and courage to compass their very difficult
project. But Michael Durack, like Charles McDonald,
was a born pioneer: a man of unflinching pluck and
perseverance. The party comprised eleven men and
60 horses; and to carry out-fit and supplies there was a
14-horse waggon, and a two-horse waggonette. The
first part of the route, from Isisford to Winton, western
Queensland, via the Barcoo and Thompson Rivers, was
fairly agreeable, but nearing the junction of the
Georgina and Burke Rivers, they were in camp for six
months waiting for rain which at last, to the great
relief of the party, came, when all hope seemed to have
vanished. Going on, they followed the Gregory River
to its junction with the Nicholson, where Mr. M. Durack
was again obliged to halt the stock, for pleuro had
broken out among the cattle, and he decided to erect
yards for the purpose of inoculating the stricken herd.
After getting rid of the pleuro, through which they lost
600 head, they moved on to Settlement Creek, their last
point on the Queensland border, and within a few weeks
they gained the Roper River, passing through a sandy
belt of country which in a way resembled a sea beach.
Strange to say, howmver, this country was well timbered
with beautiful messmate and coolibab. Leaving the
Roper at Bitter Springs, they passed on to Abraham's
Billabong, on the overland telegraph line. At Roper
Bar, the wild blacks one night stripped the provision-
waggon of the party, making off with a lot of flour,
sugar, and tea, etc., but some of this w r as recovered.
The party had now and then to resort to their firearms
to beat the savages off. At the junction of the Ord and
Negri Rivers, the aborigines made another fierce attack,
but after a sharp conflict the wild warriors were com-
pelled to scatter, and in future they kept their distance.
But the blacks continually hovering in the vicinity
of the route as the party neared the country of their
destination, and the signal was sent from tribe to tribe
of the coming of the white men with the great mob of
cattle. The warning took the shape of a cloud of smoke
by day, or a pillar of fire by night—reminiscent of the
scriptural statement of the sign (a cloud of smoke) which


preceded the wanderings of the Israelites in their quest
of the “promised land” as noted by Mr. Roderic Quinn,
the Poet, to whom we are indebted for some of the
particulars relating to the Duracks’ trip. But there is
an end at last, even to the longest, and most eventful
journey; and the Duracks reached their destination on
September the 17th, 1885, having been on the road
over two years and four months —surely a record over-
landing trip. Compared to the work of the Duracks
etc., the deeds of many of our early pioneers pale into
insignificance: for such men as the Duracks and
McDonalds, who, as it were, tied together the two far
extremities of the coil of enterprise from the east unto
the west; laid the continent under toll to their energy,
their courage, and their success in developmg the far
west, and in showing the highest standard of Australian
grit and self reliance.
Some Exciting; Droving: Experiences.
One of the most eventful droving trips of which we can
speak with feeling concern a b'g venture of Messrs. Fred,
and John Badgery, made in the year 1870, viz. : 3000
fat bullocks which the Badgerys had bought from that
King of Squatters, Mr. George Loder, of Abbey Green,
near Singleton. They were a splendid lot of bullocks,
in fine condition, most of them being the progeny of Mr.
Loder’s noted Hereford bulls, raised on his stud farm
on the Hunter River. The buyers took delivery at Mr,
Loder’s “Mirah” station on the Namoi River, some 40
miles from Narrabri. Mr. Fred. Badgery had charge
of the droving arrangements, personally, and he starred
the mob in three lots, going himself with the biggest
mob, viz. ; 1250 head. It was with this lot the great
“break” or rather series of “breaks” occurred, which we
describe herein. A few days after leaving the Namoi
station, their starting point, a camp was made one night
near a dense Brigalow scrub in the Castlereagh country.
Two of the drovers (all of whom were Sutton Forest
natives), were on watch (or patrol around the cattle),
and Mr. Badegry and the others were sleeping. “Snd


denly,” to use Mr. Badgery’s words, “my slumbers were
broken by wbat seemed worse than the explosion of a
powder magazine and a clap of thunder rolled in one.”
No bushman, we might say, no bush-bred child, could
possibly mistake that sound—the sudden, instant
“break” of a mob of frenzied cattle —for anything else
on earth. Disturbed by some vague whisper of the
night—perhaps the breaking of a twig ’neath the sudden
jump of an opposum—the 1250 bullocks had sprung to
their feet “as one man,” and, as if “all Hell's devils
rode after” went crashing through the dark scrub,
trampling all before them. Says Mr. Badgery again,
in his vivid recollection of the “rush,” “I called the men,
and in a few minutes we were flying on bare-backed nags,
ourselves bootless and hatless (for there’s no time for
dressing when you ride at a break), and on we tore after
the cattle. The head of the mob was fully a mile away
by this, and the earth seemed to shake with their thunder
and crash as they swept along, and saplings and dead
limbs went like so many straws before the blind rush
of the frenzied cattle. I shouted to the man in the lead
to wheel them to the right. He shouted back, 'I can’t;
the devil himself couldn’t turn them: they’re stark,
starin’ mad.’ I said,” Mr. Badgery continues, “ ‘Well
come away; give them plenty room’; and then, galloping
out away from them, we suddenly turned, three of us,
and came with a fearful yell smack against the leaders.
This strategy frightened them into giving way, so we
doubled them up, as it were, till the whole mob were
together again; but suddenly the bullocks made another
smash, and breaking into two parts, gave us a worse
chase than the first. Soon, to my great delight, however,
we got into a big belt of open box country, and here,
just as the dawn was breaking, managed to steady the
leaders. We were miles away from the others, and of
course, I had no idea how they were faring. But after
awhile, my mob settled down, and we turned towards
our last camp. It was sundown before I got into touch
again with my men, to find, happily, they had at last
mastered the main mob of the cattle. As, like the
others, I had been out all night until about 4 o’clock


that (next) day, without a morsel of food, I simply
‘went for’ my next meal with the appetite of a famish-
ing tiger. I fully expected that the ‘roll-call’ would
show a loss of at least twenty beasts, but was agreeably
surprised to find that, barring the fact of four badly
crippled bullocks, the break had cost nothing worse than
our discomfort and anxiety; so we cheerfully accepted
the ‘forbearance of the gods.’ ” But, as is wed-known,
if a fresh lot of bullocks get into the habit of rushing,
they will repeat the performance for several nights after
their first stampede. This occurred with Mr. Badgery’s
mob, and for six nights following, most of the men were
in the saddle 19 or 20 hours out the twenty-four. But
the mob gradually settled down, and did a fair trip
to Wagga Wagga, where they were purchased by that
popular cattle buyer, Mr. J. S. Dougharty, being pro-
nounced the finest lot of bullocks that had ever crossed
the Murrumbidgee River.
A Wet Droving Trip.
The experience above recorded was, fortunately, ac-
companied by fine weather, but our present narrative
will be, metaphorically, soaked with water. In August,
1886, the Author, in conjunction with his son, E. C.
McAlister, now of Wollogorang, purchased 550 head of
mixed cattle from Mr. Donald Gunn (now
M.L.A.), of Glenlyon Station, Queensland, and soon
after purchase the mob was started, in charge of E. C.
Me A., for Goulburn, which destination, however,
they never reached. Always on his droving trips, my
son made it a rule to have as chief assistant a very ex-
perienced and capable drover, viz. : the late Hugh
McAleer, of Mummell district, and, as usual, he was
with the party on this occasion. The season had set in-
very wet, and on reaching the Severn River, which was
in flood, the party had to swim the cattle and horses
across—“The men and myself,” says the nartator (E.
C. Me A.), “being, through the courtesy of Messrs.
Purves Bros., of Maiden-Head station, piloted over in


their boat. We found the Severn River also ‘a banker,’
and on attempting to drive in ten head to lead the mob
across, they were swept back again before you could
say ‘Jack Robinson.’” That night they camped a
quarter of a mile away from the river, and at daybreak
the water was ankle-deep in the tents. McAleer had
stripped a sheet of bark to protect the cooking utensils,
and on coming back to the camp in the afternoon, after
taking the cattle to high ground, the water was up to the
top notchings of the stripped tree. After waiting six
days for the water to subside it was decided to travel
up the river; and it took two days to reach Mrs. Fitz-
gerald’s “Edgerton” station, 14 miles, where, after great
difficulty, the cattle were swum across the swirling
river. “In this,” says the narrator, “we were greatly
assisted by two Queensland blackfellows, ‘Tim’ and
‘Towney,’ that I had coaxed as far as the Macintyre
River, and without their aid I don’t know how we
could have got the cattle over. The stream was fully a
quarter of a mile wide, in its flooded state, with a little
island about the centre : and to this haven ‘Tim’ piloted
the swimming cattle, while ‘Towney’ kept them wading
across to the landing place. Both those darkies were
splendid ‘water-dogs,’ and kept swimming backwards and
forwards on their well-trained horses, while the other
men and myself forced the sullen cattle into the stream
getting a proper soaking in the process. One of the
white drovers, was, how T ever, instinctively afraid of
water, and I had hard work while swimming across by
his side to keep him from tumbling into the stream.
I remember a yearling calf was swept dowm stream, get-
ting caught in the over-hanging branches of a tree that
skirted the water, and at some risk ‘Towney’ swam to
the calf’s rescue, bringing it over before him on the
saddle. ‘Tim’ and ‘Towney’ were ‘champions.’ ”
While flood-bound at the Severn, however, we had
run out of supplies, so I started back for an out-station
on “Bonshaw,” to see if I could obtain the necessities
required. While crossing a little swamp, I “struck”
a place where the land had broken in, and formed a
kind of hidden gutter. My horse went out of sight in


a, twinkling, and in making a spring out of the saddle,
I was caught by the horse as he rose again, and the
impact sent me head over heels into the water. I was
badly shaken by this accident, and kept a sharp look-out
for crab-holes afterwards. At the Macintyre, the two
Queensland aborigines went home again, as through
some strange superstition, they declined to cross into the
territory of the New South Wales blacks. “Baal cross
over that pfella,” they said, “big Marra (wild black-
fellow) wait, kill ’em other side.” On coming to the
Namoi, we found it also at flood level, and in swimming
it, three weak steers were drowned.”
After leaving the Namoi,they metaflock of sheep,wh.Cit
had travelled the route the cattle were to follow, and ps
the hot sun coming out dried the tracxs, made harder
by the sheep droppings on the route, a number of the
cattle grew very lame (as their feet were tender through
the travelling in wet country) and as five or six knocked
up each day, it was decided to sell the mob by auction
on reaching Gunnedah. “And,” says E. C. McAlister,
in concluding the story, “so ended as unpleasant a
droving experience as one might happen to strike on this
side of the Great Mystery, though as a slight set-off, we
were compensated by making a tidy profit out ot the
speculation at the Gunnedah yards.”
The Author, in concluding those droving remin-
iscences, would express his indebtedness to that thorough
Queenslander, Mr. H. Bracker, of Moreheads,, Limited,
Brisbane, who has kindly lent photos of the late Jas.
Tyson, and Patrick Leslie, for reproduction in this
work; and in referring to Mr. Bracker’s long acquaint-
ance with Mr. Tyson, we would remark that it was fol-
lowing on a conversation between Mr. Bracker and Mr.
Tyson, that the latter was indeed to offer to Sir Thos.
Mcllwraith (then Premier of Queensland) the free loan
of £200,000, which, in 1886, helped the Queensland
Ministry to tide over a time of great financial stress.
Such a fact throws an interesting side-light on the char-
acter of “Jimmy” Tyson; and shows that the man at
heart was a thoroughly patriotic Australian, who was
ready to come to his country’s aid in the hour of her


darkest fortunes. We would add that the Author, on a
trip to the Darling Downs, in 1880, visited “Toolburra”
station, near Warwick (the Boston of Queensland) —a
place (viz. : Toolburra) ever famous in Queensland an-
nals as the first locale of Mr. Patrick Leslie, the pioneer
settler of the Darling Downs.
CHAPTER XLIV.
The Right Hon. W. B. Dailey and the
Soudan Contingent.
By the death of the Right Hon. W. B. Dailey, in
October, 1888, there was eternally lost to our public
life a mail who was justly regarded as the most brilliant
Australian statesman of his time. Mr. Dailey is as-
suredly entitled to be numbered amongst the few really
great voices and intellects who have thrilled and led the
multitude during the past century, ranking with Glad-
stone, Bright, Thos. Sexton, and such great Britons;
with Joseph Webster, Wendall Phillips, and Col. In-
gersoll (U.S.); with M. Thiers (France), and such world-
famous contemporaries. It will be remembered that
Mr. Dailey accompanied Sir (then Mr.) Henry Parkes to
England in 1870, upon an Immigration crusade, which
paved the way for the success of the Immigration po'icy
of a few years later, and at least improved the geo-
graphical notions of the British masses, in regard to
Australia.
But the great stroke of policy which made Mr. Dailey
famous throughout the world, was his action in creat ng
the New South Wales Contingent, which took part in
the Soudan War, of 1885-86. This was the first move-
ment of the kind initiated in Australia, and Mr. Dailey’s
soul-stirring call to the youth and manhood of the
country, to take up arms in vindication of the quarrel
of the Empire, was answered in a way that convinced the
nations that Australians were at heart loyal to the tradi


tions of their race ; for we realized that “blood is thicker
than water,” and freely responded to the summons
of the Acting-Premier, as Dailey was at the period.
About a score of Argyle Volunteers enlisted in the Con-
tingent, amongst them being Sergeant Morris, Corporals
Sam and Joe Nelson, and Privates A. C. Barrett, W.
Porter, A. Stubbings, R. Horan, W. Barnes, W. Divall,
F. Wright, etc.; and for seven or eight months they had
their share of campaignipg under the burning suns of
Egypt, against a foreign foe. The South African war
with the gallant Boers some fifteen years later, inspired,
of course, a much larger effort, but no greater enthu-
siasm than the departure of the Soudan Contingent.
All classes of the community hastened to assist
in some way towards the equipment of the Soudan ex-
pedition. Some unblessed with wealth proffered other
kinds of help, as, for instance, the offer of the “briefless
barrister,” who wrote Mr. Dailey as follows:—“Al-
though not an agent for St. Jacob’s Oil or other patent
medicine, I hasten to show my loyalty. I, therefore,
beg to inform you that I shall be happy to supply the
Contingent with 100 legal opinions gratis during the
next twelve months.—Yours, etc., XXX.” The maker
of this pathetic and humorous proposal seemed to have a
prevision that after the war the soldiers might consider
they had a bigger claim against the Government than
that covered by the pure patriotic impulse which inspiied
them to risk their lives under the colours for a few
shillings a week. The embarkation of the troops on 3rd
March, 1885, was a stirring function, and many of the
soldier-boys as they marched down to the transport, to
the lively air of “The Girl I Left Behind Me,” were
kissed in patriotic fervour by some of the prettiest ladies
in the land. Thus War, though “Beauty’s Nemesis
ever,” often in its mimic stages disputes with Love the
ruling of “the Court, the Camp, the Grove.” A few
days prior to the troops’ departure, Mr. Dailey said, in
the course of a speech delivered in an inland city: “The
people had shown to the world within a week or two
the glorious unity of the Empire ; the force and capacity
of sacrifice in its remote .dependencies . . that in


moments of peril or reverse, millions of armed men would
rally round and uphold its standard. The Colonies are
the camps and barracks of the Imperial Forces, and
Australians were ready to fight for the Flag wherever
the Foe may be found. Embarkation day would be the
first in our heroic history, and would be invested with
all the circumstances and grandeur of a National Fes-
tival and of an historical epoch.” But the martial re-
sults of the expedition, though not inglorious, cannot be
said to have shed much lustre on our first essay at arms
in the forefront of war. Indeed some people described
the alleged capture of a Soudan donkey, and an Egyp-
tian goat, as the sum total of the Australian achievement
at the 1 'Front”; but it was not the fault of cur heroes
that they did not leave their mark on their elusive savage
foes. And to give the latter their due, it must be ad-
mitted that they were fighting for the patriot’s sacred
cause —viz., the defence of their native haunts and
homes against the invader.
The Other Side of the Argument.
But as we know, differences of opinion will arise in
the best regulated families, and not a few, both in hish
and humble circles, opposed the sending of the Soudan
Contingent. Sir Henry Parkes (then out of Parlia-
ment) was acknowledged as the leader of the anti-ccn-
tingent side, and was soon afforded a fine public oppor-
tunity of airing his views on the matter. This was
at the bye-elechon for the Argyle seat (on the resigna-
tion of Mr. J. T. Gannon) in the autumn of 1885. Sir
Henry stood as an opponent of the Soudan expedifon,
his opponent being Mr. John Osborne (now Secretary of
the New South Wales Public Service Association), for-
merly a Methodist minister. The election was hotly
contested. At the meetings several episodes in Sir H.
Parkes’ career were brought up by some of the electors
inimical to the old statesman, and the G.O.M. of Aus-
tralian politics fiercely resented this treatment. Speak-
ing in Goulburn one night, he said: “He did not fear


the verdict of that great constituency against the mean,
grovelling tactics of the puny, scrannel creeping crea-
tures who had attacked him. . . . Amongst some
savage peoples when a man who had well served his
fellows grew whiteheaded, he was tomahawked to death:
that was what the electors of Argyle were asked to do—
to politically 'tomahawk' him out of public life at the
bidding of men who would never do a quarter of what
he had done if they lived a thousand years.” Mr. Os-
borne (with whom the Author travelled the electorate)
insisted on keeping his famous opponent to the main
issue; and, referring to Sir Henry's denunciation of Mr.
Dailey’s scheme, said the electors "were asked by S r
Henry to tacitly give Her Majesty's Government a slap
in the face, and to expose themselves and the cmatry
to the derision and contempt of the civilised world.”
The polling gave Parkes a majority of 41, the numbers
being : Parkes, 816; Osborne, 775 ; but we think the re-
sult was rather indicative of the recognition of the great
political work and personality of Sir Henry Parkes than
a true verdict of the popular feeling on the Soudan ex-
pedition. But whatever may have been their preju-
dices and errors, Dailey and Parkes were both great
men, whose aims and conceptions were those of states-
men; whose like we shall seldom see again. In those
later da}is within the "zone” of Imperial federation, it
would be, no doubt, considered heretical to oppose
co-operation in the wars of the Empire.
The Centennial Celebrations, 1888.
When Australia attained the first centenary of its
history under white auspices in 1888, it was naturally
decided to celebrate the great event—the coming of age
of the nation, as it were —by having "a good old time”
under Government and civic patronage. One of the
most important functions was the opening of the Cen-
tennial Park, a noble enclosure amid the eastern suburbs
of Sydney, which on the 26th of January, 1888, was
handed over to the citizens. Here trees were planted
by Lord and Lady Carrington, Sir Henry Parkes, and


other personages. At night a great banquet was held
at the old Exhibition Building, Prince Alfred Park,
Sydney, at which Sir Henry Parkes predicted that "at
the end of another century the population of Australia
will be at least sixty millions of souls." A Centennial
Press dinner was also attended by the Premier (Sir H.
Parkes). On that occasion the old statesman said that
"noble as it should ever be to maintain the liberty of the
p res g—itself a beacon of human liberty—he also thought
that a telling essay might be written on the iniquities
of certain public journals. He had seen papers, the
concocters of which ought to be whipped through the
world with a whip of scorpions." But however deserved
might be the application of a "whip of scorpions” to
some journalists in other lands, we personally hold the
highest opinion of the journalistic value and high moral
and public tone of the papers of the Southern districts,
not forgetting the "Goulburn Post” and "Herald,” the
"Argyle Liberal” and "Crookwell Gazette,” the
“Queanbeyan Age,” "Observer,” and “Leader,”
etc., the whole of them clean, progressive,
and ably edited journals. And while on the
subject of journalism, we feel that it would be little
short of high treason against the best aids and impulses
of Australian nationhood if we forgot the grand national
force of such papers as the bright and fearless Sydney
“Bulletin,” the "Sydney Morning Herald,” and the
"Freeman’s Journal,” etc., for both by their high liter-
ary standard and their genuine Australian spirit, those
journals stand as the faithful evangels of liberty and
patriotism. But without detracting from the policy or
ideals of other prominent journals, we think that the
"Bulletin” has done considerably more than most of its
contemporaries to foster a national Australian "school”
of Literature, and has ever appealed to the patriotic
sentiments of the individual and communiijy. Another
notable centennial event was the laying of the founda-
tions of the Sydney Trades Hall on Anniversary Day,
1888. This function was performed by Lord Carring-
ton, in the presence of some 9000 members of massed
trades unions and a huge concourse of the public. Mr.


J. E. West (then President of the Trades Hall Com-
mittee) said, in his address: “One of the great aims of
trades unionism is to obtain Liberty, Pleasure, and Pro-
gress for the industrial classes.” This, we are sure, will
be admitted as a fair and legitimate object by every
democrat in the country. And in conclusion, we ven-
ture the “prophecy” that the next Centenary of our his-
tory will be celebrated by a nation, which, while infinite-
ly stronger in numbers, wealth, and greatness, will be
just as proud as their projenitors of their Anglo-Celtic
origin; and whatever may be the possibilities of Asiatic
invasion, we know that so far as the resolve of every
true Australian patriot can influence matters, our next
Centenary will be honoured by a people as white in racial
colour and sentiment as we who beheld Australia’s First
Centenary in 1888.
CHAPTER XLV
Retrospective.
We have now, as regards this little narrative, arrived
at the beginning of the end; and, agreeably to a modern
adage, viz. : “That every elector of the present represents
a constituency of the past,” we would as a constituent of
the past, make a brief modern retrospect, in cleaning up
the litter of those reminiscences. Let’s see; it is just
twenty jmars since the passing of the great land boom—
that maddest speculative debauch in our annals, and to
which in a sense the Government of the day was privy.
The “boom” was splendid while it flourished—even every
second “street-arab,” so to speak, could jingle money in
both pockets—but when the London money market shut
down on the “spirited” borrowing policy of the Govern-
ment of that time, then came the “deluge.” In a few
months the country was face to face with its “unlimited”
liabilities, and blue ruin. The failures (of mushroom
banking and building societies) in Sydney alone involved
shareholders in a loss of £25,000,000, and the year after


the collapse saw 30,000 persons thrown out of work;
destitution was widespread, and the industrial prospect
was never darker in our history. We seek no moie
booms of the sort narrated. Rather we want a boom to
keep right on. (But the “black” year of ’87, with its
financial losses, was made yet more sadly memorable to
the Author and his family, through the removal by death
of her, the beloved and revered of our home-circle.)
As the world knows, a series of industrial troubles
followed the collapse of the “boom,” culminating in the
Shearing and Broken Hill strikes of 1891-92, which
“precipitated” the first N.S.W. labour party into Par-
liament. The entry into the political arena of graduates of
the handicrafts and of the labouring class would probably
have been considered rank political blasphemy by some
of the “Giants of the Past”; but, whatever its demerits,
the Party has moulded several measures of humanitarian
legislation, badly needed by the masses; and has clipped
the wings of privilege and monopoly to some purpose.
But the Labour Party, with its able lieutenants, such as
Chris. Watson, W. R. Hughes, D. R. Hall (Ms. H.R.),
J. T. McGowan, W. A. Holman, and N. Neilson
(Ms.L. A.), is only one joint in our governing machinery;
and the modern evolution has also been well assisted by
other parties led by such patriotic legislators as Messrs.
W. J. Lyne, G. H, Reid, J. H. Carruthers, James
Ashton, G. S. Briner, and E. W. O’Sullivan
(Ms.L.A.) There are, however, faults and anomalies
in our present over-costly legislative system, which, we
feel, the good sense of the community will ere long
rectify. And the sooner this amendment is accomplished
the better for the proper government of the country.
The South African War*
Of the 18,000 strapping Australians and New Zea-
landers who won their battle-spurs in the course of that
graphic struggle for supremacy in South Africa (from
October, 1899, to July, 1901), between the gallant Boers
and the British forces, not a few fell upon the ba L tle


field, or, to the more insidious, but net l©ss harmful,
ravages of disease and discomfort which accompanied the
war. We are not here concerned with the dntaite ©p
“politics” of the conflict, but whatever its subtending
issues, it brought as a chief result, the establishment of
the British South African Confederacy, which will, no
doubt, prove a grand substitute for the somewhat
primitive rule of the late Mr. Kruger, and the Boers,
who finally, as the Sydney “Bulletin” brightly said,
“went down beneath a mountain of ignominy, and a
horde of Tommy Atkins.” But it will be universally
admitted that the Boers made one of the most resolute
and heroic fights in history. But we would fain pass
from the contemplation of red, red war to brighter
themes as we near the end of our tether. We would
rather, with youth renewed, if possible,
“Make the most of to-day,
Tread the maze of the dance;
Rejoice and be gay,
With the elves of Romance,” &c.
And so we will pass on to that brightly youthful subject:
The Birth of the Australian Commonwealth
Beyond all question the most memorable date in our
history, since that of Captain Cook’s annexation of Aus-
tralia as a dependency of the British Empire, was that
Anniversary Day (January 1st, 1901), which ushered in
the birth of the Australian Commonwealth. Went-
worth was surely premature in remarking that the grant-
ing of responsible government “precipitated New South
Wales (and the rest of the country as it was then), into
a nation”—but it must be reverently admitted that from
the acorn of Government planted by Wentworth and his
allies, in 1856, sprung the great tree of nationality
which matured, so to speak, in 1901. The festivities of
Federation Day were the most graphic and glorious in
our annals. • One of the most agreeable features was the
cordiality shown by the great nations of the world at
the founding of the Commonwealth—each having erected


o’er the path of the official procession through the streets
of Sydney, a grand triumphal arch with a striking in-
scription. Thus the German Arch proclaimed that,
“United Germany welcomes United Australia.” The
U.S. Arch was lettered, “To our comrades of the South-
ern Seas.” La belle France wished Australia “Liberte,
Egalite, Fraternite,” and so on. The Commonwealth
Arch, naturally the finest of all, presented striking mot-
toes or expressions by our leading public men; such
phrases as, for instance, “One people, one destiny” (Sir
Henry Parkes) ; “A continent for a nation, a nation for
a continent” (Barton); “May just laws ever brighten
the homes of the poor” (G. H. Reid). The scene at the
swearing-in of the Governor-General (Lord Hopetoun)
at the Centennial Park, Sydney, on that bright January
morning of 1901 —the colour, the music of massed bands,
the gay trappings of the military units from every part
of the Empire, the enthusiasm of the half a million
spectators —all formed a display which was worthy of the
unique and memorable occasion. Not the least martial
of the military divisions were the score of whiskered
veterans who had received their baptism of fire in the
Soudan expedition, some 16 years earlier. They marched
along as if the shade of the famous Duke of Wellington
was their commander, and as if the glories of the Empire
were in their keeping. Provincial feeling, we remember,
was pretty strong in some districts, while the Federation
Bill was before the electors; and a speaker said on one
occasion that the measure reminded him of what one of
Cromwell’s soldiers said about the first coins minted by
the Lord Protector (Cromwell). On one side of the new
coins there was the inscription “God with us,” and on
the other side, “The Commonwealth of England”; and
on this the old soldier remarked, “Ah, I see; God and
the Commonwealth are on different sides”; and the
speaker likewise “doubted if the Almighty
favoured the Commonwealth Bill.” But whether
the Constitution was divinely ins'hred nr not
in every line and comma of its scope, we have
no doubt of the patriotism and statesmanship
of its founders : and, allowing for all the minor troubles


which accompany the working of a new system, it must
be said that the Australian Commonwealth has pro-
gressed with a minimum of friction; without the least
trace of venality in its rulers, and has added a greater
dignity to the name Australian, at home and abroad.
But to sum up we will again touch our rustic lyre —
There is a flag, a blue-edged banner starry,
That's lately been unfolded on the breeze;
It flies above a nation young and wary,
Whose Homeland is the darling of the seas;
Behold it, sons of freedom, re-united,
It is young Australia's banner, free from stain;
Beneath its folds the wrong shall e’er be righted,
And justice find a home on earth again.
Finis.
And now ere the curtain has irrevocably fallen on the
finale of these reminiscences, a last word ere “The play’
is o’er, and we bid “a long farewell to all our greatness.’'
As premised, we have but sought to give a faithful,
however crude, review of the interior work-a-day life,
moods, and recreations of the Australian people, from
our personal standpoint —the bushman at home and
afield; the trader, the digger, the townsman —our brave
compatriots of old times, and new —with a few passing
glympses into the tragic bye-ways, and the legislative
and civic halls of the past. No more. “The very head
and front of our offending hath this extent, no more.”
But how inadequate is this scant appreciation of the
people whose afliinities fill those pages; who, during our
well-nigh eighty years’ experience, have moulded the
vigorous nation of to-day from the veritable wilderness
of the Thirties. And alas! how few of those who were
the jocund youths of the Author’s boyhood yet remain;
so few, indeed, that in the loneliness of age, each sur-
vivor may well re-echo Moore’s lament, and
“Feel as one who treads alone a banquet-hall deserted :
Whose guests have fled; whose garlands dead,
And all but he departed.”


But the lesson of the pioneers—their unquenchable
courage, their boundless hope, their virile record—will
be the grand prologue to the first Epic of Australia’s
Homer. But what shall be the central theme of that
Epic ? Perhaps, ere long, in the course of the irresis-
tible decrees of the future, Australia shall enter upon
its first national ordeal —the beginning, perhaps, of a
Titanic life or death struggle, whereby the existence
of our white nationality may be imperilled. But our
fervent prayer shall be, that, whatever the trend of
things to come —be it peace or war —Australia, in its
hour of need, as in its hour of triumph or achievement,
shall find leaders as valiant, as able, and farseeing as
those of the early epochs; and shall never lack soldiers
and toilers of the strenuous, enduring fibre of the heroic
pioneers of old times. The outlook is, however, encour-
aging: Union “brightly reigning here,” presides like a
guardian angel over our governing councils; and hope
is buoyant o’er the land. May internal feud ne’er des-
troy that guild of brotherhood, and may the invader,
should he come, find in that Bond of Union the death-
warrant of his powers.
And so we had almost dared to prophesy —but ah! tis
the light of another day; the curtain has fallen; and we
must perforce bow to the inexorable —for verily,
“It is time to be old :
To take in sail.”


INDEX.
Author’s Family, arrival in Australia g
Author’s Father, reference to 8, 10 17 32
Aborigines, The ’. . ’ o’ go
Antill, Major ’ 25
Adams, George (Tattersall) 336 354
Badgery, Henry, Sent ' ’ 3
~ Andrew 222
- J° h “ 225, 375
~ Fred D 375
Barry, William g*
Barlow, Rt. Revd. Dr 364
Baxter, Chas 34V 040
Bathurst Settlers, Early _ 4
Barrett, A. C Ql7
Betts, A. M '.V.V.V.V.V. onl
Belcher, S. H., Senr 366
Bradley, William ! 6 27 30 100
Brennan, Superintendent M. (Police) ’ ’ ’ 94Q
Broughton, William '"' c‘ 97
Bradbury, W., Senr log’
Bombala (1843) \ W'.W''." I™’ 1 ™’ 128
Boiling Down Works 103
Calver, Charles lob 1 07
“Caboosha” (vessel) ’ g
Christie, Captain qq
Chisholm, Hon. Jas 5 361
~ John W ’ qqo
„ wiiiiam 99 4
~ Charles 35Q
pi I’.’ A A ; 351, 355 j 369
Cnalker, John (trooper) 293
Chapman, Wm. (Tirana, &c.) 99 q
Cook, Captain V 007
Cowper, Sir Charles . 3Q2
Cowper Charies, Junr 19, 241! 313
Cole, John 10
Cooper, R. C
Connolly, William 191
Cunningham, Edward ocq
Davies, William Vm
Dailey, w. b ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; ;;;; 3^
Dairy Farmers’ Co-operative Movement . . grg
De Lauret, A. G
Deneihy, D. H. . .
Duracks’ Overlanding Trip q 7 o
D wyers (B urrowa) s.ati
Edinborough, Captain 5
Evans, William 247 289
391


Page.
Emanuel, Solomon, and Sons ??
Emanuel, Sydney «
Faithfull, W. P., Senr b
„ George 281 ’
’ a. L 800
Faithfull Brothers’ Encounter with Bushrangers 281
Faithfull’s Men, Massacre of, Broken River ■ ■ ■■
Finlay, A, G f,i,
Fenton, R., Inspector
Ferguson, Robert and Thomas
Ferguson,
Fyfe, Nixon g- 2
Federal Capital ( See ot o^f2
Gallagher, John, Rt. Revd
Gale, W onS
Gannon, J.
Gibson, Dr. A 99r -
Gibson, A. Q- t
Gibson, S. ' '■vj-'
Gippsland < See Not ® s >
Hartley, 99R
Hassell, T. 19 ' q -
Healey, Matthew
Hillas, John and Mark iix
Hillas, Matthew 2™
Hanford, Dr., M • • • 9 „,
Hogans, The iid ’ q b i
Holt, Thomas, Junr
Howe, Thomas ~
Hoddle, Jas. (surveyor)
Hume, John ’ qn
Hurst, Revd. q- n
Hunt, Lee De Vere tg
Ireland, John °o
Jamieson, Jiihn (Southern Pioneer)
Jamieson, Sir John 999
Jenkins, John 47
Johnstones, The (Annandale, &c.)
Jobson, William , 77
Kendall, (politician) q R o
Kendall, Henry (poet) q ll
Kennedy, Daniel, Senr 2bd ’
Kennedy, Edward 91fi
Keighran, 9 ?o
Lake, Thomas e- 9
Lackey, (bailiff) , fi7
Lang, Revd. John D. qcn
Lamgan, Rt. Revd. William 225
Leonard, Revd. John q R q
Leslie, Patrick (Darling Downs) 000


Lee, Revd. Canon ggg
Rees, Wm. and R. (Bois-chere) 125
Lithgow, William (Kenmore, &c.) ’’ n
Lilias, John 358
Lockyer, Major 5 6
Lowe, Robert (Lord Sherbrooke) ’ igg
McAlister, Lachlan, Capt 4 q on 0/ qm
„ W. T. (Strathaird) .’.' 16, 78 203,’ 224
jy 1 nomas (Yalbraitli} 141 940
~ E. C. (Wollogorang) 337,’ 379
” 348
J*’ £ 347
” 336
TU Al” D Pet j r ri 193, 196 > 198
McAlroy, Revd. Dr ggg
McArthur, John, Capt q o gn
McArthur, Hannibal ’ ’ ’ a
McCallum Bros occ:
McDonald, Archibald i'i|
~ Donald ” ' ' 153
j, Charles (overlanding trip) ... . 371
McHardy, Charles 347
McKays, The 000
McKenzies (Teelwood) 371
McLean, Charles 155
Macqueen A (See' Notes)
Maiden, James 215 219
Marsden, Jas. (lawsuit with) ’ 333
Marulan 4
Milne, T. O. (Railways) 305 303
Mitchell (Major), Sir Thomas ■.‘.V. ‘. . . ! 24
Moran (His Eminence Cardinal) 300
Mort, T. S. 171 iso
Mooney, Patrick (Taralga) 223
Mooney, John 304
Monaro References ’ 129
Moses and Benjamin 12 97 103
Murrumbidgee Country S2B
Nelson, Constable (shooting of) 280
Nicholls, Robert 171
Nicholls, Gus 333
Nosworthy Brothers 108
O’Brien, John 358
O’Brien, Henry 104
O’Connor, J. G 341
O’Donoghue, Revd. John 367
O’Donnells, .The 100, 342
O’Sullivan, John 97 ; 255
O’Sullivan, Revd. M 367
Parkes, Sir Henry 182, 382, 383
393
INDEX.


Phillips, N. C. . Pag6 '
Peters, Joe ... 100, 107
Plunket, John H. 10
Pollocks, The ... 171, 178
Poets and Singers, A Word on 242 ’ 248
Pritchard, Revd. Canon . 368
Queanbeyan (in 1843) 367
Quinlan, William . 129
Rankin Bros. (Lockersleigh) 209
Ryan, Michael s ' 27, 355
Ryans, The (Burrowa) 232, 234
Rynes, The (Monaro) 138
Riley, W. R 129
Ross, David (Glenlea) 101
Ross, Lachlan 22, 150
Rossi, P., Captain 23
Ross, Revd. Wm, M A 21, 344
Rowe, Dr., M.D. . 150, 183
Rogers, Charles .. 216
Robertson, Sir John, K C M G 305
Roberts, J. J. (“Ginger”)
Roberts, J., Senr. 132, 144
Roberts Chas. (“Kinkora”) 23
Richlands Speculation 23
Saunderson Superintendent' ‘ a;-- 821
Sandford, W. . 249, 267
Slocombe, John 180
iSTfe- f“' < att^’ii y Hawiiornei;::::::;;. 147 :
Sowerby, Revd. Dean ■ l-■ ■ 32
Stokes, Alfred (ex-M LA) 97 ’ 107 - 183
Storriers, The . ' 257
Strathaird 195
Taylor, Thomas . (See Notes)
Taylor, George . 29
Teece, William 55
Therry, Revd. Father 55
Tobin, Andrew ... 105
Tyson, James ... 218
Waugh, Dr., M.D 25 > 217, 230
Warby, B 101
Warn, John . . 228
Waddy, Lieut. . 116
Walsh, Chas. H. 59
Walker, J. T ' 150
Walsh, Revd. Dean 102
Wentworth, W. C 150, 183
Wheatley, W H 194, 150, 161
Wood, W 224
224, 356
INDEX.


Page.
Wombeyan Caves .(See Notes)
Zouch, Captain ... . 247, 293
„ M 246
„ H .--291
EDITOR'S NOTES.
Note 1. —“Gippsland” (page 20). Captain L. McAlister
was, perhaps, the pioneer squatter of North Gippsland,
having in conjunction with his brother (Dr. M. McAlister),
and the McFarlanes of Inveralochy, near Goulburn, formed
several stations there in the Twenties and Thirties. In fact,
the McAllister River, and “McAllister Rocks,” the latter
immortallised in Gordon’s poem “From the Wreck,” de-
rived their appellations from Captain McAlister’s connec-
tion with that (Gippsland) side of Victoria. We might also
remark here that the Scottish estate of Strathaird, from
which our Argyle station “took its name,” was for centuries
the home of the Feudal Chiefs of the McAlister clan. It
(the Scottish Strathaird) has several historic associations,
one being the fact that Robert Bruce (later the famous
King of Scotland), on being hotly pursued on an occasion by
English soldiers, took refuge in Strathaird Castle —an inci-
dent referred to in Scott’s great epic poem “Lady of the
Lake.” A daughter of Captain McAlister is Mrs. Mac Queen,
wife of that genial Scot, Alex. Mac Queen, Esq. (Valuer, &c.,
A.M.P. Society, N.S.W.)
Note 2. —“Federal Capital” (page 242). Relative to the
Federal Capital question we inadvertently omitted reference
to the able advocacy in the press of the claims of Goulburn,
by the Author’s esteemed friend, Mr. E. O. Moriarty (late
Chairman of the Southern District Land Board). Yet
though we believe that the eligibility of the Goulburn site
should be better recognised, we feel that the matter will be
ultimately fairly settled, according to the patriotic considers-
tion of our Legislators.
395
INDEX.


Note 3. —“Wombeyan Caves” (page 336). The Caves rank
as the “Star” scenic of the Argyle district. Since the
Author’s first visit (in 1839), when only two chambers had
been explored, a number of remarkable “discoveries” have
been made. Nature has been both peculiarly whimsical and
matter-of-fact in framing its “life-like illusions” in lime-
stone; and its own incomparable “statuary” at the Caves.
For instance, “Lot’s Wife,” “Napoleon’s Figure,” and
“The Cockatoo,” might have been chiselled by the world’s
greatest sculptor, so remarkably do they cheat the imagery.
But, truly, the Caves (with musical effects added, per the
strains of Mr. M. Chalker’s caretaker’s bagpipes), must be
seen —and heard —to be “understood.”
The Author regrets to say that he was unable,
amongst other incidentals, to obtain a suitable photo-
graph of the late Sir Charles Cowper, in time for
reproduction in the First Edition of this work, an
omission which we hope to rectify in the next Edition,
an omission which we hope to rectify in the next Edition.
Our best thanks are due to the following, who have kindly
lent original photographs, from which reproductions have
been taken for this work, viz., Miss F. Faithfull (“Spring-
field”); Miss M. Finlay (“Ardgowan”); Miss M. O’Sullivan
(N. Sydney); Mrs. A. Landsdowne (Goulburn); Mrs. W. Ross
(Golspie); and Messrs. H. S. Badgery, A. B. Chisholm, Chas.
Styles, Chas. McHardy, H. Peden, Spencer Phillips, H.
Bracker (Queensland), and Chas. Baxter.
ERRATA.
Page 47, Line 3: for “Stories,” read “Stores.”
Page 158, Line 9; for “Kenny,” read “Kennedy.”
Page 190, read Araluen (sub-head).
Page 194, Line 25: for “inevitable,” read “un-
enviable.”
Page 267: for “Cooper,” read “Cropper.”


sale id a =
FLEMINGTON -MONDAYS and THURSDAYS.
SHEEP and CATTLE
X
U
O
H
H
<
s^-
u-
&
a
3
o
9
o
it
lO
I
r
o
u
a
CITT YARDS:
TUESDAYS and FRIDAYS PIGS.
WEDNESDAYS— CALVES.
Account Sales
and Nett Proceeds Day After Sale.


«fr&B>
(<•
W
TIMOTHY J. COFFEY,
LICENSEE OF THE COMMERCIAL HOTEL,
CROOKWELL
* * The Leading Hostelry in the Town* * ,
Unblemished Record for Tears, during which
he has held licenses at Rye Park, Grabben Gnllen,
Crook well (twice), Tuena, Young and Cowra.
EIGHT YEARS IN PRESENT HOTEL. j»


Jno. S. LILLIS & Coy.,
BUYERS OF^#
Wool, Sheepskins, Hides, Tallow, Fur Skins
And all kinds of Colonial Produce.
Manufacturers of Australian Furs and Rugs.
Ladies’ Furs Made Up to Any Design.
Old Furs Altered and Remodelled. Skins Tanned.
Jno. S. Lillis & Coy.,
CLIFFORD ST..
.. QOULBURN. . .
St. Patrick’s College,
G-OTJLBTJ^Tsr.
Conducted by the Christian Brothers, uudi r
the patronage of the Right Rev. Dr. Gal-
lagher, Bishop of Gout burn
The n>ost bracing climate in Australia lor
growing youths
Boys are prepared for all Public Exams, as
well as for Commercial Pursuits
Por Prospectus, etc., apoly to the PRESIDENT f


PENBERTHY & DONNELLY.
The AI Cheap and Reliable Coachbuilders,
• • • GKDTJILIBTJIE^nsr
SYDNEY SHOW, 1905.
HONOR TO A GOULBURN TRADESMAN.
(Extract from the Goulburn Herald, 19th April, 1905.)
When an important society like the Carriage and Waggon
Builders’ Association of Australasia selects a man out of the
entire population of this and adjoining States to act as
judge of the coachbuilding sections at the Royal Agricul-
tural Society’s Grand Easter Show, it pays him a compli-
ment of no mean character. When two years later it again
selects him for the same purpose, it shows warm apprecia-
tion of valuable services rendered; and when in the following
year its choice once more falls upon him, there could be no
better proof of his fitness for the work, or his thorough and
recognised knowledge of every detail of the trade, or of his
possessing all the qualifications requisite in a good judge.
This honour has fallen to the lot of our fellow-townsman,
Mr. B. Donnelly, of the noted Goulburn coachbuilding estab-
lishment of Penberthy and Donnelly. In 1902 and again in
1904 he acted with complete satisfaction as judge of the
coachbuilding exhibits at the grand Easter function, and
he has again been chosen out of a large number of nomina-
tions to serve in the same capacity at the forthcoming show.
Mr. Donnelly may justifiably feel proud of the distinction
thus repeatedly conferred upon him. It is a signal mark
of the confidence reposed in him by one of the leading trades
of the State, and shows that his fellow-craftsmen recognise
in him sterling business qualities, a wide, comprehensive,
and thorough experience of everything pertaining to the
trade, and a judgment which is sound, impartial, and based
upon practical knowledge. It is natural after gaining the
diploma, so to speak, of the Royal Society, Mr. Donnelly
should be in great request for district shows. In this respect
he has officiated at Yass, Moss Vale, Crookwell, Taraiga,
and other centres.
A GOULBURN JUDGE.
“The Royal Agricultural Society of N.S.W., Sydney, 11th May, 'O5
“ B. P. Donnelly, Esq., Verner St., Goulburn.
“ Dear Sir,—l am desired by my council to convey to you their thanks
for the services rendered by you in the capacity of judge at the late show.
Trusting on some future occasion to again have the benefit of your advice
and assistance in a similar position—Tours faithfully
W. NEGUS, Acting Secretary R. A. Society (N.S.W.)


W. H. Wheatley
STOCK & STATION AGENT,
Goulburn, N.S.W.
Auction Sales held in GOUL-
BUBN every Wednesday, also in
any part of the State as arranged.
Sales for 1900 were-Over
half a million sheep, and
Oven seventy thousand
cattle,
Sales for three proceeding years
were : 1905-4-35,192 Sheep.
39,929 Cattle 1904 412,793
Sheep 33,820 Cattle 1903
-478,722 Sheep, 80,444
Cattle
The official returns of stock sold at the Public Sale Yards, Goulburn. for
1906, show that out of a total of 190,294 sheep, this firm sold 113,868, being
very many more than all the other selling agents put together.
Out of a total of 36,215 cattle this firm sold 14,890,
In addition to the sales at the Goulburn Yards auction sales were held at
Orange, Bathurst, Forbes, Narrandera, Cootamundra and Wngga Wagga.
. .THE . .
Coastal Farmers’ Co-Operative Society,
Limited.
HEAD OFFICE—SUSSEX ST., SYDNEY.
A Progressive Co-Operative Business.
A. Branch of this ociety hac been established for past four
years in Auburn St., Goulburn, and each successive year
local producers have more widely given it their confidence.
Dairy and Farm produce are handled exclusively on
Commission.
Heavy stocks of best qualities in all lines are carried.
Buyers can rely upon prompt and careful attention. Cor-
respondence invited.
HENRY FRYER, Manager Goulburn Branch.


3a#: r
■ftv
[2s®
■■xes
CASEY'S
HOTELS)
. . AND .
Wine and
Store.
Spirit
Hotel Tel. 2SIO. Bottle
Dept. Tel. 1655.
Corn< r
George and Liverpool
Streets, SYDNEY.
M. CASEY,
PROPRIETOR.
Kiret-class Accommodation.
Moderate Tariff.
tfW Special Price List on
Application.
SH
ms
WOOD & Co.,
STOCK and STATION
Agents,
Live Stock Salesmen,
AUBURN BTRBBT,
a-OTJILieTJIE^ILT,
Sheep and Cattle sold every Wed-
nesday at Municipal Sale Yards.
First-class Paddocks for the Con
venience of Clients.
All Stock receive Personal Atten-
tion, and Classed by an Experienced
and Reliable Staff.
Private Sales Conducted in all parts of the State.
Advances made on Stock and Property for Absolute Sale.
Bankers—city bank, goulburn.


Edward Kennedy,
Proprietor
(Samperdown Hotel
Sydney,
Will always be glad to see past and
present Pioneers of the Sunny
South, and those from all other
points on the Compass.
Best Bpands of Llquops and
Beeps always In Stock.
Note the Address . . .
Off MISSENDEN RD., CAMPERDOWN
C. J. J. MISKELLY
Newsagent and General Storekeeper,
Gives the Best Value for Money in the Country.
Post and Telephone Office,
Myrtleville, N.S.W.
J. & J. DONOHOE
o
AUBUKN
General Produce Merchants,
STREET, GOULBURN.
The best place in Goulbum to obtain your supplies in
Forage, Coal and Fuel, or Farm Produce.
ALF. DEAN —=
The Leading Coachbuilder, and Greatest
Prizewinner on the Southern Line &
It you want a Sulky, Buggy, Cart, or Dray, call and in-
spect before purchasing. Remember the Address —
ALF. DEAN, Auburn Street, Qoulburn


P. McSHANE’S
Wool, Wood & Coal Yards, & Steam Chaff Mills,
Wholesale and Retail Produce Merchant,
Corner of . . .
Auburn and Bradley Streets, Qoulhurn,
Bong Bong and Merrigang Streets, Bowral.
All goods quoted at lowest possible prices. Highest cash price given for
every description of Colonial Produce. A trial respectfully solicited.
P. McSHANE, Goulburn and Bowral.
IF YOU WANT TO SAVE MONEY
purchase your Drapery at . . .
R. S. RUSSELL'S
for BEST VALUE in GOULBURN
R. S. RUSSELL, 83 Auburn St. t Goulburn.
Wright Bros , . .
COACH BUILDERS . .
Established for 25 years.
Goulburn.
Try us for Sulkies . . . You cannot wear them out. . . They
are Cheapest and Best.
Tyres set while you wait by West’s Patent Hydraulic Cold
Shrinker . . The best known Method of the Age. Come
with your Tyres and see for yourselves. Save your Time
and save your Money.
W. 8. FOXALL,
Draper, Milliner, Importer of Fancy Goods, Stationer
and Bookseller, Boot and Shoe Warehouse,
141-143 AUBURN STREET, GOULBURN.
Best Goods at Lowest Prices.
Agencies; W. H. PALING & CO., Ltd., for Pianos and Music,
OOETICELLI SILK 00., for Pure Washing Silks.
MADAME PAPPRILL CORSET CO., Measurements taken.




