

OLIVJSE' CEOMWELL
* AND
HIS SLANDERERS:
BEING
PASTOR D. ALLEN’S
REPLY
MR. WALTER FT. COOPER,
BARRISTER-AT-LAW.
Sydney:
S. GLASSOP, West City Machine Printikg Office,
92 Clarence Street.
1877.




M 3 BTV"S )ft Kf P'Stt 7
Oliver Cromwell and his Slanderers,
BEING
Pastor D. ALLEN’S Reply to MR. WALTER H. COOPER,
Barrister-at-Law.
Mr. W. Cooper’s lecture was given at the School of Arts, on the
14th of November, 1876. There was a large attendance. Mr. G. A.
Loyd, M.L.A., was voted to the chair ; and around him on the plat-
form were Mr. Greville, M L. A, the Rev. Monsignor Lynch, the Rev.
Mr. McCarthy, the Rev. Mr. Malony, and many other Roman Catholic
clergymen and gentlemen.
Pastor D. Allen’s lecture was given at the large Temperance
Hall, on the 24th of November, 1876. There was a large attendance.
J. Rosehy, Esq., J.P., pi’esided. On and near the platform were Mr.
D. Buchanan, M.L.A., Mr. Hill, M, LA., Mr. Greville, M L.A., Mr.
W. Cooper, and Mr. Mountcastle. Pastor D. Alhn said:---“Mr.
Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, —Mr. Cooper’s lecture contains 20
of the greatest slanders ever uttered by the human tongue. As op-
posed to these blackest, vilest, and most untruthful slanders, we believe
the most perfect knowledge of the life and times of Oliver Cromwell
would lead every impartial mind to the conviction that he was one of
the most excellent men that ever our nation had at the helm of the
state ; and that had there been no Oliver Cromwell, there would have
been no William TIL of glorious memory No Episcopalian. Piesby-
terian, Congregationalist, Baptist, or Wesleyan; but all wmuld have
been one hot bed of Popery from one end o l ' the nation to the other.
Hence the array of priests about Mr. Walter Cooper, to slander this
good man.
I. The method taken by Mr. Cooper and his priesthood to
slander Oliver Cromwell is a method long adopted, or taken, by such
persons, to villify and slander the noblest men of freedom before the
Reformation, and the most glorious stars of liberty engaged in that
amazing work. Hence, Huss, Jerome, Luther, Zwinglius, Latimer,
Cranmer, Ridley, Calvin, and many others have been held up to con-
tempt, derision, and scorn by these parties, as having intercourse
with devils, because they spoke of their temptation from him, and
with being villains because they humbly confessed their sins. This
has been the manner in which the priest, Machanoche, with hundreds
of other Roman priests, who have crept into the high departments of
the Church of England, have defamed the honored men I have be-
fore named. Lawyer-like, they have felt that they have had no good
to plead on their own parts, and they have advised “Abuse the other
side ” This barrister-at law, having received his brief from his
priestlv clients, thus proceeded to defame the verv best man E’g’and
ever had to hold htr sceptre ; and whose only crime was, that lie d< -
livared the people from a most deadly design to Romanise the whole
kingdom, and enthral the nation in bondage and blood shedding once
again.


By the same method as this, by which Rome and the Stockivhip
gentlemen have attempted to blacken the fair fame of the noble army
of the reformers and the puritans, some of their company have de-
famed the Prophets, the Apostles, and the holy harmless Son of God
and Son of Man. Because the two first of these were men of like
passions with us, and were led to humbly confess their, sins and im-
plore the forgiveness of their pardoning God, they have been scan-
dalized and defamed as if they had been the basest men that
ever lived, by the same rule as that, by which this barrister-at-law
and the Roman Priesthood have lately scandalized Oliver Cromwell
in this our city.
By this rule of fixing upon human infirmities in good men, and
fastening upon their humble confessions before God, Noah has been
scandalized as a drunkard, exposing his shame to his household—-
Lot has been scandalized as guilty of inebriation and incest—Abra-
ham has been scandalized as having been guilty of lying and expos-
ing his wife to adultery—Sarah, with cruelty and injustice to Hagar
—Jacob with lying, deceit, and fraud—the patriarchs with designs of
murder upon their own brother, and the absolute murder of their
sister’s lover —Moses has been slandalized as a murderer., and out-
rageous- Joshua as a robber —Rahab as a harlot—Ruth as coquet-
ting Boaz —Samson as woman mad, and a man-killer—David
as a liar, murderer, and an adulterer—Job as vile —Isaiah
as filthy rags—Asaph as a beast—Daniel as corruption itself
Jonah a rebel in a rage—Peter as a sinful man, lying, swearing, and
dissembling—Paul as a most wretched man, not doing the good, but
the evil—and so on.
Some of these scandalizers of the Reformers, and Oliver Crom-
well also, carry their infamous and most horrible defamations on
yet further, and blasphemously fix upon the Lord Jesus himself,
They say he was the offspring of an unmarried woman—that he re-
ceived into his company a woman of the town—-that he, barrister-like,
pleaded the cause of another, like her, in the very temple—that he
absolved another such at the well of Jacob—that he ordered his ser
vants to steal an ass—that he continually broke the Sabbath —that
he associated with the very lowest scum of society, publicans and
sinners —that he had a devil, and was mad—that he was a glutton
and a wine-bibber —that he died as a criminal, justly—that he was
stolen out of his grave by his friends, and that he then slipped out of
the way as a coward, without one redeemable feature in his most
ignoble character —that the praises of him in every land, in every age,
bv some in every nation under heaven, is only the same old heart-
organ which one silly person learns of another silly person, and can
only be accounted for by the people being so entirely ignorant of the
history of Jesus, the Lord.
Now, this is the method by which “ Stockwhip ” men ever scan-
dalize the Son of God and his apostles and prophets—and this is the
method by which Mr. Cooper and his priesthood have lately sought
to Vast the fame of Oliver Cromwell.
Well might the defamed Jesus exclaim, “ Woe unto you lawyers,”
u Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees—hypocrites ! for ye make
clean the outside of the cup, and of the plater, but within they are
full of extortion and excess.” (Matthew 23 and 25.)


These are the words of Christ to these slanderers of good men.
I would recommend Mr. Walter Cooper, barrister-at-law, also, to the
stanza upon the tomb stone of one of Oliver Cromwell’s great ad-
mirers, interred in Bunhill’s field cemetery, who was a lawyer of ster-
ling character, as Cromwell also was. The eulogy of his friends
placed upon his tomb, which I commend to our barrister, was as
follows:
“ Here lies a man, believe it if you can,
Who, though a lawyer, was an honest man ;
To him the gates of heaven were opened wide.
But shut to all the lawyers beside. ”
Whilst the slandered Saviour pronounced the above “ woes
upon the slandering lawyers and priests, he fell to comforting the
slandered prophets and apostles, saying to them, “Blessed are ye
when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all man-
ner of evil against you falsely, fur my sake. Rejoice, and be exceed-
ing glad, R»r great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they
the prophets which were before you.” (Matthew 5 and 11).
Relative to the infirmities for which the Prophets, Apostles 1
Reformers, and Oliver Cromwell were slandered, and are so still, we
are told distinctly that they are now washed from them in the blood
of the Lamb. “ These are they that came out of great tribulation,
and have made them white in the blood of the Lamb.” (Rev. vii, 14.)
This washing in the fountain opened for sin and uncleanness, prove
them to have been men of like passions with us. Hence, the infirmi-
ties of Oliver Cromwell, in common with priests, kings, nobles,
prophets, saints, and apostles before him.
“ Once they were mourning here below,
And wet their couch with tears.”
They wrestled hard, as we do now,
With sins, and doubts, and fears,
But have our barrister-at la w and his priesthood washed away their
sins, and made themselves clean in the blood of the Lamb 1 lam
sure no holy water will remove their stains. Relative to the holy,
noble, and godly lives these men lived, notwithstanding their con-
fessed, declared, and deplored infirmities, this has put Rome to
shame, infidelity to silence, and baffled the Prince of Darkness him-
self. Kings, governors, princes, pagans, philosophers, sages, angels,
and men of every nation, name, grade, and tongue, have, and do witness
that these slandered men and women have lived the holiest of any class
of men upon earth. Yea, so severe was Oliver Cromwell’s party in
their keeping of the commandments of the Lord, that such men as
Mr. Cooper, and Dean Lynch have, in mockery of their holy lives,
charged them with hanging their tom cats for killing rats on the
Lord’s day. How strangely inconsistent are these lawyers and
priests to mock the holy piety of Cromwell in one breath, and in
the next declare him to have been an impious and villainous man.
However, such is the self-contradiction, ignorance, and wickedness
of men, whom bigot principles, and malicicious feelings, govern and
control. Malice blinds the eye, corrupts the sense, and vitiates the
soul.
«f.


This smoky glass upon the mind,
Makes brilliant suns look black,
It dims the glittering stars above,
Makes dew drops black appear ;
It casts a gloom over heaven and earth,
And mocks the penitential tear.
After this manner they slandered Wycliffe, The Pope’s agents were
ready for any evil work to move Richard against Wycliffe. They
got him expelled from Oxford, summoned to trial to Rome, and so
on, but God preserved him, They said, “He was the devil’s instru-
ment, the church’s enemy, the people’s confusion, the heretic’s
idol, the hypocrite’s mirror, a sower of hatred, a forger of lies, a sink
of flattery • who, at his death, despised like Cain, stricken by the
horrible judgments of God, breathed forth his wicked soul to the
dark mansions of the black devil.” Such were the tender tones of
the ever-merciless Church of Rome towards the man who had done
so much to bring the Bible and Throne into union, by which he had
shaken the very foundation of the parliament of hell. It may be we 1
said of him, “Even as the morning star being in the midst of a
cloud, and as the moon being full in her course, and as the bright
beams of the sun, so doth he shine and glisten in the Temple
and Church of God.” Under Henry Y., 1414 or 1415, Pome re-
covered sufficient power in our nation to dig up his bones and cast
his sacred ashes into the Swift, floating on to the Avon, and from the
Avon to the Severn, and from Severn to the narrow seas, and from
these to the wide ocean, and thus the ashes of Wycliffe are the
emblem of his doctrine, which now is diffused throughout an empire
upon which the sun never sets, and to many other nations of the
earth. Oliver Cromwell was like him.
Having noticed the unjust method of Mr. Cooper’s slandering
Oliver Cromwell, I will now proceed to notice his “ Life and Times,”
and show the fallacy of such slanders and monstrous imputations.
Carlyle, with others, affirms—“ There is no doubt at all but Oliver
the Protector’s family was related to that of Thomas Cromwell, Earl
of Essex.” From this fact we can easily see that Bible-blood had
ran in the veins, and Bible principles moved the every faculty of
their souls for more than one hundred years, inasmuch as this Lord
Cromwell had pleaded for the printing of the Bible in England in
the reign of Henry VIII. It is recorded that Cromwell, Earl of
Essex, in his youth had made the testament of Erasmus his com-
panion from Rome to England in his travels. The influence of this
blessed book upon his mind led him afterwards to plead for, and pay
for the Holy Bible’s publication in the nation by royal authority.
This was done by the sanction of Henry VIII. in 1538 and 1539.
Here the Bible and Throne met, and blessedly embraced, after being
shook asunder by the atvful thunders of Rome for 325 years, except
in their near approaches to each other in the reigns of Edward HI.
and Richard 11. Coverdale and his colleagues wrote to Lord Crom-
well from Paris on the 23rd of June 1538: “We be entered into
your work of the Bible, whereof, according to our most bounden
duty, we have sent unto your Lordship two ensamples, one in parch-
ment, wherein we intend to print one for the King’s grace, another
for your Lordship, and the second in paper, whereof all the rest
shall he made.”


Oliver Cromwell himself was born at Hemington, April 25th
1599, about 50 years after Lord Cromwell had procured an open
Bible for the whole nation, in spite of the malice and vigilant oppo-
sition of the Church of Rome. Oliver was a descendant of an
ancient and considerable family in the county I have named. His
father was Mr. Robert Cromwell, second son of Sir Henry Cromwell,
and brother of Sir Oliver, who, at his house at Hinchingbrook, made
the noblest entertainment to King James I at his accession to the
English Throne, that had ever been offered by a private subject.
This Oliver, had a very great estate, but our Oliver’s was compara-
tively small. I mention this origin of Oliver to refute the slander,
that he was some upstart from the scum of the earth. As opposed to
this, we find him coming from high and noble blood, enriched bv a
love of God’s most holy book, the glory of our land—the precious
Word of God.
As he was of a noble family his education was of a most efficient
character from the ordinary schools to the University of Cambridge,
where he was a student in Sidney College.
This fact will be sufficient to refute the vulgar idea, that he was
brought up in poverty, sin, and ignorance, therefore unacquainted
with what was right in the sight of God and man.
“ When his father died,” his biographer says, ‘ ‘ he returned home, and led
an extravagant kind of life, addicting himself to such follies as young persons are
too apt to fall into ; so that his mother was advised to send him up to Lincoln’s
Inn, where he betook himself to the study of the law But not liking that seden-
tary employment, he soon returned again into the country, and followed his for-
mer vicious courses, to the wasting of a great part of his paternal estate. At
length he became gre tly reformed, and grew mighty sober and religious, and hav-
ing an estate of four or five hundred pounds per annum, left him by Sir Robert
Steward, his uncle by his mother’s side, he married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir
James Boucher.
After his reformation, he adhered for some time to the Church of England,
very devoutly attending on the public service, but at length falling into the hands
of some puritans, he became a zealous friend to that party, frequently entertain-
ing their ministers at bis house. At this time he is said to have been so scrupu-
lously just, that having some years before won thirty pounds of Mr. Oalton at
play, he now paid them back again, telling him that he got it by indirect and un-
lawful means, and that it would be a sin in him to keep it any longer.
We hear nothing of his acting in a public capacity till the year 1628, when
he was one of the Committee of Religion in King Charles’s third parliament, and
gave information to the house, that the Bishop of Winchester countenanced some
who preached downright popery, and that it was by his means that Dr. Manwar-
ing was promoted to a rich living ; ” concluding, “ if these be the steps to Church
preferment, what are we shortly to expect ? ”
This will fully refute the slander that his reformation was from
mercenary motives—what did he gain by it 7 And what was he
likely to gain by it ? His future positions were unthought of by him-
self, or others ; and he joined the National Church, from which he
received nothing but abuse afterwards.
Having won from Mr. Gallon £3O in the days of his youthful
folly, after his reformation he returns it to that gentleman. Does
this look like acting from mercenary motives ? Would Mr. Cooper
and his priesthood do this 7 lam sure they would not.
Out of these flowers the bees of sincerity and love gather honey
—the honey of divine grace; but his slanderers, like spiders, make
their poison from the same opening rose, which, notwithstand-
ing its beauty and fragrance, is not without its thorn ; and


“ Why should we look for happiness,
In this -wide world forlorn ;
Or seek amid the wilderness,
A rose without a thorn.”
The Romanizing tendencies of Charles 1., with the influence of
his Papistical wife, and the fiery persecution of their Archbishop
Land, who sought to silence every evangelical clergyman in the
Church, and put the discenters to death, led O. C., after his college
education and conversion, to think of going to America, with many
others. His biographer says—
“ The power of Archbishop I.and growing grievous to the puritans, he being
very severe in his proceedings against them, many of them began to think of tak
ing refuge in foreign plantations, and such numbers of families actually tram
ported themselves, that the Government at length taking umbrage at it, pub-
lished a proclamation to “ restrain the disorderly transporting his majesty’s sub-
jects to the plantations in America, without a royal license.” Mr. Oliver Crom-
well, together with Sir Matthew Boynton, Sir William Constable, Sir Arthur
Haslerigg, Mr. John Hampden, and several other gentlemen were preparing to re-
move themselves, and were actually embarked for that purpose, but wmre pre-
vented by the said proclamation, and the following Order of Council. —“ That the
Lord Trersurer of England should take speedy and effectual course for the stay of
eight ships now in the Hiver Thames, prepared to go for New England, and should
likewise give order for the putting on land all the passengers and provisions there-
in intended for the voyage. ” And thus Mr. Cromwell’s voyage to New England
was prevented.”
This fact clearly denies the slander, that he had designs to get
into power, down with the king— and make himself.
Here we have a high spirited man just brought to God by sav-
ing grace, pining to be allowed to worship according to the dicta-
tions of the Spirit, and Holy Word, finding that King and Chief
Bishop will not permit him to do so, neither in his Church nor in his
Chapel. He resolves, with hundreds of pilgrim fathers, to go to a
British foreign colony, where he might do so, and is prevented and
thrust back, and made to live beneath a tyrant’s hand. Does this
look like mercenary motives, or hypocritical designs, or wicked in-
tentions ? If it was wicked for Israel to wish to leave the tyrant king
of Egypt, to worship God in the wilderness, then the slanderers of
Oliver Cromwell are right ; but if otherwise, they are guilty of
the foulest calumny ever cast upon a good man since Cain slew
his righteous brother Abel.
In the preface to the celebrated “ Charnock’s Works and His
Life,” his author says—
“ In 1641, the three kingdoms had been moved by the repoits of the Popish
massacres in Ireland, in which it was said 200,000 Protestants were put to death.
In 1642 Charles had made his attempt to sieze the ‘ five members,’ and soon after
the civil war began, and the king had rather the worst of it at the Battle of Edge
Hill.”
Herbert sang—-
1 ‘ Religion stands on tip-toe in our land,
Ready to pass to the American strand.”
This was the circumstance which brought Hampden and Oliver
Cromwell into friendly associations, and not, as his slanderers
affirm, “ This junction with Hampden was merely to seek popularity ”
—so far is this libel from being true—that it is indisputably true,
that he first joined with Hampton to escape from the bands of their
tyrant, King and Bishop, by fleeing to America.


These, with others, havinsr been detained, the next we hear of
Oliver Cromwell is as follows :
“ About the year 1638, the King and some lords became undertakers for
draining the Fen-lands in Lincolnshire, and the Isle of Ely. This project was op-
posed by several, chiefly by the town of Cambridge, and Mr. Oliver Cromwell
boldly headed this party against the undertakers for draining the Fens. By this
means, and by promising his further assistance in their behalf, he got to be elected
burgess for the town of Cambridge, in 1640, to serve in the parliament which was
afterwards called the Long.”
In his entrance into Parliament, one of the first things he did
was to take part with members in an endeavour to stop the King and
Bishop in their course of persecution, by which so many ministers of
the Church of England were prevented from preaching some of the
39 articles, which they had taken a solemn oath to preach in the
name of the Holy Ghost. Just think of a King and Bishop taking
an oath of thousands of Clergymen to preach the doctrines of the Refor-
mation, then sending them to prison, poverty, and death, for doing
so. This roused the indignation of the nation and those who, like
Oliver Cromwell and Hampden, were not allowed to go to America
and elsewhere.
They tried in Parliament to prevent this imposition of perjury
upon the Clergy in the oath relating to clerical subscriptions. Having
sworn to preach the doctrines of the Reformation, and then were
prohibited from doing so. The 17th article was especially referred
to in these horrible prohibitions of the King and Bishop—Charles and
Laud. That is the article upon Divine predestination and free grace,
which all Romish Kings and Bishops so inveterately hate, being so op-
posed to their merits of good works, &c.
This made Francis Rouse, Esq., in the debates in Parliament
in which Oliver Cromwell took such an active part say—•
“ Mr Speaker, we are in great danger by a new heresy in our
land —a heresy which makes the sovereign will of God, lackey to the
will of man ; set the sheep to keep the shepherd, and makes mortal
seed of the immortal God.”
It is said that at one time when Sir Thomas Chichely and Mr.
Worwick were talking with Oliver Cromwell in the House about the
affairs of religion he said “ I can tell you sirs, what I would not
have, though I cannot tell you what I would.” From these remon-
strances in Parliament the King and Bishop promised to desist when
Oliver Cromwell said to Lord Falkland— “ If the remonstrance had
not pased, he would have sold all he had the next morning, and never
have seen England more, and he knew many honest men of the same
resolution.”
Here we have all the slanders about his hypocrisy, mercenary
designs, and wicked plots against the king, for ever swept from the
lips of his defamers, and the true cause of his rising with the people
en masse , which was the deadly designs of King and Bishop, with
many Roman agents, to stamp out the Reformation in England, and
set up the altars and idols of Rome in our land once again. Rome
had only adopted a new plan to gain the same end as that aimed at
by the Armada and the powder plot. To Oliver Cromwell we owe
the nation’s deliverance from this new plot of the blood-thirsty
Church of Rome.


The celebrated church clergyman, Dr. Sibes, was one of the
thousands who suffered under these horrible proceedings of the
King and Archbishop. In the first of his 6fch volumes, page 63, it is
said, “ While churchmen of the school of Laud would have men re-
gard transubstantiation as a school nicety, bowing to the table of the
Lord as becoming reverence, images in churches, worthy commemo-
ration, sacerdotal absolution, and confession to a priest, as proper
things, the Lord’s supper, not as a sacrament, but as a sacrifice, Dr.
Sibes protested, and was driven from his Church and home, and died
before Oliver Cromwell had delivered the nation from such Roman
idolatry and monstrous tyranny.
I will here read his account of performing mass, pages 64
and 65.
“ On Sunday, the 16th of January, 1630-1, a new church was opened—St.
Catherine Creed—in Leadenhall-street. Laud, and a number of his clergymen,
performed the consecration of it. As Laud approached the door they sang, “ Open,
open, ye everlasting doors, that the King of dory may enter in.” Entering, he
pronounced it holy, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy G-host. He cast
dust into the air as he went up to the chancel. When he came to the table or
altar he bowed to it several times. Coming up to it, he bowed seven times. Lift-
ing the napkin, he bowed three times three, and stepped back, pretending to be
struck with awe. He went through the same performance of three times three
low bows, and stepping back at the uncovering of the cup.”
Thus ended thefarceof Archbishop Laud’s mass-mountebankism.
We have another clergyman of the Church—F. A. Toplady—who
from page 251 to 252 of his works, giving a long account of the King
and Bishop imposing silence upon the doctrines of the Reformation,
and introducing Roman doctrines and idolatry in their stead in the
National Church of England, and that for this reason both lost their
heads. This writer produces extracts of copies of letters, found in
Land’s papers at his trial, which were addressed to the Father of the
Jesuits at Brussels, which proves that Laud was of that awful frater-
nity, though made an Archbishop of the Church of England by
Charles I. and his Roman Catholic Queen. Can we wonder that Oliver
and the nation should deliver themselves from tyrants
like these 1 ? I say again, had there been no Oliver Cromwell to de-
lithr the nation then, there would have been no place in England
thirty five years after, for William 111., of glorious memory. Free-
dffffl'by Oliver Cromwell was the foundation on which the liberty by
William 111. was founded. As the foundation of a house, and the
roots of tree are of the first and most importance, even so was the
deliverance of the nation by Oliver Cromwell of the most importance
in the glorious freedom we now enjoy.
‘ lorn ,7.-;rro(.. Hail great and noble man,
odi mo u j<; iv;;-: v, Who laid the tyrants low,
? ■. j i;: ; : j ] ; y - YV uu idiu tuc uj'iaiioa hjw 9
He overturned the plots of Eome,
i 1 And conquered every foe.
■ J jCti J ! ft)
. Lst US ; noffglance at the tyranny of Charles in civil affairs,
united with this tyranny in church, or ecclesiastical department.
Lord Macaulay says : —“ Theories tending to Turkish despotism
were in fashion at White. Had ” From p. o 4 he proceeds to show that
Charles dispersed four or five houses of Parliament because they
would not sanction his tyianny and despotism in Church and State.
He ruled as a despot in violation of the constitution of the realm for
10


many years. He raised taxes in a tyrannical and oppressive way, in,
spite of the Parliament and remonstrance of his people. He bor-
rowed hundreds of thousands of pounds from his richer subjects,
whom he never paid or intended to pay.
Macaulay says, p. 84: “It is proved by the testimony of the
King’s most strenuous supporters, that during this part of ins reign
the provisions of the petition of right were violated by him, not oc-
casionally, but constantly, and on system, that a large part of the
revenue was raised without any legal authority, and that persons
obnoxious to the Government languished for many years in prison
without being ever called upon to plead before any tribunal.”
“ For these things history must hold the King himself chiefly
responsible. From the time of his third Parliament he was his own
prime minister.”
This was the King’s despotism in the civil concerns of the
nation.
Scorning the slanderous imputations cast upon Oliver Cromwell
by Mr. Cooper and his priesthood, we affirm, fearless of contradiction,
that the determination of the King and Archbishop Laud to Romanize
the Church, and thus by despotism to rule the state, justified Oliver
Cromwell and the commonwealth in their beheading both of them
as traitors to a Protestant nation, seeing that both of them were
sworn to maintain the civil rights and Protestant religion in their
entirety in the nation. Especially was Oliver Cromwell with the sixty
representatives of the people, who signed for the beheading of the
King, justified from the consideration of the fact that he had not only
violated the constitution of Church and State by'Roman plots, but
he had taken up his sword and slain many of his subjects, whose only
offence was, that they would not submit to his violations of the con-
stitution of the nation.
The law of God in his moral government of the nation is,—
“ He who sheds man’s blood,
By man shall his blood be shed.”
If a member of the body mortifies it must be cut off to save the
other parts alive.
As we have cleared Oliver Cromwell from these slanders in con-
nection with the commonwealth, relative to the proceedings in the
centre of the nation, let us notice his doings in other parts and
foreign lands.
Let us turn to Scotland—-Macaulay says, p. p. 98and 94 : “ Now,
however, Charles and Laud determined to fores on the Scots the
English liturgy, or rather a liturgy which wherein it differed from that
of England—differed in the judgment of all rigid Protestants for the
worse- To this step, taken in the mere wantonness of tyranny and
criminal ignorance, or more criminal contempt of public feeling, our
country owes her freedom, for the whole nation was in arms ; the
English people sympathised with the religious feeling of the
insurgents.”
True men here were with Oliver Cromwell.
Let us now turn to Ireland, and look at the absolute need of the
extreme measures Oliver Cromwell took on the behalf of the common-
wealth in that land, for which he has been so foully slandered by the
foes of freedom. Just before Oliver Cromwell was sent to Ireland,


“ Pope Urban VII. sent the following bull to his Irish subjects, which en-
dorsed the awful massacre in 164,1. —“ Urbanus Octavius, &c.” —“ Having taken
into our consideration the great zeal of the Irish towards propagating the Catholic
faith ; and having got certain notice, how, in imitation of their godly worthy
ancestors, they endeavour by force of arms to deliver their thralled nation from
the oppression of the heretics, and gallantly do in them that lieth to extirpate
and boldly root out these workers of iniquity, who in the kingdom of Ireland had
infested the mass of Catholic purity with the pestiferous leaven of their heretical
contagion. We, therefore, being willing with the gifts of those spiritual graces
whereof we are ordained the only disposers on eai’th, and by virtue of that power
of binding and loosening souls which God was pleased to confer upon us, to all
and every one of the faithful Christian in the aforesaid kingdom of Ireland, now,
and for the time militating against heretics, do grant a full and plenary indul-
gence, and also take remission of all their sin, desiring heartily all the faithful in
Christ, now in arms, to be partakers of this precious treasure.—-Dated at Home,
in the Vatican of St. Peter’s Palace, May 25th, 1643, in the 20th year of our Pon-
tificate. A. M. Moraldus.” See vide Trial of Lord McGuire for high treason. He
also wrote to the rebel O’Neal, Oct. 18th, 1642, and also to the Popish clergy and
nobles of Ireland to the same effect.
By some computations, those who perished by these cruelties are made to
amount from 150,000 to 200,000 ; by the most moderate, and perhaps the most
probable accounts they must have been near 40,000. —(See Hume’s History of
England;”)
Can any lover of freedom from Roman tyranny like tins, say
that Oliver Cromwell's measures were too harsh for this treason and
bloodshed of this Pope’s agents in Ireland not long before he arrived
in that most unhappy land ? If we were to look at the act of hanging
Nichols and Lester without considering their horrible deeds, that act
would appear cruelly scandalous, even so the scandalisers of Oliver
Cromwell dwell upon his conduct without noticing the horrible
treason and murder he was sent to suppress and avenge.
Dr. Watts says—
“ The Lord has judgment for the proud,
And mercies for the opprest.”
The Pope co-operating with Charles I. and Laud, had thus blest
Ireland with human blood in great measure. W hen God had per-
mitted retribution by Oliver Cromwell, he blest Ireland with very
great prosperity. Macaulay says also, page 29
“ Prom the time when his array was remodelled, to the time when it was
disbanded, it never found in the British Islands, or on the continent, an enemy
who could stand its onset. In England, Scotland, Ireland, Flanders, the puritan
warriors, often surrounded by difficulties, sometimes contending with three-fold
odds, not only never failed to conquer, but never failed to destroy and break in
pieces whatever force was opposed to them. They at length came to regard the
day of battle as a day of certain triumph, and marched against the most renowned
battallions of Europe with disdainful confidence. ”
He says again—
“ But that which chiefly distinguished the army of Cromwell from other
armies was the austere morality and the fear of God which pervaded its ranks.”
As Cromwell had been victorious with his army everywhere in
putting Roman tyrants down, and establishing freedom for the Bible
everywhere in the nation, it was but natural that the people should
have looked up to him as their protector and civil head.
Let any man of common intelligence take a glance through the
histories of empires, nations, and states, and he will see at once that
it has been a law, regarded by God and man, that the deliverers of
the nations have been their rulers. According to this inevitable law of
12


God and man, Oliver Cromwell declining to be King, was made and
declared to be—“ His Highness, the Protector of England.”
As Macaulay says, (page 120)
“ How could one chase a thousand except God were with him.”
As the results of his glorious triumphs, he became the head of
the nation, and the terror of foreign tyrants in league with Rome.
Macauley says, (page 138) —
“ After half a century, during which England had been of scarcely more
weight in European politics than Venice or .Saxony, she at once became the most
formidable power in the world, dictating peace, and avenging the common injuries
of Christendom.”
Here we have the nation raised from obscurity, poverty, and
shame, to a first-class nation amongst earth’s proudest empires, by
Oliver Cromwell. Could this be done without the blessing of him who
‘ ‘ Raises monarchs to their thrones,
And sinks them if he please ? ”
The English Spectator thinks we need a Cromwell now, as op-
posed to those contemptible slanderers of Oliver Cromwell. It says or
asks, —
Is Selfishness Policy ?
(Our duty at this critical moment is to maintain the Empire of England.—
Speech of Mr. Disraeli, August 11, 1876.)
England speaks and Europe listens, —what doth England say ?
From the very shrine of Freedom comes a voice to-day—
Comes a voice from Christian England, bids them spare or slay,
Is it death, or is it life ? What doth England say ?
1 Shall a brother help a brother, if the waves run high ?
Shall a nation save a nation if it lose thereby ?
Keep the peace, endure oppression, trade and gather pelf,
England’s wisdom, (hear it heaven !) is to save herself. ’
Hath he said, and shall the world say, “ This is England’s choice ! ”
Kay, but this is the supplanter, this is Jacob’s voice.
Shall he rob us of our birthright, right to free the slave,
Right to comfort the afflicted, right to hear and save ?
Shall the Danube hurry seawards, red with Christian blood,
Outraged maids and ripped up mothers rolling down the flood ?
Shall the savage lust of Islam hold its revel there,
And the putrid breath of corpses lade the sluggish air ?
Oh, for Milton’s rolling thunder, Cromwell’s fiery zeal for God ?
Then should England rise to vengeance, tread the path that once she trod,
Once again for sacred freedom should her hosts go forth to fight,
And the battle-cry of England should be, “ God defend the right!”— Spectator.
Dr. Sibes wrote of great distress before Oliver Cromwell came
into power. (Page 58.) And Dr. Southwell writes of Oliver Crom-
well sending £35,000 to the relief of the Waldenses, in the vallies of
Piedmont, and sending to tell the Duke of Savoy that if he did not
stop the slaughter of these people, he should soon hear the English
cannon roaring about his ears, and that Roman tyrant was obliged to
obey the voice of Protestant power from the lips of the noble Oliver
Cromwell. Do you wonder that Rome should hire low daring men
to slander a man like this ? As they dare to do this, I shall ever,
whilst I have breath, dare to defend him !
Oliver Cromwell’s ambassador having returned from these vallies,
after turning away Rome’s sword of tyranny and death, reporting the
same to Oliver Cromwell and his friend Milton, the latter wrote—


Avenge, 0 Lord, thy slaughtered saints, whose bones
Lie scattered on the Alpine mountains cold ;
E’en them who kept thy truth so pure of old,
When all our Fathers worshipped stocks and stones.
Forget not ! in thy book record their groans
Who were thy sheep, and in their fold
Slain by the bloody Piedmontese that roll’d
Mother with infant down the rocks. Their moans
The vales redoubled to the hills, and they
To heaven. Their martyred blood and ashes sow
O’er the Italian fields, where still doth sway
The Triple Tyrant, that from these may grow
An hundred fold, who having learned thy way
Early may fly the Babylonian Woe.”
Thus we see the secret spring of the malice against Oliver' Crom-
well, and the slander’s with which his name is defamed, is his having
overturned the plots and suppressed the dominant powers of the Church
of Rome, established civil and religious liberty in our nation and in
other parts of the earth.
Let us now turn our attention a little to his proceedings in England
for a short time, and we shall soon see that Oliver Cromwell was no
sectarian bigot, but one who gave freedom to the worship ot God,
though he would not allow idols to be set up in our land ; for his pro-
hibition of these, of course, he has been, and is, tremendously slandered
by infidels and idolaters.
Having returned from his triumphant wars, and dissolved a Parlia-
ment which was wasting its time with its foolish jealousies of Cromwell
and the army, he was urged by the greater portion of the most impor-
tant people of the nation to become the nation’s King, as he had become
the nation’s deliverer from Popish tyrants and Romish plots.
But in his XIV. speech, given by Carlyle, he said :
“ I should not be an honest man if I did not tell you that I cannot accept the
Government, nor undertake the trouble and charge of it. I cannot undertake
this Government with the title of King. And that is my answer to this great and
weighty business.”
Does this look like self-seeking and desire for kingship as his foul
slanderers have intimated 1 I say it does not. But though he thus
modestly refused these great honors urged upon him by the Parliament
of the people, they still entreated him as the saviour of the nation, to
become “ His Highness the Protector of Great Britain.” To this he
agreed, and was installed in the manner described by Carlyle. Car.,
vol. Y, p. p. 76, 77, in 1653.
Having thus been raised to power by the vmce of the people, the
nations who had loved him as the deliverer in the Protestant cause of
freedom, and those also who had trembled at his power in war sent
their Ambassadors to recognize this act of the nation, and to negotiate
with his court. When the Ambassadors had assembled with his
court —Dr. Thomas Goodwin, the author of 12 vols. before us—one of
the greatest divines that ever lived was called to preach to this wonder-
ful meeting of the Ambassadors of the nations. The Doctor’s text
was, —“ What shall one answer the messengers of the nation 1 That
the Lord hath founded Zion, and the poor of His people shall trust in
it.” Isaiah xiv. 33.
Where these great nations, with their great Ambassadors and this
great Dr. Goodwin, all fools—thus to recognise Oliver Cromwell as the


Great Protector of England 1 Is the little Walter Cooper and his
pigmy Priesthood so wise that they can charge the whole of this noble
court with folly 1 Let these 12 vols. of profound learning and holy
divinity correct the daring presumption of these foolish and insolent
men. How true the words of Dr. Young,—
“Fools rush in, where angels trembling stand.” Or, “Where angels fear to
tread.”
Relative to the slander about the sth Monarchy men, so far was
Oliver Cromwell from deceiving them that they very grossly deceived him,
as their leader, the notorious Goodwin, did Charles 11. after Oliver
Cromwell’s death, these monstrous men pretended to be of the same
mind as the commonwealth people were. But instead of this tlmy held
the very doctrines Laud had tried to introduce into the nation. They
also said that they were the saints who were to possess the earth after
the four great monarchies had past away, as mentioned in the 7th of
Daniel. They not only taught this, but they took violent measures to
take possession of the nation, and had to be put down by civil powers
as greater tyrants than Charles 1., Charles 11., or James 11. Oliver
Cromwell at last finding out the Romish nature of their doctrines and
the treacherous character of their designs, very justly discarded them
and prevented the execution of their treacherous intentions. All which
may be seen as gathered from various undeniable historians in Toplady’s
whole works. Pages 55, 56, 57, and 58.
These late slanderers of Oliver Cromwell have proved themselves
entirely ignorant of sth. 4th, 3rd, 2nd, and Ist Monarchy men, and
ought to hide their heads in shame for their monstrous affirmations.
Such was the largeness of the liberty under Oliver Cromwell that
though for centuries the Jews had not been allowed to have a syna-
gogue iu the nation, they were allowed to build one in London during
his glorious reign, for the worship of the God of Abraham, Mac. vol. 1.,
137. The Hebrew families owe a debt of gratitude to the name of
Oliver Cromwell, which I hope they wall pay by protesting against the
late slandering of him at the School of Arts. What say you, you
Levis and Solomons for the man w r ho made you free in our land 1
At the head of Oxford, Oliver Cromwell puts the greatest scholar
and divine that ever entered that college : Dr. John Owen 20 out of 30
of his volumes are before us now. So loving, liberal, and largehearted
was this noble-minded man that people could hardly tell whether he was
a Presbyterian, Independent, or an Evangelic Churchman. In his con-
duct to all these and in his writings it was, and is still, hard to tell
which of these three had the most of his sympathy and kindly care. No
man was put out of his church or place by this noble-minded scholar
unless he rebelled against the Government as the Popes and sth
M marcy men did, or was otherwise most erroneous, none were persecuted
by him. This profoundest of all English divines, and the most loving
and humble of all men in the nation, put into the highest ecclesiastical
position in the nation, which he hlled with the greatest kindness,
courtesy, and impartiality towards all Evangelic denominations, and
also to the Jews, proves the imputation of bigotry to Oliver Cromwell
to be monstrously false. This is the most blessed Dr. John Owen,
mentioned in the life of John Runyan, who went to hear that ex-
tinker ; and at the end of the service that greatest of scholars and pro-
foundest of divines, said :—“ I would gladly give up all my learning to
be enabled to preach like that tinker.”


This was the man who was the chief adviser in all Church matters
in the nation. This is demonstration that he was no persecutor of
those who differed from him, where there was no treasonous intention.
I appeal to the Life of Dr. Owen, and to the thirty volumes of
the most splendid works he has left us, for the truth of what I say.
Oliver Cromwell was no persecuting bigot.
Then again, the sublime scholar and profoundly spiritual author—
Dr. Thomas Goodwin—he was Oliver Cromwell’s principal man at
Cambridge, acting in the same loving, liberal, and impartial way as his
friend and brother, Dr. Owen did. ISTo man on earth could charge him
with bigoted partiality. Independents, Churchmen, Presbyterians, and
Baptists, all found a loving, impartial brother in Dr. Thomas Goodwin,
and I appeal to the fact of his being put into his high position by Oliver
Cromwell, and to his holy, loving life, and to his twelve splendid
volumes now before us, to bear witness that he was no persecuting
bigot, but a noble-minded man, of glorious freedom and God-glorifying
liberty.
This very Dr. Goodwin asked the venerable John Howe about his
mind upon Independency, and was informed that his sympathies were
with the Evangelical Church party, which Laud and Charles I. so
bitterly persecuted. Dr. Goodwin still treated him as a dear brother.
This blessed John Howe was chosen to be the chaplain of Oliver
Cromwell’s house and court, though he was of another denomination to
that of the great Protector. This Howe, being in London, attended
divine worship where Oliver Cromwell worshipped, was noticed by him
and sent for. He was asked to preach the next Lord’s Day to Crom-
well’s household and court. Howe pleaded that his people in the coun-
try would be expecting him, and that he must go to them. But Oliver
Cromw'ell told him he would write to them and send them another
minister. He did so; and John Howe became Oliver Cromwell’s
minister, and remained so. One day the Protector said to him, “ Mr.
Howe, you have asked favors for everybody besides yourself, pray,
when does your turn cornel” Howe replied, “My turn, my Lord
Protector, is always come, when I can serve another.”
These were the sort of men who surrounded Oliver Cromwell’s
court, and were the glory of the nation.
Again, I appeal to the position, to the holy life, to the profound
learning and deep thought of John Howe, as set forth in these his
eight volumes now before us, to bear witness that Oliver Cromwell was
no canting hypocrite or persecuting bigot, but a noble fellow of large-
hearted freedom and glorious liberty.
I could mention hundreds more of a similar character to Dr. Owen,
Dr. Goodwin, and John Howe, but time would fail me, as St. Paul said
of the worthies of old.
There is Dr. Brooks with his life and 6 vols. of great learning,
much research, and profound spiritual excellency. These bear the same
testimony as the others do.
There is the wonderful Dr. Sibes, a profound scholar of amazing
deep experience, with his life and 6 vols., in which we have the same
witness as in the others.
There is the seraphic Di. Charnock, with his life and 6 vols. upon
the Divine attributes, &c. He was one of the most heavenly writers
our nation ever had. He bears the same witness as the others do.


Clarkson in Ms three vols. does the same, and Adams also does the
same in his 3 volumes. The sweet and blessed Oliver Hey wood does
the same in his 5 vols.
There is also the most incomparable Flavel with his 6 vols., all bearing
the same witness to the fact that Oliver Cromwell was compelled to do
what he did to suppress the Popish plots of Charles I. and establish
liberty of worship for true Protestants of every denomination with the
enjoyment of their civil rights. These all prove also that Oliver Crom-
well was not a persecuting bigot as his slanderers have said by false-
hood and scandal.
Will Mr. Walter Copper and his priesthood set themselves up in
the face of the testimonies of these greatest and noblest men that ever
trod the English soil. No ! let them be silent in shame.
There are not only these volumes of the testimonies of these
greatest of all English writers, to which I have referred yon, but each
of these had their glorious satellites revolving around them, shedding
brilliant light upon the dark world through which they passed, to the city
which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God.
Then again, there are the two thousand ministers who were turned
out of their churches and homes, and all that was dear to them on earth,
to roam as strangers and pilgrims on the earth, persecuted and tor-
mented by that other limb of Rome, Charles 11., two years after his
ascension to the throne.
The most of these two thousand noble hearted men had suffered by
the Romish tyranny of Charles I. and Archbishop Laud, in common
with Oliver Cromwell and his friends of the Commonwealth.
They had taken part with the latter in trying to restore things to
the constitutional order of the nation. They had failed, and stood by
while the nation cast off its corrupt head, to take the Commonwealth
form, and then the Protectorship. They were loyalists, many of them,
but did not resist the then existing government. They were permitted
undisturbedly to remain in their churches with their flocks,
though of another denomination altogether to that of the Protector.
These two thousand clergymen, first hunted by Charles 1., and then
turned out of church and home by Charles 11., were protected in the
Church of England by Oliver Cromwell. They constitute, therefore,
two thousand undeniable witnesses that he was not a persecuting bigot,
but a noble minded man of glorious freedom, allowing Jew and Gentile
more liberty than had ever been known for four hundred years before
the time of this immortal Oliver Cromwell.
Dare Mr. Walter Cooper and his Pigma Priestnood attempt still
to mock these two thousand witnesses to the liberty of Oliver Cromwell’s
government by comparing these to an old hand organ grinding out
Cromwell’s praises from year to year? Fie upon him for his ignorance,
sin, and shame ! Let him and his company know that they are turn-
ing the same old millstones of slander that the priests in the reigns of
Charles 1., Charles 11., James 11., sent spinning round with the noise
of “ murder, anarchy, and usurper,” and such like, and their decendants
have kept the same slanderous noise up to this day. This late School
of Arts slander is but the old priestly cry of 225 years ago. People of
education and reading, now, well know by the able pens of Carlyle,
Geziot, D’Aubigne, and others who have written upon Oliver Crom-
well’s life—that this slander-mill has been exploded long ago.
17


The whole nation has been compelled long ago to remove the traitor
martyr from the prayer-book ; all intelligent people revere the name of
Oliver Oromwell. The Freeman's Journal itself is ashamed of Lloyd,
Cooper, Priests and Company. No, Freeman could not for very shame
face this monstrous ignorance in this foul slander of the good, noble and
great protector.
Let us now conclusion, at the close of this great man’s
day’s on earth. (See Carl, vol. v. p. 151.
“How blest the righteous when he dies,
When sinks a weary soul to rest,
How mildly beam the closing eyes,
How gently heaves the expiring breast;
Life’s duty done, as sinks the day,
Liaht from its load, the Spirit flies ;
While heaven and earth combine to say,
How blest the righteous when he dies.”
In the Day of Rest, 1875, p. 581, we have a defence of Oliver
Cromwell, which I recommend to Mr. Walter Cooper, and Co. It is
by his grand-daughter, Mrs. Bendish. This lady may be well consi-
dered a repitition of what Oliver Cromwell was. Her mother was the
eldest daughter of the Protector. Her father was the celebrated Henry
Ireton, of Ireton, in the county of Derby, sometime Lord-lieutenant of
Ireland, B. 1648. When a child, as the favorite of her grandfather, she
was sitting upon his knee at one of his Privy Councils. One of the
Councillors objected to her presence, Oliver said, “ There is not a secret
that I would trust to any of you, that I would not trust to that child.”
She never betrayed his confidence by threats or promises.
She married Thomas Bendish of Gray’s Inn, son of Sir Thomas
Bendish, of Essex, English ambassador at the Court of the Ottoman
Porte. This lady buried her husband at Yarmouth, in Suffolk, in 1707,
and carried on her business in that place afterward. The Bev. James
Anderson says Likelier grandfather, she was eminent for goodness
of heart, as well as strength of understanding. She could not witness
misery without feelings of sympathy j and the benevolence that seemed
always at work in her breast, was ever prompting her to acts of benevo-
lence.” Mrs. Bendish believed that anything could be accomplished
by_ prayer, faith, and energetic this conviction, like
Oliver Cromwell, she acted, shutting herself up to reading the Bible
and prayer, until she had become impressed with the mind of God re-
lative to the thing she intended to do.
The celebrated Dr. Owen numbered IMrs. Bendish among the
members of his congregation. His works were her favorite books, and
she was a steadfast friend to all non-conformists. Dr. Brooks says,
“ This very extraordinary woman wanted only to have acted in a
superior sphere to be ranked by historians among the most admirable
heroines. Courage was a remarkable feature in her character. She
would travel alone in the darkest nights, trusting in the protection of
God. She was a splendid centre of attraction in society. Her admiration
for her grandfather was unbounded. She revered him for his achieve-
ments in arms, and for his ability as a ligislator and statesman, but in
hei judgment, these occupied a subordinate and secondary interest and
place in his character compared with his piety. To her he was the
Anointed of the Lord, a ‘chosen vessel,” a “regenerated child of
God.” She fully believed he was a saint of the first magnitude, and
18


resented every aspersion cast upon his character as a personal injury.
On one occasion she was travelling with two strangers, and their con-
versation turned upon. Oliver Cromwell, whose character and conduct
they criticised with much acrimony. Mrs. Bendish began hotly to de-
fend her noble ancestor.’ She failed to convince these men, and one of
them, Cooper-like, became more violent. He spoke of Cromwell with
every term of opprobrium, derided his pretentions to patriotism and
sanctity, and stigmatized him as’a-traitor and a tyrant. The lady was
incensed and provoked at this ungallant, cowardly, ruffianism. Whe n
the coach stopped, she wished to speak to this ghost of Walter Cooper’.
She then told him that he had in* the grossest manner belied and abused
the most pious man that effef lived ; that Cromwell’s blood, that flowed
in her veins, would not allyw her to pass over the indignities cast upon
his memory in her presence ; that she could not handle a sword, but
she could fire a pistol as well as he ; and she demanded immediate
satisfaction to the injured honor of her family, insisting that if he
would not incur the charge of cowardice, he should not make her sex
the pretence for declining to accept her challenge. The cowardly slan-
derer escaped her pistol only by an humble apology.
Could this sublime old lady but have marched on to the stage of the
School of Arts the other night, she would have sent Lloyd, Cooper and
priests flying in a minute, as ’ scandalizing detainers of her noble old
grandfather. Yea, I do believe, with her bonnet in one hand and
pistol in the other, she would have cleared the whole house of those
who could defame a noble-minded man.
Let us close with Carlyle’s true testimony agreeing with that of
this splendid evidence to this greatest and noblest of all England’s de-
liverers and rulers. He says, (volume v. page 56)
“The works of man, bury them under what guano-mountains and obscene
owl-droppings you will, do not perish, cannot perish. What of heroism, what of
eternal light, was in a man and hit* life, is with very great exactness added to the
eternities ; remains for ever a new divine portion of the sum of things ; and no
owl’s voice, this way or that, in tlu least avails in the matter.
As in Oliver Cromwell’s day, sosffow,* the harlot Rome seeks to shave off the
Sampson-like locks of Protestant, strength in our nation—but says Carlyle
“Awake before it comes to that Gods and men bid us awake ! The voice of
our fathers, with thousand-fold to one and all, bid us awake.”
Thus friends, we vinddfcate the name,
Defamed by pigmy foes ;
Their names are rotting in the earth,
His—fragrant as the rose.
He raised the realm to all that’s great,
Spread freedom far anS wide ;
His fame runs on from age to age—
His foes in shame shall hide.
In this our strictures on his foes —
A dark and gloomy ifost,
We have not meant to raise, but lay,
His noble, peaceful ghost
God save the Queen, and prolong our liberty.
The Herald says “ The lecture was throughout most en-
thusiastically received.
S, GLASSOP, West City Machine Printing Office, 92 Clarence-street, Sydney.
19


♦ *
* .*» • %
V
• * ■ rfjjL ■ * ■*> •
