

■II
■ll
„ SI
■II
■II
■
■II
■
■II
■II
■II
■II
■11
■11
■ !i
mj:
PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR,
3Q2 P Aim AM ATTA KOAI ),
PETERSHAM.
-
1895.
vM i.
ua
■
1 ■
1 !■
■
■
4' ■
John McNally, Printer, 173 Sussex St., Sydney*
/•••tiTO • 8 L r .» ! .
CHEAP EDITION.
I i THE
•mi a
fm a a
gilniß
.
amma
PRICE SIXPENCE.
H AUSTRALIAN (LESAR
amma
Biiiniß »
Bn a
Biiiiita
anmiß
amma
a a
aiiui.a
a •
an ' a
amnia
an mi
Bimiia
’
BIUIIIB
a a
airnna
Billina
a:" a
Biiiina
a a
Biiiina
amnia
amnia
aiinna
Biiiina
amma
amnia
■mma
a a
Biiiina
amnia
•mma
amnia
aiimia
amnia
amma
Bn : a
amma
aiinna
By S. A. EOS A.
i i • ■ a
amma
a a
i i
amma
amma
Bum a S' 1 ! 1 !!!






Portrait of the Author.


THE
AUSTRALIAN CiESAR,
THE COMING TERROR.
By S. A. ROSA.
PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR,
302 PARRAMATTA ROAD,
PETERSHAM,
1895.


. ' V
■
\
: i


CHAP.
CONTENTS.
I,—The Attack on the Bank,
ll.— The Causes of the Insurrection.
lll.— The General Strike.
IV. —Oliver Spence, Dictator.
V. —Saved by a Woman’s Love.
VI. —The Great Battle,
Vll.— Free Land, Cheap Money and “Confiscation.”
VIII.— The Wedding.
XX.—A New Government and a Dialogue on Government.
X.—More Changes.
Xl.— The New Garden of Eden.
Xll.—Work, and Love and Paradise.


To return to the mob. Among the men who particularly distinguished
themselves in the attack on the bank, was a gigantic navvy who, brandishing
a large new axe, marched in the forefront of the rioters, and —the bank
having been now successfully looted —called upon his followers to hasten to
destroy the "den of thieves,” by which term he meant the Parliament.
The crowd, with many vociferations and execrations, followed their leader
along King Street, looting and wrecking the luxuriously furnished shops as
they passed along that fashionable afternoon promenade. The attempts of
shopkeepers to defend their wares were of course unsuccessful, the mob
having armed itself by the looting of the gunehops, and making short work
of those who attempted »*y resistance. One man who attempted to defend
the jewellery of which he was the nominal owner, by pointing a revolver at
tlie crowd, was promptly disarmed, and thrown crashing through the plate
glass window of the shop in which he acted as the agent of a financial syn-
dicate. Cries of “ Bread or lead ! ” “ Down with the bank swindlers ! ’*■
“Work or blood !” “ Give ub back our savings ! ” “To hell with the finan-
ciers ! ” resounded on all sides, while the flames from the house* fired by
these in the rear of the mob, and the reports from firearms, gave the street
the sounds and appearance of the mythical Pandemonium.
On arriving at Parliament House the mob found a small detachment of
the Permanent Artillery, armed with a maehine gun, guarding the entrances
to that building. The men in charge of the gua were soea disposed of by
some insurgent marksman, who, firing from the crowd, or the adjoining
housetops, picked them off with a skill which showed them to be no novices
in the use of the deadly Giffard gun. The insurgents then by a strategic
move captured the gun, and the artillerymen surrendered.
The crowd then poured into the House, while of pale, panic-
stricken legislators tumbled over each other in their anxiety to avoid the
inrush of the avengers. Several of the most unpojmkr members were killed
on the spot, among them being the members of the Government, the other
members being allowed to escape with more or les* aware injuries. Spence,
the gigantic navvy, then took possession of the Speakar’s Qhair, and in a few
firmly- uttered words announced that henceforth th# House would be used
as the meeting place of the Revolutionary Commit*##.


CHAPTER 11.
THB CAUBBS OF THIS INSTJEHECTIOX.
After the statesmen of Australia had succeeded in bringing about the
federation of the Australian states, the natural result was the formation of
a large standing army, which, as our readers are aware, the Federal Q-overn*
ment, from its headquarters at Albury, made ample use of as a valuable
auxiliary in their determined maintenance of “ law and order,” “ freedom
of contract,” and the right of the syndicates to employ mea at as low a
wage and as long hours as the necessities of the laboring people might com-
pel them to accept. Boycotting, or any attempts on the part of strikers to
interfere, even in the most peaceful way, with “free” or non-uaiom laborers,
were treated as overt acts of rebellion, and the strikers were promptly dra-
gooned into submission. The result was that the various unions had been
gradually broken up, and were succeeded by branches of a vast secret organ-
isation known as “ The Brotherhood of the Poor.” The ramifications of
this association included all sections of workers, and even criminals and
social outcasts were admitted to membership, it being a maxim of the Bro-
therhood that, the outcast being himself a victim of unjust and corrupt
institutions and laws, his aid would, on occasion, be of greater value than
that of those who had uot been strengthened and sharpened by the Ishmael-
like life of the outcast.
This formidable body, which scorned any definite reconstructive plat-
form, and appeared to aim only at the destruction of what they considered
a corrupt and festering civilisation, was very skilfully and powerfully or-
ganised, and had become so strong and far-reaching in its membership, and
had been in existence for so' long, that the ruling classes despaired of sup-
pressing it, and had at last decided to affest to ignore its existence. The
career of the Brotherhood had been distinguished by acts of heroism, forti-
tude, audacity and fidelity which far surpassed anything recorded of previous
secret bands of conspirator*. Monopolists who had rendered themselves
particularly odious to the populace by the ostentatious display of their
possessions, or by open and cynical disregard of the feelings of those who
were forced by necessity to minister to their desires, were frequently killed
in their own houses by men or women who, prior to making their escape,
stamped upon the bodies of their victims the seal of the Brotherhood. It
was only by the exercise of the utmost eautmo and the expenditure of large
sums of money in the payment of faithful bodyguards, that the leading mem-
bers of the syndicates and corporations which controlled the government
and industries of the country saved themselves from assassination. The
members of Brotherhood were also possessed of an amount of knowledge


of military tactiss, and the use of explosive*, which was very surprising
when one considers the small amount of leisure left them by the nature of
their daily avecations; and eventually this remarkable conspiracy became
•till more potent and terrible by the fact that Bourdoin, a French chemist
who was one of the members of the Brotherhood's Directing Council, had
diseovered a very powerful destructive agent. It was called Banmort, and
was in the form of a ga», which, when liberated from the strong glass envelope
in which it was inclosed, completely and terrifically destroyed everything
with which it came in contact. Banmort bolls, which were a little larger
tham ordinary revolver bullets, were need as ammunition for small ingeni-
ously constructed air-guns, which would throw the balls to a considerable
distance, where they would spread death and devastation all around.
Among the most deop-seated causes of the outbreak, although not its
actual occasion, was the annihilation of the small-property-owning middle
class by the operations of the Sydney financial rings. The middle class had
been a decided safeguard against revolution, and a powerful conservative
force. To members of that class, “ everything that was, was right,” so long
as it did not interfere with their possession, or possible possession, of small
properties. They had served as a sort of buffer between the hungry prole-
tarian poor and the surfeited, sybaritical rich. But the financiers, finding
their opportunities for the greater acquisition of wealth and consequent power
immensely increased by the additional facilities secured to them by their
creatures, the members of the Federal Parliament, hastened to extend their
operations and ramifications throughout the length and breadth of Australia,
until so irresistible became their unfair competition, so gigantic their opera-
tions, and so immense their monopolies, that there scarcely remained a
squatter, farmer, manufacturer, “small business man,” or thrifty ” work-
man, who was not hopelessly and helplessly in the hands of the usurers.
Such wae the condition of things, when a great and tetrible drought,
which, being unlocked for, had also been unprepared for, played huge havoc
with the securities of the banks and other financial institutions. The most
terrible financial crisis ever experienced in Australia immediately followed.
Millions of sovereigns were rapidly withdrawn from the banks by “ those in
the know,’ r and lodged for safety in the Sydney Money Strenghold, and
the immediate and complete collapse of all the banks was only prevented
by the action of the Federal (Government in legislatively compelling
■the acceptance of the Basks’ notes as a “ legal tender.” For a time the
Government's action succeeded in “restoriag confidence,” but when it became
quit© apparent that the banks were unable to liquidate their liabilities in
anything but their own discredited paper “ promises to pay,” the notes
rapidly depreciated, and finally were treated as mere waste paper. A fierce
t&ry then went up from the note holder*, depositors, and shareholders who,
-it became clear* had been remorselessly swindled and utterly -ruined


THE COMING TESEOE. 3
*by the secret ring* -who formed file “ inner circle ” of hank director* ajjfi
shareholders, while the great n«mber of'crnel end bratal eviction* oftkoea
who Were be the clutches of the baake, and whoee home* were Bold up to paj
the banks’ debts, excited the indignation of the people to the pitch of frenaj
This indignation became stiPi greater when it was seen that the ring*
(whose gold in the Money Stronghold wm protected frdmiheir creditors by
legal ‘chicanery) were “ rigging ’’ the market, and wae-e thus enabled through
their agents to invariably obtain possession of the eold-a'p properties at phe-
nomenally lew figures. Then it was that the ruined middle class became
formidable revolutionists, and in their deeds of desperate daring and eve*
heroic revolutionary enterprise, surpassed anything that had been done hj
the habitually half-starved poor.
But at last the Federal Government took a step in an individualistic
direction which had for its members and the class to which they belonged
the most disastrous consequences. The variolas branches of the public ser-
vice, though very corrupt, and used as a means of rewarding political and
personal friends, or finding positions for the friends or relative* of women
who secretly prostituted themselves to men in power, were yet regarded with
hope by reformers, as stepping-stones which they thought Would lead to the
democratic State ownership of all means of production and exchange. But
shortly after the financial crash which has just been referred to, the Govern-
ment decided to dispose of the Australian Railways to the highest bidders.
The financial “ Inner Circle ” at once formed a syndicate and purchased the
railways. They then discharged large numbers of railway employes, and
proceeded to work the railways on Vhat they termed ” commercial prim
ciples.” The discharged men, who previously had considered themselves a
sort »f ‘ aristocracy of labor,” and wore noted for their comparative eon-
servatism and contempt for those shut out of the sphere of Government
employment, now became furious in their denunciation of the ruling classes-,
and one of them one day observing the chief of the railway syndicate driving
along the “block,” seated between his tfcro mistresses (sodneed workmen’s
wires), shot him dead. The assassih was publicly executed,, but received an
ovation from the assembled populace, and only the presence of a very strong
military guard, and the restraining influence of the Brotherhood chiefs,
prevented his rescue. The whole of the ex- railway employes became eneri
getic members of the Brotherhood.
The people were now thoroughly ripe for insurrection, but awaited a
leader. Such, a person was found in Oliver Spence, a powerfully built ancl
determined man, who had been of what was termed “ good family,” was
wdl read, and a keen observer of men and things. The ruthless competi-
tion of the great syndicates had ruitted his father, a small capitalist, and
forced Oliver to tUm his abnormal physical strength to accohnt by earning
his living as a navvy. This man’s self-acquired military knowledge and in-
ham military genius at ance marked him out to his comrades; and he
speedily became the Gommander-imChief of the Revolutionary Brother
hood oi the Poor.


a THIS COMING- TERROR,
On a certain day of the year ir; which, our story opens, a mass meeting
of the unemployed was announced to behold in the Sydney Domain. In
this meeting the Brotherhood determined jfco take part-. The Gtovernmenfe
suspecting nothing, had taken, no ■ precautions against a possible outbreak,
and the revolutionists consequently had,everything their own way. Violent
speeches were made,,and ultimately the crowd, forming themselves with the
aid of the drilled members of tho Brotherhood into marching order, marched '


CHAPTER 111.
THE GENERAL STRIKE,
At tee conclusion of the first chapter, Oliver Spence was left master b£
the situation in Parliament House, declaring that that House would hence-
forth be used as a revolutionary headquarter* This declaration seemed to
be taken as a matter of course by his followers, and, calling for the keys.-
Oltver, having obtained them, locked up the^House, and—first placing a
strong’guard at the various entrances—proceeded, accompanied by a number
of his adherents, to the old headquarters of the Council of the Brotherhood,
the rest of the insurgent multitude hhving in the meantime, under the skil-
ful direction ef members of the Brotherhood, taken possession of the prin-
cipal Government buildings and other place* of importance in the city.
To the great joy and exultation of those members of the Council wht
were not absent superintending the operations of the aeob, Spence re -
lated what had occurred ; and, after some slight discussion, the following
manifesto was drawn up and ordered to be printed
TO THE AHST KALIAN PEOPLE.
-X-.V73 WA-teen tO-5 +-+ 'JT, ««-M- 'XT. ti
Eexlow Shtberersl
The organised toiling and poverty-cursed inhabitants of Aus-
tralia have at last achieved a great and glorious victory over the
wealthy oligarchy which has so long compelled the men and women
of the‘poor to prostitute their intellect, their beauty, or their
strength for the purpose of keeping in luxurious power a class which
is without conscience, compassion, or sense of justice. A class which
has considered and treated the laboring poor ns of far less import-
ance than were the chattel slaves of ancient times.
The RETOLtmowAmY Committee cb the People’s With,
has now by force and right of conquest taken possession of the Syd
nev Parliament House and many other buildings of strategical or
political importance, and henceforth the Committee will sit at Par-
liament House for the purposes of a Revolutionary Administration,
which are; —
Ist, To safeguard the interests of the suffering and the poor
against possible reactionary monopolistic conspirators,
2nd. To freely and impartially administer justice to all.
In order to effectually paralyse the resources of our enemies,
fhc Committee dee& it necessary that the workers in every industry
or occupation shall at once cease work. The Brotherhood c, *»ic
Poor is charged with the duty of seeing that this order is pxanrpAw
ssbc. effectively obeyed.


The Revolutionary Committee is certain that in all its present
onerous -work it will reoeive the active support of all those who have
suffered from plutocratic tyranny, for the poor have nothing to lose
by a revolution but sordid misery and odious slavery.
They have a world to gain!
To Aems ! To Aems !!
Signed on behalf of the
RivoLtmoNAEY Committee, )
OLIVER SPENCE,
Commander-in-Chief of the
Revolutionary Forces.
This manifesto having been posted up in all places of public resort,
was at once acted upon. The newspapers, telegraphs, and railways, which
hitherto had been always at the disposal of the plutocracy, were, if used at
all, used only by the strikers to facilitate their own operations.
The Revolutionary Committee also strengthened its hands tremendously
at this period by the institution of National Workshops and Stores, which
supplied the strikers and other revolutionists with the necessaries of life
and the sinews of war.


CHAPTER TV.
OLIVER SPENCE, DICTATOR.
On the first Monday after the issue of the Gfeneral Strike manifesto,'B
National Convention of delegates from all parts of Australia was held in
the Parliament House, Macquarie Street, Sydney. The delegates had been
elected by meetings convened by local sections of the Brotherhood of the
Poor, which had now ceased to be a secret organisation. Each delegate
having solemnly declared his fidelity to the cause of the People, the Con-
vention was declared open by Oliver Spence, who then addressed it as
follows -.—
“ Fellow Men!
“We are assembled here to-day as the delegates to a Convention which
is probably the most important gathering which has ever taken place on
Australian soil. We are the bearers of the mandates of au indignant and
wrathful people who have chosen us to consider and devise for them a Con-
stitution which shall be, for the first time in our history, a just one. Let
us devote ourselves to that task with zeal yet discretion.
“We are, it is true, the appointed of a minority, and with that fact our
enemies already taunt us, but, I would ask you, has it not always been
minorities who have achieved anything worth achieving ? who have brought
about any unmistakably radical political or economic changes ? And more,
was it not a minority which plundered and oppressed us?
“ If, then, we, being determined men who would not be obedient slaves,
have preferred to risk death rather than endure enslavement, who dares
to question our right to rebel ?
“ We have disregarded the apathy of the majority, have attacked the
ruling minority, and overthrown it.
“ 1 again say, who dares to question our right ?
“ An old English aristocratic writer has said,
‘ Treason never conquers—
What’s the reason?
If it conquers,
None dare call it Treason!’
although we do not wish to ill-treat those whom it might please To
us traitors, yet the quotation substantially expresses our position.
“ If we had waited for the majority to rebel, then we might have waited,
an eternity, for they were so brutalised by excessive toil, and dispirited by
the evidences of the enormOlis,poWer of wealth, that they had become oi-
like in their lives, and suffered to "continue that oppression which it had
become well-nigh impossible to remove by pacific methods.
“If the taajority has been apathetic, however, it cannot long remain
30, but must soon range itself on our side, for, without speaking of the justice
of our cause, we are the victorious p ;ty, and ‘nothing succeed? lifce


“ .Having therefore successfully rebelled against a most ignoble, degrad- .
tug, and brutal tyranny, we now find ourselves in the position of men who-,
vill have to contend against the desperate energy of.those who were former-
Kf our rulers. If they again get the upper hand, they will be merciless and ,
inexorably cruel in their revenge ; the history of the past teaches us that.
“Mo must therefore be wary, yet swift hard bold.
‘ V\ e must hesitate at nothing which will render Our triumph unques
don ably complete and lasting.
’ Let all our sympathisers carry arms, and as many as possible enro
themselves in companies of military volunteers.
“1 recommend further that the resources of the new Government be
used for the purpose of giving employment to all who are in need of it, and
further, that it be made a criminal offence to employ men more than eight
npurs daily, except in case of special unforeseen emergency.
It should be decreed by law that a minimum wage of not less than
Pounds sterling weekly should be paid to adult workers in all industries.
A Board should be selected to fix a maximum price for all theneces"
saides of life.
“All civil law must be abrogated, and the criminal law entirely re-
modelled.
“ Only by the measures I have proposed, can we maintain the revolu-
tionary enthusiasm, and guard against the possibility of reaction or counter
j evolution.
“ M hen wo have taken these steps, we can then proceed to gradually,
out as speedily as possible, bring into existence that peaceful, harmonious
social state, that Co-operative Commonwealth, which has been for genera-
tions the dream of poets, the ideal of philosophers, and the demand of
revolutionists.
I conclude with the words of tlfO French ‘ man of action,’ Danton —
< M e must have boldness, boldness, and always boldness ! s ”
Oliver Spence resumed his seat amidst a perfect hurricane of applause
ajul exclamations of undying fidelity to the revolutionary cause. The old
building fairly shook with the vociferations of the delegates, and' so great
v*is the excitement that the air seemed as. though charged with electricity
Spence had been listened to amidst a silence which seemed almost death- .
like in its stillness, but when he pointed out to the delegates the necessary
stops to be taken in order t o give practical effect to the aims of the revolu-
tionists and to prevent the.possibility of a return to the old order of tilings,'
1 11 gave him, their enthusiastic support, and a resolution to the effect that
hp should be appointed, for a "period of ,one year, Dictator with plenary
ppwers, was carried Unanimously.
The speaker who proposed the isolation-.-s-aid that for- centuries
people had, been swindled, plundered, and oppressed by corrupt ruling gangs
Cidlel Parliaments.. They would now see what could be done,by tire rule -
of one good, wise, and capable man.
After the Convention had appointed committees for the purpose of re* .
Vqodeiling the criminal code and fixing a maximum price-forioods and
of life, the delegates adjourned.


CHAPTER Y.
mi A HTTP T T
SAVED BY LOVE'.
It was moonlight In the garret of a house apparently inhabited by
poor people, there might have been discovered a young woman, poorly
dressed, but with a sweetness of faee and beauty of form which it was im
possible for the poverty of her dress to entirely hide. She was weeping
silently, and her finely moulded bosom heaved convulsively as she thought
of the possible dreadful fate of her lover. For she loved an insurgent, and
with an intense and passionate devotion of which she had hitherto believed
herself incapable. The hour was late, and though her lover had promised
o, if alive, send her a message assuring her of his safety, the appointed
hour had passed, but no word had been received from him whom she loved
What should she do ? She would go to him.
vv nau snouia sue uu r one »uum gu
So thinking, the young woman, hastily fastening a cloak around icr
superb form, and placing upon her head a tasteful but inexpensive bonnet,
went forth into the streets. They w-ere deserted.
The sombre beauty of the charred and desolated ruins of the portio.
xne somore oeauiy oi rue cuarrcu aim j-
of Sydney through which she passed was heightened by the wondrous pah
splendor of the full moon, whose beams bathed in liquid silver the courts
and alleys of Sydney’s poor. But the locality which once thronged with
cringing; toil-distorted, haggard njen, women, and children, was now deserted,
save by the one solitary wanderer whom the reader has just been introduced
to. The insurgents had literally carried oxit their demand ‘ The people
to the mansions, and the torches to the slums ! ’ and the unhealthy disease-
breeding hovels of the poor had been burnt to the ground, while their for-
mer inhabitants were now housed in the huge magnificent mansion c -
lit one time owned by the rich although frequently not occupied by
t them. Walking-hurriedly along, our heroine at last found herself in
King St. and was within a hundred yards of Macquarie St. when sud-
denly her .naturally elegant carriage and remarkable beauty attracted
the attention of a band of nocturnal revellers who emboldened by he.
apparent timidity insisted on detaining her while she was made the
tejk recipient of a string of extravagant compliments. Not satisfied with this, .
one of the rowdies, disregarding,her remonstrances and entreaties, would
have snatched a kiss from her ripe ruby lips, when suddenly a tall, stoutly
built young man, evidently not one of the revellers, rushed forward and
pushed her would-be assailant violently aside, addressing at the same time
words of. stern rebuke to the half drunken rioters who, recognising him ,
■slunk, silently away.
The new comer was no other than Oliver and on the young;
woman perceiving that it was indeed he, she fell, in a half-fainting, condi
tion. into big arms —for .he was,her lover.. O.up.hero looked *-*


THE COMING TERROR.
hero, the fire of genius flashed from his eyes, while his broad massive brow
stamped him as a thinker, and his well-defined nose indicated that he reas-
sessed sufficient force of character to enable him to carry his thoughts into
execution.
With the aid of a little water from a neighboring fountain, our heroin
was quickly restored to consciousness, and on seeing that the roysterers had
actually taken their departure, she looked languishingly at her lover audsaid:
“ Are you then safe, my ownde-ar Oliver ?”
“ Yes, safe, and what is more, victorious, my darling Mary; Take heart,
dear love, for to-day our oppressors have received a terrible blow, and T
have been placed in a position whereby I am entrusted with power, great
power, power to carve out for Australia a great place among the nations oi
the- world, and to render my name illustrious as a wise lawgiver and bene-
ficent ruler ! ”
Ou hearing these words from her loved one, Mary’s bright hazel eyes
looked the pride which she felt. As the lovers stood therein the moonlight
they looked a well-matched pair, he with his determined eagle eyes and noble
bearing, she with her fine form’s graceful poise, which, with the sweetness
of her face with its finely chiselled nose and dazzling white teeth, and Iter
well-shaped head with its glorious crown of luxuriant brown hair, seemed
to obtain added beauty and regal dignity from the pleasure with which she
was filled by Oliver’s words.
Mary pressed the hand of her lover, and walked slowly by his side, con-
versing with him in the language of lovers ; and so absorbed in each Other
did Oliver and Mary become, that they failed to observe the actions of twit
ruffianly-looking men, who, keeping in the shadow of the houses, crept
silently nearer and nearer to the amorous couple. They were armed with
long sharp knives, and they carried them unsheathed in their hands.
Suddenly, with an oath, the bravos sprang upon the couple, and, fell-
ing Mary to the ground with a crushing blow, they turned their attention
•to Oliver, who, having been taken entirely by surprise, might have been
there and then deprived of his life, had it not been for his great natural
agility and enormous physical strength. Seizing the dagger of one of his
would-be assassins, he wrenched it from hi 1 hand, and stabbed him to the ||
heart. The bravo fell weltering in his gort *nd expired without a groan,
Oliver then turned his attention to his other .vssailant, who, though some
■what unnerved by the fate of his companion, showed himself no mean
'antagonist, and proved himself a master of the art of wrestling, and a match
for the man whose life he had determined to take. Oliver gripped the wrist
of the hand which held his opponent’s dagger, but found his own hand also
'held in a vice-like grip. The two powerful men swayed to and fro in each
•other’s grasp, each thirsting for the blood of tho other. Their veins stood
out like whip-cord, and their breaths came hot, short and quick. Every
“trick known to the professional wrestler was in vain tried by Oliver, and h©
had almost begun to despair of success and to resign himself to his .fate
Maryq who had recovered -from the blow she had received, picked lip


from the ground where it had fallen, the loaded stick habitually carried
by Spence, and struck his antagonist a violent blow at the back of the
head.
He dropped like a log.
It was evident that the blood of the Amazons flowed in Mary’s veins.
Of such material were made those heroic women who, during the French
Revolution, led the revolutionists against the palace of King Louis XVI
at Versailles, of such material were made Joan of Arc, Sophie Perovskaya,
and Louise Michel. As she stood over the prostrate form of the man she
had struck down, her face flushed and her eyes flashing with unwonted
excitement, Oliver could not repress his feelings of admiration.
“ You are indeed fit to be the mother of the Gracchi,” said he?
“ Do not speak of me dear Oliver, tell me if you are injured.”
“Not at all Mary, thanks chiefly to your courage and presence of
mind. It would seem that the enemies of the people are adopting the
same tactics now, as the same class did in the days of the ancient Roman
civilization. Just as they then, hired assassins who murdered the Gracchi,
the great reformers of that period, so our monopolists, hire creatures who
for pay, would murder me, but they shall not find me as easily frightened
as Cromwell was. I defy their vile machinations. ”
“I know, my darling, that you are not afraid,” said Mary “but re-
collect that your enemies still possess gold, and there is scarcely anyone
and anything but you, and I, and love, which gold cannot buy. Let us go
home. ”
So saying she placed her hand in Oliver’s arm, and the lovers hastened
away in the direction of Mary’s residence.


CHAPTER VI.
THE GREAT BATTLE.
After the collapse of the British Empire, which, as all students of
history are aware, was chiefly occasioned by the Anglo-Russian war, in
which the “ Tsar of all the Russias” was completely victorious, and by
the annexation of India extended his territory to the Indian Ocean, the
Australian Colonies were formed into an independent Federal Republic.
The method of government was still in theory democratic, although in
practice plutocratic. There was a Federal Parliament, consisting of a
House of Representatives and a Senate. Each Representative had a con-
stituency of not less than thirty thousand electors, which no one but a
rich man or a tool of the financial rings ever attempted to “represent,"’
for not only did it require considerable money to contest such a large
electorate, but it was generally believed that the ballot had ceased to be
secret and there was so much fraud exercised at elections by the agents of
the financial rings that it was regarded as quite impossible to return pure
democrats to power. Of the two branches of the legislature, however,
the more oligarchic was the Senate, which consisted of eight men from each
of the State Parliaments. These men were, of course, actually appointed
by the rings, and in the Senate were, after the rings, the most powerful
in Australia. They retired from office by rotation, so that there was never
a general election, nor had the President of the so-called Republic, power
to dissolve the Senate. It had a veto over all bills passed by the “Repre-
sentatives,” was secure by the nature of its constitution from any possi-
bility of its being influenced by the masses (termed by the Senators “the
swinish multitude”), and was defended by a powerful army and well-
equipped navy. The army and navy had been originally formed for the
ostensible purpose of protecting life and property from a possible Russian
or Chinese invasion, but it was soon evident that the greatest danger to
the Australian plutocracy was “ from within, not from without,” and con-
sequently for the purpose of stamping out anything like incipient revolt,
the army and navy became very useful to their employers.
The seat of the Federal Government was at first Hobart, which had
become but a trifling distance from the continent, owing to the great ease
and speed of the newly-invented boats, driven by compressed air; but when
it became manifest that even in conservative Tasmania the Government
was not quite secure from “ popular clamour,” it was decided that Albury,
once celebrated as a border town, but which, after the enlargement of
Victoria and the consequent shifting of the border, had degenerated into
a mere Sleepy Hollow, should be the new Federal city. The change
answered admirably and the Government, now enormously powerful, ruled
Australia, in the interest of the rings, with a rod of iron.


As soon as the news of the New South Wales outbreak (which had
rapidly spread to the other colonies) reached the Federal Government,
extensive preparations were at once made for its suppression. Many of
the military had joined the insurgents, but there still remained a very
large number who were willing to fight to maintain the old order of things.
Most of these were massed in Victoria, where the outbreak had been,
after severe fighting, temporarily quelled.
The defeat of the Victorian insurgents was, however, more owing to
the smallness of their numbers and their want of sufficient arms and am-
munition than to any other cause, for they fought with great
courage, pertinacity and skill. The Brotherhood marksmen particularly
distinguished themselves by the ease and accuracy with which, firing from
the roofs and windows of houses, they picked off the various officers, and
the men told off to work the machine-guns. The authorities had, with
their troops,a number of machine-guns, termed “ mob-quellers,” an improve-
ment on the old Gatling gun. The simple, yet delicate machinery of these
guns was, however, soon put out of gear by well-directed shots from the
insurgent sharpshooters.
Eventually, however, the insurgents had no alternative but to aban-
don the fight, and by a piece of highly creditable strategy they succeeded
in making good their retreat.
After the Victorian flight both sides drew together their forces with
the view to a decisive battle, which finally took place in the interior of
the continent.
Prior to the federation of Australia a large portion of the interior of
the country was unknown. Many attempts had been made by explorers
to penetrate to the heart of this terra incognita, but apparently with but
small success, as few of the explorers had ever returned to the coastal
settlements to relate their experiences. After the Federation, however,
it was determined by the Government that a large party should be fitted
out for the purpose of thoroughly exploring the whole of the hitherto
unexplored portion of Australia. The Government was rewarded by the
discovery, in the north-western portion of the interior of a large settle-
ment of white people, of whom further information will be given in
another chapter. It was in that portion of Australia that the celebrated
“Battle of Leichhardt” took place.
The Governments of Victoria, West Australia and Tasmania sided
with the Plutocracy, while New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia
and the newly-discovered State of Leichhardt were in the hands of the
revolutionists. North Australia (formerly the Northern Territory) was
considered doubtful, as that State was chiefly populated byChinamen,
who, though bitter against the white workers in the South, because of the
large number of Chinamen who had been killed or maltreated by them,
were yet strongly suspected by the Plutocracy of sympathy with Commun-
istic principles.


The Commauder-in-Chief of the Revolutionary forces was, of course,
Oliver Spence. The Honorable Israel Smith led the forces of the Pluto"
cratic Oligarchy. Israel Smith was said to be a descendant of Bruce
Smith, who, it is believed, was in the ante-federation days a member of
the Government of New South Wales.
In numbers the insurgent forces were but seventy thousand men,
while those of the Plutocracy numbered one hundred thousand. The In-
surgents, however, made up in enthusiasm what they lacked in numerical
strength, while their opponents were held together chiefly by the promises
of plunder, position and pay, made to them by the Oligarchy; and it was
strongly suspected that many would desert to the insurgents if there
appeared any reasonable probability of the Revolution being ultimately
successful.
A number of skirmishes occurred between the combatants, but the
decisive battle did not take place until some days after the marshalling of
the forces on both sides.
The battle will now be described, necessarily from the insurgent side,
as that side has handed down to us the most reliable accounts of the great
event.
On the morning of the battle, about eight o’clock, orders were received
from the Commander-in-Chief to retain in some secure place as many of
the explosive bullets, gas-balls (described in the second chapter) and other
ammunition as possible ; it was also ordered that the air-ships used to
convey baggage should be sent to the rear. It became evident that Oliver
Spence intended to disregard the Fabian tactics of the enemy and to give
battle at once. It also became known that a force of men from the capital
city of Leichhardt was marching to the support of the rebels.
An hour after, it was seen from the excitement among the staff-officers
that the battle was momentarily expected to begin. The insurgents
received orders to stand to their arms, and shortly afterwards Spence
ordered them to take up a very advantageous position on a gently rising
ground, where they awaited the enemy’s onslaught; for Marshall Israel
Smith had, it appeared, from the movements in his army, observed by the
insurgent officers, decided to pick up the gage of battle thrown down by
Spence.
Shortly after the insurgents had taken up their position, their right
was attacked by a portion of the enemy and warmly engaged by them,
but the insurgents beat them off, and by the orders of the Commander a
long line of portable steel barricades was erected between them and the
enemy. These, by the peculiar nature of their construction resisted all
the ammunition of the enemy, so that it became evident that Israel Smith’s
forces must attack the insurgents in the rear. This they at last succeeded
in doing, and soon the groans of the wounded and dying filled the air.


Owing to the fact that on both sides where powder was used, it was of the
smokeless, noiseless variety, the evils of war could be both seen and heard
in all their horror.
The fight continued for some hours with varying fortunes on both
sides, until Oliver Spence, who had hoped to win without resorting to the
more terrible means at his disposal, finding it impossible, ordered out the
Electric Bomb Throwers. These terrible engines of war were loaded
with large Panmort bombs and discharged their death-dealing con-
tents by means of a simple electrical appliance, which had then but
recently been invented. This action of the Revolutionary Commander
practically decided the battle, and the arrival at that time of the Leich-
hardt contingent was taken as a signal, and excuse for the immediate sur-
render of the Oligarchy’s army. The Oligarchy was completely and dis-
astrously defeated. Marshall Israel Smith and several officers shot them-
selves, rather than become prisoners, while nearly all the soldiers who
surrendered joined the revolution. Over half the Oligarchy’s forces had
been killed and the Revolutionists had also suffered severely. Spence had
conducted the battle with great skill and personal valor. Four horses had
been killed under him, and at one time he had been temporarily blinded
by the blood which gushed in his face from a comrade whose skull had
been shot away.
War is a dreadful thing, but is sometimes as necessary to save and
secure the lives and liberties of peoples, as on occasion a surgical operation
may be, to preserve the life of an individual.


CHAPTER VII.
FREE LAND, CHEAP MONEY, AND “CONFISCATION.”
Oliver returned to Sydney, the undisputed and supreme ruler of all
Australia. The people regarded him as a hero, and he was treated as one.
Vast triumphal arches covered with laudatory mottos and inscriptions of
welcome decorated the principal streets. Everyone smiled on him, every-
one rushed to shake him by the hand. It was even proposed to offer him
a throne and crown him king of Australia. But for such gee-gaws Oliver
had no mind, and so in no unhesitating fashion, he informed his admirers.
Until the expiration of his term of office he was the uncrowned “Tsar of
all the Australias,” and with that dignity he would rest content until the
time came for him to resign his office into the hands of those who had
elected him.
His sweetheart Mary was the first to meet him when he set foot in
Sydney. When she saw him, the tears in her eyes seemed to vanish and
to be replaced with a smile like a sunbeam. Her lover, her hero, her god,
was back in Sydney again, safe and sound, with the old winning smile, the
old manly bearing, free to stroll with her, to talk with her. Her happi-
ness was ecstatic, she walked on air, feeling so elastic, so buoyant, as she
walked by his side that she half-wondered why she did not fly off with
him into cloudland, there to wander until they reached the realms of the
blest.
Oliver, too, was happy in the company of his comrade-sweetheart,
and was busy considering how, when, and where their marriage should
take place, for needless to say he had long ago “popped the question,”and
had received her consent, but he was compelled to leave the problem un-
solved for the time, and to give his attention to weighty matters of State.
The Convention had appointed for Spence’s assistance and guidance a
Board of Advice, consisting of forty trusted and tried members of the
Brotherhood of the Poor, and after consulting with them, he determined
to issue a proclamation declaring that in future all unoccupied and unused
land should be treated as unowned, and the fiist-ccmer be lawfully en-
titled to take possession of it. This proclamation at once swept away
the monopolists, who for speculative purposes, had “locked-up” some of
the richest land in Australia, and it threw open to the people an immense
quantity of “ free land.”
His next step was the creation of a National Bank of Issue, such a
bank having been imperatively necessary, even before the collapse of the
private banks. The syndicates had introduced the system of farming upon
a large scale, with all kinds of elaborate and expensive machinery, driven
by steam, compressed air, or electricity. The consequence was that the
agricultural population had become so accustomed to these large farms,
which by their competition had reduced most of the farmers to the position


of hired labourers for the syndicates, that it appeared to most of them
impossible to farm successfully upon a small scale. Such of them as were
inclined to try, however, were at once advanced in the notes of the
National Bank, sufficient sums of money at very low rates of interest, to
enable them to earn their living from Mother Earth without crowding into
the already over-populated cities. Others were encouraged by the same
means to form co-operative agricultural companies ; and the rest of them,
those who appeared to require some person or persons whom they might
look upon as employers, were placed upon huge State farms, where they
were employed under the direction of competent State officials.
In the meantime it became quite evident to the Dictator that to sue.
cessfully carry on a National Bank at such a time of popular disturbance
as that following a terrible civil war, required a very considerable gold
basis for the Bank’s note issue. To secure this gold basis, he, therefore,
took possession of the whole of the coin and bullion remaining in the
vaults of the Federal Money Stronghold. This amounted to several hun-
dred millions sterling, for although some members of the ring—forseeing
the triumph of the Revolutionists—had escaped from Australia in their
private yachts, most of the financiers had remained, and believing that
their army would overthrow the Revolutionists, had lodged their valuables
for safety in the Money Stronghold.
There were, of course, a few men who still had sufficient hardihood to
shriek “confiscation” and “robbery” at the Dictator’s action, but he heeded
them not, for he did not forget that the reason why the Paris Commune of
1871 was overthrown was that the Commune refused to touch the money
in the Banks of Paris, and was thus bereft of the most necessary “sinews
of war.” The Dictator also called to mind the frightful vengeance of the
plutocratic conquerors of the Commune, and he resolved to put it out of
the power of the financiers to accomplish in Australia such a hideous
butchery as their class had perpetrated in France.
To meet the necessary expenses of Government the Dictator imposed
a tax upon land values, which was heavy where the demand for certain
land was great, and light where the demand was small, thus the most
productive or otherwise most desirable land paid the heaviest tax, which,
however, was not oppressively felt, as the amount required for the cost of
maintaining what was decidedly the least expensive Government ever
seen in Australia was very small.
The Dictator crowned his acts of “confiscation” by declaring private
property in land a crime against the people of Australia. All land should
in future, he proclaimed, be leased from the State, and should return to
the State at the death of the leaseholder. The leaseholder, could, how-
ever, possess property in his own improvements, which he might dispose
of, as it pleased him. It was also proclaimed that every man of the age
of 21 or over should be entitled to lease land from the State free of all
charges, except the ordinary tax on land values. To encourage young
men to marry and make a home, a loan from the funds of the National
Bank of Issue was made to every young married man leasing a homestead.


CHAPTER VIII.
THE WEDDING.
The time now rapidly approached for the marriage of Oliver and
Mary. Their lives, had been in tne past, of aby no means monotonously
happy character. Both of them had suffered, and suffered poignantly.
Mary herself had been a member of the ruling class. She had been reared
in luxury, and supplied with everything which wealth could provide for
her. But although supplied with every possible luxury, she was not
happy, for she craved for someone upon whom she could lavish the wealth
of affection which constituted so great and important a part of her healthy,
passionate nature. Possessed of the perfect and splendid form of a fully-
developed beautiful woman, she was also the possessor of the intense
emotionalism and perfect capacity for love, which is always the charac-
teristic of the natural woman whose ardent feminality has not been
diminished or destroyed by the indigence, or excessive luxury, which is
a usual concomitant of high civilization.
At last Mary met her complement in Oliver Spence, and as the
steel flies to the magnet, so she flew to, and clung to him. To her he
was perfection, the sound of his voice was to her ears the sweetest,
entrancing music, his utterances appeared the quintessence of wisdom,
and his appearance that of a Greek god. For him she threw up her
position in society, and her excellent opportunities of marrying some
rich man for whom she could have no love. Her friends condemned,
because they could not understand this “infatuation,” as they termed
it, for this poor, and obscure, suspected conspirator.
Her parents cast her off, and she was compelled to earn her living in
domestic service. Oliver, who reciprocated her affection, would have
married her, but although she was so passionately devoted to him that
she often felt willing to abandon everything to him, although every fibre
of her being ached and hungered for him, yet, so strangely are women
constituted that she indefinitely postponed the acceptance of his offer,
persuading herself that it was for his welfare ; that she would avoid the
possibility of impeding his progress, or fettering him in his great work.
Oliver’s triumph, however, altered matters. She saw that in his new
station she could be of considerable assistance to him, more particularly
as the people were beginning to marvel at, fand unfavorably comment upon,
the celibacy of their Dictator.
The marriage took place in the Sydney Town Hall, in the presence of
the members of the National Board of Advice, and a large concourse of
men and women. The bride looked very happy as she walked into the
Town Hall, accompanied by her new friends, the wives of some of the
most distinguished of the Revolutionists. She was attired in a white


satin dress, her face was veiled with point lace, her neck encircled with
pearls, and her head wreathed and crowned with orange blossoms.
The marriage ceremony was performed by the Registrar-General,
Oliver, although not an Atheist, had no belief in any of the current
religions, nor had his wife. The Dictator also desired a secular marriage,
in order that he might avoid the possibility of stirring up sectarian strife,
as, had he been married by the priest or minister of any Church, he might
have reasonably been supposed to be a member of that Church.
They left the Town Hall arm-in-arm, amid the admiring plaudits of
the multitude, who were charmed and transported by the extraordinary
beauty and grace of the Dictator’s wife. Arrived at Spence’s house,
they sat down, with a large number of guests, to the wedding breakfast.
Mary Lovelace had exchanged her name for that of her lover, and her
fondest wish, her highest ambition was gratified. Was she happy? Yes;
supremely, ineffably happy. She would not have exchanged her new posi-
tion for all the treasures in the world. She fondly followed her husband’s
every movement, and impatiently longed for the time when they would be
alone together, that she might throw her arms around his neck and devour
him with her burning kisses.
At last all the guests had departed, and the newly-married couple
retired together to their private apartments, where we will leave them,
for it is not our business to pry into the sacred and esoteric mysteries and
pleasures of the nuptial chamber.


CHAPTER IX.
A NEW GOVERNMENT AND A DIALOGUE ON GOVERNMENT.
Our hero and heroine seemed to both become younger by their ex-
perience of the unalloyed happiness which followed their marriage. Their
faces seemed softer and their eyes even kinder and gentler in expression.
The honeymoon was, owing to Oliver Spence’s position, necessarily a very
short one, so that in a few weeks Oliver was again giving close personal
attention to the State affairs of Australia. Mary was of great service to
him by her advice and assistance. She particularly interested herself in
the welfare of the weaker sex, and personally saw that the wish of the
Dictator, that all women who desired employment, should, on receipt of
their application be given suitable work, and paid the same wages as men
should be effectively carried out, and the fact that all women in need of
employment could at once go to the National Workshops, and, like the
men, receive the employment for which their physical or mental organiza-
tion best fitted them, did more in a few months to abolish the compulsory
unchastity of prostitution than all the canting or prurient members of
Social Purity societies, could, by their methods, have accomplished in some
centuries. It also obviated the necessity of mercenary marriages, a most
vile form of life-long prostitution, which the disciples of Social Purity,
had quite ignored.
So invaluable did Mary’s help in governing, become to Oliver, that
towards the period when his term of office was to expire, Australia was in
fact governed by Oliver and Mary conjointly. Nor did the people object
to this dual Dictatorship ; on the contrary, they valued and esteemed the
benign influence and actions of the Dictator’s beautiful wife, so that when
the Dictatorship expired, the National Electoral Convention elected them
both the Joint-Rulers of Australia. It was thought that the female half
of Australian humanity had rights to conserve quite as much as the male
half, and those rights could best be conserved by endowing Oliver’s
amiable wife, with administrative and legislative powers equal to his own.
The Joint-Rulers frequently had long conversations together about
the affairs of State and the principles of government, which, had they
been reported, would not have been without interest to the reader. The
following condensed abstract of one of these dialogues may serve to illus-
trate the principles of government upon which the new order of things
was founded:—
Mary : “ Although, my dear Oliver, we are the supreme rulers of
Australia, I cannot conceal from you that I still have some lingering belief
in Democracy or government by the people. We, as you know, are after
all, the appointed of a minority. ”
Oliver: “Government by the people might be right enough, my
dear, when they have for some considerable time enjoyed the advantages


of leisure, education, independence, and comfort. Pure Democracy is, I
believe, the only form of Government which is theoretically sound, and
were the people possessed of the advantages I have just mentioned, and
were there no wealthy class, but only a wealthy people, pure Democracy
would be possible and beneficial. But,thitherto,wealth has been the monopoly
of a class. Wealth is power, great power, whoever possesses the wealth of
a people, will rule that people, consequently, we have had in Australia, what
was in name a Democratic Government, but, in fact, an Oligarchy, composed of
the few men who owned Australia’s wealth. Though the masses had the
vote, there was no real Democracy, only Plutocracy, or Government by
the wealthy. The masses could read, but they were not educated, they
had neither means, nor leisure, to obtain a knowledge of economics, and of
the processes by which they were robbed and degraded. Indeed,
their knowledge of how to read actually had, under the circumstances, a
pernicious effect, for by its means they were enabled to read the class-
owned newspapers, which, having an enormous circulation, drugged with
lies, their gullible, ill-informed, toiling readers.”
Mary : “What you have said about the former condition of the
working-people, I know to be absolute truth, my dear Oliver, but why
would it not have been better to wait until, by oral propaganda, and the
use of an independent Democratic press, we had converted the majority,
and thus changed things peacefully ?”
Oliver : “Because, even if possible, a peaceful radical change would
have taken many generations, and we preferred to have the change in our
own time. Posterity can take care of itself. I am, besides, very doubt-
ful if the change could ever have been brought about by peaceful means.
Everything worth doing in the past, has been done by the sword in the
hands of a determined minority. Majorities may crucify a Christ, poison
a Socrates, and hang innocent men, like the so-called Anarchists, who,
many years ago were judicially murdered in Chicago, but they do not re-
form abuses, or radically change systems. Majorities are always too
much occupied with their own private and domestic affairs, to interest
themselves in anything but the doing to death of some unpopular poor
man. As to the peaceful reformation of society, men have been trying
that, ever since the commencement of the Christian Era. Here is a valu-
able work by C. Osborne Ward, who was in the days of the existence of
the United States of America, a Librarian and Translator to their Depart-
ment of Labour, his book is entitled “ The Ancient Lowly,” and he shows
that there were not only labour unions, more than two thousand years ago,
but that that the unions tried by peaceful political action and co-operation
to reconstruct society. Workers have been trying, by the same means,
ever since, but, as you know, without success. Listen to some of the
Labourer’s electioneering inscriptions, found among the ruins of Pompeii
overwhelmed a.d. 79 :
(1.) ‘The members of the Fishermens’Union, nominate Pompedius
Rufus for member of the Board of Public Works. ’


(2.) ‘ The International Goldworkers’ Association of the City of Pom-
peii demand for Member of the Board of Public Works, Cuspis Pansa.’
(3.) ‘Verna, the home-born, with her pupils, in all right, put Mrs.
Capella to the front for a seat on the Board of Magistrates. ’ ”
The workers failed then because the men of the sword were against
them, and they have failed since for the same reason.”
Mary : “But I have read, dear Oliver, that the workers in England
enjoyed great prosperity, ease, and plenty during the fifteenth century.
Surely, that was not brought about by the sword ?”
Oliver: “You are in error, my dear, Professor Thorold Rogers, and
other historians clearly show that it was chiefly brought about by the
temporary success of the partial “Revolt of the Peasants,” under the
leadership of Wat Tyler.”
Mary : “It does seem sad that justice cannot be obtained without the
sacrifice of human life.”
Oliver : “ It is sad enough, my dear, but true, and what is more, the
higher the civilization the greater seems the need of political surgery. If
a tree shows signs of disease, we lop off the infected branches to prevent
the spread of the disease, in the same way, when society becomes corrupt,
it is necessary to cut out that corruption in order to save society from com.
plete rottenness, and ultimate disintegration. The history of mankind
shows that the more highly civilized a society becomes, the greater is its
corruption, and, consequently the greater its need of a surgical operation
or judicious pruning.”
Mary; “To change the subject, somewhat, Oliver. Do you not
think that the old system of Parliamentary Government was in harmony
with Democratic principles
Oliver; “No, my dear; Parliamentary Government was a huge
farce. In the first place, it was not representative, partly because
no man can represent another, he can only ‘represent’ himself, so
that, if sent to Parliament with vague instructions to ‘represent’ his
constituents, he simply managed matters in his own interest; and partly
because of fraudulent practices at the elections, and the influence of the
rich man over those who were employed by him; or who were under obli-
gations to him; or who, strangely enough, admired and respected him,
because of the wealth he had legally cheated them out of. In the second
place, it being difficult to fix responsibility upon a whole Parliament,
its members were almost invariably venal and corrupt and, they
were animated by plutocratic class bias. In the third place, it is
reasonable to assume that it is easier to pick out one or two good and
great men in a nation than to discover a Parliament of such men. You
and I, Mary, are entrusted with power for a period of three 3- ears, and
the eyes of the whole nation are upon us, we two, and we only, are held
directly responsible by the nation, who could, if they so desired, depose


us and appoint others in our stead ; but in a Parliament, the responsibility
is scattered over such a number that it cannot be definitely fixed, so that
the majority of members always remain the instruments of plutocratic
cliques. It is true that we have been elected by a National Electoral
Convention, consisting only of the delegates of the Revolutionary minority,
but the nation knows definitely who its rulers are, and can rise and over-
throw us if it does not approve of our rule. ”
Mary-: “Do you think, my dear Oliver, that there is any possibility
of the people rising against us?”
Oliver : “ None, my dear. Without laying too much stress on the
apathy, not to say cowardice of the average man of the majority, their
remain the facts that the people are now far better oft’ than they were in
the days of the Plutocracy, and that we have not left our enemies the
money to pay for a counter-revolution.”
This concluded the conversation, and after transacting some business,
our hero and heroine quitted the Treasury Buildings, where the conversa-
tion had taken place, and returned to their private house.


CHAPTER X.
MOKE CHANGES.
Among the laws made by Oliver and Mary, was one absolutely pro-
hibiting the taking of interest upon money, by any person outside the
officials of the National Bank, who were empowered to collect, for State
purposes, and none other, 2 per cent.; being the interest upon the loans
advanced by the National Bank. This interest was, of course, paid only
by the Bank’s debtors, The operations of the National Bank, which had
already been of enormous service to the poor of both country and town,
were extended, and its functions were made to include the payment (in
National notes) of Government employees, who now constituted an im-
mense multitude, as all government work was done by the State, instead
of by private contractors. The taxes were also received by the Bank, as
were deposits. In short, the Bank, together with the other departments
of government, became such formidable competitors against “private
enterprise,” that the private capitalist was rapidly being impioved off the
face of the earth.
The members of the legal profession were replaced by skilled arbitra-
tors in each State, who decided all matters brought before them. No
charge was made to the litigants, but vexatious or malicious prosecutions
were severely punished. There existed the right of appeal against the
Arbitrators’ decision, to the Rulers, Oliver and Mary, but this right was
seldom exercised.
The members of the medical profession were appointed and regulated
by a State Medical Board. The services of medical men were given
free of charge to the patients, all expenses being met by the State.
Religion was left entirely to the various religious sects. Nothing in
the nature of State assistance, for any purpose whatever, was granted any
church. It was generally felt that in the past, religion had been used for
the purpose of chloroforming the intelligence of the poor, and that the
ministers of religion had acted as a sort of spiritual police, maintained
(chiefly by the rich) for the purpose of enjoining the poor to be content
with their poverty, and not to lay violent hands on the ill-gotten posses-
sions of the wealthy. The people could also not avoid remarking how
much the practice, and even precept of the so-called Christian ministry,
contrasted with the life and teachings of Jesus and the Apostles. It was
mentioned that bishops and other ecclesiastics in receipt of large in-
comes from their churches, had been among the most prominent of the
extortionate financial syndicates, which had paid themselves enormous
dividends out of the toil, tears, and disasters of the unfortunate poor.
The Railways, which had been sold to the financiers, were resumed;
of course, without compensation, and run free of all charge to passengers


or those transmitting freight. It was considered by the Rulers that
charging those who used the “ iron roads” of the country was as unreason-
able and short-sighted a system, as that which formerly prevailed in some
countries of charging tolls for the use of stone roads and bridges. The
country derived great benefit from the increased settlement of the people
on the soil, which resulted from the abolition of freight-charges, and as
these charges were, of course, not added to the prices of the articles pro-
duced, the consumer was benefited as much as the producer. In order to
utilise the vast mineral and other natural resources of the interior, a
Central City was created in the heart of Australia, having direct railway
communication with all the coastal cities of the great island-continent.
The Rulers recognised that Australia had in the past, suffered severely
from the want of sufficient facilities for the irrigation of the soil, and the
conservation of the waters of the country. They, therefore, ordered the.
construction ol artesian wells, which obtained immense supplies of water
from the subterranean riverine system of the interior ; and the waters
were stored in gigantic reservoirs, whence, when required, they were con-
veyed by means of acqueducts and canals to the lands which needed them.
It was also found possible to construct canals for purposes of
which was done, the people finding that, unlike railways, they were not
destructive of natural beauties, and were sometimes preferable to railways
in many other respects.
Any person who, after the payment of the tax on land values, and the
interest on money borrowed from the National Bank, was found to have an
annual nett income of more than three hundred pounds sterling was cumu-
latively taxed on that income, as it was considered that the possession and
enjoyment of a larger income than the sum named tended to foster the ex-
cessive luxury in one class, and resultant poverty in another class, which
had already destroyed the world’s greatest civilizations.
The right of inheritance was limited to articles which could not he
used to enable people to live in idleness by the private employment, ex-
ploitation and consequent robbery of the workers.
The abrogation during the Dictatorship, of all Civil law, had, of
course, included all laws for the collection of debts. The holders of
Australian Debentures and Treasm - y Bills, were very angry at this, and
most of them, being Englishmen, called upon the English Government to
enforce payment. But Russia had so seriously crippled the power of Eng-
land, that she made no attempt to do so.
Oliver and Mary proclaimed that in future no Australian Government
or municipal council should be empowered to borrow money from any per-
son, or from any institution, other than the National Bank. The debts
of the National Bank were the only debts which, together with the taxes,
were compulsorily paid. In enforcing their payment, however, the
greatest care was taken to avoid the infliction of undue hardship, and in no


case was a debtor reduced to the condition of destitution and abject poverty
which was so prevalent during the reign of the financial rings.
The Rulers, believing with John Ruskin, a Nineteenth Century writer,
that “ the use of substances of intrinsic value as the materials of a cur-
rency is a barbarism,” forbade any further production of gold and silver
money, and decreed that as soon as the coin then in circulation should
have become light or defaced, it should be replaced by notes of the Na-
tional Bank. It gave the Rulers particular pleasure to issue this decree,
as it appeared to them folly, and even worse, to waste such a vast amount
of labour in dangerously seeking and mining for metals which were not
actually necessary as money. The Rulers regarded with particular horror
the hardships of the silverminer’s life, and the diseases to which he was
peculiarly subject. It was decided that the reserves of the National Bank
should be kept in ingots of gold, until the increased confidence of the
people in the new order of tilings should render gold reserves no longer
necessary.
The Rulers thus having done all that it appeared to them possible to
do by legislation, to bring about the abolition of that private ownership of
great wealth, which results in the degradation of the many by the com-
bined, cunning few, determined to rest upon their laurels and await the
beneficent influence upon the people, of just, and ennobling laws and
institutions.


CHAPTER XL
THE NEW GARDEN OF EDEN.
Upon the map of North America there for many years appeared the
words, “ Great American Desert,” until there arose, in what was then the
United States, but as our readers are aware is now a portion of the great
American Empire, a man of singular proselytizing power, whose name was
Joseph Smith. He asserted that the text of a book which he termed the
“ Book of Mormon,” had been revealed to him by supernatural agency.
Many thousands of people believed him and a new sect was formed called
“The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints.” The new church
increased and multiplied, notwithstanding its uncomfortably long name,
but its members, though many, were not popular, and in a few years the
assassination of Joseph Smith, and other persecutions, caused these
“Saints” to pack up their household gods and journey into the “Great
American Desert,” which they discovered to be not a desert, but a land of
promise, which by their industry they shortly made to flow with milk and
honey.
History repeats itself. A scientific theory is propounded, discussed,
later on accepted as irrefragable truth ; suddenly some savant detects a
fallacy in the theory, the theory shrinks, crumbles, and fades away.
Years after, the same theory is again propounded, accepted, exploded, re-
jected. Science, as well as superstition has its exploded dogmas, but
although those dogmas may be slain, they are capable of a cursed resurrec-
tion. Geography, in particular, has its unsound theories and fetishes.
Let us see how a geographical fetish demolished in America re-appeared in
Australia.
If the r eader will go to the National Australian Museum and take a
look at the old maps of Australia, which were current before the Federa-
tion of the Australian States, he will observe a large space marked
“ Great Sandy Desert.” The tract of land so named was believed to be an
immense wilderness of sand, salt and stone. Lion-hearted men had sallied
out to explore the mysterious interior of Australia, and some of them had
never more been heard of. It was conjectured that they had met their
death among the burning stones and glistening patches of salt, of the
“Great Sandy Desert.”
The Federal Exploring Party determined to explore every rood of
this terrible desert. Perchance they would stumble upon some deposit of
gold or precious stones, which would add more wealth to the possessions
of the Plutocracy. They found wealth, but it was of a different kind.
It was a priceless treasure. A community of simple, honest, truthful,
unsophisticated white people !
For some distance through the Desert the explorers travelled without


meeting with anything but the traditional burning sand and blistering
stones, until, almost without warning, they found themselves in a hilly
country, and green growths began to show between the interstices of the
stones. As the explorers ascended, the air grew cooler, and the glare of
the sun on the soil less painful to the eyes. Soon the travellers were
astonished and delighted to observe what appeared to be human habitations
in the far distance. The explorers proceeded, and cotrld hardly be-
lieve their eyes when they found themselves walking along a rustic road,
with smiling fields, and picturesque houses and cottages, the invitingly
open doors of which, seemed to offer lavish hospitality to the hungry and
weary travellers. The houses and fields appeared to be deserted, however,
and although the travellers called a halt, and cooeed, no answer was re-
ceived. Exhausted nature could hold out no longer, and the travellers
marched into one of the largest of the houses. There was no one within.
The first chamber in which they found themselves was apparently a sort
of reception-room, although there were none to receive them. It was fur-
nished in a quaint, comfortable style, which, to the travellers, seemed
vaguely familiar. They threw themselves into the roomy arm-chairs, and
rested and waited. Still no host. There were several open doors leading
to other chambers, so at.last they determined to explore the house still
further. They passed into another chamber and found themselves in a
large dining-hall, containing several tables c.overed with fruit, bread, and
what looked like wine ; they soon found that it was wine, light, but good,
the fruits were luscious, the bread sweet and mi Ik-flavoured. Having
made sad havoc with the edibles, and eaten their fill, our burglars passed
out into the road again. They had been walking about fifteen minutes
when they heard, 0 joy of joys! the plashing of water and voices speak-
ing in what seemed to be the English language. They rushed hastily in
the direction of the sound, and who shall paint their astonishment when
they beheld a fine blue lake, in which were a number of young men and
women bathing, chatting and laughing together, apparently supremely
unconscious of any possible impropriety in their conduct.
The strangers soon attracted the attention of the bathers, and at once
an old man, who had been sitting smiling at the sportive gambols of the
young people, came forward, and with an expression of astonishment,
not unmixed with alarm, upon his honest, aged face, inquired of the
strangers, in very excellent, courteous English, whence they had come.
In a few words the strangers informed their interrogator that they formed
a party fitted out by the Australian Government for the purpose of ex-
ploring the Great Sandy Desert. The old man listened attentively, but
not without some apparent uneasiness.
Meantime the arrival of the intruders had abruptly put an end to the
aquatic sports of the swimmers. They left the water and first drying
their bodies with some pieces of a white, soft material, which were strewn
about the bank, leisurely proceeded to clothe themselves in loose, scanty
garments of the same material. That work completed, they stood around
in graceful attitudes, awaiting the attention of the Elder, as he was called.


The Elder led the way to a large bath-house, where the strangers re-
freshed themselves with baths, were conducted back to the dining-
hall, and invited to partake of further refreshment, which invitation they
sparingly availed themselves of. They informed the Elder that they had
already taken the liberty of breakfasting in that house ; but beseemed to
take it as a matter of course, and spoke laughingly of the surprised ex-
clamations of the young folks on beholding their breakfasts partially
demolished.
Refreshments over, the travellers entered into a long discussion with
the Elder as to the people and nature of this strange region.
The part of the country in which the travellers found themselves, was,
it appeared from the Elder’s account, one of the valleys which existed in
that district. The travellers were told that the country which was there
mountainous, was well watered by the springs and streams which abound
there. The origin of his people the Elder could not tell. They appeared
to have been there for many generations. He could only tell them that
he did not believe they had always been as white as the explorers now
saw them. Many generations ago, a party of white explorers, under the
leadership of Dr. Leichhardt had come among them in a famishing, fevered,
half-delirious condition, and the good people of the valley, had nursed
them back to health again. Dr. Leichhardt and his company were so
delighted with their kindness, and enchanted by their manners and cus-
toms, that he married and settled down among the residents of the valley,
at the same time enjoining them never to seek the land from whence Dr.
Leichhardt had come, as it was evil, corrupt, and the abode of all forms of
cruelty and fraud. They had taken his advice and avoided communication
with the coastal settlements, living in consequence, a life of tranquility,
harmony and comfort, which was entirely unknown to the human beasts
of burden of “civilization.”
These dwellers in the valleys formed a number of purely Democratic,
self-governing communities. There were no police, no military, no parlia-
ments, no “governments,” in the ordinary sense. The inhabitants looked
respectfully to the old, and, consequently, experienced men of the com-
munity for advice, but when anything had to be done, the people met
together in public meetings, discussed the matter, and did it.
There was no enforcement of private property, but, generally speaking,
private property scarcely existed. Onty when an individual manifested,
for sentimental, or other valid reason, an attachment for some particular
article, was he allowed to retain it as his ; and then, chiefly because some
simi'ar articles were easily to be obtained by any who wished for them.
In an easy-going fashion, each did what he or she could to supply the
needs of the community, yet, although there was no compulsion to labour,
there was always plenty produced. “ Thrift” was unknown, but so was
wanton waste. Nearly all the necessary duties of life, such as working,
eating, bathing, and so forth, were performed in companies. Harmonious
co-operation pervaded the lives of these unsophisticated people.


Strict monogamy prevailed, yet there were no marriage ceremonies,
other than the public kiss, bestowed by the man upon the woman, who had
consented to be his wife, and which kiss she also publicly returned.
Bananas, pine-apples, oranges, guavas, grapes, mangoes, bread-fruit,
eocoa-nuts and many other tropical and semi-tropical fruits grew and still
grow in great profusion there.
Both men and women wore a sort of silken, flimsy drapery, manufac-
tured by a simple process, from the inner bark of a tree. The natives were
handsome, and the manner in which they draped their stately forms harmon-
ised well with their cdassic regularity of features.
Such, our Federal Explorers gathered from the Elder, were the cha-
racter, resources and customs of this strange, primitive and amiable people.
They were charmed, and felt inclined to follow the example of Dr. Leich-
hardt, and marry and settle down among them. Bnt in a few months
ambition gained its victory over them and they returned to civilization,
their return being hastened by the discovery in the valley, of immense
natural deposits of jasper and other precious stones.
On the return of the explorers a great sensation was created by their
report. A syndicate was at once formed for the purchase of the jasper
fields, and missionaries were sent under the protection of military for the
purpose of converting these benighted heathen.
The natives refused to sell any part of their country, or to have any-
thing to do with the missionaries, upon which the military gave them a
lesson in Plutocratic Christianity and brotherly love, by promptly shooting
a great number of them. The new-comers then seized the land, annexed the
fields of precious stones and settled down to spread “Christianity,” loathsome
diseases, sweating, prostitution and other “blessings of civilization.” A
great tide of emigration from the coast to the interior set in and the
newly-discovered country became a part of the Federation, under the title
of the State of Leichhardt. But when the Revolution came, Leichhardt
was among the first to declare in its favor, and to promise military assis-
tance. The Federal Government deciding to chastise Leichhardt for its
“insolence,” sent its forces there, where they were met by the Revolution-
ary army, and in the Great Battle (described in a previous chapter), com-
pletely defeated.


CHAPTER XII.
WORK, AND DOVE, AND PARADISE.
It is twenty years after the demolition of the Austral Bank by the
Revolutionists, under the leadership of Oliver Spence.
The sun is shining brightly through the trees, the sky is as beautiful
in its heavenly blue as only an Australian sky can be, the birds, filled
with the joy of living, are twittering merrily.
Two well-dressed men are strolling leisurely along, chatting together
in a friendly manner. The elder of the two is probably about forty-four
years of age, the other some ten years younger.
“I suppose, Jack, that your pension will soon be due,” says the
younger man.
“ Not for another year yet, Tom,” says the other. “I am not forty-
five yet, and the pension is not due until I reach that age.”
“Times were very different when we were young, Jack. No labour
day of four hours and a retirement pension at forty-five then. Nothing
but uncertainty of employment, low wages, long hours, and the possi-
bility of a pauper’s grave stared us in the face. ”
“\ ou may well say that, Tom. lam older than you, and I have
seen more, but I never saw a workman going to his work dressed as we are,
nor taking his time about it, as we are. And the misery that existed
among the workers was appalling. It is marvelous how they could have
endured it so long. I would willingly have gone through two revolutions
to abolish such an iniquitous tyranny as that of the usurious plutocracy
which then held sway. Under the old regime no man could be certain
that his life would not terminate amidst scenes of abject pauperism or
desperate criminality. Now w T e are all certain of a suitable occupation
and an honorable career. There is work for all, and overwork and slavery
for none.”
“ What do you think of the new law, giving every man and woman
in the country a vote ?”
“ I quite approve of it. At the same time, although many find fault
with the Revolutionists for seizing political power, and holding it without
consulting the majority, I think they did right. The majority at that
time had not sufficient courage to take up arms against any government,
Revolutionary or otherwise, but they had been so deluded by the press,
the politicians, and the rest of those who were “in the swim,” that they
would certainly have voted against the Revolutionists had they been given
the power.”
“They have changed now, Jack.”


“Yes, for not only have the government teachers of economics been
abroad, but people have now had several years convincing experience of
the happiness that is possible in a land where the usurer, the land-mon-
opolist, and the profit-monger are things of the past. I am glad that
Oliver and Mary were re-elected with such almost unanimity. ”
“ Yes, Jack, they are wise, good, and courageous rulers. Of course,
they have been malignantly slandered, and attempts have been made to
assassinate them, but that must always be expected by any public man
who honestly tries to do good and to act justly, particularly if he directs
his efforts against the immoral cupidity and tyranny of rich men. Well,
I must leave you now, Jack ; here’s my shop.”
With these words, the younger man disappeared within the doors of
one of the Government boot factories, while his comrade, a furniture
worker, proceeded on his way.
We will leave him, and freely using the privilege of authors and their
readers, respectfully listen to the conversation of the noble-looking couple
who are now approaching. The man is apparently about fifty years of
age, his wife but a few years younger. They are walking arm-in-arm and
cling together with an evident undisguised love for each other, which,
though common enough among married people in these times, was seldom
observed in the years of moral night which preceded the Revolution.
“I could die happy now, my sweet Mary,” said the man, “my mission
is accomplished. The Australian people are not only free, but happy, and
the happiness which follows freedom from care is a glorious boon.”
“Do not talk of dying, my own dear Oliver,” answered his wife, “we
have many more years to live, and much good to do, even yet. There are
people called Anarchists, who object to the payment of taxes and desire to
do as they please, free from all governmental interference. They may
make trouble yet.”
“I think not, my dear. Australia is large enough to enable me to
help the Anarchists to form a settlement somewhere in the interior, where
they may live according to their ideas and without government, if they
can. Let us talk no more of politics, let us rather talk of love, which
transforms even the deformed, but makes of the beautiful the angelic.
My darling you are my angel, and I love and adore you with the same
fervor as in my youth,”
“My own dear faithful Oliver,” said Mary, as her eyes brightened and
her face flushed with the fervour of her love for her husband. “You
darling,” she said, as she passionately kissed his lips. “ Let us go home.”
But the married lovers did not go home. They sought a little rustic
seat, and there the rulers of a great empire sat pouring out to each other
vows and protestations of eternal, unchanging love. The occasional
passers-by turned away their heads with a pleased smile, and even the birds
on the trees seemed to sing with greater joy, but the lovers heeded them not.


Hours passed away, and the sky became stormy, red, and flaming, as
the sun sunk down like a dying Revolutionist, amidst the blood-tinged
clouds, but the lovers beheld it with serenity and confidence, for they
knew that to-morrow it would rise upon a land of peace and plenty?
where the insults of the rich and the whines of the slave were alike
unheard ; and where just laws, wise government, and an equitable social
system were making an earthly Paradise of what had been a veritable
Inferno,


jArp
l?>i6L.fo
f I*dOh 3
v cmA
3 1508 00247562




' /
-*•
