

* ;i % Kvl SC
Pern
bo/
K
(iDllii JJodrida.
? CARS TO OUR COFFIN ADDS A NAIL NO DOUBT,
BUT EVERT GRIN BO MERRT DRAWS ONE OUT,?
Melbourne;:
HENBIQUES AND CO., PRINTER?, ? HERALD? PASSAGI, BODRKB SIRMT.
1870.
X
C


SCOLDING MATCH EXTRAORDINARY.
o?connell and mbs. mohiarty.
In Madden?s ? Revelations of Ireland ? we find a whim-
sical account of a scolding match between the late Mr.
O?Connell, then a young man just called to the Bar, and
one Biddy Moriarty, an ancient widow, who kept a
huckster?s stall on one of the quays nearly opposite the
Eour Courts, and whose powers of abuse were notorious
from one end of Dublin to the other. The lingual duello
was the result of a wager, Mr. O?Connell backing himself
to outscold and silence the virago. The result is thus
described :
The party adjourned to the huckster?s stall, and there
was the owner herself, superintending the sale of her
small wares?a few loungers and ragged idlers were
lounging round her stall, for Biddy was a ? character,?
and, in her way, was one of the sights of Dublin.
O?Connell was very confident of success. He had
laid an ingenious plan for overcoming her, and, with all
the anxiety of an ardent experimentalist, waited to put it
into practice He resolved to open the attack. At this
tune O?Connell?s own party, and the loungers about the
place, formed an audience quite sufficient to rouse Mrs.
Moriarty, on public provocation, to a due exhibition of
her powers. O?Connell commenced the attack.


? What?s the price of this walking stick, Mrs What?s-
your-Name.??
? Mori riy, sir, is ray name, and a good one it is ; and
what have you got to say agen it ? and one and sixpence?s
the price of the stick. Troth, it?s chape as dirt, so it is ?
? One-and-Sixpence for a walking stick,whew! Why
you are no better than an impostor to ask eighteen-pence
for what cost you twopence.?
? Twopence your grandmother !? replied Mrs. Biddy ;
??do you mane to say that it?s chating the people I am 1
impostor, indeed !?
? Ay, impostor ; and it?s that I call you to your
teeth,? rejoined O?Connell.
? Come, cut your stick, you cantankerous jackanapes,?
? Keep a civil tongue in your head, you old diagonal ,?
cried O?Connell calmly.
? Stop your jaw you pug-nosed Badger, or by this
and that,? cried Mrs Moriarty, ? I?ll make you go
quicker nor you came.?
? Don?t be in a passion, my old radius ?auger will
only wrinkle your beauty.?
? By the hokey, if you say another word of impudence
I?d tan your hide, you bastely common scrub ; and sorry
I?d be to soil my lists upon your carcase.?
? Whew! boys, what a passion old Biddy is in ; I
protest as I am a Gentleman?.?
? Jintleman ! jintleman ! the likes of you a jintleman !
Wisha, by gore, that bangs Banager. Why, you potato-
faced pippin-sneezer, where did a Madagascar monkey
like you pick enough of common Christian dacency to
hide your Kerry brogue ??


? Easy, now?easy now,? cried O?Connell, with im-
perturbable good humour, ? don?t choke yourself with
fine language, you old whisky-drinking parallelogram."
? What?s that you call me, you murderin? villian ??
roared Mrs. Moriarty, stung into fury.
? I call you,? answered O?Connell, ? a parallelogram ;
and a Dublin judge and jury will say that it?s no libel to
call you so !?
?Oh ! tare-an-hounds ! Oh, holy Biddy ! that an
honest women like me should be called a parry bellygrum
to her face ! I?m none of your parrybellygrums, you
rascally gallows-bird; you cowardly, sneaking, plate-
lickin? bliggard !?
? Oh, not you, indeed !? retorted O?Connell; ? why,
I suppose you?ll deny that you keep a hypothenuse in
your house ??
? It?s a lie for you, you robber ; I never had
such a thing in my house, you swindling thief.?
? Why, sure all the neighbours know very well that
you keep not only a hypothenuse, but that you have got
two diameters locked up in your garret, and that you go
out to walk with them every Sunday, you heartless old
heptagon .? ,
� Oh, hear that, ye saints of glory ! Oh, there s bad
language from a fellow that wants to pass for a jintle-
man! May the divil fly away with you, you micher from
Munster, and make celery sauce of your rotten limbs, you
mealy-mouthed tub of guts !?
? Ah ! you can?t deny the charge, you miserable sub-
multiple of a duplicate ratio?
? 00, rinse your mouth in the Liffey, you nasty tickle-


pitcher ; after all the bad words you speak it ought to be
filthier than your face, you dirty chicken of Beelzebub ?
? Rinse your own mouth, you wicked old polygon ?to
the deuce I pitch you, you blustering intersection of a
superficies !?
? Yen saucy tinker?s apprentice, if you don?t cease
your jaw I?ll but here she gasped for breath,
unable to hawk up any more words, for the last volley of
O?Connell had nearly knocked the wind out of her.
? While I have a tongue I?ll abuse you, you most
inimitable periphery. Look at her, boys ! There she
stands ?a convicted perpendicular in petticoats ! There?s
contamination in her circumference , and she trembles
with guilt, down to the extremities of her carollaries.
Ah ! you?re found out, you rectilineal antecedent , and
equiangular old hag ! ?Tis with you the devil will fly
away, you porter-swiping similitude of the bisection of a
vortex !?
Overwhelmed with this torrent of language, Mrs.
Moriarty was silenced. Catching up a saucepan, she was
aiming at O?Connell? head, when he very prudently
made a timely retreat,
? You have won the wager, O?Connell, here?s your
bet,? cried the gentleman who proposed the contest.
O?Connell knew well the use of sound in the vitupe-
ration ; and having to deal with an ignorant scold,
determined to overcome her in volubility by using all the
sesquipedalia verba which occur in Euclid. With these,
and a few significant epithets, and a scoffing, impudent
demeanour, he had for once imposed silence on Mrs.
Biddy Moriarty.


JEJROPtIECIKS
SISTER ROSA COLUMBA
? The object of Prophecy," according to the Angelic Doctor,
? ? is the knowledge of Divine Truth, ?
Holy Scripture says : ? When Prophecy shall fail, the People
shall he scattered abroad." ?Proverbs.
Extract from an account, deposited in the Episcopal
Court of Yentiniglia, of the predictions of Sister iiosA
Columba, a Dominican Nun, who died in the Monastery
of St. Catherine, at Taggia, on the 6th June, 1847 :
Sister Rosa was of noble family, and took the veil
early in life ; she was chiefly remarkable for her great
simplicity, her exactness in the fulfilment of her duties,
her sph?it of prayer, and her mortifications.
Sis foretold the interview between Gregory XYI.
and the Emperor of Russia, the efforts of protestantism
in Italy, and that the successor of Gregory XYI, would
he a Pope, Pius in youth, character, and name. She said
that the acclamations which saluted Pius IX. would last
but a short time and change into insults. On hearing the
cries of joy which greeted the Holy Father, she wepk and
begged her sisters to pray, saying, ? That the time would
come when the Pope would be persecuted, forced to
abandon his see, and be despoiled of his government by


his own children.? ? The Holy Father,? she added, ? will
lose his Throne, but it will be- restored to him by
Napoleon.?
This prediction of hers is attested on oath by many
persons who heard her speak it frequently, and in parti-
cular by the lawyer, Philip Grhu, of Taggia, Procurator of
the Monastery, who used to say to Sister Rosa, in jest: ?
? Well, then, so we are to see Napoleon rise again ??
?You know nothing about it,? she would reply, ? yet
you will see the Pope restored to his throne by Napoleon.
Monsignor de Albertis, who was bishop of Yentiniglia
when His Holiness fled from Rome, wrote to the Nuns of
Taggia that he would believe Sister Rosa?s prophecies if
he should see the Pope restored to his throne by Napoleon
This letter is still preserved by the Nuns.
? Poor Louis Philippe,? she often said, ? he will fly
from France and die an exile in England. Many tri-
coloured flags will appear with the banners oi the Pope,
and the priests will be forced to bless them. This will be
the signal of the war which will afterwards break out. The
king of Piedmont, Charles Albert, will be the first to join
in the conflict; he will be conquered and obliged, to fly
into exile, and will soon die on the confines of Spain. To
him will succeed a childish reign, which will terminate by
the dethronement of the king.?
? Speaking of Napoleon,? she said : ? The reign of
Napoleon will not last long, but he will soon lose his
throne.?
?In consequence of the dethronement of Napoleon
there will arise a great persecution against the Church,
which will be the work of her own children.?


A persecutor, whom she called ? the precursor of
Antichrist,? will arrive. She spoke of him as being then
born, and said that he will call himself the Redeemer;
that many sectaries will join him ; that they will perse-
cute the Church, both Avith false doctrines and by violence,
and will be so subtle in their malice that they will
deceive many with their wiles.
?At the same time there will be a sanguinary war.?
She spoke ot it with horror?? great confusion of nations,
noise of drums and arms, ruins accumulated in Italy.?
She often exclaimed, ? Poor Italy !?
Speaking of Taggia itself, she said : ? All the religious
will not persevere.? The Nuns, who often heard her repeat
this prophecy, say that she did not speak of perseverance
in the faith, but of perseverance in the Monastery?but
those who remain firm will be crucified upon the Mount
?a place within the enclosure of the Monastery planted
with olives ?together with other persons who will take
refuge in the Monastery.
The confessors of the faith will be consoled in these
troubles by pious and learned priests, especially by those
of the order of St. Dominic.
Speaking again, in general, she said : ? A few bishops
will fall away from the faith, but the majority will re-
main firm and will suffer much for the Church.
That there would be a great revolution throughout
Europe ; that the nobles would be imprisoned, and a
spirit of wild democracy prevail; that peace would not be
restored until the white flower?the lily of the descend-
ants of St. Louis?should be restored to the throne of
France.


That the Eussians and the Prussians would bring war
into Italy and turn the Churches into stables ; that horses
would be lodged in the new Church of her Monastery.
And. because she saw it would serve' as a stable for the
Muscovite horses, she never would give her vote for its
erection. ? When it is built,? she repeated, ? never will
I hear mass in that Church, for the Eussians will stable
their horses there,? and, in fact, she died six months
before the Church was blessed. That the persecution
would take place in the lifetime of her Sisters.
That Austria, Eussia, and Prussia, would league
together against the rebels, and that Prussia would sub-
mit to the Church. England would be converted.
That the Eussians would be admonished by the Sove-
reign Pontiff, and be more humane towards Catholics.
That the Eussians will take Constantinople, and the
Austrians Jerusalem.
Then the Eussians will encamp in Piedmont, and the
king, Victor Emanuel, will have lost the kingdom and
will be a Eussian General.
Some sovereigns invade France, which is desolated by
civil war, but they will not have arrived in Paris before it
is already destroyed by fire. Before that there will be in
Paris?famine, pestilence, and civil war.
Then Henry V. will be King of France and he will
leave the isle of captivity.
Next, England will become Catholic, with two Sove-
reigns of Germany.
Antichrist will come into the world in 1856.
Fifteen years after Paris has been destroyed, the great
peace of the Church and of Europe will be troubled by the


Russians. France, Austria and Germany will give battle
to the Russians, and that battle will last three days, be-
tween Minden, Holtum, and Werl. After three days
there will be a decisive struggle at a mound called the
Birch tree, and the Russians will be defeated.
The Bourbons will end in France. The Jews will be-
come Christian. Great cities will be destroyed. Anti-
christ will begin to make himself known.
But the time of the end has begun ; God combats by
his two just ones, but the man of sin is victorious. Then
God burns the world.
Another old German prophecy says?of the battle near
the Birch tree : ? The Prince, who will fight this great
battle, will start from Bremen (a village near Werl) ;he
will see the enemy near the Birch tree
Near to Holtum there is a crucifix between two lime trees;
he will kneel before it and pray with his arms extended.
Then he will lead his soldiers, dressed in white uni-
forms, to battle, and will be victorious after a terrible
struggle.?
The Prophecy of St. Malachi alludes to eleven more
Popes, successors of Pius IX. ?In the last persecution
against the Holy Roman Church.? says the Prophet, in
terminating, ? a Peter will fill the Apostolic Chair.?
Thus the name of the first apostle will be that of the last
Pontiff; recalling the promise of those words of the
Saviour : ? Thou art Peter (a rock), and upon this rock I
will build my Church.?


By Macaulay.
There is not, and there never was, on this earth, an
institution so well deserving of examination as the Eoman
Catholic Church. The history of that Church joins
together the two great ages of civilization. No other
institution is left standing which carries the mind back
to the time when the smoke of sacrifice rose from the
Pantheon, and when camelopards and tigers bounded in
the Flavian amphitheatre. The proudest royal houses
are hut of yesterday when compared with the line of
the Supreme Pontiffs. That line we trace back, in an
unbroken series, from the Pope who crowned Napoleon
in the nineteenth century, to the Pope who crowned
Pepin in the eighth ; and far beyond the time of Pepin
does this august dynasty extend.
The republic of Venice came next in antiquity, but
the republic of Venice was modern when compared with
the Papacy ; and the republic of Venice is gone, and the
Papacy remains, not in decay, not a mere antique, but
full of life and youthful vigour. The Catholic Church is
still sending to the farthest ends ol the world missionaries
as zealous as those who landed "in Kent with St. Augustin,
and still confronting hostile kings with the same spirit
with which she confronted Attila. The nur\ her of her
children is greater than in any former age. Her ac-
quisitions in the new world have more than compensated
her for what she has lost in the old. Her spiritual
ascendancy extends over the vast countries which lie
between the plains of Missouri and Cape Horn; countries


which a century hence, may not improbably contain a
population as large as that which now inhabits Europe.
The members of her communion are certainly not fewer
than one hundred and fifty millions. Nor do we see any
sign which indicates that the term of her long dominion
is approaching- She saw the commencement of all the
Governments and of all the ecclesiastical establishments
that now exist in the world, and feels no assurance that
she is not destined to see the end of them all. She was
respected before the Saxon had set foot in Britain, before
the Frank had passed the Rhine, when Grecian eloquence
still flourished at Antioch, when idols were still worship-
ped in the temple of Mecca ; and she may still exist, in
undiminished vigour, when some traveller from New
Zealand shall in the midst of a vast solitude, take hia
stand upon a broken arch of London Bridge, to sketch,
the ruins of St. Paul?s.
GENERAL RILEY?S SPEECH
IN THE MISSOURI HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
February 8, 1861.
After a long and heated discussion on the reference-
of a bill amending the charter of the City of Carondelet
to a standing Committee of the House.
Mr. Eiley obtained the floor, and addressed the House.


Mr. Speaker,?Everybody is a pitching into this
matter like toad frogs into a willow swamp on a lovely
evening in the balmy month of June, when the mellow
light of the new moon fills with a delicious flood the thin,
ethereal atmospheric air. (Applause.) Sir, I want to
put in a word, or perhaps a word and half.
There seems to be a disposition to fight, I say, if
there is any fighting to be done, come on with your
corn-combs and lightning-bugs ! (Applause.)
Now, there has been a great deal of bombast here to-
day. I call it bombast from ? Alpha ?to ? Omega.? Sir,
the question to refer is a great and magnificent question.
It is the all-absorbing question ?like a sponge, Sir, ?a
large unmeasurable sponge, of globe shape, in a small
tumbler of water ?it sucks up everything. Sir, the
debate has assumed a latitudinosity. We have had a
little black-jack buncombe, a little two-bit buncombe,
bombast buncombe, bung-hole buncombe, and the devil
and his grandmother knows what other kind of buncombe.
(Laughter.)
Why, Sir, just give some of ?em a little Southern soap
and a little Northern water, and, quicker than a hound
pup can lick a skillet, they will make enough buncombe-
lather to wash the golden flock that roams abroad the
azure meads of heaven. (Cheers and laughter.) I allude
to the starry firmament.
The Speaker. ?The gentleman is out of order. He
must confine himself to the question,
Mr. Eiley.?l?ll stick to the text as close as a pitch
plaster to a pine plank, or a lean pig to a hot jam rock,
(Cries of ? Go on !? ? You?ll do!?)


I want to say to these carboniferous gentlemen,
these igneous individuals, these detonating demonstrators,
these pereginuous volcanoes, come on with your combus-
tibles ! If I don?t ?well, I?ll suck the G-ulf of Mexico
through a goose quill. (Laughter and applause.) Per-
haps you think I am diminutive tubers, and sparse in the
mundane elevation. In the language of the noble bard?
? I was not born in a thicket
To be scared by a cricket.? (Applause
Sir, we have lost our proper position. Our proper
position is to the zenith and nadir ?our heads to the one
our heels to the other, at right angle with the horizon,
spann?d by that azure arc of the lustrous firmament,
bright with the corruscations of innumerable constella-
tions, and proud as a speckled stud-horse on a county-
court day. (Cheers.)
? But how have the mighty fallen!? in the language
of the poet Silversmith. We have lost our proper position.
We have assumed a sloshindicular or a diagonological
position. And what is the cause! Echo answers ? Bun-
combe,? Sir, ? Buncombe.? The people have fed on
buncombe, while a lot of spavined, ringboned, hamstrung,
wind-galled, swine-eyed, split-hoofed, distempered, poll-
eviled, pot-bellied, politicians have had their noses in the
public crib until there ain?t fodder enough left to make
gruel for a sick grasshopper. (Cheers and laughter.)
Sir, do they think they can stuff such buncombe down
our craw r ? JS o, Sir ; you might as well try to stuff butter
m a wild cat with a hot awi, (Continued laughter.
The thing can?t be done.


The public grindstone is a great institution, Sir, ?yes.
Sir, a great institution?one of the greatest, perhaps, that
ever rose, reigned, or fell. But, Sir, there is too much
private cutlery ground. The thing won?t pay. Occasion-
ally a big axe is brought to be fixed up, ostensibly for the
purpose of hewing down the knarled trunks of error and
clearing out the brushwood of ignorance and folly that
obstruct the public highway of progress. The machine
whirls ; the axe is applied. The lookers-on are enchanted
with the brilliant sparks elicited. The tool is polished,
keenly edged; and, while the public stare in gaping
expectancy of seeing the road cleared, the implement is
slyly taken off to improve the private acres of some
? faithful friend of the people.? What is the result F
The obstructions remain unmoved. The people curse
because the car lags?or, if it does move, ?tis at the
expense of a broken wheel and jaded and sore-backed
team. I tell you the thing won?t pay. The time will
come when the nasal promontories of these disinterested
grinders will be put to the stone, instead of their hard-
ware. (Applause.) lam mighty afraid the machine is
a going to stop. The grease is giving out thundering
fast. It is beginning to creak on its axis. Gentlemen, it
is my private opinion, confidentially expressed, that all
the ? grit ?is pretty near worn off. (Applause.)
Mr. Speaker, you must excuse me for my latitudinosity
and circumlocutoriness. My old blunderbuss scatters
amazingly, but if anybody gets peppered it ain?t my fault
if they are in the way.
Sir, these candadical, supersquitical, mahogany-faced
gentry?what do they know about the blessings of free-


?dom ? About as much, Sir, as a toad-frog does of high
glory. Do they think they can escape me ? I?ll follow
them through pandemonium and high water. (Cheers
and laughter.)
These are the ones that have got our liberty-pole off
its perpendicularity. ?Tis they who would rend the stars
and stripes?that noble flag, the blood of our revolutionary
fathers embalmed in its red ; the purity of the cause for
which they died denoted by the white?and blue the
freedom they obtained, like the azure air that wraps their
native hills and lingers on their lovely plains. (Cheers)
The high bird of liberty sits perched on the topmost
branch? but there is no secession salt on his glorious tail.
I fear he will no more spread his noble pinions
beyond the azure regions of the boreal pole. But
Missouri pull the last feather from his sheltering
plume a shaft to pierce his noble breast; or, what is the
same make a pen to sign a secession ordnance. (Ap-
plause.) Also, poor bird, if they drive you from the
branches of them hemlock of the North, and the palmetto
of the South, come over to the gum-tree of the West, and
we will protect your noble birdship while grass grows
and water runs. (Immense applause). Mr. Speaker,
I subside for the present.
A. L. Henriques A Co., Printers, ?Herald? Passage, Melbourne.
