

Zecloojjf
SOW - I
2 00/ 1
& & C*JLA**
(jr*<t




' \ •’*, «r-
5 van
■ ' s
OF THE
SCIENTIFIC MEETINGS
OF THE
ZOOLOGICAL SOCIETY
OF LONDON,
FOR THE YEAR
1884.
MARCH and APRIL.
AUGUST Ist, 1884.
PRINTED FOR THE SOCIETY,
SOLD AT THEIR HOUSE IN HANOVER SQUARE.
LONDON:
MESSRS. LONGMANS, .GREEN, READER, AND DYER,
PATERNOSTER-ROW.
PROCEEDINGS
PART 11.
CONTAINING PAPERS READ IN


LIST OF CONTENTS.
1. A Revision of the Fishes of the Genera Sicydium and Lentipes, wiih Descriptions of five
. T?,r wt T? rinn -itttti i m / n n :: t? t> cj
new Species. By W. R. Ogilvie-Grant. (Communicated by Dr. Gunther, F.R.S.,
Y.P.Z.S.) (Plates XL, XII.) 163
2. Note on Anas capensis, Gm. By T. Salvadoui, C.M.Z.S. (Plate XIII.) 172
March 18, 1884.
The Secretary. Report on the Additions to the Society’s
(Plate XIV.)
Mr. Teeetmeier. F.Z.S. Exhibition of snecimens of the Pinl
The Secretary. Report on the Additions to the Society’s Menagerie in February 1884.
(Plate XIV.) 17b
Mr. Tegetmeier, F.Z.S. Exhibition of specimens of the Pink-footed Goose, showing variation
of colouring in the feet 176
Sir Richard Owen, K.C.B , F.R.S. Notice of the twenty-fifth of bis series of Memoirs on
the Extinct Birds of the Genus Dinornis
1. On the Diseases of the Carnivorous Mammals in the Society’s Gardens. By J. B. Sutton,
Lecturer on Comparative Anatomy, Middlesex Hospital Medical College 177
2. On a Sea-Lion from the East Coast of Australia ( Of aria cinerea, Peron). By J. W
Clark, F.Z.S 188
3. On two new Genera of Spiders. By the Rev. O. P. Cambridge, M.A., C.M.Z.S., &c.
(Plate XV.) 196
April 1, 1884.
The President. Remarks on the Society's Removal to their New Premises 205
Professor Flower. Exhibition of, and remarks upon, four skulls of the Common Bottle-nose
Whale ( Hyperoodon restrains), showing the Development, with age, of the Maxillary Crests 206
Professor Flower. Exhibition of a mass of pure spermaceti obtained from the “ Head-
matter ” of Hyperoodous 206
Mr. Sclater. Exhibition of, and remarks upon, specimens of the Eggs of two Species of
Testudinata laid in the Society’s Gardens 206
Contents continued on page 3 of wrapper.
Page


- ■ I J#
1884.] DISEASES OF CARNIVOROUS MAMMALS. 187
very uncommon. The larger Carnivora (Lions, Tigers, and Leopards)
are exceedingly vulnerable to attacks of pneumonia, and Bears fre*
qnently die from this affection, due to the suppuration of the consoli-
dated portion of the lung. The Coati ( Nasua ) is very liable to suffer
from cavities in its lungs due to this breaking-down of inflammatory
products, and on three occasions pneumothorax has resulted from
the rupture of a vomica. Once I met with a Lion with such a
condition of things, and, in addition, by some means the air had
made its way into the cellular tissue at the root of the neck, so that
the creature was “ blown up” like a calf in a butcher’s shop.
With ordinary care there need be little fear that parasites may be
mistaken for tubercle, but this does happen occasionally. By far
the most important cases of tuberculosis remain to be described.
For a considerable time 1 have been investigating tuberculosis in
birds, in which the disease is exceedingly common. After a con-
siderable number of observations I came to the conclusion that the
disease had its origin in the food or at least in the alimentary
canal. Prom the splendid series of researches which enabled Koch to
announce to the world his discovery of the “ bacillus of tuberculosis,”
it would seem that the specific nature of this disease depends on the
presence of this minute rod-like organism. On submitting the
viscera of the diseased birds to Dr. Heneage Gibbes, who is an autho-
rity in this particular department of pathology, he found bacilli by
“ thousands and tens of thousands.”
In December last we communicated these facts to the Pathological
Society, and at the same time adduced the following facts as evidence
that this disease of Fowls is in all probability infectious. I was aware
that certain of the Carnivorous animals, of which the viscera had been
examined, presented similar lesions to those observed in the diseased
Fowls. Two cases soon came to hand, one a Paradoxure, the other a
Felts eyra. These animals are fed on birds’ heads and viscera, and
as their livers contained “ bacilli ” it was fair to infer that they had
accidentally contracted the disease by feeding on tuberculous birds.
What the precise nature and origin of these organisms may even-
tually turn out to be, is of course very uncertain ; the matter is still
being investigated and must for the present remain sub judice.
The facts recorded in the preceding pages are the outcome of the
post-mortem examination of a considerable number of the Carnivora.
From January 1882 to February 1884 one hundred and thirty of
these animals died, varying in size from a Lion to a Cynictis. Of
this number I have had the opportunity of examining the viscera of
nearly all, excepting now and then, when an animal of great rarity
was required for dissection, and its anatomical value far surpassed
its interest from a pathological standpoint.
It behoves me in conclusion to offer my very best thanks to the
Society for the liberal use of so much valuable pathological material.


2. On a Sea Lion from the East Coast o£ Australia (Otaria
cinerea, Peron). By J. W. Clark, F.Z.S.
[Received March 18,1884.]
In the New South Wales Court of the Fisheries Exhibition which
was held last year at South Kensington, there were four stuffed
Otarias belonging to the Australian Museum, Sydney. They were
labelled : “A group of Australian Eared Seals. The Grey Sea-Lion
(Arctocephalus cinereus, Gr.), from the Seal Rocks near Port Ste-
phens, New South Wales.” 1
The following notes on the four specimens were partly communi-
cated to me by my friend Mr. E. P. Ramsay, Curator of the Museum,
partly written by myself.
1. A male from which the skull (figs. 1 and 2) had been extracted.
The animal was between six and seven feet long ; the hair short,
stiff, and bristly, especially on the nape of the neck : the underfur
red and very sparse. Colour a uniform brown, rather lighter on
the head and on the back of the neck 2 .
2. An animal nearly as large as the former, and said to be a female
of the same species. Hair bristly ; the general colour brown, but
paler on the back than in the male, and on the head and neck
inclining to a dusky yellow ; on the under surface of the body and
on the upper surface of the ‘ pes ’ and ‘ manus ’ a dark brown. * The
stuffer had fortunately set the jaws open, so that the teeth could be
examined. The molars were —each having a posterior and
anterior cusp, with the exception of the first tooth in each row.
3. A small Otaria rather less than three feet long. It had no skull,
and therefore the age could not be ascertained. Hair short and fine,
with a dense undertur. Colour a yellowish grey, paler on the under
surface of the body, and becoming a light brown on the upper surface
of the ‘ pes ’ and ‘ manus.’
4. A very young Otaria , about two feet eight inches long, of a uni-
form dark brown on the back, lighter underneath.
It appears to me that nos. 1 and 2 are rightly referred to the same
species, but I doubt about their being male and female ; and no. 4 may
very likely be a cub of the same species also. It appears to be a rule
among the Otariidce that the cubs are of a dark brown colour ; and Mr.
Ramsay informed me that this animal had unquestionably been taken
from the same rocks as the former. On the other hand, I suspect
that no. 3, from the density of the underfur, is a specimen of the Fur
Seal of Australia, for which I ventured to revive the name Otaria
forsteri (P. Z. S. 18/5, pp. 650-677) ; and which is, I believe, the
same as l)r. Hector’s Arctocephalus cinereus (Trans. New Zealand
Inst. 1871, iv. p, 196).
Besides these specimens I purchased a few months since a com-
plete skeleton, not quite full-grown, said to have been obtained from
a Stephens is an inlet about 100 miles to the north of Sydney,
■liiis specimen is now in the jßritish Museum.
188
[Mar. 18,
MR. J. W. CLARK ON A


1884.]
SEA-LION FROM AUSTRALIA.


the same locality ; and further, Mr. Ramsay was so good as to give
me a skin and skull (figs. 3—5) of an animal of about the same age,
which had been taken at the same time and place as those exhibited 1 .
On the evidence of the skulls, I feel no hesitation in assigning these
two specimens to the same species as nos. 1 and 2 of the former group.
The skin, however, is much lighter in colour. On the head and back
the.dark-brown hairs are tipped with yellow, and a good many yellow
Otaria cinerea, S ; under surface of hinder half of skull to show the form of
the opening of the palate and of the auditory bulla; half natural size;
from the same specimen as fig. 1.
hairs are mixed with the others ; the underside of the body is of a
light brown; and a sparse underfur of the same colour lies at the
roots of the hairs on the back. The upper side of the ‘pes’ and
* manus ’ is covered with very short fine hair of a rich brown.
We have, then, before us four specimens of an Otaria which has
been called Arctocephalus cinereus ; and we have to investigate the
history of the species, and to determine whether they have been
rightly referred to it.
In 1859, Dr, Gray, in one of his numerous revisions of the Seals,
1 These specimens are in the Museum of the University of Cambridge. The
specimen purchased appears to be a male, not full-grown; that given to me by
Mr. Ramsay is a female.


enumerated Arctocephalns cinereus among the species which, in his
judgment, ought to be referred to the genus Arctocephalus, proposed
b y Frederic Cuvier in 1824. The species is due to a brief descrip-
tion by Peron, who stayed from December 1802 to February 1803
at an island off the S. coast of Australia, near Adelaide, which the
French explorers called Isle Dectes, but which is laid down on modern
maps as Kangaroo Island. After describing the numbers of Kanga-
roos, he proceeds :—“ Parmi les Phocaces nombreux qui peuploient
les rivages de Tile, on distinguoit surtout une nouvelle espece du
genre Otarie (Otarin cinerea, N.) qui parvient a la longueur de 30 a
32 decimetres [9 a 10 pieds]. Le poil de cct animal est tres court,
Fig. 3.
Otaria cinerea, 5 ; side view of skull.
tres dur, et tres grossier; mais son cuir est epais et fort, et I’huile
qu’on prepare avec sa graisse est aussi bonne qu’abondante. Pour
Pun et Pautre rapport, la peche de cet amphibie offriroit de pre-
cieux avantages ; il en est de meme de quelques antres especes de
Phocaces plus petites qu’on trouve egalement en tres-grand nombre
sur ces herds, et qui portent des fourrures de bonne qualite.” 1
Peron, as is well known, did not live to write the work on the
Otariidce for which he had made preparations, and he brought home
no specimens, or, if he did, they have long since disappeared. His
brief notice of the Otarin which he intended to call 0. cinerea tells
us nothing except that the animal was what is called a “ Hair Seal,”
for he contrasts it with others which possessed abundant underfur.
Ten years afterwards an Otaria was captured near Port Western in
Bass’s Straits, during the voyage of the ‘Astrolabe.’ MM. Quoy and
1 Peron, 1 Voyage tie decouvertes aux Ter res Australes ’ (4to, Paris, 1816), ii
p. 77.


Gaimard, the naturalists to the Expedition, determined to call it
Otaria cinerea, out of deference to Peron; and, further, by wav of
compliment to him, they established the species in his name instead
Fig. 4.
Otaria cinerea, J ; under surface of skull.
of their own : — u Peron a nomme Otarie cendree une espece de
Phoque prise a peu pres dans les raemes parages que notre individu.
II n’en a point donne de description qui puisse, a proprement parler,
la faire reconnaitre. Comme cette espece, la meme selon nous que


celle qui nous occupe, a ete admise dans les catalogues, nous lui
laisserons le nora que lui a impose le naturaliste que nous venous de
citer.”
They then proceed to describe their specimen : —“ Tout le pelage
en dessus est uniformement grisatre. Cette couleur devient plus
claire sur le museau. Le menton, les aisselles, les cotes de la partie
posterieure et inferieure du corps sont roux. Les cotes du cou sont
d’un cendre tirant sur le blanchatre, et les oreilles sont noiratres a leur
pointe. Les membres posterieurs sont presque noirs, et les anterieurs
d’un brun fonce tirant un peu sur le rougeatre. Les polls de la tete
Otaria cinerea, 5; upper surface of anterior half of skull.
et du cou sont longs, rudes, et grossiers; ceux des autres parties
sont plus courts et plus serres. Leur couleur cendree resulte du
melange de ces polls dont les uns sont d’un blanc jaunatre et les
autres noiratres. En les ecartant on voit un feutre roux peu epais.
Les polls qui recouvrent les membres sont tres fins et serres. Les
barbes sont fortes et jaunatres. Les ongles des membres anterieurs
sont a peine indiques. Ceux des posterieurs sont etroits ; les trois
intermediaires sont plus saillans, et I’exterieur n’est point apparent.” 1
I am aware that Mr. Allen 2 has recorded Peron’s Otaria cinerea
among “mythical and undeterminable species ; ” and had no further
description of it been given than the original notice cited above, I
1 ‘Voyage de decouvertes de I’Astrolabe.’ Zoologie par MM. Quoy et
Gaimard, i. p. 89, plates 12, 13, 15.
2 ‘History of North-American Pinnipeds.’ ByJ. A. Allen. Bvo, Washington,
1880, p. 215,


should have considered that he was right in so doing ; but as MM.
Quoy and Gairnard thought proper to sink their own individuality
iu that of Pcron, it seems to me that we have no choice left but to
accept the species with Peron’s name attached to it, more especially as
they brought home a skin and skull, both of which are figured in
their work, and are now in the Museum of the Jardin des Plantes.
These specimens ought, I submit, to be considered as the type of the
species; and it was after a careful examination of them that I
ventured on a former occasion to mention Otaria cinerea as one of
the four distinct species of Otaria inhabiting the Australian coast
(P. /. S. 1870, p. G 76).
I have taken the skulls now before us to Paris and compared them
with the type of Otaria cinerea, and there can be no doubt that
they should all be referred to that species.
The type skull is of an animal not quite adult, stated by the authors
to be a male ; it is in excellent condition; and the teeth have never
been displaced. It is 10§ inches long by inches broad across the
zygomatic processes. The form of the nasals and of the orbital
process of the frontal will be better understood from the figure of
the same bones here given (fig. 3, p. 191) than from any description.
Immediately behind these processes the skull contracts suddenly, so
that while the width across the processes is 2\ inches, that across
the narrowest portion of the skull behind them, close to the brain-
case, is only inch. The dental series is, as usual: —
i 6 . I—l 6—6 Q c
i- 4> c. in-p m. -5-36.
Iu the molar teeth the “ cingulum ” is very feebly developed ; and
each tooth, both in the upper and lower jaw, has a posterior and an
anterior cusp, characters which are very useful in separating this
species from that which appears to be most nearly allied to it, Otaria
albicollis, Peron, =O. australis, Quoy and Gairnard, of which there
is a fine series in the same museum. The opening of the palate is
long and V-shaped (fig. 4, p. 192), and the auditory bulla is pro-
longed posteriorly into a peg-like process (figs. 2 & 4, pp. 190, 192).
Of the skulls before us, the largest (figs. 1,2) undoubtedly belongs
to a full-grown male. It is lif inches long by 7| broad, measured
across the zygomatic arches. The occipital and sagittal crests, and
the parietal processes, are all fully developed, and the nasals are nearly
obliterated by anchylosis with the premaxilla. It is, however, easy
to see that the form of these bones, and of the upper part of the
skull generally, is identical with the female skull (fig. 5, p. 193), which
has been already referred to as closely resembling the type specimen.
I he palate iu the male skull (fig. 2) is more elongated than in either
of the others or in the type specimen ; but, useful as the form of this
part is for specific determination, it must be remembered that it is
subject to remarkable individual variations, the neglect of which
has led to a needless multiplication of species l . In order to show
1 I hope ray friend Professor Turner will forgive me if I quote his Euotaria
Sfhis’hyperves (Journ. Amt. IBt‘>B, p. 113) as an instance of this. I feel tolerably
sure that the skull so named should be referred to Otaria pusilla .


Prof. E. Ray Lankester, F.R.S., exhibited and made remarks on
a living example of a Scorpion from Ceylon (Buthus cceruleus).
A communication was read from Prof. T. Jeffrey Parker, being
the first of a series of studies in New-Zealand Ichthyology. The
present paper gave a description of the skeleton of Regalecus
argenteus. The species was founded on a specimen cast ashore at
Moeraki, Otago, in June 1883.
This paper will be printed entire in the Society’s ‘ Transactions.’
The following papers were read :
1. On the Acclimatization of the Japanese Deer at Powers-
conrt. By Viscount Powerscouut, F.Z.S. 1
[Received February 28, 1884.]
In the years 1858 and 1859 I took up the idea of experimenting
upon the acclimatization of various animals which I thought might be
ornamental as well as useful in Deer-parks in the United Kingdom,
as suggested by the collection formed at Knowsley by Lord Derby.
I purchased, mostly from Jamrach, the well-known animal-dealer,
various kinds of Deer and Antelopes.
I had at one time alive together in a park formed for the purpose
at Powerscourt, in a part of the place called the Racecourse, con-
taining about 100 acres, of which about two thirds was open pasture
and one third wood, Red Deer, white as well as common, Sambur
Deer, Nylghaies, Axis Deer, Llamas, Elands, Wapiti Deer, and
Moufflons or Wild Sheep.
The Red Deer of course increased, and the Wapiti Deer also bred ;
but the Nylghaies, which were running about quite healthy one
evening, were both found dead the next day.
The Sambur Deer lived for two or three years, but never throve
well, neither did the Axis Deer. The Elands were also too delicate
for the climate of Ireland, and I very soon found it necessary to
dispose of them, as they would not have lived. I had only a pair
of them, and they were "sold to the Antwerp Zoological Gardens.
There were originally three Wapiti Deer, unfortunately only one
of them a female, and they were of the same breed which Lord
Derby had had at Knowsley. I tried to get another female, but at
that time it seemed to be almost impossible; the female which I
had, met with an accident and broke her leg, but nevertheless she
produced a stag calf a few months afterwards. She had had a
female calf the year before, so that my herd was increased to five
animals. But the only males were the sire of the female calf and
another young male, which died. I then, finding the small park
where they were too confined in space, had all the Deer caught and
removed to the large Deer-park, containing about 1000 acres.
1 See, for previous notes on this subject, P. Z. S. 1879, p. 294.


After all the Deer had been there for a year there was a
remarkable improvement in their health, from the extent and variety
of pasture which they had there, and the Wapiti as well as the
Sambur and Red Deer improved very much. But unfortunately one
of the Red Stags had a fight one day with the Wapiti, and, being
more active, gave him a thrust and broke his hind leg, just below
the hock. We managed to secure the wounded Wapiti and to set
the leg; but although the bone knit, and he could put his foot to the
ground, he never recovered, but dwindled away and died. I then
sold the remainder of the Wapiti to an agent of King Victor
Emmanuel of Italy.
The Sambur Deer lived for three or four years, and as there was
no male (one which I had got from the Royal Collection at Windsor
having died), there were several hybrids born, no doubt between a
Red Stag and the Sambur hinds, but one by one, both the pure
Sambur and the hybrids died off, until there were none left. The
climate was evidently too damp for them.
It was a curious thing with the Sambur Deer, and it was no
doubt the cause of their death, that they never would come out of
the thickets in the daytime. They unfortunately could not be taught
that Ireland has not a tropical climate, and they used to skulk in
the thickest cover they could find, out of the sun, all day, and only
came out to feed at night, as they would in the jungles of Mysore,
where I have seen them pursuing the same tactics. Of course by
this unnecessary precaution on their part against the meridian rays,
of which we should like to see a little more in this country than
we do, they got chilled through, and eventually died.
In the meantime, on a visit to Jarnrach I had seen some Japanese
Deer (Cervus silca) ; and I thought that as the climate of Japan is a
pretty severe one in winter, I would try if they would succeed any
better than the other species. I bought therefore one male and three
females ; and these have been the only Deer of any newly intro-
duced kind which have been a real success.
The Llamas and other animals all died off; and these pretty little
Deer are the only ones which have multiplied, and have also never
required any shelter of any kind nor any winter-feeding except what
the ordinary Red Deer and Fallow Deer get, such as hay &c. I
find that Indian corn is the best food for all Deer after hay. It is
easily given, and there is no waste, as they pick up every grain as
soon as thrown out to them. I tried locust beans, which are good
but expensive, and also oil-cake, but they do noteat that up so clean
as the Indian corn, and if the weather is wet it melts away.
There should be rock-salt always given to Deer, in places where
it can be put, in a shed of some kind, so as not to be exposed to
wet.
These Japanese Deer were put into the park at Powerscourt about
the year 1860, and at present (1884) I have upwards of 100 of them,
besides having shot two or three yearly, and also having given away
a great many and sold others.


The Japanese Deer (Germs sika).
I have distributed Japanese Deer from my herd to the following
places up to this time, and I believe they are thriving in every
locality where they have been introduced ; so that they may be
looked upon quite as a British Park-Deer; —at Killarney, in the
woods of Muckross; at Glenstal (Sir Croker Barrington’s), near
Limerick; at Castlewellan (Lord Annesley’s) in county Down; at
Colebrooke (Sir Victor Brooke’s), county Fermanagh ; at Lord
Ilchester’s, Melbury, Dorsetshire ; and at Baron Ferdinand de Roths-
child’s, Waddesdon Manor, Aylesbury.
The Japanese Deer here have undoubtedly interbred with the
Red Deer; there are three or four Deer in the Park here which are
certainly hybrids, the Red hind in each case being the dam.
The Japanese are a most satisfactory little Deer ; the venison when
dressed is about the size of Welsh mutton and very well flavoured.
The little Stags, with their black coats and thick necks like mini-
ature Sambur, are very picturesque and ornamental, and I think
they are a decided addition to our varieties of hardy Park Deer.
Some of them are always to be seen in the Society’s Gardens; but
these give no idea of the beauty of the animals when in a wild state
in a park.
They also have a most peculiar cry in the rutting-season, a sort
of whistle, varying sometimes into a scream.
Any body wishing for venison of a small size and good quality
will, I think, find these Deer very desirable for that purpose.


2. Diagnoses of new Reptiles and Batrachians from the
Solomon Islands, collected and presented to the British
Museum by H. B. Guppy, Esq., M. 8., H.M.S. 'Lark/
By G. A. Boulenger, F.Z.S.
[Received March 25, 1884.]
Lepidodactylus guppyi, sp. n.
Head small, oviform ; body elongate; limbs moderate. Digits
moderate, inner well developed, webbed at the base; eleven lamellae
under the median digits, the two or three proximal divided. Scales
uniformly granular, the grannies larger on the snout, largest and
flat on the belly. Rostral quadrangular, more than twice as
broad as high ; nostril pierced between the rostral, the first upper
labial, and three nasals; eleven or twelve upper and as many lower
labials; mental small, smaller than the adjacent labials ; three or
four rows of very small chin-shields. Tail cylindrical, tapering,
covered with small equal flat scales. Pinkish brown above, sides
with darker spots; a dark streak on the side of the head, passing
through the eye; tail with dark annuli; lower surfaces whitish,
throat speckled with reddish brown.
From snout to vent 48 millim.; head 12 millim.; tail 45 millim.
Faro Island.
Hoplocephalus par, sp. n.
Scales in 16 rows (14 posteriorly). Head moderately large, de-
pressed; superciliaries not projecting; vertical shield a little longer
than broad ; two postoculars ; seven upper labials, third and fourth
entering the eye; temporals I+2 +3; the chin-shields of the pos-
terior pair separated from each other by a scale. Yentrals 166 ;
anal divided ; subcandals 43. Upper surface of body with broad
reddish-brown cross hands separated by narrow interspaces ; upper
surface of head, and edges of the scales blackish brown; lower sur-
faces and interspaces between the red bars white.
Total length 75 centira.; tail 11 centim.
Faro Island.
Rana bueoniformis, sp. n.
Near Rana Jcuhlii.
Vomerine teeth in tw-o oblique series behind the choanee. Habit
stout, toad-like. Head very large, with short broad snout; canthus
rostralis distinct; interorbital space as broad as the upper eyelid ;
tympanum distinct, one third the diameter of the eye. Fingers
short, with slightly swollen tips, first extending beyond second ; toes
two thirds webbed, the tips dilated into regular disks; subarticular
tubercles large; two metatarsal tubercles, inner oval, blunt, outer
rather indistinct. The hind limb being carried forwards along the


body, the tibio-tarsal articulation reaches the hinder border of the
eye. Upper surfaces entirely covered with porous warts, forming a
small paratoid-like ridge above the temple; belly and lower surface
of thighs feebly granulate. Uniform purplish brown above, yellowish
inferiorly.
From snout to vent 145 millim.
Treasury Island.
Rana guppyi, sp. n.
Near Rana grunniens.
Vomerine teeth in two short straight transverse series behind the
choanae. Head large, subtriangnlar; canthus rostralis distinct;
interorbital space as broad as the upper eyelid; tympanum distinct,
two fifths the diameter of the eye. Fingers moderate, with slightly
dilated tips, first extending beyond second; toes nearly entirely
webbed, tbe tips dilated into small disks; suharticular tubercles
large; two metatarsal tubercles, inner elliptic, blunt, outer rather
indistinct. The hind limb being carried forwards along the body,
the tibio-tarsal articulation reaches the tip of the snout. Upper
surfaces minutely warty ; a strong fold above the tympanum. Dark
olive above, dirty white inferiorly.
From snout to vent 165 millim.
Shortland Islands.
Rana opisthodon, sp. n.
Near Rana grunniens.
Vomerine teeth in two transverse oblique series between and
behind the choanae. Head large; snout rounded, with distinct
canthus rostralis; interorbital space as broad as or a little narrower
than the upper eyelid; tympanum distinct, two fifths to half the
diameter of the eye. Fingers moderate, with slightly dilated tips,
first extending beyond second; toes three fourths webbed, the tips
dilated into small disks; suharticular tubercles large; inner meta-
tarsal tubercle elliptic, blunt; no outer tubercle. The hind limb
being carried forwards along the body, the tibio-tarsal articulation
reaches the eye. Upper surfaces nearly smooth or with rather large
warts, which are rounded on the upper eyelids, pelvic region, and
limbs, elongate on the back; a strong fold above the tympanum.
Hark brown above, with more or less indistinct darker markings ;
hinder side of thighs light-dotted ; lower surfaces whitish.
From snout to vent 125 millim.
Faro Island and Treasury Island.
Cornxjfer guppyi, sp. n.
Vomerine teeth in two short transverse series behind the level of
the choanse. Habit of Rhacophorus maculatus. Head large, much
depressed, with well-marked canthus rostralis; interorbital space as
broad as the upper eyelid; tympanum three fifths the diameter of
the eye. First finger shorter than second ; disks of fingers very


largo, as large as the tympanum; toes one third webbed, the tips
dilated into large disks, which are, however, not quite so large as
those of the fingers; two rather indistinct metatarsal tubercles.
The hind limb being carried forwards along the body, the tibio-
tarsal articulation reaches the anterior corner of the eye. Skin
smooth, granular on the belly and under the thighs; a fold from
the eye to the shoulder. Light brown or pinkish above, spotted or
dotted with brown ; legs cross-barred ; lower surfaces whitish.
From snout to vent 68 rnillim.
Treasury Island.
CoiINUFER SOLOMONIS, Sp. n.
Vomerine teeth in two transverse or slightly oblique, slightly
arched series behind the choanse. Head very large ; snout rounded,
as long as, or slightly longer than, the orbital diameter; eyes ex-
tremely large; interorbital space narrower than the upper eyelid;
tympanum round, nearly half the diameter of the orbit. Fingers
moderate, first extending beyond second; toes moderate, with a
slight rudiment of web ; tips of fingers and toes swollen rather than
dilated ; subarticular tubercles very strong ; two metatarsal tubercles.
The hind limb being carried forwards along the body, the tibio-
tarsal articulation reaches the eye. Upper surfaces slightly granu-
lated, with short longitudinal folds; a strong fold from the eye to
the shoulder. Grey-brown above, with more or less distinct darker
markings; loreal and temporal regions dark brown; lips with more
or less marked dark vertical bars; tympanum chestnut-brown.
From snout to vent 75 rnillim.
Short land, Treasury, and Faro Islands.
Ceratobatrachus, g. n.
The type of a new family, Ceratobatrachida ?, occupying in the
series Firmisternia the place which the Hemiphractidce occupy in
the Arcifera, and characterized by the presence of teeth in both
upper and lower jaw, and by the diapophvses of the sacral vertebra
not being dilated.
Pupil horizontal. Tongue deeply notched and cordiform, exten-
sively free behind. Vomerine teeth. Head large, strongly ossified.
Tympanum distinct. Fingers and toes free, with non-dilated tips.
Outer metatarsals united. Precoracoids present; omosteruum and
sternum with a bony style. Terminal phalanges simple.
Ceratobatrachus guentheri, sp. n.
A omerine teeth in two small groups behind the level of the
choana'; latter large, eustachian tubes larger still. Head triangular,
not much smaller than the body; mouth enormous; interorbital
space broad, concave; tympanum large, vertically elliptic; skull
with prominent ridges and a small curved spine at the angle of the
jaws. Hind limb rather short. Digits swollen at the tips, with
strong subarticular tubercles. Upper surfaces with linear ridges


in the upper jaw being 30 raillim. instead of 72 as in the adult.
They evidently represent the narrow apical portion of the permanent
teeth, which as growth proceeds wears off, and they are not in any
case milk-teeth. As the first of the series, or prernolar, is as fully
developed as the one which follows it (or first true molar) it must
either have no predecessor, or one which has disappeared at an early
stage of intra-uterine life.
Contents ( continued ).
Mr. R. Rowdier Sharpe. Exhibition of specimens of the Red-throated Pipit {Anthus cervinus)
caught near Brighton, and of the true Water-Pipit ( Anthus spinoletta ) captured at
Lancing, in Sussex 200
Prof. E. Ray Lankester, F.R.S. Exhibition of a living example of a Scorpion from Ceylon . 207
Prof. T. Jeffrey Parker. Abstract of a Memoir on Regalecus argenteus 207
1. On the Acclimatization of tlu Japanese Deer at Powerscourt. By Viscount Powerscourt,
E.Z.S 207
2. Diagnoses of new Reptiles and Batrachiaus from the Solomon Islands, collected and pre-
sented to the British Museum by H. B. Guppy, Esq., M. 8., H.M.S. ‘ Lark.’ By G. A.
Boulenqer, E.Z.S 210
3. On the Coleopterous Insects collected by Mr. H. O. Eorbes in the Timor-Laut Islands. By
Oitas. O. Waterhouse. (Plate XVI.) 213
4. On the Lepidoptera collected by the late W. A. Forbes on the Banks of the Lower Niger.
—Rhopalocera, by F. D. Godman and O. Saltin. Heterocera by H. Druce. (Plate
XVII.) 219
5 Description of three rare Species of Flycatchers. By R. Bowdler Sharpe, F.L.S., F.Z.S.,
&c., Department of Zoology, British Museum 230
6. On an apparently new Species of European Nuthatch. By R. Bowdler Sharpe, F.L.S.,
F.Z.S., &c., Department of Zoology, British Museum 233
7. On the Myology and Visceral Anatomy of Capromys melanurus , with a Description of the
Species. By G. E. Dobson, M.A., F.R.S. (Plates XVIII.-XXI.) 233
May 6, 1884.
The Secretary. Report on the Additions to the Society’s Menagerie in April 1884 251
Prof. Bell. Exhibition of, and remarks upon, Estheria melitensis 251
Lieut.-Col. H. H. Godwin-Austen. Exhibition of, and remarks upon, an old Indian drawing
containing a figure of a White Elephant 251
Mr. G. A. Boulenger, F.Z.S. Notice of a Memoir on the Reptiles and Batrachians of the
Solomon Islands 251
1. Note on the Dentition of a young Capybara (. Hydrcchcerus capylara). By Prof. W. H,
Flower, LL.D., F.R.S., P.Z.S., &c 252
253
PROF. FLOWER ON lIYDROCHOSRUS CAPYBARA.
1884.


LIST OF PLATES.
1884.
PART 11.
VT A
I New Species of Sicydium and Lentipes 153
XIII. Anas capensis 172
XIV. Oercopithecus martini 176
XV. New Spiders 196
XVI. Ooleoptera from Timor-Laut 213
XVII. West African Lepidoptera 219
XVIII. Capromys raelanurus 233
XIX.]
XX. I Anatomy of Capromys melanurus 233
XXI. )
NOTICE.
According to present arrangements the * Proceedings ’ are issued in fqur parts,
as follows.—
Part I. containing papers read in January and February, on June Ist. .
11. „ ~ ~ March and April, on August Ist.
HI. ~ „ ~ May and June, on October Ist.
IV. „ „ „ November and December, on April Ist.
The price is 12s. per part for the edition with coloured, and 3s. per part for
that with uncoloured Plates.




