

ON A COMPRESSED-AIR FLYING-MACHINE.
By Lawrence Hargrave.
[With Three Diagrams,]
[Read before the Royal Society , N.S.W., June 4,1890.']
ie> i ou.






ON A COMPRESSED-AIR FLYING-MACHINE.
By Lawrence Hargrave.
[With Three Diagrams.]
v
[ Rea/ 1 before the Itoi/al Social' jV.S.W., June 4,1890.'}
Considerable satisfaction is felt in recording a material advance
since August 1889, in the development of the detail of flying-
machines, and in the direct proof by experiment that yet another
form of apparatus flies with ease. The principle embodied in this
experiment is that of Borelli, published in 1680, and it doubtless
has had many staunch advocates in later times; but the writer
maintains that this is the first practical demonstration that a
machine can, and does fly by the simple flapping of wings ; the
feathering, tilting, twisting, trochoiding, or whatever it be called,
being solely effected by torsional stress on the wing arm.
The combination of Borelli’s views with the results of work
recorded in your proceedings has swept away such a mass of tackle
from the machine that its construction becomes a ridiculously
simple matter. The engine of the model of course retains its
position as the most important part, and by continuous effort the
number of pieces and the difficulties of construction have been so
reduced that it is possible to make them by the gross at a cost that
cannot exceed five shillings each. For instance the cylinder, usually
the most expensive portion of an engine can be produced with the
ease and celerity of a jam-tin. The importance of this cheapness
of manufacture may be realized when we consider that there must
be many young mechanics who would willingly work at this branch
of engineering, but for the difficulty of procuring or making a
light and powerful motor ; such objection cannot now be made as
herewith you have drawings showing the relative dimensions of a
proved successful machine, and it surely will not be a laborious
job to make others of greater range and power.
As to the efficiency or rather the absence of it in this engine,
let us take the centre of effort of the wings at two feet from the
fulcrum ; their total area is L 5 square feet, and supposing from
the indicator diagram that as many as forty double vibrations
were made in twenty seconds, it is clear that a little over 300
foot-pounds is all the flapping power used to drive a machine
weighing 2-53 pounds a distance of 368 feet horizontally in a dead
calm. Regarding the theoretical foot-pounds of work in the 144-6
cubic inches of air at 2301bs pressure. Mr. Arthur Pollock of
the Physical Laboratory at the University has ascertained for the


writer that the work done by the 145 cubic inches of air at 2301b5.
initial pressure above the atmosphere in 40 double vibrations of
the engine, on the assumption that it expands approximately,
adiabatically into the cylinder and at the end of each stroke
escapes into the air, is 2,500 foot-pounds. If the adiabatic relation
was fully realized the pressure in the receiver after the forty-third
double vibration would be 3 2 lbs. above the atmosphere. As the
final pressure by the diagram is really 501bs. at the end of the
forty-third double vibration a correction has been applied to the
above calculation.
Mr. Pollock has also no doubt that the calculation of 300 foot-
pounds for the work required to flap the wings is quite unreliable
as it takes no account of the disturbances set up in the air, and
he feels confident that very nearly 2,500 foot-pounds is spent in
driving the machine. On the other hand the writer thinks that
if the wings flapped up and down in the same place at every stroke
the eddies created would be a waste of a further portion of the
300 foot-pounds ; and if the 2,500 foot-pounds was really a applied
to the air through the piston and rod, 5-7 double vibrations per
second would be the result instead of 2 as there ai’e actually. We
now begin to grasp the idea of how imperfect the motor is still,
and what a trifle of thrust makes the machine fly.
On the supposition that 7-32 ounces is the force resisting the
motion of each wing, a similar wing was held rigidly by the butt
and a weight of 7 - 5 ounces put on the membrane 24 inches from
the fixed point and If inches abaft the wing arm ; the deflection
produced due to torsional stress was 3|- degrees ; and even by
moving the weight from If inches to 3| inches, that is half way
across the wing, it was only twisted 8-£ degrees. So that only \
of the 300 foot-pounds is actually used in pushing the machine
forward, the rest being lost work. This suggests a wide field for
experimenting with slow-burning rocket compounds and well
proportioned direct-acting jets.
The valve gear is thought to be a truly original invention, but
surprise will not be felt if it comes into general use to see others
claim and prove too, that it is quite common and has been known
for years. The problem to be solved in its construction was to
make the valve reciprocate when the piston was in two positions,
at all other parts of the stroke the valve was to be stationary;
the force that moved the valve was to be uniform and independent
of the pressure in the cylinder, as from the nature of the case the
cylinder pressure was decreasing. A slight variation makes this
gear suitable for using the air expansively; the model shows it
in its first form, from which it will be seen that three additional
moving pieces are required for cutting off at half stroke, and two
more enable us to do so instantaneously at any earlier point.


This is not thought to be an extravagant number compared with
the generality of expansion gears.
The drawing shows the arrangement of parts clearly and the
valve has only failed on one occasion when it was choked with a
scrap of dirt or sand. The engine works if the valve is not held
by either catch, but then the piston has not the full stroke. The
catch that holds the valve in its lower position is too high up in
the drawing, the steel plate into which the valve is screwed would
knock against the catch instead of against the head of the guide
bolt that regulates the travel of the valve. It will be seen that
one catch is fast to the valve and the other to the valve cylinder;
in the model exhibited both are on the valve cylinder, this does
not alter the principle of the valve gear, it is an adaptation to
suit this particular case. That thing like a string of beads
in the drawing is a spring | inch diameter, made of steel music
wire No. 8 ; it is soldered by the middle to the valve plate. Some
of the failures of these vibrating engines have been due to the
ports being too small, this is an error that might have been avoided
by a little more elementary knowledge of engineering.
The receiver ends and cylinder covers are pressed, but do not
think for a moment that a fly-press is one of the writer’s laboratory
tools, neither are the dies steel nor hardened. Any scrap of brass
or iron is used for the dies if the size is suitable, and the disc for
the proposed cover is cut out with the tin shears, a grip in the
vice completes the operation unless a ragged edge has to be turned
off in the lathe. The test pressure with water gives the required
amount of dish to the receiver ends. The piston and junk ring
are made of vulcanite, and the cup leather packing does away
with the necessity for the cylinder being either round or parallel.
The air-pump has proved itself a serviceable tool, it has a bent
lever handle and long links on the principle of the Stanhope press
so that the most powerful leverage acts on the cylinder full of air
when it is reduced to its smallest volume. The valves are made
very small and great pains were taken to reduce the clearances to
a minimum. The ram is 11 inches diameter, and the stroke about
inches. The suction valve is in the bottom of the ram, through
which the air is drawn. The delivery valve seat is inch diameter
and there is no water jacket to the cylinder. The receiver in
Plates I. and 11., is charged in six minutes to 230 pounds, the
pump is then warm. When the pump leather is in good condition
a pressure of 400 pounds can be shown on the gauge. Should
more high pressure air-compressing gear be required, a water pump
will be used to force water into a large receiver to compress the air
therein, thus avoiding the loss of power by the expansion of the
air left in the cylinder and passages between the valves at the
end of the stroke. It may be pointed out that even the air-pump


is not a necessity for this class of investigation as the engine of the
machine is an air-pump itself if its action is reversed and the wing
levers are used as pump handles. This is a distinct advantage in
using compressed air as a motive power which is not to be lightly
ignored, as it is obvious that instances could be cited where coal
mines, gas-works and water would not be available for restoring
the power to the machine.
Attention is called to the starting gear as being very simple
and effective, it has a spring to the cock handle which opens it
the desired amount when the toggle that keeps it shut is with-
drawn ; the left wrist is passed through the becket of the toggle.
This arrangement has never failed to produce a perfect start.
It is thought that much useful work has been lost to us by
experimenters loading their apparatus with devices to save them
from damage, and artistic conceits to show where the passengers
are to be seated in ornamental cars with flags &c. It should be
remembered that flying machines are oidy to battle with the air,
and not for knocking "down fences or ploughing u p the ground.
It is not usual to proportion the scantling and plating of ships so
that they will stand beating on rocks and sand, but only to safely
resist the strains produced by the winds and waves. Perhaps
much of the writer’s success has been due to the avoidance of this
fault, although it is somewhat of a trial to see a month’s work
knocked out of all shape in a moment.
This last machine is the first departure from previous practice
in this respect, as it has a stick lashed under the receiver and
projecting about sixteen inches before the engine, so that when the
machine comes to earth the stick is broken and the engine and
receiver are less injured than they would be otherwise. There has
been no material damage done although seven wrecks are recorded;
on the eighth flight as is usual in a successful trial, the machine
escaped with hardly a scratch. Some of the wrecks are believed
to have 'been due to the centre of gravity being too high, so the
sides of the body plane have been made to slope upwards ; this
has the advantage of checking any tendency to slue by opposing
some considerable lateral resistance.
in spite of past experiences the percentage of area in advance
of the centre of gravity has been made as much as 30 f o of the
whole area, but continued disaster caused its reduction to 23 , 3 / /£:
it is so difficult to force the mind to believe what seems unreason-
able. In fact to show that a large part of the tail area is absolutely
useless, a crossbow model of this machine, as it was at the seventh
trial, seemed perfectly balanced, and yet when the paper surface
A B C D, Plate 1., was cut out it was still in equilibrium
although 41-8% of the area was in advance of the centre of gravity.
There is much to be learnt here, it seems as if the centre part of


the body is best removed as it only serves to conduct the air, the
inertia of which has been overcome by the weight of the forward
part of the machine, to the tail. Whereas if the middle of the
body plane has been cut out the used air escapes upwards and the
tail has a better chance of getting comparatively solid air to float
on. The neglect of previous knowledge gained partly arose from
reasoning that in calculating the area in advance of the centre of
gravity the dividing line should be taken through the centre of
gravity of the machine when wound up ready to fly, instead of
through the mean centre of gravity; as in the india rubber driven
machines it is moving forward as the bands contract.
Another experiment was made that bears on this point of the
continuity of surface. A stick and paper model for the cross bow
had two surfaces, 10 inch by 10 inch, in the same plane, separated
by a distance of 15 inches, with the centre of gravity in the middle,
that is 7‘5 inches from either plane. This showed a slight inclin-
ation to rise forward, but equilibrium was established by moving
the centre of gravity only -72 inch from the geometrical centre.
Every effort has been made to render this matter intelligible,
and no pains have been spared in making the drawings perfect;
but some apology is due to the members for their inferior repro-
ductions in the last paper “ Flying-machine Memoranda,” which
were not submitted to the author for approval.
It is well known that publishing the results of experiments as
they progress is not a course that most inventors would pursue,
but the whole subject is thought to be so far-reaching in its effect,
and the varieties of practicable flying-machines so numerous, that
any attempt to secure a monopoly of the profits accruing from
their construction would be a mean and selfish proceeding, and
totally unworthy of consideration. The writer feels assured
that if he should ever make flying-machines for sale his productions
will be as well appreciated as any others ; and that the endeavour
to strangle the work of others by patenting would only result in
real progress being hampered by conflicting monetary interests
and much ill feeling.*
The use of paper as a material for the required surfaces is still
recommended, damages are then so easily repaired ; there is no
need to take much trouble in stretching it at first as after the
* The writer thinks the act of invention to be a sort of inspiration,
and a pleasure that the individual does not seek to be rewarded for
undergoing ; it is followed by a greedy sensation or wish to obtain money
from others without giving an equivalent. This results in the develop-
ment of the invention by the ordinary work of drawing-board drudges
and laboratory experimenters who are not generally permitted to share in
the profits of a patent. Inventors will always invent, they cannot help it,
•and you cannot stop them ; and a patentee is nothing but a legal robber.


gum is dry, if a light spray of water is blown over the paper a few
minutes suffices to make it as tight as a drum.
It might be said that this flying-machine is not on the principle
enunciated by Borelli, because the wings are not continuous from
the tip to the body. But this is only a device to enable the wing
tips to act on the required quantity of air with less spread; it
may possibly be one of those variations that make all the difference
between success and failure. These wings are also distinctly
double acting, and it is not quite clear that bird’s wings thrust
during the up stroke ; but, as previously stated the question as to
the exact movement of a bird’s wing is merely straw-splitting
when we have a mechanism that actually flies and is manifestly
imperfect in mechanical detail.
In the transactions of the Institution of Naval Architects, Yol-
xxx., 1889, there is a paper by Beauchamp Tower, “On an
apparatus for providing a steady platform for guns «fec. at sea.”
The wheel revolving on a cup-bearing by tangential jets, and the
vertical axial jet nozzle playing on to the passages to the rams
(Tower has four rams, three would be better) is the germ of an
automatic apparatus for steering flying-machines level.
As an instance of the unreliable nature of thrust diagrams taken
from the stationary machine, it may be mentioned that another
screw-driven one has been tried, Plate 111. is the engine of it.
When the blades are set at 20° pitch angle a high thrust is got
■on the indicator, but the machine flies a very short distance ;
when the blades are set at 45° a low thrust is shown by the
indicator card, but the machine flies 50% further. Coupling this
with the result obtained with the vibrating wings, it is reasonable
to suppose that screw machines should have the blades set parallel
to the screw shaft, and allow the pitch to be automatically adjusted
by torsion. The blade surfaces of course being altogether abaft
the screw arms. This is a matter for the consideration of those
who prefer the screw to the flapping wings.
Some may ask what is the use of experimenting in calm air when
such a state of the atmosphere is exceptional. But the answer is
that by patiently waiting for still air reliable data can alone be
obtained ; and when we have the correct proportions of the
machines none of the parts can be more strained by a gale of wind
than by the lightest zephyr. The speed through the air does not
vary, it is only the distance over the ground that is affected.
It has long been thought that there would be a spice of
in trying large flying-machines, but now it is known that i*
experiments are conducted over water a ducking is the only risk
involved, besides which the machine would be very slightly
damaged.


Discussion.
Mr. Russell—l am one of those who admire the ingenuity
and perseverance displayed by Mr. Hargrave in his attempts to
produce a perfect flying-machine. I congratulate him upon the
production of those ingenious models intended to copy the methods
followed by nature to produce motion in various animal organiza-
tions. I think it is greatly to his credit that he now willingly
admits he finds after experiment that he can attain far better
results with a simple form of mechanism than with that of a com-
plex nature. He has introduced several important inventions in
connection with his scheme, which in the case of most men would
have been taken to the Patents Office without delay, but which
he from pure love of science freely gives to the world as part of
his flying-machine. I have much pleasure in proposing a vote of
thanks to Mr. Hargrave for his interesting paper.
The President —Mr. Hargrave has my best wishes for the
success of his experiments. It would be a very gratifying thing
if a really practical flying-machine were invented by an Australian.
They say the proof of the pudding is in the eating, and the success
of this invention will be proved when we see him fly across to
North Shore (Laughter). I wish him every success.


jSidt uieur
. Journal Royal .Society NS. W. Vol XXIV. Made I
Vibratory flying -machine.
Total use.i<jfit {cha.rcj[ecL J 2’t)3 Its .
Area, of th.*. todu 2.128 so. it^S.
i . 1 j t ——
!i •
11 j 1
! j! 5
1 ! 1 - —11 ->
_ S
Area of tke. urinys 2/6 sy. ins.
Total area 2344 Sy. ins .
Area in advance of centre of gravity sy. ms — 23-3 yl
j-— ■ ■■ ■» ——■ ■■ ■ • «->—
X 31—-
O 1 2 3 tftect.
Scale.
*
v. s
f X \
X
/
/ ■ \
/ \ \
s f \ \
\ V \ \
\ \ \ /
\ \ * V''
\ \ \ ✓
\ x \ O
\ X \ *
\ X V !
\ X \
\ \ \ 1
\ x \ !
\ \ \ 1 x
s x \ 1 x
\ x \ 1
\ X \ !
\ x v \
'•A b
\ V
\ _Jy V .<>
\ n fiz*; A n
1
z \
—
"— —_
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
f
—
*
x
) — IjP?)
-T|
If f stt % X
/ X/ X
7 \ s
/ / 'V s
/ x / / / 'X
/ ' N v
/ !
' ' X
X /
/ "^X
X / /
X / / ■ X
\ / / •' ,
i
' Centre ofyra. ini y
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
V
\
1
_ c"
\ / y
/
/J°__ - - ,
/S?C.




Journal. Royal Society NS.W.VoI .XXIV. Hale 11.
Compressed-air £ apt re
JDlumeler of the. <yyil.TS.der i. z, zn-S.
Stroke IT in*-
Cut-off for expans ion. . Till
J.~)ia.metkr of the. receiver Ims .
TCeiyht of engine. S~k oz -
Ti/eiyhi of usirtys pood pope 5 oz ■
Riston, speed Sins.per second -h
Z enytA. duto -4-B+. cnis
l{/&iykt aivito f9z crz -
Test pressures 380
Workiny pressure 230 t
ends 'ff
Zap of lonyiludtncol seams 6 p LrL
Rtrenyth " “ /00 /o
c£ur.
cf apul
itdiphl 2/ ~ oz..
Turstmy slrenylA- 66q Uspr spin
Capacity measure} /4-4.1 cuCtc ms
Thickness of shell 32 mtU




Journal Royal' Soapy NS.W.VoI JXIV. Plate 111.
Cu dlfta, ly±<Xy/ML ffy u A /y /L St c /d






