





the Proceedings of the Royal Society, No. 102, 1868.]
ON A
SCIENTIFIC EXPLORATION
CENTRAL AUSTRALIA.
H Y
Dr. G. NEXT MAYER.




SCIENTIFIC EXPLORATION OF CENTRAL AUSTRALIA.
By Dr. G. Neumayer.
If vve look on a map of the Australian continent published ten years
ago, we are struck by the immense expanse of land then unexplored; we
perceive at a glance that the south-eastern sea-board only of this great
continent had then been examined with any degree of accuracy, and that
very little was known to us respecting the character of its shores on the
west and north-west. In two quarters only had the zeal and daring of the
explorer succeeded in forcing a path towards the central portions of this
vast territory, Sturt having penetrated as far as 24° South and 138° East,
and Gregory as far as 21° South and 128° East. The nature of the coun-
try traversed by these two eminent explorers was such as to countenance
the supposition, that the interior of Australia was little better than one vast
desert, offering almost insurmountable obstacles to exploration. The idea,
originally advanced by Oxley, that the greater part of the interior was
occupied by vast inland lakes, was then abandoned; and the theory just
mentioned took its place. In such a state of utter uncertainty as to the
nature of the interior of a vast continent, it is but natural that various
theories should be started ; and no doubt they will, in the end, help to keep
up the spirit for rigorous examination and exploration, yet care must be
taken that they do not, by the unfavourable nature of their suppositions,
tend to discourage enterprise. From such a danger we had a narrow escape


348 Dr. Neumaycr on a Scientific [May 14,
during the years following A. C. Gregory’s exploration of the interior, and
his expedition in search of Dr. Leichhardt, as at that time it was generally
helieved that the arid plains .and stony deserts met with in the east and
south, and the sandy desert in the north-west, were but the outskirts of
a desert country unparalleled on our globe.
Fortunately, however, for the progress of civilization and geographical
knowledge, this unfavourable opinion as to the nature of the interior was
not universally entertained. Many men, well versed in terrestrial physics,
especially with reference to the Australian continent, could not, from rea-
sons based upon meteorological observations made in the south-east, concur
in the prevailing belief. They urged the possibility of tracts of fine coun-
try interspersing the so-called desert, and the necessity, in any case, of
clearing up the mystery still surrounding this important geographical
question; and in this view they were strongly supported by the improba-
bility (generally speaking) of the existence of a desert country of such
enormous extent and such a description in any part of the earth’s surface. It
would be useless to enter now upon the arguments for and against the various
opinions set forth during that period of uncertainty, except that they might
in some instances serve to put us on our guard against advancing or accepting
hold conjectureswhich may be put forward at any future time, and more par-
ticularly in the special case we have to deal with in this paper. Suffice it
to say, that the spirit of enterprise and the desire of increasing our geogra-
phical knowledge triumphed at last. The year 1860 gave a fresh impulse
to Australian exploration, and will for ever be memorable as having inau-
gurated a new era in this respect. In the end of that year and the begin-
ning of 1861, Burke and Wills crossed the continent with comparative
ease. It was now said by many of the adherents of the old desert doctrine,
that Burke had merely hit upon a narrow strip of good country, which
carried him across; had he but deviated to the one side or the other of
his path he must have failed in his attempt. But when M'Dougal Stuart
three times crossed and recrossed the continent in other parts, and the last
time from shore to shore —when M'Kinlay made his way from South
Australia, by way of the Gulf of Carpentaria, to the coast of Queens-
land, driving before him a flock of sheep —when Walker and Landsborough
had accomplished their journeys through the imaginary desert country —
the old opinion could no longer be maintained, and the desert theory fell
utterly into discredit, at least as far as the eastern part of the continent is
concerned. Since that time this once so much dreaded task has been several
times successfully accomplished, so that we are now enabled to give a pretty
accurate description of the features of the country forming the scene of
these glorious achievements; and as it will doubtless prove of material
assistance to the complete understanding of the following exposition and
plan, I may here be permitted to give in a few words an outline of the
main character of the ground to the north of the parallel of latitude 26°,
between the coast-ranges of Queensland and Stuart’s route through the


centre, which embraces nearly the whole of the country discovered and
examined since 1860.
from the records of the various explorers, it would appear that the line
which divides the waters flowing to the coast, and those flowing to the in-
terior, runs from 19|° S. on Stuart’s track to 19° S, latitude on Lands-
borough s south-west expedition, in 138° east longitude. According to
Mr. M‘lntyre s apparently reliable observations, this line would then pass
through 22° S. in E., whilst M'Kinlay places in the same locality
the watershed between the Middleton and Muller rivers, in a latitude but
slightly differing from that just named ; and in Walker’s Diary we find it
passing through S. and 145° E., where I find the highest elevation
recorded hy the latter explorer on his expedition in search of Burke and
Wills. Mr. A. C. Gregory’s exploration places the continuation of this
line of watershed through the north-west in 13° S. and 130° E., whilst in
the east it meets the main watershed between the Belyando and Thomson
on the one side, and the Burdekin and Flinders on the other, in about 21°
8. and 14o|° E. (See accompanying map.) The sweep of this line leads
across a sandstone tableland of considerable elevation—in parts even as
high, if we may rely on the data hitherto collected respecting it, as 1900
or 2000 feet. On its coast side this tableland inclines somewhat abruptly,
whilst towards the interior it slopes more gently, thus affording a ready
explanation of the marked difference existing between its river-systems,
those flowing in the former direction passing through well- defined valleys,
while those in the latter direction run generally in shallow beds, and are
consequently subject to excessive evaporation and inundation according to
the season of the year. The general incline of the country from longitude
145° to Stuart’s track in about 135° is towards south-west, until reaching
near the latter its lowest point, as we feel justified in concluding from the
great number of hot springs on the route Stuart pursued when crossing the
continent. This immense tract of land abounds in creeks and ill-defined
water-courses. In many cases the dividing or separating ridges of sand-
stone are (probably from the effects of floods and weather) broken up, and
cover the surface, which then presents a desert-like appearance, only here
and there covered with a scanty vegetation, consisting mostly of Spinifex
(Jriodia irritans). Very frequently, however, these ridges have succeeded
in resisting the destroying effects, and we then meet with valleys of good
soil, covered with fine grass and gum forest; which state of things, hap-
pily for the future of the Australian continent, seems to predominate, as
we learn from the reports of explorers who passed through fine country
alter having once entered the tropic. These water-courses of the interior
basin drain partly towards the Barcoo River (Cooper’s Creek), partly to-
wards the south, splitting up into innumerable little creeks and rills with-
out any definite direction. As air example of the latter kind may be men-
tioned the Burke Creek, which at times causes immense inundations in the
tract of country near 25° S. and 140° E., as we learn from the reports of


350 Dr. Ncumayer on a Scientific [May 14,
Burke, Wills, Howitt, M'Kinlay, and Gregory. To the south of this region
the at one time so much dreaded “ Stony Desert ” seems to extend in the
manner indicated on our map ; and it certainly bears every appearance as if
this region of sandstone was principally caused by the effects of the inun-
dations and floods already referred to. For whereas it is very easy to trace
this peculiar phenomenon to the south, it is hardly possible to define it
exactly towards the north, which fact accords well with the explanation of
its true origin just suggested. The careful researches of Mr. B. Hassen-
stein* have tended to throw new light upon this subject, and reduce the
Stony Desert to its proper limits. We know now that the arid plains de-
scribed by some explorers, which others had found well grassed and covered
with an even luxuriant vegetation, are the receptacles of the waters flowing
from the north, and form the boundary of the Stony Desert ; we know
moreover that extensive tracts of fine country are interspersed with strips
of “stony desert” of a very limited extent. Such is the nature of the
whole country, as far as we know it, from the meridian of 145° to Burke s
track. Of the country between the latter’s course and that of Stuart very
little is known ; but it is not unreasonable to suppose that it will prove to
be mostly of the same description as that already well known to us, as it
forms only the lower part of the interior basin above described, the very
bottom of which we have been made tolerably well acquainted with by
Stuart’s exploration, which bears out that supposition. Further to the
west, in the unknown country between Stuart’s track and the west coast,
the same sandstone tableland probably rises again to the high ranges which
have been observed by the various explorers who have penetrated into the
interior from the west, attaining in some parts an elevation of from three
to four thousand feet above the ocean. Therefore it is not at all unlikely
that we shall find in the western half of the central basin in the main the
same state of things which we have found to exist in the east, with but such
slight modifications as may be determined by the configuration and lay of
the country in connexion with the prevailing system of winds and contin-
gent meteorological phenomena.
In order to complete the general description of this portion of the Au-
stralian continent, we must call to mind the effect a tropical and subtro-
pical sun must naturally exert upon a territory constituted as this interior
tableland. During the time the sun is north of the equator, in the winter
months of the southern hemisphere, the prevailing winds are from south-
east all over the northern continent, with little and only occasional rain ;
but on the sun’s approach, during October and November, the monsoon
shifts to north-west, and brings on the rainy season, gradually advancing
from south to north in the middle of December and January. At the end
of this season, in February and March, and about the time preceding the
shifting back to south-east of the monsoon in April, the heavy falls of rain
and the soaked state of the soil cause those immense floods which are
* Pctermann, Mitthcilungen, 1807, p. 80.


recorded in the Journals of the various explorers; and it is during this
period that in the territory south of the Burke Creek and north of the
Stony Desert, as we have already explained, great ravages are caused by
inundation. Further to the south the meteorological phenomena of the
northern portion of the continent pass gradually over to those prevailing
in the south, namely that of two alternating currents of air, with winter
rains and a short rainy season in September and October.
Great as have been the recent achievements with regard to the geogra-
phical knowledge of the continent, comparatively little has been done by
any one of the exploring expeditions towards the advancement of science.
Information calculated to throw light on the elevation of the interior or on
its geological character flows very scantily from the journals kept by the
. and even the astronomical determinations of localities must, at
least as far as longitude is concerned, be received with caution, as the means
at their disposal, the comparatively small practice of most of the obseivcis
in determinations of this kind, and the very methods employed, would hardly
admit of anything like a close approximation to the truth. Indeed we may
safely assert that it would have been scarcely compatible with the general
pioneering object of parties in the field since 1860 to have devoted more
attention to matters of science, strictly speaking, than was sufficient to
carry them through the difficulties they had to encounter. Perhaps it may
not be considered out of place if I express here my deep regret, on this very
ground, for the untimely death of my young friend, W. J. W ills, the as-
tronomer of Burke’s expedition ; for, had he but survived his first feat,
there can be but little doubt that his zeal for the advancement of
and the knowledge he had obtained during the time he was on the staff of
the Observatory over which I then presided, would have enabled him to
take the first place as a scientific explorer, whereas we can now only admire
him for his courageous and enterprising spirit as a pioneer. 1 his hope,
however, is at an end ; and up to the present time absolutely nothing has
been done towards the scientific examination of the vast interior of
lia —an examination of such immense importance for the advancement of
almost every branch of physical science, and for the development of the
natural resources of this great country. It is with regard to this matter that
I venture to address this Society, with the view of soliciting its im-
portant assistance in starting an expedition, having for its object the ex-
ploring of the western half of Australia, and the scientific survey of the
route across the entire continent.
When the celebrated Australian explorer. Dr. Leichhardt, started on the
expedition which was to be his last, he did so with the intention of crossing
the continent from east to west, for the purpose of discovering the extent
of Sturt’s desert, and the character of the western and north-western coast,
and of observing the gradual change in vegetable and animal life from
one side of the continent to the other*. It is now exactly twenty years
* History of Discovery and Exploration of Australia, by the Eev. J. E. T. Woods,
vol. ii. p. 518.


since this grand idea was conceived and attempted to be carried out. The
last news of Dr. Leichhardt is dated April the 3rd, 1848. Subsequent to
this date nothing has been heard of him ; and deep mystery still surrounds
his fate, notwithstanding the many efforts which have since been made,
originally to rescue the explorer and his party, and subsequently, when all
hope of again seeing any of them alive was abandoned, to ascertain the
manner in which they perished, and the locality where it occurred. No
doubt, to many it may have appeared premature on the part of Dr, Leich-
hardt to have entered upon such an undertaking at a time when so little
was known of the nature of the interior as to make it utterly impossible to
lay down a route across the continent on any other ground than that of
mere conjecture. Circumstances, however, have since that time changed
considerably ; at least one half of the continent has since been explored in
such a way as to make us acquainted with the natural resources an explorer
may expect to meet with and turn to account, whilst even from the western
coast numerous expeditions have tended to diminish the risk with which
such an undertaking would be invested. And in directing the attention of
this Society to Dr. Leichhardt’s idea, with the view of seeing it carried out,
I do so with the conviction that now the proper time has arrived for taking
in hand an enterprise of such importance for the future of the Australian
colonies, and especially for the advancement of science, and thereby mani-
festing alike our appreciation of the various interests at stake, and of the
noble mind who risked all he had in their furtherance. In the execution
of such a work, its scope may now be materially extended. Instead of a
rough survey on a single line from north-east jto south-west, with an appa-
ratus which allowed of but a limited attention being paid to strictly scien-
tific matters, it is now proposed to form a base-line for the various branches
of science through the interior of a vast continent. That such a work can
now no longer be regarded as impracticable or premature, and that its suc-
cessful completion cannot be otherwise than replete with the greatest inte-
rest, I hope to be able to show in the course of this paper.
After these introductory remarks, I shall proceed to detail the plan
which I propose to follow in carrying out the exploration of the western
half of the continent, and the scientific survey of the line of route to be
followed in traversing the interior from the east shores of Queensland to
Western Australia.
It is proposed that the expedition be organized in Queensland, probably
on the Burdekin, near Port Denison, in 20° south latitude. From a point
in 20° South and about 148° East it will strike out for a point in 24|- 0
South on Stuart’s track. So far the interior has to some extent been
explored already, and it can be predicted with some degree of certainty,
with what difficulties and with what facilities the expedition will probably
meet*. From this point, Avhich I designate on the accompanying map
by the letter B, the original starting-point being A, to the south-western
* The greater part of the country between the east coast and Burke’s track will pro-
bably have been taken up for squatting purposes in a very few years.


extremity of the continent, nothing is known; and in choosing a prac-
ticable route, we must’ be guided entirely by surmises as to the nature
of the country, based upon the supposition that we shall most probably
have to deal with a state of things in the west very similar to that already
known to exist in the east. ' I shall, in the first place, however, lay down
the entire course, and then enter upon my reasons for having done so.
From point B I propose keeping nearly on the same parallel as far as
point C, in longitude 125f° East; from thence proceeding on the same
meridian to a point in 27° South, and thence to a point D in 116|° East
and 31South. Near the latter point, on our route to Perth in Western
Australia, we shall strike the Swan River. The entire distance on that
route is about 2649 miles, of which 1080 comprise the distance from
A to B, and the remainder that from B to C and D, an allowance of
20 per cent, being made for curvature, which percentage must always be
understood when reference to distance occurs in the course of this paper.
As a close examination of the country traversed is the primary object of
the expedition, it is proposed to accomplish it in thirteen stages, so that
fourteen separate depots will have to be established during its progress,
each depot being intended to be retained only for such a time as will be
requisite for the survey and exploration of the surrounding country, and
for the formation and transport to the next. From Ato B the number of
depots will be six, so that the average distance between two consecutive
depots will be 216 miles, while from B to C and C to D there will be eight
depots, with an average distance of 200 miles. On the map these depots
are marked; but it is evident that it is next to impossible to assign them
their proper positions with any degree of accuracy, as these will depend so
much upon circumstances at present almost entirely unknown to us. It is
only for the line from A to B that we are enabled to fix with any certainty
the positions of such depots, as we are already acquainted with some loca-
lities the nature of which will probably recommend them for such a pur-
pose. Thus we should propose fixing depot No. 2on the meridian of 145°
and near Walker’s track, depot No. 3 on the Middleton River of M/Kinlay,
depot No. 4 near the “ fine open plains ” of Burke and Wills, and depot
No. 6 on Stuart’s track somewhere between the Fincke and Hugh rivers,
in each of which cases the country is described as w'ell grassed and provided
with permanent water. For depot No. 6, and depots 7to 12, we have no
data whereby to guide us, until we again approach the regions already ex-
plored from the west. As it is proposed from these various depots to strike
out in different directions, they will have also to be sfelected with a view to
enable these minor expeditions to yield the greatest possible amount of in-
formation with respect to the largest possible tracts of country.- v
With reference to the time required for accomplishing the whole expe-
dition in a manner commensurate with the scientific objects of the under-
taking, it may be said, that it is proposed to devote three years and six
months to it, of which fifteen months are taken up by the examination of


the country between A and B, and twenty-seven months for the exploration
and scientific survey of that part of the route within the entirely unknown
region between points B and D. Now let us examine what prospects of
success this would allow for the performance of the task proposed. The
distance from the Burdekin to Stuart’s track may easily be travelled through,
at the moderate rate of ten miles a day, in 108 days, or three months and
a half, allowing a time of stay in each of the several depots of nearly two
months (I*9). For the route through the western country, the time has
been increased at a rate proportionate to the increased risk incurred and
the care to be bestowed upon the explorations within its regions. The time
requisite to travel over the line from B to D would be about five months
and a half, which would allow of a period of stay in each of the depots of
2-4 months ; counting, however, depot No. 6 twice, as it is proposed, for
reasons presently to be explained, to prolong the stay at that point beyond
the time generally allowed to the other depots. From this exposition, it is
evident that ample opportunities are offered for an exact study of the ground
travelled over with reference to the various branches of science to be in-
cluded in the scope of the entire work. This will become still more appa-
rent on°the further unfolding of the details of the organization of the expe-
dition. Dr. Leichhardt intended to travel over nearly the same distance
in about two years and a half, and that too without having also, as regards
the eastern portion of the Continent, any information whatever to guide him
in his route ; and it was probably to some extent owing to the insufficiency
of time allowed by him for the carrying through of such an extensive un-
dertaking, and the consequent deficiency of provisions and outfit, that he
failed in its accomplishment. The extent, moreover, of the scientific labours
proposed to be undertaken on this occasion is something widely different
from what explorers twenty years ago could attempt, and is such as would
of itself alone justify an increase of time by twelve months.
I shall now have to enumerate a few of the reasons prompting me in
proposing the route I have laid down in the preceding pages. From what
I have already said respecting the character of the tropical and subtropical
interior of Australia, it appears that the line of route from the Burdekin
to the Fincke of Stuart passes, as far as known, through practicable coun-
try, well watered and grassed, abounding in game of all kinds, and likewise
well peopled with aboriginals. We are on this route likely to meet with
the most practicable country in the interior we propose to explore and
examine, and shall probably shun entirely the so-called desert country, sub-
ject to destructive inundations. There is much likelihood that the unknown
regions in the west bear in many respects a great resemblance to the eastern
half; and I therefore feel inclined to believe that on the same parallel of
latitude (23° S.) we shall meet with no greater obstacles to progress than
we are likely to encounter in the east. The explorations of Mr. Gregory
in the same latitude and in longitude 117° seem to corroborate this opinion,
as the country appeared to him from that point towards the east to bear


for many miles a promising appearance. Observations made in other parts
of the north-west littorale of Australia confirm this view, and some of the
rivers have been supposed to take their origin in high granite and trap
ranges three hundred miles from the coast. They would in this case be
only four hundred miles from our point C, towards which the high western
tableland, of which these ranges are probably the watershed, inclines until
again reaching the lowest part near Stuart’s hot springs and the lake district
forming the receptacle of the drainage from the Barcoo River. The course
proposed passes very nearly through the centre of the unknown interior, and
offers therefore, as an inspection of the map will show, an opportunity fin-
exploring these unknown regions, and most likely also for tracing the limits
of Mr. Gregory’s sandy deserts in the north-west. With reference to the
south-west extremity, I accept for the greater part the suppositions thrown
out by the Rev. J, E. T. Woods respecting its nature, first ably set forth in
a letter addressed to the * Melbourne Argus ’ some years ago, and again re-
peated in his excellent work on Australian exploration (vol. ii. p. 511), from
which we quote the following passage. Mr. Woods says, —“If the western
end of the tableland be on an average two thousand feet high, there must be a
drainage to the interior nearly equal to that which causes so many rivers on
the west coast. The watershed has never yet been crossed from the west
side; but one cannot help remarking that wherever it has been crossed
elsewhere good land has been found. It is no evidence against the existence
of a river that none are found on the south coast, especially in the Austra-
lian Bight, where it would be most likely to appear. Many places in the
inteiior have an extensive drainage, which never reaches the sea. The
Barcoo drains into Lake Eyre, which is the receptacle of many other streams.
A stream from the west coast might empty itself into Lake Gairdner*. There
must at any rate be some important drainage in connexion with that large
sheet of water.” It is scarcely needful to add anything to the reasons here
set forth for the necessity of the existence of a large drainage area in the
south-western extremity of the continent; but it may perhaps be not out
of place to recall to mind here that the Barcoo River (Cooper’s Creek)
drains a territory of nearly nine degrees of longitude and seven degrees of
latitude before emptying itself into Lakes Eyre and Gregory, forming, after
its bifurcation near the locality where the final scenes of the Burke and
Wills tragedy were enacted, an immense river delta, far exceeding any of
the well-known deltas in the worldt. If we now place a drainage system,
in dimensions similar to that just spoken of, to the west of Lakes Eyre
and Gairdner, it would in all probability be intersected by the course
proposed through the western interior. An expedition, after having once
struck such a river-system, would of course have to follow up the discovery ;
and would, in its further course towards south-west, have mainly to be
» I rather feel inclined to believe that the receptacle spoken of is formed by some
lakes to the north of the Australian Right, yet undiscovered.
f According to the recent exploration of Major Warburton.


guided by the watercourses, without however losing sight of its primary
object. It is not unlikely that, by the time the proposed expedition would
reach the country north of the Australian Bight, expeditions from Western
Australia, and even from the recently opened harbour on the south coast
(Eucla), will have thrown new light upon this subject, thereby considerably
facilitating this portion of the undertaking.
It has already been mentioned that at point B on Stuart’s track it is pro-
posed to make a longer stay than in any of the other depots. The prin-
cipal reason for so doing is to afford the expedition at that stage an oppor-
tunity of communicating with the settled portion of South Australia, pre-
vious to entering on the unknown territory to the south-west. A small
party may be detached from the main body for the purpose of travelling to
the nearest point of settlement, on which occasion collections and documents
may be sent to Adelaide or Melbourne, as well as any information received
which may be of importance for the progress of the expedition, and chiefly
such respecting the progress of exploration in Australia, having an imme-
diate bearing on the problem at issue. Such an expedition may also pre-
sent an opportunity of exchanging or making up our complement of men
and horses, replenishing stores, &c. That this does not present any serious
difficulty in execution we know from Stuart’s expeditions, who on an ave-
rage travelled the distance from the Fincke to Mount Margaret * (Mr.
Jarvis’s station) in twentv-four days. It is therefore fair to suppose that
within ten weeks this party could proceed to the first settlements and re-
turn, after having accomplished its objects.
In the preceding part of this paper I have laid down the track I propose
following, and have, I believe, succeeded in explaining the reasons which
guided me in doing so. I have avoided, however, all matters of detail as
to the branch expeditions, which are intended to be undertaken on both
sides of the main route, as such expeditions must to a great extent depend
on the nature of the country to be explored, on which point our knowledge
is still very scanty. I shall now in a few words give an outline of the
scientific objects of the expedition, and then proceed with some details re-
specting its organization and probable expense.
An expedition passing through the centre of such a vast continent, tra-
velling through 32 degrees of longitude and 12 degrees of latitude, cannot
be otherwise considered than as productive of the most material advantages
to the cause of science generally, provided the plan of its working be such
as accords with the present state of scientific inquiry, and the conduct of
the whole be entrusted to competent hands. It is frequently supposed that,
in expeditions of this nature, it is expedient to confine the scientific re-
searches and observations within the narrowest limits. Indeed, a rigorous
scientific inquiry is frequently thought incompatible with geographical dis-
covery. This is a grievous mistake, and has invariably proved to be such
whenever an expedition has taken the field,'in the organization of which
* Probably the stations are now still further advanced towards the north.


proper attention Lad been paid to the objects it had to serve. There is no
doubt that the many unemployed hours, even of those of the party gene-
rally and more exclusively engaged upon exploration matters, may, for the
benefit of the well-being of the whole expedition, well be turned to account
in assisting scientific inquiry. On such principles the scientific plan of
operations of the proposed expedition, as detailed hereafter, has been
framed. It includes the following branches
1. Astronomical Science and Surveying. —ln addition to such operations
as are absolutely necessary for the mapping of the country, it is proposed
to organize a system of observations of the moon, w ith a view to assist lon-
gitudinal determination. Such more accurate determinations of the geo-
graphical position may be carried out at the various depots above
spoken of.
2. Terrestrial Physics and Meteorology. —Systematic registration of
meteorological phenomena and terrestrial magnetism is likewise to be car-
ried out at the depots, particularly with a view to assist barometrical mea-
surements of elevations and magnetic observations in the field.
If it should prove at all practicable, it would likewise be advisable to
include in the general plan of working observations on the length of the
pendulum vibrating seconds.
3. Geology, Palaeontology, and Mineralogy. —A geological sketch-map
of the whole route across the continent is to be made, and palaeontological
specimens are to be collected. Special attention has to be paid to the
mineral resources of the country travelled over.
4. Botany. —Observations on the physiology and geographical distri-
bution of plants are to be included, and collections made.
5. Zoology and Comparative Anatomy, including Ethnology . —This
branch is likewise to be attended to with a view to assist physiological
studies, and to examine into the applicability of Darwin’s Theory on the
Fauna of Australia, ancient and modern. Collections are to be made.
/
Character and language of the aboriginals in the various parts of the
continent are to be studied.
6. Sketching and Photography. —These arts will be employed more par-
ticularly for the purpose of representing the character of the various tracts
of country passed through, but will have likewise to assist the various
branches of science in the complete execution of their parts.
I refrain from entering into particulars respecting the general scheme of
scientific work to be adhered to in the course of the expedition ; the more
so as it is intended that the authorities in the various scientific branches,
both in England and in the colonies of Australia, should be consulted on
this matter, and their cooperation and advice solicited. It is especially by
the aid of the scientific men and institutions in Australia, and their exten-
sive labours in the various branches of science, that I am led to hope for a
great success in the scientific part of the work of the expedition, as these
labours form an excellent base whereon to build and start from. Thus
much, however, I may state, that it is to be made a rule that nothing be


358 Dr. Ncumayer on a Scientific [May 14,
included in the plan of immediate investigation while in the field which
may well be deferred without prejudicing the general objects of the expe-
dition. This rule is to hold good for all scientific branches, and will also
be made a guiding principle with reference to the reduction and discussion
of observations, the examining of natural-history objects, and the collecting
of specimens.
At the present time, when mystery still surrounds the fate of Dr. Leich-
hardt, I should consider myself open to just reproach were I to lay out the
plan and scope of an expedition through the interior of Australia without
calling attention to this subject, and including it among the duties of such
an expedition to aid in clearing up that mystery. As remarked at the
outset of this paper, twenty years have now elapsed since the utter disap-
pearance of that great explorer, and there is now indeed scarcely any like-
lihood of rescuing any of his party alive. But the hope of even ascertain-
ing the fate of that brave body of men should never be abandoned until
the object be attained, though there can be no doubt that the chances of
our doing so grow smaller from year to year, every fresh inundation or
conflagration of large tracts of forest diminishing them considerably. The
scientific survey entailed upon such an expedition as that proposed offers
great facilities also for the promotion of a search after traces of the missing
explorers. In addition to which I consider it of extreme importance for
such a purpose that the search should be instituted in the direction in
which the missing expedition intended to move, the more so as all efforts
to cut Leichhardt’s probable route at right angles have hitherto proved
ineffectual. When we consider that the eastern portion of the Australian
continent has been so frequently crossed and recrossed during the last six
years without any material information having been gained as to Leich-
hardt’s fate, we feel almost disposed to believe that he shaped his course
from Upper Victoria and the Alice River, in a direction somewhat similar
to that taken by Mr. Gregory on his expedition in search of him, paiticu-
larly as such an opinion is supported by such an authority on Australian
exploration as Mr. J. E. T. Woods in his recent work. According to his
opinion the explorer was compelled to follow the Barcoo, and may hav e
perished in the country to the west of Lake Lyre and Stuait s track. But
we must not forget that such a course to the south-west would, with this
indefatigable explorer, have been equivalent to giving up his original plans
respecting the exploration —plans which, as far as we are acquainted with
them through the Rev. Mr. Clarke of Sydney, and others intimately con-
nected with him, w ould have carried him to the west, and even to the north
of west. This opinion was also entertained by Mr. A. Gregory, who thought
“ that Leichhardt had left the Barcoo at its junction with the Alice, and,
favoured by thunderstorms, penetrated the level desert country to the
north-west, where, being unable to return, they may have perished loi
want of water.” (Expedition in Search of Dr. Leichhardt, 1857-58,
page 8.) Such may be the case, but it may also be that they succeeded
in forcing their way through the country referred to by Gregory, and there-


1868.] Exploration of Central Australia. 359
fore the country between Stuart’s and Burke’s track must be well examined
with a view to find traces of the party. Although it may at first sight
appear difficult to conceive that Stuart could have passed six times through
the country which Leichhardt most probably crossed on his way to the
west without observing any trail or mark of the latter’s course, neverthe-
less there is no improbability in such being the case ; and unremitting zeal
should be displayed throughout the whole expedition in endeavouring to
lift the veil from off this sad tragedy. Should the expedition fail in finding
the remains of the party in the east, they will have to search for them in
the west and south-west extremity of the continent.
An expedition through the vast interior of Australia, with such an ex-
tended scheme of operations and so many important matters to attend to,
should be organized on such a base as to give full guarantees for being able
to accomplish its main objects, as well as to protect itself against attacks
of the aboriginals and the destructive effects of unforeseen misfortunes. It
is therefore proposed that the expedition should number twenty-five men.
The following is the plan showing how the exploring expedition proper is
to be composed :
Leader, assistant leader, storekeeper and overseer, saddler and tent-
maker, blacksmith and wheelwright, twelve stockmen, and three abo-
riginals. To these are to be added the following scientific men of the
party: —1. Geologist and mineralogist; 2. Botanist and chief medical
officer; 3. Zoologist, palaeontologist, and medical assistant; 4. Artist,
photographer, and custos of collections ; 5. Assistant for physical science
and observer.
With reference to the organization of the party, so as to ensure a satis-
factory cooperation of all concerned, it is proposed to adhere to the follow-
ing principles:—■
1. The scientific members of the expedition, with the exception of the
leader and the assistant leader, do not form part of the exploring party
proper, but are under the leader’s supervision, and may be employed as
may appear to him desirable for the advancement of the objects of the
expedition.
2. The exploring party proper consists of the leader as first officer, the
assistant leader second officer, and the overseer third officer, two artisans,
twelve stockmen, and three aboriginals.
3. The exploring party proper is to be divided into three bodies of
men: —
a. Depot party. —Storekeeper and overseer, saddler and tent-maker,
three men, and an aboriginal. To this party the assistant observer
is to be attached.
b. Field Party I.—Leader, blacksmith, four men, and an aboriginal.
To this party any of the scientific men may be attached as best
answering the purpose, care being, however, taken that one ot
the medical men be included among them.


2. Outfit of the expedition, exclusive of provisions
2,980
0
0
3. Salaries, wages, and contingencies for three years and six
months
17,6/5
0
0
Total expenditure
£21,535
0
0
c. Field Party ll.—Assistant leader, five men, and an aboriginal.
To this party &c. as above.
4. The depot party remains in the depots which will successively be
formed in the course of the expedition. It will chiefly be employed in
keeping everything in repair and good order, in preparing provisions, and
propagating useful plants. The sick and convalescent are likewise to be
received into it. Systematic registration of meteorological and magnetical
phenomena is to be carried on by it under the immediate superintendence
of the assistant observer.
5. The field parties will be employed in such a manner that one will be
examining the neighbourhood of the depot, say thirty miles round, while
the other will undertake the larger excursions on both sides of the main
route. In case of a removal of the depot in the direction of the main route,
all parties will have to cooperate. It is proposed, moreover, to employ
the field telegraph, as well for the promotion of the scientific objects as for
the more satisfactory cooperation of the whole party engaged. The per-
fection to which ballooning has been brought by the zeal and energy of
Mr. Glaisher makes it not unlikely that it may be employed with advantage
in this expedition for the facilitation of the exploring and mapping of tracts
of country otherwise barely accessible.
For means of transport it is proposed to employ fifty horses and eight or
ten camels, which latter animals have now been acclimatized in the colo-
nies, and show a special fitness and adaptation for Australian exploring
work.
We may now add a few words as to the probable amount of expenditure
an expedition of this kind would involve, referring, however, for particulars
to the appendix.
The following is an abstract of the probable expense
1. Expenses previous to the organization of the expedition a6BBO 0 0
This estimate has been framed without regard to any expenses in connexion
with the publication of the results of the expedition. The sum may, at
first sight, appear somewhat large; but when we come to take into consi-
deration the objects which the expedition professes to advance —when avc
remember that, for the first time in the history of Australian exploration,
the various governments are to unite in support of a uniform and well-
planned scheme of exploration—when we consider that this sum is to be
distributed over a period of three years and a half —we cannot fail to per-
ceive the moderate amount of the sum proposed to be expended.
It is proposed that the expenditure for this'great scheme of exploration
of the vast interior of Australia, and the scientific researches contingent


upon it, shall be borne by the mother country in conjunction with the
various Australian colonies. So soon, therefore, as an arrangement to that
effect may have been arrived at, trustees should be appointed, residing in
the colonies, who would act as a Committee of administration, such Com-
mittee to consist of not more than five members. All funds would be
placed at their disposal, and all money transactions in connexion with the
expedition would be made under their supervision and subject to their
approval.
The objects of the expedition having been attained, and the time arrived
when the same is to be broken up, the residue of the stock and stores—
horses, camels, equipment, instruments, provisions, &c. —would be handed
over to the Committee of Trustees, to be disposed of as they might think fit.
All observations, journals, maps, natural-history collections, drawings,
and photographs, without exception, would likewise be handed over to the
Committee of Trustees on the completion of the expedition, in order that
the same may be turned to account in furtherance of the interests of science,
and of the various countries that have taken a part in this great undertak-
ing. Members of the expedition would not be permitted to make private
collections, and none of the results would be made public, unless by special
authority of the Committee of Trustees.
Such are the objects and leading principles of an expedition which I hope
to be able in person to carry out; and I trust it will not be deemed pre-
sumptuous on my part if I add a few words in support of my claims to be
entrusted with the conduct of so noble an enterprise. I have been con-
nected with Australia, with brief interruptions, ever since the year 1852, and
the greater part of that long interval of time has been employed by me in
studying the physical character of that great continent. In 1858 I suc-
ceeded in establishing an Observatory at Melbourne for the advancement
of our knowledge of terrestrial physics, and my labours and publications
on the observations made up to the time of my resignation and retirement
from that institution in 1863, will in a very short time come to a conclu-
sion. The magnetical and other observations collected during my travels
through Victoria, part of New South Wales, and of South Australia, com-
prising an area of nine degrees of longitude and six degrees of latitude, are
now in course of publication on behalf of the colony of Victoria. As soon
as this is accomplished, I purpose again to devote my energies to further
inquiries respecting the physical geography of Australia, but on this occa-
sion likewise as an explorer. In this determination lam prompted by no
other motives than the advancement of science, and my attachment towards
a rising country —an attachment not unnatural, after a connexion extend-
ing over a period of so many years. v
It is on these grounds that I solicit the powerful support of this Society
in this great national undertaking, which, I am persuaded, will, if success-
fully carried out,.conduce equally to the advancement of the interests of
science and to the material welfare of Australia. Men may differ as to the


mode of proceeding in its execution; but none, I presume, will venture to
deny its importance, especially with regard to the development of the
natural resources of that immense area, in the interests of civilization —
none, I feel sure, will oppose it as being premature or inopportune. It
would be presumptuous on my part were I to urge the importance of the
opening up of the western interior for the successful settlement of Western
and North-Western Australia, which at some future time, and under certain
contingencies that might arise, would have a most important bearing on
the security of the British possessions in India. For lam well aware that
men, regarded as authorities in colonial policy, have long ago brought this
subject under the consideration of the Government. Nor need I speak of
the enlightened spirit in which the various Governments in Australia have
ever shown themselves ready to assist the cause of exploration, and scientific
research. The many and valuable contributions that science, in nearly
every one of its branches, has received from the colonies cannot fail to
assure us of their assistance and cooperation in a systematic and scientific
exploration of the unknown interior round which they are clustered. I
feel confident there needs but an impulse from England, and the sanction
of its highest scientific authorities, to secure for the undertaking a ready
assent and strenuous support on the part of the people and the Govern-
ments of Australia.
APPENDIX.
A. —Annual Expenditure of the Expedition.
a. Salaries and wages for the members of the expedition proper.
1. Leader, annually £450 0 0
Assistant leader, annually 3.00 0 0
Storekeeper and overseer, annually 200 0 0
Saddler, tent-maker, &c., monthly £l2 144 0 0
Blacksmith, wheelwright, monthly <£l2 144 0 0
.£l2BB 0 0
2. Twelve stockmen at £8 a month £1152 0 0
Three aboriginals at £4 a month 144 0 0
£I29G 0 0
h. Salaries for the scientific men.
Geologist, mineralogist, annually £.300 0 0
Botanist and medical officer 100 0 0
Zoologist, palaeontologist, medical assistant 300 0 0
Artist and photographer 300 0 0
Assistant observer for physical science 200 0 0
£l4OO 0 0


Total, Salaries and Wages.
a. 1 <£l2BB 0 0
n. 2 1296 0 0
b. 1400 0 0
£3984 0 0
c. Expenditure for provisions, tobacco, &c £866 0 0
And for wear and tear and repairs 200 0 0
£1066 0 0
Total of the annual expenditure 0 0
£5050 0 0
Total for three years and a half £17675 0 0
B. —Expenditure of the Expedition for Instruments , Outfit, exclusive of
Provisions.
1. Instruments—Astronomical £2OO 0 0
Physical and meteorological 250 0 0
Physiological and botanical 80 0 0
Surgical medicine-chest 60 0 0
Geological 40 0 0
Photographical 50 0 0
Packing and transport to Australia .... 60 0 0
£740 0 0
2. Tools and implements, including rides, revolvers, ammuni-
tion, rockets, nlue lights, horseshoes, &c £4OO 0 0
3. Tents, a boat, and a small iron vehicle £3OO 0 0
4. Saddlery, including thirty riding saddles and pack saddles,
water bags, &c £440 0 0
5. Live stock; fifty horses at £2O each £lOOO 0 0
Some sheep 100 0 0
£llOO 0 0


Total Outfit.
1 .£740 0 0
2 400 0 0
3 300 0 0
4 440 0 0
5 1100 0 0
£2980 0 0
C. —Expenditure during and prior to the Organization of the
Expedition.
Expenses in Europe £lOO 0 0
Passage money for the officers to Australia 380 0 0
Probable expenditure prior to the organization 400 0 0
Total -£BBO 0 0
Grand Total Expenditure
A £17,675 0 0
B 2,980 0 0
C 880 0 0
£21,535 0 0


3-oc.EqyrSoc. VoiX^I.Tlate/1.
115° 120° 125° 130
135° 140° 1
45° 1
50°
i r
\ MAP
to accompany
l>f Nemnayer’s Paper on
Scientific Exploration
CENTRAL AUSTRALIA.
tW
JS&i
rmU '°
-X Catoeata
Ci
Puli}) any
| \
£ f V\
j ia, 1 SCS
.
I5°t
1868.
\ \r
di *' i"
”* 1
j J
i
n j
y]:
17 /]
1/ U
[(V~k |
L\
■U
L/
>-■
10°
i 1
1 Tropic CJt;
tiA 8 s •
Cacp^-icorn.v
4
/ I'-
Ji
- J Tll
Sfi \ 14,
yehampto^i
20°
—f "T TaT t 8
j —
\ 1 J-
Tr
\ ? -i
25°
[XT /Jr 1 1
\/j \
U /K
1 1 L-
I \1 1
!
( hTtraJjBairiij^C'
•» 1 A-
k Stmg&esertKZ*
)v
I J \J J/f
D r y
|MJ
\*
V
25“
30°
l
Gfurdn
\
er ii A
, BTflcxa:
1 1 / . #7
1 L /
l & ///
'' / pyilnoy
30°
? 5 °
\ . . ._L. .
7
35°
\ ioo o ‘ ibo aoo 300 i»oo sooKKlos 1
-® BjouU>, A Pi ■i/rapn 1 \statitrus \ OldbFwMzs sinca 18
prapo.sefl . \ \ .
W.
L J-
/
115° 120°
125°
130° 135° 140
145°
150°
4 J Basiro Izth/.


J Afjj
&1&U0
F 13/44
U co^-j
1508
02236139




\
4 -
* v
", *
