

kM-'Jr
I Jm 4
SSSI i 1 Wvys ipj&J S i; JO 1 1 I
i
fe - . - ! ; ,*•*
ByKj__ >
El
fe,-,'/ ■ •« ;... : ■.•• ■ ■ : / ; ;:“ ■ v.-'V
swool^
■
.
|pB Pw 1 '(S ?Pvi ifiooy jpooSSuOw I
■■
-• % f' *$£ ■ s'-
Hfiflfil K Sffl j J i K 8 ? f? SJS xjjjjj®S
it-;. ■. -■,■ » ■•?• ■». . • v fv: „ •• ’• .■ ■■ ■*■ .V .
. , . ’ :•. - ■■ -r .• •■■/. <, ; '»■■ '
H IIP H 1
a IIH Hi 8 B11 i 1 i§ii
™88g qj S ssS B S IS SS E^wS!
•
|H j t n
39rK8|
1H
OKflW
wow
m!88K
t-- 1 vss&z-w- ■ --agsw 6 ' ::
- :'V ■ . ■.*■;*:-■»■ \*> ■:
■ ■• l’ ' ■'■: ' r -.r* ... ’ •. .*; .<■ ", •.‘. y . -, • -
" i'■ '/■* '* t'llf ,1 Lf ,r’ ’ ■'*' •>' »M
'
.
■ • ■* '
hHH
■
.
•
<Ak.
• * •■•'* '* ■•” ;••■ 1 >?. .- v> ••* - •■' *3 '%’•>•’ "■ . •■•s ; v { ■ '•.-'* ■
•''v2s5v . ■ ■• ■• .* >. jrV. • ,'■. . ; i ■••-
w? ■
'' - \ ’’, . ' * ‘ 'v V ' ’ .'/I
* '»/' “.'‘1 • *™i r •'*■*?! * ■; <t ■ ■ .• ,
■ r V. / '■•■■•■ •■•’
f
'
->.^#5.,. ' -.\-h : .-• •■ ■ i .'••r.s-.r,
Kv 1 1 '• 'V - ’■ V-'-:■.’••■'' * 1 • .• v >- . : v-.
V c ■-' ■' . ■ ', ,1.'}' ‘S S c- i’-'l-i ■-."!,•*■ * V-- r .J. v'v>. '%V-
-'• ,■ , *,<, - ■ • i ' \ ‘ V ~ 1 " t ’ • * * V ' ‘ •' ■ •' ‘ ' ’ ' ' , %1
.
. jMUS ,'■
MB
Hnul- fe P
: *i ;
m . .. $*V" /-a?.*sSkv $&$■ £»jfv’ - .• '''"f '-• : : ■ -c
•
•
n
'
•
■ .••’ ;}“ . v ‘‘ . - •- . v '■ V is ■• ’’v' ' -
* ■' ■■#
-- • ' -.. ■.•■:'"-• ‘ ’ •'(..; V ■ • —.f- ,•'';'. ‘
: f§y '.• r-> ■ •.;<-. " .': ' • ’• • :- ?
u '--' ; t •. .• -
. *.‘ i-W • ‘ f V • - f ■ •■ v ; , t . ,
■ r s ' r,y ' ? M: ■ -Jl
-
■
'■*■ ,■•'. 'V. -- "■ ' • • ■ ' iT ■ ''
si' - ; -C §
* V.; •■- : i'j-
[M|
■ • •. . . - .....
otmW
•■ :■■£■:.? • fvi: '
'
■ :V- i#
. ' .. ’ '
*' - <-V.3S£> ■ ''’-S-'-ia
_
\T-- ■■ ■ :< '-V. ■
OyywS s»i fill |ool jij J j j j J
.
Hi HIM HI 1 | I || I I
j' . -, . *-# k •££»!
* •• '■$&*•'{■ •*.'. 4v
-.v jf/ ' ■■' j ' ■' 1 ■ t,k £ • - •’. >■
jfSS’ ,
Mk, I.
'
. r. '
m








SECOND EDITION.
BRITISH COLONIZATION;
PARTICULARLY IN REFERENCE TO
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
EDWIN HARTLEY MEARS,
Tlie substance of the following Essay was delivered as a Lecture at the Greenwich Literary
Society, on the 31st January, 1839.
LONDON;
*
TUBLTSHED AND SOLD BY G. MANN, 39, CORNHILL;
J. REYNOLDS, 174, STRAND;
AND MAY BE HAD OF ALL BOOKSELLERS,
Price Fourpenoe.


London: printedby J. Reynolds,. l74, Strand.


ON BRITISH COLONIZATION
The subject of Colonization has attracted the attention of all enlight-
ened nations, and is becoming one of daily increasing interest to the
British people. The intelligent enterprize of the Greeks enabled them
to found most successful Colonies, and their example was imitated in
this, as in many other respects, by the Romans. The emigration of
the former, however, was conducted under the peaceful auspices of
commerce, for the purpose of affording new fields for the employment
of an abundant population; while the military spirit of the conquerors
of the world was the chief directing principle colonial system.
This native olive was planted by the emigrating Greek in his adopted
home, but the Eagle surmounted the Standard of the Roman senate
and people, which fluttered in the breezes of a distant and subjugated
clime.
The history of European Colonization, of which I shall now proceed
to give you an account, originated in the love of adventure, the
acquisitionof territory, the thirst for science, and the lustafter wealth ;
but these discoveries have been marked by every species of misery and
especially a frightful and iniquitous waste of human life.
In the 15th and 16th centuries, it was the established doctrine, that
the mere act of discovering a country in which heathens lived, was
quite sufficient to give the discoverer a lawful title to the land, and
authority over all its inhabitants ; the duty of converting the native
people to Christianity being the sole condition annexed.
In the year 1497, in the reign of Henry 7th, John and Sebastian
Cabot discovered the continent of America, and brought back to
England some of the native Indians; and historians have suggested
that it was probably a part of their plan to found a colony in America.
In the reign of Henry Bth several expeditions were fitted out to
colonize different parts of America, but each of them failed; in some
instances the colonists landed and settled themselves, but acts of
oppression towards the natives, and the just punishment of a consequent
loss of the means of subsistence, caused death and dispersion.
In the reign of Edward the 6th several of our nobility and merchants
(for the former in those times took laudably prominent part in speh
things); originated an expedition which led to the foundation pf the
old Russia Company.
The object of this company was to form a fleet, to be called the
“ Discovery Fleet,” at the iiead pf which was the enterprising nayi-


gator Sebastain Cabot. The king also granted “ letters missive,”*
which, from the sound and humanizing principles they contained, it
is to be wished had been more strictly acted upon.
It appears from the account of the historian, that the “ captains and
mariners took shipping and departed from Ratcliff, and being come
near to Greenwich where the court then lay, presently on the view
thereof, the courtiers came running out and the common people flocked
together, standing very thick upon the shore. The Privy Council,
they looked out at the windows of the court, and the rest x - an up to the
tops of the towers. The ships hereupon discharged their ordnance,
after the manner of war, and of the sea, insomuch that the tops of the
hills sounded therewith, and the vallies and the waters gave an
echo, and the mariners shouted in such sort, that the sky rang again
with the noise. To be short, it was a very triumph in all respects to
the beholder.’’ Their first discovery was Russia, and their meeting
with the barbarous inhabitants illustrates the happy effects of the
humane spirit couched in the letter missive I have just read you.
“It appeared,” says the Chronicler, “that they espied a far off a
certain fish boat, which master Chancellor, accompanied with a few of
his men, went towards, to commune with the fishermen who were in
it. But they, annoyed with the strange greatness of his ship, began
presently to avoid and flee. He still following them, and being come
near, they, in great fear as men half dead, prostrated themselves before
him, offering to kiss his feet; but he looked pleasantly upon them,
comforting them by signs, and guestures, refusing those duties and
* LETTER MISSIVE.
4i Edward the Sixth, by the Grace of God, King of England, France, and
Ireland, to all Kings, Princes, Kulers, Judges, and Governors of the
Earth, and all other having any excellent dignity on the same, in all
places under the universal Heaven ; peace, tranquillity, and honour,
be unto you, and your land and regions, which are under your domi-
nions, and to every of you as is convenient.
“ Forasmuch as the Great and Almighty God hath given unto mankind, above all
living creatures, such a heart and desire, that every man desireth to join friendship
with other ; to love and be loved ; also to give and receive mutual benefits; it is
therefore the duty of all men, according to their power, to maintain and increase this
desire in every man, with well deserving to all men; and especially to shew this
good affection to such as, being moved with this desire, come unto them from far
countries. For how much the longer voyage they have attempted for this intent,
so much the more do they thereby declare that this desire hath been ardent in them.
c ‘ Furthermore, also, the examples of our fathers and predecessors do incite us
hereunto: forasmuch as they have ever gently and lovingly entreated such as of
friendly mind came to them, as well from countries near at hand, as far remote,
commending themselves to their protection.
i * And if it be right and equity to shew such humanity towards all men, doubtless
the same ought chiefly to be shewed to merchants, who, wandering about the world,
search both the land and the sea, to carry such good and profitable things as are
found in their countries, to remote regions and kingdoms, and again to bring from
the same such things as they find there commodious for their own countries, both as
well that the people, to whom they go, may not be destitute of such commodities as
their countries bring not forth to them, as that also they may be partakers of such
things, whereof they abound. For the God of Heaven and Earth, greatly providing


reverence of theirs, and taking them up in all loving sort from the
ground.” Thus commenced our connection with the once barbarian
hordes of Russia. But this humane spirit did not regulate the public
feelinglong. Cabot recommended, inhis instructions, the use of strong
drink to work on the feelings of the natives, and a writer of that time
eulogizes the abominable treatment by the Spaniards of the natives in
the West Indies, and accounts their being madeslaves, and, as he says,
“ delivered from the bondage of Satan’s Tyranny” sufficient satisfac-
tion for the loss of their freedom, their native land and their lives.”
In Elizabeth’s reign, the letters patent to the various adventurers
were of the same character, to seize upon the discoverered lands, and set
forth the design of making the colored people Christians, but few means
were devised for effecting the desirable object, and no guarantees existed
for their protection ; on the contrary, the most atrocious acts were per-
petrated by the navigators, unnoticed by the Government. “Reinhold
Forster,” the companion of Captain Cook, thus writes upon the cruelty
and superstition of the early navigators. 4 lt was concluded to seize
the poor people, and pretended to be designed for their good. Now
supposing the Europeans had the laudable intention of doing them
service, and of instructing them in the Christian religion, yet surely
their violent proceedings were not the most likely method of effecting
for mankind, would not that all things should be found in one region, to the end
that one should have need of another, that by this means friendships might be esta-
blished among all men, and every one seek to gratify all.
“ For the establishing and furthering of which universal amity, certain men of
our realm, moved hereunto by the said desire, have instituted and taken upon them
a voyage by sea into far countries, to the intent that between our people and them
a way may be opened to bring in and carry out merchandize, desiring us to further
this enterprise. Who, assenting to this petition, have licensed the right valiant,
worthy Sir Hugh Willoughby, Knight, and other our truly and faithful servants,
which are with him, according to their desire, to go to countries to them heretofore
unknown, as well to seek such things as we lack, as also to carry unto them, from
our regions, such things as they lack. So that hereby not only commodity may
ensue both to them or us, but also an indissoluble and perpetual league of friendship
be established between us both, while they permit us to take of their things, such
whereof they have abundance in their regions, and we again grant them such things
of ours, whereof they are destitute.
“ We therefore desire you, Kings and Princes, and all other, to whom there is
any power on the earth, to permit unto these our servants, free passage by your
dominions ; for they shall not touch anything of yours unwilling unto you. Con-
sider you that they also are men. If, therefore, they shall stand in need of anything,
we desire you of all humanity, and for the nobility which is in you, to aid and help
them with such things as they lack, receiving again of them such things as they
shall be able to give you in recompense. Shew yourselves so towards them, as they
would that we and our subjects should shew ourselves towards your servants, if at
any time they should pass through our regions; thus doing, we promise you by the
God of all things that are contained in Heaven, Earth, and the Sea, and by the
life and welfare of our kingdom, that they shall as friendly and gently be enter-
tained, as it they were born in our dominions, that we may thereby recompense the
favour and benignity which you have shewn to our men.”
€i Written in London, which is the chief city of our kingdom, in the year from
the creation of the world 5515, in the month of January, 14th day, and seventh
year of our reign.”


their purpose, nor could the religionof Christ have any great attractlort
for a people groaning under the oppression of its teachers, and who
could not but perceive their violation of its most fundamental precept,
that of treating your fellow creature as your brother. But the
professors of Christianity were far moreintenton procuring intelligence
where gold was to be found; a circumstance which proves to a
demonstration that their zeal for the conversion of souls was the most
hypocritical of all imaginable pretences. And what are we to think
of the so called Ghristains, who could mistake, as they did, an ill
favoured old woman for the devil incarnate, and were not to be
convinced to the contrary till they found she had not got a cloven
foot? Men under the influence of superstition like this, are but ill
qualified to become leaders of the blind ; men who can treat with So
much inhumanity a people, whom, in spite of prejudice, they are
compelled to acknowledge to be possessed of great virtures. Surely
such men are totally unfit to propagate a Gospel which only breathes
the gentle spirit of charity and peace.”
It was in this reign that Sir John Hawkins formed the first
company in London for commencing the infernal slave trade.
We now come to the time, from 1584 to of Sir Walter
Raleigh, who Occupied so distinguished a station at that time among
the illustrious discoverers. Contemporaneous narratorsdisagree as to
his character and conduct, but his papers lead one to presume he
sought the wealth of America for the benefit of this country, that the
King of Spain might be successfully withstood. “It is Indian gold
(said he) that endangefeth and disturbelh all the nations of Europe;
it purchaseth intelligence, creepeth into councils, and setteth bound
loyalty and liberty in the greatest monarchies of Europe.” His
instructions to the seamen were to respect the female Indians, pay
scrupulously for their provisions, and when wrong was done to any
native, he brought the guilty before the injured party, and there
punished, or compelled perfect restitution.
The natives adopted the Queen’s authority, from the protection Sir
Walter Raleigh afforded them against the Spaniards, and, at his last
voyage, the natives of Guiana offered to make him their king. At
the same time it is very evident that Raleigh, was only so far disposed
to be tender of the rights of the natives of new countries, as should
promote the attainment of his object in getting wealth ; he took pains
to conceal from them his desire of gold, and the purpose of “invasion,”
and although he hoped to establish a profitable trade by peaceful
•means, yet, he says, “ the Chief hath neither shot nor iron weapon in
Ml his empire, and therefore may be easily conquered.” Numerous
attempts in the space of 40 years, at the end of the 16th century, were
macQ to settle Virginia. They originated with Raleigh ; they were
all batfed on bad principles; violence and injuries to the natives,
inequality of the sexes, convicts, and adventurers sent out, instead
of honest laborers; and negroes imported for slaves. No laws, nor
protection for the Indians, no attempt made to render civilizing efforts
proportionate to the necessities of the case, even although the nobility


and clergy entered warmly into the different enterprises. No muni-
cipal measures that would ensure justice to the Indian, between man
and man, in fact, nothing but pro
hlack, on whose land he was an intruder. The result was, as might
have been anticipated ; the oppressive treatment of the Indians by the
colonists led to plots by the Indians, which ended in an indiscrimi-
nate slaughter of friends and foes on the 22nd of March, 1622.
The early history of our North American Colonies was very
disastrous, though the first three were planted by Sir Walter Raleigh,
They had abundance of capital, and land of the most fertile descrip-
tion, but these were useless to the settlers, who died of famine, because
they wanted laborers; it was only the arrival of a slave ship that saved
them from destruction, but at the same time introduced a moral
pestilence that continues to infect, and threatens to convulse the fair
fabric of the American constitution.
About this period Lord Bacon, Sir William Monson, and others,
wrote on this subject. The cruelties exercised towards the natives,
caused many to consider, whethei’ we had any Tight to take possession
of their lands, or to attempt their conversion to ,
especially as no pains were taken to introduce civilization amongst
them; but the answer was, that “ the discovery of America was a
miracle, by which God, aftex* punishing the Atheism and Idolatei’s of
the heathen and brutish nations, by the conqueror’s cruelty, and after
acquainting them with civility by mixture of some other people,
meant to cause the Gospel to shine on them.”
About 1644 a petition was presented to Parliament signed by a
number of Puritan Ministers, which laid the foundation of all the
Protestant Missions since established. This gave rise to a new class
of events, and Colonization took the place of discovery, articles were
made with reference to Eleutharia, since called Bahama, that no
inhabitant should offer the natives any wrong, violence, or any
incivility whatever.
Voluntary exile for conscience and liberty also gave a new impetus
to Colonization. You are all familiar with the noble Hymn of Mrs.
Heraans in commemoration of this event. The Pilgrim-Fathers have
at last had justice done to them by the Poetic Muse.
What sought they thus afar ?*
Bright jewels of the mine ?
The wealth of seas, the spoils of war ?
They sought a faith’s pure shrine I
Ay, call it holy ground, .
The soil where first they trod!
They left unstained what there they found—
Freedom to worship God.
The Quakers in particular went in large numbers to America, and
other parts. Pennsylvania was founded by one of their excellent
body, William Penn, whose name will be remembered with honor so
long as humanity is reverenced among men. He endeared himself to


the Indians by his liberality, kindness, simplicity, and personal treat-
ment. He concluded a treaty with the natives, and received alargegrantof
land from them for which he liberally paid therm he enacted a system of
arbitration to decide complaints, with half whites and half blacks, buthis
scheme was not complete, inasmuch, as he neglected to give the Chiefs
a share in the government, and thereby amalgamating them with the
Colonists, which would have been the only thing to have kept them
together. He made numerous journeys into their country, to hold
conferences with them, and nothing approaching to an injury ever
happened to him, although frequent wrongs were being suffered by
them from the rest of his countrymen, the other Colonists. Both
Natives and Quakers called for the prohibition of spiritous liquors,
but the sale was continued in spite of the law. For many years
encroachments were made on the native’s lands, for the sake of
fraudulent sales. The Friends made many efforts, but in vain, to
protect them. In 1754 the Indians vowed vengeance,and the governor
prepared to repel them. The Friends interfered, urging, “that before
war be carried into execution it would be right to try whether some
pacific measures would not appease the anger of the Indians.” They
had a conference with them, and the result was, after King Teedvus-
cung had, in a speech of much energy, portrayed the history of their
wrongs, the introduction of ardent spirits, the voracious appetite for
their hunting grounds, the evil conduct of their traders, for which he
demanded retribution at the hands of the Governor, the treaty was
concluded, and thus Penn and his friends perhaps saved the Colony,
besides much bloodshed. But the proprietaries, who werein England*
managed to bring the matter before the British Government, when
the sapient head of the Colonial Department ofthat day, commissioned
the Governor to read the people called Quakers, a lecture for their
unwise interference.
The United States of North America have hitherto been considered
as advancing to wealth and greatness with a rapidity unexampled in
the history of the world. In proportion to the population the com-
mercial wealth of that country is less than that of New South Wales
or Van Dieman’s Land. By the last Census the population of the
Union was 12,000,000, and in the year 1832 the Imports and Exports
amounted to 180,000,000 of dollars, that is, they were equivalent to
15 dollars or £3. 4s. Bd. per head. In New South Wales the
Imports are equivalent to £16., and in Van Dieman’s Land to £2O.
per head upon the population.
We now come to the consideration of another portion of the'Globe,
which has given of itself a new era and impulse to colonization, -I
mean the Continent of Australia or New Holland.
British spirit and enterprize.have added to our already immense
possessions, although to the Dutch seems to belong the honor of
having first discovered it. about the year 1606. It is the largest
Island in the world, situated in the Southern Ocean, reaching from
10 to 44 degrees of south latitude, and 113 to 154 degrees of east
longitude. But Captain Cook more fully explored it about 1770 •


and in 1788 Governor Phillip was sent out in His Majesty’s ship
“ Sirius” with an armed tender, 3 store ships, containing provisions
and stores, and 6 transports with 778 convicts.
Van Dieman’s Land, the Island to the south of New Holland, was
discovered by one Tasman, a Dutchman, who called it after his
mistress. Our knowledge of these places was very imperfect until
Flinders undertook to explore it—and the circumstances attending
his expedition are very curious.
It appears, that having importuned the Government without
success, he bought at Sydney a small hatch boat, and accompanied
by his friend George Bass, a Surgeon (who with himself felt satisfied
that Van Dieman’s Land was an Island which was not then known),
they put to sea, and after encountering many difficulties they sailed
between the Continent of New Holland and Van Dieman’s Land,
thereby determining the question of its insular position. Flinders
named the straits after his friend, who fell a sacrifice to his love of
discovery. Fie then returned to England, and having been px - omoted,
he obtained the command of two vessels fitted out for further discove-
ries, and with letters of protection —which were necessary, we being
at war with France at that time. On his expedition he fell in with
M. Baudin, a French navigator, who w ; as then engaged in making
discoveries for that country. They communicated with each other,
and it appeared that they had almost made a similar track. Flinders
having sent his “tender” home, was unfortunately wrecked, but
nothing could damp his ardour ; he fitted out another vessel, and set
sail from Sydney, but was taken by a French privateer, and although
he produced his letter of protection, he was consigned to prison,
where he remained 11 years. Having obtained his liberty, he published
an account of his discoveries, which are well worthy of perusal. It is
rather a singular circumstance, that M. Baudin published his voyage
immediately after Flinders was taken prisoner, and it is nothing to
his honor, or that of the French Government, who lay claim to most
of the discoveries of poor Flinders.
The site originally intended for the first settlement in New South
Wales was Botany Bay: Captain Cook having favorably reported
of it, he named it from the circumstance of the land being literally
covered with flowers. But Port Jackson having a fine harbour the
settlement was made at Sydney, which is completely on a rock. The
land is not good in and near the Town; but they have plenty around
of very rich fine land, and well adapted for agricultural and pastoral
pursuits: they are occasionally sxibject to droughts, which is a source
of great calamity. New South Wales struggled for years under an
almost despotic military government, and the vice entailed, and
engendered, by its being a convict settlement, rendered its progress at
first a difficult and laborious undertaking. The military officers opened
spirit shops in every direction, and under the eye and in defiance
of the Government, and thus fostered, and kept up the viciousness
that had been imported into the Colony. By degrees they supplanted
these evils, and the growing demand at home for a wider field for


the outlay of capital and labor led numbers to flock to those Commes.
The great resources they naturally possess, the facilities given to
encourage emigration of respectable persons (beyond what had ever
been known before), the pressure of the times in the Mother Country,
have made these Colonies prosperous to such an extent as to show
what mav be expected under a wise system of government. Immense
wealth has been amassed by individuals, ahd poverty w unknown to
the industrious, but the moral contagion that exists arising from their
being penal settlements* is sufficient to deter respectable parties from
emigrating, and the population therefore is considerably less than it
would otherwise have been. . 10 oi
Its Imports and Exports in 1828 were £660,050, m 180 l were
£814,320, and in 1835 £1,723,318, showing an increase of cent, per
cent, in 4 years. ,
And although, from the military establishments, and other heavy
expences to keep up as a penal settlement, the revenue must be
sufficient to prevent its being a charge on the Mother Country. Ihe
amount of revenue for 1810 was £B,OOO, in IBz6 £72,220, in 1
£l2! 065 and in 1836 £300,000. The population now is about
60,000, giving an average of about £6 per head. This e^o^twotis
revenue is principally derived from the sale of ardent spirits.
The chief articles of export are wool, oil, and whalebone.
The quantity of wool shipped within the last 6 years is foi
14.948 bales; in’34, 16,279 bales; in’3s, 19,762 bales; in 06,
22,783 bales; in ’37, 30,318 bales; in ’3B, 30,648 bales; at an
average value of £3O per bale, this would give for the last year in
wool alone, the enormous sum of £919,440. _ .
In 1825 was the first importation from thence ;it amounted only to
800 bales, it has been increasing since, to its present important branch
of* trsdc
In 1828 a settlement was founded on the Coast at Swan
River, and a location since then at King George’s Sound, both
situated in what is termed Western Australia ; but being founded on
mistaken principles, and partaking of the nature of a Government
iob, it has been involved in difficulties, which have seriously impeded
its prosperity, and it is now only recovering itself, and laboring
steadily to bring forth the fruits which in common with other parts
of Australia, it possesses the means of creating, The real cause of
its failure will more fully appear in the development of the principles
upon which the New Colony of South Australia is founded, to which
I now proceed to direct your attention.
The disastrous issue of the Swan River settlement aroused the atten-
tion of several intelligent and entorprizing gentlemen, versed in the
principles of political economy, and animated with a benevolent desire
to establish a system of Emigration, secure and efficient, because
founded on enlightened views of philosophical politics.
To the Author of Eng land and America appears to be due the credit
of having giving to Colonization the character of a science. Mr. Wm.
Hutt enlightened the members of the House of Commons with that


startling truth, and Col. Torrens, the well known political economist, has
already added his share in his work on Colonization, written expressly to
promulgate the new principles. They are comprehensive and simple;
they set out with the fact that the great elements of wealth, are land,
capital, and labor: that in connection with our vast tracts of waste
lands in the Colonies, they acquire value as labour and capital are
applied to them, and that by the mode of disposing of it, a constantly
increasingfund maybe formed, which shall be expended in taking out
young and able bodied laborers to these Colonies. Now, simple and
intelligible as this appears, it was incomprehensible in Downing Street,
and it took a number of intelligent and influential gentlemen, who
formed themselves into Committees, to digest plans, weigh and sift
evidence, devise means, &c. from 1831 to 1835, before they could get
the Government to grant them an Act of Parliament, to enable them
to carry these principles into effect. At last, in 1835 Mr, Spring
Rice introduced into the Commons a Bill, which was also carried
through the Lords by the instrumentality of the Duke of Wellington;
and although an anomaly in some of its features, it is an immense
boon to the public at large, and was most gratefully received by its
parents; the statute is the 4th and sth William 4th c. 95. It
recites that that part of Australia which lies between the meridians
of the 132 and 141 degrees of East Longitude, and between the
Southern Ocean and 26 degrees of South Latitude, together with all
the Islands adjacent thereto, and the bays thereof, was placed at the
disposal of the nominees of the Crown, to be established into one or
more provinces, but to be only ruled by the peculiar species of
Government directed by that Act.*
Agreeably to the Act ten, gentlemen were sworn in as commissioners,
to be called the Colonization Commissioners for South Australia.
The spot selected on which to try these new and peculiar principles,
was the southernmost part of what is now called the “Great South
Land,” or New Holland. It was discovered by Captain Flinders in
1802: it has two indentations of Spencer’s and St. Vincent’s Gulfs,
extending far into the interior, opening into a large extent of fine
land to water communication* and across the offing, Kangaroo Island
stretches about 100 miles in length, abounding with salt, and
surrounded by seas, most favorable for black whale fishing, with
harbors and every adaptation for Commerce. Such is the situation
Selected for a great experiment, the complete success of which will
constitute an epoch in the history of Colonization,
The Board of Commissioners are morally responsible for the due
execution of the terms of the Act. They superintend the sales of land,
exercise a general control over matters of Emigration, as also the
administration of affairs in the Colony. There is a resident Com-
♦South Australia contains an area of nearly 300,000 square miles, or 192,000,000
acres.


sioner in the Colony, a Governor appointed by the Crown, with a
Legislative Council, Supreme Court of law, and other functionaries.
The principal features of this new plan of treating waste land, are
these, That an uniform system of disposing of lands should he
adopted, that they shall he declared ’public lands, and sold at an
upset price of not less than T2s. per acre, without any reserve for
Crown lands, Sfc. which has given rise to so much jobbing in the
other Colonies.
That the whole of the money obtained by the sale of public land
shall form an Emigration Fund, and shall be employed by the
Commissioners in conveying poor laborers to the Colony,
Thai all poor persons so taken to the Colony by means of the
Emigration Fund, shall be, as far as it is possible to make the
selection, young adult persons, of both seres in an equal proportion.
The gi'eat advantage in this mode of disposing of land, is, that it is
permanent, uniform, and free from any tincture of partiality.
Jt may be affirmed, and is frequently asserted by those who do not
understand the principle, that the price of 12s. per acre is too high
for waste land. The answer is two fold—in the first place, it provides
laborers to cultivate that land; reckoning the cost of passage
at £l5 each adult, the present price of £T per acre would give four
laborers for every 100 acres—and again, it prevents the laborers taken
out with the purchase money of new land from becoming landowners
until others shall have arrived to take their places in the market of
hired labor: then for every acre appropriated there will be a supply
of labor wherewith to cultivate it; by requiring this price as a rule
for the supply of new land, you increase the first element of wealth,
in due proportion to the other elements of capital and labor; and the
Colonists being necessarily kept together, would raise more produce,
would get higher profits and wages, would have more physical enjoy-
ments, to say nothing of their escape from the moral evils of great
dispersion.
Another advantage in fixing a high price to land, is, that no one
will pay more than he has means to bring into cultivation. The evils of
the superabundance of land will be fully shewn in the following ac-
count of the Swan River Settlement. Mr. Peel, one of the founders
of the Colony, the cousin of the then Secretary of State, had a grant
of 500,000 acres of land, and took out with him about 300 persons of
the labouring class, men, women and children, and about £50,000
■capital. That grant was made round about the port, or landing place.
Now it was impossible for Mr. Peel to cultivate so large an extent of
land, or even 100th part, but others were of course obliged to go
beyond the limits of his grant, in order to take their land ;so that the
first operation in that Colony was to create a desert; to mark
cut a large tract of land, and say no one shall come here, no man
shall cultivate this land. So far dispersion was produced, because
upon the terms on which Mr. Peel obtained his land, land was given
toothers —the Governor took another 100,000 acres, another person
took 80,000 acres; and the dispersion was so great that at last the


settlers did not know where their neighbours were. This separation
necessarily did away with combinable labor.
Of the 300 persons whom Mr. Peel took out with him, in six
months after his arrival he had nobody even to make his bed, or to
fetch him water from the River. All the labourers had left him*, find-
ing that land could be obtained with the greatest facility,and separated
themselves into isolated families. The capital therefore which was
taken out, viz, implements of husbandry, seeds, and stock, immedi-
ately perished, the sheep wandered and were lost; eaten by the native
dogs, killed by the Natives, and by some of the other Colonists, very
likely by his own workmen; but they were destroyed; his houses
were of no use, in pieces, they could not be put together, they rotted on
the beach. At last, the labourers falling into great distress, returned
to their master, and insisted upon the fulfilment of the agreements
upon which they had gone out; but then Mr. Peel said, “All my
capital is gone; you have ruined me by deserting me, by breaking
your engagements, and you now insist upon my observing the en-
gagements when you yourselves have deprived me of the means of
doing so.” They wanted to take his life, and he ran away to a distance
where he secreted himself for a time, till they were carried off to Van
Dieman’s Land. Now the only condition for obtaining land was an
investment of capital on the land at the rate of Is. 6d. per acre. New
comers were enabled to give the laborers extravagant wages, who
soon became land owners, and capitalists were reduced to the
necessity of working in the same manner as their late servants thus
Realizing, to their cost, the truth, that land is of no value without
labour to cultivate it.
Swan River has now been established about 12 years, and although
upwards of i 0,000 persons have emigrated there, the population at
the present time does not exceed 1,500 souls, and they are only iust
now emerging from a state of poverty and suffering*. }
Their present Governor, Mr. John Hutt, fully understands the new
principles of Colonization, and will I have no doubt effect a reform
that wm enable Swan River to take a corresponding position with her
bister Colonies.
Now with reference to the use made of the Emigration Fund.
Supposing all the people sent to the Colony with the purchase
money of Waste Land, to be young men and women, in equal num-
bf"Awhat ke the effect on the Colonial population? At the end
of 20 years after the foundation of Virginia, the number of Colonists
was about 1800, while during the 20 years, near 20,000 persons had
reached the settlement. This rapid decrease of population was
of'thJ So 000 6 mi f ry ° f the C ° lo,,ißts » P«tly to this, that
of the 20,000 emigrants a very small proportion only consisted of
females. The settlement of N. S. Wales has so far prospered from the
beginning, that no one has ever found it difficult to maintain a
family; yet_ the population of the Colony is nothing like as great as
the number of emigrants that have gone out. But why? Simply
because of these persons, by far the greater number were men; and


that of the women who composed the smaller number, many were
past the age of child-bearing. Had those persons consisted of men
and women in equal proportions, but of a middle age, the population
of the Colony might have been much greater than it is, but if they
had consisted entirely of young couples, the population of the Colony
would have advanced with wonderful rapidity. .Reckoning the number
of Emigrants in each year at 2000, there seem to be grounds for be-
lieving 0 that the population would by this time have amounted to
nearly 500,000 instead of 50,000.
Again ; the immediate effect of selecting young couples for emigra-
tion, would be to diminish very much the ordinary cost of adding to
the population of the Colony; besides, they are the most valuable
class as labourers, and the time of marriage is a time of change, when
two persons, just united for life must, nearly always, seek a home;—
Marriage too disposes the mind to hope, to acts of ambition, to underr
takings which require decision and energy of purpose. Marriage
produces great anxiety for the future, and a strong desire to be better
off in the world for the sake of expected offspring. This then is the
class of people that would be most easily attracted to the Colony by
high wages and still better prospects. Every pair of Emigrants
would have the strongest motives for industry, steadiness, and thrift.
Thus does a system of Colonization, like the present, distribute good
in every direction. It not only provides a future home for the
young, but it draws off from the labor market that sort of labor which
will give it most relief; it is the best poor law that ever was imagined,
and calculated to relieve the middle and working classes at home,
more than any scheme that could be conceived. It is only a matter
of the greatest surprise that Government had never considered the
means of relief that might have been afforded to thousands of the
poor by an extensive system of Emigration ; that they had a faint idea
of the good, may be inferred from certain correspondence between
this and the Colonial Government. In a dispatch from Lord
Goderich to Governor Darling, dated January 1831, his Lordship says,
that propositions have been made to His Majesty’s Government, call-
ing their attention to the importance of endeavouring to relieve the
distress prevailing amongst the Agricultural Laborers in England;
and he says, that New South Wales might, it is represented, receive
with advantage a considerable number of such Emigrants. But, for-
sooth, how do you think he proposes that the fund should be raised
to send these labourers out ?By making the Colonist pay a tax of
10s. per annum, for each assigned Convict! but his Lord-
ship, although he pretends he does not know the numbers, shrewdly
guesses them to be about 9,000, which at the rate of £ls per head
cost of passage money, would give relief to the parishes of England,
by withdrawing three hundred souls from as many hundred thou-
sands ! He quietly hints, though, that a fund might be raised by
increasing the price of the Crown Lands, which was tacitly agreeing
to our principles. Shortly after that the price was raised in all th@


Australian Colonies to the minimum price of ss. per acre, which has
already formed a fund to a considerable amount in New South Wales.
Another advantage arising from this plan of sending out the sexes
in equal proportions, is, that there will be no necessity to send ship
loads of friendless single women, as has been the case at Sydney, and
which has added to the moral curse which pollutes the atmosphere of
that Colony.
While on this head, it may he well to introduce to your notice
another distinguishing feature of South Australia; it is, that the Act of
Parliament provides that no convicts shall ever be transported there;
this freedom from the curse and contamination of a convict population
is of immense advantage: New South Wales has been likened to one
large jail.
The curse of the felonry of New South Wales hangs upon every
thing connected with the Colony ; the consequence has been a grad-
ual lowering of the tone of society, and of the standard of morality.
Murder has become common, robbery a noon-day occupation; we can-
not wonder at it when the most highly polished of the gentry, are sent
from here to practice in another field; lights are burnt all night, and
every ingenuity devised for protection. A tolerable specimen may be
imagined from the following; a person writing from Van Dieman’s
Land says, “Our cook has committed murder, our footman burglary,
and our housemaid bigamy.”
Lord Bacon said, “ It is a shameful and an unblessed thing to
take the scum of a people, and wicked condemned men, to be the
people with whom you plant.”* But no such virtuous feelings have
hitherto been allowed to maintain influence with our Government. The
sweepings of our jails have been sent to people one of the fairest
regions of the universe, while our industrious people at home have
hardly known how to exist from week to week, and have been clam-
ouring loudly to Parliament and Government for relief. The
practice commenced in the reign of James the First, he having sent
100 convicts to Virginia ; but I am happy to say, this public wrong
is very soon likely to be entirely abolished —wiped from our Statute
Booh as a disgrace too long suffered to exist.
Another distinguishing feature in the new system of Colonization,
is, that it respects the rights of the aboriginal possessors of the soil—
this feature is prominent in contrast with every other Colony.
Wherever Christians have gone, blood has followed in their track,
and their treatment of the aboriginal natives has been any thing hut
a “blessed work;” it has left a dark stain on the name of Christi-
anity, which the true spirit now abroad should endeavour to efface.
• 33rd Essay—Of Plantations. The sentence immediately following contains
the principle of South Australian Colonization. “ The poeple wherewith you plant
ought to be gardeners, ploughmen, labourers, smiths, carpenters, joiners, fishermen,
fowlers, with some few apothecaries, surgeons, cooks, and bakers.”


In Virginia for example, the first Colony we settled, the tribes
were originally strong enough to destroy three separate bodies of
Colonists, who acted like brutal invaders, in return for a friendly
welcome. Their thousands of warriors were reduced two-thirds in
62 years, by our spirituous liquors, our diseases, our wars, and
by our abridgment of their territory, —fatal to a people who lived
much on the spontaneous productions of nature. They are now
extinct, as also in Newfoundland, after a 300 years possession of
ours; and in Van Dieman’s Land, by the quicker removal to an
island hardly large enough to hold them, where they were deprived
of land, liberty, and, eventually, life.
Colonel Arthur, in his dispatches home in 1828, recommends
removal as the only remedy against their returning the attacks of
the Whites. He is candid enough to confess, that he “ cannot
divest himself from the consideration that all aggression originated
with the White inhabitants,” and therefore he says, “ much ought
to be endured in return before the Blacks are treated as an open
enemy by the Government.” He further says, “ not to mention the
extreme difficulty of this scheme, nothing short of the last necessity
could tolerate so great an aggravation of their injuries, as they would
unquestionably consider removing them from their native tracts.” —
They already complain that the White people have taken possession
of their country, encroached upon their hunting grounds, and des-
troyed their natural food, the kangaroo; and they doubtless would
be exasperated to the last degree to be banished altogether from their
favourite haunts—“ any attempts to civilize them under such cir-
cumstances must completely fail.” However, Col. Arthur found it
necessary to authorize the whites to use force to expel them from
their settlements; the districts they inhabited were placed under
martial law, they were hemmed in by the military, preparatory to
their being taken from their rightful soil to make way for their
oppressors, the whites. This picture is disgraceful to the age in
which we live ; but I am happy to say, that it is the intention of the
colonizers of South Australia to act very differently.
The Commissioners have appointed a Protector of the Aborigines,
whose duty it is “ to guard them against personal outrage and
violence; to protect them in the undisturbed enjoyment of their
proprietary right to the soil, wherever such right may be found to
exist; to make it an invariable and cardinal condition in all bargains
and treaties entered into with the natives for the cession of lands
possessed by them, in occupation or enjoyment, that permanent
subsistence should be supplied to them from some other source, and
to promote amongst them the spread of civilization, and the peaceful
and voluntary reception of the Christian religion,”
The resident Commissioner is required to furnish the Protector
with evidence of the faithful fulfilment of the bargains or treaties
which he should effect with the Aborigines ; and it is the duty of the
latter not only to see that such bargains or treaties are faithfully
executed, but also to call upon the Executive Government of the


Colony to protect the natives in the undisturbed enjoyment of those
of their lands of which they should not be disposed to make a
voluntary transfer.
The Commissioners also propose that such lands as might be ceded
by the natives to them, should be sold under the condition, that, for
every 80 acres, the purchaser should pay for 64 acres only; the
conveyance to be made subject to a stipulation, that at the expiration
of a term of years, the reserve 16 acres were to be resumed for the
use of the Aborigines ; and the remaining 64 acres to be the freehold
of the purchaser, he having had the gratuitous use of the 16 acres a
sufficient time to pay him for the trouble of inclosing, clearing, &c.
We hope these wise and judicious regulations may not remain a
dead letter ;no time should be lost in carrying them practically into
effect. Already have some thousands of acres of their land been
appropriated; already have the Colonists began to hunt what they
consider is their hereditary food, and should ill blood once be shown
on their part, the consequences may be as lamentable as have occurred
in the other Colonies. It is true, by some oversight, no mention is
made of the natives or their rights , in the South Australian Act of
Parliament; but justice and humanity loudly demand* that the wise
regulations of the Commissioners for their protection and future
civilization should be effectually carried out. '
I have now, I believe, laid before you the theoretical, I may say
philosophical principles, upon which South Australia is founded. I
will proceed to lay before you a statement of what practically has
been done. The Act of Parliament required the£3s,ooo worth of land
should be sold, previous to any ships being dispatched to the Colony,
This regulation was unwise, inasmuch, as it retarded the sailing of the
surveying expedition, and caused expence and delay to the first settlers,
besides the difficulty thatexis ted in raising so large a sum of money before
any guarantee could be given as to the stability of the undertaking.
However, through the co-operation of a Joint Stock Company, which
was simultaneously established, viz. the South Australian Company,*
the sum required was raised by the sale of 437 lots of land, consisting
of 134 acres of country, and J acre of town land each, at the price of
12s. per acre. The preliminary conditions of the Act having been
fulfilled, the surveying expedition set sail under the command of
Col. Light, Surveyor General, on board the Brig Rapid, April 1836,
for the purpose of locating the principal settlement; and arrived at
Kangaroo Island on the 19th of August, 1836.
It was originally considered, that the chief town should be near
Port Lincoln, Spencer’s Gulf, oh account of the superior harbour, but
as the vicinity of the Murray river made the eastern coast of St.
Vincent’s Gulf a more eligible locality, provided a suitable harbour
could be found in that quarter, it was explored very anxiously by
Col. Light, who at length found a creek on the eastern side of the
Gulf, about 50 miles from the open sfea, which proved to be the
* See Appendix.


embouchure or mouth of a fresh water river, with what he describes
“ as beautiful and safe a harbour, as the world can produce.” Safe
from every wind, and abounding in creeks, one branch extending 7
miles, from \ a mile to a mile in width, and of a depth varying from
3 to 5 fathoms, suitable for vessels from 300 to 400 tons. The country
too all along this coast, was of the most attractive aspect, described
as resembling English Park scenery : consisting of widely extended
open plains, moderately wooded, requiring little clearing, fit for im-
mediate occupation for tillage or sheep runs, and well watered by
frequent streams; with a rich dark soil, clothed in luxuriant grass,
and beautiful flowers and plants. It sloped backwards from the
coast for several miles, to a line of shady hills, intersected by pictu-
resque valleys, terminating in an elevated range called Mount Lofty,
behind which lay the Lake Alexandrina, and the far reaching country
of the Murray. So many advantages decided the Surveyor General
in fixing on this as the site of the principal settlement; and on an
eminence, about six miles inland from the harbourage, the capital was
founded, which, with its adjacent ports, were by desire of His late
Majesty, named after Queen Adelaide.
Considerable opposition has been made by some of the Colonists
against the site chosen by Col. Light for the chief town, especially by
the late Governor, and Sir John Jeffcott, the judge, who lost his life
in attempting to prove the justice of his opposition, by examining the
capabilities of Encounter Bay. Since that melancholy event, the
loss of the “ South Australian, Solway, and John Pirie,” by going
ashore at Encounter Bay, have sufficiently indicated, that that
was not the place for the chief settlement of South Australia, and every
day brings fresh proofs that Col. Light’s selection possesses the
requisite capabilities for a capital town. If proof were wanting as to
the capability of the Port, it is afforded by the fact of a fine vessel of
501 Tons, drawing 15§ feet water, the “ Emerald Isle,” from Bengal,
having entered the Port at the end of last July.
On the 20th Dec. 1836, the first Governor Captain Hindmarsh,
K. N., landed amid the cheers of the settlers, and straightway the
allotment and sale of the lands commenced.
The town surveys were completed about the 10th March, and
the plan of the town mapped out; and exhibited for public inspection,
on the completion of which, the Surveyor General and resident Com-
missioner proceeded to apportion the respective lots, first reserving 10
acres of land close to the town in a beautiful position on the margin
of the river Torrens, as the Government domain. 1040 acres were
marked out and numbered (exclusive of streets, quays, and public
walks), part in South Adelaide, on the ground south of the river
Torrens, which runs through the town, and named in just honor of
the chief Commissioner, and the residue in North Adelaide on the
opposite side of the stream. The holders of the preliminary
sections had the first choice. The remainder of the 1040 acres, of
which the capital consists, were put up to public auction, at the upset
price of £l. per acre; and sold to the highest bidder. They realized


the average price of £6 6s. per acre, and fortunate are the possessors
of those acres, which have already risen enormously in value, £3OO.
having been refused for an acre, within my knowledge, and the
average value throughout the town at present is £9O. per acre. Their
future value can hardly be conjectured.
In the neighbouring Colony of New South Wales, the upset price
of town lots, in the secondary township of Paramatta, and even in the
infant townships of Liverpool, Windsor, Oampbell-town, &c., is £2O.
per acre.
In Sydney Town lots are so valuable, that they are put up, not by
the acre, but by the perch. Dr. Lang informs us that, “ the mini-
mum price of ground belonging to Government, in the town ofSydney,
is £lOOO. per acre, but allotments in eligible localities sell for £20,000.
and even£3o,ooo. per acre.”
Prinsep, in his journal of a voyage from Calcutta to Van Dieman’s
Land says, “ Ground in the neighbourhood of Hobart Town is in-
creasing in value with amazing rapidity.”
“ To give you an idea of this I am just nowin treaty for Land, which
6 years ago sold for £4, per acre, and is now valued at £40.”
Country land will also rise in proportion. The present price is £l.
per acre, but land selected within a few miles of the town, is already
selling at a premium of 30s, per acre, without any anxiety of the posses
sors to part with it.
Wentworth, in his account of Australia, says, that “ land on the
banks of the Hawksbury, New South Wales, has increased in value
annually, since the foundation of the Colony, at the rate of 3s. 2|d.
per acre, or about 30 per cent, annually, on the present price of New
Sections.”
Governor Hindmarsh, before he left the Colony,sold asection close
to the town, for £l,OOO ; for which he gave £Bl. a few months before.
The preliminary sections that cost the possesors, say £38,991, 4s,
are now worth, owing to the increase in the market value, say £217,990.
giving a profit to the original purchasers of £178,998, 16.
Accounts from the Colony to the 4th of April, state, that 130,000
acres had been surveyed and were ready for selection, so that land
may be readily obtained on arrival.
The lands are divided into sections of 80 acres each, purchasers
may have as many as they please, but no fractional part. The pur-
chase can be either made here or in the Colony, but the advantage is
in buying here, as he will have the right of selection on arrival, and can
take out with him 2 men and 2 women, as servants under the Com-
missioners’ regulations.
The Commissioners, also, in order to give every encouragement
to sheep-farming, grant leases of the pasturage of unsold lands, at the
yearly rent of 40s. per square mile, or 640 acres. The term is 3 years;
such leases are, however, limited exclusively to pasturage, as sheep
runs. And in order that the principle of concentration may not
interfere with the most free selection of lands, they have directed,
“ that the surveys of the waste land be so constructed as to afford to


purchasers the most extensive choice, and the most complete liberty
of appropriation; both with respect to quantity and situation.”
They have also given the privilege of calling for a special survey
of 15,000 acres; to any party purchasing 4,000 acres.
The South Australian Company, a very spirited and highly respect-
able body, whose operations are calculated most materially to benefit
the Colony, have purchased a very large tract of freehold land with
the right of pasturage: they have divided it into sections and sections
of 134 and 67 acres, which they let for the purpose of encouraging
small farmers to emigrate, on very advantageous terms.
The present rates of rental are,
4s. per acre, per annum, for the first 7 years.
ss. “ “ “ second 7 “
6s. “ “ “ third 7 “
And for pasturage, 40s. per square mile.
Should the tenant wish to purchase his farm at the end of either of
these periods, the price would be,
£4. per acre, before theend of the first 7 years.
£5. “ between the first and second 7 “
£6. “ from the second to the third 7 “
The land differs from that generally met with by Emigrants in
America, it being but thinly wooded ; indeed it is reported that there
are thousands of acres fit for the plough, with not a stone or stubble
to be removed ; but yet there is no lack of wood, and they have been
fortunate in meeting with a species of gum tree, which splits into
shingles ; and is admirably adapted for their fencing and building.
There is also plenty of fresh water; and we have every reason to be-
lieve that minerals will be found there, as they are met with in abund-
ance in other parts of Australia.
Dr. Lang says, “ Coal and Iron, the most valuable minerals, are met
with in abundance in Australia. At Sydney the price of coal is 9s.
per ton.
Iron stone has been met with, and is generally considered to be
an indication of coal in the neighbourhood. Limestone, slate,
granite, with excellent brick and potter’s clay, are found in abun-
dance. South Australia is naturally a pastoral country. The breed-
ing of sheep, for the growth of wool, will be the most productive
species of property. The usual annual increase is about 80 per cent.;
a flock of 500 is considered the number to commence with. Mea-
sures are already in progress for purchase of stock, on a very exten-
sive scale. It is supposed that there are now in the Colony about
5,000 head of cattle, and 30,000 sheep.
Two extensive and intelligent proprietors of stock, Messrs, Hawdon
and Eyre, have made their way overland from Sydney, with both cattle
and sheep. This route, it was anticipated, would be accomplished in
the course of time; but the early accomplishment of so desirable an
object, has filled the Colonists with satisfaction and delight.
Joint Stock cattle and sheep Companies, are being formed, according


to the last advices from the Colony; and the Contractor (Mr. Hill,
of Sydney), intends to take his own extensive herd, and settle in
South Australia.
The city already begins to wear a city aspect, and to exhibit the
symptoms of a thriving community. The houses are increasing, com-
posed. principally of stone, pise, cob or wood, with slated, thatched,
or shingled roofs; but there are some buildings that would do credit
to. London—one or two stores built of stone, resembling, as the writer
says, Somerset House, more than any other building.
The Government buildings are also progressing, business in general
is active, and gradually systematizing, as in the towns at home.
The statistics of the Colony have not yet, at so early a stage, been
made the subject of regular reports, but the following statements
shew the quantity of land sold, and number of vessels dispatched :
108,395 acres have been sold since the establishment of the Colony
up to this time, producing £87,821.95., and the Commissioners have
just received intelligence from the Colony, that the first month in
which Country Land was sold there, upwards of £5OOO. were
invested.
Sixty vessels have sailed from England for the Colony since the
22nd February, 1836, being an average of three a month,—an occur-
rence unprecedented in the annals of Colonization.
The number of persons who have sailed in them are 686 adults,
and 199 children, of the superior class, and 3609 adults and 1375
childen of the labouring class —giving a total of 5869 souls, with
31,226 tons of shipping. But this must not be taken as the popula-
tion of the province, a considerable number of persons having, as
already hinted, arrived from the neighbouring settlements. This is
sufficient to show the estimation in which the Colony is held, and
will bear comparison with her sister Colonies, being 3| times the
amount of Swan River, after an existence ofl2 years, and one-fifth of that
of Sydney, founded half a century ago, and swelled by a considerable
portion of convicts.
It is also gratifying to find, that the period in the progress of New
Colonies, which may be deemed hazardous, is past, with South
Australia. The Commissioners took especial care that there should
be no scarcity of food, and their arrangements for the reception of the
early Emigrants, were admirable, and marked by that care and
forethought which have distinguished the whole of their proceedings.
Mr. Gouger, the Colonial Secretary, in his work on South Australia,
says, “No Colony of which 1 have heard or read, has been formed so
rapidly, or with so complete an absence of suffering; indeed, as far
as I know, not one instance of pain worthy a stronger name than
discomfort for a time, has been the lot of any Emigrant to South
Australia. ’ ’
Settlers may now resort to the Colony, confident of safety in
investments, and find society equal, and perhaps more extensive than
that which they may leave behind them. It has proved in practice
what was recommended in theory, by a writer on the subject, when


the plan was in contemplation, that “ Colonization should be likened
to the careful removal of full-grown trees from a spot in which they
were injured by want of room, to one where they should have ample
space to expand and flourish.’’
It has been considered that another town might now be formed
with advantage, and without detriment to Adelaide, and a number of
gentlemen interested in the Colony have formed themselves into an
association for the purpose of endeavouring to possess themselves of
9000 acres. £12,000. was immediately subscribed, £9,000. of which
has been paid to the Commissioners, aud the remaining £3,000. is to
be applied as occasion should require, in searching for the best
situation for the New Town.
At present the taxes in the Colony consist of a few duties on certain
imports, but it is expected on the arrival of the new Governor,
Col. Gawler, an entire system of Colonial taxation will be agreed
upon. The taxes will, however, be very light, the machinery of the
Government being on the most economical scale.
The expenees of Conducting the affairs of the Colony have been
defrayed by loans, which the Act allows the Commissioners to raise
to the amount of £200,000. on the future security of the Revenue.
This prevents the Colony from becoming a burden on the Mother
Country, the principle ofits existence being self-supporting.
As an earnest of the future staple of the Colony, 4 bales of Wool
were shipped in December last from Adelaide, being the first clip of
a South Australian flock, and 150 barrels of Sperm Oil were brought
home in the “ Rapid” for the South Australian Company.
And if we can congratulate the Colonists on their pecuniary
prospects, we have no less reason to do so with regard to their moral
and spiritxxal welfare. A Church has been built by subsci’iption, and
also a Methodist Chapel; there is a Chaplain to the Colony, and two
or three Dissenting Ministers. ,
Arrangements Ixave been made to provide sound, moral, and
religious education for the rasing genei'ation, for the children of
Emigrants, and one Upon an extensive scale for the purpose of
providing the means of superior education for the children of the
higher classes of the Colonists, not only of South Australia, but of
Van Dieman’s Land, New South Wales, and India; it being only six
weeks sail from thence. It seems more than probable that the
Anglo-Indians might prefer voyaging to South Australia, than to
England, especially with the advantages of a more congenial climate*
pleasant society, good schools, and a much more accessible country.
It also boasts of a Literary and Scientific Institution, a corresponding
Colonial Society, a Benefit Society, a Mechanic’s Institution, a
Savings Bank, and a Freemason’s Lodge; and I am further enabled
to state, that the drama is not neglected, there being a Theatre.
Wages are indeed very high, varying according to the work and
the abilities of the workmen, from ss. to £l. per day, [See Appendix.]
Provisions are also dear, but not in proportion to the wages* as they


fluctuate according to the supply. Being only 6 days sail from
Launceston and Port Philip, and not more than 10 or 12 from
Hobart Town and Sydney, the fact of the Colony wanting any
particular article will be sure to bring an immediate and plentiful
supply.
Although South Australia will be principally a pastoral and
agricultural country, there is a wide field for commercial and
professional pursuits, from her contiguity to Van Dieman’s Land,
Sydney, New Zealand, India, Isle of France, and even the Cape of
Good Hope: already has she laid the foundation of her future
greatness, for ships are daily entering and leaving her ports, and the
wealth imported into her infant bosom has begun to fructify.
The fisheries will be an important source of wealth to the Colonists.
Indeed, if they continue to progress as they have begun, they will
soon realize what Dr. Lang has said, “ That there are more persons
in New South Wales possessing an income from £SOO. to £SOOO. per
annum, than in any part of the world besides —in proportion to the
amount of population.”
The introduction of this plan of Colonization is the greatest boon
that the public have received for many years. It reflects the highest
credit on the originators of the system, and also on the Commission-
ers, who have hitherto so ably performed their duty in carrying the
Act into execution. They are an unpaid body, but upon them rests
the whole responsibility of the success or failure of the Colony—the eyes of
a large portion of the public are fixed on them —the Colonial Office,
naturally watches its progress step by step, —the libellous portion of the
press either damn it with faint praise, or strangely pervert the truth; but
facts are stubborn things, and every ship brings tidings from those who
have had the courage to leave their native land, when that land no
longer afforded them shelter, or a return for their industry. These
letters teem with tidings of their success, describe in glowing terms
their brightened prospects, their restoration to health, the beauty of
the climate, the richness of the soil, and the plentiful harvest that
awaits the evening of their days, to cheer them with the comfortable
reflection, that they can leave their families behind them, free from
the blighting curse of poverty, and the ingratitude of the world.
The establishment of the province of South Australia has intro-
duced a new era in the history of Colonization, —improvements have
been made in the entire system of emigration. In the first place,
the selection of the Emigrants is made with much care ; the arrange-
ments for their accommodation on board the ships are most complete ;
every want is supplied, 'and when they reach the land of their adop-
tion, they are received by the Government, housed and fed till work
is found for them; the consequence is, that the degree of mortality
has been less than the ordinary average on land, and no accident
whatever has befallen any of the ships.
They have made a bridge across the ocean, and joined South Aus-
tralia to England, whereby the young and the ardent, who find their


talents chilled in the Mother Country, may seek in that new, but
now not distant land, the field for enterprise.
It is to be hoped that the future success of this Colony may
equal its commencement, and that Government will see the necessity
of adopting the recommendations of a * Committee of the House of
Commons, and place all the Crown Lands on a similar footing.
The good that South Australia is likely to accomplish will be great,
but the relief that would be afforded the Mother Country by sending
out the poor, from the funds arising from the sale of the Crown Lands,
would be immense; it would, as I have said before, be the best
Poor-Law England could adopt—besides the impulse itmust give to
trade, it necessarily would increase the shipping, and create new de-
mands for our manufactures. England must profit by the spread of
her people ; and does not humanity require that something should be
done for 2,300,000 of her subjects in Ireland, who are in a state of
starvation for thirty-two weeks in the year, dying of hunger, begging
in the streets, with nothing but potatoes and weeds to exist upon ?
The principles that I have endeavoured to explain to you, are at
once so new and important, and are operating so successfully, with
every prospect of continued advantage to the Colony, and the Mother
Country, that I feel it to be deserving the serious consideration of
every subject of the empire—for it is a matter of great philosophical
interest and of practical importance.
Of the various weighty subjects which now agitate the public
mind, there is notone of greater importance than Colonization. For
notwithstanding all the great real and much greater apparent pros-
perity of this country, there is no rank of society which has not many
members belonging to what has been justly called the “ Uneasy Class.”
The small capitalist finds himself met by some Leviathan of the trade,
who is enabled by the superior economy and resources resulting from
large capital, completely to outbid him in the market; the toil-worn
artizan works, like Ixion at his wheel, in one ceaseless round of me-
chanical drudgery, without any hope of raising his condition or of
ever procuring more than mere subsistence by his body-and-soul-de-
stroying labor; and even to ascend considerably in the social scale, the
various candidates for the honor and emolument of professional life
are too numerous to permit any but a select few to enjoy them. How
much intellect and worth are daily crushed in England ! How many
men, born with talents and powers adequate to high duties, are de-
prived of the opportunity for their exertion, and “cribbed, ,
and confined” by the malice of fortune or the present limited field for
the employment of their faculties!
This great country is rich indeed in every species of physical
wealth, and is no less rich, in that intellectual power, which is the
creator and maintainer of wealth ; but though the scope for the use of
those faculties and that wealth be wide and liberal, especially when
contrasted with any other country on the earth, yet it cannot be de-
nied or concealed, that one of the great sources of suffering at present
in England arises from the want of an adequate field for the employ-
* June, 1836-


mentofthe various talents existing in it and ■panting for occupation.
And therefore, though I agree with those who say that the full re-
sources of the empire for the employment of its inhabitants are not
duly developed, and that vices in the distribution of the national
■wealth produce great evils, which might be easily remedied, yet, I
confess I look with earnest anxiety at every measure connected »with
Emigration , and calculated to facilitate its operations.
The true course of the English people to pursue, is, to widen the
field for the employment of their capital and talents ; and this must
chiefly be done, by opening new countries to their energy and
industry.
COLONIZATION COMMISSIONERS
FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Appointed by virtue of an Act of Parliament , (\th Sf slh
William \th, cap. 95.
Office, 6, Adelphi Terrace, London.
COLONEL TORRENS, F.R.S., Chairman.
EDWARD BARNARD, ESQ.
WILLIAM HUTT, ESQ., M. P.
JACOB MONTEFIORE, ESQ.
GEORGE PALMER, JUN., ESQ.
JAMES PENNINGTON, ESQ,
JOSIAH ROBERTS, ESQ.
W. ALEX MACKINNON, ESQ., M. P-
SAMUEL MILLS, ESQ.
GEORGE BARNES, ESQ., Treasurer.
ROWLAND HILL, ESQ., Secretary.


APPENDIX.
Extract of a letter from I. W. Adams.
Adelaide, May 30, 1837.
We are continually thinking of you when we sit down to meals,
whether you are having anything good at home. You may say that you
are too old to come such a voyage, but there are people who are 70
years of age that have come out with their families, and never were
they so well in England as they are here. You would not be frozen
to death in the winter, as we are not likely, in the latitude we are in,
to have any ice. We are now near the middle of winter, and the
weather is like May in England. Our shortest day-light will be
hours sun; there is very little twilight, and it is soon dark after sunset.
The climate is good and healthy at all seasons, all are agreed upon that.
The appearance of the country is beautiful. The town is situated
upon rising ground, and about three miles from us there is a range
of little hills about the height ofPortsdown, and behind that is mount
Lofty, as it were looking over upon us. There are level plains which
extend for 12 miles that will be good farming land, A railroad is
about to be constructed, 7 miles from the harbour, which will
afford an easy conveyance to the town. I have stated in one letter
that no water-cresses were found here, but some one has discovered
them to be plentiful a little distance from us ; mushrooms grow very
large, and vegetables grow quick. I have an onion I planted one
month after I landed, and the seed is nearly ripe. I have potatoes,
peas, French-beans, and cabbage-plants coming on nicely; the Ameri-
can corn grows to a very large size in Sydney, and I have planted
about a quart, and I shall have two young pigs in three weeks time,
so that the corn and the pigs will grow together: I have also sown
some oats and turnip seed.
Extract of a letter from Mr. Stephen HacJc.
Glenelg, May 1, 1837.
Dear
The first great doubt I always had of the way the blacks would
behave is, lam glad to say, completely set at rest: they are honest
to a remarkable degree, generally well behaved, and often extremely
useful; in point of fact, there are far fewer instances of the blacks mis-
behaving than the whites, and those few are of the most trifling na-
ture. Their usual job is fetching wood and water, for which they
are always paid in “ bichetty,” as they call it; they work a long time
for the sake of one biscuit.
Extract of a letter from J. Morphett.
Adelaide, July 31, 1837.
You recollect the Albeona being reported to be lost some months
ago, she is just arrived here from the Swan; having made a trip to


the Mauritius since we first heard of and expected her. The gentle-
man who chartered from the latter place is on board: he is an intelli-
gent gentlemanly man, who has travelled a great deal in Europe an
America, and has been at every settlement in Australia, at some ot
which he has spent a considerable time. . .
His opinion respecting our Colony is therefore deserving of attention,
and I am as happy to say it as you will be glad to hear it such
opinion is eminently encouraging and satisfactory. He says that he
has not seen such an extent of good land in any part of Australia as
we have in the immediate vicinity of Adelaide. Now you and I know,
and, without presuming, I may say that I know better than you, that
there are hundreds and thousands of acres of good land within an
available distance from the capital: in fact, the whole of the country
between the sea and the lake is exceedingly valuable, and eminently
well calculated for a first settlement. By the bye, since you left us, we
have discovered a treasure of immense forests, in the neighbourhood
of Mount Lofty, of stringy bark, a tree which, for its wood an^bark,
is most highly prized in the other colonies.
Mr. Pollard, the gentleman I have been speaking of, says that at
Swan* River there is no pasturage within ninety miles of the coast,
and when one gets to it there is no comparison between it and our
herbage at King George’s Sound. The distance of pasturage from
the coast is forty miles. He is trying to buy town sections and has
been talking to Mr. Fisher about a special survey; whether this is
only talk, or whether he intends to have one, I cannot determine, but it
only the former, it is gratifying. He has a considerable quantity ot land
at Swan River. He came here without intending to do so when he
started from the Mauritius, and he is going to Sidney to sell his car-
go: still he purposes detaining the vessel a fortnight, that he may
have the opportunity of examining the country, and has expressed his
astonishment and delight, to every one whom he has seen, at the
beauty and excellence of the land. His expressions are confirmed and
unknowingly echoed by the master of the schooner and other passen-
gers, one of whom has been eight years at King George s Sound,
governor of which settlement, Richard Spencer, has written to Hind-
marsh to say that he fears the establishment of our Colony will very
much retard his.
Extract of a letter from Stephen Blunden.
Dated August 1, 1837.
The town acre I gave six pound for in March, I can now sell for
twenty-five pound ! I will sell neither of my town acres for less than
one hundred pound each, which I am sure will be worth the money
in twelve months.—The country land will be quite as valuable, m
proportion, as the town land. We had twenty-four passengers landed
at our port from Swan River; they were quite delighted with Adelaide
and the neighbouring country, which is truly beautiful. there are
others coming from King George’s Sound, and Sydney, to settle m
South Australia; they all wish to buy land.


Extract of a letter from Mr. Finniss.
Adelaide, August I, 1837.
Nepean Bay is capacious enough to contain a whole fleet, with eight
and nine fathoms water close inside the entrance; it is completely-
protected by the sandy reef which extends from Point Marsden several
miles to the eastward: the reef is dry at low water, and can always
be avoided by the soundings, which are very regular. In the bight
of the bay a small river empties itself from May to November, its
course is then about twenty miles, and the water is sweet at the
mouth at low tide.
Upon landing it was found that large lagoons of fresh water com-
municated with the head of the harbour, and further search led to the
discovery of Torrens’ River, a stream which, in winter, is from thirty
to forty yards across, taking its source in the Mount Lofty range,
and loosing itself in the lagoons above mentioned. The magnificent
country through which it winds, rich in timber and grass, seemed to
invite Colonel Light to the choice he mode , —here therewas every thing
sought for by the purchasers of land—a harbour capable of receiving
ships of the burthen generally employed in these seas—an abundant
supply of good fresh water —good land —fine pasture —and plenty of
timber. The interior also is watered by numerous mountain streams,
adapting the country in every respect tor occupation. Port Adelaide
is about fifteen miles to the northward of Holdfast Bay, where lhave
previously mentioned Mr. Kingston had been stationed for the
purpose of thoroughly examining the interior; his reports were
decisive of the elegibility of this tract of country for agricultural
purposes. At Holdfast Bay, as the name implies, the anchorage is
of the best possible description, as also at the mouth of the harbour,
and all along the coast between. There is a continuous line of fine
sandy beach, from which the water deepens very gradually; ships of
jany size may ride out the heaviest gales without the least danger,
because no swell of any consequence can arise, owing to the proxim-
ity of the land opposite and almost all round. These considerations
decided Colonel Light in favour of a settlement here ; he considered
the place suitable in the greatest degree, since it met the views of the
Commissioners in every respect, combining with the advantages above
enumerated, a central position as regards the limits of the Province,
and the nearest possible communication with the Murray River.
Extract of a letter from Mr. J.
Adelaide, Nov. 3. 1837.
I think our colony will be more engaged in wool-growing for the
first few years than in farming, as the experience gained in the other
Australian settlements shows that to be the most prudent plan; in
fact, in the former there is little or no risk, in the latter there is a con-
siderable outlay required, with a good deal of risk. The increase
upon sheep is reckoned eighty per cent, per annum ; and the clip
from a flock of 500 would nearly, if not quite, pav all the expenses
attending it 1


Do not sell any articles of furniture you may have, without they
are of such a character as take up an unconscionable room in a ship,
and consequently cost a great deal for freight, as you could easily
sell them here, if you did not want them on arrival. You may bring
the bed you speak of with you, as I expect, by the time of your
coming amongst us, we shall have an eye to luxuries and elegancies. n
With respect to dress, 1 should say that we are in that primitive
state of society at present, aud that men are not estimated by the cut
of their clothes, or respected for the goodness of their hats. Persons
having pretensions to be classed as gentleman, from their feelings,
manners, and education, are to be seen in all kind of dresses, each having
consulted his own fancy previous to leaving England, in the creation
of a suit adapted to the climate of South Australia. It is a difficult
subject to advise any man upon, since every one has his own particular
notions, some very magnificent, others extremely simple ; I will
therefore make my remarks very general. In the winter you may
wear such clothes as you would in England, having a cloth cloak,
great coat, or mackintosh with sleeves, good stout shoes, with short
leather gaiters, or stout ankle-boots.
Liveliness of mind and activity of body are great accessories to
preserving health and content amongst passengers on board ship ;
you must encourage the steerage people to dance, to sing, to walk
about (in their own limits), and keep themselves and their berths and
bedding clean and sweet.
Extract of a Letter from Mr. Thomas Wilson.
Adelaide, Nov. 7, 1837.
I can convey no idea, never having seen anything at all worthy to
compare with it. It is not mere romantic beauty, but, speaking as ai
farmer, its richness and undoubted fertility of soil is quite equal to
its appearance, and far surpasses anything I had supposed to be in
existence. There are thousands and tens of thousands of acres, im-
mediately adjoining the city, quite equal to Romney Marshes ; one
mioht at once go a haymaking; and, intermixed with the grasses,
there is, now in full bloom, a kind of lupin, three or four feet high,
and possessing as nutricious qualities as vetches ; indeed, the best
proof of the quality of the pasturage, which is most abundant, is
supplied by the present condition of the oxen, which, though work-
in<y hard nearly every day, are yet in such condition as would not be
despised in Smithfield for the butcher. There really seems to me to
be everything provided here by nature to supply the wants of and
form a prosperous community. I do believe that if 500,000
persons, properly apportioned with all appliances for working the
land were immediately set down in the range of country round this
place which from the different points of the town the eye can almost
take in, they need not be at all in each other’s way, or experience the
least difficulty in drawing a plentiful subsistence from the soil, which


is equal in staple, in many large blocks of thousands of acres, to the
deep rich loams in the neighbourhood of Maidstone.
Town acres are in many situations not to be purchased at all, and are
readily marketable at from £SO. to £200., according to position. I
am so well satisfied with the prospect of ultimate success here, that
I would not for £5,000. quit this to spend the remainder of my days
in England, speaking of course merely as to profit, and looking at the
difficulty of properly placing one’s family there.
Extract of a Letter from Mr. John Morphett.
Adelaide, Dec. 18, 1837.
The average rental of town acres in the best part of South Austra-
lia varies from £2O. to £3O. per annum, for a term of seven years,
The rate of interest for money upon good security is 12 percent.;
but when time has rendered capital more valuable, by opening fresh
fields for its profitable employment, I have no doubt that from 15 to
18 per cent, will be realized.
The following is from the South Australian Gazette; —
“To the Capitalist we have little to say:—chiefly because he is
likely to be well informed of a place where investment of money is
sure to be profitable and safe. Any man with 1000 ewes might
realize an ample fortune, on our unlimited ranges of healthy sheep-
walks, in five years. The industrious farmer should turn his
attention to South Australia. Let him purchase 100 acres of land,
bring his ploughs and spades, and two or three active sons, or steady
labourers, to assist him, with £2OO of cash to purchase a pair of
bullocks, and a few sheep and pigs ; and he will double his property
in two years. Every Emigrant should bring out sufficient tools for
his trade ; these are dear in all Colonies, especially new ones, where
the supply of labour being sometimes insufficient, individuals must
work at different trades. Nothing is more useful than axles and
wheels, from the common barrow to the large waggon. Good axes,
saws of all descriptions, a few wedges, wall rings, screw bolts, and a
little iron for repairs, are necessary, A twelvemonth’s supply of the
materials most needed should be brought by the Emigrant: as to
clothing, that of England answers well. We therefore recommend
Emigrants, wishing to live in a fine country, with elbow room, and
where industry is sure to be rewarded, to lose no time in shipping
themselves and their children for South Australia. We want no
idlers—no drunkards ; —but steady, sober men, not ashamed to live
by the sweat of their brow, will be welcomed, end cannot fail to
become independent in a few years.


SOUTH AUSTRALIAN COMPANY
OFFICE, % NEW BROAD STREET.
Directors.
G. F. ANGAS, ESQ., Chairman. *
CAPT. T. W, BULLER, R. N.
RAIRES CURRIE, ESQ., M. P.
CHARLES HINDLEY, ESQ,, M. P.
HENRY KINGSCOTE, ESQ,
JOHN PIRIE, ESQ,, Alderman
CHRISTOPHER RAWSON, ESQ,
JOHN RUNDLB, ESQ., M. P.
THOMAS SMITH, ESQ.
JAMES RUDDELL TODD, ESQ.
HENRY WAYMOUTH, ESQ.
Auditors ,
D. T. JOHNSON, ESQ.
W. U. SIMS, ESQ
Bankers ,
MESSRS. LADBROKES & CO.
Solicitors ,
MESSRS. BARTLETT & BEDDOME.
Manager , Manager in South Australia ,
E. J. WHEELER, ESQ. DAVID Me. LAREN.
Capital £500,000. in Shares of £25. each.
London; Printed by J, Reynolds, 174, Strand,








h lm


' * '
ipf ■ \
•
, **■ $
-
V '
1 y
.
’ 'll
-
■ ' '
1
,: v f
\ \ y '0yP. |
’ 4 y [j&i ".i jj- s&ik
i ■ ■ i im.
if. } 4
-
yf
>
' T
% % \
" V? ' ;••<'?' . - -. ' ' ■ ■ - - "" " '.'-V - - , ' .j ; ■- . ‘ -
:fc, v k> r WA
■
€
■
■ '€
•
v 4
i
£ \' 1
’
: y
I
■
■
1
A
> . ' ' ’■ '.,'7.. . :
,V *' ri
-
