

[.Reprinted from the Transactions of the International Congress of Prehistoric
Archceology, Third Smion.]
ON CERTAIN ANTIQUITIES IN STONE FOUND IN THE
ISLANDS OF THE PACIFIC AND SOUTH SEAS.
Br J. H, Lamprey, Esq.
I propose, by the title of this paper, rather to stir up
inquiry than to settle a point—to inquire into the origin of
the race who constructed these monuments, and endeavour
to trace the principles which influenced those by whom they
were erected.
Two kinds of structure have been observed—the one a
rude attempt to imitate the human form in gigantic car-
vings, the other a modification of the pyramid formed of
hand-wrought blocks of stone.
The human-shaped figures seem to be uniform in design,
of both sexes, hideous in aspect, European in profile as to
the face, having pendulous ears, arms a-kimbo, legs widely-
flexed (where the whole figure is elaborated), the feet resting
on a cube, and in general appearance resembling figures in
stone found at Java, and described by Raffles, Crawfurd, and
others; or still more like those wooden supporters to the water
temples found at Dorey Point, New Guinea, and figured in
the ‘ Voyage of the Astrolabe,’ plate 125; such as Roggewein
described in his history of the discovery of Easter Island,
and subsequently mentioned by Cook, Vancouver, and others;
such as now only exist in museums in Europe, or are badly
figured in the works which treat of missionary enterprise.
These rude attempts at human portraiture frequently rest
upon square bases in three tiers, gradually increasing in size.
The second form is limited to structures resembling the
bases upon which these human effigies rest, and, being of
great dimensions, these are to be considered as perfect
without the superimposed figure, although in some places
many scores of small male and female figures were planted
around and upon these truncated pyramidal structures ; but,


these being of wood, were not necessarily of the same age
as the stone structures beneath them. The stone blocks of
which these colossal bases are formed, are of coral—coral
passing into limestone—and other hard material, not always
identical with the formation of the island where the structure
is set up, but of materials carried over the sea from some
distant rocks, where suitable stone was known to exist, and
from whence it was quarried, as may be gathered from more
than one of the authors subsequently quoted in this paper.
These blocks seem to have been wrought with great care;
the surfaces are perfectly smooth; and the joints so admir-
ably adjusted that they have resisted the insidious attacks
of time, and never fail to strike the least observant with
admiration for the skill of the artificer who contrived them.
These stone remains are destitute of surface decoration or
inscription of any kind, only one inscribed rock occurring in
the South Seas (that at Pitcairn’s Island); but there seems,
nevertheless, a conclusive proof that their builders were not
devoid of a certain mysticism, from the evident harmony
of the arrangement of the tiers, and the constant law which
seems to prevail throughout the entire series. No one, how-
ever, has made a fair measurement of the surfaces, or secured
for us accurate drawings, and the canon of art to which the
builders were evidently subjected has yet to be examined.
The present native inhabitants, or rather occupiers, of the
islands seem to comprehend their sacred meaning, but use
only the very large structures for religious purposes, while
they utilise the lesser surfaces as floors for their frail
dwelling-places. There can be little doubt respecting the
want of all building capacity in the Polynesians dwelling in
these islands at the present day; they do not seem to pos-
sess the power, intelligence, or genius to enable them to
construct any such buildings; and, with one exception,
mentioned by Captain Cook, they do not seem to have built
anything in stone since the time of their earliest discovery
by Europeans. Easter Island, examined by Roggewein *in
1720, was peopled by a race who have altogether disap-
* This island was recently visited, and several circular stone head-dresses for
statues were found in a quarry of stone high up in the mountains, ready to be trans-
ported to the shore, but lying, since they were made in former times, in &itu.


peared, and subsequent travellers have noticed an inhuman
set of savages in occupation of the island, whose ears are
dragged by art into pendulous forms, with a view to emulate
the stone idols. The Easter Islanders can neither repair nor
renew these decaying statues, which serve, as it were, to guard
their coast. Other islands, also, have been swept by pestilence
and depopulated in the historic period; and it is mentioned
in the history of the ‘ Mutiny of the Bounty/ that the first-
comers to Pitcairn’s Island found in the graves of a race
formerly existing there, large shells of a pearl oyster, not
found in the surrounding sea, but common in other latitudes.
The experience derived by ethnologists who have de-
voted their attention to the migrations of the Polynesian
races, serves to throw no light upon the builders of these
structures in the Pacific ; for, while many attempts have been
made to trace these people to Papuan and other origins,
we cannot discover in these several originals a stone-work-
ing family. That there are, in the islands now occupied by
Papuans, stone remains, there can be no doubt; but there
seems to be a chain of evidence that the race formerly occu-
pying the islands in the Pacific came from the northern
region of China and Thibet, if similarity in the form of stone
remains existing in these countries at the present day, would
serve as a clue by which to trace the direction taken by the
building race.
Marsden, when speaking of the Sumatrans, says, ‘ In pro-
portion as the arts in use with any people are connected
with the primary demands of nature, they carry the greater
likelihood of originality, because those demands must have
been administered to from a period coeval with the exist-
ence of the people themselves; or, if complete originality be
regarded as a visionary idea, engendered from ignorance and
the obscurity of remote events, such arts must be allowed to
have the fairest claims to originality at least. Arts of ac-
commodation, and more especially of luxury, are commonly
the effect of imitation, and suggested by the improvements
of other nations, which have made greater advances towards
civilisation.
‘These afford less striking and characteristic features,


and, though they may add to the beanty, they diminish
the genuineness of the work. We must not look for un-
equivocal generic marks, where the breed, in order to mend
it, has been crossed by a foreign mixture. All the arts of
primary necessity are comprehended within two distinc-
tions : those which protect us from the inclemency of the
weather and other outward accidents, and those which are
employed in securing the means of subsistence. Both are
essential to the continuance of life, and man is involuntarily
prompted to exercise them. In climates like these of the
South Seas, the impulse extends not far. The human
machine is kept going with small effort in so favourable a
medium. The spring of importunate necessity there soon
loses its force, and consequently the wheels of invention,
that depend upon it, fail to perform more than a few simple
revolutions.’
In regions less mild, this original motive to industry and
ingenuity carries men to greater lengths, in the application
of arts to the occasions of life; and these of course, in an
equal space of time, attain to greater perfection than among
the inhabitants of the tropical latitudes, who find their
immediate wants supplied with facility, and prefer the nega-
tive pleasures of inaction to the enjoyment of any conveni-
ences purchased with exertion and labour.
It is greatly to be regretted, that the obstacles in the way
of anything like a fair comparison of these South Sea
remains, one with another, are needlessly great; and they
arise from many causes, amongst which the following may
be enumerated. The voyages and travels have been revised
for the press by literary helpers, who were totally ignorant of
the necessity of clearness of description, towards which there
is evident approach in the manuscripts they have revised;
that the slight ray of light is nearly obscured by such
revision is evident, if not admitted, in such works as the
‘ History of the Wreck of the Antelope,’ which is composed
from the journals of Captain H. Wilson by George Keate, &c.
That monuments identical with those under observation
existed in the Pelew Islands, and were described as such,
there is internal evidence sufficient to satisfy us, as will be
shown.


Another source of confusion arises from the careless
illustrations of remarkable objects, done from hearsay de-
scriptions by artists at home, who cannot be expected to
understand the purpose of their work.
Again, it arises from the indifference of the worthy mis-
sionaries, who have the best opportunity of accurately re-
cording facts respecting the appearance, general condition,
and method of working the stone under consideration, of
observing the traces of tool marks on the less polished
surfaces, and who might cause search to be made for the
very tools employed, which perhaps remain buried in the
surrounding soil.
But of all the witnesses respecting these remains, the mis-
sionaries are the least fitted to report on their condition,
mainly because they consider such works as obstacles in the
way of the progress of Christianity, or that, being unac-
quainted with the antiquity of the monuments, and deceived
by the wooden idols found in their immediate neighbourhood,
they confound these works with the more recent structures
erected by the Portuguese and Buccaneers, who fortified
their positions by building redoubts during their occu-
pation, which exist to the present day in these seas, and of
whose occupation we have authentic information. We there-
fore search in vain for information in recent publications re-
specting South Sea antiquities, and we are compelled to turn
to the pages of Cook, Dairymple, La Perouse, the ‘ Voyage of
the Astrolabe,’ &c., for reliable information, scanty though it
be; while the evident defects in the numerous illustrations
to these memoirs compel us to reject such material help in a
study like the present, as altogether valueless, and certain
only to mislead.
In the selection of such extracts as throw some light upon
the subject of this paper, I have started from the most
eastern point, namely lat. 27°, long. 110°, Easter Island, to-
wards the Marquesas and Pitcairn Island, in the south of
the group; and Tahiti, Samoan Islands, Fiji Islands, New
Hebrides, Caroline Islands, Pelew Islands, Ladrone Islands,
towards Japan. It may be worthy of notice, that the present
horse-shoe-shaped tomb of the Chinese, Japanese, and Loo


Choo islanders is found slightly modified in many places to-
wards the south, as far as New South Wales and New Zea-
land, where incontestable evidence of ancient Chinese and
Japanese remains are found, and are noticed in many books
of travel.* But as the subject is in some degree foreign to
the purpose of the inquiry proposed in the present paper, I
have made no further allusion to these modern, or compara-
tively modern remains in such outlying regions; hut only as
a proof that, in ancient times, these seas may have been
traversed in all directions by a race of men of high intelli-
gence, great physical endurance, capable of patient toil in
the accomplishment of great works, whose scant remains,
simple as they are in form, are not destitute of that mystic
rhythm in arrangement which at once entitles them to a
place in the records of prehistoric times.
Easter Island, South Pacific,
Discovered by Jacob Eoggewein, on April 6, 1721. It is 9
miles broad by 13 long, and lies from N.W. to S.E.; has a
peak 1,323 feet high, lat. 27° 5' 30" S., long. 109° 46' 30" W.
Behrens, the historian of the voyage, relates that the first
native they communicated with, on being kindly treated by
the ship’s company, returned in his canoe towards the land,
shouting the word Odorroga! which at first they thought
meant to be addressed to some large idols which were seen
placed on the shore; and the Dort narrative gives the follow-
ing description of these idols:— ‘ Two stones, of a size almost
beyond belief, served them for gods; one was broad beyond
measure, and lay on the ground; upon this stood the other
stone, which was thrice the height of a man, and of such
extent that seven of our people with outstretched arms would
hardly have been able to encircle it. About the top of this
stone was cut or carved the shape of a man’s head adorned
* Ereycinet, in his ‘ Atlas hisfcorique,’ plates 73, 74, 75, and 81. Consult Herrera,
decud. 3,1, 7, et seq. ; Argensola, ‘ Conquista de las Molucas,’ lib. i.; Gonzales
de Oviedo, ‘Hist, de las Indias;’ Gomara, ‘Hist. gen. de las Indias;’ ‘Ultimo
Viage al Estrecho de Magalhaens,’ p. 205; ‘ Anson’s Voyage ‘ Byron’s Voyage ;’
‘Wallis’s Voyage,’ p. i. 279 ; ‘ Portlock’s Voyage;’ Gilbert’s ‘Voyage of the Char-
lotte,’ 1788; ‘Astrolabe et Zelee;’ Mortimer’s ‘Voyage of the Mercury.’


with a garland, set together of inlaid work made of small
stones, not ill done. The name of the largest idol was Taurico,
and of the other Dago.’ Captain Cook, who visited the island
in March 1774, gives a more particular account of these
remains. On the eastern side of the island near the sea, they
met with three platforms of stone work, or rather the ruins
of them; on each had stood four of these large statues, but
they were all fallen down from two of them, and also one
from the third, All, except one, were broken by the fall, or in
some measure defaced; this one was fifteen feet long and six
feet broad over the shoulders. Each statue had on its head a
cylindric stone of a red colour, wrought perfectly round, fifty-
two inches high and sixty-six in diameter. In some of these
cylinders there was an ‘ upper corner taken off, in a sort of
concave quarter-round.’
In a small hollow, on the highest part of the island, they
met with several such cylinders as are placed on the heads of
the statues. The statues were of grey stone, seemingly of
the same sort as that with which the platforms were built,
though some thought the stone was different from what they
saw on the island; and, speculating on the difficulty of their
structure, says, ‘the workmanship was rude, but not bad, nor
were the features of the face ill-formed, the nose and chin in
particular; but the ears were long beyond proportion,’ the
writer goes on to say: ‘ But by whatever method these statues
were set up, they must have occupied much time, proving the
ingenuity and perseverance of the islanders in the age in
which they were built; for the present inhabitants have most
certainly had no hand in them, as they do not even repair the
foundations of those which are going to decay. At this island
they noticed small heaps of stones piled up, having a few white
stones at top. The working tools of these people were made
of bone, stone, and shells; they had no iron tools, and set but
little value on them.’
George Forster, in his ‘History of the Voyage of H.M.S.
Resolution,’ says, ‘ these idols have a strong affinity to the
figures called Tee on the king’s grave at Otahaitee: their
weapons resembled the New Zealanders.’


Marquesas Islands.
Melville, in his account of a four months’ residence at
Nukuheva, one of the Washington group, lying in the paral-
lels of 8° 38' and 9° 32" south lat., and 139° 20' and 140° 10"
west long., states that he saw, at the base of one of the
mountains, and surrounded on all sides with dense groves, a
series of vast terraces of stone, rising step by step for a con-
siderable distance up the hillside. These terraces cannot be
less than 100 yards in length and 20 in width. Their magni-
tude, however, is less striking than the immense size of the
blocks composing them. Some of the stones, of an oblong
shape, are from ten to fifteen feet in length and five or six feet
thick; their sides are quite smooth, but though square and of
pretty regular formation, bear no mark of the chisel. They are
laid together without cement, and here and there show gaps
between. The topmost terrace and the lower one are some-
what peculiar in their construction ; they have both a quad-
rangular depression in the centre, leaving the rest of the
terrace elevated several feet above it. In the intervals of the
stones, immense trees have taken root, and their broad boughs
stretching far over, and interlacing together, support a canopy
almost impenetrable to the sun. Overgrowing all was a wild
canopy of vines.
* As I gazed upon this monument, doubtless the work of an
extinct and forgotten race, thus buried in the green nook of
an island at the ends of the earth, the existence of which
was yesterday unknown, a stronger feeling of awe came over
me than if I had stood musing at the mighty base of the
Pyramid of Cheops. There are no inscriptions, no sculpture,
no clue, by which to conjecture its history; nothing but the
dumb stones.’
This writer also describes the curious massive stone found-
ations called by the natives pi pis. ‘ Some of these are so
extensive, and so great a degree of labour and skill must
have been requisite in constructing them, that I can scarcely
believe they were built by the ancestors of the present inhabit-
ants. If indeed they were, the race has sadly deteriorated
in their knowledge of the mechanic arts. To say nothing of


their habitual indolence, by what contrivance within the
reach of so simple a people, could such enormous masses
have been moved or fixed in their places ? and how could
they, with their rude implements, have chiselled and ham-
mered them into shape ? ’
These pi pis foundations are so numerous, that the natives,
when they shift their abode, select another of these stone
platforms on which to erect their bamboo dwellings.
In Langsdorff’s account of the Russian expedition of
1803-7, he states that ‘ The houses of Nuthahiva are built
on a platform of quadrangular smoothed stones, which some-
times extends several feet in front of the house. In these
buildings one cannot but be very much astonished that such
people put together such immense stones. They are of a
size scarcely to be moved by less than ten or twelve men, and
are united without any cement, so that they are absolute
Roman walls: they would indeed do honour to any European
architect.’
‘ The place in which the sacred dances are held is in the
most level part of the valley : it is paved with large, broad,
flat stones, put together so close and even, that one could
almost believe it to be done by a European workman. The
place is seldom less than 100 fathoms long, and is tabooed.’
Ascension, Western Pacific.
T. H. Hood in his notes of a cruise in H.M.S. ‘ Fawn ’ in
the Western Pacific, in the year 1862, p. 174, says: ‘Around
the burial ground at Moa, I observed large slabs of a coarse
red porphyry, which is brought from an island in the lagoon.
This is the rock of which large blocks were conveyed in
former times to Tongataboo in the great war canoes, when
its chiefs or kings held this and the intermediate islands of
Nian-Foo and Keppel as appendages of their kingdom.’
‘ This circumstance renders more accountable the existence
of the ruins of ancient buildings and circles of stones, com-
posed of materials not obtained except from distant localities,
as those at Strong’s or Kunaie Island, at Paadsen, Easter
Island, Waiahu, &c. Now all tradition of their origin is lost,


and the natives regard them as the work of their god-like
ancestors, who fished up the very islands from the depths of
the ocean,’
‘ Amongst the most singular of these remains may be men-
tioned those of Ascension, or Ponapi, an island in lat. 7° north,
and long. 157° 50' east: they are situated upon the low land,
extending out upon the flats which surround the island.
A writer in the Honolulu paper (Eev. W. Clark) visited
them in 1852. He says : ‘We approached the ruins from the
island side by crossing a creek or canal, from twenty to thirty
feet wide, walled on both sides, and nearly dry at low water.
This led to the outer entrance of the ruin or fortification,
which was through a large open.*
Tahite.
In Walpole’s ‘ Four Years in the Pacific,’ p. 101, he relates,
that in the hills above Fatawa, ‘roaming about, we came
upon vast squares of stones similar to the piers on which the
houses are built; but they could not have been for houses
up here, though the whole island bears evidence in the
numerous dwellings found in the bush, of a former and much
more numerous population.’
In Wilkes’ expedition little notice is taken of antiquities;
but in one of the Samoan group, the island of Tutulia, where
La Perouse lost M. de Langle in an encounter with the
natives, ‘he saw several piles of stones under which the
natives formerly buried their dead; but as M. de Langle was
buried after the then custom of the inhabitants, namely, in
the sand of the seashore, it may fairly be concluded that
the piles of stones belonged to an ancient race who practised
other customs.
Hawaii.
In Ellis’s ‘Missionary Tour through Hawaii, 1826,’ p. 141,
he says: ‘We had often passed over the ruins of deserted
heathen temples and the vestiges of demolished altars in the
Sandwich Islands, and I had frequently visited those in other
groups of the Pacific: here (in a place described below) how-


ever was a scene unique among the ruins of paganism, which
we contemplated with unusual interest.
It was a compact building ( the house of Keave ), twenty-four
by sixteen feet, standing on a bed of lava. The pavement was
of smooth fragments of lava, laid down with considerable skill,
several rudely carved male a,nd female images of wood were
placed on the outside of the enclosure; some on low pedestals
under the shade of trees, others on high posts on the jutting
rocks that hung over the water. A number stood at unequal
distances all round ; but at the south-east end was the prin-
cipal assemblage on a pile of stones, neatly laid up in the
form of a crescent, about three feet wide, and two feet higher
than the pavement; and on this pile the images were fixed:
they stood on low pedestals three or four feet high.
There were two Puhonuas, or cities of refuge, on the island;
one at Honaunau was 715 feet in length and 404 wide, the
walls 12 feet high and 15 feet thick. In it had been three
large heiaus; the remaining one was a compact pile of stones
laid in a solid mass, 126 feet by 65 feet, and 10 feet high.
Many fragments of rock or pieces of lava, of tons each or
more, were seen in several parts of the wall, raised at least
six feet from the ground, &c.
At p. 335 he states that the burying-place at Keauhou was
a space surrounded with high stone walls, appearing very
much like a heiau or temple; but he was tabooed from visit-
ing it.
At p. 65 he speaks of the temple of Bukohola, 224 feet
long and 100 wide, with large stones 6 feet wide, forming
a wall: on the top of the walls, 20 feet high in places,
pillars to support the altar still stood; the pavement was
perfect. He states that this was composed of smooth stones
brought from a considerable distance, and that it had been
erected thirty years before; but it can be proved that it stood
there in the earliest times of the discovery of the Sandwich
Islands.
At Ruapua was a heiau, 150 by 70 feet, built of immense
blocks of lava. At the north end was a small enclosure
partitioned off by a high wall with a narrow entrance.


Tonga Islands, South Pacific.
In the account of the transactions at the Tonga Islands,
given by Mr. Mariner early in 1805, he describes how the
grave of a native was prepared. This is called a Fytoca , or
burying-place, including the grave, the mound in which it is
sunk, and a sort of shed over it. The grave of a chief man’s
family is a vault, lined with one large stone at the bottom,
one at each side, one at the foot and head; is about eight feet
long, six broad, and eight feet deep, covered at the top with
one large stone.*
The Island of Tinian (Ladrone Islands).
Commodore Anson, on August 26, 1742, visited the island
of Tinian in long. 114° 60' W. It ranges from S.S.W. to
N.N.E., is twelve miles long by six miles in breadth. i There
are, in all parts of the island, many ruins of a very par-
ticular kind. These usually consist of two rows of square
pyramidal pillars, each pillar being about six feet from the
next, and the distance between the rows being about twelve
feet: the pillars themselves are about five feet square at the
base, and about thirteen feet high; and on the top of each of
them is a semi-globe, with the flat surface upwards. The whole
of the pillars and semi-globe are solid, being composed of
sand and stone cemented together and plaistered over.’ An
engraving of the ruin is given in Anson’s Voyage. The island
is somewhat sandy, he states, undulating and free from all
bushes and underwoods; but, in a more recent French ac-
count of these remains it is stated, that the pillars are mono-
liths and the caps are composition, but solid and smooth.
New Zealand.
In 1839 a missionary at Wangaree found the natives cook-
ing food in an old hell (?). The history given of this metal
* A megalithic structure in Tongataboo, called Ho Ho Manga na Maui, or the
Burthen of Maui, has been noticed in the ‘ Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries
of London,’ Ist series, vol. iii. p. 19 ; 2nd series, vol. i. p. 287 ; and * Archaeologia,’
vol. xxxv. p. 494, where a representation of it may be found. It has also been en-
graved in the ‘lllustrated London News ’ for March 10, 1860.


object was, that formerly a large tree had been blown down
in a gale, and amongst the roots this bell was found, inscribed
with characters like Chinese in form, but more square and
regular than Chinese. It seemed to have been broken down
to less than its original size, as it 4 was far too shallow for its
width,’ and a hole, where the tongue or clapper ring had
been, was stopped up by some means in order that it might
be used as a cooking pot. Mr. E,. Taylor, in his work on
New Zealand, 1855, states that he saw this curious object.
Professor Huxley said he had not visited the particular
islands that had been mentioned in the paper just read, but
some years ago he had reason to look up the literature con-
nected with them, and he could not say that he was impressed
with, any opinion of the great antiquity of these remains.
There were evidences in Captain Cook’s voyages and else-
where, that the inhabitants were then building with large
blocks of stone. The present race of people in Tahiti had
built up a monument of the kind, and they were well able to
do this, for they had stone axes, and the substance with which
they built was soft rock, or coral rock, which could be had of
every description of hardness. Such monuments could be
made, and in Cook’s time were made, by the then population.
Moreover, in consequence of the peculiar nature of the popu-
lation, we might understand how they would very soon forget
how these monuments were made, or cease to be desirous of
making them. In the small islands, the inhabitants became
too numerous to be supported, and then they lost then-
temper and fought, and thus their resources were destroyed,
and they sunk into such a condition of poverty and misery
as to lead them to forget all about their monuments, or not
to be able to keep them up. He did not think that any of
the remains mentioned in the paper were of prehistoric ori-
gin, nor indeed of any considerable antiquity.
Dr. Hookee, F.R.S., said, that relics of a Stone Age had
been discovered in New Zealand, from which island Dr.
Hector, F.L.S., had sent him chipped obsidian and other
implements altogether resembling the European, and which
had been found associated with the bones of the extinct


Dinornis. With respect to the bell alluded to by Mr. Lamprey
as having been discovered in New Zealand, an account of it
had been sent to him immediately on its discovery, and sub-
sequently a photograph of it. The inscription on it bore so
close a resemblance to the Cingalese character, that he sent
it to Dr. Thwaites at Ceylon, from whom he received the
following interpretation of the inscription: i The bell of the
ship Moheyedeen Yakkusa,’ which signifies in Tamil that it
had belonged to a Mahommedan ship. In all probability it
had belonged to some ship blown out of its course, and
wrecked on the shores of New Zealand.*
The discussion was continued by Mr. Campbell, Mr. Stevens,
and others, all of whom corroborated the views of Professor
Huxley as to the modern character of the relics mentioned
in the paper.
* The bell is engraved in the ‘ Transactions of the Ethnological Society, ’ new
series, vol. v. p. 169.
LONDON : PRINTED BT
BPOmSWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
AND PARLIAMENT STREET




