

On CHANCE, LOTS and LOTTERY.
From ?The South Australian Chronicle,? June 4,1892.
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir ?You have had many letters at various
times of late on gambling from both the advo-
cates of the totalizator and other forms of
backing with money the probabilities of racing
and other games, and also from those who are
opposed to such practices in every form. Per-
sonally I am averse to every mode of gambling,
but I do not propose here to enter into the
question of its morality, but for the interest
and entertainment of your numerous readers
to give the result of some notes I made on
?chance,? ?lots,? and ?lottery? some years
ago for a different purpose. To the greater
portion of mankind nothing would seem to be
less the result of chance than the apparently
deliberate decisions of their own minds. We
will do this or we will not do it. We will go
or we will not go. What is to prevent our
freedom of action ? Surely the Great Author
of All in
? binding nature fast in fate,
Left free the human will.?
Certainly, the will of man appears to be quite
free. The reasons for and against a certain
course of action are weighed, and having made
his determination he acts accordingly ; or, an
unforeseen circumstance occurs which throws
him off his guard, and on a sudden impulse he
performs some action. Few would suppose
that in both instances, however he acts, it is
simply in accordance with antecedent circum-
stances derived from the united action of the
numberless elements affecting l all society, and
to which his own volition, as a unit, is sub-
servient. This action of the whole influence
of society is so uniform that it seems to reduce
to mathematical formulae the individual acts
of the human race. From birth to death men
are subject to this supreme principle of generali-
zation. It determines at the time of concep-
tion whether they shall be male or female, for
though there appears the utmost irregu-
larity in the number of the sons and
daughters throughout the nation, the
average number of sexes is maintained
from year to year, being 105 boys to every
100 girls. The same principle is manifested
when men and women choose their partners
for life, for though each may be conscious of
the utmost liberty in accepting or rejecting
one another it is found in practice that not
only the number of marriages annually, but
also the relative ages of the persons forming
matrimonial connections are subject to a uni-
formity as precise as that which regulates the
movements of the planets. If there be a small
increase in the number of marriages one year,
there is sure to be a deficiency in another. A
well-known author tells us that the experience
of a century has proved that in England at
least, so far from marriages being determined
by personal feelings or having any connection
therewith, that they have a fixed and definite
relation to the price of corn and the average
earnings of the great mass of the people ; and
he assures us that the immense social and reli-
gious institution of matrimony is not only
swayed, but is completely controlled by
the price of food and by the rate
of wages. The scarcity of grain and its con-
sequent dearness influences also crime. In
Bavaria, for example, it has been shown that
every increase of six kreutzer in the price of
corn meant one theft more per 100,000 inhabi-
tants. When a man of 30 chooses a
woman of 60 as a wife, surely both
may be considered to act voluntarily, yet
the occurrence of such alliances is as regular as
the motions of the solar system. For instance,
in Belgium the average number of men 30 years
of age and under who marry women above 60
annually is 6, and the variation from this either
way is usually limited to sor 7. If in one year
there are only five of such marriages it has been
preceded or will be followed by one in which
the number is seven. Again it is found that 18
men whose ages are between 30 and 45 annually
marry women above 60, with a slight variation
either way. Also that the number of men from
45 to 60 who contract marriage with women
above 60 is yearly 27. The birth of illegiti-
mate children being so entirely dependent upon
voluntary acts would seem likely to vary
greatly each year, yet in every country where
records are properly kept the annual number
of illegitimate children is in an invariable
proportion to those born in wedlock.
In England, France, and Belgium the
ratio is 1 to 13, and this is continued in all
these countries from year to year with all the
precision of physical laws. There are in fact
no actions man can perform that have been


fairly tabulated, which do not become arranged
under their several heads with a regularity
similar to that shown in the instances we have
already given. Persons appear even to forget
to act with the same precision that they obey
the dictates of their will. Thus it is found by
the returns of the post-offices in England and
France that there are annually put into the
branch establishments throughout each country
an unvarying number of unaddressed letters.
In London the number is yearly about 2,000
such letters, or an average of about six per day.
A certain proportion of these are always found
to contain money and other valuable property,
and it is a remarkable fact that the ratio of
such letters to those which possess no enclosures
is also invariable. The doctrine of averages
received a remarkable illustration in 1869
as regards fatal street accidents in London.
In the 19 weeks preceding May 8 there were
four short of the usual average. In the week
between May 8 and 15, to make up the full
number for 20 weeks, eight deaths were due
instead of the usual number of four, and
strangely enough eight took place, according
to the registrar-general?s report. The number
of persons charged with crime and the number
acquitted have a uniform proportion to the
rest of the public and to each other. In
France out of 100 accused individuals 39 are
regularly discharged. Buckle remarks that
murder is committed with as much regularity
and bears as uniform a relation to certain
known circumstances as do the movements of
the tides and the rotation of the seasons, and
he quotes M. Quetelet on this subject in the
following words: ?? In everything which con-
cerns crime the same numbers recur with a con-
stancy which cannot be mistaken; and this is
the case even with those crimes which seem
quite independent of human foresight, such,
for instance, as murders, which are
generally committed after quarrels from
circumstances apparently casual. Neverthe-
less we know from experience that every year
there not only takes place the same number of
murders, but that even the same instruments
by which they are committed are employed in
the same proportion.? So again with suicide.
Numberless are the causes which may induce
a man to commit self-destruction. Notwith-
standing the relentings which arise in the
breast when the idea is first conceived and the
difficulties which may interpose in the design
being carried out, returns show us that year
by year the same number of persons are
guilty of this offence. Thus the writer we
have already quoted concludes that suicide is
merely the product of the general condition of
society, and that the individual suicide only
carries into effect what is a necessary con-
sequence of preceding circumstances. In a
given state of society a certain number of
persons must put an end to their own life.
It is a curious fact that the frequency of
suicide in any given year increases and
decreases with the length of the days. This
is true, not only on the whole, but in each
separate laud and even in each great city.
Everywhere there are more suicides in Europe
in June and July and fewer in November,
December, and January than in any other
months. This is found to have been as
uniformly the case in former years, as from
1835 to 1843, as it is now. Of every 1,000 self-
murders it is found that 64 take place in
January, 68 in February, 79 in March, 88 in
April, 106 in May, 113 in June, 100 in July,
92 in August, 79 in September, 76 in October,
66 in November, and 60 in December. And
even in London, when the fogs of November
are popularly regarded as melancholic and
suicidal, that month is found actually to furnish
but 6J per cent of all the suicides, while June
and July report each more than 11 per cent.
Is the will, like the muscles, it is asked by the
compiler of these statistics, Alexander von
Oettinger, weakened by the heat of summer ?
Some uniformities, the same authority
tells us, are found in the num-
bers of suicides committed by different
means. Year after year it is observed that the
same proportions of self-murderers choose the
same methods to escape from life. Among 100
male suicides in France drowning is the choice
of 26, hanging by 42 or 43, shooting by 14 or
15, stabbing of 4 or 5, precipitation from a
height 23, breathing carbonic acid gas of 6 or
7, and poison of 2. But of the same number
of women who kill themselves 40 or 45 do it by
drowning, 25 by hanging, 5 or 6 by throwing
themselves from a height, 14 by carbonic acid,
3 by poison, while only 1 in nearly 200 shcots
herself. Of all the children under 15 who
commit suicide 86 in every 100 boys hang
themselves, while 71 in every 100 girls throw
themselves into the water. Most of the cases
of pistol shooting are young men, while it is
chiefly in advanced age that cutting the throat
is attempted. Among suicides hanging is the
most common in the country, especially among
farm laborers, shooting among soldiers and the
aristocracy, poisoning in . the large cities,
drowning among servants. The influences of
age and that of sex are also obvious. In every
country three-fourths of all the suicides are of
the male sex; but in every country and
in both sexes the disposition to commit
this crime increases with advancing years,
and is always greatest in extreme old age.
It has also been noticed that the maximum of
crimes against property is reached in winter,
and that rapes and crimes of violence are most
common when the temperature is high. So
much for the conclusions of men who claim
to have a right to decide upon such facts as aro


given above, and which to say the least are
very suggestive as bearing upon the question
of man?s moral responsibility. As regards
?lots? and ?lottery,? men in all ages have
been disposed to allow their conduct and
action in many momentous periods of their
lives to be decided by apparent chance, though
this has been because they believed a provi-
dence and will superior to their own deter-
mined what was the best for them to do. The
Jews of old were firmly convinced of this.
The scapegoat had to be chosen by lot. The
land of Canaan was portioned cut among the
Israelites by lot, as is mentioned in several
places in the Pentateuch, particularly in
Joshua 18th and 19th chapters. The people
also went up to fight against Gibeah ? by lot.?
Saul also appealed to God in a time
of emergency and ?said unto the Lord
God of Israel, give a perfect lot.??I.
Samuel, xiv., 41. And the abiding conviction
of the whole of his nation is conveyed in the
proverb?? The lot is cast into the lap, but the
whole disposing thereof is of the Lord.? ?Prov.
xvi. 33. And this belief was so sincere and
lasting that in a critical period of Christianity
when an apostle had to be chosen in the place
of Judas, and the choice lay between Barnabas
and Matthias, the assembled disciples, number-
ing in all about 120, having prayed, saying
? Thou, Lord, which knowest the hearts of all
men, show whether of these two men thou
hast chosen, that he may take part of this
ministry and apostleship,? proceeded to deter-
mine the will of God in the usual Jewish way.
? And they gave forth their lots, and the lot
fell upon Matthias, and he was numbered with
the apostles.??Acts i. 24-26. Writing of the
Moravian brethren in his journal, Wesley says
of this estimable people?? They have a
peculiar esteem for lots, and accordingly
use them in public and private to
decide points of importance when the
reasons brought on each side appear to be of
equal weight. And they believe this to be
then the only way of wholly setting aside their
own will, of acquitting themselves of all
blame, and clearly knowing what is the will of
God.? In the time when this was written and
for long afterwards, though I believe not at
present, the United Brethren, as the Mora-
vians are also called, believed so fully in the
efficacy of lottery that it was not an uncommon
event for the wives of their ministers and mis-
sionaries to be selected by this mode. It
should be also mentioned that marriages formed
in this confiding spirit generally proved happy
ones, the respective partners consoling them-
selves for any shortcomings or deficiencies in
one another by the reflection that their union
was decreed and pointed out by the
will of God Himself. My own maternal
great grandparents, my grandfather and grand-
mother, and my mother?s brother, all ministers
of this section of the Christian Church, were
brought together by lot. I well remember my
uncle?s marriage to his wife, selected from
other eligible ladies in this manner, which took
place between fifty and sixty years ago in the
Manchester Cathedral, then called the Old
Church. He afterwards went to Jamaica as a
missionary. This was before the abolition of
slavery in that island. These simple and pious
Christians were great believers in the practice
of Bibliomancy, which consists in resorting to
the Bible as a kind of oracle, whose words
should direct them in seasons of doubt and
perplexity. It is often called sortes Bihlica or
sortes sanctorum. It consists in choosing verses
or words of Scripture at hazard, either by
putting the finger when the eyes are shut
and the Bible is open, on the exposed leaf,
pricking the verses with a pin at random, or by
taking the first line of some particular verse
before determined upon, and then drawing
conclusions therefrom concerning the future.
This kind of divination was much used
formerly at the consecration of bishops.
Bibliomancy was prohibited under pain of ex-
communication as early as 465 a.d. by the
Council of Vannes, and in the next century the
Councils of Agde and Orleans gave their
decisions against it. It continued, however, to
prevail for many centuries afterwards. It was
introduced, it is said, into England at the time
of the Norman conquest. This custom of
appealing to the Bible became so common in
England that the superstition was denounced
from the pulpit as being forbidden by the
Divine command, ?Thou shalt not tempt
the Lord thy God.? Verbal omens are
of heathen origin. The elevation of
Severus is said to have been foretold by his
opening at Virgil?s line, In reg ere imperis
populos Romans memento, Charles I. and
Lord Falkland are both said to have obtained
remarkable responses by consulting their
Virgils before the civil war commenced. The
former opened iEneid IV. where Dido pre-
dicts a violent death to .ZEneas, while the latter
chanced upon XI. at Evander?s lamen-
tation over his son. The Puritans often used
their Bibles in the same way, and Sir Walter
Scott, in his novel of Woodstock, represents
one of his characters, a soldier of the Common-
wealth, as unwilling to ascend an upper room
in the palace of Woodstock because ?he had
consulted the Scripture that morning by way
of lot and his fortune had been to alight on
the passage, ?Eutychus fell down from
the third lift.?? It will be a surprise
to many to learn that the Rev. John
Wesley himself was much addicted at one
time to the practice of Bibliomancy, and some
of his proceedings he allowed to be determined
by lot. Thus we find it recorded in his journal,


March 10, 1739, when invited by Mr. Whit-
field to go to Bristol, that he was not forward
to do so, and he says ?perhaps a little the
less inclined to it because of the remarkable
Scripture which opened as often as we
enquired touching the consequences of this
removal. On the following day he writes :
?My journey was proposed to our society in
Fetter-lane, but my brother Charles would
scarce bear the mention of it, till appealing to
the oracles of God, he received these words as
spoken to himself ??Son of man, behold, I
take from thee the desire of thine eyes with a
stroke, yet shalt thou not mourn or weep,
neither shall thy tears run down.? Our other
brethren, however, continuing the dispute
without any probability of their coming to on e
conclusion, at length agreed to decide it
by lot. And by this it was determined I
should go. Several afterwards desiring we
might open the Bible concerning the
issue of this we did so.? The pas-
sages of Scripture opened upon are then
given. Numerous other instances are related
by Wesley in his journal which show he
often resorted to the Bible as to an oracle,
and his conduct was not unfrequently actuated
by the response given to his enquiries. I have
myself known the Scriptures used as Wesley,
his brothers, and many before and since have
used them, and we cannot be surprised that
those who believe with Dr. Candlish, that
?every word of the Bible is what it is, and
where it is, by the direct will of the Holy
Spirit,? or with Dr. Bay lee, who says of it, that
? every word, every syllable, every letter is just
what it would be had God spoken from heaven
without any human intervention,? also believe
that the Divine Spirit at all times pervades it,
and directs to suitable words those who in
faith consult its mysterious and immutable
directions. In the same confidence of perfect
reliance not long ago the Scotch cleric Bonar
assured us ?it is furnished with superhuman
virtue,? and Spurgeon that it is indeed ?a
god of books.? Perhaps the worst instances
in which lottery is resorted to are in cases where
juries cannot agree respecting their verdict;
the fate of many a prisoner has been decided
by it ?sometimes by the tossing of a coin,
? tossing? itself being but a kind of lottery.
Do judges ever decide the fate of criminals by
lot? The idea is not a new one. ?When
Pantagruel arrived at Myrelingues he found
that Judge Bridoye, after carefully considering
all the facts of a case, was accustomed to
decide it by means of dice; and Pantagruel
fully admitted the humility, piety, and im-
partiality of this method. If our judges before
pronouncing sentence were first to determine
the years to be awarded by a solemn casting of
dice the result might be as good as those
reached by the not very dissimilar system now
adopted.? By the latter remark, the author
now quoted, refers to the tendency of judges to
choose periods of imprisonment represented by
numbers which terminate in the figure five or
a cypher. In England it is remarked the
decimal unit is held in chief favor by judges,
and the question is asked, ?Do they ever
realise what it means to the man they
condemn?? ?I am, &c.,
E. P. NESBIT, Sen.
East Adelaide, June 3, 1892.
Printed at ?The Advertiser? General Printing Office, Adelaide.
