

ON
Colouring
as distinct from Tone-inflection
A lecture by
TOBIAS MATTHAY
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
36 SOHO SQUARE, OXFORD STREET, W.1
Price[?] net


A. H. SPENCER Pty. Ltd.
New, secondhand, and rake
Booksellers
86 Bourfce St., Melbourne
(The ‘Hill of Content’) Au»t.


ON COLOURING


PRINTED IN ENGLAND BY
HENDERSON AND SPALDING LTD
SYLVAN GROVE
CAMBERWELL
LONDON
S E IS


PREAMBLE
In an Additional Note to “Musical Interpretation
I alluded to the distinction between Tone-inflection and
Colouring; but I have been asked to give further details on
this point, hence the present Lecture.
T. M.
* Musical Interpretation, its haws and Principles and their Application in
Teaching and Performing. (Joseph Williams, 1913.)




COLOURING v. INFLECTION
A lecture by
TOBIAS MATTHAY
First let me remind you of one or two facts, the understand-
ing of which is a necessary preliminary to the question of
Colouring. Music consists of two Elements: the Shape
Element and the Emotion Element.
The Emotional in Music cannot be explained nor talked
about; we either feel it or we don’t—although we can
enhance our perceptions in this respect. The Shape Ele-
ment, however, can be reasoned about, and it has Laws that
can be observed and obeyed.
Shape in music implies Rhythm—and Rhythm implies
Accentuation. Now I have shown, in Musical
Interpretation * and elsewhere that musical Rhythm always
implies Movement, Progression, or Growth, in its Four
Main Aspects ; (i) the movement of the key itself in making
each sound—a down-movement of the key to that precise
place in its descent where sound begins; (2) the Group of
quick notes moving towards the next Pulse or Beat; (3) the
Phrase, moving towards its rhythmical climax near the end
of it; and, finally, (4) the Growth of these phrases into a
Whole.
(Illustrations of all these four points were then given.)
But we can only express Emotion and Shape (or Rhythm)
through Inflection; and there are only Three Forms of
Inflection possible in playing. These are:
(1) Tone-variety and Colouring ;
(2) Duration-variety, and
(3) Time-variety and Rubato,
Of these, Rubato is really the most far-reaching of all.
It is the one thing, alone, that can be fully transmitted by
* Musical Interpretation. (Joseph Williams.)


the microphone, whether applied rightly —as it sometimes
is—or wrongly, as it so often is! Indeed, we use Rubato all
day in our ordinary speech.
Let me first show you what is implied by the presence or
absence of Inflection; and how a succession of notes remains
musically meaningless unless one or more of these forms of
Expression are properly applied. I will give you two short
examples which you all know:
(The lecturer here played the first two pages of Chopin’s
Ballade in A flat, and a child’s piece, Schumann’s ‘ The
Merry Peasant.’)
So you see, even a child must never be allowed merely to
strum —he must at once be shown to use sounds as a means of
Self-expression. Even a dog, although he has but one
word available, uses that for Self-expression! What a world
of feeling he can manage to communicate through its
Inflections —Fear, Anger, Rage, Joy and Affection!
(The lecturer here imitated the inflections of a dog’s bark.)
If a mere dog can do all this with one word only, how
much easier for a child to learn to use musical sounds for
such purpose!
The application of all these three forms of Inflection come
under inflexible laws and rules which we must learn to obey
if we would be artists.
We may perhaps learn this by Intuition (through fineness
of ear and perception), but will learn it more quickly and
surely by deliberate use of our Reason , led by present-day
knowledge of the physical, physiological and musical facts,
and then transferring the knowledge thus gained to our
Subconsciousness.*
We have to teach our Subconsciousness to act and choose
rightly; and the first step towards such successful power of
judgement is to understand the Laws governing Choice, and
* As to these contrasts of Tone, Duration and Time, and the laws
determining their appropriate application, it is clear that unless the per-
former has all this literally at ‘ his fingers’ ends ’ he cannot hope to grapple
even with the beginnings of the problem of Interpretation.
Moreover, no real Self-expression (nor imitated expression) can become
possible until all such technical facility, both instrumental and musical,
has become Subconscious —and some of it actually automatic. Here
we have one of the most difficult problems for the teacher (and self-
learner) to face, not only in Music, but in all other forms of Education.


also those governing our treatment of the instrument, and
of our own muscles.*
Coming now at last to the term Colouring, we find this
term is often used quite vaguely, like most musical terms.
Some include in it all forms of expression, whatever their
nature; whilst others restrict the term (as it should be)
solely to that particular device which, in Piano playing, is
analogous to Orchestral Colouring.
It is this last aspect we are here going to consider, Colouring,
that is, as an approximation towards orchestral instrumenta-
tion in Pianoforte playing. Here, then, besides those
Inflections of tone from note to note which constantly occur
and are implied in every true performance, we must for this
broader kind of contrast keep whole phrases or sections of
the music at about the same chosen levels of tone , or tone-
quality.
Colouring therefore mainly means that, instead of using
inflections the whole way up and down, we must keep round
certain levels of tone, high up or low down or midway; and
we must keep our inflections around these contrasting tone-
levels. In thus laying out the various portions of a piece
at various planes of tone, we here, in a measure, simulate
those far greater contrasts of tone-quality which the
orchestral palette offers us. Thus:
FIG. 1
Not inflections covering the whole gamut of Tone. But,
instead, with inflections around chosen tone-levels.
Let me illustrate this point, choosing the little Intermezzo
in A, Op. 117, of Brahms. I will first play a page of it —with
a certain degree of tone-inflection, but keeping it all to one
mf plane ; and I will then repeat it, laying out the various
portions at quite different tone-levels and you will at once
• See Musical Interpretation, its Laws, etc. (Joseph Williams), and its
Supplement, The Slur and Couplet of Notes, and Musical Concentration,
and also The Visible and Invisible in Piano Playing. (The Oxford
University Press.)
f The use of different layers of tone-quality also assists us here.


see what is meant by ‘ colouring ’ in this Piano-Orchestral
sense, as distinct from mere Inflection.
(a) Played at mf level but with wide up and down inflec-
tions, and then
{h) Played orchestrally—at different tone-levels.
Successful Part-playing also depends upon this device —
of laying out the various parts at different tone or quality
levels. Obviously, all contrapuntal music needs this, but
so does more modern music where part-playing is required.
As a simple illustration, let us take Henselt’s little Wiegen-
liedchen in G flat. It serves as a good example since it is
throughout laid out in four layers of tone —the tune, the
bass, and the two middle parts must all through be kept at
their own distinctive tone-levels compared to each other.
Thus:
(The lecturer here played this piece.)
This form of colouring—or Pianoforte scoring (as it might
be called), however, should not be left to the performer, as it
so often is, even by some of the great Masters. It is indeed
the composer' s province to consider this kind of colouring,
when he is laying out his work for the chosen instrument;
yet it is clear that some composers have not in the least
realized this part of their technical duties, while others have
succeeded in so doing. Yet it is one of the main distinctions
between effective and ineffective writing for the instrument.


Beethoven, although some there are to-day who may
affect to sneer at what they suppose to be his ‘ bad Piano
writing Beethoven had a far clearer conception of this
requirement than most of the older great masters and even
many modern writers.
He realized the value of Pitch-contrasts far more than many
a later Master has done! Indeed, you can hardly turn up
a page of Beethoven without realizing the force of this side
of his technique. Take, for example, the opening of his
Sonata, Op. 90, in E minor, where we have such scoring
(or instrumentation) applied in minute details of changes of
pitch. Schumann, for one, on the contrary, seems to have
had no inkling of such possibilities. He would probably
have written these first lines of Op. 90 all of one pitch— in the
middle of the instrument!
Compare these two versions:






As another instance, of somewhat larger patches of this
kind of scoring, take the second subject of Beethoven’s
‘ Waldstein ’ Sonata, and imagine how Schumann might
have presented that —all of one pitch, and the repetition
given verbatim, thus:


Note the Melodic variation of the tune here


Do not think I am here poking fun at Schumann. I have
been an ardent Schumannite from my earliest days; and he
appeals to me now as strongly as ever; but there is no reason
why we should not learn even from the evident weaknesses
of a beloved Master’s technique.
Chopin also used the device of pitch-contrast to a con-
siderable extent. His peculiarly effective pianoforte idiom,
however, does not so much depend upon the use of this
particular device (of pitch contrast), nor upon any of the
many other contrast-resources of the instrument; but his
effectiveness is rather the result of his supreme musical
delicacy of ear , which always makes him choose (for the
Pianoforte) the most appropriate expression of his thought.
Chopin’s music, in short, is ‘ effective ’ just because of his
marvellous sense of beauty , and because of his delicate per-
ception not only of the needs of the instrument , but also of
the possibilities of the human finger using it—qualities that
have not been equalled by any other Piano composer. And
besides all this, his thought and feeling is always fragrant,
delicate, and never coarse.
Notice, as a mere matter of composing-technique, how
carefully he avoids calling attention to the worst shortcoming
of the Pianoforte—its innate percussiveness. This percussive-
ness is indeed a precious asset rhythmically —no other
instrument is so effective in this respect; yet this is a grave
fault melodically , especially when we find it so often
aggravated by the harmonies being stated in solid vertical
masses—vertical blocks, or blobs, like those of a hymn-tune,
or harmony-book exercise of the old days. Notice
how Chopin’s constant mobility of language (the horizontal
instead of vertical laying out of his harmonies) almost
persuades you and deceives you into imagining that the
Piano is a sustaining instrument! For instance, take the
simple groundwork of his B minor (first) Scherzo , and then
realize how greatly the charm of this piece arises from his
wonderfully clever horizontal placing of it on the key-
board. How differently would Brahms, for instance,
have indited the same material! A totally different language
indeed! Thus;








Mendelssohn, of course, would have omitted all or most
of these telling passing notes. Let us see how Mendelssohn
might have indited the same material—but not the same
mood ! Thus:






It is hardly to be credited nowadays that this very effective-
ness of Chopin’s, the fact of his music being so delicately
and appropriately expressed, caused him to be misunderstood
and contemned by some of the older musicians of my
student-days, to whom Chopin’s idiom was then new and
strange, and was even supposed to be ‘ ugly ’!
I remember how one of these older musicians used to speak
of Chopin as ‘ a feeble drawing-room writer ’ ! I also remem-
ber how another one, at a lecture, while commending the
E fiat Nocturne, referred to Chopin’s later masterpieces (such
as the fourth Ballade, etc.) as being ‘ puerile ’ harmonically—■
that is, harmonically childish!
Indeed, one of the foremost critics of that day publicly
lamented that Leonard Borwick was ‘ wasting his time ’
playing so ‘ ephemeral ’ a production as the B flat minor
Sonata!
Here it is well to realize that, while it is true that mere
‘ effectiveness ’ may be the sole merit of some music, never-
theless it does not follow that a work is necessarily vulgar
just because it happens to be well written for the instrument.
Effectiveness, without a Mood-message, is always poor and,
indeed, useless art; clumsiness of utterance, however, does
not necessarily hide depths of feeling and thought—such
as offered us by a Browning or a Brahms, in spite of their at
times uncouth languagel Indeed, fine thought, although un-
couthly expressed, ever remains of greater value than mere
inanities, however plausibly and expertly expressed—even
when,musically,they are quite irreproachable, like Mendels-
sohn’s music, for instance, always is! The decisive factor, in
the end, always lies in the fact whether the music, or poetry,
is a sincere product of Self-expression or not. If it is sincere,
then it is true Music, no matter whether it is expressed so
clumsily as Brahms’s often is, or whether it is expressed so
perfectly as Chopin’s invariably is. I will at the end of the
lecture read some notes on ‘ Effectiveness and Worthiness
in Music ’. But we must now pursue our main theme:
Now there has been one composer greater than any other
in this respect of Colouring. He was not even really a great
Master! But his influence on Vx&no-writing has perhaps been
greater than that of any of the really great Masters. I allude
to Franz Liszt; and there never has been a greater master
of Piano -colour resource than he! As an illustration of


his use of Pitch-contrasts, and so many other contrasting
devices, we will take as an instance his Twelfth Rhapsody,
in C sharp minor. We are apt in these days to contemn
such a piece as ‘ mere display music ’ —and perhaps it is
already old-fashioned, i.e., dated; yet these old Hungarian
folk-tunes (like all folk-tunes) are ever fresh; and as to
‘ vulgar display ’ —well, it all depends on the performer!
Such a piece, it is true, can easily be made a vehicle for
vulgarity, pure and simple; but if the particularly beautiful
tunes this Rhapsody (and some of the others) contains are
treated musically, with the spirit of reverence they so fully
deserve, then Liszt’s wonderful settings may yet give
pleasure for many years to come. In his own playing of
the Rhapsodies (when I heard him in the ’eighties) there was
then no longer any trace of the showman and mere virtuoso;
for under his fingers they appeared as finished artistic
productions, perfect and beautiful.
1 will try to give you some idea of this 12th Rhapsody —to
illustrate Liszt’s use of pitch contrasts and other true
colouring devices. You will notice he gives some ten distinct
colourings in the very first two pages alone! Thus :
(The lecturer here played the whole of No. 12 Rhapsody with
the exception of a cut near the end.)








ON EFFECTIVENESS
AND WORTHINESS IN MUSIC
Chopin was not contemned by some of the old musicians
solely because of his effectiveness; he was also misunderstood
because his music was so new in thought and in idiom— -and,
indeed, has remained so to this day. To be ‘ new ’ is always
a crime in Musical History, because it is a young art. Every
great Master in Music has had to expiate his newness. And
this , because eventually the best of us (musicians especially)
become hide-bound, and we then rage against anything and
everything that does not comfortably agree with the hard-
and-fast formulae with which we happen to have fettered
ourselves. Let us, however, be tender towards the older
musicians, let us remember that we are all of us fated to
become immobile eventually, both in intellect and emotion.
With some of us this sadness supervenes comparatively early
in life, with some later on, but it is sure to happen in the
natural course of existence —in that little swing of the
pendulum which represents the span of our individualistic
participation in the progress of the Universe.
While we are still young and nimble of mind, everything
new, striking, and surprising excites us wildly, whatever its
nature, whether good or bad. But gradually, insidiously, after
middle age, we shall find our minds gradually stiffening
like our muscles, and then, instead of the wild delight that
the excitement of mere novelty used to bring to us, we shall
first begin by questioning each novel sensation, and, still later,
perhaps find that anything and everything unusual becomes
an irksome matter; until at last we shall indignantly resent
being stirred up at all —and, of course, we shall then no
longer be able to valuate any new thought (because our own
immobility of mind will no longer allow us to adjust our
musical habits to the new circumstances) and thus the
highest power we can attain to in life will have left us! For
as Herbert Spencer has said, truly, the highest and best life
is the one that can with the greatest ease adjust itself to its
environment.


When the time comes that we are shutting the doors of
our minds, I trust we may all have the wisdom of old
Sir John Goss :
Cipriani Potter (one of the former Principals of the Royal
Academy of Music) had allowed himself to be converted by
his pupil, Arthur Sullivan, into being an ardent ‘ Schu-
mannite’,and thus had proved himself to be still youthful
in spite of his years; but when he, in turn, tried to convert
the older man, Goss, he found himself up against a wall.
But Goss had the wisdom to know himself and his
age. Instead of rampaging against this ‘ new music ’ of
Schumann’s, and trying to stem the rising tide in Schumann’s
favour, he resignedly said to Potter, ‘ No, I am unable to
enter into your enthusiasm, I cannot like this new music
but—l am not going to condemn it\ lam an old man, and
maybe it is I who am no longer able to take in the New ’.
Sullivan told us this in class, and it made a vivid impression
on me—which I hope I may remember when my days of
Shut-doors shall have arrived. They haven’t yet, I am
thankful to say!*
The moral of all this is, that we must be careful to watch
our own attitude in judging the Arts, We older ones must,
indeed, remember, that as the years roll on, the force of our
personal bias will surely grow stronger and stronger. On the
other hand, while we are still young, we must also be on our
guard, else the attraction which mere novelty and excitement
then exercises over us, may lead us to worship mere super-
ficial qualities, and even bad and make-believe Art. For
Art is not necessarily strong and great and fine just because
it is— SUCCESSFULLY UNUSUAL.
A really clever technician can always use means of effect —
stunts — to create the Unusual— provided he possess some
measure of imagination. One can, indeed, turn out the
‘ successfully unusual ’ to order , but we must not be misled
by such Advertisement (or Poster) Music.
* Indeed, I find that when really new and great music is presented
(such as the Bax Concerto-Septet or Bloch String Quartet, recently
heard), that I am just as much moved by these true Master-pieces, as
I might have been fifty years ago! Possibly more so, since the
piled-up experiences enable one better to grasp what has been accom-
plished, modern idioms and all. Certainly, as the years roll on, one
becomes more intolerant of make-believe music, but one has the com-
pensation that the value of the older master-pieces is found to grow ever
greater and greater!


Here we shall see, as I maintained a moment ago, that while
thought and feeling sincerely expressed always deserves the
name of Music —although it may happen to be ‘ effective ’,
and although it may even happen to be new and strange —
nevertheless it does not follow that it is of high value. High
value depends on the nature of the thought or feeling
expressed; it depends on the nobility of the emotions that
have prompted the music into existence. Herein lies
the power of the really great Masters of Music. Not
only do they try sincerely to express what they feel, but over
and above this, the thoughts and feelings expressed are
also of a high order of mind. You will find that the emotions
expressed by the really great Masters are not trivial relations
of petty, private personal feelings—although even Beethoven
and Brahms are occasionally found ‘ whining ’. No, the great
Masters are great because they are so often found dealing
Mth emotions arising from a perception of that which is
(in a sense) outside of us. Indeed, they bring home to
us the sense of the Universe itself !
It is particularly so with ‘ the three B.V — Bach, Beethoven ,
and Brahms —that we so often find messages of this nature;
but the other great Masters also reach this height at times.
We feel elevated, ennobled, by an understanding and
understood performance of really great works, because we feel
that we have been brought into nearer contact with the Ulti-
mate in Nature —the Something All-pervading outside of us,
and yet part of us. The great ones teach us, and help us
indeed to the highest perception of which we are capable,
but which perception, nevertheless, is so often obscured for
us by those specially professing (but failing) to teach it,
through the eidolons, dogmas and formulas of the Churches!
However, the days of this kind of Obscuration are now
happily past!
CODA
I think what I have said and shown you has made clear the
important distinction between mere Inflection and the
broad effects of True Colouring. Keep these distinctions in
view whenever you are teaching, practising or playing, and
it will better all your work!
But always remember, here as everywhere else, that all
rules of expression—all those rules and laws which I have


tried to make plain—are but a Means to an end, and that
such means must never be applied for their own sake, or
for your sake, or others’ sake, but must only be applied to
make clearer the Mood, the Music-sense of Shape and
Emotion, and the sense of the Beautiful—expressed through
Rhythmical Shape.
In short, never try to do, but always try to see!


Educational Works for Pianoforte by
TOBIAS MATTHAY
THE ACT OF TOUCH IN ALL ITS DIVERSITY*
With 22 Illustrations. Bvo, pp. xlii +328. 10s. 6 d.
‘ When Mr. Tobias Matthay first published his work, The Act of Touch, in 1903, it was
received with very mixed feelings by the musical profession. Many scoffed at the mere
fact that an acknowledged expert required some 300 pages of closely printed matter
to explain how to play the pianoforte; others regarded the book as “ a one-man’s fad ”
which would have its day and be gone; others indignantly denied that anything could be
wrong with existing methods, which had produced a Liszt, a Rubinstein, a Madame
Schumann. But the wise, even if unable to grasp a tithe of the new gospel at first,
recognized the fact that here was something giving food for thought and experiment.
‘ And now? The “ one-man's fad ” has within ten short years altered radically the
whole system of modem pianoforte teaching. The Matthay Principles, Matthay Doctrines,
Matthay Methods, call them what one may, are known the world over, and probably
never before in art has an almost world-wide revolution been accomplished in so short a
space of time. Truly of art did Schumann say, “ Es ist des Lemens kein Ende.” ’ — Musical
Times (1913).
THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF PIANOFORTE
PLAYING*f Being an extract from the Author’s ‘ the act
of touch Designed for School use, and with two additional
chapters —‘ Directions for Learners ’ and ‘ Advice to Teachers
Crown Bvo. 4s. 6 d.
* Italian Translation: S. T. E. A 7., Turin.
t German Translation: Kahnt Gebrueder, Leipzig.
COMMENTARIES ON THE TEACHING OF PIANO-
FORTE TECHNIQUE. A Supplement to ‘ the act of
touch ’ and ‘ first principles ’. Crown Bvo. 2 s. 6 d.
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., 39 Paternoster Row, London, E.C.4.
RELAXATION STUDIES. In the Muscular Discrimina-
tions required for Touch, Agility and Expression in Piano-
forte Playing. Cloth bound (150 pages, 410), with numerous
Illustrations and Musical Examples; with a Portrait of
the Author, 410. 7 s. fid.
BOSWORTH & CO., Heddon Street, Regent Street, W.
THE PRINCIPLES OF FINGERING, LAWS OF
PEDALLING, etc. An Extract from above. 410. is. 6 d.
BOSWORTH & CO.
ON MEMORIZING and playing from memory and on
Practice generally.'* 2 s. net.
THE SLUR OR COUPLET of Notes in all its variety, its
Interpretation and Execution. A Lecture: A Continuation
of Musical Interpretation. With 96 Musical Examples.
45. net.
THE ACT OF MUSICAL CONCENTRATION. A Lecture:
The function of Analysis in playing. * 2 s. net.
- THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE in Pianoforte Technique:
A Summary of the Laws of Technique. Bs. 6 d. net.
AN EPITOME from same (for School use). 35. 6 d. net.
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS, 36 Soho Square, London, W.l.
Sole Agents for U.S.A.: CARL FISCHER, INC., 56 Cooper Square, New York.


THE FOREARM ROTATION PRINCIPLE: ITS APPLICA-
TION AND MASTERY. 4to, with illustrations.
2 s. 6 d. net.
Sole Agents for Great Britain and Colonies: JOSEPH WILLIAMS, 32 Great Portland
Street, London, W.
Sole Agents for U.S.A.: THE BOSTON MUSIC CO. (Schirmer), 26 West Street, Boston,
Mass.
♦THE CHILD’S FIRST STEPS IN PIANO PLAYING.
Written for Children, but also for Adults as an Introduction
to their teaching. 410, with Illustrations. 3s. net.
Sole Agents for Great Britain and Colonies; JOSEPH WILLIAMS, 32 Great Portland
Street, London, W.
Sole Agents for U.S.A.: THE BOSTON MUSIC CO. (Schirmer), 26 West Street, Boston,
Mass.
♦THE PIANIST’S FIRST MUSIC MAKING
The Music Material to accompany above, by Felix Swinstead
and Tobias Matthay. (Anglo-French Series.) In Three
Books, Books I and 11, 3 5.; Book 111, 2 s. 6 d.
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS, 36 Soho Square, London, W.l.
♦THE NINE STEPS TOWARDS FINGER INDIVIDUALI-
ZATION. A supplement to ‘ the pianist’s first music
making ’ and ‘ the child’s first steps ’; and Summary of
Technique, (Anglo-French Series.) 410. ir.
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS, 36 Soho Square, London, W.L
* These three together are in place of the now out-of-date ‘ Tutor ’.
DOUBLE-THIRD SCALES: THEIR FINGERING AND
PRACTICE. Practice Card No. i. is, 6d. net.
Sole Agents for Great Britain and Colonies: JOSEPH WILLIAMS, 32 Great Portland
Street, London, W.
Sole Agents for U.S.A.: ARTHUR P. SCHMIDT, 120 Boylston Street, Boston, Mass.
MUSICAL INTERPRETATION
Its Laws and Principles, and their application in Teaching
and Performing. Crown Bvo, with Illustrations, pp. xiv+l63.
7 s. 6 d. net.
Sole Agents for Great Britain and Colonies: JOSEPH WILLIAMS, 32 Great Portland
Street, London, W.
Sole Agents for U.S.A. : THE BOSTON MUSIC CO. (Schirmer), 26 West Street, Boston,
Mass.
THE T. M. P. S. PRACTICE TRIANGLE AND CARD
Exercises for Rotational Freedom, Finger Extension and
Freeing. Triangle, 75. 6 d.; Card, is. 6 d.
Sole Agents: JOSEPH WILLIAMS and THE BOSTON MUSIC CO., as above.
THE PROBLEMS OF AGILITY
(Anglo-French Series) u. 3 d.
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS, 36 Soho Square, London, W.L
ON METHOD IN TEACHING: A LECTURE
(Anglo-French Series.) 31.
MUSICAL CONCENTRATION: A LECTURE
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS, 36 Soho Square, London, W.l.
2 S.




