

► ,'.f


MAP bHOWINfl
THE LINE OF
ST
E. A
M COMMUNICATION WITH INDIA, by the. cape
OF GOOD
HOPE
4(
? % i
. Ftvftfu
/ "X 1 "
/ Id
1 £f*
/ K A I K
'Slice
-
$
W M:
o
-*
’ / H”
A
C 7
S
70 rsc
I A
/^ V '7 *&
'iO
Av.ores or
tV r .t7j,-n “/X
fa
Tttnrrt.
: ff i
'■‘~uMr*d r.'y <t J
nary 7 1 J
*=■ ■»,- 0
7
/C
¥1
'AW >s
KA * j
7«
\VV
', \ *w
1 \
V j UJ
o
\ \
xv '*
V X 'S
■>% v
'■ y . L»
/
T>
( :X
Htn do<
X—
J v\ tx. 1 i tvS
C« 1 c* 4 «
X
X
d
J ] <
r
CHINA r
Cape Verdi
L D * °5 t
<•
s
~^K
A x
M Htrm,hajy
Wad rad
■? T 1
C.Offnonjrv
,.'■
.
n
r ' 7*vtrtl d* (WZ#
<
V
K /
|V j ■
Z- / y
!&5 .A
v
o
§1
ri
Kqualor
Jifalchve,7f"\', ••'
J xS. j^BomeaS^Q
£ /
L
o d.&Mtn*sronl q r ,\
"k •
»Taw
%
\
>
JttJ
/
J N X>
JeycheUe /f •:
Comoro I- .-* *•
i
1 A... iX" O.
Chores J:. ■
Jiazclr of"JVazaretfv
C 1:’, A N d
-»<a»
2o
' C .? f . viva
airninirf
mII fapai
2
*• SeUdanha &%
C.of Good Rope
-
r-fi/
J / £/
Bay
4
0< e
0 6
0 ft
7<
7^
jdixb lislie d
Zy
Order of
the Directors.
j.
rTocJ.Jyic&r £o otvf fo<-een
£.
*


C OMMUNIC AT I 0 N
TO INDIA,
IN LARGE STEAM-SHIPS,
THE CAPE OF GOOD-HOPE.
PRINTED BY ORDER OF
THE INDIA STEAxM-SHIP COMPANY,
AND ADDRESSED
TO THE BRITISH PUBLIC.
SIR JOHN ROSS, C. 8., &c.,
*
CAPTAIN IN THE ROYAL NAVY.
LONDON:
PUBLISHED BY SMITH AND ELDER, CORNHILL.
1838.


LONDON :
PRINTED BY SAMUEL BENTLEY,
Dorset Street, Fleet Street.


STEAM-NAVIGATION
TO INDIA,
THE CAPE OF GOOD-HOPE.
On my return from a voyage of discovery,
in the year 1819, to that part of Scotland
where steam-navigation was making the
most rapid progress, my attention was, as
a naval officer, naturally turned to the
wonderful and important revolution which
Steam would make in naval warfare and in
commerce ; and being desirous of making
myself master of a subject so intimately
connected with the profession to which I
have the honour to belong, I made many
voyages between Greenock and Liverpool,
Leith and London, for the express purpose
of obtaining a perfect practical knowledge
of the machinery, as well as of the tactics,
peculiar to this new system of navigation,


having previously studied the various
works published on the subject.
Being at length convinced of the neces-
O O
sity which every naval officer must be un-
der, during a future war, of acquiring a
considerable knowledge of that locomotive
power, in order to qualify himself for the
additional duty he must be required to per-
form, I ventured to publish my opinions,
in a letter addressed to the late Mr. Black-
wood, in April 1826, under the signature
of“ * * Captain R.N.”—My object in this
letter was to draw the attention of my bro-
ther officers to that new and important part
of their profession; and although I have
reason to believe that the step I had taken
was not approved of by his late Majesty’s
ministers then in office, who wished to
keep secret the value and progress of
the naval steam-engine, I have had the
satisfaction to learn that my publication
roused many of my brethren from that
state of apathy and indifference to the sub-
ject, which had been the baleful conse-
quence of the ridicule that had been cast


on the supposition that steam might one
day supersede every former mode of war-
fare, and that they had been thereby led
to inquire into the subject; and I need
scarcely add that the most beneficial ef-
fects have been the result. My letter,
which produced two editions of that num-
ber of Blackwood’s Magazine, was, at the
request of my naval friends, subsequently
printed as a pamphlet and distributed
among them.
In 1827, I published a Treatise on Navi-
gation by Steam, as applicable to commerce
and maritime warfare, in which, after giv-
ing an account of the steam-engine in terms
which I conceived would be most easily
understood by naval men, and with which
I deemed it absolutely necessary they
should be acquainted, I proceeded to give
the results of my numerous experiments,
my conclusions therefrom, and a system of
naval tactics, which, though necessarily in-
complete, or capable of improvement, since
that period, is the only one yet extant; and
a second edition having been sold, I have


reason to think it may have met with the
approbation of the public;— and I have no
hesitation in declaring, that if the regula-
tions for the government of steam-vessels
therein recommended had been enforced
by the Legislature, many lives and much
property would have been saved since that
time.
Having had the honour, previously to
1799, of serving four voyages in the ships
belonging to the Honourable East India
Company, during which I visited the three
Presidencies, my attention was naturally
directed to communication with India by
steam. The state of the machinery at that
time being such as to preclude the possi-
bility of carrying fuel sufficient for a long
voyage, it was evident that the route by the
Red Sea must be the first tried, and I ac-
cordingly recommended what has since
been partially put in practice.
But I considered steam to be at that
time in its infancy, and I foretold that the
day would come when the old route round
the Cape of Good-Hope would obtain a


decided preference. With this view I pre-
sented the model of a ship to the Honour-
able Company, such as I supposed would
eventually be adopted, in which steam is
only, of course, recommended to be used
in tropical calms, until a further improve-
ment.
Since that period, 1827, I have waited
with much anxiety for the long-expected
era which has at length arrived; and the
invention of the ingenious Mr. Collier
having put the question beyond a doubt, I
have been induced again to take up my
pen.
It is here necessary, for the information
of the public, to advert critically to the
several publications on the important sub-
ject of steam-navigation which have, since
the appearance of my work, emanated from
the pens of men well known in the scientific
world, officers of the Royal and Indian
navy, and others who have taken an in-
terest in the success of a general steam-
communication with distant countries ; and
I must entreat these gentlemen, when they


find any discrepancy between my asser-
tions and those which they have made,
that they will not attribute such difference
of opinion to disrespect, or want of cour-
tesy ; but, considering that our objects are
the same, namely, the good of our country
and the advancement of science, they will
believe that my views and opinions originate
from no personality or prejudice, but from
a conviction that they may promote the
ultimate success of a great undertaking by
putting the public in possession of more
full information on a side of the question
which has not been fully or fairly set be-
fore them.
The first publication I shall notice is
that of J. H. Wilson, Esq. commander N.I.
This intelligent officer was the first, and
for some years the only steam-navigator
in the Red Sea, having made four suc-
cessive voyages between Bombay and Suez,
in the Hugh Lindsay, a steam-ship built
of teak, at Bombay, in 1829, of 411 tons,
according to a plan sent from England.
She had two engines of eighty-horse


power, made by Maudsley, and was origi-
nally intended as a vessel of war.
Captain Wilson gives an interesting ac-
count of the winds and weather prevalent
in the Red Sea, and between the coasts of
India and Arabia, setting forth in the
clearest manner the numerous difficulties
arising from the ever-varying state of the
winds and currents in the former, and the
monsoons in the latter; and then furnishes
an accurate account of the various har-
bours (all of which have some objections),
as stations for coal-depots on the different
parts of the coast in these unfrequented
regions; also, two distinct plans for com-
munication by the Red Sea between Eng-
land and Bombay, with descriptions of
the proper vessels and machinery to be
employed on that service. To this he
adds a faithful journal of the different
voyages he made. And from a passage in
the fourth page, it appears he had never
anticipated the possibility of steam-com-
munication being established by the way
of the Cape of Good Hope. But the


most interesting part of this pamphlet is
contained in the supplementary observa-
tions ; in which the writer justly exposes
the fallacy of Mr.Waghorn’s assertions, and
ridicules the proposition of making voyages,
with advantage , against a south-west mon-
soon, when a steam-vessel would have to
propel near three thousand miles without
stopping her engine, against a strong wind
and heavy sea, as well as a lee-current.
He maintains, by a very clear argument,
the absurdity of drawing any comparison
between steamers in Europe and those em-
ployed between Bombay and Suez; and
shows in a satisfactory manner that it is
far more easy to cross the Bay of Biscay
than to make a passage between Bombay
and Bab-El-Mandeb against the south-west
monsoon, because the wind in the Bay of
Biscay is seldom directly against the ship,
and never remains long at south, but gene-
rally veers to the westward, when the
steam-ship might make some use of sails,
and have the sea on the beam instead
of right a-head. He refers to the expe-


dition of Colonel Chesney, which he calls
a failure, but which is, at any rate, subject
to the same objections as the Red Sea
route, and therefore need not be referred
to by me.
But I must here inform the public
that Captain Wilson was writing in the
absence of all knowledge of the very great
improvements which have taken place in
the boiler, and in the construction of
engines, which obviate entirely the objec-
tions he has raised to the performance
of a long voyage. He has, indeed, clearly
shown that the communication by the Red
Sea can never pay its expenses, or be of
any use to commerce, while the vessels
he recommends are unfit for warlike pur-
poses, compared to those of a much larger
size ; and he advocates the continuation of
that route only from the supposition that
steam would never improve so as to make
the route by the Cape of Good Hope prac-
ticable.
It is true, indeed, that since Captain
Wilson published his pamphlet, a voyage


has been made against the monsoon to
Suez from Bombay ; but it is admitted, in
evidence given by Captain Brucke, that time
would he saved , as well as the wear and tear
of the vessel and machinery, if the ship
went from Bombay to Point de Galle, and
crossed from thence to Bab-El-Mandeb,
during the south-west monsoon ; and that
the average time of letters arriving in
England would be sixty days ! By the last
accounts, the Berenice, when she had
steamed against the monsoon about eight
hundred and fifty miles, had the misfor-
tune to break the main shaft of the pad-
dle-wheels, and was consequently obliged
to return to Bombay. And it is evident,
that if any accident happens to the engine
when on a passage during the monsoon,
the vessel has no alternative but to return,
as to sail against it is utterly impossible;
whereas, if such an accident were to
happen to the engine of a large steamer
going by the way of the Cape, at any
period of her voyage she could proceed
under sail just as well as any other ship
in the merchant service.


The next publication, which appeared
in 1834, is by Lieutenant McDonald,
R. N. an enterprising officer who laud-
ably devotes his time to the acquirement
of useful knowledge, and who seems to
have been awakened to the necessity of
making himself perfect in that branch
of his profession which is now admitted
to be essential for every officer. He gives
a brief account of his voyage to India
in the Vansittart, and of his journeys
to various parts of India, and at length to
Bombay, where he embarked in the Hugh
Lindsay for Suez, which he reached in
thirty-two days. As his opinions are ex-
actly the same as Captain Wilson’s, who
still commanded that vessel, I need not
repeat them; and his statements, w hich
were given in evidence before a committee
of the House of Commons, go to show an
intelligent officer labouring under a want
of information of the real state and pro-
gress of steam machinery. He is also de-
cidedly of opinion that the steamers by
the Red Sea will never pay their expenses,


and, as a commercial speculation, will be
utterly unprofitable.
The year 1837 has been fruitful in pam-
phlets on the same subject, no less than
four having made their appearance. The
first I shall notice is that of Dr. Lardner,
whose name is well known in the scientific
circles, from whose labours much was ex-
pected. Having been present at the
meeting of the General Association at
Bristol, where he delivered a lecture on
steam communication wdth America, I am
not surprised at his advocating the course
of communication to India in the manner
he has done. His deductions were made
from the then state of steam navigation,
both as regards the size of the vessels, the
state of the boilers and engines, and the
consequent quantity of fuel necessary;
but these conclusions are now superseded
by the late improvements, which he had
not even anticipated, and by the increase
in the size of the steam-ships. While he
has much underrated the various objec-
tions to the route by the Red Sea, he has


described the advantages in a manner that
cannot be borne out, and which have been
so completely exposed in a more recent
publication as to render it unnecessary for
me to enter into the subject; I shall, there-
fore, only recommend its perusal as con-
taining much useful information respect-
ing the expenses and regulations necessary
in the equipment and navigation of steam-
ships. But the distances between various
places are in general very erroneously
stated, and comparatively with the route
round the Cape of Good Hope, calculated
to mislead the reader.
Captain Melville Grindlay, a gentleman
who has taken great interest in the com-
munication with India, has followed in the
same wake, and, like his predecessors, has
taken it always for granted that the voyage
by the Cape must be entirely abandoned;
he has, therefore, bestowed all his labour
on the best manner of accomplishing the
object by the Red Sea and Mediterranean,
and provided that such route was the only
one that could be continued, his views on


the subject are well worth adoption. The
credit, however, of establishing the present
line of communication in that direction is
mainly due to the exertions of Mr. Wag-
horn, whose perseverance and activity,
combined with the extreme anxiety of the
inhabitants of India, may be said to have
induced the Government and the Ho-
nourable East India Company to lend
their powerful aid; but it is quite absurd
to imagine, that the communication by
that line can ever be of any service to
either, far less that it will ever pay half
the expenses. The Government and the
Honourable Company, whenever they have
despatches of any importance, will and
must continue to send them by a courier
entirely overland, who will, in peace, arrive
in India many days sooner than any steam
communication; and in war time, when
the courier cannot be permitted to pass,
the route by Egypt and the Red Sea
will be cut off also, and the Cape voyage
must be at last resorted to. It is of
the highest importance therefore that the


communication by way of the Cape of Good
Hope should be established, if possible, as,
in all the publications I have mentioned,
it is admitted that, if found practicable, it
would be the best. The publication of
the two last-mentioned pamphlets called
forth a counter-statement from Mr. John
Seaward, an intelligent and well-informed
civil engineer, who had devoted much time
to the subject, and had previously pub-
lished a plan for a communication with
India by way of the Cape, for a private
company, which he maintained would en-
sure profit even in the unimproved state
of steam machinery, but which did not
induce subscribers to come forward, pro-
bably from the interest in that object not
having been awakened as it subsequently
was. This gentleman, after more mature
deliberation, and after having compared
most impartially the different routes pro-
posed, has clearly demonstrated that the
preference should be given to the route by
the Cape, although he was still in profound
ignorance of the important improvements


which have since taken place, consequent-
ly his outlay and expenditure far exceeds
what is actually necessary in the plan
which shall be hereafter proposed. He
writes in the expectation that Govern-
ment, and the Honourable East India Com-
pany, will abandon the present unfruitful
and ineffective method of communication,
and adopt that which is so evidently more
beneficial in every point of view; and in
the manner of constructing, equipping,
and navigating the ships which he
proposes, the reader will find much
valuable information. In his distances
from England to India he has erred on
the safe side, having given them above
four hundred miles more than they are;
and all his other calculations are com-
pletely within the truth ; so that the reader
is in no instance deceived by their perusal.
He proceeds to point out, in strong but
respectful terms, the erroneous statements
of his predecessors; and concludes with
an ingenious table, and an explanation of
it, which it is unnecessary to repeat, as


being totally superseded by the plan
which I am about to describe.
But before proceeding further, it may be
proper to state, that the establishment of
a direct communication with India, such as
1 now lay before the public, whether con-
sidered in a commercial, political, or na-
tional point of view, possesses a degree
of importance which far exceeds every
other patriotic undertaking on record.
To the commercial world, when it is re-
collected that eight millions sterling is
the annual amount of trade (as appears
by official returns) to the Presidencies of
Madras and Bengal, and that probably
four millions more may be added for the
Cape, Mauritius, Bombay, China, &c.; and
when the vast importance to the mer-
chant is considered, of his goods appearing
in the market in the short space of fifty-two
days, accompanied with his correspondence,
it must be evident that there are sufficient
inducements for the enterprize; and if it
can be shown and proved, that the passage
to India, with a monthly cargo of five hun-


dred tons, besides passengers and mails,
can be accomplished in so short a period
of time, there can be little doubt that the
speculation will be profitable.
Again, in a political point of view, it
cannot be questioned but that Government
will most assuredly look on the establish-
ment of seven ships of 1200 tons each
as a most effective and valuable nursery
for a class of officers and men whose
services, in the event of war, would be of
the highest importance ; while steam-ships
of such a size and description, w r ould be
an addition to our naval force, of which
the Government could avail itself with de-
cisive effect. And when we reflect that
there is a manifest disposition on the part
of rival powers to wrest from Great Bri-
tain the dominion of the sea, and that our
advancement in the abstruse science of
steam-navigation, as regards the officers of
the royal navy, has not kept pace with
our neighbours, who (particularly the
northern powers) have spared neither
pains nor expense in the instruction of the


rising generation, it must be evident to all
that the projected enterprise merits every
encouragement.
Lastly, in a national point of view, the
extreme anxiety universally expressed, both
in England and India, on this important
subject, is an undeniable proof of the in-
tense interest with which it is regarded by
the public, and of the advantages which
both countries would justly expect, com-
mercial communication between England
and India being shortened by more than
one half the time now expended in a
voyage in sailing-vessels round the Cape.
The cadet who leaves the country as a
boy, and the student who leaves the col-
lege for India just as he reaches the
age of manhood, will no longer so deeply
regret the separation from his parents, and
from all that is dear to him in his native
land, because, besides a very much short-
ened correspondence, he will have the
prospect of paying a visit to his relations
in a six-months leave of absence! The
anxious parent, and the esteemed or be-


loved friend, will no longer despair of
ever again beholding the objects of their
affection. And when we remember that
there are few who have not friends in
India, the solicitude for a steam com-
munication not obnoxious to interruption,
which has been so fully and sincerely ma-
nifested, cannot excite surprise.
It may be insisted on (by those who
look at the map of the world without
reflection), that the route by the Red Sea
appears the most advisable for a steam-
communication ; but when they are in-
formed of the many difficulties which must
be surmounted, such as changing from
one vessel to another, crossing a desert
where baggage must be limited and inse-
cure, the intricacy of the navigation, the
effects of the monsoon, and the inferiority
of the vessels, they will soon perceive that
the shortest distance will in the end be
the longest in time; and when they re-
flect that friends and correspondence
have to pass through a district annually
visited by the plague, and that they are


consequently subjected to quarantine after
arrival in England or India, they must
yield to truth; and the perseverance which
has been so pertinaciously shown in the
continuation of that dangerous and unpro-
fitable route, can only be regarded as an
additional proof of their natural anxiety to
keep alive, at any hazard, that warmth of
feeling and affection so worthy of respect.
On the ground of humanity, therefore,
the projected enterprise also claims, and
justly deserves the gratitude and counte-
nance of the nation; and there can be no
doubt that every reasonable assistance will
be afforded by her Majesty’s Government
and the Honourable East India Company,
whose liberality is proverbial, and who
have both given proofs that they are dis-
posed to encourage an undertaking which
must carry along with it the best wishes
for its success from every party, and of
every rank in society. It is true, that the
Government and the East India Company
have, at a great expense, established a
communication by way of the Mediter-


ranean and Red Sea—not that it could
ever be of the smallest benefit to them, or
that they supposed it could ever be made
a profitable or a permanent concern; but
it was to mark their respect for the popu-
lar feeling of the time by a laudable in-
stance of their usual liberality, the route
to India by way of the Cape of Good
Hope having been at that period by com-
mon consent given up as hopeless. When
it is a notorious fact, that the Honourable
Company continue to send despatches of
importance, by an overland courier, in far
less time than would be occupied by any
steam communication, and at a compara-
tively trifling cost, it must be obvious that
the route by the Red Sea is not only of
no benefit to them, but is an additional
annual and troublesome expense; while
it cannot be denied, that the commercial
route must be generally advantageous to
merchants, and, for reasons already no-
ticed, be of the utmost consequence to
the nation at large. It may be here stated,
that the four vessels which they have


constructed, and are now employing be-
tween Bombay and Suez, would answer
admirably as branch packets from the
Grand Central Station at Point de Galle
to the three Presidencies.
It is manifest that the great object of a
direct communication to India cannot be
made by the means hitherto employed on
shorter distances; but it has been fully
ascertained, that ships of a large size have
decided advantages over small ones, their
capacities being far greater in proportion,
while their momentum in overcoming the
winds and waves, by its vis inertice, is in a
far less degree impeded by their oppo-
sition.
In these assertions I am fully borne out
by the Report of the Bristol Committee
on the subject of Steam Navigation, of
which the following is an extract :
“ It appears that the increase of ton-
nage beyond a certain amount, say five
hundred tons, does not require increase of
power at the same ratio that it does below
that amount: my own observation, to-


gether with inferences drawn from above,
lead me to believe that a vessel of twelve
hundred tons, modelled on the present
improved principles, and propelled by en-
gines of three-hundred-horse power, would
contend much better against the elements,
and go as fast as a vessel of six hundred
tons and two-hundred-horse-power of the
same, build.”
It has also been fully ascertained that
the expense of constructing, equipping,
and navigating a large steam-ship is
not near so great in proportion as a
small one, while her capacity to carry
extra fuel and cargo is infinitely greater.
The safety and comfort for cargo and pas-
sengers are in a still greater degree efficient
and superior; and, in short, I am confi-
dent, when the improvements have been
explained, and when the proofs of their
efficacy are fairly laid before the public,
there will not be a doubt in the mind of
the most sceptical on the success of this
patriotic enterprise.
1 shall now proceed to demonstrate the


facts on which the undertaking has been
founded. My first object was to ascertain
the safety of the boiler to be used; for it
appeared to me that in so long a voyage
it was absolutely necessary that its ex-
plosion, from whatever cause, should be
put beyond a possibility. I had, indeed,
seen several beautiful and effectual me-
thods of preventing that calamity, one of
which was invented by the Earl of Bal-
carras; but it was possible that something
accidentally thrown on the apparatus
would destroy the effect, and each of the
others had some such objection. The simpli-
city of Mr. Collier's invention of a breath-
ing-pipe, wdiich will be hereafter described,
has, however, put an end to every ap-
prehension; and it is now proved to be
impossible that the neglect, ignorance, or
malevolence of the engineer, or of any
individual on board, can cause an explo-
sion or bursting of the boiler; it is, more-
over, secure even from accident, and
I have no doubt that the public will
soon insist that this principle, which


can be applied to any boiler, shall become
general.
The next desirable, if not so highly neces-
sary, object, was the diminution of fuel, and
of the size and the weight of the boiler,
in proportion to what has been hitherto
employed. In this Mr. Collier has been
triumphantly successful; but for its de-
scription I must refer the reader to
the appended specification, drawings, and
testimonials of its performance, and pro-
ceed to submit to the public the experi-
ments which I have personally witnessed
and assisted at.
On the 26th of June 1837, I went,
accompanied by Professor Brande, Dr.
Ritchie, and other scientific gentlemen,
to prove the comparative generation of
steam upon a boiler of twenty-five-
horse-power on Mr. Collier's construc-
tion. A hundred and twelve pounds of
coal were weighed out, and the steam
was raised from cold water to working
power, or 4 lbs. pressure to the inch, in
forty-five minutes by this quantity of coal,


the contents of the boiler being four hun-
dred gallons.
The second experiment was to prove
the perfection of the safety-pipe, the in-
vention of Mr. Collier, who held down the
common valve bv a lever until the steam-
•/
power was raised to 6f lbs. to the inch;
at which point the water in the boiler
instantly rushed up the safety-pipe, and,
descending the funnel, extinguished the
fire. The altitude of this pipe was 12 feet
6 inches from the surface of the water in
the boiler, and was acted upon solely by
atmospheric pressure. The efficacy and
simplicity of this invention was evident to
all; and when we consider that it was
totally out of the power of the engineer
to interfere with it, either by accident or
design, and that it could not be prevented
from acting, it must be manifest to the
public that a very great desideratum has
been accomplished, and that passengers
may venture on board a steam-ship fitted
with the safety-pipe of Mr. Collier in per-
fect confidence that no explosion can pos-
sibly take place.


A few days after the above-mentioned
experiments, the same gentlemen at-
tended for the purpose of determining the
comparative saving of coal in the gene-
ration of steam by the same boiler. Ac-
cordingly the fire, which had been banked
down with small coal, was broken up
and drawn forward. In eight minutes and
a half, the steam was up at a pressure of
4 lbs. to the inch, between which and
5 lbs. it was kept during the whole time
of the experiment, nine hours and seven-
teen minutes ; at the expiration of which,
with an expenditure of 872 lbs. of coal,
it evaporated 836 gallons of water, which
establishes that T 043 lbs. of coal was
used in the evaporation of one gallon,
or 10 lbs. of water. The boiler was fed
from the jacket which surrounded the fun-
nel, and which was supplied by means of
a forcing-pump from the well at its natu-
ral temperature. This experiment was
satisfactory to all present, whose testi-
monials will be found in the Appendix.
These experiments were repeated with


the same results. It was also manifest
that the boiler occupied much less space
than any other ; that the steam was gene-
rated from the boiler’s exposing a greater
surface of metal to the fire, and by the
radiation of heat from the exterior being
prevented by the surrounding jacket, be-
tween which and the boiler there was an
excellent non-conducting composition, that
likewise added materially to the safety of
the ship and the comfort of every one on
board. All these circumstances being
u
theoretically and personally proved on
shore, it remained to determine whether
this invention was equally applicable to
steam-ships. The results of which are
given in the following Report.
Report of Trials made on board the City
of Glasgow Steam-ship, to determine the
comparative efficacy of Steam-boilers in-
vented and constructed by Mr. E. H.
Collier, civil engineer.
The City of Glasgow steam-packet, of 283
tons, built at Greenock by Messrs. Scott


and Co., and supplied with engines by Mr.
David Napier of Glasgow, of 56 horse-
power each, and a pair of boilers on the
old plan, had been purchased by the Com-
mercial Steam Navigation Company, and
employed carrying goods and passengers
on various stations ; and her old boilers
being worn out, it was determined to re-
place them with the pair of boilers on Mr.
Collier’s construction, which had been suc-
cessfully tried onboard her Majesty’s steam-
vessel Meteor, on a voyage to Lisbon, and
returned to the inventor, principally be-
cause he could not repair some damage
they had received in the short time allowed,
and make some alterations and improve-
ments which could not conveniently be
done on the spot. These boilers, with only
one out of several improvements, were,
according to agreement, put on board the
City of Glasgow, principally to try their
comparative efficacy in the unimproved
state, as time could not be allowed to com-
plete the additions or make new boilers.


The following are the circumstances under
which the trials were made:—
Ist. Space occupied, 9 ft. high.
The old boilers, each 18 ft. by 15 ft. by 9 ft.=27o
Collier’s boilers, each 10 ~ by 13 „ by 9 ft.=l3o
Collier’s boilers smaller than Napier’s by 140 feet,
which is 90 feet less than one-half the space occupied
by the old boilers, while the quantity of water contained
was about one-third.
2dly. The engines which had been supposed to be 50
horse power each, were found to be 56, while the boilers
were only 50 horse power each, and were therefore six
horse power each under the proportion.
3dly. The engines being newly repaired and set up,
could not work so well as if they had been tried for a
few days.
4thly. The vessel was not coppered, her copper having
been taken off.
sthly. The jackets surrounding the boilers w ? ere
stuffed with a moist composition, which, until dry, would
act as condensers.
6thly. The paddle-wheels were of an increased size.
It is evident that under these disadvan-
tages, if the vessel was impelled with the
same velocity as formerly, it would com-
pletely prove the superiority of Mr. Col-
liers boilers even in the unimproved state.


The first experiment was made on Thurs-
day the 11th January. The weather was
extremely unfavourable, as there was a
constant fall of snow, and the overflow of
water in the jacket of the funnel falling on
the steam-chest, was much against the suc-
cess of the trial, as well as the wet condi-
tion of the non-conductor which surround-
ed the boiler. However, with all the
abovementioned disadvantages, the engine
made for a considerable time twenty-four
revolutions, which (from what 1 could
learn) was within one of her usual rate with-
out a cargo, and which was fully as much
as could be reasonably expected.
The second experiment w r as made on
the 14th and 15th current, on a voyage to
Southampton. In addition to the disad-
vantages already named, the ship was
deeply laden with iron and sugar, and her
draft of was consequently nine feet
ten inches aft, and nine feet two inches for-
ward, being exactly two feet more than on
the first trial; and much floating ice being
on the Thames, the water supplied to the


boiler was at a very low temperature, and
the deck covered with frozen snow, which
as it melted went down on the steam-chest.
At 7'50 a.m. on the 14th, the ship started
from London bridge, when it was with diffi-
culty the engines could be made to work :
but a gradual increase followed —detentions,
from various causes not connected with the
boilers, took place, and it was 5 p.m. before
she reached the Nore. During this period
the vessel used steam exactly seven hours ;
the tide being equally for and against her, it
was evident she had averaged about seven
miles per hour. The fires were covered,
and at twenty minutes before 1 a.m. on
the 15th, the ship got under way, and pro-
ceeded under steam from the Nore to
Southampton, when her speed averaged
eight miles an hour, having increased from
seven and a half to eight and a half; and,
allowing for the darkness of the night,
which obliged the captain to go down the
Queen’s Channel and give a wide berth
to the owers, the whole distance may be
reckoned at two hundred and forty-six


miles, which was performed in thirty-one
hours and five minutes; and considering
that during twenty-three hours of that
time the tide and wind were against her,
she must have made about eight miles per
hour the whole way. The captain said
that with the former boilers, when the
vessel was loaded with such a heavy cargo,
her velocity was never more than seven
miles per hour, excepting on one occasion,
when they had a gale of fair wind and the
square-sail was set, —then she went seven
and a half miles, but never more. It was
manifest that although the boilers were
16 horse power too small for the engines,
and the size of the ship—for boilers should
always be 10 horse power above instead of
below that of the engine—they were more
effectual and did more work than her
former boilers ever did or could do, and
also with about one-half of the fuel ; and
it was estimated that the expenditure of
coals was about 6lbs. per hour to the
horse-power. It was admitted by all that
the principle was not only superior to every


other boiler, but even in the unimproved
state a vast saving of fuel, while it left no
doubt of its superiority in generating
steam, and that the advantages set forth
in the statement of the inventor are fully
borne out and completely established.
The gentlemen present on this trial were
Col. Barrow, Mr. Collier, and Mr. Blaxland,
Inspecting Engineer of the Commercial
Steam Navigation Company; and it may be
remarked that the latter, who was ignorant
of our ultimate object, after declaring that
this important improvement in steam-boil-
ers would in effect entirely supersede sail-
ing vessels, said he had no doubt but that
steam-ships might now, even in the present
state, steam all the way to India, and that
he would recommend it to his company
without hesitation !
I have now only to add, that I have
taken every detail into consideration : after
the trials I have witnessed, and after mature
deliberation, I give it as my unqualified
opinion that ships of 1200 tons, with en-
gines of 320 horse power and boilers of


the same power, on Mr. Collier’s improved
plan, could in the short space of fifty-two
days carry sufficient fuel, besides 600 tons
of cargo, to India, by only touching at the
Cape of Good-Hope, and that such a line
of steam-packets would be a profitable con-
cern, as well as a patriotic enterprise.
John Ross, Capt. Royal Navy.
It appeared to me, therefore, that the
time had arrived when this great and im*
portant enterprize should be undertaken,
and I was rejoiced to find that individuals of
a true patriotic spirit, of wealth and of influ-
ence, were not wanting to carry into effect
the plans which I have personally commu-
nicated, and which I cheerfully undertook
to lay before them, first in the shape of
a proposal, with estimates, and then as a
prospectus.
My proposal was, that a Company should
be formed, with a capital of 300,000/. in
order to build a certain number of ships,
with power to extend capital to 500,000/.


if necessary ; that in the first instance three
ships of twelve hundred tons each should
be built on the most approved model; that
their engines of three-hundred-and-twenty
horse power should be constructed by the
same engineer, every part of each to be
exactly alike, so that the same spare ma-
chinery should fit all the engines ; that the
boilers on Mr. Collier’s improved plan of
three hundred and forty horse power should
be supplied; that a large ship should be
purchased for a depot of coals, water, &c.
at Saldhanna Bay, thirty miles on this side
of the Cape of Good Hope, and that
another depot of the same kind should
be established at the Point de Galle; that
intermediate depots of coals should be
sent to one of the Cape de Yerd Islands,
and another to the Mauritius, to be used
only in case of accident, as each ship will
have a sufficient quantity of fuel for the
passage to Saldhanna Bay, without touch-
ing anywhere else, and from thence to
Point de Galle without calling at Mau-
ritius. As the steam-ships will go imme-


diately alongside of the depot-ship in Sal-
dhanna Bay, where the coals will be kept in
bags ready to transfer to the steam-ship,
it is expected that one day will be all the
detention on the passage; and that the
whole distance from England (Plymouth)
to Point de Galle, will be completed in forty-
six days; from thence smaller steamers
will branch off to the three Presidencies.
In the first year one ship will sail on the
first of every second month, and each ship
making two voyages will complete six in
that period. In the second year, it will
be proposed to add three more ships, and
then one will sail on the first of every
month, and each ship will be able to carry,
besides the fuel, six hundred tons of cargo,
and one hundred passengers of the first
class, and one hundred of the second and
third classes, their luggage and the mail.
These ships will be commanded by Lieu-
tenants of the royal navy, or captains who
have been in the Honorable Company’s
naval service. In order to give respecta-
bility, a uniform will be established : there


will be three mates, and next to them in
rank will be the first engineer; the regu-
lations for passage-money, freight, and for
the passengers’ mess will be agreed upon,
printed, and subscribed to; and the follow-
ing are the estimates which have been
submitted to the first meeting.
Calculation on the annual expense of
one steam-ship of twelve hundred tons
(carpenters’ measurement) which will carry
seventeen hundred tons, of three hundred
and twenty horse power, and boiler of
three hundred and forty, to make two
voyages from Plymouth or Falmouth, out
and home to Point de Galle, a distance of
eleven thousand nine hundred and ninety-
five statute miles.
Coals for 23,990 miles at 100 tons for every
1000 miles, that is 2400 tons of coals; for
two passages—4800 tons of coals at 30s. i? 7200
Oil for the engine, tallow, and other neces-
saries 1000
Wages and victualling, per annum 4000
Cost of the ship 48,000/. —depreciation thereon 12,000
5 per cent contingencies and expense 1400
25,600


Brought over £25,600
For interest and charges for store-ships 12000/.
cost
2000
Victualling passengers, say seventy-five, at 4s
per day, 900 x 4
3600
Expenses at Cape de Verde Island and Mauri
tius for supply in case of need
Annual expense of navigating one ship <£*31,300
Supposing that a ship will only last four
years, 12,000/. a-year has been allowed for
perpetuating that property; but it is ex-
pected that she will last six years without
any thorough repair, in which case the
12,000/. a-year will be omitted.
The expense of management say £4,300
and to perpetuate other property 5,000
9>300
The expensewould be the same in the manage-
ment of seven ships; for the three ships,
therefore, the outlay 144,000
Management 4,300
<£148,300
This must be laid out in the first year —besides the
annual expense of each ship, which would be 95,400/. in
all 243,700/.


This expense is exclusive of the two
store-ships, which would increase the ex-
penses 12,000/,, making the whole outlay
for the first year 255,700/. ; the addition
of the three ships in the following year
would only be 144,000/., and that would,
of course, be reduced by the income, so
that it may be calculated that there would
be no further outlay than about 300,000/.,
and 320,000/. would certainly be a suffi-
cient capital for this enterprize.
To elucidate the plan adopted by the
Directors, a lithographic chart of the in-
tended route is given at the beginning,
and a plate of Mr. Collier’s patent boiler
at the end of the Appendix.
In conclusion, while I admit that my
own opinion is decidedly in favour of the
route to India by the Cape of Good Hope,
in preference to that ‘ by the Red Sea/ 1
must disclaim any intention of doing more
than to set that side of the question by
comparison fairly before the public, who
will soon be able to make their choice;
and 1 can assure all parties who are in-


terested, that the individuals who compose
“The India Steam-Ship Company,’' ac-
tuated by the most patriotic motives,
look for a share of the public favour only
if justly deserved !
John Ross, Capt. R.N.
London,
February, 1838.
THE CAPITAL
OF THE
INDIA STEAM-SHIP COMPANY
will be 500,000/.,
Divided into 5000 Shares of <PIOO each.
Prospectus may be had at the Company’s Offices,
No. 7, Pall Mall; and of Mr. Stephens, Paul’s Wharf,
No. 24, Upper-Thames Street,


APPENDIX


TABLE OF DISTANCES,
AND EXPLANATION OF THE CHART.
Remarks.
—
Knots,
or G eo-
graphic
Miles.
Statute
Miles.
No. of
Days.
Remarks.
Falmouth to Table Bay
Table Bay to Point de k
Galle, passing east- >
ward of Madagascar }
Point Galle to Bombay
Point Galle to Madras
Madras to Calcutta . .
Table Bay to Point |
Galle, passing west >
of Madagascar j
Table Bay to Falmouth
Total
5958
4938
933
, 432
734
6901'
5094
Total
1140
490
850
25
21
46
5
n
4
1 And 24 hours
y- detention at
) the Cape.
4 To be done
V by Branch
) Steam-ships.
< And24hours
< detention at
Cthe Cape.
4653
5958
5285
6901
22
24
10611
12186
46
v On the Chart, the route out to the Cape, and from thence
to Point Galle eastward of the Cape, is marked by a dotted
line, as also homeward inside, or westward of Madagascar.
At the islands of St. Jago and Mauritius, where “ Small
Depot” is marked, it is intended that coals shall be kept,
that in case of accident they may be resorted to, but it is
intended that no stop should be made but at the Cape of Good
Hope, where each ship will remain one day—thus the four
passages will occupy, say 200 days; there will therefore be
165 days of the year to be divided between England and India,
for the shipment of fuel, cargo, and passengers ; or 41 days at
each port.


APPENDIX, No. I.
On the superior advantages of Collier’s Improved Pa-
tent Steam-Boilers, Manufactory, Globe Stairs Docks,
Rotherhithe.
1. Boilers of 100 horse power will be only 10 feet
long, instead of about 24 feet, and will thereby save 14
feet in length—an entire section of the most valuable
part of the vessel—and likewise, from the diminished
quantity of iron and water required, above fifteen tons
in weight.
2. A ship will be kept perfectly cool, by the boilers
being surrounded by a jacket, or iron casing, containing
a slow conductor of Beat; and comfort be given to
the passengers and crew, and safety to the vessel, as
well as security to the provisions and other merchan-
dize, live-stock, &c.
3. A saving will be effected of one-half the fuel.
4. A safety or breathing pipe, which renders these
boilers perfectly secure from explosion by expansion or
collapse.
5. No incrustation from salt or sediment can take
place.
There are also other important improvements in these
boilers; but the foregoing will, it is presumed, show
the very great advantages which will be gained by their
introduction. The boilers, prior to the great im-
provements made in them by the inventor, were most
successfully employed by the Admiralty, and their su-
periority certified by the engineer and stokers of the
Government vessel. Engineers and boiler-makers are
particularly invited to view these boilers, to whom
licences will be granted on liberal terms.


A 25 horse power boiler is daily in operation, from
ten until three o’clock, at the Manufactory, Globe
Stairs Docks, Rotherhithe.
The public are respectfully informed, that, in con-
sequence of the great number of gentlemen of high
rank and scientific knowledge, who have witnessed the
working of these boilers, having suggested that a more
extended time should be given for their being shown at
work, — the Patentees have accordingly extended the
time until three o’clock daily.
The important advantages of these boilers must be ap-
preciated , when it is known that one-eighth of the ton-
nage, and half the expenditure of coal, will be saved by
every vessel using these boilers. This fact must en-
lighten all persons directing Steam-Navigation Com-
panies, and bring attention to their true interest.
The following contrast between the boilers of the
Perth, 800 tons, and 260 horse power, with the patent
boiler for same power, must be strikingly obvious: —
PERTH BOILERS COLLIER’S PATENT
(three) boilers (two)
Boilers 26 f. lg. by 26 f. wide. 12 f.onlyl Ig. 26 ft. wide.
Height 9 feet 2 inches. 9 feet.
Weight of Iron . . 50 tons. 40 tons only !
Weight of Water .70 tons. 20 tons only !
Consumption of fuel 9to lOlbs. 4£ to slbs. only !
Number of Furnaces 10, 8 only !
It requires no great discernment to see the beneficial
gains that must result from the use of these boilers.
As under, is shown the generating surface in these
boilers for 120 horse power.
Crown of Boilers ..... 88 feet.
The several sides &c. .... 288
Bridges ....... 60
Chamber Surfaces ..... 768
The take ups 20


Being about ten feet for each horse power, and above
two feet more than allowed for boilers now in use.
The superficial feet occupied by boilers now in
use for 120 horse power .... 308 feet.
Collier’s patent boilers, only . . . .130
Trials. —These boilers were put on board Her Ma-
jesty’s steamer the Meteor, by order of the Lords of
the Admiralty.
The first trial to prove their power of generating
steam, was made in still water, when eighteen revolu-
tions of the paddle-wheels were made—those of another
vessel of the same power making eleven only.
Next, the Meteor was ordered down the river, with
the Government Inspectors, to try her speed, when it
was seen that nine and9-10th knots per hour were made ;
shewing an increase of speed of nearly one and a-half
knot per hour ; as by her former log she was never
found to exceed eight and a-half knots per hour.
Another trial was made against Her Majesty’s vessel
Firebrand, from Woolwich to Sheerness, which trial
was witnessed by four Lords of the Admiralty; the
Meteor beating the Firebrand by twenty minutes in
this short distance. She was then ordered to Lisbon.
On her way, off Sheerness, in a gale of wind, and thick
hazy weather, the pilot would not take her through
Margate Sands, and consequently came to anchor, and
lay twenty-nine hours with the fires banked back. The
weather cleared up next day at one o’clock, the fires
were raked forward, and in the short space of five
minutes the steam was blowing off. She then proceeded
to Plymouth, and had another trial against Her Ma-
jesty’s ship the African, from Plymouth to Falmouth,
a distance of fifty-five miles—gaining an hour and a
half in speed during that short run. The vessel then
proceeded on her voyage to Lisbon, Mr. Collier having
been directed to attend the voyage.


The voyage proceeded to the admiration of all on
board, and especially to the Charge d’Affaires from the
court of Brazil to Lisbon, his brother and his secre-
tary —to George Samuel, Esq., of Regent Crescent—
J. C. Moss, Esq. of Philadelphia—the engineer, stokers,
and officers of the vessel: the stokers declaring that
they would rather stoke these boilers for six months,
than those in present use for one month. As these
boilers have no flues, consequently there is no delay
on the voyage, as is the case with the boilers in pre-
sent use.
With equal success the voyage was performed back
from Lisbon to Falmouth, where the boilers were scru-
pulously examined, and were found to be quite as per-
fect as when first put on board, and without an atom
of sediment from the impurities of the water, or crystal-
lization of salt; thus proving another of the great
merits of these boilers.
The boilers, from their peculiar structure (being
surrounded with a jacket of iron, and between which
and the boiler lies an intervening slow conducting
medium), prevent all radiation of the heat, so much so,
that the hand may be put on the boiler without ex-
periencing the least inconvenience—thus securing com-
fort to the passengers against the oppressive heat in-
variably attendant on the boilers now in use, and also
the preservation of goods, which may now be stowed
close to these boilers. The rnultum in parvo of these
boilers is, in the present state of navigation, the greatest
desideratum; for, taking a comparative view, the
patent boiler only occupies ten feet in length for a 100
horse power, whilst those in present use occupy twenty-
four feet ; by which not only is gained fourteen feet in
the entire section of the principal part of a ship;
a space which may be employed either for stowage, or
the accommodation for passengers by enlarged sa-


loons; but a saving also of above fifty tons in weight —
as in these patent boilers, on account of their di-
minished size, so much less water is required. These
objects, combined, will naturally show that a great
saving of fuel must follow of course.
By the great reduction of bulk and weight in these
improved Collier’s Steam-Boilers, a sufficient quantity
of fuel might now be taken on board to convey steam-
vessels to North or South America, or even round the
Cape of Good Hope to Bombay, without requiring
any additional supply of coals, or other fuel, on the
voyage.
The following is a summary of the chief advantages
of these patent improved Steam-Boilers;—There is a
saving of fifty per cent, in weight, room, and fuel; no
incrustation can take place therein, from salt or sedi-
ment ; and, consequently, the boilers are rendered more
durable; and, as no heat can radiate from the boilers,
so the ship is kept cool throughout, and the comfort of
the passengers and live-stock promoted; butter, eggs,
and other provisions, will be preserved ; there is no
danger from setting fire to the coals or cargo; and, in
consequence, the rate of insurance ought to be reduced.
The steam is got up in less than one half the time re-
quired by the ordinary boilers ; if necessary to bank the
fires for twenty-four hours, five minutes is only required
to get up the steam. As these boilers are worked under
an open column of atmosphere, of course, they can
never either explode or collapse. Repairs can be easily
effected on board, with as much facility as in any other
situation, thereby saving the expenses of unshipping
and shipping. There are no flues to sweep: in case of
long voyages, spare sets of chambers can be taken on
board ; the boilers are supplied with hot feeding water,
which causes a saving of from ten to fifteen per cent, in
fuel. Boilers upon this principle of only ten feet in


length, will generate more than a sufficient quantity of
steam for engines of 100 horse power.
It is presumed that the great advantages proposed in
the organization of steam-vessels, by the use of the
boilers, will at once be obvious to all persons interested
therein. And it is worthy of remark, that a vessel of
100 horse power requires a boiler of only ten feet in
length ; but a vessel of 1,000 tons, requiring 300
horse power, will only require a boiler from fourteen to
sixteen feet in length ; thus insuring the saving of
space, in a greater ratio, as the magnitude of the vessel
increases.
The attention of the public is particularly invited to
the safety-pipe in these patent boilers, which, from its
construction, by working under an open column of at-
mosphere, gives them an undoubted security against
explosion. It also prevents all strain upon the boilers,
and thereby renders them more durable. These safety-
pipes can be applied to the steam-boilers now in use ,
either on land, or at sea, and at a very moderate ex-
pense.
The explosion of steam-boilers generally arises from
the prodigious expansion of the gases, produced by the
decomposition of the water by the heat. This mischief,
however, will be entirely prevented by the introduction
of this beautifully simple invention, “ the safety or
breathing pipe.”
From the arrangements made by the Patentees, these
boilers will be supplied to the Public at nearly the same
cost as those made by respectable engineers; and thus
the public will be put in possession of all the benefits
derivable from the valuable combinations in Collier’s
Patent Steam-Boilers, without much extra charge.
The Patentees have thought that the best proof of
the merits of these boilers would be afforded by giving
the public an opportunity of seeing them actually at


work, and thereby setting all doubts as to the theory of
their action aside, by demonstrating the fact from actual
observation ; they have, accordingly, set up a boiler of
25 horse power, which can be seen at the Manufactory,
Globe Stairs Docks, Rotherhithe, opposite Stone Stairs,
Cock Hill, Ratcliffe, at work, every day, from ten until
two o’clock, where the scientific world, and all those in-
terested in steam-boilers, are invited to view them, and
judge for themselves.
The many important alterations made upon the ori-
ginal Patent have induced the Patentees to take out new
Patents, comprising the old and new improvements.
The following Certificate from the Engineer and Stokers,
on board the Meteor during her voyages to and from
Lisbon, will, it is hoped, fully confirm the above state-
ment :
CERTIFICATE.
“ London, Ith June, 1836.
“ Sir,
“ As you have considered that my testimony regard-
ing your Patent Steam-Boilers may be of service to your
introduction of them to the public, I have much pleasure
in stating, that, as I was an engineer on board His Ma-
jesty’s steam-vessel the Meteor, during her voyages to
Lisbon, and back to Falmouth, I had every opportunity
of witnessing their superiority.
“ In the first place, we gained, in the distance of fifty
miles between Plymouth and Falmouth, one hour and
twenty minutes upon His Majesty’s steamer the Afri-
can. We had a redundancy of steam during the
voyages; —we consumed less fuel than in the boilers
now in use: —after laying to for twenty-nine hours at
Sheerness, to my astonishment, the steam was up to
working-power in little more than five minutes : —and,


in consequence of the slow-conducting medium-jacket
surrounding the boilers, the vessel was kept so cool, that
many of the crew availed themselves of the Stokers’
room ; the Stokers themselves declaring, they would
rather stoke one of your boilers for six months, than
others for one month only. In short, they performed
their work admirably; gaining speed and consuming
less fuel: and this, although labouring under the disad-
vantage of bad Welsh coals. Indeed, I must say, your
boilers positively proved, whilst under my management,
to fulfil all the great advantages detailed by you.
“ I witnessed, on the arrival of the Meteor at Fal-
mouth, the blowing off of your boilers ; and it is a fact,
that no incrustation, by salt or other sediment, had
taken place therein.
“ I beg also to mention the great convenience upon a
voyage arising from the construction of your boilers, in
their having no flues to clean out, as is required in other
boilers at least every other day.
“ I conclude, therefore, that your boilers, on being
compared with others, from their very reduced size, sim-
plicity of construction, and other prominent and highly
important advantages, will be duly appreciated by all
persons interested in steam navigation.
“ I am, Sir,
“ Your most obedient Servant,
“ T. RAPSON, Engineer.”
“ To Mr. E. H. Collier.”
TESTIMONY of the Men who were employed as
Stokers to Collier’s Patent Boilers ; and who have
long been employed in His Majesty's Steam-vessels.
<c Mr. Collier. London, August 2nd , 1836.
“ Sir,
“ We feel much pleasure in handing you our Testi-
mony regarding your Patent Steam-Boilers, which we


stoked from Woolwich to Lisbon, and home—on board
His Majesty’s steam-ship Meteor.
“ The Meteor made eighteen revolutions of the pad--
dle-wheels in still water in Woolwich Basin. When she
was experimenting down and up the River Thames, she
made ten knots an hour: and, on her return from Lisbon,
from Falmouth to Plymouth —twelve knots per hour. —
“We distanced His Majesty’s ship the African, be-
tween Plymouth and Falmouth, in our passage out, one
hour and twenty minutes.
“When the Lords of the Admiralty witnessed the
experiments of your Patent Boilers from Woolwich to
Sheerness, on board the Meteor, we distanced the Fire-
brand, which accompanied them, by twenty minutes.
“We experienced no inconvenience from heat:
we never lost our steam —although labouring under
the disadvantage of having very tempestuous weather
the whole passage, and bad Welsh coals; as much of
which, or nearly, were thrown overboard with the ashes,
as were consumed; yet, we could get up our steam in
five minutes, even though the fires had been banked for
twenty-four hours, which was the case at Sheerness, on
our passage out.
“ On examining the water-chambers at Falmouth and
Lisbon, out, and on our return to Falmouth, there was
not the least appearance of salt, or any incrustation
whatever.
“It may be further necessary to mention, that in
getting the steam up from cold water , it took but from
thirty to thirty-five minutes.
“ We feel quite convinced of the superiority of your
Boilers, and should have a greater pleasure in working
them than any others now in use.
“We are, Sir,
“ Your most obedient Servants,
(Signed) “ THOMAS SAVAGE,
“ HENRY POOLE, his X Mark ”


“ STEAM.—Perhaps at no period on human record has any sub-
ject occupied the attention of man so much as the advantages to
be obtained by this extraordinary power; and there appears to be no
lack of zeal among enterprizing merchants and capitalists to keep pace
with the march of improvement already made. We see daily adver-
tisements of companies formed and forming to navigate nearly the
whole world by steam-vessels. We also see mechanical improvements
offered to the public, tending to give stability and success to the great
enterprize; and amongst them we find “Collier’s Improved Steam-
Boilers’’ particularly recommended. If Mr. Collier has realized all
that he professes to have done, he will have made, by his ingenuity,
one of the greatest steps towards perfection since the days of the great
Watt; and, at all events, we would recommend capitalists and com-
mercial men to look into the statements which Mr. Collier has ad-
vanced.’’—Nautical Magazine.
Specifications and Drawings may be had at the Manufactory, and
also of Mr. JOHN STEPHENS, Paul’s Wharf, 24, Upper Thames
Street, together with such further explanation as may be required.
N.B. The Manufactory is upon a large spot of ground, command-
ing 290 feet of water frontage, with a slip, and a double dry dock,
affording every facility and convenience to vessels of any magnitude.






APPENDIX, No. 11.
COLLIER’S IMPROVED PATENT STEAM-
BOILER.
The importance to all persons interested in the em-
ployment of Steam Power, and especially to the Public
at large, whose persons and property are frequently in
imminent danger, induces the Patentees to lay the follow-
ing testimony before tine Public.
Extract of a Letter addressed to the Editor of the
Morning Post , and which appeared in that Paper,
14th June, and also in other Public Journals:
“ In consequence of the bursting of the Boiler of the
Union Steamer at Hull, and having heard that there
existed a remedy for the evil so justly and loudly com-
plained of, I was induced to visit the Manufactory of
Stephens and Co., Globe Dock, Rotherhithe, in company
with Capt. Sir John Ross, R.N., to see an experiment
performed on Collier’s Patent Steam-Boiler, to which
is attached a Safety, or Breathing Pipe, which, in my
opinion, and in that of Sir John Ross, appeared to afford
a perfect security against the possibility of explosion ;
if this opinion be confirmed by other practical and pro-
fessional men, I conceive it is the bounden duty of the
Legislature to compel all owners of Steam Vessels to the
use of it, and thus prevent a recurrence of so shocking
a calamity.
“ I examined and noted down the result of the ex-
periment, which I understand has been frequently
tried in the presence, and to the entire satisfaction of
several civil engineers—and I send you a copy of my
note.


Experiment. —To show the perfection of the Safety
Pipe, as the means of preventing the bursting of Steam
Boilers, the inventor, Mr. Collier, forcibly held down
the Safety Valve with an iron lever, until the steam
pressure was raised to 6| lbs. per inch; at which
moment the water rushed up the Safety Pipe, descended
the funnel, extinguished the fire, and thus prevented
the Boiler exploding by any further generation of Steam
or Gas.
(Signed) W. H. JUDD,
“ 9, Maddox Street, Hanover Square,”
Extract of a Letter to the Editor of the Morning Post.
“ Observing in your Paper of the 14th inst. a letter
signed W. H. Judd, detailing an experiment made in
his presence, and that of Capt. Sir John Ross, R.N.,
to prevent the bursting of Steam-Boilers , I beg to add
my testimony in confirmation of Mr. Judd’s statement—
having tried the same experiment very fully, and had
every reason to be satisfied with the result; and I also
saw quite enough to convince me of the power of the
Boiler in generating Steam, the economy in fuel, and the
great saving in weight of metal and space, that would
be effected by the adoption of these Boilers in Steam
Boats.—l am quite sure it is only necessary to direct
attention to the merits of this discovery, to insure its
general and immediate adoption.
(Signed) “ CHARLES MANBY, C.E.
“ 9, John Street, Adelphi.”
Mr, C. Manby, on the 29th June 1837, tried an ex-
periment on a 25 horse power Patent Boiler—the fol-
lowing is the result:
At 20 minutes to 9 a.m., got up the Steam from
the fire banked down the preceding night, in 8| minutes.


At | to 9 a.m., began work, steam at 4 inches on
the gauge.
Weighed out 1,1321b5. of coal, worked the boiler
for 9 hours, steam up to 4 and 4| inches on the gauge
the whole time—leaving 2601b5. of coal, making the
consumption for the 9 hours 8721b5. being only 3 lbs.
14 oz. of coal, per horse power, per hour. —Evaporated
836 gallons of water, being nearly 10 lbs. of water for
1 lb. of coal.
Mr. Manby may be referred to and will attest
this fact.
Extract of a Letter from Dr. Win. Ritchie , University
College.
“ I have carefully examined Mr. E. Collier's
Patent Steam-Boiler, and have seen experiments made
with it, from which I infer:
“ That it evaporates more xvater with the same quan-
tity of coals than any similar Boiler, for low pressure
engines, with which I am acquainted.
“ That it takes up less room.
“ That the Safety, or Breathing Pipe, will prevent
accident from explosion , by preventing the possibility
of steam rising above a given elasticity.”
Extract of a Letter from Professor Wm. Thos. Braude,
Royal Mint, August 5, 1837*
“ In reference to your request that I would give you
a written opinion upon Collier’s Engine Boiler, which
I saw in action in company with Capt. Sir John Ross,
R.N., Dr. Ritchie, and some other gentlemen, 1 need only
state, that I agree with Dr. Ritchie in regard to its
general merits, and that, as far as I can judge from the


experiment, which I witnessed with the insulated Boiler,
it combines safety with great efficiency in the production
of Steam , and economy in fuel , and appears to be con-
structed upon judicious principles as to the attainment
of these ends.”
N.B. The Breathing, or Safety Pipe, can be ap-
plied to all low-pressure Boilers, for marine or land
purposes.


APPENDIX, No. 111.
DESCRIPTION OF THE BOILER.
In the annexed print, fig. 1. is a front section of a
steam-boiler, for supplying steam to two engines, of
65 horse power each, with part of the front plate re-
moved, the right-hand side shewing the furnace doors,
whilst those on the left are removed ; and below the ash-
pits two covers of the apparatus, for occasionally clean-
ing out any mud or sediment, are shewn ; they being
placed at the lowest part of the boilers, where all the
deposit will naturally be lodged.
Fig. 2. is a side section or elevation of the boiler,
taken at the line AB, of fig. 1. Fig. 3. is a plan of
one-half of fig. 1. taken at the line C D, of that figure.
Fig. 4. is a section taken at the line EF, in fig. 2. And
fig. 5. a horizontal section of the funnel.
In this steam-boiler the water is divided amongst a
number of narrow upright chambers, with spaces be-
tween and around them, for the flame and heated air
from the furnaces to pass through, and thus, quickly to
heat the water ; their back ends all opening into one
common cross chamber. These chambers being nearly
closed at their tops, the steam generated ascends and
escapes at the upper part of their back ends, whilst
the water is constantly flowing in at their lower parts,
and thus a circulation is produced, which effectually
prevents any sediment being lodged within the cham-
bers. These chambers are placed in separate furnaces,
and the whole is enclosed in one casing, forming the
steam-boiler; the chambers, ash-pits, and the whole
furnaces being enclosed, and surrounded by water.


There is likewise provided an outer casing, (not shewn,)
containing a slow conducting medium, to prevent the
radiation of heat, as above mentioned. The flue is like-
wise surrounded with water, to become heated, and to
supply the boiler, in proportion to the evaporation
occasioned by the escape of the steam : this supply is
effected by an upright pipe, proceeding from the water
around the funnel, and connected with a horizontal pipe,
from which, branch pipes enter at the bottoms of all the
chambers, and thereby prevent the possibility, however
violent the fire may be, of the water being removed from
contact with the interiors of the chambers ; the pressure
of the column of water being much greater than the
pressure of the steam- There are likewise provided vent-
pipes, at the upper front ends of the chambers, to allow
the escape of any surplus steam that may be generated
in the chambers, to the mass of steam contained in the
steam-chest. These two last improvements effectually
prevent all injury to the steam generators or chambers,
from any carelessness or wilful design to injure them by
over-firing.
In fig. 2. an upright pipe or tube is represented,
which is opened at both ends; the lower end being im-
mersed within six inches of the bottom of the boiler ;
and the upper end entering the funnel; and thus, in case
of any accident arising from the sticking of the valves,
or other causes, the pressure of the steam in the boiler
will force the water into the funnel, and extinguish the
fire; and vice versa , in case of collapse, from any sudden
condensation of the steam, the upper end of the pipe
being open, will admit the atmospheric air to enter and
restore the equilibrium. And it is a known fact, that a
boiler of any description, as a common house-copper, or
a tea-kettle, for instance, have never been known to
burst, either by expansion or collapsing ; as, notwith-
standing all the gases which may be generated, from the


oxygenation of the metal by the water, the pressure of
the atmosphere keeps the water in constant contact witli
the metal, and prevents it from being overheated,
which is the general cause of the bursting of all boilers.
By the great reduction of weight and bulk in these
improved Collier’s Steam-Boilers, a sufficient quantity
of fuel can now be taken on board, to convey His Ma-
jesty’s Mails, or any other Steam Vessels, to North or
South America, or even round the Cape of Good Hope
to Bombay, without requiring any additional supply of
Coals, or other fuel, on the voyage.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY SAMUEL BENTLEY)
Dorset Street, Fleet Street.


•
.
..
■ ~ - : i ‘ r - : ' ■ ■
*
*
*
-
-
0
•
h
•
•
*
i
>
.
-
