

DIRECT STEAM COMMUNICATION
BETWEEN
BY LARGE AND FULL-POWERED STEAMERS,
THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE.
COMMANDER OF THE LATE S.S. “ QUEEN OF THE THAMES.”
GEORGE MACDONALD,
ROBERT GRANT AND SON, 107 PRINCES STREET.
LONDON: SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, & CO.
ENGLAND AND AUSTRALIA,




DIRECT STEAM COMMUNICATION
BETWEEN
ENGLAND AND AUSTRALIA,
BY LARGE AND FULL-POWERED STEAMERS,
THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE.
GEORGE MACDONALD,
COMMANDER OF THE LATE S.S. “ QUEEN OF THE THAMES.”
EDINBURGH:
ROBERT GRANT AND SON, 107 PRINCES STREET.
LONDON; SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, & CO.
1871.




DIRECT STEAM COMMUNICATION
BETWEEN
ENGLAND AND AUSTEALIA.
The rise and progress of the colonies of a nation is only
equalled in interest by that of the nation itself. Their pros-
perity or adversity is a subject of general concern, whether
we regard its hearing on the advance of commerce, the spread
of civilization and religion, or on the distribution and ascend-
ency of particular races. Now, if we survey the present
position of our dependencies, none of them is so rapidly ad-
vancing in a career of greatness as Australia, and none of them
has achieved so much in the same period. She is the most
inviting field ever opened to the moral or physical energies of
man, and her commercial ascendency amongst her sisters has
gained the admiration of the whole world. Few countries can
he named that possess more numerous and happily combined
advantages to facilitate its development as a commercial
colony than she. Her internal resources are quite marvel-
lous, as she emulates England in commerce and in manufac-
tures ; moreover, the field is even much more extensive than
that which the mother country occupies.
When we think of the colossal strides which our commerce
has made in all quarters of the globe, we are forcibly reminded
that we owe our commercial success very much to the intro-
duction of steam navigation. In those countries where steam
communication is most regular and frequent, the beneficial
results of an increasing trade are most apparent. The forma-
tion, therefore, of proper and adequate steam communication
between England and Australia via the Cape is imperatively
demanded, to supersede the more tedious routes. In the pre-
sent age, when railways are necessary for successful competi-


tion in commerce, and are forming a network over every
civilized country, a steam communication, as suggested, be-
comes an absolute necessity. The history of the early attempts
at steam navigation with India is well known, and 1 cannot
hut applaud the Government of that day for their foresight in
subsidising the enterprising Company has brought our
communication with India, China, and Australia to its pre-
sent state.
Daily steam communication with America is an established
fact, and, behold, what a development of trade has been the
result. By the many reforms and improvements which the
competing lines of steamers have brought about, we are now
within ten days of New York for passengers and merchandise.
And while steam power has been thus successfully employed
on comparatively short routes, there have been increasing
endeavours to bring those countries, less favourably situated
in a geographical point of view, into closer communication
with England. In the case of the Pacific Steam Navigation
Company Valparaiso is now brought within thirty-eight days,
including some half dozen stoppages at intermediate ports.
I may also include the Brazils, China, India, and other parts
of South America, in an ecpially short period of time. These
attempts have been successful; and the increase in exports
and imports with those countries bear proofs to the great
advantages which the mail route has secured. The Australian
Colonies were among the first to see the advantages to be
derived from having a regular mail line, and their attempts
to improve their communication via Suez have met with
merited success. Nevertheless, though we would not by any
means ignore the advantages of the existing means of com-
munication, I am of positive opinion that the Cape route offers
many advantages and favourable circumstances to the Colonies
which have been hitherto overlooked, and would avoid the
great risks incident to the real sea passage.
By this route the passage round Cape Horn, with its attend-
ant cold and dangers from icebergs, will be dispensed with, as
the ships will return by the Cape of Good Hope, thus travel-
ling chiefly through temperate latitudes. There are many who
talk about steam ships going the same route via the Cape as


sailing vessels are compelled to take, but those who do so
show their utter ignorance of navigation by steam ships, and
probably many of this class are already largely interested in
sailing vessels. Moreover, the gain of a low rate of mortality
among passengers would be considerable. The medical returns
of Her Majesty’s Emigration Commissioners have amply
proved this ; and as the passage is done more quickly, the rate
will be proportionately reduced. That the voyage can be
completed in about fifty days has been proved by that splendid
steam ship the “ Queen of the Thames,” under my own com-
mand, and I may here state without egotism, I have done more
to solve the problem which has hitherto been looked upon as
impracticable than any other I know; and but for the unfor-
tunate accident I met with on the homeward passage, the
voyage of “ The Queen ” would have been one of the greatest
successes of the day. The exact time from England to Mel-
bourne being fifty days, thirteen hours, in spite of strong head
winds during the whole of the voyage, with the exception of
about twelve hours on the last day. * The run from King
George’s Sound to Melbourne was the quickest on record, and
had I had sufficient coals on leaving England, I would have
made the voyage with ease in forty-five days. It is now con-
fidently believed that first-class vessels, fitted with modern
appliances, will accomplish the distance from England to
Melbourne in about forty days. An eminent shipbuilding and
engineering firm is prepared to build vessels to accomplish
this fact; and to show and prove that it is no mere theoretical
scheme produced on paper, they are prepared to hold as a
permanent investment a large share in each boat. No ship
has hitherto steamed all the way round the Cape of Good
Hope except the “ Queen of the Thames.” And what has been
done by her under the disadvantageous circumstances already
named, can, no doubt, be surpassed by other ships, carefully
and specially built for the voyage.
The inducements held out in the name of subsidies and
grants by the Cape Colony have resulted in their being sup-
plied with an excellent line of mail packets, which has placed
them within monthly communication with England, and there
is now a second line of steamers successfully competing for a


share of the trade of that colony. From this line of steam
communication we obtain important data as to the possibility
of direct voyages being made by full-powered steamers from
England to Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, &c., —the voyage
from the Cape of Good Hope to Australia having frequently
been done by sailing vessels in twenty-four to twenty-six
days. The fact that the vessels of the late New Zealand and
Panama Company of only 1400 tons accomplished the distance
from Wellington to Panama (6800) without coaling, is an all-
convincing proof that the voyage from England to Melbourne,
via the Cape, can beyond any question be accomplished by
vessels of larger tonnage and of greater power in from thirty-
eiyhi to forty days.
Passengers from England to Australia via the Cape would
have the important advantage of steaming through seas which
are practically free from danger; and the tropics would be
crossed from north to south in a brief time, whilst the greater
portion of the voyage would be made in temperate latitudes.
In short, the advantages of this route have only to be known
to be appreciated, and the former attempts at steam communi-
cation via the Cape have paved the way for its successful
development in a more practical form, and on a scale commen-
surate with the requirements of the times, by the substitution
of full-powered for auxiliary steamers.
The success which has attended the “Great Britain” is
already well known ; and, considering that she has to depend
chiefly on her sails, and consequently takes the sailing-ship
track, returning by Cape Horn, I highly commend Captain
Gray and her owners for having placed Melbourne within an
average of about sixty-five days of England; and from this
fact, and the rapid voyage of the “ Queen of the Thames,” we
may draw the conclusion that it is possible to bring the
Colonies of Australia within thirty-eight to forty days of the
mother country.
The trade of Australia employs nearly six hundred thou-
sand tons of shipping, fifty thousand tons of which are
constantly on the berth in London alone. We may thus
estimate what will be the increase when the population of the
Colonies becomes doubled. This population is steadily in-


I.— Via the Cape of Good Hope.
Miles.
Falmouth to the Equator,
3,125
creasing, their trade rapidly extending, new sources of wealth
and new fields of industry are being continually discovered,
whilst their valuable .resources are becoming more and more
evident, inspiring the entire community with full belief in a
highly prosperous future and still more greatness. With
their commerce the shipping is rapidly augmenting, and to the
intending emigrant no other colonies can offer so good a field
for labour, or a more certain prospect of success. Every
facility for emigrants will be afforded by the promoters of
this direct mail route, and assisted emigration may be organised
so as to supply the wants of the colonies, whilst small
capitalists may be induced to add to the number of the
already prosperous settlers.
The geographical position of Melbourne singles it out as the
best terminus for a mail route, from which will radiate the
lines of communication with other important cities and stations
throughout that flourishing country. Indeed the Australian
Colonies cannot be overrated at home, and the proposed
enterprise would tend very materially ±o their mutual advan-
tage. It would, moreover, benefit New South Wales, and all
the surrounding Colonies, as well as Victoria; and all that is
needed to ensure complete success is that the project be under-
taken with spirit and energy. It cannot for one moment be
doubted but that the advancement of our Australian Colonies
will meet with warm and ready promoters in this country;
and I venture to assert that in no way can they be so per-
manently benefited, and their prosperity so materially secured,
as by the increase of first-class steamships to run on this
route rapidly, frequently, and regularly. And certainly the
most profitable outlay of the public funds which the State
could make, would be the investment of a good and sufficient
subsidy to a line of suitable steamers which would convey
people out and home in comfort and in the shortest time.
Comparative Distances by Various Routes to Australia from England.
Equator to Cape of Good Hope, . . . 3,000
Cape of Good Hope to Melbourne, . . 5,375
Total, 11,500


II. — Via Suez.
Falmouth to Gibraltar, .
1,080
Gibraltar to Malta,
975
Malta to Alexandria,
845
Alexandria to Suez,
170
Suez to Aden, ....
1,335
Aden to Galle, . . .
2,165
Galle to King G. Sound,
3,365
King G. Sound to Melbourne,
1,387
Total,
11,322
III.— Via Panama.
Miles.
Melbourne to Wellington,
1,500
Wellington to Panama, .
6,800
Panama to Chagres,
Chagres to Falmouth,
60
4,650
Total,
13,010
The above tabular statement shows that the milage is
slightly in favour of the Suez route; but we think that the
great dangers of the lied Sea and other drawbacks very mucli
more than counterbalance this small difference. In short,
the advantages of the Cape route are too apparent to provoke
even discussion or comment.
It is proposed by myself andfriends to promote a line of purely
steam ships to carry out what I have endeavoured to describe,
and to bring the Australia colonies in closer, more frequent, and
especially more regular communication with this country.
From my own practical experience and intercourse with many
of the leading members of the present Government of Victoria
and the leading importers and exporters of Melbourne, and 1
may include many of New South Wales and adjacent colonies,
I can confidently state that the former are quite prepared to
grant a fair subsidy; and the latter, from their own assurances
to myself, will be only too glad to have the opportunity of
paying a good rate of freight so long as they can confidently
depend upon the punctuality with which the steamers are
dispatched and arrive. Of course this cannot fail to be
apparent to every business man as being of paramount
importance, more especially as I believe telegraphic communi-
cation between Australia and this country will ere 1871 has
closed be an accomplished fact.
I am, your obedient servant,
GEO. MACDONALD.


Since writing the foregoing 1 have received an Australian
(Melbourne) paper, from which I extract the following:—
“ The Cape route was another topic touched upon by the Chief
Secretary, who declared his continued confidence in the advantages
that were to he derived from the establishment of a line of
powerful steamers by that route ; at the same time intimating that
he would not enter into arrangements for such a purpose until a
favourable moment had arrived. Now, we are of opinion that no
more opportune moment presented itself for encouraging such a
line than this. A great war has desolated one of the fairest
countries in Europe, and has made its disastrous effects felt all over
the Continent, and in Great Britain. It has convinced the indus-
trious and the moneyed classes that the old barbarous rule of brute
force is very far from being at an end; and that if they wish to
follow the pursuits of industry in peace, and to transmit the
property they acquire to their children without the risk of its
being devastated by hordes of armed men, they must transport
themselves and their families far from countries which maintain a
million of skilful homicides in their pay, and where the slaughter
of to-day is certain to be avenged by a bloody retribution in ten,
twenty, or thirty years hence. This, then, is the appropriate time
for building a bridge between Europe and Australia, for reducing
the voyage to five or six weeks ; and for making known to men
and women in France, Germany, and Great Britain, who survey the
events of the past seven months with horror, and who look forward
to the future with painful apprehension, the security, the comfort,
and the prosperity which await them in Australia.”
This, I think, confirms in a great measure all I have endea-
voured to describe.
Capitalists and gentlemen interested in this enterprise, and
who may wish further information on the subject, will please
address to me at “ The Lombard,” Lombard Street, London;
or care of Messrs Houlder Brothers & Co., Leadenhall Street,
London. G. MT).
PRINTED BV NEILL AND COMPANY, EDINBURGH.


