

ON SOME
AFFECTIONS OF
CITY LIFE
AND
Common Ailments of Children.
DR. HENRY WHEELER.




Homoeopathic
Medicines
Have thoroughly established themselves
throughout the Colonies as
He Host Reliable and Convenient Form of
Domestic Medicine.
All the Medicines prescribed in this Book can
be obtained at our Pharmacy,
180 GOLDINS STREET,
MELBOURNE,
Or of our Agents throughout the Colonies.
Price, 1/- per Bottle; or 10/6 per Dozen.
Medicines sent by Post to any address.
MARTIN & PLEASANCE
Homoeopathic Chemists,
180 COLLINS STREET,
MELBOURNE.


Special Notice.
J*
LL THE MEDICINES, &c., RECOMMEN
DED IN THIS BOOK MAY BE
OBTAINED FROM
POULTON & OWEN,
Homoeopathic Chemists,
189 COLLINS STREET, MELBOORNE.
Tinctures &= Pilules, price i/-, 1/6,2/6 per bottle
Six 1/- bottles ... 5/6 | Supplied in upright
Twelve 1/- bottles... 10/6 j card cases.
N.B.—Each bottle bears a descriptive label, stating
uses and doses of medicine it contains.
P. & O’S.
INFANT’S FEEDING BOTTLE,
The most perfect Feeding Bottle
ever introduced.
PRICE - - - 1/6.
SOLE AGENTS—
POULiTOfi & OUXEH,
HOMEOPATHIC CHEMISTS,
189 COLLINS STREET,
Four doors above the “Argus” Office.


THE CURE OF DYSPEPSIA.
PEPSIN “TABLOIDS” (FAIRCHILD).
Pepsin Tabloids are very extensively prescribed, and with
great satisfaction, for gastric dyspepsia. For eructations,
nausea, stomach cramp, water-brash, distress, distension, flat-
ulence, or other symptoms, they are much employed.
They set the perverted digestive processes aright, and aid
the impaired slow digestion, by supplying the ferments natural
to the stomach. They do for the weakened organ what it is
unable to do itself. Their action is pronounced, and the satis-
faction they give is generally immediate and complete.
ZYMINE “TABLOIDS” (FAIRCHILD).
These Tabloids constitute the only natural digestive adjunct
ever introduced into medicine solely and specifically for
intestinal indigestion. They act by supplementing the
weakened and perverted digestive functions with the ferments
naturally required, and the experience of the profession con-
cerning their action appears in the fullest sense satisfactory.
They are pleasing to the eye, no trouble whatever to swallow,
and may be carried in the pocket by patients, ever ready for
use.
COMP. ZYMINE “TABLOIDS” (FAIRCHILD).
Each Tabloid contains : Zymine 2 grains, Bismuth Sub-
nitrate 8 grains, Pulv. Ipecac. 1/10 grain.
Zymine supplies a natural digestive adjunct, powerfully
efficient in the digestion of the various “ food stuffs.” By its
action the ultimate elaboration of food in the intestine may be
materially assisted.
The bismuth present is not only an excellent general mineral
tonic, but exerts a sedative topical action on the gastric aud
intestinal mucous surface, allaying irritability, correcting
acidity, cleansing erosions, and preventing flatulence. The
small quantity of Ipecacuanha serves a two-fold office : it
gently stimulates the weakened, sluggish, perverted or
diseased digestive organs, to a proper and physiological per-
formance of their normal functions ; and secondly, it quickly
removes the slightest tendency there may be to nausea,
“ water-brash,” eructations or vomiting. The usefulness of
this agent in “ bilious dyspepsia ” is quite generally recognised
by medical men. Where an array of dyspeptic symptoms is
present, with the signs of hepatic derangement considerably
pronounced, a new line of treatment is herewith available by
but a slight deviation from what has until lately been the
more usual routine of medical practice.
BURROUGHS, WELLCOME & CO.
London, Melbourne, and New York.


ON SOME
COMMON AFFECTIONS
INCIDENTAL TO CITY LIFE,
TOGETHER WITH REMARKS ON CHILDREN’S AILMENTS
AND SOME INFECTIOUS DISEASES,
WITH THEIR
lwatmoit*
BY
HENRY WHEELER.
Licentiate of the Royal Collegeof Physician*, London ; and Member of the
Royal College of Surgeons, England ;
Honorary Physician Melbourne Homoeopathic Hospital;
Late Physician London Homoeopathic Hospital.
Htcllmmu:
MARTIN & PLEASANCE,
HOMCEOPATHIC CHEMISTS AND DRUGGISTS AND
MEDICAL BOOKSELLERS,
180 Collins Street, Melbourne,
AND lUTRWOOP ROAD, HAWTHORN,


Pears’ Soap
TO Persons whose skin is delicate or sensitive to
changes in the weather, winter or summer,
PEARS’ SOAP is invaluable, as, on account of its
emollient, non-irritant character, Redness, Rough-
ness, and Chapping are prerented, and a clear
appearance and soft velvety condition maintained,
and a good healthful, and attractive complexion
ensured. Its agreeable and lasting perfume, beauti-
ful appearance, and soothing properties, commend
it as the greatest luxury and most elegant adjunct
to the toilet.
A most eminent Authority on the Skin,
Professor Sir Erasmus Wilson,
F.R.S.,
Writes in the “ Journal op Cutaneous Medicine,”
T IYHE use of a good Soap is certainly calculated to pre-
_L “ serve the skin in health, to maintain its complexion
“ and tone, and prevent its falling into wrinkles. PEAKS
“ is a name engraven on the memory of the oldest inhabitant;
“ and PEARS’ SOAP is an article of the nicest and most care-
“ ful manufacture, and one of the most refreshing and agree-
“ able of balms for the skin.”
Mr. John L. Milton,
Senior Surgeon, St. John's Hospital for' the Skin, London.
Prom the “ Hygiene of the Skin.”
41 TTYROM time to time I have tried many different Soaps.
Jj “I have now, after Fifteen Years’ careful trial in
“ many Hundreds of cases, both in Hospital and Private
“ Practice, no hesitation in giving my verdict to the effect
“ that nothing has answered so well, or proved so beneficial to
“ the skin as PEARS’ SOAP.”
Sold by all the Leading Retail Houses.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
Indigestion in the Stomach, comprising
Gastrodynia, or Spasm of the Stomach n
Acute Dyspepsia 13
Heartburn - - ‘ ' " *5
Flatulence - - * * " "
Pain after taking Food - - - ‘ l6
Acidity ‘ " I 7
Waterbrash - - - - ‘ 18
Chronic Indigestion, or Gastric Catarrh 19
Indigestion in the Bowels, comprising
Diarrhoea - - 2 5
Dysentery 2 7
Constipation 28
Haemorrhoids, or Piles - - - - 3 2
Fissure of the Bowel - - - - -3^
Fistula in Ano - - - ' ' 3 3
Liver Disorder or Biliousness - - 39
Simple Bilious Attack 39
Acute Congestion of the Liver - -4°
Inflammation of the Liver 43
Jaundice
Brain Exhaustion, or Brain Fag - - 4 6
Alcoholism


rAGE
Measles 57
Scarlet Fever and Scarlatina - - - 59
Diphtheria - 64
Typhoid Fever 69
Teething of Children - - - - 75
Diarrhoea of Children 77
Vomiting of Children 81
Cough of Children 82
Convulsions of Children -
Croup, Infantile and Inflammatory - 85-86
Ophthalmia (Inflammation of Eyes) - - 88
Sun, Effects of 9


PREFACE.
In this treatise I do not propose to displace
the more elaborate works which treat, amongst
other things, of the ailments herein described ;
but to give a concise description, with, as far
as can be done, the treatment for each affec-
tion, in as simple a manner as possible.
It is well known amongst medical men that
those persons who spend their time in city
occupations are subject to certain maladies
which do not so commonly affect the rural
population. The hurry and bustle of business
life, the keen competition of trade, compelling
men now-a-days to work in such a manner as
our forefathers never dreamed of, have their
corresponding effects upon the organism,
health, and comfort of the individual.
How common the remark, on the sudden
death of some well-known business man, or
the temporary laying aside of one in active


city life : “ Ah ! poor fellow, he killed himself
with over-work;” or “ So-and-so is quite
knocked up.” Now, Ido not suppose that
anything I shall say will have the effect of
diminishing the “fight for life” or “struggle
for existence but lam not without hope,
by drawing attention to some of the evil effects
that result from such a state of things, that
some good may be done at least to alleviate, if
not entirely to remedy.
Amongst the chief disorders incidental to
such a life as I mention, are the various forms
of dyspepsia, or indigestion, with all the train
of most uncomfortable feelings comprehended
under this head. The various forms of
stomach derangements, flatulence and pain,
are often the result of eating hurriedly, or of
eating too much or too little, or of taking food
at an improper time, when perhaps the brain
and nervous system are exhausted.
Under this head of digestive derangement
we have, too, various forms of liver affection,
or “ biliousness.” Constipation, too, will be
touched upon, and its appropriate treatment
pointed out.


Another most painful and very common
complaint to which persons of sedentary occu-
pation are liable, is haemorrhoids, or piles,
often leading to fissure of the bowel, or painful
ulcer of the rectum.
Besides all this, there are the effects which
the wear and tear of city life produce upon the
brain and nervous system. Modern business
habits demand great powers of endurance, and
it is no wonder that so many break down from
exhaustion of the nervous system and brain
fag.
What is comprehended under the term
alcoholism will demand some attention. Much
misery is the result of this pernicious habit ;
and, given the desire for relief, much may be
done to remedy the habit and alleviate the
sufferings.
I have endeavoured to give the result of my
own experience in the treatment of the several
disorders, as far as it is possible to do in this
manner, with the hope that it may prove
useful to those who are suffering.
58 Moorgate Street,
London.


INTRODUCTION TO SECOND
EDITION.
In complying with the request to publish
another edition of this little brochure, I have
endeavoured to revise it thoroughly and adapt
it to the needs of Colonial life. Having had
some years’ experience of the Colonies, I am
able to supplement the treatment of the various
affections herein contained, and written ex-
pressly for England, by the experience thus
gained. In addition to what was published in
England, I have added some chapters on a
few of the Epidemic Affections so common here,
viz., Measles, Scarlet Fever, Typhoid or
Enteric Fever, and Diphtheria ; also some
chapters on Children’s Affections most com-
monly met with.
178 Collins Street,
Melbourne.


ON SOME
COMMON AFFECTIONS
INCIDENTAL TO CITY LIFE.
DYSPEPSIA, OR INDIGESTION.
In treating upon this wide subject it is
necessary to distinguish between the disorder
of the digestive process as occurring in the
stomach itself, and called the primary diges-
tion, and that which takes place after the
food leaves the stomach, and which is called
the secondary digestion. The first and most
frequent form of indigestion in the stomach
is
GASTRODYNIA, OR SPASM OF THE
STOMACH.
This is most commonly produced by eating
unsuitable food, or eating too quickly. Damp
and cold often produce it.


Symptoms.— Shortly after eating there is
experienced great pain at the pit of the
stomach; no tenderness to pressure, but
often relieved thereby. The pain is often
associated with distension of the abdomen.
It is paroxysmal in character, returning at
intervals, sometimes of hours, sometimes of
days. In some cases the pain results in
vomiting, or gaseous eructation.
Treatment. —In most cases Aconite 1,
and Nux Vomica 1, give immediate relief ;
two drops of each should be taken alternately
every half-hour or two hours, according to the
severity of the pain. If in three or four
hours there be no relief, Cocculns 1, two drops
every hour or so, should be given. Hot
fomentation to the stomach, and often the
drinking a tumbler of hot water will give
speedy relief. In those patients subject to
this affection the regular wearing of a hydro-
pathic compress is very beneficial. Light and
easily digested food is essential.
The next most common form of indigestion
in the stomach is what for want of a better
term we call—


ACUTE DYSPEPSIA.
This is almost invariably the result of par-
taking of improper food. “ Dining out ”is a
frequent cause of this affection ; the custom
of eating a number of rich dishes, with the
admixture of several wines, winding up with
pastry, cheese, &c., produces the not uncom-
mon result of an attack of acute indigestion.
Should an attack of vomiting supervene, there
is generally speedy relief; or even if the food
passes from the stomach and produces dis-
turbance in the bowels, by diarrhoea, this too
will probably prove beneficial. •
Symptoms. —The patient usually wakes
with headache, nausea, foul tongue, loss of
appetite, and feeling of general “ malaise
more or less flatulence, with heartburn.
Treatment. —If neither vomiting nor
diarrhoea has resulted, Nux Vomica 1 may
be taken, three drops of the tincture every two
or three hours. Abstinence from food for
some hours is advisable, and only light broth,
beef tea, cocoa or milk and water, should be
taken for a day or two. If there be much


nausea, but no vomiting, putrid taste in the
mouth, and indisposition for food ; Pulsatilla
1, three drops every two hours, should be
taken. After some hours, a few doses of
China 1, three drops every three or four hours,
will complete the cure, resuming the ordinary
diet by degrees.
Should there be excessive vomiting, Ipe-
cacuanha 1, two drops every half-hour, will
relieve it, to be followed by Pulsatilla 1 in
the course of a few hours, two drops every
three hours. If there be much diarrhoea, with
headache, Iris Versicolor 1, two drops every
two hoflrs, should be taken.
The next affection or rather series of
symptoms, the result of a more chronic con-
dition of dyspepsia, I purpose treating under
the various heads of Heartburn, Flatulence,
Pain After Taking Food, Waterbrash and
Acidity. These symptoms are all embraced
in the term Chronic Indigestion, and are
nearly all the result either of weakness of the
stomach itself, preventing it doing the work
of digestion, or that the food taken is not
such that the stomach can digest. Into the


subject of the proper diet for dyspeptic
patients I shall enter at the close of this
subject.
HEARTBURN.
Causes. —lmperfect digestion, and probably
fermentation of the food in the stomach.
Symptoms. —A very disagreeable rising in
the throat, often reaching to the mouth,
accompanied by a burning irritation in the
gullet.
Treatment. —Carbo Vegeta bilis 3, in
trituration. Two grains dry on the
tongue every two hours ; or if no relief in
a few hours, Hux Vomica 1, two drops in a
little water every two hours. Pulsatilla 1,
two drops every three hours, if no relief from
the above. A glass of hot water an hour
before a meal will often prevent its occur-
rence.
FLATULENCE.
Causes. —Same as above.
Symptoms. —lt needs no description.


Treatment. — One of the best remedies is
Uux Vomica 1, five drops an hour before each
meal, and Carbo Vegetabilis 3, two grains dry-
on the tongue an hour after the meal.
If these fail to give relief, Bryonia 1 or
Lycopodium 3 may be tried in the same way
as the Nux Vomica.
PAIN AFTER TAKING FOOD.
Causes. —This distressing symptom may
occur as a result of neuralgia of the stomach
itself, or from weakness of the organ, or as
an effect of an acute attack of' vomiting
(bilious attack), when for some days the act
of digestion is carried on with pain. It may
also occur as a result of a more serious con-
dition of things, viz., ulceration of the mucous
membrane, or from cancer ; these, however,
are rare affections, and by far the most
common cause of pain is debility of the
stomach or unsuitable food.
Symptoms.— Shortly after eating, a sen-
sation of fulness in the epigastrium, with
great tenderness to pressure ; and dull aching


or throbbing pain, lasting for some hours,
when it gradually subsides to be renewed at
the next meal. There is usually no vomiting
as an accompaniment of the pain.
Treatment. A tumbler of hot water
taken an hour before the meal will frequently
prevent an attack of pain. Bryonia 1, five
drops taken half an hour before a meal, and
repeated half an hour after, will do good.
Nux Vomica 1, five drops every hour or so,
if the pain is spasmodic or griping. Carbo
Vegetabilis 3, if much flatulence, a grain
every two or three hours dry on the tongue.
For debility of the stomach, China 1, five
drops an hour before a meal.
If the pain is of a braised character and
probably due to weakness of the muscular coat
of the stomach, Arnica 1, three drops every
three hours, will be of service.
ACIDITY.
Acidity is caused either by a too great
increase of gastric juice, or from acid fermen-
tation of the food, and gives rise to a very
annoying affection.


Symptoms. —A frequent rising of sour fluid
into the mouth an hour or two after food,
sometimes producing nausea and vomiting.
Treatment. —Care in diet (see Diet).
Calcarea Carb. 3, two grains an hour before
every meal, where there are “ obstinate acid
eructations and a teaspoonful of pure lemon
juice, two hours after the meal, in a wine-glass
of water. Failing this, Uux Vomica, Pul-
satilla, and Lycopodium may be tried. .
Sulphuric Acid 2, three drops an hour before
the meal, will frequently give great relief.
WATERBRASH.
Symptoms.— ln this affection the eruc-
tation, or rising in the mouth, is not sour, but
an insipid, or slightly saline, or even foul-
tasting fluid, often in considerable quantity.
Treatment.— Here, too, Nux Vomica 1 is
of great use, two drops an hour before the
meal. In delicate constitutions, Pulsatilla 1
may be more efficacious, taken in the same
way.


CHRONIC INDIGESTION, OR
GASTRIC CATARRH.
Previously, I have spoken of various pro-
minent symptoms occurring in the course of this
affection, or even being present as the remains
of an acute attack of indigestion, and requiring
special treatment. I now wish to speak of the
subject as a whole.
Causes. — These are most varied. Amongst
the most common may be mentioned heredi-
tary predisposition, chronic liver disease, excess
in eating, or the habitual use of improper
food ; imperfect mastication, excessive mental
or physical work immediately after meals ;
the habitual use of strong stimulating fluids,
especially spirits in an undiluted form ; the
abuse of tonic medicines.
Symptoms. —Sense of weight and oppression
after a meal, with feeling of uneasiness and
distention from flatulence ; fulness in the
throat, and often an ill-defined pain between
the biadebones ; appetite capricious, although
the discomfort is often temporarily relieved
after eating. The tongue usually coated in the


morning, and foul taste in the mouth ; fre-
quent feeling of nausea and general “malaise
urine thick, depositing a reddish sediment ;
thirst is frequently present ; the bowels some-
times constipated, sometimes relaxed ; the
breath is offensive, and the gums often spongy
and liable to bleed. These are some of the
most prominent symptoms, but they by no
means exhaust the list ; space, however,
forbids a more extended notice.
Treatment.— lt is impossible in the limit
of this book to lay down a complete course of
treatment, but the indications for several of
the most prominent medicines will be given.
Pulsatilla 1 has a marked effect on the
mucous membrane of the stomach, and is
useful in that form of indigestion characterised
by weight and pressure at the stomach, sour
or bitter taste in the mouth, coated tongue,
and bad smell of the breath, together with
acid risings. It is particularly useful after
eating rich food, and when there is slight
diarrhoea. Two or three drops, night and
morning, should be taken.
Nux Vomica I.—The indications for this


medicine are almost the opposite of those for
Pulsatilla. It is chiefly indicated in weakness
of the muscular coating of the stomach, which
is one of the most prominent indications for
its use in constipation. There is also flatu-
lence and oppression after meals ; tongue
coated, particularly at the back; morning
headache, with drowsiness and feeling of
nausea. Particularly useful after “ dining
out." Those who exercise the brain much,
and take little exercise, will find this medicine
very useful. Two or three drops an hour
before each meal, in hot water.
Gelseminum 1. —One of the most useful
medicines in certain forms of dyspepsia,
particularly in that of debility of the nerves
of the stomach. One of the chief symptoms
is that of sinking at the stomach ; an in-
describable feeling of emptiness, or want,
accompanied by yellowish white tongue, bitter
taste with thirst, and tendency to diarrhoea.
Two or three drops an hour before each meal.
Antimonium Crudum 3.—lts chief indica-
tions are milky white coating of the tongue,
with great aversion to food, flatulence of foul


odour, with alternate diarrhoea and constipa-
tion ; great weakness and prostration, and
occasional attacks of eruption on the skin ;
nausea, and even vomiting, are often relieved
by it. Two grains, dry upon the tongue, an
hour before meals.
Hydrastis I.—This medicine is most use-
ful in the more painful form of indigestion or
Gastric Catarrh. The pain usually comes on
from one to two hours after the meal, and is
very severe just at the pit of the stomach. It
is useful also in habitual constipation as a result
of inactive liver. For the pain, three drops
should be taken every half hour, in a little hot
water, till relieved. In constipation, five
drops, morning and evening, will he found
useful.
In a small work such as this it is impossi-
ble to indicate anything like the whole of the
remedies useful in this troublesome complaint;
we cannot leave the subject, however, before
laying down a few simple rules of diet, for the
guidance of those who suffer from indigestion.
First, as to the manner of taking food. All
dyspeptics should eat slowly, and at regular


intervals. The tendency of city life is to
prevent that attention to meals which is
absolutely necessary. The daily life of
thousands of city men is something like this :
Not too early up ; to begin with breakfast,
hurriedly eaten ; tea or coffee drunk scalding
hot ; the solid portion of food half-masticated ;
a hasty walk to catch the train ; newspaper or
book read all the way to town ; brain hard at
work till mid-day, when either a sandwich is
eaten, or, in some cases, a heavy dinner
hurriedly taken. Those who only eat
sparingly in the middle of the day, continue
hard at work till 4 or 5 o’clock, then a rush
to the train, again the newspaper or book, and
so home to dinner. The meal is eaten while
the brain and nervous system is thoroughly
exhausted, and the consequence is, drowsiness
and sleep follow, as a matter of course. This
state of things persevered in for a shorter or
longer period, and a condition of dyspepsia is
the natural result.
Now, to avoid this, I would advise rising
in time to eat the breakfast comfortably.
Make a good breakfast , if possible, a little


meat or fish, chocolate or cocoa, taken not too
hot. At eleven o’clock a raw egg beaten with
a tablespoonful of water, and a teaspoonful
of brandy. At one or half-past one, a lightly
grilled chop, and bread a day old, with a glass
of claret. At six or seven o’clock, a light
dinner with meat and a little vegetable, and
light farinaceous pudding. It must depend
upon circumstances whether anything be taken
after this. It is not possible to lay down a diet
for each case ; but the above, modified to
suit particular circumstances will he found
to suit those who are only slightly affected
with dyspepsia, but who will become more so
if the diet be not proper.
Another point of great importance to
dyspeptics is to take the food dry. I mean
by this, not to drink a large quantity of fluid
while the food is being taken. The pint of
stout or bitter ale, often taken with the
mid-day meal, is the worst possible accom-
paniment, and is a fruitful cause of indiges-
tion. Hot fluids, too, are most prejudicial,
taken with the food. In some cases a tumbler
of hot water taken an hour before the meal,


is very useful in preventing pain and aiding
digestion. Again I would repeat, eat slowly
and masticate the food well.
INDIGESTION IN THE BOWELS.
( Secondary Digestion.)
After the food leaves the stomach, a very
considerable part of the digestive process has
to be undergone ; and it often happens
that food of improper quality may be taken
and yet pass out of the stomach without
producing much disorder, but on reaching
the small intestines it may be productive of
great disturbance, and the chief effect pro-
duced by this state of things is
DIARRHCEA.
Causes. —Cold or chill, or excessive heat ;
excess in quantity, or deleterious quality of
food. One very frequent cause is impure
water. Constitutional causes of various
kinds.
Symptoms. —Relaxed and frequent evacua-
tion from the bowels, either painless or


accompanied by more or less pain of a griping
character. When there is pain, it usually
occurs in paroxysms. When occurring as
a symptom of indigestion, there is generally
a furred condition of the tongue, often with
great thirst and feeling of faintness and
debility.
Treatment. —The first remedy for dyspeptic
diarrhoea is undoubtedly Pulsatilla, especially
useful after partaking of rich food. Its
special indications are loose painless stools,
with the passing of mucus, but without any
straining (tenesmus). Dose, three drops
after each motion. Mercurius, is indicated
in frequent, dark brown or yellowish stools
of a bilious character, with burning heat in
the rectum. A grain, dry on the tongue,
after each motion.
Arsenicum 3. —Very frequent watery stools,
great thirst and prostration. Two drops after
each motion.
Veratrum I.—Painful diarrhoea, with cramp
in the legs, and feeling of faintness, and
vomiting. Three drops after each motion.


DYSENTERY.
It is not desirable to treat this condition
without medical advice, except where it
cannot be obtained. Dysentery is characterised
by inflammation of the lining membrane of
the large intestine, with the passage of
frequent, painful, and bloody stools.
Causes. —Exposure to cold and damp,
intemperance, malaria ; also certain consti-
tutional predispositions.
Symptoms.— Generally some febrile dis-
turbance and general constitutional symptoms,
such as quick pulse, hot and dry skin, and
very often with shivering at the commence-
ment of an attack, followed by great pain in
the bowels and frequent stools ; the character
of the pain is peculiar to dysentery, and is of
a straining, forcing character, urging at the
rectum, and a sensation as though the bowel
would never be emptied. The stools are more
or less mixed with blood and bloody mucus.
There is also prostration of strength, fre-
quently accompanied by great anxiety.


Treatment. —Baptisa 1, is one of the best
remedies where there is marked prostration of
strength, with frequent bloody stools, and not
much sti’aining or urging. Three drops every
one or two hours.
Mercurius Cor. 3.—Frequent, bloody, or
mucus and bloody stools, accompanied by
much straining or urging, and cutting pains
in the abdomen. Three drops every two or
three hours.
Colocynth 3.—Also useful when there is
frequent bloody stools, but with severe colicky
pain around the navel, which is relieved after
an evacuation. Three drops after each
motion.
CONSTIPATION.
It seems scarcely necessary to define what
is meant by this affection. It may shortly be
described as a departure from the natural
standard of health, in reference to the evacu-
ation of the bowels. It is well known that, in
full and robust health, there should be an
emptying of the bowels once in twenty-four
hours at least. There are of course exceptions


to this rule, and it would scarcely amount to a
disordered condition if evacuation did not
occur for thirty-six or forty hours. From
sedentary habits, however, or from neglect of
the call of nature, or from some form of dys-
pepsia, there is often produced a much more
prolonged condition of constipation, giving
rise to a variety of very disagreeable and
troublesome symptoms, such as headache, low
spirits, pains in the abdomen, and sometimes
sickness, with loss of appetite,
In such a condition as this, it is necessary
to give relief, and the common practice with
many is to fly at once to some form of
purgative.- This undoubtedly gives more or
less relief, but the practical result is that the
relief becomes more and more transient, the
purgative has to be repeated oftener, the dose
has to be stronger, and at last, it fails to give
the required relief.
The constant use of purgative medicine is
prejudicial in other ways. It nauseates the
stomach and impairs the appetite, and, if long
continued, tends to weaken the bowels, so
that there will be no action without it.


Now in the treatment of this affection there
must he no half-measures, the purgative must
be laid aside once for all. There are certain
accessory means which may be used if
necessary to overcome any temporary incon-
venience while the medicines are acting.
Treatment. —Before touching upon the
medicines useful in this troublesome disorder,
I may mention a few things which will be
found helpful, which are not strictly medicinal.
1. Attention to diet. Brown, or whole
meal bread, is very useful. Vegetables may
be used freely. Stewed fruit, Normandy
pippins, French plums, figs, etc., are all
helpful.
A glass of cold water taken on rising in the
morning will often be found of service. Too
much animal food should be avoided, as this
tends very materially to constipation.
One other point is of great importance,
and that is regularity in attending to nature’s
call. Nothing tends so much to disorder the
condition of the bowels as irregularity in this
respect, therefore it should be made a rule, if
possible, to attend to this at a regular hour.


Exercise is of great importance, and should
if possible be regularly attended to ; a good
brisk walk will often have the desired effect
without any other assistance.
In those cases where there is great torpidity
of the lower bowel, the use of an injection of
cold or tepid water may be resorted to with
perfect safety, and with immediate relief.
This may be done two or three times a week
without producing the least unpleasantness,
and is quite free from danger of any kind.
The use of the enema is far preferable to the
use of laxative drugs, which only produce
reaction and a renewal of suffering afterwards.
In using medicinal agents for the treatment
of this affection, it must be borne in mind
that homoepathic medicines do not act in any
way like an active dose of purgative drug.
They act by restoring the function of the part,
and so allowing nature to do her own work.
One of the simplest methods of overcoming
temporary constipation, when arising from
digestive disorder, is to take Nux Yomica 1,
two drops at bedtime ; and Sulphur 1, two
drops the first thing in the morning. In


most cases this will relieve. Hydrastis 0,
three to five drops at bedtime, will frequently
give the needed relief in the morning. If the
constipation is of a more chronic character,
Plumbum 3, in trituration ; a grain in a little
water twice a day, with the Hydrastis at
night, will seldom fail.
One other remedy is very useful in over-
coming the torpid or sluggish action of the
bowels, viz. :—Opium 3, two drops night and
morning. By the steady use of one or other
of these means, with the occasional use of the
tepid water eneinata, most cases of constipation
will speedily be relieved.
HÆMORRHOIDS, OR PILES.
This painful affection is caused in most
cases from some obstruction to the circulation
through the veins of the lower bowel, and may
be defined as a varicose condition of the veins,
producing pain and enlargement, with or
without bleeding.


The causes which lead to this state of
things are various. Amongst them may be
mentioned constipation, especially if accom-
panied by much standing. Sedentary habits,
the use of malt liquor in some cases, or the
over use of stimulants of any kind will tend to
their production in others, and sitting on a
damp or wet seat.
Piles are usually spoken of as bleeding or
non-bleeding, external or internal. This is a
mere arbitrary division, as the pathological
condition is the same in both cases, and
bleeding may take place either from the
external only, or from those more internal, or
from both. It is essentially a disease ‘of
middle and advanced life, and is often the
cause of prolonged suffering. At times the
bleeding is very great, seldom a motion passed
without; at other times there is a mere trace
of blood.
Symptoms. —Burning, itching, or tingling
at the anus after stool, with great tenderness
of the external orifice, which may be felt
swollen and painful. Sometimes an excre-
scence protrudes from the bowel, after the act


of defecation, which returns at once with
slight pressure, or even without. Sitting is
rendered painful by reason of the swollen
condition of the excrescence. More or less
bleeding takes place at every act of
defecation, according to the condition of
the piles.
Sometimes the piles do not protrude from
the bowel, but,seem wholly upon the outside,
and are mere masses of hardened integument,
more or less painful and irritating. These
are called external piles.
Treatment. —If the piles are recent and
depend upon a constipated condition of the
bowels, Nux Vomica 2, two drops at bedtime,
and Sulphur $, two drops in the morning, will
often give relief at once ; follow this up for
some days, and use an enema of cold water
every morning, with a little Hamamelis Cerate
applied externally at night, and most recent
cases of piles will disappear.
If they are more chronic, and are very pain-
ful, with tendency to bleed, and much inflam-
mation, Aconite 1, two drops at bedtime,
followed by iEsculus Hippocastanum 1, two


drops three times a day, a fomentation of hot
water for ten minutes, and a cold sponging
for three minutes afterwards. This treatment
is very useful in what is known as “ an attack
of piles.”
If there be no constipation, but a constant
bleeding at stool, with little or no external
manifestation of the presence of piles, I should
recommend the bowel to be relieved in the
evening by the aid of a cold water injection,
and then about two tablespoonfuls of the
following lotion injected and allowed to
remain : Hamamelis 6, one teaspoonful, water
two tablespoonfuls. This to be done every
evening for a week or so ; and at the same
time take Hamamelis 1, three drops twice a
day internally.
In cases where the injection of the lotion
of Hamamelis is not convenient, a piece of
lint well anointed with the ointment may be
applied close to the bowel, or even just within,
and kept fast there by a handkerchief passed
between the legs.
The diet should be light and unstimulating ;
fruit and vegetables may be taken freely, meat


once a day only ; oatmeal porridge in the
morning will be very useful. Alcoholic
beverages should be strictly avoided during an
attack ; tea and coffee also should not be
taken. Cocoa or milk is the most appropriate
fluid.
It is better as a rule to sit upon a moder-
ately hard seat than a very soft one, and if the
habits are sedentary walking exercise should
be strictly enforced. Cold sponging night
and morning will be found very helpful also,
both local and general.
FISSURE OF THE BOWEL.
This very painful affection is of very com-
mon occurrence, much more so than is
generally thought, and occurs very frequently
as a result of constipation. The effort to
expel the contents of the bowel, which are of
a hard and dry character, has the effect of
cracking the fine mucous membrane at the
orifice of the anus ; then the use of rough


materials for purposes of cleansing prevent this
crack from healing, and so a fissure is pro-
duced which is very difficult to heal and
produces very unpleasant symptoms.
Symptoms. —lntolerable burning, itching at
the anus, more particularly at night or when
quiet ; some amount of pain is usually felt on
unloading the bowels, and usually a small
quantity of blood follows ; the bowels are
usually constipated.
Treatment. —Several medicines are recom-
mended for this affection, but as a rule the
internal administration of medicines is not
found sufficient. The use of Hamamelis
ointment at bedtime will frequently give great
relief to the irritation. The ointment of
Hydrastis has been found of benefit also in
healing up the fissure. I generally find,
however, that the application of a little nitrate
of silver, with the use of Nitric Acid 2, three
drops night and morning, by far the best
mode of treatment. Anything not cured by
this means must have a little surgical attention
by a medical man,


FISTULA IN ANO.
In a treatise of this kind it is impossible to
lay down treatment for this serious disorder,
and it is merely mentioned in order to point
out the symptoms. The remedy must be
found by application to a medical man.
Fistula is almost always the result of a
previous abscess or gathering at or near the
orifice of the bowel. The abscess breaks
either into or just outside the bowel, and
after discharging for a time does not heal up
in the usual way, but there is a continual
oozing or weeping therefrom, giving rise to
great irritation and discomfort. The bowels
are not necessarily constipated, they may even
be relaxed. There is frequently sharp sting-
ing pain at the rectum, and if of long stand-
ing there is a lowering of the tone of the
general health, loss of appetite, and general
malaise. It is of great consequence that this
state of matters should be attended to, but it
cannot be done without surgical assistance,


LIVER DISORDER OR BILIOUSNESS.
Wliat is popularly known as liver disorder
or bilious attack is in most cases a complicated
affection, in which the liver is only one organ
affected ; but inasmuch as the liver is more or
less in a congested condition in these attacks,
it differs from simple dyspepsia, where the
mucous membrane of the stomach is at fault
chiefly. This disorder is frequently brought
on from chill during the prevalence of damp
weather, and may be productive of sickness
and diarrhoea (which generally proves bene-
ficial), of acute congestion or even inflammation
of the liver, or jaundice, and other grave
symptoms.
SIMPLE BILIOUS ATTACK.
Symptoms.— Sometimes slight chill, followed
by headache and feeling of nausea ; this is
speedily followed by vomiting, and sometimes


with diarrhoea, great feeling of drowsiness,
loss of appetite, and distaste for everything
but cold water.
Treatment.— lris Versicolor 1. Two
drops every one or two hours seldom fail to
relieve this attack.
If the tongue remains coated after the
attack is over, a few doses of Nux Vomica 3,
two drops three times a day, will complete the
cure.
Let the diet be light and simple for some
days. Milk and farinaceous food chiefly, with
beef tea or mutton broth as desired, gradually
resuming the ordinary diet.
If the appetite is fitful, after a day or two
China 1, three drops three times a day, will
restore it.
ACUTE CONGESTION OF THE LIVER.
This is purely a functional affection, the
result of several causes ; the most common of
which is some error of diet producing an
attack of indigestion, which results not in


stomach disorder, but in liver derangement.
It is often produced by the abuse of alcoholic
stimulants, especially from malt liquor. Ex-
posure to damp and vet producing chill will
often bring on an attack of congestion of the
liver. Habitual over-eating and over-drinking
predispose to this affection.
Symptoms. —Sense of weight and fulness
at the right side, immediately under the short
ribs ; slight tenderness to deep pressure ;
headache, with feeling of languor and debility.
A very marked symptom of liver disorder is
lowness of spirits. There is usually a consti-
pated condition of bowels and white-coated
tongue. If the attack is severe it may
induce vomiting. A peculiar burning aching
pain beneath the right shoulder blade is, too,
a very common symptom of liver disorder of
the congestive kind.
Treatment. —If the attack is the result of
chili, Aconite 1, two drops every two hours
for six times, may be taken, followed by
Bryonia 1, three drops every three hours.
This may be continued for twenty-four hours,
and Mercurius Sol. 3, one grain in a little


water every three hours, for a day or so, will
usually be sufficient. Should there be a
decided overflow of bile, with vomiting and
pain, Podophyllum 0, three drops every four
hours, may be taken. If the attack is brought
on from over-feeding or from excessive use of
stimulants, Nux Vomica 1, two drops every
two or three hours, will be best. This may
be followed in twenty-four hours by Sulphur
1, three drops night and morning, for three or
four days.
Rest and quiet in bed are essential to insure
a good recovery and to avoid a worse disorder.
Light simple diet, chiefly farinaceous, with
milk ; a raw egg beaten up with milk is very
useful in this affection ; cold water may be
taken freely. Cooked fruit is allowable.
Avoid all stimulants strictly, especially wines
and malt liquors. If there be much pain and
tenderness in the region of the liver, a com-
press of hot water applied to the right side
and worn all night will be found very useful.
It should be made by those who understand
them, and most homoeopathic chemists keep
them ready for use ; but one may be extern-


porised by folding a small white handkerchief
to the size required, and wringing it in hot
water, cover with oil silk, and then a large
piece of flannel, and lastly fasten it on with a
binder or towel. The chief point for con-
sideration in applying a compress, either to
the throat, chest, or abdomen, is thoroughly
to prevent evaporation by using a sufficiently
large piece of waterproof material over the wet
cloth, and fastening it sufficiently tight.
INFLAMMATION OF THE LIVER.
This affection is so rare, and is ushered in
with such severe symptoms, such as shivering,
followed by high fever, hot skin, thirst, etc.,
and all the symptoms of a grave disease, that
no one would think of treating themselves,
but would instantly seek advice. Its treat-
ment will therefore not he attempted in a book
such as this.


JAUNDICE.
This affection is always caused through
some interference with the function of the
liver preventing the outflow of the bile. This
interference may be either in the liver itself or
in the gall duct or gall bladder ; but from
whatever cause, the symptoms of jaundice are
unmistakable, and nearly always follow a
regular sequence.
If merely the result of a functional disorder,
its cure is comparatively easy. If it is
dependent upon organic disease, or impacted
gall stones, it is associated with great pain
and general disturbance of the system, and
should only be treated by a medical man.
Many cases of slight jaundice are however
merely the result of functional disarrange-
ment, and are easily cured.
Symptoms. —One of the first symptoms of
jaundice is an extremely dark colour of the
urine, not much sediment usually, but often
the colour of porter. The white of the eye
becomes quite of a yellow colour : there is a
tingling and irritation of the skin. The


bowels are usually constipated, the motion of
a pale slate or drab colour.
Treatmext. —Podophyllum 1, five drops
every three hours, in recent cases of jaundice,
had better be given at the commencement,
followed in twenty-four hours by Mercurius
Sol. 3, two grains dry on the tongue every
three hours.
If the jaundice is accompanied by pain in
the region of the liver, Aconite I, two drops
every two hours for five or six doses, should
be given, followed by Mercurius Sol. 3, two
grains dry on the tongue every three hours.
A hot fomentation or compress (see Acute
Congestion) may be applied with benefit.
If the jaundice be dependent upon the
passage of a gall-stone, the pain is very
severe, even agonizing, and felt just under the
ribs on the right side. Under these circum-
stances, a hot bath is to be given at once, and
Aconite 1 and Hux Vomica 1, given
alternately every half-hour to two hours in
doses of one drop. If the pain continues
with increasing severity, medical aid had
better be obtained.


BRAIN EXHAUSTION, OR BRAIN
FAG.
Scarcely any department of city life is
exempt from this distressing affection. Every
one whose life is active, and whose business
involves anxious thought and care, is liable to
suffer from it. All do not suffer equally,
because of the variation in the constitutional
strength, some men being able to bear more
wear and tear than others ; but even the
strongest cannot with impunity overwork the
brain and nervous system.
It may be thought that hard work of the
mind would develop and strengthen the brain,
in the same way as hard work of the body
develops the muscles ; and so no doubt to a
certain extent this is true, when carried on
legitimately and with care ; but it is not this
judicious and regular use of the mental
faculties that leads to the condition we are
considering, but that anxious, worrying, high
pressure condition that modern business
habits engender.


The brain is one of the most long-suffering
and enduring organs in the human body ;
provided there be change of occupation, it is
wonderful how much overtaxing it will stand
without breaking down.
Symptoms.— One of the first symptoms of
an overworked brain is sleeplessness, accom-
panied by irritability of temper and excitement
of manner ; various forms of neuralgic pains,
varying much both as to locality and also
intensity ; slow and often weak pulse ; the
patient is often easily fatigued ; attacks of
palpitation frequently occur ; headache and
feeling as of cold water running down the
back ; occasionally loss of memory ; the
patient is often obliged to make considerable
effort of will to enable him to do what is
required of him. If he does not improve, a
more serious train of symptoms develope, show-
ing that the function of the brain is materially
interfered with.
It is not necessary to pursue the symptoms
of this affection further ; enough has been
said to indicate the serious nature of it, and to
justify the measures of rest to be adopted.


Treatment. —ln the first place, if the
symptoms of brain fag are becoming developed,
the first indication for treatment is rest,
entire and absolute, for a time, change of air
and scene, so as to change the current of
thought and action entirely. Avoidance of
stimulants, except of the lightest and simplest
character, such as claret, hock, or some light
Hungarian wines ; good, light food, such as
is easily digested.
In reference to medicines the only one
especially indicated in this condition of brain
is Phosphoric Acid 1, five drops night and
morning. If there is any complication of
symptoms of a dyspeptic character, the treat-
ment may be found under that head.
ALCOHOLISM.
The well-nigh universal custom of drinking
to excess which exists in all large cities is unfor-
tunately too manifest to need proof. It seems to
have become a part of the daily life of the
nation ; and however much one may deplore it,


it must be recognised as amongst the evils to be
remedied, just as much so in fact as any other
form of disease. Some persons by the nature
of their occupation seem compelled to take
more alcoholic stimulant than is good for
them, the exposure to temptation being so
constant, and the will to resist so feeble. The
vicissitudes of weather and climate are a
fruitful source of temptation in others. Here-
.ditary predisposition, too, not uncommonly is
a cause of excessive drinking. Sedentary
occupation, especially if monotonous, seems to
be provocative of an appetite for strong drink.
Trouble and anxiety often drive persons to
drown their miserable feelings in drink, and,
unfortunately, the facility with which it may
be obtained in our large cities is calculated to
encourage the propensity.
The habit of drinking, more than any other,
seems to have a tendency to become confirmed,
until the person becomes literally a slave to it.
At first a moderate excess is overcome by
perhaps a bad headache or an attack of sick-
ness ; but each recurring excess is followed by
a miserable train of symptoms, almost com-


pelling him to have recourse again to stimu-
lants to obtain the temporary relief needed,
until at last he becomes a continuous and
confirmed drinker.
In all our large cities there are hundreds of
persons, male and female, who, though never
perhaps intoxicated in the ordinary acceptation
of the term, are really very seldom sober.
They have recourse to stimulants immediately
on rising, . rum and milk perhaps, or gin
and bitters ; during the forenoon several
glasses of ale or perhaps spirits ; this may be
continued through the afternoon ; and evening
comes with its hot spirits and water : so that,
taking the twenty-four hours through, such
persons take a very large quantity of alcohol.
These habits may continue with more or less
impunity for some time, but by-and-bye
symptoms begin to show themselves which
betoken its effects on the system.
In good health and amongst temperate
persons, one or two ounces of alcohol may he
taken during twenty-four hours with impunity,
in the form of ale, wine, or spirits. More
than this in most persons will produce slight


symptoms of alcoholism. The symptoms may
not be evident to others, but the person him-
self will be conscious of some excitement of
the nervous system ; such a quickening of the
function of the brain, followed by a general
feeling of drowsiness and torpor.
If an excess be indulged in for some time,
then we have symptoms of chronic alcoholism
produced. These are—first : a general feeling
of restlessness and inquietude, sometimes
amounting to actual tremor of the limbs, and
requiring the exercise of the will in order to
prevent it, sleeplessness at night, although
feeling drowsy, accompanied also with intense
restlessness. After a while a second stage of
alcoholism is reached ; and there the restless-
ness and inquietude is increased and persistent,
the tremor scarcely absent, only controlled by a
great effort, and usually affecting both hands
and feet. This symptom is generally worse
in the morning, and is no doubt due to
exhaustion of the nervous system from want
of sleep. It is in this condition that the
sufferer is tempted to fly to the stimulant in
order to enable him better to control himself ;


and no doubt to some extent this is successful,
but the remedy is worse than the disease, and
he can never get well while this habit is
indulged in.
Besides these nervous tremors, there is often
a dull, diffused headache, with buzzing or
roaring in the head, specks or clouds before
the sight, and often flashes of light occurring
at night just as sleep is approaching. Attacks
of vertigo or giddiness are not infrequent, but
do not usually last long. The restlessness
becomes more and more intense, until sleep is
well-nigh impossible, and horrible dreams and
hallucinations harass the already worn and
excited brain and nervous system.
The mental condition of the patient soon
becomes most distressing. Uncertainty of
aim or purpose, inquietude of mind, renders
him almost unfit to carry on even ordinary
business occupations, and this may be without
any definite delusion. His temper may be
harsh or even violent, or on the contrary he
may be the subject of a feeling of horror and
dread, as of some impending anxiety or
trouble, which is simply a delusion. At this


stage is observed a congested and watery con-
dition of the eyes, with a jaundiced appear-
ance of the whites, together with a peculiar
puffiness of the skin of the face, with perhaps
redness of, and an eruption upon, the nose.
The patient now complains of nausea and loss
of appetite, with sometimes retching or
vomiting ; the tongue is almost always foul,
and the breath foetid.
Should the patient continue to pursue the
evil habit, he will most probably soon suffer
from symptoms of palsy, or perhaps a more
serious form of paralysis, or he may sink into
a condition of such moral degradation, that
the loss of mental faculty will leave him a
hopeless and incurable lunatic. It would
be easy to enlarge upon the evils attending
the pernicious habit of excessive drinking, but
enough has been said upon this point to show
its dangers. Into the subject of delirium
tremens, and the more advanced nervous
disorders, as dipsomania, it is not the province
of this book to enter.
Treatment. —lt will be evident from the
foregoing, that the first step towards recovery


from the effects of the evils of excessive drink-
ing, is absolutely and at once to abstain from
taking stimulants, and here it may be well
to call attention to a very popular fallacy in
respect to this : it is often thought undesirable
or even dangerous to omit at once the
accustomed stimulant. Now, it cannot be too
forcibly impressed upon the mind of the
sufferer, that he may, nay, he must, once for
all absolutely relinquish all stimulants, or he
cannot get well. There must be no half
measures ; the whole thing must be aban-
doned, and the resolve made not to touch it.
Having made up the mind to this, the rest
comparatively easy, always supposing there
is no permanent injury done. Nutritive
soups and broths must be taken frequently
and in small quantities, until the appetite
improves, and there is a desire for better food.
Milk with lime water may be taken freely ;
iced soda water with milk is very grateful
when the stomach is irritable and weak. As
soon as the stomach can bear it, a little fish
or meat may be taken and increased as the
appetite improves.


Although the administration of nourish-
ment of a light, bland character is of essential
consequence in the treatment of chronic
alcoholism, together with total abstinence from
stimulants, there are several medicines that
are helpful in the treatment of the various
distressing symptoms.
Nux Vomica I.—This medicine should be
taken when there is nausea or even vomiting ;
foul tongue with thick, white coating ; dull
headache, with giddiness. Two drops every
three hours. As soon as relief is obtained by
this means, follow it with China 1, three drops
every four hours, which will restore the tone
of the stomach and improve the appetite.
If there be much headache, with suffusion
of the eyes and nervous tremor, Belladonna
may be alternated with Nux Vomica. Two
drops of each medicine alternately every two
hours. Should there be great restlessness and
want of sleep, Kali Bromidii, five grains to
ten grains, repeated every two or three hours,
will have a most beneficial effect in quieting
the nervous system.
In cases where there is a sincere desire to


abandon the habit of over-indulgence in stimu-
lants, much assistance can be obtained by
taking 20 to 30 drops of Cinchona Rubra
twice a day in a wineglass of water.
Any other symptoms will most probably be
found under the head of indigestion, except
those that are of a grave nervous character,
when medical advice must be obtained.


ON SOME
INFECTIOUS DISEASES.
MEASLES.
One of the most common eruptive diseases
of childhood. The attack is usually ushered
in with a ■ feeling of lassitude and feverish-
ness ; this is quickly followed by symptoms
of catarrh, the eyes, nose, windpipe, and
throat being mostly affected. Intolerance of
light, sneezing, hoarseness and dry hard cough
are early symptoms. The feverishness usually
continues to rise until the fourth day, when an
eruption breaks out. The eruption consists of
small blotches somewhat raised above the sur-.
face of the skin, and often running together,
forming large patches. The fever does not
abate immediately on the appearance of the
rj\sh ; on the seventh day the rash usually


disappears, and also the fever. The most
common complication of measles is that
affecting the lungs, especially in winter and
spring months, bronchitis being a not infre-
quent accompaniment ; ear-ache and bleeding
of the nose are also frequent after-effects of
this disease, and occasionally the kidneys
become disordered.
Treatment.— Early confinement to bed is
most important to prevent the eruption from
receding. It frequently happens that a child
goes to school for two or three days after the
catarrh has commenced, and as this is the
most infectious time, it is no wonder that a
whole school is affected by the contagion. It
is thus very important that the earliest symp-
toms be recognized, and the child put to bed
in a moderately warm room. It is good to
give a warm bath before the rash appears.
Aconite 1, two drops every two hours, should
be administered as early as possible, and con-
tinued for forty-eight hours. If the rash does
not come out freely, Bryonia 1, two drops,
should be given alternately with the Aconite ;
this usually lias the effect of bringing out the


rash. As soon as the rash is well established
and the fever declining, Pulsatilla 1, three
drops every four hours, should be given, and
and continued until the rash has entirely dis-
appeared. Sulphur 1, five drops morning and
evening, for three or four days should be given
during the convalescent stage.
Should Bronchitis supervene, Aconite and
Bryonia should be administered, three drops
alternately every tv T o or three horns, and
medical aid called in at once. The other and
various complications can scarcely be treated
domestically, and need not be touched upon
here. The period of incubation, viz., from
taking the infection to the appearance of the
rash is from ten to fourteen days.
SCARLET FEVER AND SCARLA-
TINA.
These are precisely the same affections, but
one is a milder and more modified form of it
than the other, scarlatina being of the milder
type. It is a most infectious fever, characfer-


ised by a bright scarlet eruption, smooth, and
not raised on the surface of the skin, and
accompanied by more or less affection of the
throat and tonsils, with frequent swelling and
inflammation of the glands. It is, like
measles, essentially a disease of childhood, but
far more severe in character, and more to be
dreaded. It usually occurs but once in the
same patient ; when it does occur a second time
it is usually very mild and favourable. We
recognise three forms of this fever—lst, simple
scarlet fever, where the skin only is affected,
and scarcely any sore throat, and usually called
scarlatina ; 2nd, true scarlet fever, where
the skin and throat are both affected more o r
less severely ; and 3rd, malignant scarlet
fever, where the fever is of a low type and the
patient dies within two or three days, usually
from brain symptoms, the rash in these
eases being often of a dark dusky colour, the
tongue dry and cracked, the throat swollen,
but with a tendency to ulceration and
sloughing.
Symptoms.— Period of incubation from
four to six days, after which the earliest


symptoms are headache, lassitude, and fever,
with occasional vomiting and white-coated
tongue. On the second day the eruption
appears in the form of numberless minute dots
of a bright scarlet colour, usually occurring on
the chest and front of the neck first, spreading
to face and trunk, and finally to the legs.
When fully out, the eruption has a very dis-
tinctly bright scarlet hue, and not in raised
patches like measles, but smooth. The tongue
is thickly coated with white fur at first, but in
a day or so this gives way to a bright red
appearance, “ strawberry tongue , which is very
characteristic of this fever. The water is
usually scanty. About the fifth day the rash
disappears, sometimes earlier, and then the
cuticle commences to come off in the form of
fine dandriff, called “ desquamation ” or
“ peeling.” During the period of the rash
coming out, the mucus membrane of the
mouth, palate, and nostrils assume a livid
scarlet colour, with great soreness in swallowing.
In the more severe forms of the fever the
tonsils are greatly swollen and tender to the
touch, and the difficulty of swallowing inten-


sified. The glands of the neck are frequently
swollen and tender ; sometimes there is a
profuse discharge from the nose. Occasionally
the rash is delayed to the third or fourth day,
and then comes out in patches. As the rash
disappears, the throat inflammation and general
feverishness subside also. In the malignant
form of scarlet fever, the symptoms are much
more grave, and assum'e a typhoid type. The
brain complications are early manifested : there
is delirium of a low muttering character;
tongue very dry, throat of a dusky red colour,
great prostration and restlessness. The rash
disappears and is renewed several times, and
frequently convulsions and coma supervene.
There is nearly always suppression of urine.
Sequels, or After Effects.— These are
very various both as to number and character.
Ist, Ulceration and enlargement of the tonsils ;
ulcers on various parts of the body ; inflam-
ation of the eyes ; enlargement of the glands
in the neck ; abscesses in the ears, with running
foetid discharge; acute rheumatism usually
of the smaller joints ; dropsy, and disease of
the kidneys, with poisoning by total suppres-


sion of urine. Chronic kidney disease is a
frequent result of neglected cases of mild
scarlet fever.
Treatment. —In the mild form, confine-
ment to bed, with a warm bath or two, light
diet, chiefly of milk and beef tea. It is a good
plan to give an enema of warm soap and
water early in the treatment, so as to insure
evacuation of the bowels.
For medicine, Belladonna 1 alone is sufficient
in the mild form of the disease, two drops
every two hours or so. Should the fevei seem
at all high or be persistent, Gelseminum 1
may be alternated with Belladonna, two drops
for a dose.
In the more severe form, Aconite and
Belladonna should be given alternately, three
to five drops of the 1 dilution alternately
every two or three hours. This may be con-
tinued for twenty-four hours at least, and then
should the throat symptoms be at all urgent,
Apis 1, two drops, should be alternated with
the Belladonna, omitting the Aconite. If there
is ulceration of the throat and glandular
complication, Mercurius lodide 2, two grains


dry on the tongue, should be given every four
hours or so, continuing the Belladonna.
In the majority of mild and moderately
severe cases this line of treatment will be
sufficient; but where possible medical advice
should be obtained in all cases, as the manage-
ment even of the very mildest form is most
important to insure a good recovery. The
diet should be light and simple in all cases,
consisting chiefly of milk, beef tea or broths,
farinaceous foods, and stewed fruits. Ho meat
should be given until quite convalescent.
When the throat is bad, great relief is obtained
by gargling with a weak gargle of ozonised
water, used as hot as the patient can bear it, or
the throat may be sprayed with the same
solution, through a spray producer. Hot
compresses to the throat also give great relief.
DIPHTHERIA,
Or Malignant Sore Throat.
This is an epidemic and contagious disease
°f the throat, of great severity and danger,


and no time should be lost in getting medical
aid, Avlienever there is the least suspicion of
its presence.
Symptoms.—These usually commence most
insidiously, and in some of the worst cases
the child does not complain of soreness of the
throat until the disease has made extensive
and dangerous progress. There is usually at
first a feeling of languor and prostration, with
headache and nausea. Sometimes chilliness,
followed by great heat, ushers in the disease ;
there is frequently diarrhoea, but seldom
vomiting. Very soon the skin becomes hot
and dry, the face flushed, and pulse quick.
With these symptoms there is usually
difficulty and pain in swallowing, and tender-
ness and swelling of the glands under the lower
jaw. On looking into the throat, the palate
and uvula are found red and inflamed, with
perhaps a whitish patch of mucus-like material
covering one or both tonsils. It may be that
none of this is to be seen at first, or it may be
covering the palate or the upper and back part
of the nasal passage. This exudation very
soon begins to look like a bit of dirty chamois


leather covering the tonsils and throat, and
then the characteristic odour of the disease
becomes most apparent, and not easily foi
gotten. As the disease spreads the exudation
gets thicker and more tenacious, and if
forcibly removed the surface beneath bleeds,
and the exudation forms again. For this
reason it is unadvisable to interfere Avith it by
forcible removal, as it can be of no benefit and
may do great harm. Generally speaking, if
all goes well, the exudation comes away of its
own accord, through the aid of treatment, about
the sixth to ninth day. The constitutional
symptoms are after all the most important, and
demand the greatest attention and care. The
chief soirrce of danger in diphtheria is the
spreading of the disease to the Avindpipe and
larynx (Croupal Diphtheria) ; and another
element of danger is the occurrence of hoemorr-
hage, and failure of the heart. The after
effects are also very serious and severe, com-
bining several secondary nervous affections, as
neuralgia, paralysis of throat or limbs,
defective vision, &c.
Treatment.—This must be firstly constitu-


tional, and secondly local. The constitutional
treatment must be based upon maintaining
the strength and vitality of the patient by
every possible means. Confinement in bed of
course from the first, and the administration of
food, milk, beef tea, and wine, as: much as the
patient can take, from the commencement of
the attack ; raw eggs with port wine, essence
of beef (Cibils), cream, and in fact everything
of a most nutritious character. The adminis-
tration of nourishment is most important and
must not be relaxed for anything. The room
must be as large and airy as possible, with
free ventilation. Eucalyptus or Carbolic Acid
vapour should be admitted freely into the
room as an antiseptic ; or a little Sulphur may
be burned occasionally, the patient being
carried into another room during the time.
Local Treatment. This consists of
gargles, where it can be done, and one of the
best is the Ozonized Water, a few drops in
hot water sufficient to make it a light mauve
colour. Boracic Acid in the proportion of six
grains to the ounce of water is very useful as
a gargle or spray used hot. When the patient


is too young or inexperienced to gargle, the
spray should be used frequently, or the throat
may be painted with Tinct. Perchloride of Iron
with a large and bent camel hair brush. Ice
may be sucked freely if agreeable, or iced
drinks may be be given with advantage. In-
sufflation of Sulphur is often of great service,
especially in the early stage.
Medicines. —ln mild and simple cases, Bel-
ladonna 1 and Phytolacca 0, should be given,
five drops for a dose alternately every two
hours for at least every twenty-four hours. If
no improvement in a short time, give Mercurius
lodide 2, three grains dry on the tongue every
two hours alternately with the Phytolacca.
This treatment will usually suffice for
mild and simple cases, anything beyond
that must have medical assistance and
need not be touched upon here. When
convalescence is established, the diet must be
very generous, and as soon as it can be borne
Cod Liver Oil should be given, a dessertspoon-
ful after the meal twice a day or at bedtime.
Change of air to the seaside as soon as the
patient is strong enough to bear it, but


removal should not be unduly hastened, lest
the strength be overtaxed.
TYPHOID FEVER
May be defined as a slightly infectious or
contagious fever, most prevalent during the
summer and autumn months, and usually
communicated through contamination of drink-
ing water with sewer gas or other effluvia
from drains or nightsoil. Liable to become
epidemic at times, varying in intensity and
duration from a few days to many weeks, and
running a very uncertain course. Relapse is
not infrequent. It attacks rich and poor
alike. The infection is frequently conveyed
through the medium of milk.
Symptoms. —These vary considerably, and
it is difficult to paint a true picture in a short
treatise. There is usually a period of incuba-
tion of from ten to fourteen days. It is very
rare that the symptoms come on immediately
after exposure to the poison. The disease sets in
slowly and insidiously, generally with a feel-


ing of languor and debility. After a day or
two there are chills, headache, aching in limbs,
thirst, and sometimes diarrhoea, but in this
colony we have more often constipation,
especially in the early stages. As the disease
advances, there is great restlessness and flush-
ing of the cheeks, urine becomes scanty, and
the pulse rises to 110 to 130. The tempera-
ture of the body rises also to a great height,
from 102 to 104 deg., and even higher, it being
lower usually in the morning and rising at
night. The breath becomes offensive and of
a peculiar ammoniacal odour. The tongue,
which at first is white and coated, becomes red
and glazed or brown and dry, with thick brown
mucus around the front teeth. At the com-
mencement of the second week there is usually
a slight eruption of rose-coloured spots, isolated
and few in number, on the abdomen or chest ;
but in a good proportion of cases there is no
rash whatever. After the middle of the second
week there is swelling of the abdomen, with
tenderness in the right side of abdomen low
down, and gurgling sound on pressure. At
this stage there is at times diarrhoea like pea


soup, arising from ulceration of the mucus
membrane of the bowels ; but this symptom is
frequently absent here. Haemorrhage from
the bowel may also occur from the ulceration,
and death from perforation of the bowel
frequently takes place. Deafness and noises
in the ear are very common symptoms, and in
the severe types of the disease delirium and
prostration are marked features.
Treatment. —Prophylactic and Sanitary :
Great attention should be paid to all drains
and night-soil arrangements. Liberal use of
Carbolic Acid or other good disinfectants,
with regular flushing of drains. Proper
filtration of all water used for domestic cook-
ing, or drinking purposes.
Medical : In the early stage of this
affection Baptisia undoubtedly is the proper
remedy. Five drops of Baptisia 1, should
be given every three hours and continued for
some days. Bryonia 1 and Baptisia 1, may
be given in alternation every three hours after
the first three days. If there be great pros-
tration or diarrhoea, Arsenicum 3, five drops
every three hours, must be given and cop-


tinued for some days. Should hoemorrhage
from the bowel occur, Mercurius Corrosivus 3,
in alternation with Acidum Muriaticum 1, three
drops of each alternately every three hours. As
soon as the fever has left and the temperature
normal, China 1, five drops four times a day,
should be given, or Quinine 1, five drops
three times a day, during the convalescent
stage.
Diet: The greatest care is necessary in
feeding a patient suffering with typhoid fever.
Milk that has been scalded should form the
principal portion of the diet and may be given
in moderate quantity, say six to eight ounces
every three to four hours, and this should be
alternated with about three or four ounces of beef
tea or light broth, free from all solid matter.
Iced soda and milk is very grateful, and may be
given in small quantities at a time. Cold water
or toast water may be allowed freely. No solid
food should be given until completely con-
valescent, as frequent relapses occur through
over-anxiety in feeding the patient with solids.
As the fever subsides, beaten up eggs may be
given cautiously.


Stimulants : This is a very important
question, and must be treated accordingly. In
many cases it is not necessary to give any
stimulant whatever from first to last, and
they should be avoided unless there is
manifest need for them, and then the
best form of stimulant is good brandy, and
given in doses of a dessertspoonful to a table-
spoonful in a little water, from three to four or
six hours. The indications for use of
stimulants are, mainly, evidence of weakness
or failure of the heart ; frequent, weak and
fluttering pulse ; great prostration, or when
the teeth and mouth become covered with dry
brown mucus (sordes): these symptoms are
unmistakably those for the administration of a
stimulant.
When the temperature runs very high and
other unfavourable symptoms occur, a stimu-
lant should be given at once. Again,
occasionally the fever leaves almost suddenly ;
the patient breaking out into a cold
perspiration, with great prostration. Here the
timely use of a stimulant will often be most
beneficial, and save a patient from complete


collapse. The brandy should be given imme-
diately after a little milk or beef tea.
The patient should be placed in a large and
well ventilated room if possible, the windows
and doors of which should be always open to
insure abundance of fresh air. Feather or
flock beds should be avoided, a good horse-
hair mattress is the best. The covering
should be light, but sufficient to protect from
sudden changes of temperature. Sponging
the body with tepid or cold water morning
and evening is very beneficial and grateful to
the patient. Everything that passes from the
patient should be disinfected at once, and im-
mediately removed from the room.
In all cases of continued fever the aid of a
medical man should be obtained as soon as
practicable.


ON SOME
AFFECTIONS OF CHILDREN.
TEETHING.
Various are the troubles that affect the
children during the first year, and they are
mostly referred to morbid dentition. Now
there is no doubt that there is a predisposition
in some children to cut the teeth with difficulty
and pain. This is particularly the case in
delicate or highly nervous children. The pro-
cess of dentition seems to increase the activity
of the whole system, and various forms of
irritation are set up. Thus, one child
will suffer from diarrhoea, another from
vomiting, another from cough and bronchial
irritation, another from convulsions and
other brain symptoms, each irritation being
the result of the process of teething and
must be treated accordingly. It must not on


the other hand be supposed that every attack
of diarrhoea, or cough, or sickness, is from the
teeth ; errors of diet and digestive disarrange-
ments will account for much. Still, there are so
many ailments clearly referable to the teething
that they demand special consideration and
treatment. I will take them in the usual order
of frequency. But, first, as to a few general
points in the management of the child during
dentition.
Calcarea Carb. 3. —This is always a good
medicine to administer from the second or
third month. A grain of the trituration, dry on
the tongue, every night and morning for a
couple of weeks, and then Calcarea Phosph. 3
in the same way for a couple of weeks, repeat-
ing them afterwards in the same manner,
should there be no symptoms calling for other
medicines. The continued exhibition of these
medicines rarely fails to have a most beneficial
effect on the child.
RESTLESSNESS AND SCREAMING.
Very often a child shows no active
symptoms of any special affection, but is rarely


at ease, and is evidently suffering from teeth-
ing, but not sufficient to produce definite
symptoms beyond crying and restlessness and
general irritation of the system. In these
cases Chamomilla 1, a drop every hour or so, is
most useful, followed by a drop of Belladonna
1 at bedtime, and it may be given in a tea-
spoonful of warm milk and water. Should
the child be very feverish, with hot and dry
skin, a drop of Aconite may be given instead
of Belladonna. When there is great sleep-
lessness, Coffea 1, two drops repeated occa-
sionally, should be given.
DIARRHOEA.
This is always a troublesome and often a
serious affection of little ones, frequently
leading to emaciation and weakness from
which it is difficult to raise them. Children
who are brought up by hand are far more
liable to this affection, on account of the
artificial character of the food, producing fer-
mentation, flatulence, and diarrhoea. For this
reason great care should be exercised in


feeding artificially. Of course milk should be
the sole food of an infant up to six or seven
months at least, but this has to be often modified
to suit particular cases. Milk often disagrees
with children because mothers and nurses will
insist upon adding a considerable proportion of
sugar ; and there is, I believe, no more fruitful
source of discomfort to a child than this. I
always advise artificially-fed children to have
no sugar whatever put into the milk. Young
children do not need sweet food, and it is only
when the taste has been acquired that there is
any difficulty in getting them to take it
unsweetened. I prefer a small pinch of salt
added to the feed of milk, and it is rare indeed
that there is any trouble with the digestion of
the milk.
Properly peptonised milk is also very useful
when ordinary milk curdles, or the addition of
a small quantity of lime water will often pre-
vent curdling. There are cases now and then
met with where milk in no form can be taken
without disagreeing. In these cases I prefer
to stop milk altogether, and give raw beef
juice or mutton juice, alternated with whey ;


or sometimes even a little thin farinaceous
food seems to agree for a time ; but each child
must be treated as circumstances require, and
it is impossible to lay down a universal rule.
To make raw meat juice : About one or two
ounces of lean beef or mutton should be
minced very fine and put into a breakfast cup,
with a little pinch of salt. This should be
covered with cold water to half or three-fourths
of the cupful. It should be frequently stirred,
but not put near the fire, but rather in a cool
place. After two hours it should be strained
through a little muslin or sieve, and the red-
coloured thin liquid given to the child. This
whole quantity may be given to a baby each
day, a few spoonsful at a time. Whey is very
useful given in alternate feeds with the meat
juice. Thin barley or rice water is often very
useful when milk cannot be taken.
Symptoms and Character. —Stools fre-
quent, varying from an hour or so to several
hours, sour in smell often, colour varying from
bright yellow to dark green, watery in con-
sistence frequently, with more or less colicky
pains, and at times accompanied by vomiting.


In some forms of diarrhoea of infants the food
passes away quite indigested. In hot weather,
again, the diarrhoea is liable to be very severe ;
thin liquid stools, often like water. At times
there is great straining after the motion has
passed and perhaps some blood (dysentery).
If the diarrhoea continue any length of time,
symptoms of emaciation (loss of flesh) come
on and there is danger of the child sinking
from this cause.
Treatment.— First of all, judicious feeding,
(see above) : avoidance of everything solid or
indigestible. In teething children, where the
relaxation is not excessive, and the child fairly
well, it need not be interfered with beyond
being careful with the food. A little relax-
ation often acts as a safety valve and does no
harm. Chamomilla 3, one drop or so repeated
every three or four hours, will generally suffice
for these cases of irritation.
Rheum I.—Two drops, every three hours or
after each stool, when the motions are sour
smelling and the colic pains troublesome.
Mercurius Sol. 3.—A grain of the tritura-
tion dry on the tongue every three hours or so,


when the motions are greenish and there is
a good deal of mucus passing ; the tongue is
coated white.
Arsenicum 3.—Two drops every three hours
or after each motion, when the diarrhoea is
very watery and runs away almost involun-
tarily with very little pain.
Yeratrum Album 3. —Two drops every one
to three hours when there is great prostration
and severe diarrhoea, with much griping pain,
or may be alternated with Arsenicum.
Ferrum Metal 3. —Two grains on the
tongue is useful in perfectly painless diarrhoea
and thin liquid motions.
China I.—Two drops every four hours
should be given during convalescence, for a
few days.
VOMITING OF CHILDREN DURING
TEETHING.
Occasionally a child will suffer from attacks
of vomiting and severe retching, evidently the
result of the irritation of the teeth, and not
associated with anv stomach or intestinal dis-*


order. This should be met by altering the
food, both as to quantity and character. Avoid
milk in all forms at these times, and give thin
barley or rice water, or some cold water for
some hours. Let a very small quantity of
anything be given at one time, not more than
one or two teaspoonfuls, and repeated as fre-
quently as the child needs it, and gradually
resuming the ordinary diet. Ipecacuanha 3,
one or two drops in a teaspoonful of hot
water, and repeated every half-hour to two
hours, will nearly always relieve it.
BRONCHIAL IRRITATION AND
COUGH DURING TEETHING.
This is a very frequent trouble with children
during dentition, and is not at all of an
inflammatory character, but is evidently the
result of nervous irritation. The child is not
ill, although there may be loud mucus rattling
in the chest, and frequent and distressing
cough. The child takes its food well, and
does not seem apparently much the worse.
This extinguishes it from true bronchitis, or


inflammation of the lungs, where there is fever
and inflammation.
Belladonna 1, and Ipecacuanha 3, in alterna-
tion. —A drop or two every two hours will
usually relieve it.
Hydrocyanic Acid 3.—A drop every two
hours, should the above fail to relieve after
twenty-four or thirty-six hours.
If feverishness should supervene, the Aconite
1, two drops every two hours, or in alternation
with Bryonia, should be given, and medical aid
obtained at once.
BRAIN COMPLICATIONS AND
CONVULSIONS.
This is by no means an infrequent compli-
cation of teething, and is always to be feared
when the head gets heated, and face flushed,
gums and mouth hot and dry, water scanty,
and bowels constipated. The child is usually
flushed and restless, the head very hot,
especially at the back, If there is constipa-


tion, an enema of glycerine or thin gruel
should be given at once.
Aconite 1 and Belladonna I.—One drop
doses alternately every half hour to two hours
if the symptoms are urgent, repeated at longer
intervals as improvement takes place. Should
the symptoms of irritation increase, convulsions
will most likely occur. Should they do so, do
not put the child into a hot bath, but foment
the head with a large sponge or flannel, wrung
out of hot water and applied over the entire
head. This should be continued until the child
comes out of the convulsive fit, when it will
most likely go to sleep, and if so, this should
be encouraged, taking great care not to excite
the child when it wakes. Medical aid should
be at once sought if the brain symptoms appear
urgent. During the paroxysm of convulsions
Camphor held to the nostrils will frequently
cut short the fit. If the convulsions occur
repeatedly, Hellebrore 1, two drops every hour
or two, should be given. If the child is unable
to swallow liquids, the medicine should be
dropped on a small bit of sugar of milk in
powder and placed in the mouth and allowed


to dissolve. It may be necessary that the
gums should be lanced, but this should be left
for the doctor to decide.
CROUP (INFANTILE.)
This is a spasmodic affection of the larynx
occurring frequently during dentition, and
caused by a temporary closure of the air
passage, followed by a loud crowing sound
on the air entering the chest. It is not in-
flammatory, and not usually dangerous if
properly treated. The paroxysm may occur
frequently either from fright or anger, or they
very often come on when the child wakes out
of sleep.
A hot compress should be applied to the
throat at once when the paroxysm occurs, and
Aconite 1 and Spongia 1, two drops alternately
every ten minutes to half an hour, till
relieved.


CROUP (INFLAMMATORY).
This affection is characterised by severe
inflammation of the mucus membrane of
the larynx and wind pipe, and is closely
allied, if not, as I believe, identical with
diphtheria. In the early stage there is
fever and symptoms of simple cold or
catarrh ; this is soon followed by cough
and hoarseness, and wheezing respiration ;
frequent paroxysms of hoarse cough follow,
attended with a peculiar ringing “ brassy ”
sound, and the inspiration becomes prolonged
and painful. In true membranous or inflamma-
tory croup, there is a deposit similar to that of
diphtheria in the larynx and windpipe. The
tonsils and throat are usually red and inflamed.
In the latter stage, the breathing becomes
impeded and difficult, cough frequent, de-
pression and weakness very great, intense
thirst, and restlessness and anxiety are very
marked features. As amendment takes place,
the cough becomes looser, and the respiration
easier.


Treatment. —Hot compress to the throat
in early stage is useful in subduing the inflam-
mation. When the cough is painful and
cutting in character, with soreness of chest.
Hepar Sulphur 3, two grains dry on the
tongue every two hours alternately witli
Aconite 1, two drops in a little water. If the
cough is very spasmodic and brassy in
character, give Spongia 1, three drops every
two hours in a little water. For the painful
hoarse cough, when not relieved by Hepar
Sulph., give Kali Bichromicum 3, two grains
every two to four hours, with- lodine inhalation
—a few drops in a narrow-mouthed jug or
inhaler filled with hot water and held to the
mouth -and nose for five or six minutes at a
time.
Medical aid should be summoned wherever
practicable. Keep the patient in a cool, well-
ventilated apartment, and let the clothing be
of flannel or other woollen material. The’diet
should be mild, beef tea or thin farinaceous
food during the acute stage, and a little wine
or brandy in milk if there be any signs of
prostration.


OPHTHALMIA OF CHILDREN.
Inflammation of the eye. Very frequent
in young children after birth or during early
life from cold or dust, or from sudden chill.
Most prevalent during hot weather.
Symptoms. —Redness and inflammation of
eyes, with pain as of sand or grit; dread of
light, the child keeping the eyes firmly closed ;
swelling of the eyelids, with discharge of thick
purulent matter ; often much fever and con-
stitutional disturbance.
Treatment. —Frequent bathing with warm
water and the application of compresses to the
eye in early stage is very useful. Later on
the eyes should be bathed with a solution of
Boracic Acid, four grains to ounce of water; or
Sulphate of Zinc, one grain to an ounce of
water. Aconite 1 and Mercurius Corr. 3, two
drops alternately every two hours, should be
gnen internally where the discharge is thick
and purulent. Belladonna 1 and Mercurius
Corr. 3 two drops alternately every two hours
when there is great dread of light. Arsenicum


Alb. 3 is indicated when there is a profuse flou
of hot scalding watery discharge, two drops
every two or three hours in alternation with
Aconite. As soon as the inflammation has
subsided and the child can bear the light ghe
Sulphur 1, two drops three times a day.
During the acute inflammatory stage the child
should be kept in the dark, and the eyes fre-
quently bathed. The diet should be very light
and simple. Once a day a drop of the Boracic
Acid or Zinc Lotion should be dropped into
the lower lid.
EFFECTS OF SUN.
(Sun Apoplexy.)
The effects of the sun upon children are
very various, ranging from simple headache
to complete insensibility.
Symptoms. —After exposure to the sun the
child is perfectly prostrated with heat of head
and feverishness, restlessness, perhaps vomits
ing and diarrhoea. If the symptoms do not
improve, a condition of insensibility, more or
less partial, comes on, and frequently convul-


sions follow. The skin after a time in some
cases becomes pale, cold, and moist, with great
loss of strength, and death may take place
from failure of the heart’s action. In other
cases the face becomes livid and congested,
the pupils of the eyes at first contracted and
afterwards dilating. The skin in these cases
is hot and burning, and convulsions in this
form very frequent. In other cases there is
sudden failure of heart from the first.
d reatment.— As soon as it has been sus-
pected that the child has been exposed to the
effects of the sun, and is suffering therefrom,
the head should be fomented with hot water
for five or six minutes at a time, and repeated
every two hours. Very frequently the child
will fall to sleep while the fomentation is
going on, and it should be allowed to do so.
Aconite 1, and Belladonna 1, one drop doses,
should be given* alternately, every half to two
hours during the early stages in all cases.
If symptoms not relieved in a few hours,
and signs of heart failure apparent, Glonoine
3, three drops every half to two hours, should
be given,


If the symptoms tend towards insensibility
and coma, Opium-1, three drops every one or
two hours, should be given. The nourishment
should be light and simple for some days after
recovery.
If there is difficulty in getting the child to
swallow the medicine, five or six drops may be
dropped on a little sugar of milk and a small
portion placed on the tongue every few
minutes. Let the room be darkened and kept
as cool as possible, and the clothing of the
child light and good.
?K fiG, CHAPMAN AND CO., PKINTKKS, J.LBOl***,


INDEX.
A -J-x PAGE
Acidity _
Alcoholism 1^
Apoplexy, Sun (Children) - . .'. ' 1
Biliousness - 9
Bilious Attack, Simple - . ■ . 39
- Diet in - - . .'. 39
Bloody Stools - 4
Bowels, Griping Pain in - - . . 26^l
Breath, Offensive -
Brain, Exhaustion of 2 ?
- F ag - - - -
» Effects of Overwork to - - _ -46
” Complication in Children - _ _ g_
~ Affections, Diet in - - g
Bronchial Irritation and Cough durine
Teething (Children) - . . , S g
Bowels, Abscess in Lower - . . -38
.. Burning in Lower -
.. Fissure of Lower - . . 6
■' Indigestion in , , r _
y Itching at Lower , T
Children, Affections of - „ . 37
Compress .
Constipation - . . . -" 4 «
Diet in - - - - -30
M Injections in -
Convulsions (Children) |


PAGE
Croup, Infantile (Children) -
Inflammatory (Children) - - '
”, 25
Diarrhoea -
(Children) - - * ' ~
Diet (Children) - - " " ' ' 7
Dining out, Effects of - - ' '
Diphtheria ’ 55
Croupal - - " " '
Diet in %
Dipsomania -
Diet in - ' ' ' ' 5 s
Drinking, Excessive *
Dysentery _
(Children) ■ ' 11
Dyspepsia (Indigestion) "
M Acute 3
„ Chronic - * ' ' L?
Eyes, Inflammation of (Children) - -
~ Blight in (Children) - - ' "
Flatulence - g
Fistula in Ano - i
Food, Fermentation of - - " ’
~ Pain after 1
Gall Stones
Gastrodynia (Spasm of Stomach)
Gums, Spongy Condition of - - *
Heartburn -
Infectious Diseases - - - * * 5/
Jaundice - - - ' 39
Liver, Disorders ot -
~ Congestion of - - - ‘ ‘ 40
Inflammation of - - - ‘ "43
Measles - .47
Memory, Loss of


„, , PAGE
Mouth, Foul Taste in - - . _ . 2Q
~ Risings in - - . ... -18
Nervou s Tremors 5 j
Ophthalmia (see Eyes) 88
Piles (Hsemorrhoides) 32
Pain between Shoulders (see Liver) - ig- 4I
Piles, Diet in 33
Purgatives, Abuse of 2g
Raw Meat Juice . . yg
Restlessness (Children) 7 g
Scarlet Fever 5g
» >, Effects of 62
• > » Incubation of - - - 60
Scarlatina
Screaming (Children) 7 g
Stomach Affections
» Neuralgia of t g
Spasm of
Stool, Straining at 2 y
Sun, Effects of (Children) - . . -89
Teething, Effects of (Children) - - - 75
Tongue, White-coated - - . . -20
Typhoid Fever g g
» i» Sanitary Prevention of - 71
■ > .. Diet in - - . . . « 2
Urine, Dark Color of 44
» Red Sediment in - ... 2Q
Vomiting of Children 8l
Weight and Fulness in Right Side - - 4I
Water brash


MORRISON'S
PERFECTION
PAIR RESTORATIVE,
For Restoring Grey or Faded Hair
to its natural colour, curing
Dandruff, Scurf, &c.;
promoting the growth, and generally restoring it to
ITS PRISTINE BEAUTY AND FRESHNESS.
This elegant Preparation does not require any
bp S5 is always eflecnve and
healthful- it imparts a delightful silkiness ana
softness to the hair obtainable by no other means.
It will not stain the skin or any delicate fabric.
It contains no injurious drug or chemical,
and is perfectly safe to use.
Price _ - 3s. 6d. per Bottle.
Post free, 4s. 6d.
Sole Manufacturers:
FRANCIS LONGIORE & CO.,
183 BOTJRKE STREET,
490, 504 FLINDERS STREET.


GEORGE 4 GEORGE
LIMITED,
UNIVERSAL PROVIDERS,
Groceries, Provisions, Ironmongery, Furniture,
Patent Medicines, Tailoring, Mercery,
Boots and Shoes.
OD
E^cimuS
IMU
All Goods First-class Quality -Daily Deliueries all Suburbs.
Country Orders a Specialty-Patterns sent on application.
tt Leading House in the City for Millinerv Mantlps
FEDERAL EMPORIUM,
lQ2r to 16S Collins Street.


FORBES & CO.
Homoeopathic Chemists
AND
Medical Booksellers,
236 SWANSTON ST.,
MELBOURNE.
&C., &C.
IN GREAT VARIETY.
MEDICINES FORWARDED POST FREE TO
ANY OF THE COLONIES.


MARTIN & PLEASANCE’S
SPECIALITIES.
CAMPHOR PILULES, for Colds, Cramps,
Diarrhoea, &c. Sold in Bottles at is. 6d.,
2s. 6d., and 4s. 6d.
TINCTURE OF CAMPHOR. Bottles at is.,
is. 6d., 2s. 6d.
TINCTURE OF PODOPHYLLIN, for Bilious-
ness, Inaction of the Liver, Constipation, &c.
Bottles at is., is. 6d., 2s. 6d., &c.
NEURALINE, for Neuralgia, Sciatica, and all
kinds of Nerve Pains. Price, is. 6d. per
bottle.
SANTONIA VERMIFUGE, or Homoeopathic
Worm Powder. In Packets, is. 6d. and
2s. 6d. Directions accompany each packet.
ANTHOXANTHUM, for Hay Fever. In Bottles
at is. 6d. and 2s. 6d.
APOMORPHIA POWDERS, for Sea-Sickness.
In Packets, 2s. each.
)Q(
PREPARED ONLY BY
MARTIJr & PIEASMCE,
GHfemfefe,
AND
medical booksellers,
180 COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE.


MARTIN & PLEASANCE’S
SPECIALITIES.
DR. GUNST’S VITALINE, an invaluable pre-
paration in the treatment of Consumption of
the Lungs, Bowels, and other wasting diseases.
Price, 2s. 6d. and 4s. 6d. per bottle.
TAMUS COMMUNIS, for unbroken Chilblains.
In bottles, is., is. 6d., 2s. 6d., &c.
MARTIN’S CORN CURE, a certain and pain-
less remedy for Corns. In bottles, is. 6d.
ERASMUS WILSON’S LOTION, for promoting
the Growth of the Hair, and to prevent its
falling off. A thoroughly reliable remedy.
Bottles, 2s. and 3s. 6d.
MARTIN & PLEASANCE’S CARBOLISED
DENTIFRICE WATER, a preparation for
cleansing, whitening, and preserving the Teeth.
In bottles at 2s. and 3s. 6d.
TINCTURE OF BAPTISIA, the preventive
of Typhoid Fever. Send for Martin and
Pleasance’s Special Pamphlet on Typhoid;
post free. Sold in bottles, is., is. 6d., 2s. 6d., &c.
MARTIN & PLEASANCE’S TYPHOID
REMEDY CASES. Price, complete, 10s. 6d
These Preparations are usually obtainable of
our Agents. If not, we can send them by post
if required.
)o(
Dartin & ptrasanrr,
HOMOEOPATHIC CHEMISTS,
180 COLLINS STREET,
3VT ELBOURNE.


3 HOMCEOPATHY
In the Southern Suburbs
fi. PLEASANCE’S
Dttf£CJ|litf(jit 4)l|iirti|ades.
81 CHAPEL STREET, PRAHRAN,
Three doors from the Town Hall,
AND
8 HIGH STREET, ST. KILDA,
Opposite the Post Office.
A FULL SUPPLY OF HOMEOPATHIC
MEDICINES AND LITERATURE
ALWAYS IN STOCK.
ORDERS by POST FORWARDED PROMPTLY


MEDICINES.
PHYSICIANS’ PRESCRIPTIONS AND FAMILY RECIPES
CAREFULLY AND ACCURATELY DISPENSED.
’.B.—A. H.C.’s Dispensary is entirely isolated
from the general business part of liis
Establishment, which enables the Dis-
pensers to work free from any inter-
ruption, and renders the arrange-
ments for conducting this part
of his business absolutely
perfect.
Purity and Freshness
of all Drugs and
Chemicals
Guaranteed.
<
%
v.
O
%
% VV
%
A
O
fa/
y?
&
<p>
%
<*/
-r%
All kinds of
'tA&i
Wj
w
V
%
%
PATENT
MEDICINES.
Toilet Articles, Nursery Requi-
sites, Hair Brushes, Tooth Brushes,
Clothes Brushes.
TRUSSES, BANDAGES.
Elastic Stockings, Knee Caps, Surgical Appliances,
Invalid Requirements, &c., Ac., &c.
wOOOa.
A very large Stock of the most Fashionable kinds of
English, French, and other
PERFUMES.


