

.
V .
«i V/ v< .
ON SOME
AUSTRALIAN CEREMONIES
OF INITIATION.
A. W. HOWITT, ESQ., F.G.S.
LONDON:
HARRISON AND SONS, ST. MARTIN’S LANE,
Printers in Ordinary to Her Majesty.


■
.
.
■
'
.
■
.


V lokcr)
ON SOME
AUSTRALIAN CEREMONIES
OF INITIATION.
A. W. HOWITT, ESQ., F.G.S.
LONDON:
HARRISON AND SONS, ST. MARTIN’S LANE,
Printers in Ordinary to Her Majesty.


On some Australian Ceremonies of Initiation.
By A. W. Howitt, Esq., E.G.S.
Travellers, missionaries, and residents in the Australian bush
have long known and reported the existence of certain aboriginal
ceremonies, which attend the “ making of young men,” as the
practice has come to be called. One of the very earliest works
on Australia, namely, that of Collins, 1 describes and gives
illustrations of parts of the ceremonies as practised at Port
Jackson. Fragmentary accounts are to be found in other works
and in the newspapers and magazines published since that time ;
but, so far as I am aware, no attempt has yet been made to
give a detailed account of the ceremonies of any one tribe, nor,
much more, to attempt an explanation of the meaning and
intention of the ceremonies themselves. This, no doubt, arises
from the difficulties in the way of obtaining correct and precise
information. The aborigines are very reticent on the subject;
moreover, of the very few white men who have become initiated,
few have been competent to record the necessary particulars,
even if they had thought of doing so, and at least one has been
as reticent on the subject as the aborigines themselves. 2 The
accounts which have been made public appear to have been at
second-hand, derived from the statements of blackboys living
with the whites, or from persons who had been permitted to
witness the more public parts of the ceremonies^
Speaking generally, it may be asserted with safety that
initiation ceremonies of some kind or other, and all having a
certain fundamental identity, are practised by the aboriginal
tribes over the whole of the Australian Continent.
In this paper I propose to record only so much of the informa-
tion in my possession as will enable me to give a clear and
connected account of the initiation ceremonies which are common
to a very large aggregate of tribes in the south-eastern part of
Australia. I shall therefore leave till a future time the more
complete details, and also the discussion and orderly arrange-
ment of the scattered accounts which have been given by others.
1 “ An Account of the English Colony in New South Wales ” (London, 1798).
2 Those who were initiated in the early days were mostly escaped convicts who
joined some tribe ; others were wandering bushmen or shipwrecked sailors.
It is remarkable that Buckley makes no mention of these ceremonies in his “ Life.”
It is scarcely likely that during the thirty-two years he lived with the Port
Philip aborigines he was not present at several of their gatherings. It is most
likely, in my opinion, that he refrained from describing that which during
so many years he must have been told it was not lawful to disclose to the
uninitiated.


My account will 'be drawn partly from that which I have
witnessed and taken part in as an initiated person, and partly
from conversation which I have held with blacks as to the
ceremonies of their own tribes. On these statements I can rely,
not only by being in a position, from my own knowledge, to form
an opinion as to their truthfulness, but also because between
the initiated there is, as I have found, no reservation, but a
feeling of confidence —I might even add almost of brotherhood.
For the sake of comparison I draw a few illustrations from
the statements of my correspondents.
The tribes to which I refer are the Wolgal, the Ngarego, the
Theddora, and the Coast Murring. In a former paper on “ Some
Australian Beliefs ” x I have spoken of these, and have mentioned
their localities. To these I now add the Wiraijuri, This tribe
occupies a large extent of country along the course of the
Murrumbidgee Eiver, as far, at least, as Hay. 2 It lies to the
northward of the Wolgal, and of certain tribes of North-Eastern
Victoria, as to which I, at present, know little, except that they
belonged to that “ nation ” (if I may use the term) which applied
the word “ Kulin ”to its own men. To the east of the Wiraijuri
are the Kamilaroi; to the north, among other tribes, the Wonghi-
bon (having the Kamilaroi organisation); and to the north-west
and west, the great tribe of the Barkinghi, which occupied
almost the whole of the the extreme west of New South Wales.
To the south-west there are a number of small tribes' about
the junction of the Murray and Murrumbidgee Elvers. 3
The five tribes which I have named as the subjects of this
paper occupy, therefore, a very large extent of southern New
South Wales, from Twofold Bay to Sydney, and (including the
Lachlan Eiver) as far west at least as Hay. These five tribes,
or perhaps tribal groups, represent a social aggregate, namely, a
community bound together, in spite of diversity of class system,
by ceremonies of initiation, which, although they vary slightly in
different localities, are yet substantially the same, and are
common to all. Again, each of these five tribes, if regarded
separately, is found to be not only connected in the way I have
mentioned with the other four, but also with other neighbouring
tribes in a similar manner, so that “ the community,” as indicated
by the initiation ceremonies, spreads over even a wider extent of
country than that which these five tribes occupy, 4 For instance,
1 “ Journ. Antlirop. Inst.,” vol. xiii, No. 2.
2 From wirai = No. The tribe has three large local divisions at least, and
these local names have been perpetuated by the whites as names of places; for
instance, Narrandra = Prickly Lizard; Cootamundra , ivom-Kutamun r £\xvHe \
Murranbulla, from Muring-bula = Two bark canoes.
3 Reported upon by Mr. A. L. Cameron.
4 Yet the community of initiation-ceremonies and the practice of inter-
l


the Coast Murring, according to their own account, attended the
initiations not only of the Ngarego, but also of the Katungal
(sea-coast people), and the Kiirial (northern people), as far
even beyond Sydney. They intermarried with the Krauatun-
Kiirnai about Mallagoota Inlet, and would have no doubt
attended their ceremonies of initiation had these people had any.
The Ngarego attended the ceremonies of the Theddora, of the
Coast Murring, of the Wolgal, but their other neighbours, the
Bidwelli, in the south-west, had no ceremonies of their own, any
more than had their southern neighbours, the Krauatun, who did
not even attend the Jera-eil of the Kurnai tribe. 1 Very rarely
individuals of the Krauatun or Bidwelli have been initiated by
their neighbours. The Wolgal attended the ceremonies, not
only of those tribes which I have mentioned together with
them, but also of other tribes to the north-east, who are
of the Kamilaroi stock. Similarly the Wiraijuri attend the
ceremonies of all the tribes adjoining them, as the Barkinghi and
Wonghibon. It is easy to see how very widespread were the
bonds which bound together the native communities, and in
what manner the privileged old men—for instance, the doctors
and wizards of some distant tribes, as the Barkinghi—might, in
attending the initiations of the Wiraijuri, become acquainted
with the leading Wolgal men, and even under their safeguard
visit the Ngarego ceremonies. These privileged men play an
important part in the inter-communication of the tribes, and
have often what I may even call an inherited influence
marriage did not prevent the tribes from making raids into each other’s country-
in the olden time. The Coast Murring and the N garego were constantly and
desperately at war, and the Wiraijuri even made raids to the very coast-line.
The Coast Murring called them by a significant nickname, meaning “Come-by-
night.” .
i The Ktlrnai tribe was epigamic only with its neighbours along the coast on
either side. Its extreme isolation prevented more than the slightest intercourse
by occasional raids along the “ war-paths ’’—with the other surrounding tribes to
the east, north, and west. Along the coast to the eastward, the Krauatun clan of
the Ktlrnai adjoined the Mallagoota branch of the Coast Murring, and inter-
married with it. To the south-west, along the coast, the outlying branch of the
Bratana clan of the Ktlrnai met the western port Kulin, between Wilson’s
Promontory and the Tarwin Eiver. These people intermarried and attended each
other’s initiations. The Ktlrnai were therefore, with these exceptions, a people
quite apart from all others, and even now the Coast Murring speak of them with
contempt as “a people who have no Icuringal (initiation), and who know
nothing.” The Bidwelli tribe, which inhabited the jungle country lying between
the Kurnai, Coast Murring, and Ngarego tribes, had no initiation ceremonies
whatever. It is, however, quite clear to me that it became organised as a tribe
on the “ old lines,” so to say, by the association of “ broken men ” who have
from time to time taken shelter from the pursuer or the avenger in the fastnesses
of the inhospitable jungle, of the tract of mountain and swamp, that forms the
eastern corner of Gi'ppsland. The Bidwelli language is compounded of portions
of those of the surrounding tribes, and its members had an equally composite set
of class and totem names.


through marriages. Such a case is that of one Yibai-Malian, 1
who exercises great influence over the scattered remnants of the
Coast Murring and Ngarego, as well as of the Wolgal, to which
he belongs. His father, who was a renowned “ blackfellow
doctor” of the Wiraijuritribe, joined the Wolgal, with whom he
was related by marriage, and he then obtained a wife from the
Theddora of Omeo. By this he again became connected, through
her relations, with the Ngarego, and met the Coast Murring and
acquired influence with them at their ceremonial meetings.
It is very difficult to say, at present, to what distance the
peculiar form of ceremonies which I am about to describe
extend. I may mark their least northern extension by aline drawn
from Sydney, down the Lachlan Eiver, to Balranald, if not still
nearer to the Darling, and I think it extremely likely, from
information I have, that the ceremonies, in modified forms, may
be found to extend throughout the greater part of New South
Wales, or even into the colonies of South Australia and Queens-
land. lam unable to define the limits south of the Murray Eiver,
because the process of tribal destruction has been so complete
in many cases that as yet I have not been able to trace out
what the ceremonies were in Northern and Western Victoria,
beyond the bare fact that they had some resemblance to those I
am about to describe. So rapid was the disorganisation, for
instance, of the Woi-worung tribe of the Yarra Eiver that its
ceremonies do not appear to have survived in a complete form
more than ten years after the founding of Melbourne.
Beyond the extreme northern and south-western limits which
I have suggested for the ceremonies I shall describe—that is, in
the central part of South Australia and the south-west of
Queensland, I find reason to believe that there is a somewhat
different type of initiation marked by a general practice of
circumcision and a somewhat less general practice of slitting up
the urethra, to a greater or less length, Ido no more now than
indicate this, as I desire in this paper to confine myself to those
ceremonies with which I have a’ personal acquaintance.
The Assemblage for Initiation. —The community which
assembles for the periodical initiation of its youths is, in
principle, the united exogamous class-divisions which in a
former paper I formulated generally as A + B. But this
fundamental principle is obscured in practice. The men of A
class initiate the youths of B class, and vice versa ; but it is the
men as a whole, representing the local organisation, who control
and conduct the ceremonies.
Where the class-divisions are well marked and full of vigour,
A man of the Malian (Eaglehawk) totem of the Yibai (Ipai) sub-class of the
Wiraijuri community.


with uterine descent, as in most tribes having the Kamilaroi
organisation, it is the social organisation which takes the initiative
in calling together the whole community. Where, however, the
social organisation has become weakened, where the class-
divisions have become more or less extinct, and where the line
of descent has changed to that through the father, then it is
that the local organisation takes the whole control into its own
hands, calls the assembly, and conducts its proceedings. Yet
even in such cases there are surviving traces of the older system,
for it is invariably the case that it is the men of one exogamic
class-name who initiate the youths of the other. 1 The local
organisation, in fact, restrains the exercise of the marital rights
inherited by an individual, until after that he has been formally
admitted to the privileges, duties, and responsibilities of man-
hood. It is the assembled fully initiated men who do this, and
these men are the local organisation.
I have already said that the community, as defined by the
extent locally of the initiation ceremonies, is far wider than the
extent of the tribe. It includes, in fact, all those tribes between
which there is connubium. Wiraijuri, Wolgal, Ngarego,
Theddora, and Coast Murring are all completely distinct, so far
as the local organisation of each is concerned. But they form
one community. They are all more or less epigamic—those
most distant from each other in very little degree. The
ceremonies of initiation, although differently named in the
diverse languages or dialects of these tribes, are essentially the
same in all, and they bind the whole of the different communities
into a still greater whole. The differences existing between the
class-systems of these different parts of the community do not
even interfere with their unity as a whole, or even with the
intermarriage of people of apparently different class-systems.
Nor is this the case even where the lines of descent differ.
Making use of the convenient formula which I have before
adopted, I may give this explanation. The social organisation
of the Wiraijuri is of the well-known Kamilaroi type. 2
1 That is, a youth is directly under the charge and instruction, during his
initiation, of a man who is either the husband of his sister or who is the brother
of the girl who has been promised to him as his future wife. If there is no
“ own ” sister’s husband, or any “ betrothed,” then a “ tribal ” sister’s husband,
or brother of a “ tribal ” wife, is selected.
2 The following tabular form is provisionally given from as yet incompleted
inquiries:—
Primary classes.
Sub-classes.
Totems {Budjan) .
r
Not known to exist -
Yibai-Yipatha
Opossum, Eaglehawk, Mallee-
hen, Fly, Native Bee, &c.
Wumbi-Butha
Lizard, Crow, Padimelon, &c.


That of the Wolgal is similar, but with somewhat different
groups of totems. Ngarego and Theddora had class-divisions of
the formula A + B, without sub-classes, with a large group of
totems representing each primary class, and having uterine
descent. 1 The Coast Murring have no class-divisions, and their
totem names are anomalous, as well as in a decadent state. In
some places each individual has two totem names, and in other
places only one, and the totem name goes from father to child.
There are therefore what seem at first sight irreconcilable
differences in the class-divisions, totems, and line of descent of
these tribes. Yet there is intermarriage between them, and the
intermarriages are regulated by the equivalence of the class and
totem names. This equivalence was known to the old people,
and still forms the subject of earnest consultation when a
marriage is under consideration. 2
The term “ community,” in the sense in which I now use it,
means the aggregate of all those tribes which meet at the same
initiation ceremonies, or who having substantially the same
ceremonies might meet if occasion were favourable, and between
whom there is intermarriage, although perhaps rarely.
Totems ( Budjan)
Primary classes.
Sub-classes.
r
Not known to exist <!
Muri-Matha.
Red Kangaroo, Small Iguana,
Young Emu, &c.
Kubi-Kubitha
Hawk, Bush-rat, Flying Opos-
sum, &c.
These are clearly variations of the well-known Kamilaroi sub-classes and
totems.
Totems {Budjan).
Primary classes.
Lyrebird, Bat, Flying Squirrel, Black
Snake, Mopoke, Black Opossum, Red
Wallaby, Fish.
Meruhg (Eaglehawk)
Small Hawk, Rabbit Rat, Kangaroo, Emu,
Iguana, Native Companion, Porcupine,
Sleeping Lizard.
Ytlkembruk (Crow)
These are evidently the equivalents of the Eaglehawk and Crow classes which
extended over a large part of Victoria and over the greater part of the extreme
west of New South Wales.
2 With the Coast Murring the local groups are under a strict exogamic rule,
so that a man cannot marry a woman of his own locality, nor indeed of any other
locality than that to which his sister (own or tribal) goes as a wife. Yet he
cannot marry a woman of the permitted locality if she happens to be of the same
budjan (totem) as himself.


The initiative in these ceremonies is taken by one of the
principal men. It is usually either the principal man of the
united tribe, or it may be the principal man of some one section
of it. This man may either act on his own impulse, or he may
be moved by the representations of some other man of influence
or perhaps more frequently after the matter has been considered
by the old men who form the “ Great Council.” This Great
Council is composed of the most eminent men, that is, the heads
of totems, warriors, orators, doctors, wizards ; it holds its meetings
in secret, at some place apart. Its determinations are announced
to what may well be called the general council of the tribe, that
is, an assembly of all the initiated men, held at some place apart
from the camp where the women and children are.
When it has been decided that there are a sufficient number of
boys ready for initiation, the headman sends out his messenger.
In the tribes which have the class-system in a vigorous condition,
it is frequently the case that the messenger is necessarily of the
same totem as the sender of the message. 1 Let us suppose the
latter to be a Wiraijuri headman of the Yibai-Gurimul
(Opossum) sub-class and totem. The messenger must also be
Yibai-Gurimul, and it is to a principal man of the same that his
message is delivered, who in his turn sends it on in the same
manner. Thus the message travels throughout the whole
community by being carried by the Gurimul totem, whose
headman communicates it to the principal men of the different
totems which form the local groups. The messenger carries
with him, as the emblems of his mission, a complete set of male
attire, together with the sacred humming instrument, which is
wrapped in a skin, and carefully concealed from women and
children. It is therefore, in such cases, the totem which
assembles the whole community. 2
In cases where the social organisation has broken down, the
procedure is different in some degree. I have said that among
the Coast Murring it is the intermarrying local groups which
are strongly exogamic, and this practice obscures the effect of
the still existing restriction as to the totem. The local groups
are arranged under two great geographical divisions, named
respectively Katungal, that is, sea-coast people, and Baiangal,
1 This is not the case in all tribes. In the Dieri tribe, according to Mr. Gason,
the head of a murdu (totem), in sending a message, would probably send one of
his own name, but not necessarily; he might send any one else.
2 I learn from Mr. J. C. Muirhead that the practice of sending a message
through a totem occurs in Northern Queensland, and further, that even the
message-stick which is carried by the messenger must be made of some tree
which belongs to the same class division as both the sender and the bearer of the
message. In the tribes referred to the whole universe is, so to say, arranged
under the two primary classes.


that is to say, forest people. 1 Assuming that the ceremonies
were ordered to be held by the principal headman of the
Katungal, he would send his messenger to the headman of the
Baiangal, who would take action accordingly. The social organi-
sation has here no apparent part in assembling the community,
for the messenger is not necessarily of the same totem name as
the sender.
I now take some other instances for the purpose of illustration.
The last great meeting of the Kiirnai tribe was called together
by the headman of the Brabrolung clan, who was also the most
influential man of the northern moiety of the tribe. 2 The
message was carried by a young man of this headman’s local
group, and he bore with him as his credentials one of the “great
man’s ” weapons. 3 He delivered it, together with his message,
to the principal man of the southern moiety of the tribe, who
then, gathering his people together, led them to the appointed
place, where meanwhile the northern half had collected under
their headman and prepared the ceremonial ground.
In the Woi-woriing tribe of the Yarra River it was the head-
man who summoned the assemblies for initiation. He sent a
messenger to the headmen of the local groups, who carried a
man’s belt hung on a reed. In the Adjadura tribe of South
Australia the ceremonies are ordered to be held by the headman
of the whole tribe by his messenger, who carries a message-
stick marked in such a manner that it serves to illustrate his
message ; together with this there is also sent a sacred humming
instrument. 4 In the Chepara tribe of Southern Queensland the
initiation ceremonies are called together by the principal head-
man, who sends his messenger (usually a son—own or tribal) to
all the other headmen. The messenger carries a message-stick
and a sacred humming instrument. 5 These instances will
suffice to show how similar the mode of calling together these
assemblies is in far distant parts of Australia.
1 Properly speaking, Baiangal means “ belonging to tomahawk,” and refers to
the use made of that implement for chopping holes in climbing a tree. The
Baiangal are therefore, correctly speaking, “ Tree-climbers ” —gaining their living
in the forests, climbing in search of game, as distinguished from the Katungal,
who live on fish, and other produce of the sea, and are therefore properly spoken
of as “ Fishermen.” The whites know them by this name, but speak of the
others as “ Waddy men,” from the word waddg, colonially used for tree.
2 It will be well, in order to avoid misapprehension, to confine the use of the
word clan to the local division of a tribe which has agnatic descent. Mr. Fison
has suggested to me the word horde, as suitable for the local division of a
tribe having uterine descent. The reader will please bear' in mind that where I
use either of the above terms, I do so in the sense indicated.
3 Ghveraeil = great, and Kurnai = man. This is the designation of a headman
in this tribe.
4 Mr. Thos. U. Sutton, of Yorkes Peninsula, South Australia.
5 Mr. J. Gibson, J.P., of Stanmore, Queensland.


The Ceremonies of Initiation . —l now proceed with reference
to the five tribes which I have taken into special consideration.
The ceremonial meeting having been called together, that moiety
of the community which called it prepares the ground and gets
all ready for the arrival of the various contingents. Some
spot has been selected where a good supply of food is obtainable.
The preparation of the ground is regulated by the peculiar form
which the ceremonies have taken in any one tribe. The best
illustration which I can give will be by describing the procedure
of the Coast Murring, which is a good general example of the
ceremonies of the great group of epigamic communities which I
treat of in this paper.
The ceremonies themselves may be one of two kinds:—either
the full ceremonial, called Bunan, or the abbreviated ceremonial,
called Kddja-wdlung. 1 The ceremonies are also spoken of
generally in either case as Kuringal . 2 The difference between
these ceremonies is partly that the Bunan lasts three or four
days, while the Kddja-wdlung lasts about half that time, and
partly that in the latter not only are the proceedings abbreviated,
but that some which belong to the Bunan are omitted. For
instance, the Bunan is held in a carefully prepared ground,
where every stick or stone has been carefully removed, and the
earth has been thrown up in a circular mound about the place
of ceremony. The novices are placed on this mound in front of
fierce fires, and are kept there sufficiently long to fully test their
power of endurance. Each novice holds upright in front of him-
self his mother’s “ yam stick,” on which are hung the belt of man-
hood and the other articles of attire with which he is by-and-by
to be invested. It is inside this circular mound that many of
the preliminary dances, at which it is lawful for the women and
children to be present, take place. A cleared path leads from
the great Bunan for some distance through the bush to a retired
spot where is the small Bunan, enclosed by boughs, in which
the tooth is knocked out. The women are sent away, under the
charge of some old man, from the great Bunan before the pro-
cession of the initiated and of the novices takes place along the
cleared path.
The difference between the greater and the lesser Kuringal is
mainly in the presence or absence of the circular mound, of the
cleared path of the small Bunan, and in the more or less
extended and developed character of the ceremonies.
I shall now describe the proceedings as carried on at the
1 Probably from “ huning ” =to knock or strike, having reference to the knock-
ing out of the tooth. Kddja-walung means “raw ceremonies,” having reference
to absence of the roasting process, which is only done at the Bunan.
2 From Kuring—the forest or bush.


lesser ceremonies of the coast tribes. On the arrival of a con-
tingent, led by the messenger who summoned it, its women and
children halt at a distance, and a peculiar long-drawn “ Coo-ee ” is
uttered by the messenger. On this being answered from the
camp, the men follow their conductor to the council-place, while
the women proceed to encamp. The spot which they occupy is
on that side of the general encampment which faces in the
direction of their country. Meanwhile the men have sat down
at the council-place, and after a silence the headman of the
newly arrived contingent and the headman of the people who
receive it, converse, and it may be that all the old men consult
together. The arrival is often arranged to be about nightfall.
The next proceeding is for all the men present at the council-
place to run in a long winding line from it to the general camp.
The line is headed by one of the old men, or sometimes by the
“ sister’s husbands ”of the novices. 1 Each man holds a bough
in his hand, 2 which is struck rythmically from side to side as the
long line winds stamping forward with deep guttural exclamations
of Huh ! Wah ! The signal for the start of this snake-like pro-
cession is given by the last-arrived messenger, who draws out
his concealed mtidji, and swinging it causes it to make a loud
roaring noise. 3 So soon as this is heard the men commence
their winding course, and the women start up in the camp, roll
their rugs, and commence to drum and to sing the “ tooth song,”
which is intended to cause the novice’s teeth to come out easily.
The procession of men is by this time winding, stamping, and
shouting Huh! Wah! through the entire encampment, visiting
each separate hut, and, as I may say, gathering the women and
children into a clear space outside of it. Here the women and
children crowd together, while the men dance round them in
more than even double fold, if the line is long enough. One of
the men now starts forward, shouting loudly the name of the
locality of the newly arrived contingent, which is hailed with
shouts by the men, who then silently raise their boughs over
the women’s heads towards the sky. In this way a number of
the most distant localities from which there are people present
1 In the coast language, Tcabo ; in Ngarego and Theddora, jdmbi; in Wiraij uri,
muriwun , These words all mean “ wife’s brother,” as well as “ sister’s husband ”
—for sisters are exchanged as wives in these tribes under arrangement of the
respective fathers.
2 I have seen some men hold a hoomerang instead.
3 I use the word “snake-like” because it best represents the movements of
the procession. That this resemblance is not merely fanciful may be seen from
this, that the very first overt act by which the women are made aware that the
men have determined to hold a Kuringal is, that one of the last initiated young
men is sent to run through the camp shouting “ a snake! a snake ! ” and the men
then follow and form the procession. In the coast tribes the humming instru-
ment is called mudji, or mudthi.


are pronounced—not only to the assembled community in words,
but by the upward-pointed gesture with bough, boomerang, or
finger, to the Great Master; 1 for this is the gesture-sign by
which these tribes indicate the name of the dreaded Spirit,
which it is not lawful to speak before the uninitiated, or in places
where it is not sanctioned by the performance of these ceremonies,
which he first instituted and taught to his people.
After this ceremony the evening is spent in singing and dancing
for the general amusement.
When all the contingents have arrived the council of old men
determines the day on which the great ceremonies shall be held.
These are commenced by a stamping, winding procession as
before, but this time the women and children are not only closely
crowded together, but crouch on the ground, and those women
whose sons are to be initiated are placed in front of the group.
The men having danced in a long chain back and fro before the
women, halt in front of them, and, directed by the principal old
man, closely cover them up with rugs. 2 The women all this
time are droning out the “ tooth song.” At a sign from the old
man who is the master of the ceremonies, each kobo seizes his
particular charge by the arm, and holding him tight drags him
forth and hastens away with him, followed by the shouting
crowd of men. 3 Some old man is left behind to see that the
women behave themselves, and do not indulge in any unlawful
female curiosity by following the men.
When at a distance from the camp the boys are rubbed with
1 The meaning of “ Bidmban ,” as “ master,” is quite clear to me. A man is the
Bidmban of his wife and children; an old man is Bidmban as regards the young
men who obey his orders; the great warrior or wizard who rules the local groups
is its Bidmban ; the principal headman of all is the Bidmban of the tribe, and
Baramulun, the Great Spirit, is the Bidmban over everything.
2 In the Bunan ceremonies the women are not covered up at this time, but
each mother sits in a camp behind her son. who is on the mound undergoing the
“fire ordeal”; the other women being further back. The Wiraijuri follow
much the same practice above described. The Wimmera tribe of North-Western
Yictoria also roasted the boys on a mound.
I observed at a Coast Kuringal that a very old man of the Bidwelli tribe,
which has no initiation ceremonies, but who was at the encampment, being
friendly with all, and related by marriage to some of the contingent visitors,
was not permitted to Join, but was driven crouching among the women and
children, and together with them was covered with rugs. One of the Krauatun-
Kurnai, who have no ceremonies, as I have before said, who was also at the
camp, went away altogether when the proceedings commenced.
3 This shouting is intended to cover the noise made by the departing men.
The women and children are supposed not to know what has become of them
when the rugs are taken off by the man left in charge. At the Bunan, the
departure of the novices and their guardians along the path is marked by the
men, who continue to run round the inside of the Bunan, making a noise like
“ p-r-r p-r-r,” and gradually stealing off one by one. During this time the
women have been lying down outside the circular mound at the side furthest
removed from the path leading to the small Bunan.


red ochre and fat, and each one is covered closely with a rug or
blanket so that nothing but his face is visible.
The ceremonial procession now commences, and each kobo is
deeply engaged in giving his boy a preliminary instruction as to
his duties. These may be summed up as follows: —
(1) He is on no account to stare about him, but to walk with
his eyes fixed on the ground, excepting when told by his guardian
to look at anything.
(2) He is not to laugh, nor to show the slightest sign of being
conscious of that which he sees, or hears, or that which is done
to him.
(3) He is, however, to pay the greatest attention to all that he
is told, and he is, moreover, told that for disobedience of these
commands he may be struck down instantly, if not killed, by the
magic powers of the old men.
It is the duty of the guardian to watch over his charge, to
care for him in every way, to give him food and drink, when
these are allowed to the novice, and above all to fully explain
the ceremonies; to teach him the name and attributes of
Daramulun, and in every way to be to him a “ guide, philosopher,
and friend.” 1
The proceedings may be divided into three parts; the _ pro-
cession, the encampment, the return; and I shall for convenience
deal with the ceremonies in that order. Before proceeding with
my description I must, however, make some general statements
which apply to the whole, from beginning to end. So soon as
the initiated men with the novices are out of sight of the camp,
or at the greater ceremonies have left the Bunan circle —the
women being left behind —it becomes lawful to openly speak
of those things which elsewhere are not spoken of at all, or only
in a hushed tone. Even, in some respects, the language is
altered, for many words are now used for which at other times,
and in other places, quite different ones are used. The principle
underlying this is, that all things belonging to these ceremonies
are so intimately connected with Daramulun that they may not
be elsewhere spoken of without risk of displeasing him, and the
words which imply these ceremonies, or anything connected with
them, are therefore forbidden. For instance, the name of Dara-
mulun may now be freely uttered, —in what manner I shall
shortly show, —whereas at other times he is only alluded to by
the general name of Bidmhan 2 master, or Bapanf = father,
1 Among the Wiraijuri the novice was shrouded as I have described, leaving
the face uncovered ; but among the Theddora the rug was so arranged that a
flap hung down so low over the face that the novice could see nothing but the
heels of his jdmhi, whom he closely followed.
2 Coast language.
Ngarego language.


or more generally by a simple gesture by pointing the forefinger
of the right hand towards the sky.
The Procession. —This is to some retired and secret place,
which may be several miles distant. All the men throw off the
silent, self-contained, even dignified manner which is so marked
in many old blackfellows, and all, from the youngest to the oldest,
become in some respects more like a set of schoolboys let loose
for a “ lark,” than anything else I can think of. From this time
until the end of the proceedings, when the men resume their
ordinary manner, there is a very peculiar practice of speaking
in what I may call an “ inverted sense,” The most extraordinary
statements are made to each other, and to the novices, but at
the end of each sentence is added the word Yah! which
means, as the men themselves explained by English words,
“gammon,” or “a sell.” Thus the real intended meaning is
always the opposite of the apparent meaning of the words used.
For instance, I have heard one of the old men say to one of the
novices, with a comic manner, “ I say, boys, you can go home now
Yah ! we have done with you— Yah ! ” The conversation hardly
ever flags, but jests, replies, and retorts are bandied from one to
another, accompanied by a constant fire of Yah! until the
word becomes utterly wearisome. It is said that this practice is
intended to teach the boys to speak the straightforward truth,
and the hobos thus explain it to them.
The procession is broken into a number of stages, at which the
boys, each attended by his guardian, stand in a row with down-
cast eyes; at these halts there are performances in which all
the men take part, under the direction cf one or two old men,
who act as masters of ceremonies.
These performances are some of them intended to amuse, some
to instruct, and some to warn and terrify. For instance, the
first performance at the Kuringal, which I am now describing,
was that two old men sat down on the ground, in front of the
novices, and proceeded, with most ludicrous antics, to make a
“ dirt-pie,” after the manner of children, while the men danced
round them. The hobos told their charges that this was to
show them that they must no longer consort with children and
play at childish games, but for the future act as men.
Other performances represent hunting incidents. At all these
stages the pantomimic representation is accompanied by dancing
on the part of the men generally. The dancers usually perform
their part standing in front of the novices, so as to leave a small
space open, and into this suddenly rushes one of the wizards,
who while dancing, sinks down almost to the ground, and, often
with fearful contortions, exhibits between his teeth some sub-
stance which he is supposed to be able to bring up from his


inside at will, and which is believed to be of terribly magical
power. The wizard is supposed to be able to injure or even kill
any one by invisibly throwing such a substance at them. 1
Here, then, the novices for the first time witness the actual
exhibition of those magical powers of the old men of which they
have heard since their earliest years. 2 They have been told
how these men can produce from within themselves certain
deadly things, which they are then able to project invisibly into
those whom they desire to injure or to kill; and now the boys
see during the impressive magical dances these very things, as
they express it, “ pulled out of themselves ” by the wizards.
There is a succession of these performances, and the accom-
panying dances until the scene of the main ceremonies is
reached. Throughout the whole course the singular “ inverted
speech ” is used, and among other devices for impressing on the
novices the absolute necessity of obedience by them to the
directions of the old men, saplings growing on the line of route
are bent over into arches, under which the novices pass, some-
times even being obliged to crawl on the ground to do so.
All this time, during the march, the novice is closely attended
by his guardian, who is most of the time engaged in earnestly
instructing him, and in explaining to him the meaning of the
various performances which are gone through by the men.
The Magic Camp. —A camp is formed when the spot is reached
which has been fixed upon for the site of the tooth-knocking-
out ceremony. The first thing done is the lighting of a “ magic
fire ” on an open space round which the different camps are
disposed. The novices, always closely attended by their hobos ,
are caused to lie down on a couch of boughs, closely covered
over by their rugs or blankets. The couch of boughs is intended
to keep them off the ground, which otherwise might make them
ill, if damp. The rule is that the novices and their guardians
are to encamp themselves near the men of that contingent which
has come from a place most distant from their own country, in
1 The wizards are supposed to obtain these substances from Daramulun, and
the most potent of all is the crystal of clear quartz which is intimately connected
with him. A Wiraijuri man, who had in some dream or vision, or perhaps under
the effect of something like the so-called electrobiology, imagined himself to have
been taken by his father on a thread up to the “ Camp of JBaiamai,” beyond the
sky, described him to me as a very aged man seated in a kneeling position, with
a quartz crystal extending from each shoulder to the sky above —that is to say, a
second sky from the earth. Other magical substances which the wizards extract
“ out of their internal consciousness ” are like sinew, like flesh, like intestine,
like chalk, like black stones, or pieces of bone, &c.
2 Speaking of these matters with a young man of the Coast Murring he said to
this effect: —“ When I was a little boy people used to tell me that the old men
could kill people with things they pulled out of themselves, but I hardly believed
it ; when I was taken and made gumbang-ira (raw tooth— i.e., initiated), I saw
the old men bring these things up—how could I doubt then ? ”


order that, being placed entirely among strangers, and away from
the countenance of their kindred and friends, they may be more
easily impressed by that which they see and hear.
A constant succession of ceremonies, of pantomimic represen-
tations, magic dances, songs interspersed with the inverted
speeches, and the accompanying “ Yah” now continue,until far
into the night, even until very near morning. Throughout all
this there is during the dances a constant display by the wizards
of their magic powers. Occasionally, when late at night the
men become somewhat tired and seem inclined to fall asleep,
the mUdji is swung in the gloom of the forest, and as its roaring
sound is heard the people are roused to renewed efforts.
The mudji is held to have been first made and used by
Daramulun, when in the beginning of things he instituted these
ceremonies, and constituted the aboriginal society as it exists.
The noise made by it is the voice of Daramulun, calling together
the initiated, and, moreover, it also represents the muttering of
thunder, which is said to be his voice “ calling to the rain to
fall and make the grass grow up green.” 1
Throughout all this time the novices are kept in a constant
state of excitement and uncertainty. The performances, songs,
and dances are alternately exhibited by the two tribal moieties—
one performing, and the other witnessing. At the end of each
of the “ Acts,” if I may use the term, there is a short halt for
rest. The men sit in their camps, and talk or smoke, or even
snatch “ forty winks.” The novices are told to lie down, in such
words as these: “ Now we have finished. You can go to sleep
till morning— Yah! ” No sooner have the novices been settled
under their rugs, and might be supposed to be dozing, than some
old man rushes into the magic ring, and commences a fresh set
of performances, and the novices are at once roused up and
brought back to the fire.
The ceremonial performances. —All the men during these
performances are, or should be, quite naked and rubbed over
with powdered charcoal. Of the ceremonies the greatest is that of
the extraction of the tooth, which, with the group of tribes I now
treat of, is one of the upper middle pair of incisors, usually the
left one. A place is prepared out of sight of the magic fire, by
clearing everything off the ground, and a pair of holes is dug in
this space for each boy to stand in during the ceremony. A
number of men hideously disguised 2 kneel in front, and the man
1 These are the very words used by Umbara, the minstrel and improvisatore of
his tribe, when speaking to me on these subjects during the Kuringal.
2 The disguises are made by beating out stringy bark fibre into what looks
much like coarse sheets of yellow tow. With these the performers are covered
from head to foot. Huge wigs are made of it, and all that is visible of the


at each end of the line holds a strip of bark in his hands, with
which, by striking on a small heap of earth raised in front of
him, he can produce a noise like the distant explosion of a gun.
At one side of the ground the figure of Daramulun is cut on some
large tree, in the attitude of dancing the magic dance.
Sometimes other figures or marks are made in the surrounding
trees. All being ready, the principal old man gives the signal,
and the novices being guided from the camp with their eyes
fixed on the ground at their feet, the mudji is swung, loudly
roaring somewhere out of sight. The novices are now placed,
each with his feet in a pair of holes, and his kobo stands behind him.
The old man now gives a signal, and the end man of the row
of hideous kneeling figures raises his piece of bark, and brings it
down with a loud report, and at the same time he and all the
others surge away from his end of the row, making a rumbling
sound, in imitation of the surf breaking upon and rushing up
the shore ; the other end man now in his turn strikes the ground,
and he and all the men surge back with a similar deep sound.
This is intended to represent the thunder from the mountains
rolling back the sound to the sea.
When this has gone on rythmically for a little time the men
jump up and rush forward towards the boys, who have been told
to attentively observe them. The kobo now kneels on one knee,
so that the other forms a seat on which the novice sits, while
another kobo 1 stands immediately behind, with his right arm
round the boy’s body, and his left hand over his eyes, so as to
blindfold him, and at the same time turn his face skywards. 2
The men now commence an excited dance, while from some
place of concealment near at hand the old man whose office it
is to knock out the tooth dances forward with a wooden chisel
in one hand, and a wooden mallet in the other. 3 Sometimes he
performer is his black face, which is distorted by strings tied across his nose and
reverting his lips.
1 It must be borne in mind that the boy has what I may term “ tribal ” Jcahos
as well as “own” Jcabos, just as he has “tribal” sisters, as well as “own”
sisters, and in the future will probably have “ tribal ” wives, as well as his
“own” wife.
The distinction between these advanced tribes, which have individual marriage
and agnatic descent, and the less advanced, which have some form of group
marriage and uterine descent, is well marked by these “own” and “tribal”
wives. In the advanced tribes the “ tribal wife ”is only nominally a wife,
excepting in some tribes, on very rare ceremonial occasions, while in the back-
ward standing tribes she is generally a wife in fact, although perhaps only an
“ accessory ” one.
2 With the Ngarego and Coast tribes the boy is in some eases seated across his
guardian’s neck, just as is figured by Collins. With the Wiraijuri the boy’s two
guardians stand, one behind him and one at one side of him, and thus hold him
during the operation.
3 The mallet is a piece of wood about 15 inches in length, and flattened at the
four sides.


pushes back the gums from the boy’s tooth with his finger-nail,
but sometimes this is dispensed with. He then seizes the boy
by the head, and inserting his own lower incisors underneath
the tooth which is to be extracted, gives a “ hoist ” up to loosen
it. It is said that a tooth occasionally comes out under this
process, but more frequently it does not, and then has to be
knocked out by placing the wooden chisel on it, and striking it
with the mallet. All this time the men round are frantically
jumping up and down, shouting “ Wiri, Wirri! ” 1 and as many
as are near the operator patting him on the back to encourage
him. Under such circumstances, more especially as the
operator endeavours to keep up the magic dance himself, it is
not surprising that many blows are sometimes required before
the tooth is extracted. I have known as many as thirteen
blows to be given. When the tooth holds fast, the explanation
always given is that “ the boy has not kept to himself, but has
been too much in the company of the girls and women.” 2
When the tooth is extracted it is taken charge of by one of
the old men. The boy is soothed and told that “it is all over
now.” He is enjoined to be careful not to spit out the blood
flowing from the gum. He is now almost a man. When all
the boys have been made gumbang-ira? they are taken to the
figure of Daramultin, and instructed concerning him, and
cautioned against revealing anything about him or his ceremonies
to women or children, under the severest penalties.
All the disguises are now stripped off, and thrown in a heap
on the cleared space ; the men stand round in a circle, facing
outwards, and at a given signal scratch together a large heap of
rubbish over it; then turning their faces towards the heap
extend their hands several times downwards over it.
The boys are now taken back to the magic fire, and, being told
that no more will be done to them, are each one invested with
1 Wiri = quick.
2 One of the Theddora, in telling me about his initiation, said that his jdmli
impressed upon him very earnestly that he must answer the questions of the old
men truthfully in all things. “If the old men ask you whether you have been
too free with any of the women, tell them the truth, because otherwise they may
perhaps kill you, or at least send you away into the bush for a long time by
yourself.”
In the Wiraijuri tribe a certain hoy had often been reproved by the old men
for playing too much with the little girls, and not mending his manners the old
“ blackfellow doctor ” took him in hand and proceeded to extract from his legs
certain strands of the “woman’s apron” which he said had got into him in
consequence of his behaviour. A further consequence of this was that when
he was initiated subsequently this same old man could by no means get the tooth
out, until after a very great number of blows, which then was only successful
when he had rubbed the boy’s neck and again extracted quite a number of pieces
of the “ woman’s kilt.” This was indeed a case of being “ tied to an apron-
string.”
3 Qumbang-ira = raw or bleeding tooth.


the belt, the kilt, and other insignia of manhood. The perform-
ances, which are intended to complete the initiation of the youths
by instructing them in their new duties as men, are now com-
menced These are, as I have before said, of different kinds.
The pantomimic representations . —These are of several kinds;
some are amusing pieces of buffoonery, others represent the
different totems, and others again are what may be truly called
“ moral lessons.” Some illustrations will make this clear.
An old man runs into the magic circle carrying a lump of
wood as if it were a young child. He imitates the crying of an
infant, and this is supposed to be a sick one. Other men now
join him, who pretend to be doctors, examine the child, and go
through the usual remedial course—pretending to extract the
disease in the form of pieces of stone, wood, bone, and other
rubbish; the whole of this is very comically done, and even the
old “ doctors ” themselves join in it.
Another instance is where two old men are seen standing
beyond the fire at the edge of the magic circle; to the left and
in the gloom of the forest are the other men crouching together.
They are “Hock wallabies,” and one old man proceeds to “ drive ”
them past the other one, whose business is supposed to be to
knock each one over as it passes, with some weapon. This of
course represents the hunting of the Hock wallabies, by driving
them past other hunters in ambush. But this pantomime
is intended to be comic. The wallabies are driven one by one,
hopping past the hunter, who, simulating weapons with pieces
of stick and bark, always misses his object, and is therefore
comically abused and beaten by the driver. When the wallabies
have all passed in front of the fire, and have laid down in the
shadow at the other side, the two old men rush to the fire clap-
ping their hands, and shouting the word meaning “Wallaby.” All
the performers then rush in and form a dancing circle, shouting
the word in time to the dance. This dance is always of the same
character. The legs are kept somewhat apart, and at each jump
the knees are slightly bent, but there is none of the quivering
used at the Corroborree; at the same time the arms, hanging down,
are swung to and fro across the front of the body: this is the
whole step and action. It is hardly possible to imagine a wilder
scene—a more complete “ witches’ sabbath ” —than this, where a
number of naked blackfellows, made truly hideous by being
rubbed with charcoal, dance furiously in this manner by night,
round the magic fire, in the depths of the forest, shouting some
word in time to the dance. 1 It is completed when the old men
rush into the ring and dance crouching, so that the tips of their
1 This is precisely the magic dance which I have described in “ Kamilaroi and
KQrnai,” p. 252, as being performed by the “ Bunjil Barn.”


fingers almost touch the ground, or even on their knees, until
sometimes, apparently overcome by the magic influence, they fall
down, seemingly in an exhausted state.
Other dances merely represent the “ totems.” For instance,
the bowlings of what seems to be a pack of dingoes is heard in
the forest. The sounds come nearer, the howls answering each
other, until at length the leader of the band runs in on all fours
to the fire, followed by the others. They run after each other
round the fire imitating the actions of dogs, until, as before, the
leading old man jumps up, clasps his hands and shouts the
native word for “ wild dog.” All then join in precisely such a
dance as I have before described.
What may be called the “ moral lessons ” have, at first sight,
a very immoral appearance, and it is not easy to describe some
of them. They represent in pantomimic dances various offences
against propriety and morality, and the old men and the guardians
point these representations by telling the novices what will be
the consequences should they, after leaving the initiation camp,
commit the represented offences. I have heard the old men say,
for instance : “If you do anything like that when you go back,
you will be killed ” —that is, either by magic or by direct violence.
That which is thus forbidden I can sufficiently describe by
saying that it includes, inter alia, disrespect towards the old men,
the interference with unprotected women or the wives of other
men, and those offences for which, it is said, the Cities of the
Plain were destroyed by celestial fire.
Besides these representations there are many merely “ magic
dances,” which seem to be performed for the purpose of enabling
the wizards to exhibit their power of “ bringing things out of
themselves.” The mode of dancing is precisely that which I
have described before, but the word shouted is either the name
of some particular magic object, as of the quartz crystal, or the
name of some part of the body, as head, legs, &c., which may
become the subject of the magic influence.
Among these magic dances those of Daramultin and
Ngalalbal are pre-eminent. The former is to the word
DaramulUn, and the old men then show all they can do in bring-
ing up those substances with which it is said he provides them.
The Ngalalbal dance is rendered very effective by being
preceded by the “ duality ” Ngalalbal, the wives of Daramulun.
These are seen to glide from the forest past the fire, and to
disappear in the gloom beyond, to a slow and rather melancholy
air sung by the audience, the words of which may be rendered,
“ Ngalalbal, you two coming from afar, where are you going
to ?” 1 Ngalalbal is represented by two men shrouded in rugs
1 I think this name is derived from Ngalal sinew, in reference to the sinewy


precisely as are the novices, and each protruding a boomerang
from the small space left at the face.
Throughout all these performances there is the constant use
of the “ inverted speech,” and the novices are continually
instructed by their guardians, and specially by one or other of
the old men.
One very significant part of the ceremonies remains to be
noted, and I may now also say that it occurs periodically from
almost the very commencement of the ceremonies until their
end.
At the conclusion of some performance —it does not seem to be
confined to either kind—the old men rush towards the novices,
followed by the others. Each man rythmically moves his hands
alternately from himself to the novices, palm upwards, as if
he were scooping something from himself to them, at the same
time emphatically keeping time with the word nga (good);
the novices on their part, as also the hobos, move their hands
as if they were drawing something towards themselves. When
this has gone on for a short time the old men cease, and utter
the emphatic words, Yah ! Huh ! Wah ! at each word making a
downward motion of the hands towards the boys.
This is said to be done for the purpose of making the boys
“so that DaramulUn likes them,” and I feel there can be no
doubt that the idea is that the magic influences of the ceremonies
is thus passed to the boys, and “ clinched ” by the emphatic
motion of the hands. In other words, the boys are filled with
the influence and made acceptable to the Great Spirit Daramu-
lUn, who instituted these ceremonies, and who is supposed to
watch them whenever performed. 1
These proceedings go on until far into the night, and at early
dawn the magic fire is replenished, and for a time the magic
dances are repeated. During the day the men rest, or go out
to hunt, and the boys remain closely covered with their rugs in
charge of their guardians.
legs of the Emu, which is Ngalalbal, and from bal, a dual affix. This female
duality is probably the analogue of the bulum-baulcan = two baukan, who are,
according to the Ktirnai belief, the mothers of the youth Bulumtiit. It is said
that these two mothers and one son ascended to the sky via Wilson’s Promontory
at the time when an ineffectual attempt was made to steal the fire of the
Kurnai.
1 I have seen one of the old men rush furiously at one of the novices, seize
him by the head and apparently bite some part of it. This is supposed to pass to
him the power of “ bringing up things.'’ To me the most remarkable feature
was the utter impassibility shown by the boys to all these proceedings, which
must have certainly roused alarm in their minds. I remember one young lad of
about twelve, who showed no more sense of anything going on round him than
if he had been a bronze statue, and yet, as he afterwards said, he felt quite sure
several times that he was about to be killed.


At night the ceremonies recommence, and are a repetition
such as those which I have described. When it is considered
that they have lasted long enough, the final ceremonies of the
return procession are commenced.
The magic fire is covered up with earth and rubbish, and
carefully trampled down and extinguished —finally by the
emphatic downward motion of the hands. But before this some
dry bark has been cut; pieces are placed in pairs together, and
being tied at the ends with a few leafy twigs, are lighted at the
magic fire. One of these fire-sticks is given to each of the
novices, in order that he may cany it with him and light the
fire which he is to use during the time of his lt is
believed that the omission to do this would cause fearful and
destructive storms. 1
During the return there are certain ceremonies of which the
following may serve as an example. 2 The procession being
formed, and on the march from the magic camp, the roaring of
the mudji is heard and a halt is made. The old men, having
carefully cleared a piece of ground, proceed to mould in earth,
in high relief, the life-sized figure of a naked man in the attitude
of the dance. He is represented as having his mouth filled with
“ magic substances,” and in the full ceremonies is surrounded by
an assortment of the native weapons. This is Daramulun. The
novices are brought and placed in front of this figure and the
dances take place—one to the word Dammultin, the other to
the word Ngalalbal. It is now that the novices are finally in-
structed as to this being and his attributes. I have heard them
1 It is a. common belief that the old wizards have magical substances scattered
in the Kuringal ground, in order to injure or kill any person trespassing upon
it after the ceremonies are concluded. On no account would a woman enter one
knowingly, for such an act would certainly be expected to be fatal to her.
2 As showing how the various “stages,” if 1 may use the word, differ in
different tribes, I take the following from the most distant one, the Wiraijun,
which precede the extraction of the tooth : > v l) A strip of bark is taken spirally
from a large tree down to the ground. This represents a path from the sky to
the earth, down which Daramulun descends; (2) the figure of Daramulun
moulded in the ground. DaramulUn is in this tribe not the supreme master,
but the son of Baiamai, who rules everything ; (3) the moulded figure of
Daramulun's tomahawk, which he threw after the Emu as he was descending
by the path from the sky to the earth; (4) tw r o footprints of the Emu a little
distance apart from each other, made when it was endeavouring to escape
from Daramulun ; (5) the figure of the Emu itself where it fell. Magic dances,
exactly such as those I have described, take place at each stage, at which the
wizards “ bring up” and exhibit their magic substances. I have heard of more
than one Daramulun— in fact, of “ several Daramuluns, the sons of Baiamai. This
again suggests the “ sons of Bunjil ,” of the Woi-worung tribe—namely, six of the
totems (animals and birds) which, together with Bunjil, have become stars and
thus watch over the fortunes of men, t.e.,of Woi-wortingmen. Moreover, Bunjil
(as the star Eomalhaut) has his two wives with him, which recalls the dual wife
Ngalalhal.


told by the principal old man “ This is the master (Biamban),
who can go anywhere and do anything.” They are also
cautioned never to reveal this or to make such a representation
unless at the ceremonies, under pain of death.
The figure is now carefully covered up, and the procession
proceeds a further stage on its march, when another halt is made
and the novices are seated at a distance with their guardians.
The old men, meanwhile, disguise several of the others with
stringy bark fibre as I have before described, but in this case
the performers were entirely covered, face and all, and were
connected together by a cord passing from head to head. 1
During this time a grave is dug, and one of the old men, lying
in it on his back, after the manner of a corpse, is lightly covered
up with sticks and rubbish and earth, and so far as possible the
natural appearance of the ground is restored, the excavated
earth being carried away to a distance. 2 The buried wizard
holds a small bush in his hand, resting on his chest; the bush
appears therefore to be growing in the soil, and other bushes are
stuck in the soil to heighten the effect. All being ready the
novices are brought to the edge of the grave. The “singer
is somewhere close at hand, and the performers at perhaps two
hundred yards’ distance. In the instance which I am now
describing, the singer commenced a well-marked but melancholy
chant, the words of which are no more than the class-name of
the buried man, and the word for the stringy bark fibre used of
the disguise. 3 The performers now commenced to move in a
kind of slow dance, keeping time with the song. The performers
in their advancing line held a small strip of bark in each hand,
and by striking these together with a sharp sound they marked
the time of the song and of their steps. A little at one side, and
advancing with them, are two other disguised men, who represent
two very ancient and therefore powerful wizards, by whom the
proceedings are directed. Each one, as signifying his great age,
assists himself in his tottering dance with a staff in each hand.
When the strange procession reached the grave, it wound round
it and ranged itself on the side opposite to the novices. The
song still continued, and then the bush held by the buried man
began to move and to quiver —to move more and more, until
1 In Eirerina, where bark cannot be always procured, long tussock grass is
used for these disguises.
2 In one of the Tbeddora ceremonies two men were buried in this ceremony,
each in a crouching position, and were covered with a sheet of bark and earth.
In this tribe the usual form of interment was in a round pit, sometimes in a
side chamber excavated at its bottom, and the corpse was buried in a crouching
position with the knees drawn up towards the head.
3 Yibai — i.e., the equivalent of the Kamiiaroi Ipai and Burin-burin = stringy
bark fibre.


suddenly the earth opened, so to say, and the wizard rose, and
throwing off his concealment, danced his magic dance in the
grave and exhibited his magic substances.
The proceedings being over, the disguises were as before
covered up and concealed.
This ceremony is most impressive. It is the bringing back
to life of the dead wizard by other wizards invoking his class-
name. In this case the buried man was of the sub-class Yibai,
which is the equivalent of the Kamilaroi Ijpai, and according to
his own statement, the name Yibai is also a synonym of
DaramulUn} The last one of the secret ceremonies takes place
at some water-hole or creek. The novices are brought to the
water’s edge, being told in a joking manner, for instance, “We
are going to catch some fish —Yah ! ”
The men go into the water and thoroughly wash themselves,
so as to remove all traces of the charcoal with which they have
smeared themselves, and together with it leave everythin a
behind connected with the secret ceremonies. While they are
doing this they splash the water over the boys, and conclude
by passing to them a final portion of the magic influence, and
which the novices and their guardians draw to themselves as I
have before described. Finally, with an emphatic Yah ! Huh !
Wah ! and a downward movement of the hands, all is ended. 2
The men go into the water-hole with the curious part joking,
part serious, part buffoon manner of the ceremonies, and come
out with their ordinary manner. The old men resume the quiet,
somewhat self-contained and reserved manner which I have'
observed to be so marked in many of them.
There are now only two more proceedings before the novices
are taken to the camp. As the men all move off homewards, the
novices and their guardians go on a little ahead, and the mudji
is now brought out and loudly sounded. The novices are brought
back, and the headman shows to them the mudji, and the
wooden chisel, and explains their use, and also forbids them to
reveal anything that they have seen or heard under pain of
death. now proceed towards the main camp, or to that
place to which the women have been directed to proceed, and to
erect a new camp. 3 The novices now walk with the men,
1 It is well to note also that this man is of the Malian = Eaglehawk totem
and that in many tribes of Victoria, Bunjil = Eaglehawk, is the name of one of
the two primary class divisions, as well as also the name of the Great Spirit of
those tribes.
2 The boys are forbidden for a long time afterwards to swim, or even to go
into deep water, which it is thought would wash out of them all the ceremonial
influence.
3 In all cases a new camp is formed, even if it is only moved a couple of
hundred yards.


attended, but not guarded, by the kabos, and sometimes, in order
to still more impress them, a number of men, who have hidden
themselves in the path, rush out violently, spears aimed as if
about to kill the youths, who are threatened with death if they
reveal anything to the uninitiated. 1
Before reaching the camp where the women are, the youths
are carefully dressed with the full equipment of a man, and
painted after the manner customary in the tribe. On nearing
the camp a peculiar signal is given, and on this being answered
by the women each youth is raised on his guardian’s shoulders,
and the men close in round, holding up branches so as to
effectually screen them from sight. The procession then moves
slowly forward towards the camp. It is frequently the case that
the principal old man walks a little apart, on one side and towards
the rear.
During the absence of the men the women have made a hut
of boughs resembling one of the ordinary habitations, before
which there is a smoky fire. In this hut stands the mothers
and grown-up sisters of the newly made young men, dressed in
their gayest adornments. As the men approach close to the hut
they separate, and the guardians deposit each his charge at the
front of the fire. The youths then enter the hut, and the oldest
woman, after eyeing her son all over, lightly strikes him twice
with a boomerang. 2 It is an understood signal, at which all
the novices immediately run from the camp back into the
bush, followed closely by all the men.
The ceremonies are now completed, and the youths remain
for a certain time, which is fixed by the old men, gaining their
own living as best they can, by catching such food-animals as
are not forbidden to them. The rules under which certain
animals, birds, &c., are forbidden are such as these : the novice
may not kill and eat —
(1) Any animal that burrows in the ground, for it recalls to
mind the foot-holes where the tooth was knocked out; e.g., the
wombat.
(2) Such creatures as have very prominent teeth, for these
recall the tooth itself.
(3) Any animal that climbs to the tree tops, for they are then
near to Darmuliin; e.g., the native bear.
(4) Any bird that swims, for it recalls the -final washing.
1 At one great Bunan , held about fifteen years ago, the novices were forbidden,
as one of them related to me, to reveal anything to “ women, children, or white-
fellows.” In the Kuringal which I have just described, no promise was
expected from me, as being already an initiated person, but I was earnestly
entreated by one of the principal old men not to reveal any of the mysteries “ to
the Kurnai, who have no Kuringal, and who know nothing.”
2 With the Wiraijuri the novice is struck by his mother with a bough.


(5) Nor, above all, the Emu, for this is Ngalalbcd, the wife of
Daramultin, and at the same time “ the woman ”; 1 for the novice
during his probation is not permitted even so much as to look at
a woman, or to speak to one ; and even for some time after he
must cover his mouth with his rug when one is present. Yet
on one occasion during his probation he is shown to his mother,
in order that her mind may be at rest concerning him. 2
These food rules are only relaxed by degrees by some old
man giving the youth a portion of the forbidden animal, or
rubbing him with its fat. In some of the tribes, e.g., the
Wolgal, these food rules only become relaxed gradually, so that
it is the old man only who is free to use every kind of animal
food.
During the time of probation the young men are under the
charge of their guardians. But they are also visited and
instructed by the old men. After a time, as the council of elders
is satisfied that the youth is competent to take his place among
the men, he is recalled and permitted to be present at the
general councils, but he does not speak at them, or take any part
other than a passive one.
After a still further period he is permitted to take the wife
who has been assigned to him by the arrangement of his and
her father, and in acquiring her he takes his sister (own or
tribal), as an exchange—that is, as a wife for her own or
tribal brother. These mutual exchanges are often arranged
at a general meeting of all the people before the various
contingents separate after the ceremonies are over. 3 The
extracted tooth is taken care of by one of the old men. It
seems that there is no strict rule as to who shall first have charge
of it, but in any case it is passed from one headman to another
until it has made the complete circuit of the community, which
1 The Wiraijuri call the Emu “ the food of Baiamai ,” and hence it is strictly
forbidden to the novices.
2 Among the Wiraijuri the novices are brought in and set on a mound, on the
other side of which are all the women. After being thus “ shown to the women ”
in the character of men, they retire to the bush for probation.
a Such arrangements are made, or at any rate originated, at a kind of “ fair,”
which is frequently held just before the people all return to their homes after
the Bunan ceremonies. At this “ fair ” people barter things with each other.
These things have been made for this purpose, and carried with them. Weapons,
rugs, articles of attire, and ornaments are thus exchanged, and it is at this time,
as I have said, that matrimonial arrangements are made. For instance, the
father of one of the novices may announce that he requires a wife for his boy.
If some one present has a daughter suitable, the matter is discussed. But in
very many cases a girl has been promised to a future husband when she was
quite small, and when the future husband is not much older. Where disparity in
age is occasioned by such betrothals, and indeed where the inclinations of the
young people run contrary to the wishes of their parents, the difficulty is very
frequently cut by elopement.


was present at the initiation. It then returns to the father of
the youth, and finally to himselt. 1
Thus the gap formed by the absence of the tooth is the visible
sign of initiation. The tooth itself, together with the message
accompanying it, makes known to all concerned that so-and-so
has been made a man, and has thereby acquired all privileges
which are attached to man’s estate.
The object of the ceremonies. —lt is quite clear that these
ceremonies have for their object the conferring upon the youths
of the tribe the privileges, duties, and obligations of manhood.
The nature of the ceremonies, and several of the proceedings,
clearly show this. At the same time that the youth is enrolled
among the men he is removed from the maternal control. The
ceremonies are intended also to create a gulf between the past
life of the boy and the future life of the man, which can never
be re-crossed. They are also intended to strengthen the authority
of the elder men over the younger. Finally, the opportunity is
taken of impressing upon the mind of the youth, in an indelible
manner, those rules of conduct which form the moral law of the
tribe. In addition to all this there is even a quasi-religious
element which tends to strengthen very greatly the effect which
the ceremonies are likely to have upon the mind of the youth.
Taken as a whole I cannot imagine anything more calculated to
impress, to awe, and even to terrify a young Australian savage
than to pass through ceremonies such as those I have now briefly
described.
Some interesting comparisons show themselves between the
ceremonies which form the subject of this memoir and those of
tribes standing further back in the social series. I take the
Dieri tribe of South Australia as my example. 2 This tribe has
two primary classes and a large group of totems under each, with
uterine descent. The classes are strictly exogamic, and there is
intermarriage, not only between the class-divisions of the Dieri,
but also between them and the equivalent classes of kindred
tribes, over a space of at least three hundred miles square. A
boy at his birth acquires a marital right as regards those women
of the other class-name who are not forbidden to him under the
1 The Coast Mtirring fasten the tooth to a piece of the opossum fur cord of which
the man’s belt is made, with the gum of the grass The Wolgal sometimes,
instead of the above-named cord, use one made of the twisted fibre of a small
bush or undershrub. The Wolgal also carry the tooth in a small bag with
raddle and sometimes kangaroo teeth. But whatever mode of conveyance is
adopted, the tooth must on no account whatever be placed in the bag which
contains the magic substances. This, it is believed, would cause great danger to
the owner of the tooth. . .
2 Mr. S. Gason has communicated to me full and most interesting particulars
as to the initiation ceremonies of this tribe, which he has himself participated in.
d


restrictions arising out of consanguinity; but this right cannot
be lawfully exercised until he has been formally admitted to the
ranks of the men by passing through several initiations. When
he is duly qualified, the great council, on the occasion of the
next occurring circumcision ceremony (which he has long before
gone through), allots to him a woman of that class-name and
totem with which his own has connubium. This woman may
be, and probably has been, already allotted to one or more other
men, who also themselves have been allotted to other women.
This is the marital arrangement which has been called by Mr.
Fison and myself that of “ accessory husbands and wives.” 1
It is at a still later period that a man acquires a “ special wife.”
It is quite evident that in this tribe the exercise of the potential
right which arises under the social organisation is controlled
by the local organization, as represented by the Great Council
of the tribe.
Some of the tribes which I have herein considered have
uterine, and some have agnatic descent, but it is evident that in
all of them the marital privilege which accompanies birth, and
which is attached to the inherited name, is restrained until the
local organisation has permitted it to be exercised. 2
I now shortly summarise the conclusions following from a
study of the initiation ceremonies:—
1. It is the local organisation which controls the initiation
ceremonies.
2. The ceremonies confer the privileges, duties, and liabilities
of manhood on the youths of the community.
3. Each epigamic moiety initiates the youths of the com-
plementary moiety.
4. The knocking out of the tooth is the visible sign of the
initiation of the individual.
5. The circuit in which the tooth is carried marks the extent
of the epigamic community.
There are some other general conclusions which appear to me
not to be without important significance.
The teachings of the initiation are in a series of “moral
lessons ” pantomimically displayed, in a manner intended to be
so impressive as to be indelible. There is clearly a belief in a
Great Spirit, or rather an anthropomorphic Supernatural Being,
the “ Master ” of all, whose abode is above the sky, and to whom
are attributed powers of omnipotence and omnipresence, or, at
1 “ From Mother-right to Father-right.” (“ Journ. Anthrop. Inst.,” August,
1882.)
2 In the Wiraijuri and Wolgal tribes, the totems are mostly epigamic—one
totem of one class with one totem of the other class; but in the Wiraijuri case, at
least, there are one or two totems which are privileged beyond their fellows in
having connubium with two others of the corresponding class.


any rate, the power to “do anything and to go anywhere.” The
exhibition of his image to the novices, and the magic dances
round it, approach very near to idol worship. The wizards who
profess to communicate with him, and to be the mediums of
communication between him and his tribe, are not far removed
from an organised priesthood. To his direct ordinance are
attributed the social and moral laws of the community. Although
there is no worship of Daramulfin, as, for instance, by prayer, yet
there is clearly an invocation of him by name, and a belief that
certain acts please while others displease him.
It has been said that the Australian savage is without any
form of religion or religious beliefs. If religion is defined as
being the formulated worship of a divinity, then these savages
have no religion ; but I venture to assert that it can no longer
be maintained that they have no belief which can be called
religious—that is, in the sense of beliefs which govern tribal and
individual morality under a supernatural sanction.
Discussion.
Mr. A. Tylor observed that the writer of this paper offered
an excellent illustration of the action of heredity. He evidently
owed his lucidity of expression, and interest in the details of life, to
his father and mother, those excellent writers, William and Mary
Howitt. The paper was singularly interesting, and, if the ceremonies
and spiritualistic views were quite free from any white influence,
Australian primitive life threw a strong light on the prehistoric
races of Europe. The Greeks may have developed their theatre,
their refined art of acting, from similar rude ceremonies. The Greek
Chorus appeared to us a superfluity, but the Greeks may have merely
used the Chorus because it was an essential part of the primi-
tive ceremonial acting of their ancestors, and, if so, it had a real
meaning. Then the Australian custom of burying a live man in a
sham grave had its counterpart in the initiation ceremonies of the
Gnostics, known to us because frequently engraved on gems in the
first and second centuries, A.D.
[Reprinted from the Journal of the Anthropological Institute, May, 1884.]
Harrison and Sons, Printers in Ordinary to Her Majesty, St. Martin's Lane.


3 1508 01200891 1


,
,
■
■
■
■
♦


