





XV. —On Steam Communication with the Southern Colonies
{Australia and the Cape of Good Hope). By Captain
J. Lort Stokes, r.n., f.r.g.s.
Read, May 12, 1856.
During the past ten years the establishment of steam communi-
cation with Australia has undergone the most ample discussion
and inquiry, both at home and in the colonies. The period has
now arrived when it is absolutely necessary that our southern
colonies should be knit together, and to the mother country, by
that great artery of commerce, steam. Various routes, proposed
by private enterprise and local interests, have been suggested,
but seem to be inconsistent with the general interests of the
Australian settlements, and unsupported by the evidence that had
been accumulated.
Upon reference to the investigations that have been recorded on
this subject, the following concurrent evidence will be found in
favour of a route which appears to have been comparatively
neglected :
In 1846 a select committee of the Legislative Council of New
South Wales, after obtaining a mass of evidence, reported, that
“ the least expensive, the most expeditious, and the most conve-
nient and advantageous plan would be to join the China line at
Singapore by Torres Strait.” “ The advantages,” says
the Report, “ derivable to Australia from connexion with our
Indian possessions and other parts of the East, would be greater
even, than any direct advantage from postal communication with
the mother country.”
Again, in 1846, Admiral Sir Francis Beaufort, then Admiralty
Hydrographer, recommended the eastern route by Singapore and
Torres Strait, objecting to the western route through the Indian
Ocean, on account of its adverse winds and other obstacles and
disadvantages. Sir Francis Beaufort’s report was printed in the
Parliamentary papers, and no higher authority can be quoted.
Previously to the publication of these concurrent recommenda-
tions, I had urged a route through Torres Strait at meetings
which took place in the City in 1845, and also in my publication
of ‘ Discoveries in Australia,’ made while surveying the coasts
of that continent, between 1837 and 1843.
The chief objection against the Torres Strait route has only been
raised in a cursory manner, on the ground of the dangerous naviga-
tion of the Strait, and the presumed boisterous and thick weather ex-
perienced there during the western monsoon. In reply to the latter
it may be remembered that ii.m.s. ‘ Fly,’ Captain Blackwood,
entered the Strait during the western monsoon, making the land


without difficulty. Thanks to the Admiralty surveys of Captains
Blackwood and Owen Stanley, other objections to Torres Strait
may be readily obviated ; and it will not be supposed that the
Admiralty Hydrographer, in recommending that route, overlooked
the nature of the passage; while it may be fairly concluded that
he was prepared to counteract its remediable defects.
As rather an exaggerated notion of the dangers of this part of
the route appears to be entertained, the following details of the
passage which I recommend, may be acceptable.
Ships coming from the westward should arrange to make Booby
Island (in lat. 10° 36' 5., and long. 141° 56' E.) before daylight;
and through the tranquil seas of the Asiatic archipelago, steamers
may reckon on doing so with some certainty. To facilitate the ap-
proach to Booby Island by night, it is proposed to erect a light
house, although from its elevation, isolated position, and bold cha-
racter, there is no difficulty in making it at any time. Hence the
track proceeds through Prince of Wales Channel, the entrance to
which is a mile in width, having a sunk reef on its northern side,
which it is proposed to mark plainly by two buoys. In every
other part of the track the passage is much wider, varying from
3 miles, in only a very few places, to 10 and 20 miles generally,
and free from hidden dangers, except in the single case of the
western entrance.
On clearing Prince of Wales Channel, the course lies north-
easterly, between Travers Island and Double Island (7 m. apart),
in the direction of Mount Ernest, which is above 750 ft. high.
Thence it takes a more easterly course, passing midway between
Saddle Island and Ninepin Rock, where the channel narrows to
34 ra., at a distance of 40 rn. from the western entrance. The
track continues nearly in the same direction, passing close to the
n. side of Bat Island, and midway between Dove Island, Cocoa-
nut Island, and Village Island. Then it passes w. of Arden
Island and Rennell Island, between Dalrymple and Campbell.
Six m. n.e. of the lastnaraed, lies Stevens Island, at a distance
of about 100 m. from Prince of Wales Channel. From abreast
of this island, daylight is no longer necessary, the passage lying
through Bligh Entrance, between Bramble Cay and the tidal reef
S. of it, leaving a width of 13 m., and a depth of 22 to 26 fathoms.
It is proposed (if thought desirable) to mark this entrance by a
light on Bramble Cay, and a buoy near the tidal reef. The track
continues eastward, passing outside Portlnck reef and the Eastern
Fields, when the sea is open in the direction of Sydney. The
islets, which dot this part of the Strait, are so bold that they of
themselves, quite beacon the passage. Sail may be carried through
the greater part of it in either monsoon.
In making the eastern entrance of Torres Strait the lofty moun-


tains of New Guinea may be seen forming a safe landfall; and
the greatest comfort to the navigator, is the singular shelving
nature of the bottom, fronting Bligh Entrance.
Throughout the Strait, the direction of the track ranges only
between e. and n.e., or w. and s.w., without any sharp turn.
The streams of tide set fair along it, with a moderate and even
depth of water throughout, and the navigation is the easiest that
it is possible to imagine through a coral sea. Fora hundred miles
only is daylight at all necessary.
As it will be requisite to have a coal depot in Torres Strait,
the party in charge might superintend the lights, buoys, and also
the pilotage that may become desirable. The coal may he con-
veyed from the mines near Sydney to this depot, with a degree of
ease and economy that can never he attained on the southern route ;
this is owing to the number of ships which proceed from Sydney
in ballast through Torres Strait to India.
The advantages of the Torres Strait route in developing the
commerce of Australia, have been alluded to in quoting the Report
of the New South Wales Legislature. The commerce of the
mother country must also be largely promoted by steam commu-
nication along that part of the track passing through the Asiatic
Archipelago, teeming with population, and abounding in natural
products of the greatest value. There is at present ho British
entrepot in those seas eastward of Singapore, although the Arm
Islands alone, at a distance of 2000 m. from Singapore, were re-
ported some years since to consume British goods of the annual
value of 30,500/.
The Torres Strait route recommends itself under another im-
portant aspect. The only part of Australia where new settlements
can be formed, must be sought northward of Sydney, along the
eastern coast, and in the Gulf of Carpentaria. Among other
prosperous localities on the e. coast, Moreton Bay has already
become an important centre, and flocks and herds are rapidly
stretching northward along the salubrious lofty downs and peren-
nial rivers of the coast ranges. About 2,000,000 of sheep,
234,000 cattle, and more than 8000 horses are already enume-
rated in these districts. The squatters had reached Beak Range
some time since ; and the period cannot he distant when they will
seek an outlet in the Gulf of Carpentaria, as they formerly did at
Port Phillip. Sir Thomas Mitchell has described the country
stretching away from the Barcu River towards the Gulf of Car-
pentaria, as the finest in Australia. Leichhardt, on his overland
journey from Sydney to Port Essington, along the southern shores
of the Gulf, says, that “ cattle driven by easy stages would fatten
on the road and he describes the climate as highly congenial to
the human constitution, even under adverse circumstances. My


own explorations in the interior, confirm the experience of this
eminent traveller.
The formation of a settlement on the southern shores of the
Gulf of Carpentaria, adjacent to the harbour discovered by
Flinders and surveyed by myself, would operate at once as a
trading depot for the eastern end of the Archipelago, distant 2000
m. from Singapore ; and it would also provide an outlet and port
for the squatters, moving towards that direction.
At a distance of 1500 m, from Sydney, such a settlement would
offer very favourable conditions for a penal establishment, the
territory, though wholly unoccupied, being extensive, fertile, and
capable of sustaining a large population. Road-making and
other public works would afford the convicts abundant occupation
without resorting to the objectionable practice of placing them in
private families —a system which caused as much mischief in the
colonies, as tickets-of-leave are producing now at home. A
system of dispersion may certainly be adopted that would be of
equal advantage to the settlement and the convict.
I recommended this proposal to the Duke of Newcastle, when
he did me the honour to consult me about the North Australian
Exploring Expedition. At that time the ticket-of-leave system
had not reached its climax ; while the recent meeting of convicts,
convened by Mr. Mayhew, has, by the evidence of convicts them-
selves, placed a seal .on the inefficacy of any plan short of migra-
tion. The state of our prisons also renders it evident that an
outlet of this kind is required.
Western Australia almost owes its maintenance to the transfer
of convicts to that isolated settlement; but its capacity for their
profitable occupation must soon reach its limit, owing to the re-
strictive extent of its productive resources. After the boundary
of North Australia was settled on the map, it w r as the intention of
the Government to establish a remodelled penal settlement there.
The Moreton Bay settlers have themselves expressed a wish for
convict labour.
To return, however, to points bearing more immediately on
steam communication with Australia, it would seem that those who
have advocated a southerly route across the Indian Ocean from Aden
by Diego Garcia, though only some hundred miles shorter than that
by Singapore and Torres Strait, have overlooked the circumstance,
that it crosses a hurricane track, and is exposed to the high seas
and strong winds so frequent on the S. coast of Australia. Against
these impediments it will be found that no steamer can depend on
keeping her time, and the home mail-ship from India will be
frequently missed at Aden. This delay of the Australian return
mail would be far less likely to occur, on the more tranquil or
smooth sea route to Singapore by Torres Strait, which has also


the advantage of large population and active trade along its
shores.
Another advantage in the Torres Strait route, is the adoption
of Sydney, the seat of the Governor-General, as the Australian
terminus. As a harbour, and with its facilities for repairing large
ships, it is infinitely superior to Melbourne. To this must be
added its proximity to New Zealand, to the growing trade of
Polynesia, and to the great and available coal-fields in its imme-
diate neighbourhood.
These subjects all deserve some further consideration than a
passing allusion ; but I will only dwell for a few moments on the
additional importance, which Eastern Australia derives from the
progress of other European interests in Polynesia, and more espe-
cially in New Caledonia, fronting our seaboard.
The occupation by the French of this fine island, discovered by
our immortal Captain Cook, must have a great influence on our
Australian interests, and not less on our relations with the adjacent-
regions in the Asiatic Archipelago and in the Pacific. At first
doubtless, New Caledonia will derive supplies of cattle, coal, &c.,
from our adjacent settlements on the eastern coast of Australia,
and the demand thereby created, will tend to hasten the progress
of settlement along that coast. But as New Caledonia possesses
coal mines, and boasts of fresher and richer pastures than Australia,
and even anticipates the production of finer wool than our own,
that island, supported in her infancy by the resources of France,
will doubtless soon be changed from the condition of a customer
to that of a competitor. Already we have heard of the attrac-
tions which New Caledonia will offer to vessels trading between
Australia and China ; and it is therefore only consistent with
prudence and foresight, to strengthen the traffic which has been
established between Australia and the Asiatic continent and Archi-
pelago, by introducing steam communication on that route, and
encouraging the extension of settlement towards the great northern
Gulf of Carpentaria.
From the vast amount of local steam communication existing
in Australasia, it may be considered that branch lines are already
established from Sydney to Melbourne, South Australia, Tas-
mania, and New Zealand. The Swan River mail might be con-
veyed by a smart schooner from South Australia.
If the outward mail should be a day or two longer in reaching
Melbourne by the Torres Strait route, that risk will be amply com-
pensated by preventing the home mail from being delayed a fort-
night at Aden, an inconvenience which has occurred on the southern
route.
If the Australian subsidy be great enough to warrant two lines,
then a second from Aden, via the Mauritius, King George Sound,


and Adelaide to Melbourne may be adopted, leaving New Zea-
land, Sydney, and Moreton Bay to join the Indian trunk line at
Singapore, via Torres Strait'. The rough and stormy sea passage
from the Mauritius would probably at first give greater satisfaction
to the south coast settlements, and may cause an earlier delivery
of the outward mail to those places; but for regularity, economy,
and speed, particularly homeward, the Torres Strait route would,
I believe, ultimately he preferred. As to the comparative comfort
of the two lines there can he no question ; on the one there will
he a continual roll, with nothing but sea ! sea ! sea! —while the
other offers placid waters and picturesque scenery through its
greater part.
It may be observed that many thousand tons of sugar, con-
sumed by Australia, are supplied in almost equal quantities, by
Mauritius and the Asiatic archipelago.
The consideration of steam traffic with our great settlements on
the eastern side of the Indian Ocean, naturally gives rise to re-
flections on our communications with the great African continent
which forms the western boundary of that ocean.
A branch from the great trunk line to India may he established,
offering better prospects of profit and greater facilities of postal
communication to the Cape of Good Hope, than it has ever enjoyed.
This line, starting from Aden, might touch at Mauritius and
Bourbon, or, proceeding along the African coast, it may derive
support from the trading ports of Zanzibar, Mombas, the Portu-
guese settlements of Mozambique, Joanna in the Comoro Islands,
the great island of Madagascar, Delagoa Bay, Natal, Algoa Bay,
and the Cape of Good Hope. Eastern and southern Africa and
the wealthy islands of the Indian Ocean would thus be brought
into connexion with the advantages of the overland railway transit.
Whenever it shall be determined to unite the Cape of Good
Hope and Australia with England by the electric wire, these lines
will also be found to be the most practicable. Already the East
India Company are about to extend their cables to Sumatra and
J ava.
The effect of postal facilities in developing trade along populous
and naturally productive routes must lead to results of great im-
portance. The lines proposed are of this character. No great,
profitless stretches of ocean and uninhabited coast, so ruinous to
steamship owners, would have to be passed. On the contrary,
population would be followed on the track which it has marked
out; and the proposed routes would develop intermediate traffic,
as well as form the grand trunk lines of communication from the
centre of government and commerce, to these extremities of the
British dominions.




