

On Strike




y
ON STRIKE
Where do the Girls come in ?
EDRIC GLENFIELD.
Dedicated to all his Australian Sisters
by the Author.
SYDNEY:
GIBBS, SHALLARD & CO., PRINTERS & PUBLISHERS
S4A Pitt Street.




ON STRIKE,
WHERE DO THE GIRLS COME IN ?
Reginald Oofbourne was born with the
proverbial silver spoon in his mouth. It
is not necessary for the purpose of this
work to say how his family acquired their
wealth, but at the age of twenty-one he was
approximately worth six million pounds
sterling. He was deeply in love with a
young lady who was born in a village
adjoining his own property.
His love was no sudden infatuation. He
had carried Edith Marton in his arms as a
baby, he had worshipped the sweet child
of twelve, and when she reached the age
of eighteen he was madly in love with her.
They were about to be married, when one
afternoon Edith, who was riding on the
banks of the Thames, near Slangbourne,
with her great friend, Mrs. Croolbred, met
with a serious and, as after events proved,
a fatal accident. Her horse shyed at an
amateur photographer, and she was thrown
violently on the road. Assistance was at


once obtained, and she was carried home
insensible. Reginald Oofbourne was at
once sent for, but only arrived in time to
see his darling girl expire in his arms.
Before she died she was able only to say
a few words, and her last request to her
devoted lover was —“ Promise me, Reggy,
that you will devote your enormous wealth
to benefit any of my sex who require
assistance throughout the world.” “ I pro-
mise, darling,” replied the distracted lover,
and Edith fell back dead.
I will draw a blank over the next few
days. Our hero was struck down with an
attack of brain fever, and his life was
despaired of. He, however, was rescued
when on the brink of the grave by the
careful nursing of a few devoted friends.
When he became convalescent he was a
broken-hearted man, but by his promise
his life and wealth were devoted to the
benefit of the female sex throughout the
world.
For some twenty years Reginald travelled
about, totally unsettled, doing good to
womankind whenever opportunity occurred.
On one occasion he fed twenty thousand
starving Chinese school-girls on Bath buns,
which he imported from England by a
special steamer for the occasion.


However, no opportunity had occurred
for our hero to do any great thing to prove
himself the champion of womankind until
he took an idea into his head to visit Aus-
tralia. He arrived in Sydney by the
Orient steamer “ Cuzco ” in September,
1890, and, on landing, found the city in a
state of ferment owing to the great maritime-
strike.
Though he had no sympathy with the
unionists, he naturally came in contact with
some of them, and could not help discussing
the question, as nobody talked about any-
thing else. Federation, the great hobby
of the Australians, was forgotten for a time.
Reginald could not see that the men who
were on strike had any particular grievance,
but he realised that the children were
suffering on account of their fathers being
out of work, and so he spent most of his
time driving about in cabs loaded with
fruit and food of all descriptions, which he
distributed to the children about Miller’s
Point and Sussex Street.
One day he happened to go into the
establishment of Cordons, the great drapers,
to buy a pair of gloves, and he was served
by a young woman whom he noticed looked
very pale and careworn. He got into con-


versation with her, in spite of the frowns
of the shop-walker. In a short time he
found out exactly how the respectable
working girls, who were trying to earn an
honest living in Sydney, are treated, and
he found that they had three particular
grievances, viz. :
Too long hours,
Too little wages,
And not allowed chairs
—that is, not allowed to sit down when not
serving customers.
He went further into the question, and
he found out that Messrs. Cordon and Co.
treated their girls well in comparison to
another firm of the name of Paul Pry, who
keep open at night, whereas Cordon’s
always close at six o’clock.
There are some mercantile establish-
ments in Sydney which it is advisable for
the public convenience should be kept open
till a late hour, as their customers are
principally men who are working all day,
and can only get away after six o’clock to
purchase any articles they may require. I
allude to such a business as that of Ring-
bourne, of George Street, the bootmaker,
whose business is done amongst seafaring
men, and Ringbourne, by keeping open, is


benefiting the public as well as himself,
but the people who deal with the drapers’
shops are mostly women, who can do their
shopping in the afternoon, and have no
need to do it at night.
It must be remembered that the class of
young women I am alluding to, on account
of the way in which they behave, have as
much right to be treated with proper
respect as the Governor’s wife has. But
are they treated as they ought to be ?
Yes, by the gentlemen who go in on busi-
ness, but not by the shop-walkers and other
men who are in authority over them.
It is generally known that barmaids are
looked down upon on account of the posi-
tion they hold. I myself should not wish
to see my sister behind a bar; but if my
sister was in Australia, and had to work
for a living, I would sooner see her behind
some of the bars in Sydney than in a situa-
tion in a firm of the description of Lazy,
Bones and Co., Cordon, or Paul Pry. Of
course, as everybody knows, there are bars
and bars, barmaids and barmaids ; but in
the respectable hotels a girl who behaves
herself is treated better and leads a better
life and gets higher pay than the female
employees in firms of the description of
those I have mentioned.


1 might refer to a hotel in Sydney which
is well-known by the name of Nodoubts.
In this hotel the young women are treated
as well and with as much respect as it is
possible to treat a woman who has to work
for her livelihood,but at the same time the
barmaids in Nodoubts would sooner be
behind a counter in the employment of
one of the leading drapers in Sydney, if
they got proper pay and treatment, than
behind any bar.
The Hero, having ascertained that the
women in Sydney had some real grievances,
at once set about to rectify them. He con-
sulted with some friends in Sydney whose
sympathy was on the side of the working
girls, and they organised a system of
campaign for the girls’ strike. Every
respectable girl earning her own living
was called out on strike, and received a
pound a week out of Reginald’s own
pocket. About five thousand girls came
out, and the employers at once filled up
their places with union men who were out
of employment owing to the late strike
amongst the men.
Of course, the fact of having wharf
labourers and officers of the steamers em-
ployed in the place of the girls in these


establishments caused a great deal of
annoyance to the Sydney public generally.
It is a well-known fact that there are cer-
tain articles which a lady may require
which she can only ask a woman to serve
her with, and, though the capitalists them-
selves were opposed to the strike, their
wives, feeling the inconvenience they were
subjected to, were urging them when at
home to give in to the demands of the
strikers. A girl on strike also has a great
advantage over a man in a similar position.
When a man strikes he is unable to work
at all ; he can do nothing but walk about
the streets with his hands in his pockets,
looking absolutely miserable ; the girl on
the other hand can always employ herself
at home doing needlework, or some other
useful occupation, which would at the same
time bring in a certain amount of money
towards her support. It was felt by
Inspector Gooseberry and his staff that pre-
cautions must be taken to protect the city
against any possible outbreak amongst the
girl strikists. Though the girls had behaved
in a thoroughly lady-like manner, still
5.000 of them walking about Sydney
together caused a great deal of incon-
venience to the public, and traffic generally
was much incommoded.


To make an example, the Inspector-
General ordered a constable to arrest one
of the girl strikers. The policeman, who
was a timid man where a woman was con-
cerned, walked up to the girl, w r ho was very
pretty and well-dressed, and half raising
his helmet stammered something about
being very sorry, but would she mind com-
ing with him ? “ Certainly I do, you im-
pertinent fellow,” replied the girl, “ I have
a good mind to give you in charge ; any-
way I will tell my ma.” The constable
blushed, as only a policeman can blush, and,
muttering an apology, returned to Inspector
Gooseberry, and told him he was unable
in this case to obey orders. Gooseberry
at once saw what a difficulty he was placed
in, and retired to his office in a most
dejected state of mind. Next morning an
advertisement appeared in the Morning
Terror , requesting any persons having
had experience in quelling girl strikers to
call on the Inspector-General.
About eleven o’clock a carriage dashed
up to the office, and a fashionably-dressed
lady alighted from it, giving her card, on
which was engraved Mrs. Pitcher, Potts’
Point, to a constable ; she requested to see
I nspector-Gooseberry.


She was immediately ushered into his
sanctum, and when the Inspector recog-
nised her, a smile of satisfaction lit up
his face. “ I have come to offer a sugges-
tion to you in the present crisis.”
“Mr.Goosebery,” said she, “youfindthat
you are unable to control these respectable
young women with your present force !
What you must do is to raise a force of
special girl constables.” Gooseberry at
once saw the wisdom of this idea, and
thanked Mrs. Pitcher warmly. He im-
mediately advertised, inviting 1500 of the
Sydney young ladies to come to the
assistance of the Government, and act as
special constables. Next day the whole
of Phillip-street was blocked with the
carriages of the elite of Sydney society.
The Miss Canarykins were the first to join,
and their example was quickly followed by
all the other young ladies. It was decided
that the force should be dressed in uniform,
the choice of which was left to Mrs.
Pitcher, who was also aided by Busy-
bee who kindly offered her assistance.
These ladies decided upon the following
uniform :—lt was to be full dress, as no
undress was thought necessary, and to
consist of white silk blouses, blue serge


skirts, and sailor hats, with Oxford blue
ribbons ; the badge for the constables was
a gold hat-pin, modelled after an oar, on
the blade of which was engraved S.G.C. ;
the officers, in addition to this, wore a
plain gold bangle similarly engraved. The
Government also thought it as well to raise
a corps of 100 special mounted girl con-
stables, and Captain Easton was sent for
and requested to allow his two daughters,
who are generally admitted to be two of
the best lady riders in the colony, to take
charge of this corps and organize it. He
readily consented, and, after some deliber-
ation, the uniform of the troopers was
arranged ; it was to consist of a blue serge
habit, hussar tunic, with scarlet facings and
slung jacket; the head dress, opossum skin
hussar busby.
The young lady troopers were all to be
mounted on black chargers, and armed
with riding whips only. The officers’
badges to be a gold horseshoe bangle.
The constables from numbers i to 200
were ordered to parade in the yard at the
head office of police at 4 o’clock in the
afternoon, and, as may be imagined, a great
many applications were made to Mr.
Gooseberry by some of the leading men


in Sydney to be allowed to be present at
the drill. Only a few, however, were
allowed in, and those mostly officers of the
Navy and Land Defence Forces. The
uniforms of the first two companies had
been rapidly made, partly by the constables
themselves, and partly by Free Labour, and
very pretty the young Australian ladies
looked as they fell in by companies in the
yard. The officers were selected from
those young ladies who had had any
experience with the Navy, Army, or
Volunteers, and it was remarked that there
was a decided majority on the side of the
Navy. After the officers had been selected
the roll was called, and Mr. Gooseberry
gave the command to No. i company to
size. Some fun was occasioned by one
young lady who, as soon as the Inspector-
General said size, mistaking his meaning,
stepped forward and answered, “Oh, I
take five and three-quarters, six buttons,
tan, if you please.” The Captain of number
two also made a slight error, as, when
requested to form her company into fours,
she gave the command “ All fours,” which
was literally obeyed by most of the com-
pany, who fell on their hands and knees.
However, with the exception of these


trifling errors, the drill was altogether most
creditable, as was allowed by Colonels
Scalding, Major Darey and Capt. Pathan,
who were looking on and chatting about
the happy days they had spent together
in the Soudan. When the drill was over
the companies were served out with Gem
air guns, and after a few instructions had
been given, in case of any emergency, the
parade was dismissed. The following day
the next two companies were paraded, and
so on day by day with the others until the
whole were properly organized. The
mounted lady troopers had in the mean
time been exercised in the Domain, and
were subjected to some little annoyance on
the first day by the strikers pelting them
with rotten chocolate drops. However,
they showed great firmness, and arrested
some of the ringleaders, and then the mob
dispersed. After this they were allowed
to drill without molestation.
In the mean time public business was
in a great many cases seriously interfered
with. Not only was the inconvenience which
I have mentioned before of having men to
fill the girl’s places in the shops seriously
felt, but the girl constabulary themselves
unwittingly became a source of annoyance


to the managers of the leading banks and
mercantile houses, as, when a company of
the girl constabulary was marched through
any portion of Sydney to quell a disturb-
ance, there was at once a cry, ,{ Here
come the girl police; ” bank clerks left
their counters, barristers ran out of court,
and in one or two instances men were
actually known to leave their matutinal B.
and S. untasted on the bar, and rush to the
doors to stare with enraptured eyes at this
beautiful contingent.
The girls on strike were very jealous of
the admiration excited by the girl con-
stabulary, and they decided if possible to
organize a grand procession ; with this
idea a deputation waited on Reginald
Oofbourne, and asked for his assistance.
He readily consented to arrange the pro-
cession, regardless of expense, and, with the
assistance of some of the leaders of art in
Sydney, he organized one of the most
splendid sights that has ever been seen.
The whole of the ladies employed in the
different theatres gave their services for
nothing, and were commanded in the
procession by Miss Trueheart, who is an
Australian, and is known to have the
greatest sympathy with all her poorer


sisters in the Colony ; they were all
beautifully dressed to represent different
characters in history ; the banners, which
were all specially painted for the occasion,
exceeded in beauty and design the magni-
ficent ones which had been carried through
the street in the late strike amongst the
men, and the best girl musicians had been
brought, regardless of expense, from all
parts of Australia, and formed into bands,
which played at the head of each company
as they marched, such appropriate tunes
as “ Over the Garden Wall,” “ We won’t
go home till Morning,” etc. The pro-
cession eventually reached the Domain,
where they halted, and speeches were made
in favour of Women’s Rights, Home Rule,
etc. ; they then broke up, and returned to
their homes. As time went on, one or two
slight disturbances took place amongst the
strikers ; some of them who were of Dutch
extraction had been arrested for ill-treating
a very small free labourer, but on the
whole they behaved very well Of course,
by this time it was known where the
money was coming from to support the
strike, and as the capitalists saw it was
useless to prolong it any further, they held
a meeting at the Exchange, and after an


interview with the delegates from the girls’
union, they decided that there was no use
attempting to hold out any longer, and so
they yielded every point asked for with as
good a grace as possible ; in fact, during
the conference, one of the capitalists was
so struck with the beauty and good sense
of a girl delegate, that a wedding will soon
take place, when we shall see that desirable
end obtained of Capital united to Labour.
As soon as the girls gained their point, of
course, they returned to work, and ceased
to draw the strike money which our hero
had allowed them. The girl constabulary
were disbanded, but not before the Gov-
ernment had recognised their great services
by giving them a splendid fancy dress ball
at the Centennial Hall, at which they all
appeared in their uniforms, and which was
generally admitted was even a more
brilliant and successful affair than the
great banquet given by the Govern-
ment to the gentlemen of the special
constabulary at the Prince Alfred
Exhibition Building, on the termination of
the great maritime strike a short time
previously. It is whispered amongst
people who are generally well posted in
coming events that Reginald was so much


struck with the charms of one of the young
lady troopers he met at the Constabulary
Ball, that it is possible there may be some
happiness left for him yet, though he
will never forget the great sorrow of his
early days, and can never even now look
upon an amateur photographer without
shuddering.


♦
■#. . «
«
♦
- ■
'
■ffc Jfc
■
L
'
■s* *
wt


f’
■
*
■0
4 vj
>
A
' *
"T
«r
#
\
**
GIBBS, SHALLAKD & CO., PRINTERS,
84A Pitt Street, Sydney.
. .—-—• . f
. . *
-' ■ .
■ . ‘ '■■■
' • ' • ■ '■ 4 v
■
*»
