

ON SOME EEMAINS OF
THE DISK WORSHIPPERS
DISCOVERED AT MEMPHIS.
SIR CHARLES NICHOLSON, BART., D.C.L., LL.D.,
ETC. ETC.




ON SOME REMAINS OF
THE DISK WORSHIPPERS
DISCOVERED AT MEMPHIS.
SIR CHARLES NICHOLSON, BART., D.C.L., LED.,
ETC. ETC.
[From the ‘ Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature .’]
F o>s




13355
The sculptured fragments containing the inscriptions
described in the accompanying Memoir, together with
the incised blocks of stone which formed the subject
of a paper published in Yol. YIII. of the Transactions
of the Royal Society of Literature, # are deposited in
the Museum of Antiquities of the University of Syd-
ney, New South Wales. They form part of a more
extended collection of Egyptian Antiquities made by
the author of these papers during two successive visits
to the Nile in the years 1857 and 1861. It is hoped
that the nucleus that has thus been formed in the
Metropolis of the Australian Colonies of objects pos-
sessing considerable historical and archaeological in-
terest, (and which may be regarded as unique of their
kind in the Southern Hemisphere) may from time to
time be augmented by the acquisitions of colonists
travelling in Europe, on the Nile, or in Asia Minor.
In a country, like Australia, where all is new, objects
* “ On some Funeral Hieroglyphic Inscriptions found at Memphis,”
by Sir Charles Nicholson, Bart. (Transactions of Eoyal Society of
Literature, vol. viii. p. 308.)


comparatively insignificant in themselves yet illus-
trative of the manners, religion, and thoughts of those
who lived during the earlier periods of the world’s
history, possess a value and an interest far beyond
what would belong to them in European States, where
collections of such objects are to be found in all great
cities, and have been made, regardless of all expense,
upon the largest scale.


ON THE DISK-WORSHIPPERS OF MEMPHIS.
BY SIR CHARLES NICHOLSON, BART., D.C.L., LL.D.
(Read May 20, 1868.)
In the year 1854 a series of excavations and borings
was undertaken, at the instance of the late Mr. Leonard
Horner, with the view of determining the depth, and
rate of increase, of the mud of the Nile Valley, con-
sequent upon the annual overflowings of the River.
The results of the researches then made are given in
the ‘ Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society,’
for the years 1855 and 1858. The points at which
the investigations were conducted were for the most
part confined to the neighbourhood of Matarieh and
Mit-Raheneh, the sites of the ancient Heliopolis and
Memphis; and were carried on under the supervision
of my friend Hekekyan Bey, an able and intelligent
engineer, who formerly filled the important post of
Director of the Polytechnic School established by
Mehemet Ali. The chief aim of Mr. Horner in insti-
tuting these researches was to determine some of the
geological conditions of the lower part of the Nile
Valley, as also the chronological relations of any such
remains of human art as might be discovered with the


alluvial deposits containing them. The high anti-
quity he assigned to some of the objects brought to
light during these explorations, is well known. It is
not necessary for me to advert to Mr. Horner’s views
on this subject. Some results, not bearing directly
upon the inquiry in which he was engaged, were,
however, achieved during the time the excavations
were being carried on at Mit-Raheneh, and it is with
these, as possessing considerable historical value, that
I have now to deal.
It was in July, 1854, in the neighbourhood of the
great prostrate statue of Eameses 11., that the
labourers employed came, at the depth of seven feet,
upon a pavement extending in a westerly direction,
and forming probably the ancient dromos leading
from the statue of the King to the Temple of Ptah.
In sinking the shaft (Plate 1., fig. 1) the first 34 inches
passed through, consisted of undisturbed alluvial soil.
The next 50 inches was a mass of rubbish, with frag-
ments of limestone, granite, shreds of pottery, and
calcined brick. On the removal of this, the pave-
ment above referred to, having a thickness of 7-|
inches, was discovered, (Plate 1., fig. No. 1 C.) Im-
mediately below this, there was unexpectedly found
an earlier pavement. (Plate 1., fig. No. 1 D.) The
portion opened up was found, on the removal of the
superimposed materials, to consist of blocks of stone,
each of a breadth varying from 9 to 12 inches, by a
length of from 10 to 24 inches. They were of un-
equal thickness, but so adjusted as to form a level
surface above, the inferior side being imbedded in the
loose rubble below. Some of the slabs had evidently
formed portions of larger blocks, which had been


roughly squared, so as to make pieces of nearly
equal breadth, and must have been derived from the
materials furnished by some building previously de-
stroyed, as, on several of the fragments were found
carvings and hieroglyphic inscriptions. Beneath the
blocks of stone forming this first pavement was found
another accumulation of rubbish soil (Plate 1., fig.
No. 1 E) like the upper one, and resting on a bed of
Desert sand. On this last being passed through, at a
depth of 12 feet and upwards from the present sur-
face, a further stratum of disturbed rubbish soil was
encountered (Plate 1., fig. No. 1 F and G.), precisely
similar to the two upper ones, and extending below
the level of the bed of the Nile. The excavations
do not appear, at this particular point, to have been
carried to any greater depth; a circumstance to be
regretted, as further explorations might have brought
to light traces of even a still more remote antiquity
than those hereafter to be described.
In Plate 1., fig. 2, a horizontal view is given of
the first or lower course of pavement, in which the
respective positions of the sculptured blocks of stone,
a and h, are indicated, and to the description and
peculiar character of which, as well as of the frag-
ments represented in the drawings, Nos. 3,4, and 5,
it is the principal object of this paper to direct atten-
tion. The block of sculptured stone a, (Plate 1., No.
2,) was kindly presented to me by Hekekyan Bey, and
from it the sketch in Plate 11. was made. The
drawing represents an outline, half the size of that of
the original block, which is about 20 inches in length
by 10 in breadth, and 7 inches in thickness. The
lower surface and edges are broken and uneven; the


upper surface smooth and polished. The material of
which it consists is the Gebel Giushi limestone. On
the upper side is the segment of a circular outline,
carved in deep relief, and representing a vase, in the
centre of which is a square compartment containing
five cartouches, with the names and honorific titles of
the Disk-worshippers. The vase appears as if sur-
mounted by a cover with a hawk’s head, part of
which is broken off; whilst its anterior portion is
furnished with an appendage, intended for a spout or
handle. The background (in front of the vase) is
traversed by a number of oblique furrows, and the
intaglio is rendered more conspicuous by means of a
red pigment, the traces of which are still distinctly
visible. Mr. Bonomi regards the fragment as a por-
tion of a has-relief , in which had been originally
depicted a vase, placed on an altar, irradiated by the
beams of the solar Disk. In fig. 7, Plate 1., Mr,
Bonomi has furnished a conjectural sketch of what he
conceives might have been the original form of the
subject intended to be delineated, before the block of
stone on which it was engraved was mutilated. There
can, I think, be little doubt of the accuracy of this
suggestion, and that the fragment in question is a
portion of a Tablet, on which had been originally
represented, in fuller details, a votive offering to the
Solar Disk. The fact of such having been the original
purpose with which the carvings were executed, is
evidenced by the names and inscriptions they contain.
There is no difficulty in recognizing the name of
Amenoph IV., under the new designation he assumed
in acknowledgment of his adoption of the Disk
worship, viz.:—


1. 2.
I*l m 1. Khon-n-aten.
/£• lII®
2. Ra nefer Kheper u n ra.
Together with that of his wife,
Nefrou-Aten Nefer-t-jouti.
Associated with these we have also the honorific
titles applied to the Solar Deity, viz.:—
Ra-har-ancli kliu-ti liai em-khu.
Em ran f em sku enti em Atn Ra,
These latter inscriptions are repeated in the frag-
ment of the pavement, Plate 1., fig. 3; and on a
square block of stone, subsequently discovered on an
extension of the excavations, there are the remains of
four additional ovals (vide Plate 1., fig. 4), with the
names of one or more of the immediate successors of
Amenoph IV., concerning whose exact order of suc-
cession so much hopeless perplexity exists. The two


centre rings would appear to contain the names of
the King the immediate predecessor of Horns, 1
Ka Audi Klieprou;
whilst that to the right, probably, belonged to a con-
temporary Queen,
There seems to be great difficulty in assigning the
true position of this Queen, or her exact relationship
to contemporary sovereigns. The occurrence of her
name in the present instance may arise from her
having been, as has been suggested, co-regent with
one or more of the successors of Amenoph; and of
her having so transferred the royal authority to the
King, with whose shield her own is associated. The
fragment from which the drawing was made, appears
in too mutilated a condition to allow of any positive
inference as to the other royal names of which there
are traces.
1 Vide ‘ Histoire d’ Egypte,’ par Brugsch, pi. 261; ‘ Kbnigsbuch der
alien Aegypter,’ yon E- Lepsius ; ‘ Zweite Abtheilung, die Hieroglypb-
ischen Tafeln,’ Taf. xxix., Nos. 389, 399.


Shortly after the remains above described had been
disinterred, the party engaged in the excavation came
upon another slab, containing the carved outline of
the upper portion of the figurp of a man, wearing
what appears to be the crown of Upper Egypt, and
having that peculiar contour of face which may at
once be recognized as belonging to the race of the
Disk-worshippers. The somewhat slightly retrousse
nose, thick lips, and receding forehead, so unlike the
typical form of the Egyptian countenance, leave no
room for doubt as to the identity of the portrait, or as
to its belonging to the family of whom we have such
striking pictorial representations at Tel el Amarna;
and in the remains discovered during the demolition
of the Southern Propylea at Karnac. 2
Few and fragmentary as are the materials of which
I have attempted to give a description, they neverthe-
less seem to me to possess considerable interest from
the locality in which they were found, and from some
partial illustration they afford of facts connected with
an obscure and remote episode in the history of the
Egyptian monarchy. The preenomen of “ Amen-tut-
anch ” (Pa kheper nev), is found in the Serapeum, 3
an Apis Bull having been buried during his reign.
With this single exception, no trace of the Disk-
worshippers has, I believe, been discovered further
north than “ Gebel Toonh.” Baron Bunsen states
that the name of Amenoph IV. is not found further
2 Vide ‘ Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature,’ vol. i. p.
140; £ Monumens Egyptiens,’ par B. Prisse d’Avennes, pi. x. xi. xii.
xiii. xiv.; ‘ Denlcmaler aus Aegypten und Aethiopen,’ Abtheilung iii.
Blatt. 91 to 112.
3 Vide ‘ Serapeum de Memphis,’ par Aug. Mariette, p. 8, part iii.
pi. 2.


north than Ashmnnein, in Middle Egypt. 4 Whilst
proof exists as to the authority of this singular race
having extended as far south as Soleb and Sedeinga,
it is now evident that it must have been equally
recognized at Memphis, and have been, in point of
fact, co-extensive with the whole Egyptian empire.
The suggestion that these fragments at Mit-Paheneh
may have been brought from some distant locality, is
answered by the fact, that the material of which they
consist is the Gebel Giushi limestone of the neigh-
bourhood, the rock forming the Acropolis of Modern
Cairo ; they must, therefore, have belonged to some
pre-existing building which had been the especial
object of the iconoclastic hatred of a succeeding
dynasty. That it was intended, not only to deface,
but to treat with contumely, every vestige of the
Disk-worship, is established by the fact of the employ-
ment of the materials of the edifices that had been
destroyed for purposes of paving.
The proscribed worship was thus literally, as well
as figuratively, trampled upon. In the same spirit
as that with which Homs (Hor-em Heb), in the
construction of the great southern Pylon at Thebes,
employed the stones and materials of the sanctuary
which he destroyed, and which had been erected by
his predecessor, so, at Memphis, a similar desecra-
tion and demolition of the monuments of Ame-
noph IV. must have taken place. So active, and
so inveterate in their hostility, have been the oppo-
nents of the suppressed heretical opinions, that few
traces, and those, for the most part, preserved by
accident, have been left to us, of a race of rulers
4 ‘ Egypt’s Place in Universal History,’ vol. ii. p. 540.


who must have exercised a power and influence
scarcely inferior to that belonging to the most glo-
rious epochs in the national history. Hence the
difficulty of supplying the necessary links for filling
up this obscure chapter in the dynastic annals. The
Manethonian lists afford little, if any, help towards
the identification of names. Those which have any
historical value, such as “ Horns,” “ Akencherres,”
“Acherres,” and “Armais,” are evidently misplaced
as to the order of succession, and, without the monu-
mental records found at Tel el Amarna, we should
know little, or absolutely nothing, of a whole race of
rulers, alien possibly in origin—the violent introducers
of a new religious system, and whose administration
must have been of a very marked and exceptional
character, in the political and religious life of Egypt.
The rule of the Disk-worshippers, whatever may have
been its duration, is intercalated between the most
prosperous periods of the national history, —the age
of Amenoph 111., and the accession of the 19th
Dynasty, Avhen the Monarchy resumes its ancient
splendour, the culminating point of which it soon
reached in the reign of Raineses 11. That a period
characterized by so much vigour as that extending
from the accession of the 18th Dynasty to the com-
mencement of the reign of Seti 1., should have been
interrupted—even during a brief period—by the in-
trusion of a new governing race, and the introduction
of a new religious polity, and that this exceptional
order of things should have established itself through-
out the whole limits of the empire, is a singular phe-
nomenon, and one the full significancy of which must,
from the lack of materials, probably never be rightly


understood. The scenes depicted on the walls of “ Tel
el Amarna,” the sumptuous tomb of Amen-tut-Anch,
at “ Quernet Murari,” with the varied scenes they pre-
sent of regal pomp, show that the domestic arts must
have flourished, whilst the power and authority of the
state were widely acknowledged by neighbouring and
subject nations.
In endeavouring to catch a glimpse of the sha-
dowy forms that belong to this remote epoch, we are
led to ask what was the precise nature of the reli-
gious change brought about or attempted by the Disk-
worshippers. It appears under two aspects; one
having for its aim the abolition of some, but only a
limited portion, of the ancient cult, and more espe-
cially of the Ammon-worship; the other, the inau-
guration of a new article of faith, and a new rite, in
the adoration of the Solar Disk. The proscription of
certain ancient gods and the warfare carried on
against the symbols of the Ammon-worship, appear
to be limited to the first of the apostate kings, Ame-
noph IV. The design may have been that of a puri-
tan reformer, endeavouring to counteract a religious
encroachment. For it must be recollected that at
this particular epoch Ammon must have been re-
garded as a comparatively new Divinity, as the mere
tutelary god of Thebes. His name and character had
none of the venerable traditions attached to them that
belonged to Ptah, Osiris, Isis, Neith, and the other
Memphitic gods. Whatever were the causes of the
schism, they must only have been of brief duration.
The immediate successor of Amenoph ( Khou-en-aten )
restored the banished Divinity to his former place in
the Egyptian Pantheon; and, in the assumption by


him of the title of Amen-tnt-Anch, the living image
of Ammon, and by his wife of that of Anch-sen-amun,
we have a renunciation of the heresy of the preceding
reign. There seems no necessary connection between
the establishment and maintenance of the Disk-wor-
ship and the iconoclastic zeal directed against the
Ammon-worship. Whatever the mode of its expres-
sion, the Disk-worship was probably a mere develop-
ment of pre-existing ideas, the attribution of new
functions to a recognized god. No new Divinity was
incorporated into the celestial hierarchy, Ra, the
all-pervading source of light and life, the ever-recur-
ring symbol of humanity in his diurnal course, was
represented in his divine effulgence under a form at
once novel and appropriate. Every ray is signifi-
cantly delineated as terminating in a hand, and as
offering to the suppliant the “ crux ansata ,” the em-
blem of life and immortality. So far as regards the
Disk-worship, the innovation may have been one of a
ritualistic, rather than of a dogmatic character. For
although it acquired its predominant influence under
the princes immediately succeeding Amenoph 111.,
there seems reason to conclude that its introduction
dates from an earlier period, and had been partially
effected during the reign of that monarch. Accord-
ing to an inscription on a scarabaeus now in the Va-
tican, the king last mentioned made a great tank or
lake, to celebrate the festival of the Waters, on which
occasion he entered it in the barge of “ the most
Gracious Disk of the Sun.” 5 In the Solar Litanies
8 Bunsen, ‘ Egypt’s Place in Universal History,’ vol. iii. p. 143 ;
also “ Account of the Reign of Amenophis 111. ”in ‘ Journal of Archseo-
logical Institute of Great Britain,’ by Samuel Birch, LL.D., vol. viii.
p. 396. *


in several chapters of the ‘ Book of the Dead,’ espe-
cially in the 15th, 64th, 129th, and 133rd, we have
forms of adoration employed, in reference to the
Sun, the Solar Disk, and the Horns of the two Hori-
zons, which show that the doctrine was based upon
old liturgical forms. If the 64th chapter of the
Ritual, “ the Manifestation to Light,” belong to an
age as remote as that of Mycerinus (as the epigraph
would imply), the Solar worship must have formed a
very prominent part in the religious system of Egypt
at a very early date. As part of this chapter and its
rubric occur in the hieratic inscription placed round
the interior of the sarcophagus of the Queen Mentu-
hetp, of the 11th Dynasty, 6 its great antiquity is in-
disputable. As it preceded the reign of Amenoph
IV., so also does the Disk-worship seem in some
degree to have survived its suppression under Homs.
At El Hammamat, in the Valley of Kosseir, Seti I. is
represented sitting under the disk, receiving offer-
ings. 7 The hostility therefore shown to everything
connected with the innovating and heretical race by
their orthodox successors, may have had other mo-
tives than those springing from religious differences.
It was probably personal and dynastic, and connected
with a disputed succession; because, as we see in the
Tomb of Amen-tut-Anch, the animosity shown to
the defunct king is simply confined to an erasure of
his name, and that so imperfectly, that it is still
legible.
6 ‘ The Funeral Ritual, or Book of the Dead,’ translated by Samuel
Birch, Esq. Bunsen’s ‘ Egypt’s Place in Universal History,’ vol. v.
p. 142.
7 Rawlinson’s ‘ Herodotus,’ vol. ii. p. 361,


It only remains for me to add a few brief reflec-
tions respecting the conditions under which the frag-
ments of sculpture herein described were found. The
periodical overflowing of the Nile is attended, as is
well known, with the annual deposit of a thin layer
of black impalpable mud, the silent accumulation of
which is attended with a progressive elevation of the
whole valley of the river as far as the inundation
extends. The rate at which the increment of this
deposit goes on, may, in an average of years, be re-
garded as nearly uniform in any given locality, and
in the neighbourhood of Heliopolis and Memphis,
may be estimated at about three inches in a century.
Mr. Horner and Hekekyan Bey 8 calculate the se-
cular increase at a somewhat higher rate, viz. about
three and a half inches in a century. From the facts
now brought under notice, it appears to me evident
that their calculations are in excess of the real stand-
ard. Without dwelling upon the evidence as to the
permanence and uniformity of the geological agencies
to which the alluvial valley of the Nile is indebted
for its present physical characters, it may be affirmed,
that through the long succession of ages during which
man has fixed his abode upon the banks of this
mighty stream, the phenomena of its overflow have
undergone no great variation. In the rate of the
growth of the Nile mud we have an actual chrono-
metric scale; and some of the disclosures made by
Hekekyan Bey, as delineated in the stratigraphical
outline, No. 1, Plate 1., are deserving of especial no-
3 ‘ Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society,’ vol. cxlvii.
p. 105, and vol. cxlviii. p. 53. ‘A Treatise on the Chronology of
Siriadic Monuments,’ by Hekekyan Bey, C.E. London, 1868.


tice, as bearing upon the respective ages of the diffe-
rent layers passed through, and in the order of their
superposition as associated with historical events, of
which this part of Egypt was the especial theatre.
No doubt, when the city was peopled, the overflow of
the water of the annual inundations would be re-
strained by dykes; so that whilst the circumjacent
land was progressively rising, the included area would
remain unchanged, and the earliest monuments will,
at their base-line, represent the actual level of the
spot at the period of their erection. Were no com-
pensating influences in operation, a basin-like cavity
would be formed, sinking deeper and deeper as the
surrounding soil was raised. In all densely-inhabited
spots, especially in ancient cities, there has been, as
we all know, a constantly-increasing accumulation of
soil and rubbish, by which the whole surface has
become raised, each successive generation adding to
the ever-accumulating heap. So long as Memphis
continued to be occupied, the artificial elevation of
the ground within the barriers or dykes would pro-
bably be quite as great as that on the exterior, result-
ing from natural causes. When, however, population
disappeared, and the annual overflow of the river was
no longer restrained by artificial means, then the
whole superficies of every object below the normal
level of the circumjacent plain must have become
incrusted with sedimentary mud. Since the erection
of the great statue of Rameses 11., the measure of the
deposit of the alluvium that has taken place is some-
where about 7 feet 2 inches. Assuming the scale
laicfdown of the elevation of the valley to be that
above mentioned, —three inches in a century, —we


have indications of a lapse of thirty-two centuries
from the foundation of the monument, a calculation
that accords pretty closely with (although, perhaps,
somewhat short of) the estimates derived from other
and historical data. Employing the metric unit of
three inches, let us for a few moments endeavour to
synchronize the successive strata passed through in
sinking the pits at Mit-Paheneh (in which the re-
lics of the Disk-worshippers were found) with some
of the historical events which we know to have hap-
pened.
I will commence with the lowest stratum in the
series of deposits, that marked G (Plate I. No. 1).
This was found to consist of rubbish, soil, fragments
of brick, and broken pottery, all undoubted indica-
tions of the spot having been occupied by a commu-
nity, living at a time when the surface of the Nile
valley was twelve feet lower than it now is, and im-
plying an antiquity of upwards of 5000 years. How
much lower these remains extend was not ascer-
tained. * They were found to be covered by a bed of
Desert sand, F (Plate I, fig. 1); and it is a curious fact,
that a spot which had evidently been the seat of a
considerable population should have suddenly ceased
to preserve its condition as such. The observations
were upon too circumscribed an area to justify any
very certain conclusions, but the phenomena here
presented to us would seem to point to some great
social or political crisis, such as that likely to be cre-
ated by the intrusion of a foreign force and the de-
struction of a city. I would merely throw out the
hint of the possible correlation of the Hykshos inva-
sion with what we here see. Ascending in the scale,


we find at E again an accumulation of debris , remains
of human art, brick, pottery, and other indications of
a once busy life. It is upon this conglomerate that
we find resting the first pavement, D, that in which
are found the fragments of the Disk-worshippers. It
is self-evident that the date of the construction of
this pavement,must be posterior to the epoch of the
hated dynasty; and, as the depth at which it is found
is about 100 inches, we have a date of about 1400
b.c. The upper pavement, C, corresponding with the
stylobate of the Ramesside statue, would give the
equivalent of the age of that monument as about 1100
b.c. The large superincumbent mass of conglome-
rated materials, B, resting upon the upper pavement,
and having a thickness of more than 50 inches, must
have accumulated during that long interval of pro-
gressive decay, which, probably commencing with the
Persian invasion, and accelerated by the foundation
of Alexandria, was consummated by the conquest of
the Caliphs in the seventh century, when, in the em-
phatic language of the Hebrew prophet, “Noph”
became literally “ waste and desolate, without an in-
habitant.” 9 Of this progressive decadence we have
evidence from various sources. In Strabo’s time, al-
though the city was still large and populous, and
only second in importance to Alexandria, yet the
public buildings were decayed and desolate. 10 The
erection of Fostat not only led to the desertion, but
to the utter demolition of Memphis, so that when the
site of the city was visited by Abdallatif in the thir-
teenth, and Abulfeda in the fourteenth century, little
9 Jeremiah xlvi. 19.
10 DoXis S’ earl pey d\rj re kcu evavdpos, Bevrepa pera ’ A\e^dpBpei.av


appears to have been left except colossal remains,
which had only been spared from the difficulty and
labour that must have attended their destruction or
removal. 11 The upper stratum of Nile mud, of 34
inches, has accumulated since the period when the
occupation of Memphis ceased; and the secular in-
crease of the Nile alluvium represents a period of
about eleven centuries. During that long interval, —co-
extensive with the Mohammadan rule, —year by year
the river has left its thin deposit of impalpable mud,
and the Fellah has gathered his annual crops, whilst
the buried city sank deeper and deeper, until at
length only a few scattered blocks of sculptured gra-
nite and limestone remain to reveal the site of the
oldest city in the world, the earliest known site of
art, government, science, and civilization. In the
Birket of Mit-Baheneh and its neighbourhood there
are doubtlessly still entombed invaluable remains of
antiquity, the discovery of which will not fail to
throw fresh light on some of the earliest chapters in
the world’s history. Further remains of the Disk-
worshippers would in all likelihood be found here,
and some satisfactory clue obtained as to their dy-
nastic relations with the kings who preceded and fol-
lowed them. The inquiry is the more interesting, as
in the monumental titles of “ Amen-tut- Anch ” and
/uyddcov dvBpa>v, nadcmep kcu rcov iicel crwcoKLcrpevcov. UpoKfcvr/u 8e kcu.
\ip.vcu rrjs iroXecos kcu tScv ftaiJiXetxov a vvv pev KarecnracrTUi kill (cttlv
epppa. (Strabonis Geogr. lib. xvii. c. i. p. 32.)
11 “ Menf c’est I’ancienne Misr, situee sur la rive occidentale du Nil.
Amroti, fils d’Alas, quand il fit la conquete de I’Egypte, la fit detruire
et batit par ordre du Khalif Omar Fostatb sur la rive orientale. A
Memphis se trouvent des debris de monuments antiques consistant en
blocs polls et charges de figures.” (Geographic d’Aboulfeda, traduite
de I’Arabe par M. Eeinaud, tome iii. p. 159.)


“ Ra khefer-kheprou, armaa,” we may probably have
the original designations of the “ Armais ” and “ Da-
nans” of Manetho and Josephus, and a reminiscence
of the mythical king of the Argives. Let us express
a hope that researches may again be instituted in so
promising a field. The pavement extending from the
base of the prostrate statue is still, it would appear,
undisturbed, the only portion brought to light being
the small section uncovered by Hekekyan Bey, and
the subject of the foregoing remarks. In the entire
absence of all encouragement on the part of our own
Government to scientific enterprise abroad, it will be
left to M. Mariette and other distinguished foreign
Egyptologists to develop whatever still remains to be
discovered in this and other similar fields of ancient
historical inquiry.
PRINTED BY TAYLOR AND CO.,
LITTLE QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS.






P LATEI
N°l. Section of Excavations made at Bullet Mitrahene, July 4-1854
Six' C.¥iciiolsoiL,l)eL. L()Uoini,Lith
Uncent BrootsDay & Son,lmp.


PLATE 2
N° 6. Drawing (half size of the Original) of Sculptured Limestone Slab (a) in pavement
