









ON THE GOVERNMENT
OF THE
BRITISH COLONIES.
DEDICATED TO THE
RIGHT HON. LORD JOHN RUSSELL,
FIRST LORD OF THE TREASURY, &C. &C.
BY
JOHN WALPOLE WILLIS.
“ Truth, after all, is the safest thing in public business, and even where
solemn grimace and fiction appear most harmless, they are too apt to cause
some unforeseen entanglement which leads to serious mischief.” —Speech
of the late C, Buller, Esq., M.P., House of Commons, June 17, 1845.
LONDON:
TRELAWNEY SAUNDERS, 6, CHARING CROSS.
1850.




Corran Brook, Langharne, Carmarthen,
January 4, 1850.
My Lord,
The Constitution of England demands from the
First Minister of the Crown, not only diligent super-
intendence of the United Kingdom, but also prudent
care for every portion of the British Empire. The
immediate administration of the government of our
Foreign Possessions, was, for a time, entrusted to Your
Lordship; and the present Secretary, and Parliamentary
Under-Secretary of State for the Colonial Department,
are Officers of an Administration of Your Lordship’s
formation. For their acts, therefore, —sanctioned, as
they must be presumed to be, by Your Lordship’s
authority, and by your permitting them to remain in
office, Your Lordship must be deemed responsible.
To you, then, with all respect, I now presume to offer
such observations as more immediately occur to me, on
the Government of the British Colonies, accompanied
with some Suggestions for Improvement—suggestions


which, I trust, in the words of Lord Hillsborough’s too
celebrated Despatch of the 13th May, 1769, “may
tend to remove the prejudices which have been excited
by those who are enemies to the peace and prosperity of
Great Britain and her Colonies , and to re-establish
that mutual confidence and affection upon which the
glory and safety of the British Empire depend.”
I have the honour to be,
My Lord,
Your Lordship’s very obedient Servant,
JOHN WALPOLE WILLIS.
IV


CONTENTS.
PAGE
Advantage of Colonies . 1
Benefits of Educational and Episcopal Institutions . 2—4
Example of Relief to Redundant Population . . 5
How Colonies are acquired— .... 6
By Conquest, and Cession by Treaty . . 6
By Occupancy ...... 9
Penal Colonies ....... 11
Evil of the Infusion of Convictism . . . . 11
Convicts to be excluded from Colonies originally Penal 12
Transportation . . . . . . . 13
Expense of Colonies ...... 15
The Colonies can defend themselves . . . 16
Colonization ....... 17—19
Roman Colonies 20—22
Suggestions for relieving Pauperism . . • . 23
Waste Lands . . . . . . 24
Aborigines 25
Historical Events compared 25
Municipalities 26
Board of Trade and Plantations ... 27
Taxation without Representation . . . 28—31
Secretary of State for War and Colonies . . 31
Colonial Enquiry refused .... 32
Colonial Opposition to Civil List ... 33
Attempts to coerce a Colonial House of Assembly 33
Vacillation . . . . . . , 34
Incompetence of Ministry .... 35
Oppressive Legislation 36
Garbling and suppressing Official Documents . 38
Parliamentary Representation .... 39


FAG E
Historical Events compared—
Steam Navigation removes the Impracticability
of Colonial Representation .... 39
Character of Colonial Secretary of State . . 40
American Declaration of Independence . . 40
Economical Reform . . . . . 41
Proposed Abolition of Colonial Office, and
Board of Trade and Plantations . . . 41
Public Opinion respecting the Colonial Office . 42
Opinion of the late Mr. Charles Buller . . 42
Opinion of Governor Barkley .... 43
Opinion of Mr. Under-Secretary Hawes . . 43
Mr. Cobden’s declaration of the State of the
Colonies ....... 45
The Evil of having only One Legislative Chamber . 46
Single Chamber for New South Wales ... 47
Suggestion for Improvements of Colonial Legislation 48
Federal System objected to .... 48
Union with Great Britain . . . . . 49
Colonists to defray Expenses and Costs of Defence . 50
Colonists to be Represented in Imperial Parliament . 51
Unequal Taxation no Objection . . . 51
Precedent of Roman Colonies . . . . 51
Precedent of Portuguese Cortes ... 52
Precedent of Members of Universities . . 52
Representation of Chester .... 52
Charter for Self-Government to be granted to Colonies 52
Control of Imperial Parliament .... 53
Abolition of the Colonial Office, Board of Trade,
Colonial Land and Emigration Commission,
and Judicial Committee of Privy Council for
Colonial Appeals ..... 53
Saving of Expense—Beneficial Results . . . 53
VI
CONTENTS.




THE GOVERNMENT
OF
THE BRITISH COLONIES.
It is the fashion of certain politicians of the present day, tc
undervalue (according to general opinion) the importance of
our Colonial possessions. Instead of being considered, as in
fact they are, very advantageous, they are represented as a
heavy burden to this country, which cannot be too soon
shaken off. But Lord Bacon tells us, “ That colonies and
foreign plantations are very necessary as outlets to a populous
nation, and may be profitable also, if managed in a discreet
way; ” and in his admirable advice to Sir George Yilliers, he
lays down very excellent rules respecting them. The propa-
gation of colonies is, in fact, the great external function of a
nation. They are its children; they are the natural and
legitimate vent for the expanding resources and energies of a
people, whose faculties are allowed their full and proper
development. Population must swell, capital increase, talent
and enterprise be called forth, which can find no adequate
field in the already occupied ground in an established empire,:
and if no issue be provided for these, they will foment and
corrupt in their confinement. That Rebellion which cost the
file and crown of a British monarch, and transferred the
Executive power to Cromwell, was the work of those arrested
in their progress of emigration. In consequence of the Royal
Proclamation in 1638, forbidding persons to go beyond the
sea without a licence, and testimonials of religious conformity,
the Lords Say and Brooks, Sir Arthur Haselrig, Hampden,
and Cromwell, (names afterwards conspicuous in history,)


with many other men of rank and character, were stopped on
the eve of embarking for America by an Order of Council.
A plethory requires to be bled —hut not hu war; for war,
(not easily averted by arbitration,) except in self-defence,
is evidently opposed to the precepts of Christianity. To
plant then the germs of organised polities in distant regions,
and so remove the plethory ; —to nurse them under the
fostering care and superintendence of one, and that the
Reformed and Established Church of England, that they may
grow up into fair and stately kingdoms, like rivers by the
water side; —and thus to spread the Gospel afar off, evan-
gelizing the heathen and the savage;—is worthy of a great
and enlightened nation. Proper episcopal supervision is never
more necessary for the careful preservation of the unity of
the Church, than when its children are scattered through the
wilderness, and so much exposed to the influence of illiterate
men. “Unless there be but one Church, it will (says Lord
Bacon) make a schism and rent in Christ’s coat, which must
be seamless.” Wherever the unity of the Church does not
exist, want of it is fatal to the unity of the people; fatal to
the unity of Government; and fraught with difficulties and
dangers, like those which arise from Romanism in Ireland
and the Colonies; and from Idolatry in India. Colonies,
not planted solely for commercial gain, but founded on
higher and holier principle, will “ relieve the destitute, by
affording a home where honest labour, under Providence,
may ensure subsistence, if not comparative riches ; yield
employment to our shipping and our seamen; open new
sources of supply of the raw material for our manufactures;
create markets independent of the policy of other nations ;
augment the influence of the British name ; and spread to
the farthest ends of the earth, our religion, our language,
and our institutions.” To preserve authority in its rulers,
obedience in its subjects, stability in its institutions, and
above all, the blessings of Heaven on its undertakings, an
empire, even in maturity and fixedness, requires a Church.


Still more then does a Colony require it; —new as it is
in 'position, filled with an atmosphere of change, uprooted
from its ancient habits and most deep-rooted prejudices; —its
leaders, either chosen by the Colonists, or more frequently
deriving their authority from the parent State —a State distant,
and too frequently careless in its appointments—with a spirit
full of enterprise, perhaps of criminal excitement; with wants
many, with resources few. Neither indeed will justice, nor
policy, nor charity, sanction even providing a home for the
destitute, unless that home can be enjoyed with suitable pro-
vision for the due ministrations of the Church, and the un-
speakable consolations of religion.
The Establishment of religion, is even in a worldly
view, most profitable. For example: That zealous,
persecuted, but unwearied body, by whose exertions New
Zealand has thus far been colonized, sought to provide,
not merely the means of material comfort, and progress of
the new settlements, but to give the colonists, from their
very origin, institutions, whereby higher objects of Christian
men are furthered. “ The New Zealand Company devoted,”
said the late lamented Member for Liskeard, “ a portion
of the purchase-money for their lands to the foundation of
educational institutions, and another to the endowment of
the bishopric, which had been established through the
exertions of the founder of the Company''’- —(an oversight
by Government, whether wilful or otherwise, thus happily
supplied). “So impressed were the public with the value of
such institutions, that we found them ready to embark
earger sums for settlements in which those advantages were
secured, than in those where we had undertaken to provide
merely a supply of labour. In the same space of time, we
sold more acres at 30s. a-piece at Nelson, than we had sold
at 20. v. at Wellington; and the result of our system was such
as had not been seen for two centuries. We got men of pro-
perty to invest it in New Zealand, with the intention, not of
making a rapid fortune, but of making their home, and that


of their descendants, in that distant country. We got men of
the first rank and family to become settlers, and we contrived
to join, with the simplicity and enterprize of a new society,
the refinement of English manners, and the control of public
opinion congenial with our own.”
It is indisputable, that in no condition of human nature are
the comforts of religion, or positive external law, or reverence
for antiquity, or adherence to prescription, or belief in truth,
or the control of sound public opinion , or the restraint of a
high tone in society, more needed than in the Colonies; —and
colonies in which all these are found, must prosper. Such
colonies will absorb, with advantage, much of the surplus
population of the parent State, —will afford at least a partial
remedy for its overwhelming pauperism, and repay all primary
expenditure an hundredfold. But, said the late Dr. Arnold,
“ Our Colonial Society has been in general, so Jacobinical, in the
truest sense of the word; every man has lived so much to and
for himself, and the bonds of law and religion have been so little
acknowledged as the great sanctions and securities of society,
that one shrinks from bringing up one’s children where they
must, in all human probability, become lowered—not in rank
or fortune —but what is infinitely more important—the in-
tellectual, and moral, and religious standard by which their
lives should be guided.” And such, it is to be feared, is the
general state of our Colonies; but not at Nelson, or in the
other settlements of the New Zealand Company, where a
similar system has been adopted.
A transfer, at moderate cost, to colonies already planted,
or to new locations in more fertile countries, where labour
may obtain more ample recompence, is admitted to be the
best mode of relieving a country from a redundant population.
The following is an instance:—
In the year 1848, a number of English artizans, many of
them belonging to the town of Nottingham, had gone over to
France, where they were suddenly thrown out of employment
by the Revolution. Foreseeing their return home would


merely be to augment the numbers that overcrowded the
workhouses, and having learnt that a demand for labour
existed in the Australian Colonies, they sent to their own
Government a Memorial, praying to be removed to the
Colonies direct. A body had already been formed in London,
(of which Lord Ashley and Mr. Salomons were leading
members,) to aid the distressed workpeople. Nottingham
also saw its own interest in procuring the people to be con-
veyed to the Colonies, rather than the overcrowded labour-
market, or workhouse, of their native town; and contributed
£6OO towards the expense. With the joint aid of the
officials, the charitable Association, and the country town, the
body of emigrants was accordingly shipped for Sydney, Port
Phillip, and Adelaide ; the greater number to the latter port
in South Australia, into which settlement it was originally
stipulated that convicts should never be admitted. Thus a very
troublesome question respecting the disposal of these people
was satisfactorily settled, to the advantage of the place owning
their settlement, and their own invaluable benefit. Such
transfers will also conduce to the increase of commerce, the
encouragement of shipping, and the employment of seamen.
For example, suppose a fertile but empty island to be within
reach of a country in which arts and manufacturers are
already established. Suppose a colony sent out from it to take
possession of the island, and live there under the protection and
authority of their native Government, The new settlers will
naturally apply their labour to the cultivation of the vacant
soil, and with the produce of that soil, will draw a supply of
manufactured goods from home. This will be more pro-
fitable for early colonists, than to manufacture for themselves.
In very many settlements there will be found raw materials
capable of being manufactured in the mother country, with
advantage to herself, and to the Colonies whence such ex-
ports proceed. Thus commerce, shipping, and seamen, are
advanced and fostered by colonies. Moreover, it is by colonies
that the wildernesses of newly-discovered countries are ren-


dered fruitful, and when planted with civilized and Christian
people, the blessings of pure religion are thus extended over
the earth.
Colonies are acquired by conquest,—by cession under
Treaty,—or by occupancy, which is, where an uninhabited
country, or a country inhabited by erratic tribes incapable
from the smallness of their numbers to occupy the whole, is
discovered by British subjects, and adopted and recognised by
the Crown as part of its possessions, and occupied accordingly.
According to the law of nations, (see Yattel, b. i., c. 13.,
s. 209,) such tribes cannot appropriate to themselves more
land than they have occasion for, and are able to cultivate.
Trinidad will serve as an example of a Colony acquired by
conquest, (February 18, 1797,) and subsequently by cession,
under the Treaty of Amiens (March 25, 1802). In ancient
times, colonies were principally settled for the relief of a
dense population. Master and slave emigrated together to
more fertile, or unoccupied territories; both were of the
same race, spoke the same language, and were bound toge-
ther by the same ties; —expatriation was incurred for their
sole advantage; and the only benefit the mother country
expected to derive from it, was the diminished pressure of sub-
sistence. In later times, a thirst for gold alone inspired
Europeans with views of emigration to the Western world;
and the mines not supplying this desire, the valuable products
of the tropics were cultivated. These regions being either
untenanted, or thinly inhabited by races not adapted by nature
for the development of their resources, slaves were imported
from Africa. Such was the case at Trinidad, and the other
West Indian Colonies. With regard to the aboriginal races,
it appears that in all cases they decline when in the neigh-
bourhood of superior civilization. There is in fact in the
intercourse of the higher and lower degrees of civilization,
an uncontrollable power which the lower cannot ultimately
resist; and whatever policy is adopted, (as was truly said by
the late Mr. C. Buller, in the debates on New Zealand in


1845,) ‘‘the weaker race must ultimately give way.” Ex-
aggerated tales have been told, and believed, of the extirpa-
tion of the Carribs, and the cruelty of the Spaniards. It was
the opinion of Las Casas, that the Indians could not endure
work ; and it was therefore, at his suggestion, that the Emperor
Charles I, granted a patent to supply the Spanish Colonies
with Africans as labourers in their place. On its capture by
the English in 1797, Trinidad, a sugar-growing island, was
reserved by Government as a Colony of Experiment. The
inhabitants were purposely deprived of popular representation
and free Government , and kept together under the dominion
of the Colonial Office in Downing Street. A considerable
number of aboriginals then existed in the island, amounting
in the year 1812 to 1804, or thereabouts—an amount which
had diminished in 1821, to 956; and this race ( especially
under the care of the Colonial Office) is probably at this
moment well-nigh extinct. It was reasonably expected that
the great question of the Abolition of Slavery, begun, as it
was, in 1776, by Mr. David Hartly moving a resolution in
Parliament in that year, “ That the Slave Trade was contrary
to the laws of God , and the rights of man”) —would have in-
duced the probable effects of abolition to be first tried in the
Colonial Office Experimental Colony of Trinidad, But on
the contrary, slavery was not only promoted and encouraged ,
but to a great extent made imperative by the British Govern-
ment. Instead of the condition of the slave being meliorated,
the mild provisions of the Spanish system were abrogated,
and only 13 days in the year were allowed, under the
maternal protection of the abolitionists in Downing Street,
for the cultivation of his provision grounds. This was in the
year 1800. The trade was only finally abolished in 1806 ;
and subsequently by the constant efforts of Mr, Wilberforce,
and others, the abolition of Slavery itself was ultimately
accomplished, under the provision of an Act of Parliament,
passed August 28, 1833.
Some year afterwards, to the great consternation of the


inhabitants, an enquiry was suddenly instituted by Govern-
ment into the nature of the titles to all properties in the
island-, the state of their cultivation ; and the strength of
their gangs ; and it was declared by Proclamation, that if any
estates were found at the expiration of two years from that
time, not cultivated in proportion to one-fourth of their
extent, and on which there toere not resident at least one
negro for every five quarrees, or 16 acres of land , they should
incur an annual fine of ss. for every quarree , and, in default
of payment, be seized, and forfeited to the Crown. The
Governor was authorized to sell, at the same time, Crown
lands on similar terms, but only to the extent of 360 acres to
each purchaser. But in order to tempt strangers to bring
into this Experimental Colonial Office Colony, a greater
number of slaves, a special bonus was offered : “ They will be
recommended,” says the Proclamation, “to His Royal High-
ness’s (the Prince Regent’s) gracious favour, for a greater
extent of land than is hereinbefore limited.” This was in
1815. Under the above conditions, thousands of acres were
disposed of at public sale; the purchase-money lodged in
His Majesty’s Treasury, and expended as Government
thought fit; and so rigidly were these conditions enforced, that
large tracts were subsequently resumed by the Crown, from
the inability of the purchasers to conform to them. In 1831,
it would seem that the Government of Trinidad was, for the
first time, permitted to dispose of the Crown lands in that
colony, without compelling the purchaser, on pain of con-
fiscation, to stock them with slaves. — (See Mr. Burnley's
pamphlet on the Extinction of Slavery, 1833, and the
Official Authorities there referred to.) Such was the en-
couragement of Slavery,—such the West Indian Colonization
under the auspices of the British Government, in the Colonial
Office Experimental Colony of Trinidad, previously to negro
emancipation. By the abolition of Slavery, the planters were
deprived of that species of labour ; they were unable to obtain
assistance (till too late) in providing the labour necessary to


cultivate their estates with advantage; and, finally, by with-
drawal of Protection, and the admission of slave-cultivated
sugar into the English market, to compete with that of free
labour in the British Colonies, Government has not only
brought its own Colonial Office Experimental Crown Colony
of Trinidad , but also British Guiana and the other Crown
Colonies, as well as Jamaica, and all the rest of the British
sugar plantations, to misery and ruin. Enough of colonies
acquired by conquest.
Next, as to Colonies acquired by occupancy. The earliest
are those in North America. The English claims to sove-
reignty in the north of that vast continent, are based upon the
discoveries of John Cabot, accompanied by his son, Sebastian.
These, acting under a Commission, and for the service of
Henry YIL, in the year 1497, ran along the line of the Ameri-
can coast from the 38th to the 67th degree of North latitude;
thus making their discoveries only five years later than Columbus
himself in lower latitudes. The attention of the English nation
was called to the subject of colonization by the genius and enter-
prise of Sir Walter Raleigh. In 1578, he procured a Patent
for settlement, for the use of his half-brother, Sir Humphrey
Gilbert, who in 1583 failed in his attempt to execute it. In
1584, Sir Walter Raleigh obtained a direct grant to himself,
and undertook an expedition, which failed also. Having for-
feited his Patent by attainder, King James I. granted another
Patent from the 34th to the 45th degree, (that is from North
Carolina to Nova Scotia,) under the general name of Virginia.
In 1632, Lord Baltimore obtained his Patent from Charles I.
for Maryland, which he forthwith began to colonise. In 1640,
the English Puritans from New Haven, under the name of
English people desirous of planting Churches “ after a godly
sort,” and to “trade and traffic with the Indians,” along the
Delaware Bay, made a purchase of soil for £3O from the
Indians, and based their claims on their actual purchases
from the Indian sovereigns, of whom, they alleged, they
acquired their titles. In 1664, King Charles 11. granted a


Patent of lands in America, including all the Dutclu then held
as their New Netherlands, to his brother James, Duke of
York, and thenceforth New Amsterdam became New York ;
and the Jerseys, and the western shores of the Delaware, were
forthwith transferred to British rule. The Duke of York thus
possessed of the Jerseys, granted these possessions to Sir
George Carteret, In 1675, the west part of Jersey was sold
to one Edward Byllinge, to whom, soon afterwards, Penn
became a trustee, and in his efforts to settle Byllinge’s estate;
gained such a knowledge of the region of Pennsylvania and
colonial settlements, as afterwards to be induced to purchase
the former for himself, by receiving it as an equivalent for
claims due from the British Government to his father, Admiral
Penn, William Penn being thus in possession of his province,
proceeded to allure the good people of Europe to its settle-
ment and improvement. He published terms at 40s, per 100
acres, and Is. per 100 acres quit rent. He did not sell in
such small parcels himself, but in shares of 5000 acres each,
at £lOO. There were soon many purchasers in Europe, and
hence originated “ The Free Society of Traders ” in Bristol
and London, who at first bought 20,000 acres —a society
bearing a very striking resemblance to the present New
Zealand Company. The first purchasers or adventurers made
their settlements by first rudely sheltering their families and
effects, then getting warrants of survey, and then wandering
about for their choice of locations. By the close of the year
1682, the tide of emigration produced by Penn’s popularity
was such, that 23 ships with passengers had arrived since
the spring. In those times, the Indians were kind and active
to bring the emigrants provisions, and the inhabitants and
surveyors were strictly enjoined not to settle any land to which
the Indians had claim, until he (Penn) had first, at his own
cost, satisfied and paid them for the same. The progress of
these settlements will be further traced hereafter ; but enough
has now been said to show how Colonies may be acquired by
occupancy.


But there are colonies which Great Britain has esta-
blished, founded in sin and shame; —those moral monsters,
Penal Colonies, where the cesspools of infamy and crime
have been emptied from this country, and encouraged to fer-
ment into life—perhaps to become nations and empires of sin.
In those colonies, experience has shown that neither example
to deter others from offending, nor reformation of the indi-
vidual, nor even .(as Professor Mill has observed) security
from his crimes, has hitherto been effected. It is indeed a
shameful and unblessed thing to take the scum of the people,
and wicked and condemned men, to be the people with whom
you plant; and not only so, for it spoileth the plantation, “ for
they will ever live like rogues, and not fall to work, but be
lazy and do mischief, and spend victual, and be quickly weary,
and then certify to their country to the discredit of the
plantation.” “ These things,” (also says Lord Bacon), “ should
be observed, that no known bankrupt for shelter, nor known
murderer, nor other wicked person to avoid the law, nor known
heretic or schismatic , be suffered to go into those countries, or
if they do creep in there, not to be harboured or continued,
else the place would receive them naught, and return them
into England on all occasions worse.” “ Holding,” (wrote the
late Dr. Arnold) “our West Indian Colonies to be one of
the worst stains in the moral history of mankind: a Convict
Colony seems to me even more shocking and more monstrous
in its very conception. I do not know to what extent Van
Diemen’s Land is so; but lam sure that no such evil can be
done to mankind as by thus sowing with rotten seed; and by
raising up a nation morally tainted in its very origin.
Compared with this, the bloodiest exterminations ever effected
by conquest, were useful and good.”
If then, planting with wicked and bad men, be a shameful
and unblessed thing;—if no bad character should be ad-
mitted into a colony ; —if this sowing with rotten seed, be
the greatest evil that can be done to mankind, —Can colonies
founded on holy principles ever be expected to consent to


admit them? No! they ought, and they will, with universal
voice, —with united, firm, and decided reprobation, and by all
legal means, resist the corrupt and purulent torrent of a tainted
population, unjustly, and disingenuously attempted to be
let loose among them. They will manfully withstand the
evil; and he can have no sense of righteousness who would
seek to prevent, to limit, or to sneer away all merit, and
advantage, of that bold condemnation of vice—that virtuous
opposition which he dares not imitate, —but secretly, and dis-
ingenuously, endeavours to disarm. Can we wonder then at
the indignation of the New Zealand Company, (a Company
formed for “ the introduction of moral and industrious colo-
nists ” to those islands, and formed on the express condition of
the “ absolute exclusion of convicts f ) thus stated in their
Petition, presented to the House of Commons on April 16,
1845 ? “In utter disregard of the moral contamination which
has inevitably resulted, and which ought to have been fore-
seen, a number of boys from Parkhurst Penitentiary, have
been imported into the country; and in order to evade the
pledge given by Lord Normanby, that ‘no convict should
ever be sent thither to undergo his punishment,’ the individuals
were pardoned on reaching their destination.” The Petition
presented to the House of Commons from the New Zealand
Company in May 1849, printed among the public petitions,
has only to be read, to shew the aversion and disgust with
which the prospect of convict emigration to their settlements
is beheld. The recent attempt to infect the Cape of Good
Hope with convictism, has happily been successfully resisted
by the colonists, “After having treated them like children in
their mother’s arms,” (says Mr. Cobden,) “ we proposed to send
them over the very scum of our society, —the emptying of
our gaols. They declared they would not receive them;
they denounced the Government; told the Governor they
would not receive the convicts; they set at defiance his
order to receive the vessel sailing under Her Majesty’s autho-
rity ; and resolved on passive resistance, saying, they would


not supply the Government with provisions. They shut up
their shops; and the Govenor had to seize their bullocks in
the streets, that he might not starve himself.” “ I think,’’
(Mr. Cobden added,) “ that if I lived at the Cape, instead of
living here, I should probably have been one of the first to
oppose the reception of these convicts.” Nor should it be
permitted that colonies, though originally “ planted with
wicked and condemned men,” should be again inundated with
vice. From length of time and copious supplies of purer
emigration, some portion of religious instruction, and a rise
in commercial importance almost surpassing belief, have in
some degree redeemed their sullied reputation, and with
amended character they have acquired an anxious desire to be
freed from the disease of continued convictism. The resist-
ance, therefore, to the reception of convicts in New South
Wales, after the assurance that transportation thither should
not be continued, affords matter for rejoicing, and of hope
that the wishes of an assembled meeting of 6,000 people will
not have been expressed in vain. u Godliness is great riches;”
but if rulers be without godliness, if they force ungodliness
upon any portion of Her Majesty’s subjects, the evil must be
great, and the result perilous.
On the subject of Convict Transportation, the present
Government has, it is said, “ tried everything by turns, and
nothing long,” and concluded by deeming criminals as
bounties to be conferred on every rising state; and colonies,
“ conservatories for criminal exotics.” If only on the score
of economy, this nuisance should be abated. A cheaper and
more effectual method' of secondary punishment might per-
haps, without much difficulty, be suggested; and with regard
to the evils of transportation to New South Wales, and the
substitution of a less expensive, less vicious, and more effectual
system for obtaining the ends for which punishment is alone
inflicted, it is very possible that His Grace the Archbishop of
Dublin might be consulted with much advantage.*
* See his Works on Secondary Punishment.


Perhaps the terror of expatriation, and at the same time that
example which tends to deter others from the commission of
crime, with all the beneficial effects of reformatory discipline,
might be produced by transportation ; not, indeed, to a distant
colony, but to some neighbouring Scottish or Channel Island
possessing a sufficiency of uncultivated land ; where convicts
might be profitably employed, under a somewhat similar
system to that of the pauper colonies in Holland, which com-
prise both sexes, and children as well as adults. The men, after
earning a sufficient character by industry and good behaviour,
might be formed into corps entirely for foreign service , (like
those of a battalion of the 60th Regiment, and the Royal
African corps during the late war,) but without pay, until a
small daily sum be given as reward for, and during the con-
tinuance of good behaviour; but subject to discharge at a
period fixed on at their enlistment, or sooner, if under any
circumstances it should be deemed advisable. Such corps might
be formed in the vicinity of the proposed establishment. The
commissioned officers taken from the half-pay list, and the
non-commissioned officers, in the first instance, from pen-
sioners. A sufficient number of well-behaved women should be
permitted to marry into and accompany each corps, which in
no case should exceed 500 men, and should be carefully pro-
vided with a chaplain, a schoolmaster and schoolmistress, not
only for the children, but also for the adults. Thus might
the regiments of the line be exempted, in a great degree, from
foreign service, the regular army be materially reduced, and
a considerable saving of expense effected. Military discipline,
and constant occupation , (for the men might be employed as
military labourers as well as soldiers,) and separation, by
being lodged in barracks, would prevent that contagion which
convicts impart, when permitted to mix in a community
without discipline or restraint. The women might be em-
ployed, under proper inspection, in public wash-houses, re-
sembling, in some measure, those on the Seine in Paris; but
they should never be forced upon any community , or per-


mitted to remain, while single, (until they have redeemed their
characters,) without constant occupation, due inspection, and
above all, proper religious instruction.
The Colonies are objected to on the score of expense; as
mere receptacles of Government patronage, and that patronage
often misplaced; and as seats of jobbing and oppression, too
rank for endurance. It would seem, indeed, from a quotation
from a Parliamentary Paper issued in February 1849, that
Colonies furnish 43 posts of dignity, with salaries ranging
from £BOO to £7,000, and averaging £2,784. lo.y. per annum ;
the total sum being not less than £119,746. But might not
this, and all or most of our other Colonial expenditure, be
avoided, and the Colonies retained? Might not a plan be
devised, combining good and acceptable Government with
economy, so as to make, even now, the Colonies contented,
and to free the Imperial Government from all the burdens
which at present they impose ? That this may be done, I
shall attempt to demonstrate in the course of this essay. At
all events, we have the declaration of an ex-Secretary of State
for the Colonies, so recently as the 16th of April, 1849, in
his place in the House of Commons, “ That no consideration
of money ought to induce that House or the Legislature to
sever the connexion subsisting between any one of the Colonies
and the mother country. But I will say,” (added Mr. Glad-
stone,) “ that the consideration of money, important as it is,
because a large and unnecessary expenditure is involved in
our Colonial system, —which I do not say, however, can be all
at once retrenched; —yet there is a still more important con-
sideration than that of money, and that is, how to give the
greatest and most effective development to our Colonial
institutions. I thoroughly believe,” (said he,) “ that a sound
Colonial policy has no tendency to separate the Colonies from
this country.”
The cost of the land and sea forces employed for the defence
of the Colonies, is chiefly urged against their retention. In the
ancient Greek States, according to Xenophon and Plutarch,


every free citizen from the age of 18 or 20, to 58 or 60 years,
was enrolled for militia service. The militia of British
Guiana, while Slavery existed, was formed in a similar man-
mer : and finer troops were seldom seen. How soon British
colonists can raise an army, and form an effective marine
force, may be learnt from the history of the revolted colonies,
now the United States. Even before that period. Dr. Frank-
lin, in his Autobiography, gives us the following fact. In
the year 1744, during the war between France and Great
Britain, some French and Indians had made inroads into
Pennsylvania. It became necessary to arm for defence.
Governor Thomas recommended the Assembly then sitting to
pass a Militia law. Owing to certain disagreements on other
points, it was not passed. The situation of the province
became alarming. Dr. Franklin then proposed a voluntary
association for the defence of the province; it was directly
approved of, and signed by 1,200 persons, and in a short time
by 10,000.
The Roman Colonies were (and why should not the British
Colonies be ? ) the £C propugnacula Imperii ” —(Cic. de Leg.
Agr., c. 27) : that of Uarbo Martins (Narbonne) is described
by Cicero as “ Colonia nostrorum civium specula Populi
Romani et propugnaculum ,, —(Cic. pro Font., c. i.) The
British Colonies —the Coloni —the tillers of the earth, (for
military stations such as Gibraltar, or Malta, are not in fact
colonies,) are, or soon would be, able to defend themselves,
and to aid in the protection of the general peace and welfare
of the British Empire. If left to the general and almost
exclusive management of their own internal affairs,' —(to such
management for instance, as is confided to the City of London,)
—there can be no doubt that the colonists ivould willingly
defray all costs of self-government and of self-defence. Were
the Colonies happily governed, were they free from those
internal commotions occasioned by busy intermeddling, much
of the army and navy of England now employed by the
Colonies might be dispensed with. But is it for external


defence that such force is now required ? Is it not rather to
keep the colonists themselves in subjection ? Is it nothing to
say to an oppressed people—a people in a great degree, if not
altogether, able and most willing to defend themselves—that
they are in part protected at our charge 1
The military force which is kept up in order to cramp the
natural faculties of a people, and to prevent their arrival at
the utmost prosperity, is the instrument of their servitude—
not the means of their protection. To protect men is to
forward—not to restrain their improvement.
Else what is it more than to avow to them, and to the
world, that you guard them from others, only to make a prey
of them yourself? The pretext, therefore, of the expense
incurred in defending the Colonies, seems in a great measure,
merely a bad apology for Colonial misgovernment.
Colonies cannot exist without Colonization. The limits
of these remarks preclude discussion proportioned to the im-
portance of the subject, though it cannot be dismissed without
some few observations. When, according to Thucydides
(1 —34) the Corcyrseans sent ambassadors to Athens to ask
for assistance against the Epidamnians, it was objected that
they (the Corcyrseans) were a colony of Corinth : to this
they answered, “ That every colony , so long as it is kindly
treated , respects the mother country; but' when it is injured
is alienated from it; for colonies are not sent out as
SUBJECTS, BUT THAT THEY MAY HAVE EQUAL RIGHTS WITH
THOSE WHO REMAIN AT HOME.”
It does not follow that a system of Colonization must be
the best , (according to Earl Grey,) because in ten years it has
raised one million of money, and added 50,000 souls to the
population of New South Wales ; especially if it had been shewn
to be nineteen times worse as regards money, and ten times
worse as regards population, than the system of emigration to
the United States. Nor can the emigration to Canada be
the most desirable, when carried on at the cost, in one year, of
one million of money, and of thelivcs of from 15,000 to


16,000 emigrants. A system cannot be good where emi-
grants are sent out, “ ignoti inter se, diver sis manipulis, sine
rectore , sine affectihus mutius, quasi ex alio genere mortalium
repete in unum collecti , numeris magis quam colonial —
(Tac. An, xiv. 27.)
It is stated, in a Report issued by the Society for the Pro-
motion of Colonization, that “during the last two years, nearly
half a million of emigrants have left our shores; but the only
public provision (until recently) existing for moral or spiritual
superintendence on board ship, was an allowance, which Her
Majesty’s Emigration Commissioners were empowered to grant,
of Five Pounds to some one of the emigrants on board, who
might be considered capable of acting as Schoolmaster. This
was a very inadequate arrangement, even as regarded the
children on board, to whom alone it applied. Such a school-
master could scarcely command the necessary respect, even if
otherwise competently qualified, for the discharge of his duties.
The Surgeon, if willing and competent, is from pressure of other
duties, unable to attend to the moral interests of the emigrants.
The natural consequence has been, that notwithstanding the
best arrangements that can be made for the comfort and physical
well-being of emigrants, reports, two well authenticated, have
been received as to the low moral tone ordinarily prevailing
on board the ships, the evil results of which do not end with the
voyage, but affect the after-life of the emigrants, and the best
interests of the Colonies of which they become citizens.”
The Colonial Office system of Emigration is not that advo-
cated by the present Prime Minister on the 19th June, 1845.
He is then reported to have spoken (on the New Zealand ques-
tion) as follows:—“ I was of the same opinion Mr. Huskisson
once expressed, that these commercial Companies, formed in this
country, are highly useful for the purposes of Colonization.
There are many things Government cannot do of themselves,
as for instance, collecting emigrants, and placing them in
companies, and providing for their location in a colony:
these are things which can be much better done by a Company


than Government; and as it was my wish to see the Colony of
New Zealand fairly and prosperously settled, I endeavoured
to allay difficulties which had arisen, by some practical measure
to form such an agreement, that the Government on the one
hand, and the New Zealand Company on the other, might
both work for the benefit of the country , and at the same
time for the welfare of the people of New Zealand .”
This was happily effected: and can it with truth be said
that New Zealand has been successfully colonized by the
Colonial Office ? New Zealand was in fact founded in spite
of the Colonial Office system of emigration. That Depart-
ment, indeed, appointed two successive Governors, by whom
the Colony was well-nigh ruined. The misconduct was so
flagrant, the disasters so frightful, the appeals of the colonists
so unanswerable, that a more competent Governor was com-
pelled to be appointed, who, with the co-operation and extra-
ordinary energy of the colonists and the Company, has
restored, in some degree, that success which the busy meddling
of the Colonial Office had almost extinguished. It has been
vaunted also that South Australia, under the Colonial Office
direction has become “ one of the most flourishing colonies.”
But what are the facts ? On the 15th August, 1834, an Act
of Parliament was passed to empower His Majesty to erect
South Australia into a British province, and to provide for
the colonization and government thereof. Certain managers
were appointed to colonize this new settlement, but the
Governor, (the only officer in the province appointed by the
Colonial Office,) by his incautious expenditure, brought the
Colony to bankruptcy. It is true that Government then, but
not till then, afforded assistance; but it is equally true that
the present success of the Colony is entirely owing to so
much of the plan, and to such of the early settlers as survived
the disastrous and malignant endeavours of the Colonial Office
to mar the experiment.* {< Truth, after all, is the safest
* See “ Spectator r newspaper, July 29, 1848.


thing in public business.” It was without official aid that
the early colonists of North America laid the foundation of
what is now a great Republic. Their method involved the
emigration of communities with self-government.
A Roman colony was never established without a lex ple-
biscitum, or Senatus consultum —a fact which shows that a
Roman colony was never a mere body of adventurers, but a
regular organization by the parent State. When a law was
passed for founding a colony, persons were appointed to super-
intend its formation ( coloniam deducere). No Roman could
be sent to a colony without his free consent. The law fixed
the quantity of land that was to be distributed, and how much
was to be assigned to each person. Roman citizens who were
willing to go out as members of a colony, gave in their names
at Rome. The Colonia proceeded to the place of its desti-
nation, in the form of an army (mb vexillo). An urbs, if
one did not already exist, was a necessary part of a new
colony, and its limits were marked out with a plough. The
Colonia had also a territory marked out by metes and bounds.
Thus the urbs and territory of the Colonia corresponded to
those of Rome. Religious ceremonies always attended the
foundation of a colony, and the anniversary was afterwards
observed. New settlers ( novi adscripti ) might be sent to
occupy lands not already assigned. Indeed, it was not
unusual for a colony to receive additions ; and a colony might
be re-established, if it seemed necessary, from any cause. A
Colonia teas part of the Roman State, and it had a Respub-
lica. A Colonia civium Romanorurn must, as the term
itself implies, always have had the same rights which, as
citizens, they would have had at Rome.
In the old Roman colonies, the Romans were the populus,
and the old inhabitants the commonalty. These two bodies
may, in the course of years, have frequently formed one; but
there could be no political union between them till the old
inhabitants obtained the commercium et connubium , or in
other words, the civitas; and it is probable that among the


various causes which weakened the old Roman colonies, and
rendered new supplies of colonists necessary, one was the want
of loomen; for the children of a Roman were not Roman
citizens unless the wife was a Roman, or unless she belonged
to a people with whom there was a connubium.
It seems Sigonius (de antique Jure Italics) is in error in
supposing that Roman citizens, by becoming members of a
Roman colony, lost the suffragium et honores, and did not
obtain them till after the passing of the Julian law. With
respect to the internal constitution of a Colonia, it may be
observed, that in later times of the Republic, the Roman
State consisted of two distinct organised parts —Italy and the
Provinces. Italy consisted of a great number of republics,
(in the Roman sense of the term,) whose citizens, after the
Italian war, became members of the Sovereign People. The
communities of these citizens were subjects of the Roman
people, yet the internal administration of the communities
belonged to themselves. This free municipal constitution was
the fundamental characteristic of Italy. As in Rome, so in
the Colonies, the popular assemblies had the sovereign power;
—they chose magistrates, and could make laws. When the
popular Assemblies became a mere form in Rome, and the
elections were transferred by Tiberius to the Senate, the
same thing happened in the Colonies, whose Senates then
possessed whatever power once belonged to the community.
Such was Roman Colonization ; —a system differing widely
from that of Downing Street, but offering many important
points for imitation; —a better system, with some slight
alterations, and especially with reference to a more ample
supply of females, (though the issue follow the father, and not
the mother, by the English law,) could not perhaps be easily
devised.
Although Colonization will always afford an advanta-
geous outlet for a populous nation, it may be well not to
resort to it until remunerating labour be absorbed, by all
proper means, at home. Lord Bacon gave good counsel


when he said, “ Kingdoms would be much improved by drain-
ing of drowned lands, and gaining that in from the over-
flowing of salt waters, and the sea, and from fresh water also;
and many of those grounds would be exceedingly fit for dairies,
which being well housewived, are exceedingly commodious.
Much good land might be gained from forests and chases, so
as always there be a due care taken that the poor commoners
have no injury by such improvement .” Still there will be a
surplus population, and there are, and must be, multitudes to
whom Colonization may be made available as a resource from
poverty at home, and as the means of benefiting themselves,
their families, and their country, in distant lands. “ But,” (says
Lord Bacon, with regard to colonization,) “ Cram not in
people to a colony too fast, company after company, but
rather hearken how they may waste, and send supplies pro-
portionately, but so as the number may live well in the plan-
tation, and not by surcharge be in penury.” In planting
colonies also, “ the buildings ” (Lord Bacon tells us) “ should
be altogether in towns, to be compounded as well of husband-
ries as of seats : for when men come into a country vast, and
void all things necessary for the use of man’s life, if they set
up together in a place, one of them will the better supply
the wants of the others. Workfolks of all sorts will be the
more continually on work without loss of time; when, if work
fail in one place, they may have it fast by. The ways will be
made more passable for carriages to these seats, or towns,
than they can be to a number of dispersed solitary places ;
and infinite other helps will ensue in the vicinity and society
of people.”
If a Parliamentary enquiry were to be immediately insti-
tuted, not only into Colonization as a remedy for Ireland, but
also into the best mode of Colonization ; and how far it might
generally be made a useful and available outlet for a re-
dundant population, and for the relief of pauperism,—great
benefit might ensue. As it is, perhaps the Roman system of
Colonization (supplying some obvious defects) is the best


theoretical model; but in later times no better practical plan
seems to have been adopted than Colonization, not by Govern-
ment alone, but by commercial Companies, with the assistance,
and under the sanction of Government. The Roman plan,
however, if adopted by the commercial Companies with the
assent of Government, would by a species of military organi-
zation, establish what is very desirable in the Colonies—
combination of labour; and that degree of more immediate
control, which (it may be asserted from long colonial experi-
ence) is much needed on the landing and location of emi-
grants, especially when of that description which may be
expected from a redundant population.
The relief of pauperism, and the burdens it imposes, might
possibly be accomplished (under an Act of Parliament) by
grants of land in the Colonies to incorporated Committees,
(consisting of the Chairmen of the Boards of Guardians of
the several Poor Law Unions in each county,) such grants
being proportioned to the population thus represented.
Each Committee to have the power to sell (with the excep-
tion of proper reserved sections for those willing to emigrate)
certain portions of the land so granted from time to time, in
order to raise a fund in aid of emigration. Such Committees
also might be empowered to contract for the hire of the
services (for a given period, not exceeding years) of
all those who may be desirous to emigrate, but who have not
the means, with any authorised Colonial and Government
Agents , (and incorporated commercial Companies formed for
promoting Colonization might become such Agents,) stipulating
in such Contracts, that after making proper provision for the
due maintenance, clothing, and a reasonable pecuniary allow-
ance, the residue of the computed value of the emigrants’
services, not exceeding £—, should be applied in discharging
the costs of the voyage and future location.
Authenticated copies of the Contract to be registered with
the Clerk of the Peace of each county, and the Government
Secretary of the Colony to which the emigrants’ services are


transferred. Such copies to be received in evidence ; and the
breach of contract by the employer, with whom the emigrant
may be placed, or by the emigrant himself, to be deemed a
misdemeanour. It would be presumptuous to do more than
throw out these hints for consideration.
Colonization, to be successful, must be fostered by kindly
treatment of the colonists by the parent State, always remem-
bering that the colonists have , or ought to have, equal rights
and privileges with their fellow-subjects that remain at home.
There are two points involved in British Colonization, which
must not be passed over without brief notice :• —Ist. The right
to the soil; and 2ndly, Care for the natives where the country
is previously inhabited.
With regard to the first point, discovery, coupled with
possession, confers upon the Crown all vacant lands, and
the right of pre-emption of such lands as may be usefully
occupied and enjoyed by the aboriginals. By the Civil
List Acts of King William IV. and of Her present Ma-
jesty, any casual revenue arising, either in their Majesties’
foreign possessions or in the United Kingdom, are
placed at the disposal of Parliament, in consideration of
the Grant for the Civil List. It would seem then that all
revenue derivable from the waste lands in the Colonies has
been surrendered to Parliament. But, were it otherwise, can
the Crown, according to the broad principles of the British
Constitution, be permitted to raise large sums of money and
appropriate them at pleasure, without the concurrence of the
British Parliament. If not, what course ought to be taken
where millions have been raised and spent by a Colonial
Minister on his own authority ? and what security (especially
remembering the resumption of the grants of the Irish for-
feited estates in the reign of William HI., and the discussion
of the Crown’s inability to alienate any portion of its heredi-
tary revenue which that measure occasioned) can the
grantees of waste lands in the Colonies, or those claiming
under them, where there has been no Act of Parliament , feel


in the validity of their titles ? If then any such doubts exist,
would it not be desirable to have the question settled by an
Act of Parliament? for who would become a colonist, if
the tenure of the land he may purchase be in any wise
doubtful ?
Secondly, as to the aborigines, their state has been the subject
of Parliamentary enquiry; but Ido not find their condition
to have been ameliorated. The Caribs at Trinidad, under
the care of the Colonial Office, rapidly decreased. Much was
urged in favour of the New Zealanders and their rights—
rights indeed possessed in an equal degree by the natives of
New Holland, but which those who were so loud in favour of
the New Zealanders being proprietors of the soil of those
islands, never condescended to notice with reference to the
aborigines of Australia. The Petition to Parliament of the New
Zealand Company, presented on the 16th April, 1845, sect. 22,
states as follows:— u We have sought in vain in the acts of
Government for any plan in the improvement of the natives,
or any evidence of a wise care for their interests.”
To excite a real sympathy between the colonist and the
native, the New Zealand Company interspersed reserves for the
natives section by section, among the settlements of the
colonists; thus devising the wisest and best plan ever yet
conceived for the benefit of the aboriginal races among which
our colonization is established, but it found no favour with
the Colonial Office. Justice requires every care for the
civilization and religious improvement of the aborigines,
wherever colonization is attempted.
Keeping what has been said in mind, the mention of some
passages in the history of the British Colonies, and comparing
them with more recent events, may not be unprofitable.
The early British settlements in North America have already
been alluded to, as examples of Colonies acquired by occu-
pancy. These Colonies were settled in the beginning by
private enterprise. The establishment of many of them may
be dated from the reign of James I.—a reign memorable at


home for the marked change that had taken place in the
public mind respecting the then prevailing usages ; for the
declining influence of the Crown and of the aristocracy, and
the growing power of the people; and thus bearing a strong
resemblance to the present time. Elizabeth, indeed, had pre-
viously given a name to Virginia, and planted a feeble colony
along its shores; but it remained for her successor, in spite
of numerous reverses, to secure the foundation of those im-
portant settlements. The same defects and imperfections in
individual life which render families and polities necessary,
render necessary also the formation within the polity of Cor-
porations, or bodies of citizens incorporated by supreme autho-
rity, (not as in Australia, by the sole act of the Governor of
a Colony,) for various purposes, and more especially for self-
government; possessing the advantage of individual life in
unity and consistency of action, and exempted from its dis-
advantages by the united counsels and collective interests of
many, and especially by a species of immortality, for Corpo-
rations never die. These institutions are more essential in
distant parts of the empire, where the sovereign power cannot
be directly and immediately exercised. Charters therefore
were given to our North American settlements, similar per-
haps to our Municipal Charters, but expanded afterwards
with the expansion of the Colonies, into Assemblies, making
Acts of all sorts, and in all cases whatsoever.
The first Charter of Massachusets was granted in 1629. In
1632, the Lords of the Privy Council of Charles I. appointed
a Committee of nine members of that body to take cognizance
of Colonial matters. As many settlements in New England
had been planted without the direction or participation of the
English Government, there were not wanting those who in
the reign of Charles 11. pretended to doubt their constitu-
tional dependence on the Crown of England, and it was
recommended that the King should appoint Governors, and
so make them Colonies ; or in other words, Plantations, with
Governors and Civil Establishments subordinate to the mother


country. In 1670, Charles 11. constituted a special and
select Council for Foreign Plantations, and for promoting the
welfare and preserving the flourishing state of the Colonies.
“This Board,” (said Mr. Burke, speech on Economical
Reform,) “ has had both its formation and its regeneration in
a job. In a job it was conceived, and in a job its mother
brought it forth. It made one of those showy and specious
impositions which one of the experiment-making Adminis-
trations of Charles 11. held out to delude the people, and to
be substituted in the place of real service which they might
expect from a Parliament annually sitting. It was intended,
also to corrupt that body whenever it should be permitted to
sit.” It was projected in 1668, and died in 1673. It was
revived as a political manoeuvre in 1696. It has never been
of any use to the Colonies as Colonies. The two Colonies
which owed their origin to it, Georgia and Nova Scotia, (like
South Australia and New Zealand at the present day, so far
as they have been interfered with by the Colonial Office,)
suffered from the contagion. And yet Earl Grey had recourse
to this Board to assist him in the labours of the Colonial
Office, declaring in his letter of the 12th April, 1848, “ that he
had suggested no innovation, but rather a return, as nearly as
possible, to the mode of action contemplated on the original
appointment of the Board of Plantations.” That mode of
action has been sufficiently described by Mr. Burke. Could
Lord Grey have been ignorant of the celebrated speech on
Economical Reform when his letter written? —a speech
which history declares placed its author not merely in the
first rank of orators, but also in the very first rank of practical
statesmen.
In the year 1698, soon after the new birth of this notorious
Board of Trade and Plantations, a plan was suggested for the
establishment of a Colony on the Isthmus of Darien, where an
advantageous trade (it was supposed) might be carried on in
both oceans. A body of upwards of 1,200 Scotchmen went
out and settled there. The Colony, at first countenanced by


the Crown, was afterwards suddenly denounced. The pro-
vision ships commissioned to carry supplies to the adventurers
were stopped : many of the settlers perished from hunger,
and the rest on their return, filled Scotland with their com-
plaints.
At the peace of Paris, 1763, inconsequence of the Treaty
on which that peace was founded, the British sway extended
from the Mississippi to the furthest point of Labrador,
and the British North American Colonies were, by the
cessions and provisions of that Treaty, left safe from any
foreign foe. On the 10th March, 1764, Mr. George
Grenville brought forward his resolutions in the House of
Commons for imposing new duties on foreign goods imported
by the Americans. On the 22nd March, 1765, the fatal
Stamp Act was passed. To this Act the American colonists
refused submission, and denied the right to tax them while
unrepresented in the British Parliament, and therefore
without their consent.
This gave rise to disturbances in the Colonies ; disturbances
alluded to in the Speech from the Throne at the meeting of
Parliament on the 14th January, 1766, and which drew from
the great Lord Chatham (then Mr. Pitt) the memorable
declaration, “ That the colonists were subjects of this kingdom,
equally entitled with ourselves to all the natural rights of
mankind, and the peculiar privileges of Englishmen —equally
bound by its laws, and equally participating in the Constitution
of this free country .” He denied the right of taxing the
colonists without actual Representation, and ridiculed the idea
of virtual representation, which had been urged. This scheme
of taxing the American colonists without their consent,
also eloquently reprobated by that great constitutional lawyer,
Lord Camden. (See his Speech in “ Gentleman’s Magazine.”)
All this, it might have been supposed, would not easily have
been forgotten by the Minister of the Crown, to whom the
administration of the affairs of our remaining Colonies is
entrusted. Yet we find the New Zealand Company, in their


Petition to Parliament, of the 16th April, 1845, complaining
“that New Zealand, though from the first an unmixed and
untainted community of free and enterprising Englishmen,
had been subject to the same arbitrary government, (govern-
ment without representation ,) lavish expenditure, and burden-
some taxation, which had been imposed on our Convict
Colonies.” Perhaps the strongest instance on record of
arbitrary taxation and Colonial Office injustice, was brought
to light in the House of Commons, 17th June, 1845. It was
the sanction by the then Secretary of State for the Colonies,
in his letter to the Governor of New Zealand, of the 13th
August, 1844, of a tax of 2d. per acre on all land. “It is
of course ” (says the letter) “ intended that the tax shall apply
to all lands claimed as the property of the native tribes, and
not in actual cultivation; and I presume it is contemplated
that non-payment of the tax should be followed by confiscation
of a portion of the lands equivalent to the tax unpaid.” The
Legislature of New Zealand consisted of a Governor and
Council appointed hy the Crown; the natives were not in any
wise represented, though they had been deemed competent to
enter into the celebrated Treaty of Waitangi; and yet a tax
was to be imposed without their consent —a tax which it was
foreseen would not he paid , and would lead to a confiscation
of their lands.
il The Colonial Secretary (it was said in the debate on New
Zealand, 17th June, 1845) loudly declares that the whole
land is the native’s, and that he (the Colonial Secretary) will
protect him in it against all attempts to take it from him ; and
he tips the Governor the wink, and says slyly, ‘Clap on the
land tax, and you will get the whole in a few years.’ ” Well
might this be termed a dishonest mode of attempting to obtain
the land, and of violating secretly and by stealth, a Treaty,
(that of Waitangi,) because they (the Colonial Department)
did not dare openly and honestly to renounce it.
British Guiana, a Crown Colony, comprising Demerara,
Essequibo, and Berbice, was captured from the Dutch in


September 1803. It does not yet enjoy a Representative
Government.
The “ Spectator ” newspaper, of the 18th November, 1848,
under the title of “ The Boston Riots imitated,” says,
“ British Guiana is in a state of financial revolt against the
Government, and public affairs are administered through a
Provisional Government apparently appointed by Earl Grey.
Though this state of the case is not recognised in terms, it is
so. The last of the Boston rioters has just died, but not
before he has seen another Colony justly refuse to pay taxes;
and another Government, —composed of Whig ministers !
doggedly attempting to enforce the levying imposts. No
explaining away, —no accounting for the mode in which the
quarrel began,—no pleading of stipulated bargains,—can get
rid of the substantial facts. British Guiana and the British
Government are in dispute on broad questions of financial
policy, and national justice; and if the issue is narrowed for
the moment to the question of the Governor’s salary, the other
great questions remain. The Colony has been unjustly
treated; it resents the bad treatment, but in a constitutional
manner. Lord Grey employs the power entrusted to him by
the British Cabinet, to follow up and enforce injustice, with a
tyranny that exceeds the bounds of the Constitution. If
British Guiana were an English county , he would be im-
peached.”
In the House of Commons, on the 16th April, 1849, it
was asserted, and not attempted to be denied, “that the two
causes which tended principally to light the flame in America,
were samples of injustice and folly which are now copied
to the letter in some of our Colonies. The one was the
attempt to levy taxes without the consent of the colonists,
which is now done annually to the amount of £BI,OOO in New
South Wales, and many other Colonies, by means of an
enormous Civil List. The same system which was en-
deavoured to be enforceddn our former Colonies without their
consent, is at the present time adopted towards New South


Wales, the Mauritius, Jamaica, and other Colonies, for they
are taxed with a heavy Civil List against their consent.
I presented on the 26th of last month, several Petitions
against similar attempted invasions of rights.” ( See Speech
of the Hon. Francis Scott , on moving for Colonial Inquiry .)
The other cause was altering their Constitutions without their
concurrence, and against their desire.
On the 18th March, 1766, the Stamp Act was repealed;
but it was accompanied by what is known as “ The Decla-
ratory Act,” (6 Geo. 111., c. 12,) setting forth the Supreme
Right and Sovereignty of Great Britain, —an Act which
found no acceptance with the colonists. Notwithstanding
the failure of the Stamp Act, on the 25th June, 1767, an Act
was passed for imposing duties in the North American
Colonies, on glass, paper, painters’ colours, and tea. Another
Act was passed, by which these duties, and all other duties
and customs in the American Colonies, were put under the
direction of the King’s Resident Commissioners ; and a third
Bill also, which prohibited the Governor and Council, and
Assembly of New York, from passing any Legislative Act
whatsoever until satisfaction should be given to the Commis-
sioners of Customs, and the troops, (who had been roughly
handled in attempting to enforce the new duties,) and should
submit to the (so-called) Mutiny Act.
In the midst of these dissensions, towards the close of the
year 1767, the Earl of Hillsborough was appointed third
Secretary of State, —“ Secretary for War and Colonies,” —a
new office, devoted exclusively to American affairs, required,
it was said, “by the importance of the Colonies , and the
increasing difficulty of managing them.” It was the esta-
blishment (says an excellent writer*) of an office in London
for the express purpose of administering the central
system, which has almost extinguished the ancient and most
* Mr. Wakefield.


valuable Colonial municipal institutions; —extinguished, in
fact, the vital principle of self-government.
In the King’s Speech on the opening of Parliament, on the
Bth November, 1768, fresh troubles in America were alluded
to, and the rebellious spirit which prevailed in Massachusets
Bay, strongly denounced. In 1769, Committees were ap-
pointed by both Houses of Parliament to examine and report
upon papers relating to American affairs, submitted by the
Crown. When, however, on the 16th April, 1849, the Hon.
Francis Scott moved for a Select Committee to enquire into the
political and financial relations between Great Britain and
her dependencies, with a view to notice the charges on the
British Treasury, and to enlarge the functions of the Colonial
Legislatures; he was successfully opposed by Mr. Under-
secretary Hawes, on the ground, “ that a Committee to en-
quire into the political and financial relations of our forty-three
Colonies, was a duty beyond the grasp of any Committee, and
the termination of which no Member of the present Parlia-
ment could hope to see.” And yet Mr. Under-Secretary
Hawes does not consider all this beyond the grasp of intellect
of two persons only —viz., of Lord Grey, and of himself!
More extensive enquiry was not without precedent. Mr.
Hawes should have remembered that Lord Rockingham’s
motion on the 22nd January, 1770, “ to take into considera-
tion the state of the nation,” which involved all our then
existing differences with the American Colonies, and their
constitutional and fiscal rights a subject of infinitely
greater extent than the enquiry sought for by Mr. Scott, was
actually acceded to, having obtained the support of that great
statesman, Lord Chatham. There are too, numerous instances
in more recent times, of much more extensive enquiry being
granted, and entered into with great advantage to the public.
Enquiry, indeed, is seldom shunned, but by those who fear ex-
posure. The deprivation of New York of its legislative
faculties, unless the conditions already mentioned were com-
plied with, was the result of the opposition of that body to


sanction what was called the Mutiny Bill, or more properly
a Bill for granting and better providing for the troops at the
expense of the Colonies, whereby it was intended to give a
power of billetting on private houses, as was done in war. This
suspending Act, and the arrival at Boston of the newly-formed
Board of Commissioners for enforcing the new duties, fanned
the Colonies into a flame. The colonists read in the preamble
of this Act for the imposition of new duties, that the duties
were laid “ for the better support of the Government and the
administration of the Coloniesand they detected a clause
in the Bill, which seemed to enable the King, by sign manual,
to establish a general Civil List , with salaries, pensions, &c.
&c., in every province in North America. The Colonies
instantly resisted, and insisted that the establishment of any
Civil List in America , independent of the Assemblies, was
altogether illegal. And is not this precisely what our
Colonies are at present resisting ? that against which petitions
have been represented, and declarations made in the House of
Commons, even so recently as the last Session ?
On the 15th February, 1768, the Assembly of Massa-
chusets, acting on a previous resolution, caused a circular
letter to be addressed to all the other Colonies, inviting them
to combine and defeat the obnoxious Act for the imposition of
new duties. It was readily responded to, and warmly adopted.
In April 1768, the Secretary of State for the Colonies in-
structed the Governor of Massachusets, in the King’s name,
to order the House of Assembly to rescind the resolution on
which the circular was founded, and to declare their disappro-
bation of that rash and hasty proceeding. The answer was, —
“ That if the votes of the House were to be controlled by the
direction of a Minister, there was left but a vain semblance of
liberty.” The House would, not rescind. Have there been
no attempts by the present Colonial Minister to coerce the
local Colonial legislatures, those of Guiana and Jamaica for
instance, to comply with his demands for Civil Lists, which
the ruined condition of the colonists disabled them from pro-


viding ? Riots ensued ; an armed force was sent to Boston;
and the Assembly of Massachusets in consequence declared,
“ That the use of military power to enforce the execution of
the laws was inconsistent with the spirit of a free Con-
stitution and they afterwards voted, (which the present
Ministry, as well as Mr. Cobden and his friends, will do well
to remember, “ That the establishment of a standing army in
the Colony in time of peace, is an invasion of natural rights.”
“ That a standing army is not known as part of the British
Constitution ; that sending an armed force into the Colony,
under pretence of assisting the Civil Authority, is highly
dangerous to the people, unprecedented, and unconstitutional.”
In May 1769, the Secretary of State wrote a circular letter
to the Colonies, stating that in the next Session the duties
imposed on glass, paper, and painters’ colours, would be taken
off", as contrary to the true principles of commerce ; and they
were accordingly repealed, but the duty on tea was permitted
to remain. The notice of the repeal of the other duties was
therefore received in the Colonies without satisfaction.
In the vacillating course pursued in the enactment and
repeal of the Stamp Act, the imposition and revocation of the
other duties, save that of tea; is there no similarity to the
changeable policy of the Colonial Minister of the present day ?
Take for example the Despatch respecting the social condition
of Canada (what is it just now?) sent out and revoked within
a month. The Constitution for New Zealand, sent out and
recalled within the year. Transportation to Van Diemen’s
Land, adopted, abandoned, resumed, again abandoned, and
again to be resumed in an altered form, —to say nothing of
that protection to the commerce of the Colonies, which was
only granted to be suddenly and ruinously revoked. Is history
merely an old almanac ? Is it no longer philosophy teaching
by example ?
On the 19th April, 1774, a notice with a view to the
total repeal of the ill-fated tea duty, gave rise to Mr. Burke’s
memorable speech on American Taxation. He strongly ad-


vocated the abolition of that impost; and said, “ Nothing in
the world could be so awful and instructive a lesson as the
conduct of the Ministry in this business, upon the mischief of
not having large and liberal ideas on the management of
great affairs. Never have the servants of the State looked
at the whole of your complicated interests in one connected
view. They have taken things by bits and scraps; some at
one time and one pretence, and some at another, just as they
pressed, without any regard to their relations or dependencies.
They never had any kind of system, right or wrong ; but only
invented occasionally some miserable tale for the day, in order
meanly to sneak out of difficulties into which they had proudly
strutted; and they were put to all their shifts and devices,
full of meanness and full of mischief, in order to pilfer
piecemeal the repeal of an Act which they had not the
generous courage, when they found and felt their error,
honorably and fairly to disclaim.” And is this not applicable
to the more recent administration of Colonial affairs? Take,
as example, the attempt, already mentioned, to impose 2d. an
acre as a tax on the lands of the natives of New Zealand, in
order to obtain those lands by confiscation, for non-payment
of the tax; and thus violating, secretly and by stealth, the
Treaty of Waitangi, which they did not dare openly and
honestly to renounce. Then there was the New Zealand
Government Bill, so pompously announced in Lord Grey’s
Despatch of the 28th December, 1846, to the Governor of that
Colony, and the Bill for the suspension of this Act brought
in and passed the very next Session. The attempt to enforce
the tea duty, and to take the payment of the Judges and
Governors out of the hands of the Houses of Assembly, ex-
cited the North American Colonies. We have seen what
has of late been the effect in Guiana and Jamaica, regarding
the salaries of the Governors and other officials—to declare,
u That it was destructive of their Charters and liberties to
make the Governors and Judges wholly independent of the
people, and wholly dependent on the Crown.”


The people of Boston put forth a manifesto, whereby “ they
denied the right of Parliament to legislate for the Colonies
(it will be recollected that the colonists were not represented
in the British Parliament) in any matter whatsoever:”
they denounced the Declaratory Act passed in 1766, and
charged the British Ministry with designing to complete a
system of slavery begun in the British House of Commons.
On the 31st March, 1774, a Bill (the Boston Post Bill, as
it was called) was passed to remove the Customs, Courts of
Justice, and all Government offices, from Boston to New
Salem. We have seen in more modern times the removal of
the Government in Canada to Montreal; and a removal thence
to Toronto, in consequence of very recent untoward events,
has been reported to be in contemplation.
The improper selection of the seat of Government in New
Zealand, and the very questionable proceedings to which this
is said to have given rise, may be seen in the 19th section of
the Petition of the New Zealand Company, presented to the
House of Commons on the 16th April, 1845.
On the 20th May, 1774, an Act of Parliament was made for
the better regulating the government of the province of Massa-
chusets Bay. The purport of the Bill was to alter the Constitu-
tion of that province as it stood upon the Charter of William III.;
to do away with some of those popular elections which
decided everything in that province; to take the Executive
power off the hands of the democratic party; and to vest the
nomination of the Members of Council, of the Judges, of the
Magistrates of all kinds, including the Sheriffs, in the Crown,
and in some cases in the Governor. On the 15th April,
1774, an Act of Parliament passed for enabling the Governor
to send any person questioned for any act done in the execu-
tion of the laws, or in suppressing tumults or riots, to any
other Colony, or to England, incase it appeared he could not
have a fair trial where he was. On the debate on this Bill
Ministers were told “ that the nation was running headlong to
ruin.” Next came the Quebec Bill, which passed into a law


on the 22nd June, 1775. Its objects were to ascertain the
limits of the Colony; to form a Legislative Council for all the
affairs of the province except taxation , appointed and re-
movable by the Crown , to which Romanists should be eli-
gible ; to establish the existing French laws in civil cases, and
the English laws, with trial by jury, in criminal cases; and to
secure to the Romanist clergy the legal possession of their
lands and tithes in their own communities, or from all those
who professed the Roman Catholic religion. The Bill was
opposed in the House of Commons, where it was said, “ that
if it were not the proper time to give Canada an Assembly
like those in the other American Colonies, it was better to
let the Governor be absolute, be without a Council, and be
responsible.” But there were here seventeen or eighteen gen-
tlemen who might be removed or suspended by the Governor,
so that if any act of oppression should come from the Crown,
they might serve as a screen for the Governor. On the point of
religion, Lord North said, “ that Great Britain would not per-
mit any bishop to be there under any Papal authority “ It
is expressly forbidden,” said he, “ by the Act of Supremacy .”
Mr. Dunning said, “My opinion of toleration is, that
nothing can be more impolitic than to give establishment to
that religion which is not the religion of the country.”
Governor Johnstone said, “ a great maxim to be learnt from the
history of Colonization is, Let men manage their own affairs;
they will do it better on the spot, than those at a distance can
possibly do it for them.” In September 1774, a Congress of
Delegates of all the American Colonies, from Massachusets
to Saint Carolina, inclusive, was opened at Philadelphia (a
somewhat similar meeting has been very lately held at Kingston
in Canada). They agreed upon a Declaration of Rights, to
which they said they were entitled by the immutable laws of
nature, the principles of the British Constitution, and their
several Charters or compacts. On the Ist February, 1775,
* What is the case in Ireland, and in the Colonies, just now?


Lord Chatham brought forward his plan (in many respects
a very good one) for settling the troubles in America.
Passing over the Acts for the restriction of the trade of the
Colonies, we come to Lord North’s resolutions of the 20th
February, 1775, to forbear American taxation upon certain
conditions, except for the regulation of commerce, which in
fact brought the question to “ revenue or no revenue.”
These resolutions, it was hoped, “ would separate the grain
from the chaff,” and disunite the colonists. In the course of
these discussions, (Anno 1775,) Ministers were accused of im-
parting garbled intelligence , and supressing many documents
which they had received; and they at last found themselves
compelled to lay before the House a Petition and Memorial
from Jamaica, (a singular coincidence with Parliamentary
proceedings of no very distant date,) on which evidence was
taken, and the danger of the loss of our West Indian Colo-
nies fully demonstrated.* On the 22nd March, 1775,
Mr. Burke brought forward his resolutions for conciliation
with the American Colonies. “It would be expected,”
(he said,) “ that those who had been active in such affairs
should shew they had formed some clear and decided idea of
Colony government, and were capable of drawing out some-
thing like a platform of the grounds which might be laid for
future and permanent tranquillity.” This was also expected
from the Administration formed by Lord John Russell, and
over which he now presides. Among other topics, Mr. Burke
alluded to “ the wise policy of inviting people to fixed esta-
blishments ; of throwing each tract of land, as it was peopled,
into districts, that the ruling power should never be totally out
of sight; of settling all we could, and carefully attending every
settlement with Government.” - !' He said “ the colonists com-
* It is said, in a very recent periodical publication, thg,t the Petitions
from the Government and Legislature of Canada, against the late repeal of
the Corn Laws, were kept and concealed for the sake of misrepresentation,!
Can it be so? —See Blackwood's Magazine, October 1849.
f As to this, see the plan adopted by the New Zealand Company.


plained they were taxed in a Parliament in which they were
not represented .” He had previously asked, (in his speech
on American Taxation,) “If because Manchester and other
considerable English towns were not (then) represented,
was America to have no Representatives at all ?” “ When
these children of ours ” (said he) “ wish to assimilate to their
parent, and to reflect with true filial resemblance the beaute-
ous countenance of British liberty, Are we to turn to them
the shameful parts of our Constitution ? Are we to give them
our weakness for their strength, —our opprobium for their
glory, —or the slough of slavery which we are not able to
work off, to serve them for their freedom ? ” It was the
opinion of that great, and wise, and philosophic statesman, that
the people of the Colonies should participate in the Constitu-
tion—Wales, Chester, and Durham were brought forward
as precedents; and he deemed the impracticability of the
colonists being represented in the British Parliament merely
to rest on separation by the eternal barrier of the boundless
ocean. “As I meddle with no theory,” (he added,) “I do
not absolutely assert the impracticability of such a Representa-
tion.” Steam has now removed it; but even before “ steam,”
Dr. Franklin, in a letter to Lord Karnes, acknowledged “ that
there was a time when the colonists would have been pleased
with having Representatives in the Imperial Parliament
rightly saying “ that Parliament cannot wisely make laws
suited to the Colonies , without being wisely and truly in-
formed of their circumstances, ability, and temper ; and this
cannot be done without Representation .” Adam Smith also
told us, during the American war, “ that if Great Britain
should allow such a number of Representatives, as suited the
proportion of what each colony should contribute to the
public revenue of the Empire, a new method of acquiring
importance, —a new and more dazzling object of ambition,
would be presented to the leading men of each Colony,”
Mr. Burke proposed, as a resolution of the House—first,
“ That the Colonies were not represented in Parliament; se-


condly, That they had notwithstanding often been prejudicially
taxed.” It is unnecessary to enumerate the subsequent reso-
lutions. “Be it once understood,” (said Mr. Burke,) “ that
your Government may be one thing, and the privileges of
colonists another: the cement which binds you to each other
is gone,—the cohesion is loosened, —and everything hastens to
decay and dissolution. As long as you have the wisdom to
keep the Sovereign Authority of this country the sanctuary of
liberty, the sacred temple consecrated to our common faith:
wherever the chosen race and sons of England worship
freedom, they will turn their faces towards you. The moig__
they multiply, the more friends you will have.;
ardently they love liberty, the more perfect will be their
obedience.”
In May 1775, the Congress at Philadelphia formed the Plan
of a Confederation and general Union of “ The United States
of America Georgia subsequently acceded to Congress,
which then assumed the style of the “ Thirteen United
Colonies.” In November 1775, Lord Dartmouth, who had
succeeded Lord Hillsborough as Secretary of State for the
Colonies, was promoted to the Keepership of the Privy Seal,
and was succeeded as Colonial Secretary by Lord George
Germaine, who has been described as “ the proud, imperious,
unpopular Sackville —a man without honour or character,
obstinate without real ■firmness*- and haughty and. proud with-
out any real courage.” If this description be true, What
could be expected from any such man ? It is unnecessary to
dwell upon the unfortunate legislation for prohibiting all
commercial intercourse with America, and declaring the
Colonies in a state of war; or to notice the debates on what
was then deemed might be the issue of the warfare; or the sub-
sequent efforts in the British Parliament for reconciliation with
America. It suffices to say, that on the 4th July, 1776, it was
declared by the representatives of the United Colonies in
Congress assembled, “ that the United Colonies were, and
of right ought to be, free and independent States; absolved


from all connexion with the British Crown; that all political
connexion between them and Great Britain was, and ought
to be, totally dissolved; and that as free and independent
States they had full power to levy war, conclude peace, con-
tract alliances, establish commerce, and do all other acts and
things which independent States of right could do.’’
On the 30th May, 1777, Lord Chatham brought before
the House of Lords measures of conciliation, which were
rejected. Lord North’s conciliating plans—the one for re-
muting of American taxation, and the other for Commis-
sioners to consult and agree upon the means for quieting the
then existing disorders, were brought forward in February 1778,
and carried in both Houses of Parliament. On the 7th
April, 1778, Lord Chatham appeared in the House of Lords
for the last time, and on the Duke of Richmond’s motion for
withdrawing the forces from America, used these memorable
words:—“ I rejoice that the grave has not closed upon me,
that I am still alive to lift up my voice against the dis-
memberment of this ancient and most noble monarchy. I will
never consent to deprive the royal offspring of the House of
Brunswick of their fairest inheritance.” Those who are for
casting off the Colonies should remember this. On the 6th
February, 1778, a Treaty was entered into between France
and the United States of America.
On the 11th February, 1780, Mr. Burke introduced to the
House of Commons his very excellent plan of Economical
Reform. That portion of it which related to the sale of Crown
lands, especially if extended to thosein the Colonies, merits con-
sideration at the present day, with a view to its early application.
But what demands the most especial attention are the two
public offices which, by this plan, that great statesman pro-
posed to abolish, of which he spoke in the following terms:—
“ There are but two offices, which are properly State offices,
that I have a desire to reform. The first is the new office of
Third Secretary of State, which is commonly called { Secretary,
of State forthe Colonies.’ The history of this office is too
41
ABOLITION OF THE COLONIAL OFFICE.


recent to suffer us to forget that it was made for the mere con-
venience of the arrangement of political intrigue, and not for
the service of the State ; it was made in order to give a colour
to the exorbitant increase of the Civil List; and in the same
act, to bring a new accession to the loaded compost heap of
corrupt influence. There is another office, which not long
since was closely connected with this of the American Secre-
tary, but has been lately separated from it for the very same
purpose for which it had been conjoined; (it appears from
Earl Grey’s letter of the 12th April, 1848, to have been
again conjoined ;) I mean the sole purpose for which all the
separations and all the conjunctions have been lately made—
a job ; I speak of the ‘ Board of Trade and Plantations.’ It
is a Board, which if not mischevious, is of no use at all.
Commerce, the principal object of that office, flourishes most
when it is left to itself.” The speech itself must be read,
duly to appreciate the worse than inutility of the two offices
thus proposed to be abolished.
The abolition of the Board of Trade and Plantations, with
a saving of £6,000 per annum to the country, was for a time
effected. The very intimate connexion between the Colonial
Office and the Board of Trade, renders many observations
with reference to one equally applicable to the other. At
present, however, the Board of Trade seems ancillary to the
office of Secretary of State for the Colonies.
With regard to the Colonial Department, it was declared
in the House of Commons, on the 17th June, 1845,_by the
lamented Representative of Liskeard, subsequently a member
of Your Lordship’s Ministry, “ That the system of the Colonial
Office was one which invests their functionaries with a degree
of arbitrary and irresponsible power unknown in any other
department of our Administration and again he said,
speaking of what he termed the war which the Colonial
Office had carried on against the Colony of New Zealand,
“ What enemy of the British name and race could—what.
civilized enemy would, have brought such ruin on a British-


Colony ? Yet this is the work of your Colonial Office,,
animated by an unrelenting animosity to a colonization begun
in opposition to its narrow views, and effecting its purpose by
a Commissioner of Land Claims —a rival seat of Government.
and a reckless tampering with the wild passions of a savage
rags.”
The present Governor of British Guiana, then Member for
Leominster, declared the Colonial Administration destitute of
a comprehensive system of Colonial policy. “ The Colonies
send no Representatives ” (he said) “ to this Assembly .”
Then the present Under-Secretary for the Colonial Depart-
ment, not at the time indeed in office, on the 18th June,
1845, when speaking on the New Zealand question, said,
“The Colonial Office had made a great colonial blunder; —
the miserable and narrow policy that had been pursued, had
led to that state of affairs which the papers before the House
declared. The course pursued by the Colonial Office was
one of vacillation and weakness , which had endangered, if not
ruined, all interests. He had been one of the original Asso-
ciation.” On the 16th April, 1849, Mr. Under-Secretary
Hawes emphatically denied having been a “Director.” It
seems he was only one of the original Association for colo-
nizing New Zealand, and not a Director of the New Zealand
Company, Mr. Under-Secretary Hawes, in the New Zealand
debate, also expressed himself as follows: —“ The Company
was, in fact, a valuable instrument of Colonial government.
Let the House look to the origin of all the great Colonies
springing from this country. The old Colonies of America
were Charter Colonies ; they had great and independent
powers ; —powers of taxation; of making all appointments : in
fact, they were constituted self-governing Colonies. Look
at the results; they were founded on freedom, and only lost
when that freedom was interfered with. Look at India.
There again large governing powers were delegated to the
East India Company. The results again proved the wisdom
of the policy pursued ; it cost the mother country nothing, but


on the contrary, contributed' to its wealth and importance.
Then again look to Canada and the West Indies, where Crown
and Colonial Office management prevailed. We had but
recently, in the case of Canada , a rebellion; and in the case
of the West Indies, constant trouble and constant expense.
Surely this mere allusion to our Colonial history was full of
matter for reflection. The future history of New Zealand
would either resemble that of Canada, or in prosperity that
of the American Colonies, just as toe governed upon the
principles of the Colonial Office , with its constant interfering
and meddling , or entrusted powers of government to local
Authority , to be guided by local , and not by party interests at
home The remedy would be “ Municipal Institutions and
Representative Government.”
Speaking of the powers proposed to be given to the Governor,
Mr. Hawes said “ this was to make him a dictator. He did
not object to this in the present state of the Colony. He (the
Governor) would be at least free from the laborious trifling
of the Colonial Office from its unstatesmanlike views and
instructions. Do what they would , they must emancipate
the Colony from the Colonial Office. . They must soon deter-
mine upon one of two courses: either begin to lay the founda-
tion of a system of Local Government; or the Colonies must
be represented in that House.” (Why not unite both ?) “ A
reform must take place in our Colonial Office. Individual
complaints were now often superciliously treated or neglected ,
especially when they interfered with the schemes and plans of
the Colonial Office. Nothing could so surely accelerate the
prosperity of the Colonies as their emancipation from the
hands of the Colonial Authorities at home , and then being
left as free agents to govern themselves , with as little inter-
ference from home as the political relations of the mother
country would permit .”
It is impossible to adduce stronger reasons in support of the
abolition of the Colonial Office, as proposed by Mr. Burke,
than those so ably urged by the present Under-Secretary for


that Department; except, perhaps, the very acts themselves in
which the Under-Secretary has himself participated since his
accession to office; seemingly opposing, in the strongest manner,
the sound and constitutional doctrines which he formerly
advocated. Notwithstanding the efforts made by Mr. Burke
for its abolition, the Colonial Office remained to witness the
recognition by Great Britain of the independence of the
British North American Colonies; and, if permitted to pursue
its present course without interruption, may shortly witness
the separation of all the Colonies belonging to England from
the British Crown.
“You have heard, no doubt,” (said Mr. Cobden at a meet-
ing held in December last, at Bradford,) “ lately of the
alarming accounts which have reached us from Canada, from
the Cape of Good Hope, and Australia, and you may probably
before long hear of similar accounts from the still more distant
colony of New Zealand. You have lately seen the manifesto
published from Canada, proclaiming great discontent on the
part of the people of Canada, and attributing their present
distress and discontent to the Free Trade measures which have
been lately passed in this country.” The accounts brought
by the West India mail to England in November last, pro-
claim the prevalent discontent in the British Colonies in that
quarter of the globe. Jamaica was still without a revenue ;
and riots of a very serious nature had broken out in Trinidad.
Assuredly the British Colonies were never in a more deplor-
able state.
One, and only one more example, shall be adduced, of past
events affording no warning to Government in the adminis-
tration of Colonial affairs. In the year 1794, the Crown of
Corsica was offered to the King of Great Britain, and the
offer was accepted. Instead of Paoli, by whose advice the
Crown was thus offered, Sir Gilbert Eliot was appointed
Viceroy; a Constitution, for which the general body of the
people were unfit and unprepared, and neither understood nor
cared about, was forced upon them. This Constitution was


crude and defective; it contained what history has termed
“ the monstrous and unexampled blunder of a Parliament of
only one House or Chamber ; the consequence of which must
eternally be, that the Representative will be in constant collu-
sion with the Executive.” •
It was said of the French in 1789, when the National
Assembly refused to listen with patience to an Upper House,
that “ they might have seen that no Constitution could work
without two Chambers ; that they had even Republican pre-
cedents ; for the Americans had, at an early stage, found the
necessity of having a Senate and an Assembly; and no
Republic had ever flourished without a Senate, or some sort
of body to check and control the direct Representatives of the
people.”
This one-Chamber system cost France the dissolution of
monarchy, and anarchy beyond description. Governor Eliot
had this precedent before him, but yet persevered. This, and
his general unpopularity, and his unjustifiable proceeding
against Colonel (afterwards the lamented General Sir John)
Moore, by procuring an order to dismiss him from the island
without any previous complaint or accusation being made
hnown to the party accused , (a course not unfrequently
adopted in later times with respect to Judges and other
officials who connive not at Colonial iniquity,) caused the loss
of the Crown of Corsica, which so recently had been accepted;
and Sir Gilbert Elliot himself, but for the promptitude of the
gallant Nelson, whould have passed from his Viceregal
Government to a French prison.
In 1810, the Spanish Cortes, instead of sitting in two
Houses, or voting as three separate States, of Nobility, Clergy,
and Commons, like the ancient Cortes of Spain, was all
jumbled together in one single Chamber, and all voted together
in one body like the Constituent Assembly of France; and
from this one capital blunder, which the Spaniards took as a
precedent, and to which they clung with mad tenacity in the
Revolution of 1820, is mainly attributable that over-extension


of democratic power, and that anarchy which subsequently
created so much confusion.
Yet with all this warning, a single Chamber was provided
as the Legislature of New South Wales, composed partly of
Official, and partly of Representative Members. And it is
with surprise and regret that the name of Lord John Russell
is found to appear indorsed, together with the names of
Mr. Hawes and Mr. Labouchere, on a Bill prepared and
brought into the House of Commons by the indorsers, for
the better government of Her Majesty’s Australian Colonies,
and ordered to be printed 26th June, 1849, by which this one-
Chamher system is continued. The 37th section, indeed, of
this proposed Act of Parliament, (an Act for binding those who
are unrepresented in the Legislature about to make it,) gives
powers to Governors and Councils therein mentioned, with
the assent of Her Majesty in Council, to alter the Constitution
of the Legislative Councils, and to establish in the Colonies
respectively to which the Act applies, instead of the Legisla-
tive Council, — a Council , and a House of Representatives , or
other separate Legislative Houses. But why a system
proved by experience to be fraught with so much danger, as
that of the commixture in one Chamber of all classes of
legislators should be continued for a moment longer, is most
deeply to be deplored. The proposed Bill also appears to be
in many respects objectionable, and unlikely to be satisfactory
to the colonists. If it be urged that what has been said may
tend to excite an outcry, the answer is, that I am not of
the opinion of those gentlemen who are against disturbing
the public repose. I like a clamour where there is an abuse.
The fire-bell at night disturbs your sleep, but it keeps you
from being burned in your bed. The hue and cry alarms the
county, but it preserves all the property of the province.
All these clamours aim at redress ; but a clamour made merely
for the purpose of rendering the people discontended with
their situation, without an endeavour to give them a practical
remedy, is indeed unworthy.


I therefore proceed to offer such suggestions as in my
humble judgment may, if adopted, tend to dissipate the
evils I have ventured to decry. I am inclined to agree
with the present Secretary of State for the Colonies, and
the late Secretary of State for the Home Department, notwith-
standing the respectable opinions maintained on the contrary
by many, that, (according to Earl Grey,) “ speaking from his
experience , the administration of Boards is anything but satis-
factory ; ” (I would add even of the Board of Trade, conjoined
as it has been by his Lordship in discharging the duties of
the Colonial Department, over which he now presides ;) “ and
that a Board is the most clumsy and ineffectual contrivance of
Government ever invented,” However specious the remedy
may be, (according to the late Secretary of State for the
Home Department,) “ it would not be conducive to the trans-
action of public business, nor perhaps (as he thought) would
its appointment be wise on constitutional grounds.” I put
aside, therefore, the idea of a Board to act or aid in the ad-
ministration of Colonial affairs. Neither does the Federal
system under a General Assembly, as detailed by the proposed
Bill for the government of the Australian Colonies, seem
advisable, unless it be intended to detach the Colonies at no
distant period from the British Crown.
The best Federal scheme hitherto devised, seems to have been
Dr. Franklin’s celebrated Albany Plan, in 1754, agreed to by
the Commissioners, who transmitted a copy to each Assembly,
and one to the King’s Council; but it was disapproved of by
the Ministry of Great Britain, because it gave too much power
to the Representatives of the people; and rejected by every
Assembly, as giving to the President-General (the Representa-
tive of the Crown ) an influence greater than appeared to
them proper in a plan of government intended for freemen.
This rejection on both sides, is a strong proof of its merits.
The plan itself is too well known to need repetition. Whether
the adoption of this plan would have prevented the separation
of America from Great Britain, is a question which Dr.


Franklin lias himself admitted might afford much room for
speculation.
It may be said, that by enabling the Colonies to defend
themselves, it would have removed the pretext on which the
Stamp Act, Tea Act, and other Acts of the British Parlia-
ment were passed, which excited a spirit of opposition, and
laid the foundation for the separation of the two countries;
but, on the other hand, the restrictions on trade which might
have been imposed by the British Parliament, in which the
Colonists were not represented , might have led to resistance.
Besides, as the President-General was to be appointed by the
Crown, he would naturally be devoted to its views, and
would, therefore, refuse to assent to any laws, however salu-
tary to the community, which had the most remote tendency
to injure the interest of his Sovereign. Even should they re-
ceive his assent, the approbation of the Crown would be
necessary, which indisputably would prefer the advantage of
the realm, to that of its mere Colonies or Foreign Possessions.
Hence would ensue perpetual disagreements between the
Council and the President-General; and thus between the
colonists and the Crown of Great Britain. While the Colo-
nies continued weak, they’would be obliged to submit; and as
soon as they acquired strength, they would become more
urgent in their demands, until at length they would shake off
the yoke, and declare themselves independent. Such plans,
therefore, as the Albany Plan, and its bad copy, the proposed
Australian Government Act, seem but expedients of the
moment, devised to escape the immediate pressure of impend,
ing danger, and not consistent with those large and liberal
views that should always guide the course of an enlightened
Government dealing with a matter of vast importance.
I believe that if the Colonies are to remain subject
to the British Crown, the closest connexion is essential.
I agree with the author of “ The Wealth of Nations,”
that the Colonies in point of happiness and tranquillity


would gain considerably by an union with Great Britain.
It would at least deliver them from those rancours and
virulent factions which are inseparable from small demo-
cracies, and which have so frequently divided the affections of
their people, and disturbed the tranquillity of their govern-
ment. In case of total separation from Great Britain, (which
seems very likely to take place, unless prevented by an union
of this kind,) those factions would be worse than ever. In
all great countries which are united under one uniform
government, the spirit of party commonly prevails less in
the remote provinces than in the centre of the empire. The
distance of those provinces from the capital,—from the prin-
cipal seat of the great scramble of faction and ambition,
makes them enter less into the views of any contending
parties, and renders them more indifferent and impartial
spectators of the conduct of all. I would propose, therefore,
following especially the precedent of Statute 27 Henry YIII.,
cap. 26, with regard to Wales, that all the British Colonies
(save the East Indies) should be incorporated into, and united
with England; that there should be a Commission to enquire
into the laws of their assimilation, as far as may be practicable
with those of England; that all persons born in the Colo-
nies should enjoy the like liberties as those born in England;
that each of the Colonies be converted into a County, and
that each County should, in consideration of defraying its
own internal expenses , and all necessary cost for its proper
maintenance and defence , be represented in the Imperial
Parliament.
“We, of the Colonies,” (said Dr. Franklin, in 1770,)
“ have never insisted that we ought, to be exempt from con-
tributing to the common expenses necessary to support the
prosperity of the empire. We only assert, that having Par-
liaments of our own, and not having Representatives in that
of Great Britain , our Parliaments are the only judges of what
we can, and what we ought, to contribute in this case; and


that the English Parliament has no right to take our money
without our consent .” Let the Representatives be proportioned
to the amount of the expenditure of each Colony. Ido not
propose any further imposition on the Colonies, because they
would, in all probability, be unable, and therefore refuse to
bear it; but, as was said by Mr. Burke with regard to Ireland,
“ it is no reason, because they did not pay the same taxes/they
should not enjoy the same benefits as this country. The
unhappy phantom of compulsory equal taxation has haunted
us long enough.” By defraying their own expenses, the
Colonies would pay as much as they can now bear; but if
hereafter they thought fit to contribute a greater amount to
the general expenditure of the empire, then let the number of
their Representatives be increased proportionably. “ Thus,”
as was said by Dr. Adam Smith, “ a new method of acquiring
importance,—a new and more dazzling object of ambition,
would be presented to the leading men of each Colony.” Instead
of peddling for the little prizes which are to be found in what
may be called the paltry raffle of Colony faction, they might
then hope, from the presumption men naturally have in their
own ability and good fortune, to draw some of the great prizes
which sometimes come from the great State lottery of British
politics. There is not the least probability that the British
Constitution would be hurt by the union of Great Britain with
her Colonies; on the contrary, that Constitution would he com-
pleted by it , and seems incomplete without it. The Assembly
which deliberates and decides concerning every part of the
empire , in order to be properly informed , ought certainly to
have Representatives from every part of it. Nor are there
any insurmountable objections to this plan. Though the
Colonies should send fifty or sixty new Representatives to Par-
liament, the doorkeeper of the House of Commons could not
find any great difficulty in distinguishing who was, and who
was not, a Member.
Towards the decline of the Roman Republic, the allies of


Rome demanded the privileges of Roman citizens. They were
refused. The social war broke out, and one by one, as each
State detached itself from the general Confederacy, they ob-
tained what they had required.
The Portuguese Government requires Deputies from its
Colonies to attend the Cortes.
It was on the principle that places having particular
interests to support, should be represented in Parliament,
that Members were given to represent our Universities.
The same principle was urged in favour of the Reform
Bill. The preamble of Statute 34 & 35 Henry YIIL,
which gives the right to the city of Chester to send Members
to Parliament, seems to afford a strong argument in favour
of the Colonies being represented in the Imperial Par-
liament. But the privilege of being thus represented, did
not deprive Chester of its right of internal self-government.
Nor is this now proposed, on the contrary, instead of Local
Government, on Representation in Parliament, as suggested
by Mr. Under-Secretary Hawes in 1845 : there should be
BOTH.
The Colonies should have Charters of Incorporation,
conferring entire self-government, so far as regards all in-
ternal affairs whatsoever, including internal taxation , granted
to each Colony, and to such subdivisions as may, from the
extent of any Colony, appear to be desirable. There should
be a Mayor, Alderman, and Councillors, (call them what
you will,) two Chambers, and a President, elected by the
colonists for each County or Division, with a Recorder,
Common-Seijeant, and Clerk of the Peace, recommended
by the Mayor and Aldermen, and confirmed by the Crown,
for the administration of criminal and civil justice. To
these Corporate Bodies should be entrusted the manage-
ment of their own affairs ; but there should be, as in England,
a Lord-Lieutenant for each Colony or County, appointed by
the Crown, to superintend, (with a suitable allowance from


the local Government,) and, with the concurrence and at the
expense of the local Government, to provide all proper and
necessary naval and military defence. These local Legisla-
tures should also be under the general control of the Imperial
Parliament ; and as the colonists would be represented there,
every reasonable objection seems to be obviated.
My opinion is, with regard to the Colonies, that which Mr.
Burke expressed respecting Ireland, “ that the closest connexion
is essential.” For that purpose, I humbly conceive that the
whole of the superior, and what I would call Imperial
politics, ought to have its residence here; and that the
Colonies, locally, civilly, and commercially independent, ought
politically to look up to Great Britain in all matters of peace
or war; in all those points to be guided by her; in a word,
“ with her to live and to die.” Grant then, to the colonists
Representation in the Imperial Parliament, and Self-Govern-
ment, and the storm which now rages through the Queen’s
Foreign Possessions will cease, and all be prosperity and peace.
Refuse, and the Colonies are lost for ever.
If these, or any similar suggestions be adopted, the whole
business of the Colonies might be transacted by the Home
Office, assisted by a Committee of the House of Commons,
embracing Members representing those communities, as the
Home Office would exercise, on behalf of the Crown, all
Executive powers; this would get rid of the objection to the
formation of a Parliamentary Board, which was prevented by
reviving the Board of Trade and Plantations in 1696,
Thus, in pursuance of Mr. Burke’s plan for Economical
Reform, the Colonial Office and the Board of Trade might be
abolished. I would add also, the Commissioners for Colonial
Emigration and Waste Lands, and, at least so far as regards
Colonial Appeals, (which would then belong to the House of
Lords,) the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. By
all this, a saving, surpassing the aspirations of the most
sanguine financial economist, might be effected. Every portion


of the empire would be more firmly cemented, and tranquil-
lity and happiness abundantly increased.
I think in these suggestions subordination and liberty
sufficiently appezfr—whether to satisfy a refining speculatist,
or a factious demagogue, I know not; —but surely enough
for the welfare of every British subject.
London;
Telawney Saunders, 6, Charing Cross.






