

ts
(u ?




On Two New Australian Birds.
By John Gould, Esq., E.R.S.
One of the many results which attend the progress of colonization
over the great country of Australia is the bringing to light of new
species in every department of zoological and botanical science.
Whether the explorer proceeds towards the centre of this vast region,
or in the direction of the as yet but little-known northern coast,
some new bird is sure to be brought under our notice; and thus,
through the exertions of the earlier settlers and the zeal of public
officers, Northern Queensland has yielded many fine species pre-
viously unknown, some of greater interest than others. That
the supply from this quarter is not yet exhausted seems evident
from the fact that we rarely examine a fresh collection thence
without finding therein either a new species or a specimen in such a
state of plumage as to induce an anxious desire to see an example
of it in its full beauty. The next collection that arrives probably
adds something to our knowledge of the subject; and a third fur-
nishes us with all we desire respecting it. For some years past I
have been treasuring up all the specimens I could obtain of the
little Bronze Cuckoo of Cape York, under the impression that it
would ultimately prove to be distinct from the species of the same
form inhabiting New South Wales, Western Australia, and Tasma-
nia ; and I have now before me four, exhibiting a uniformity of
characterization which distinguishes them from all their congeners,
however closely allied. To the unpractised eye they would appear
to be identical with one or other of the previously described spe-
cies ; and a cursory observer might suppose that the Australian
members of this genus are identical with those inhabiting the islands
to the northward of that country, This, however, I venture to
say, is not the case, and I shall here point out in what particu-
lars the bird from the Cape-York peninsula differs from the rest.
In size it is rather smaller than the one or more inhabiting the
southern coast of Australia, but at the same time has a stouter
bill, in which respect it somewhat resembles the Port-Essington
Chrysococcyx minutillus ; it differs, however, from that and every
other species in the rich buff colouring of the under surface of the
wings or the basal portions of the primaries. Moreover a rufous tint
pervades the upper surface; and the rufous hue of the tail is of a
deeper colour, all the feathers, except the two central ones, being of
a rich rusty fawn-colour, and the outer one on each side only marked
[l]


with spots or bands of black and white ; a similar mark of black and
white also occurs on the tips of the three other lateral feathers. In
some individuals (probably immature) the feathers of the scapularies
are indistinctly barred near the shoulder with the bronzy green and
buff seen in some of the extra-Australian species of the genus, but
which I have not observed to exist in any other examples from that
country. It would not have been necessary to give such minute
details respecting this little Cuckoo, were it not most difficult to
diagnose the members of this genus of parasitic birds, respecting
which we have yet much to learn, particularly with regard to the
colouring of their eggs, which are frequently totally different from
each other and from those of the Maluri, Acanthizce, and other
birds in whose nests they are deposited. The young, too, are most
puzzling; for they do not appear to follow the law which obtains in
the young of the true Cuckoos (genus Cuculus ), and, instead of
being strongly barred like them, they are coloured uniformly, the
outer tail-feathers only being barred with black and white.
Not having the opportunity or sufficient materials at hand to clear
up these points, I have requested Mr. Ramsay of New South Wales
to investigate those of the southern coast; and he will doubtless be
most accurate in his statement as to the period when the throat and
under surface becomes barred. That this takes place very soon after
the birds leave the nest appears to be certain; at least I have specimens
now before me which justify such an opinion. Has not my friend
Professor Schlegel described a little Cuckoo in this state ? And if
so, has he not been deceived by the unusual state of plumage ?
The specific appellation I propose for the Cape York Chryso-
coccyx is russata, from the rusty hue of the under surface of the
primaries.
Besides the Bronze Cuckoos, many of the birds of the Cape-York
district differ from allied species inhabiting other parts of Australia;
I may instance the Maluri, the Meliphagce, &c. There also we find
a beautiful and apparently very common Pitta, closely assimilating
in colour, but in colour alone, to the P. strepitans ; and I seldom
receive a letter from my ornithological friends in Australia in which
inquiry is not made as to whether it has been named. By more
than one have I been favoured with the opinion that it is distinct
from its near ally ; yet up to the present time no specific appellation
has, I believe, been assigned to it.
Having lately had a great number of specimens forwarded to me
which all agree in being of a smaller size and in having the under
surface of a deeper buff, I propose, notwithstanding the opinion
given in my ‘ Handbook,’ to characterize it as distinct, and at the
same time to assign to it a name ( simillima ) which shall mark its
affinity to the older known species. It would be interesting to
ascertain the exact range of the two birds, and at what part of
Australia they inosculate. One thing is certain; no example oi Pitta
simillima has yet been found in the brushes of New South Wales,
where, on the other hand, the P. strepitans, which has never been
found at Cape York, is abundant.
[2]


Chrysococcyx russata, Gould.
Head, all the upper surface, and wings pale shining rusty bronze ;
under surface white, crossed by numerous bands of bronzy brown;
a wash of rufous across the breast, most apparent or defined on the
sides in front of the shoulders; under wing-coverts barred like the
breast; base of the primaries and secondaries deep fawn-colour ; tail
deep rufous, the two centre feathers glossed with bronze, the lateral
feather on each side with three double spots, the upper half black,
in the form of a crescent, the lower round and white, a similar spot
on the tip of the inner web of each of the next three feathers on
each side, but with the white greatly diminishing as they approach
the centre ; bill black ; legs and feet olive.
Total length 5f inches, bill f, wing 3|, tail 2f, tarsi
Hab. Cape-York district of Queensland, Australia.
Pitta simillima, Gould.
Crown deep ferruginous, with a narrow stripe of black down the
centre; on the chin a large spot of black, terminating in a point on
the front of the neck, uniting with a broad band on each side of the
head, encircling the crown and terminating in a broad rounded
point at the base of the neck ; back and wings pure olive-green;
shoulders and lesser wing-coverts bright metallic cerulean blue;
across the rump a band of the same colour ; upper tail-coverts and
tail black, the latter tipped with dark olive-green ; primaries black,
becoming paler at the tip; near the base of the fourth, fifth, and
sixth a small spot of white ; sides of the neck, throat, breast, and
flanks buff; on the centre of the abdomen a patch of black ; vent
and under tail-coverts scarlet; irides dark brown ; bill brown ; feet
flesh-colour.
Total length 7| inches, bill I|, wing 4|, tail I|, tarsi ]|.
Hab. Cape-York district of Queensland, Australia.
[From the Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London,
February 13, 1868.]


■
.


■


