





THE CULTIVATION OE THE OLIVE
MANUFACTURE OF ITS FRUIT.
A Paper read before the Chamber of Manufactures on Tuesday, July 19, 1870,
By Samuel Davenport, Esq.
A MEETING in connection with the Chamber of
Manufactures was held on Tuesday, July 19, in
the Town Hall Buildings, to hear Mr. Davenport
read a paper on the cultivation of the olive.
On the walls were representations of oil-mills
and apparatus, and on the table there were
several varieties of olives.
The Hon. Sir J. Morphett was voted to the
chair, and in a few words introduced
Mr. S. Davenport, who read the following
paper:—
“ Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen—We are in-
debted to Mr. Scammell for having further
aroused public interest in the cultivation of the
olive-tree. Dr. Schomburgk, also, among those
new cultivations commended for our adoption in
his interesting paper read to this Chamber, has
included the olive.
“Its branch is the symbol of peace, honour,
and plenty. Its fruit preserved, green or ripe,
is both a nutritious food and a luxury. Its oil
enriches the cultivator and the country. Its
shade and shelter and silvery green are variously
useful, and please the eye. Why should not
South Australia grow the olive ?
What Climate and Soils suit the Olive.
A narrow zone only of the temperate regions is
suited to its productions, and but a small portien
of that zone.
“ England is too cold for it. It will live there
under shelter, but cannot ripen its fruit. You
must leave England to see the olive.
“You may cross the Channel to Calais, and
continue on 200 miles, to Paris; and thence 300
miles—still towards warmer climes—to Lyons ;
but you have not yet reached the olive. A
hundred miles south of Lyons, at a place called
Montelimar—halfway between Lyons and Mar-
seilles—you first come upon this tree. Thenco
to Marseilles, the olive is on your right hand
and on the left.
“You may sail from Marseilles, westward,
and coast the Mediterranean by Cette and Per-
pignan, and Barcelona and Malaga to Gibraltar;
thence, east, by Algiers to Alexandra; thence,
north, along the front of Syria; and you may go
on round the coasts of Asia Minor, and skirt the
shores of the Grecian Archipelago and the
Adriatic, and turn by the west of Italy again
into Marseilles; and in your voyage you have
pretty well gone the circle of the olive-culti-
vation of the world.
“ A few and favoured parts only of the globe
can grow the olive. In them it is one of the
chief sources of wealth; and they hold mankind
dependent for supplies. In their own interests
therefore, and in the interests of mankind, those
parts that can should grow the olive. South
Australia can, therefore South Australia should
grow it. Nature has included us among the
favoured few to whom she grants the monopoly
of its cultivation, if we would but avail of her
gift.
“The olive will not grow in the more
northern nor in the more southern latitudes,
nor, centrally, near to and within the tropics.
“Nor, in all this circuit, is its cultivation
more than a broken fringe, for, loving the sea-
air, the olive will not grow very remotely from
the sea (the French say not more than 90 miles);
whilst bleak mountains or barren sands, which
form the sea-front of much of this route, are
hostile to it; so that the localities of its actual
cultivation are oftoner occasional than con-
tinuous, and in these it is frequently inter-
spersed amongst cereals, vines, and pastures.
“ Native to Syria and Greece, the agricultural
instincts of emigrants thence in ancient times
carried the olive to (heir colonies, as they
carried their cereals and the vine, or as we carry
our cereals, and potatoes, and fruits, or other
P .


nationally-inherited food, domestic necessaries,
and luxuries to our colonics; and where climate
and soil seconded their efforts, these preferable
products were retained. Thus the olive was
lirst planted by Grecian emigrants settling on
the shores of Italy and France, and by Jews,
Syrians, and Arabs migrating to Africa and
Spain. So says the naturalist De Candolle.
“ It was not alone the people, with their in-
herited tastes, that induced this spreading cul-
tivation of the olive. Nature helped them, and
they accepted her aid, and that not as to the
olive only, but also as to the natural com-
panions of the olive, viz., the vine, and the
pomegranate, and the fig, and, in later years,
the mulberry. These all accompanied or fol-
lowed an emigration from the East, and wero
founded in the Western settlements of suitable
climate and soils, and became the means of sus-
tenance and wealth to their importers, and
through them have rendered populous and rich
large districts of these portions of the world
over numerous centuries to the present day. So
we must admit that vast wealth and vast sources
of maintaining large populations resulted from
this act of those ancient emigrants following, in
their agricultural industries, the guidance of
Nature, which indicated in these localities
favour for the olive.
“And if it be good to follow a good example,
and we seek to emulate them as founders of great
industries and populations, I ask any man —who
ever saw an olive tree that was an olive tree —
if in this country of South Australia we have
not the most abundant proof that Nature here
also favours its cultivation. Of similar age and
subject to like care or neglect, did he ever see
olive trees in the Mediterranean surpass those
growing here ? Do not plants spring spon-
taneously from our soil in hundreds, where seed
has fallen and remained undisturbed at the base
of the tree, sheltered from the too drying in-
fluences of the sun? What further evidence
do we need to prove that Nature herself solicits
our cultivation of the olive; and shall we not
do well to follow her instruction ?
“In a suitable climate any good vine soil
may be taken to be a good olive soil. In South
Australia it is probable any sheaoak soil may
prove a good olive soil, for excellent if not
always abundant fruit; and were our sheaoaks
only olive trees, we might double our population
and our wealth to-morrow. I venture the be-
lief that generally between the Murray and the
Gulf, over Yorke’s Peninsula, along the sea-coast
ranges and shore of Port Lincoln, in the better
parts of Kangaroo Island, and about our lakes
and the Coorong, the olive tree would thrive.
“ Would it pay for its cultivation? What are
its products, and how utilized? Since Nature
favours South Australia with a soil and climate
eminently adapted for the purpose, we can so
far grow the olive at less cost and with more
certainty than most other people. The facilities
accorded by the tree itself exceed those of
other members of the vegetable kingdom. It
may be propagated from every part; not alone
from the seed, but from the branches, the stem,
the roots, and from sections even of these.
“ The common enemies of the olive are excess
of moisture and frost. In South Australia we
have neither. Continued moisture during the
season of flowering renders fruiting abortive.
The late Mr. Curnow, one of our most ex-
perienced gardeners, told me that, from his
observations, this was a cause unfavourable to
its cultivation in New South Wales. Excessive
wet is its recognised enemy in parts of Europe
and Asia, whilst the occasional and severe de-
and Asia, whilst the occasional and severe de-
vastations by frost have made a Frenchman
declare that, though cultivated for centuries in
the South of France as a chief branch of
agriculture, it has not yet been fully acclimatized
there. This assertion is supported by history,
for it is recorded that on the 12th of January,
1709, half the olive plantations between Nice
and Perpignan were destroyed by frost. Between
1709 and 1743 four cold winters damaged the
French plantations. In 1755, 1766, and 1768
the cold was more or less disastrous, till, in 1789
(of sorry memory), the early and severe frosts
carried mortality to the most sheltered planta-
tions. In 1795, 1802, and in 1811 the olives
about Marseilles and Toulon greatly suffered;
but since 1709 no winter had dealt a blow to
the olive cultivation in France of equal severity
to that of 1820, when, during the night of the
10th of January, a few hours of extreme cold
spread desolation over the plantations, and
three-fourths of these were destroyed. From
such enemies we may safely conclude this part
of South Australia will be for ever free.
Modes of Propagation.
“ The seed of the olive gives wild plants and
now varieties. As here, so in the Mediterra-
nean, seedlings are of spontaneous growth.
When needed they are removed to a nursery,
and when established there are grafted for
planting out. If the seed be sown in its oily
coating it will fail to germinate, because no
moisture can penetrate to the kernel to start
its vegetation. The seed voided by a bird, or
other animal that had eaten the fruit, will
vegetate, or the long action of moisture and
heat of atmosphere and soil combined, by de-
composing the oily pericarp ; or the artificial
immersion of the fruit in an alkali which
saponifies the oily particles of the pericarp will
also leave the kernel accessible to moisture, and
induce its vegetation. The kernel alone may be
sown, if in cracking the nut to extract it it
has not been injured.
“In 1863 Mr. Barthelemy, the Director of
the Botanic Garden at Marseilles, told me that
the oil of seedling olives was good, though the
fruit was smaller than that of grafted trees.
In South Australia I have seen seedling fruit as
large as the fruit of most grafted trees.
“ The soil for seeds should be well pulverized,
free, and drained, but not too dry.
“ Cuttings of the olive will readily grow. In
using them care is needful not to bruise the
bark, and all laterals should be cut off. If in a
nursery bed, a foot long suffices. If in a trench,
where it is intended the plant should perma-
nently stand, the cutting should be three feet
long, one inch only extending above the surface
of the ground. This is the rule given by a
French writer. To Mr. Francis, of the Adelaide
Institute, I am indebted for the following
Spanish plan, as witnessed by himself when
residing (as he did for some years) in an olive
district of Spain. He says— ‘ In new land, pre-
viously unworked, limbs of trees of not less
than six-year-old wood, and 8 to 10 feet in
length, are planted in holes four feet deep and
as many square, which have been left open all
one summer. At planting a little manure—such
as top turf and leaves, &c., make—is used to
fill up the holes, into which the limb is thrust,


and the soil well trodden about it. The wood
of many feet in length thus left above the
surface is surrounded by soil in a cone shape,
heaped to within a few inches of the top of the
cutting. In one side of this cone, halfway up,
a hole is left through which to water, should the
summer prove dry. In the interval this hole is
kept open by a wisp of straw.’
“ The intention of this long cutting and the
cone of soil is to at once establish the trunk of
the future tree.
“ As with cuttings, so the fracture of roots
attached to suckers will reproduce the kind of
olive of the tree whence it has been taken. By
the country people in Corfu, in 1863, I was told
their usual method of propagation was by
suckers three years old.
“Layers succeed.
“ Split stumps and roots will grow into trees;
but care should be taken not to bruise or tear
the bark left to them, which should be cut free
of all ragged edges.
“ But of all methods of reproducing the olive
tree, I have by experience found the most
simple and sure to be that of bedding truncheons
horizontally in the ground. For this purpose,
in the month of September, cut the truncheon
a foot long and of any diameter over an inch,
not leaving it with split and ragged edges nor
bruised bark. Then bury this horizontally,
four or five inches beneath the surface. If the
soil be free and fine, well drained, but not too
dry, you are sure of your tree. In two years
after you will have a well-rooted plant four feet
high.
‘ ‘ Still, this means of propagation by truncheons,
however well adapted to the cultivator who is
increasing from his own stock, cannot compete
with the abundant and immediate supplies
which any professed nurseryman might raise
for sale. Millions of seedlings could be grown at
once, and sold at a trifling costas one or two year
old plants; or, if grafted with good varieties,
when four or five years old. One or two good
varieties would be all any cultivator need
desire. The grafting is simple. In France two
kinds of grafting prevail. That known to
gardeners as crown grafting is the favourite
about Genoa, and westward towards Marseilles,
through Mentone, and Grasse, the districts of
great olive trees; whilst in Provence the shield
grafting is preferred.
“ At Grasse—whore you may see large planta-
tions of olives, somewhat resembling a handsome
forest of sheaoaks before their beauty has been
invaded by the settler’s axe, and except that
the olive plantation is in regular lines, per-
mitting the culture of wheat or potatoes or
other substitute in the intervals—they graft on
five and six year old stocks in spring, whilst
the sap is rising and the bark is easily detached.
And they select grafts of good two-year-old
shoots, well grown, smooth skinned, and with
eyes well formed.
Varieties,
“ The subject of grafting admits us to varieties
of the olive. Our English education tells us of
the Olea Europcea, as if this was the sole plant,
at least, in Europe, without relations or com-
petitors; whereas in an olive country you find
that each seedling, as already stated, is a new
variety, and that of approved established
varieties there is an extensive catalogue.
“ I shall not trouble you with any enumera-
tion otherwise than of a few, to show they
possess distinctive habits, qualities, and uses,
and admit of distinctive treatments, and thus
how truly pliable the olive is to various cultiva-
tions in a suitable climate.
“ Some varieties excel in the delicacy of their
oil; some in the quantity they produce; some
in the green conserve called ‘ picholines;’ others
for ripe conserves.
“In France it is with the olive as with the
vine—the various cultivating districts have their
favourite varieties, and the nomenclature of one
differs from that of another district for the
same variety, so that any attempt at classifica-
tion is burdened with synonyms.
“Of the departments of Yar and the Alpes-
Maritimes, the neighbourhoods of Grasse and
Cannes give preference to a variety variously
called the * Caillet,’ Cayon, Olivier de Grasse,
Olivier Pleurer, from the gracefully weeping
aspect of the tree. This grows best in strong
soils. It needs air and sun to fructify its flowers.
To secure all the oil, its fruit should not be
gathered until quite black.
“2. The ‘ Blanquette.’ This grows best in
dry grounds. It fruit is round, little coloured
when ripe. Its leaves are shorter and less
drooping than those of the Caillet. Its oil is
sweeter, whiter, and more delicate, but keeps
badly. It is chiefly grown about Antibes under
the name of Blanquetier.
“3. The ‘ Roubeirou’ variety grows tall, and
has few branches. Its leaves are rounded. Its
fruit is oval and small, and yielding little oil,
but of a character superior to any other.
“ 4. The ‘ Plant d’Entrecasteaux’ is of rapid
growth, cares little for the nature of the soil,
but prefers stony ground. It requires little
manure. It ripens its fruit early, yielding large
quantities; but, dreading the cold, must be
planted in sheltered situations, and should be
frequently pruned.
“5. The ‘Gurnet’ gives an abundance of
excellent oil, and succeeds in all exposures.
“6, The ‘ Caillet-ioux’ yields much excellent
oil, and succeeds in low bottoms,
“7. stands the cold, gives
ordinary oil, but is much esteemed for the con-
serve of its olives.
“8. The ‘Arabon,’ very productive of good
oil. Among other choice varieties of the Yar
are the ‘ Picholine,’ for conserves; and the
‘ Salonen,’ the ‘Blanquet,’ the ‘Verdale,’ and
the ‘ Bouquettier,’ for oil.
“I single out these last four because they
appear on the invoice of olive truncheons intro-
duced into South Australia from Marseilles by
the South Australian Company in 1845, and
were planted in Bailey’s Garden. These are
good varieties we already possess; and, be it
remembered, that for oil extracted from their
fruit by Mr. Francis, now of the Institute,
South Australia gained ‘ honourable mention’ at
the London Great Exhibition of 1851.
“ In addition to these known good varieties
growing amongst us, Sir John Morphett pos-
sesses others (I think six at least), received from
Spain. Dr. Mayo has others; and I think Mr.
Peake, at Clarendon, has others ; whilst Captain
O’Halloran, Dr. Everard, and Mr. Boothby (the
Sheriff) have established plantations of the
French varieties of Bailey’s Garden; no less
than 2,500 of 4,000 seedling trees roared by
Mr. Boothby having been successfully grafted


In Nismes itself are 10 oil mills.
expressing 45,100 gallons of oil
annually, valued at 6s. 2d. per
gallon, equal ...
£13,906
In 54 surrounding villages are 125 oil
mills, expressing 493,350 gallons
annually, equal
152,116
Pickled olives, each year, value of
9,028
Kefuse, for soap, &c., yielding
12,450
by Mr. Smith, of Medindie, Thus, already we
have possession of excellent European varieties,
ample for a vast propagation. Mr. Reed, utiliz-
ing the available forces of his orphan charge,
has already planted 4,000 olives, which he pur-
poses grafting.
“Reynaud, of Nismes, himself a cultivator of
the olive over 35 years, writing in 1862, says—
‘ The products of the olive constitute with grain
and wine the agricultural wealth of the South of
France,’ And this is said of the olive, notwith-
standing that to it are generally assigned the
rocky and poorer soils. Sometimes it shares
with the vine the better soils of sites inter-
mediate between the plains and the hills, and
sometimes with wheat and other crops the soil
of the plains; but, as a rule, it is denied the
best soils of deeper loam, which are reserved
for grain and herbaceous plants. And
herein it is we find a prominent virtue of
the olive. Content, yea, producing the
best oil from rocky, gravelly, and the
drier soils, such as are ill-suited for our English
courses of agriculture, it, like the vine and the
mulberry, rather gives value to land not other-
wise utilized by planting, and thus is unselfishly
auxiliary to values raised by other cultivations
of the farm.
“In South Australia, however, we have little
need, in our vast grain lands, to deny the olive
a share of the plains. The subsoil plough,
worked along the fence lines, as recommended
by Mr. Scammell, and, if desired, at distant
intervals in lines through our wheat - fields,
would, at little extra cost of time and means, '
have prepared the ground for olive plantation.
Near Perpignan you may see the olive planted
in the wheat-fields, in quincunx fashion, 30 to
35 feet apart,
“No cattle, sheep, or pigs should be allowed
to injure the young trees.
“ Time is an item of first cost, since the tree
will not fruit till seven or eight years old; but
in after years it atones for the shortcomings of
youth, and having begun, will continue its
annual yield practically for ever.
“ The fruit is borne on two-year-old wood, so
that the ultimate development of this by
judicious pruning, concurring with the ordinary
surface labour all trees require for health and
growth, forms an item of detail in the subse-
quent management of the olive tree.
“ Reynaud gives 240,000 acres as the area of
land over which the olive grows in the South of
France, and its annual produce in oil and
preserved fruit is rated by him as of the value
of £3,000,000. Then, taking the subdivision or
arrondissement of the department of Gard,
within which his own town of Nismes (of some
40,000 inhabitants) is situated, he details, as
follows:
£187,500
“Summary.—l3s mills, working one month
each, yielding annually the value of £187,500,
less £9,028 in preserved fruit.
“ The Island of Corfu has an area ©f say 50
miles by 25. Two-thirds of its surface —at a
rough estimate—is occupied by olives, allowing
for occasional cultivations of wheat, potatoes,
flax, vines, and oranges. Much olive oil and fruit
is consumed by the inhabitants themselves, who
number some 80,000; but their annual export
of olive oil approaches a value of £500,000.
“ Oil, wheat, and wine make up the agricul-
ture of the South of Italy. Gallipoli is a vast
store for an export trade of olive oil. Great
Britain imports largely from Naples. The
Apulian oil (says McCulloch) being greatly pre-
ferred by the wool manufacturers, Spain grows
the olive very extensively. Great Britain alone
imports from all sources some 4,000,000 gallons
of olive oil annually.
“In illustration of this Neapolitan export of
oil for British wool manufacturers we received
intelligence from the Hon. Mr. Barrow on
irsday last. He tells us that at the tweed
cloth factories of Geelong they use twopenny-
worth of oil to every pound of cloth; aud that
one of these factories alone, when its machinery
is completed, will turn out 300,000 yards of
three-quarter tweed per annum. Now, Mr,
Macgeorge informs me that the average
weight of a yard of three-quarter tweed
is 13 ozs., so that 5 yards gives us 4 lbs,
weight; or (with oil at Bs. per gallon), Bd.
worth of oil is consumed per 5 yards of cloth;
or 13s. 4d. the 100 yards, £6 13s. 4d. the 1,000
yards, or £2,000 worth of oil for the 300,000
yards—their sole annual demand.
“Thus, we see, as our neighbours are cloth-
making, and as we mean shortly to follow their
example, how apropos may prove our entrance
on the produce of oil, in this sense even.
“ About Grasse and Cannes the olive flowers
in April. In a week the fruit has set, and be-
comes full-grown about September. It is then
a beautiful green colour, with fine and glossy
skin, and the flesh is firm and very bitter. This
colour soon changes, and the oil begins to form
—its first indication being the milky juice of the
pulp. According to variety, the fruit becomes
yellow, red, or black, and the oil is formed more
or less rapidly. At Grasse they say the fruit
is ripe when a drop of oil exudes on a slight
pressure of the finger.
Yield op Oil per Tree or per Acre,
“ The yield ©f an olive tree at a given age is
not easily determined. Much depends on tho
climate, position, variety, and care in its
culture.
“ Busby, of New South Wales—for whose
interesting and truthful narrative of a tour,
taken 39 years since in the vine countries of
Europe, Australia owes much reports the
annual yield, as given him of one estate in Spain,
at 66£ gallons of oil per acre of 60 trees —equal-
ling say I’l gallons of oil per tree, which, at Bs.,
gives Bs. 9Jd. per tree, or £26 10s. per acre.
These trees would be 27 feet apart, so that other
cultivation may have been raised on the same
land, or sheep browsed there. I conclude this
to mean the gross yield. He further says
(p. 30) that at a convent near Seville ‘ the man
who showed us the press said that a good olive
tree in a good year would yield from 3 to 4
fanegas, and that a fanega of olives would yield
an arroba of oil gallons). This would give
from 12| to 17 gallons per tree.’


OLIVE MILL BUILDING AT CORFU.
PLAN OF OLIVE OIL MILL.




“To Mr. Francis I am indebted for the follow-
ing statement: —When in Spain I was informed
that each tree gave on the average about half
an arroba of oil (12 to 13 lbs. or I 4 gallons), say
worth about lOd. per lb. or 7s. 6d. per gallon ;
leaving a profit, all expenses paid, of about one
dollar a tree (taking; the dollar at 4s. 2d.), and
Busby’s 60 trees, this would give a net profit
per acre of £l2 10s. or £l,OOO a year net profit
from an 80-acre section, whilst at Mr. Francis’s
value of oil, 7s. 6d. per gallon, £BOO will have
been further spent in labour out of the produce,
besides returns from pasturage, fuel, and
cuttings.
“At Perpignan, Mr. Busby is informed that
the annual average yield of olive trees in that
district is from 15 to 20 lbs._ per tree (1 \ to
2 gallons); a very fine olive, in a fine year, will
yield 80 lbs. (8 gallons), or, at 7s. 6d. per gallon,
from 11s, 3d. to £3 per tree gross yield.
“In a publication of the Central Society of
Agriculture of the South of France, 1862, it is
stated ‘ that though the vine and olive are less
cultivated in the Cevennes than they ought to
be, the olive can render satisfactory returns
there, the average yield of a hectare of land
over 31 years having amounted to 613 francs
(£24 10s. lOd.), the net revenue being 317 francs
(£l2 ss. lOd.);’ the hectare being equal to two
and a half English acres. This gross yield will be,
say, £l5 per acre, and the net £7 10s. The
number of trees per hectare not being quoted,
wo cannot fix the yield per tree, nor is any
mention made of other collateral use of the
ground, though mixed culture is a common
system of the South of France. I would remark
that the Cevennes run into high mountains,
snow-capped in winter, and the cold often
injures the tree.
“At Grasse they consider a ten-year-old tree,
well kept, can give five litres of olives (l - 2
gallons), which at the alleged average yield of
oil from fruit, viz., 20 per cent, (a sth) would
give at Bs. per gallon (which I assume as the
wholesale value of oil in South Australia)
Is. lid. per tree, but that at 30 years of age
the tree can give 50 litres (11 - 2 gallons) of
fruit, the oil from which would be 2'2 gallons,
or of the value of 18s. per tree.
“ Raibaud L’Angc, a French writer, says that
in time some trees yield 400 litres; even double
that quantity has been reported from Italy,
Corsica, and Spain. These 400 litres would be
89 - 6 gallons of fruit from one tree, equalling 18
gallons of oil, of the value of £6 4s. This, of
course, is exceptional. Mr. Scammell, in a
letter to the Register , some time ago, says there
are now in Adelaide olive trees about 20 years
old whose annual yield is equal to 10 gallons of
oil. Taking this at the low value of 6s. per
gallon, and assuming the fruit to be a third
the value of the oil, would leave 20s. as the
least value of the produce in fruit for these
trees. The produce in oil would value £3.
Mr. Tocchi —a Marseilles gentleman, living
amongst us, and who in 1865, jointly with Mr.
Sinnett, extracted the oil of 28 tons of fruit,
of which 21 tons came from Mr. Simpson’s, at
Glen Osmond, and 7 tons were collected from
sundry gardens —tells me that 15 per cent, of
oil was obtained from this fruit; that is, oyer
\\ gallons per cwt.—but that, had the crushing
rollers been good, fully 20 per cent, of oil would
have resulted, or over 2 gallons per cwt.
“ Then, as to the yield per tree, Mr. Tocchi —
well knowing the comparative value of good
varieties —says, whilst the fruit of an inferior
variety will yield not more than perhaps 10 per
cent, of oil, that of a good kind will give 25
per cent., or more. Cazalis Allut, in his work
on agriculture, 1865, says that his 13 olive trees
(seven of which were of the Verdale variety
and six Clermontais) gave him in 1819, 2_'4
gallons of oil each; in 1831, 8 - 8 gallons; and in
1833, 5| gallons of oil. The age of these trees
in 1819 is not given. They were probably well
cared for, inasmuch as Cazalis Allut was a
wealthy, intelligent, and devoted agriculturist
“Thus we have average annual yields of the
olive in oil quoted at rates varying from Is. lid.
to £6 4s. per trcl up from ten years of age; in
the estimate of which we must not overlook the
practice of mixed cultivation. In 1863_ about
Grasse and Cannes 1 saw many plantations of
olives in a healthy state, with a good wheat crop,
and sometimes potatoes, growing in the intervals
and right up to the trunks of the olives. I have
no doubt the ground had been well worked and
manured, and that, in this drier climate, we
could not look for the same result, inasmuch as
the annual rainfall (on which I have no returns)
must, from the physical structure of the country,
be greater there than here. Still, it is reasonable
to suppose that such mixed agriculture detracts
from the yield of the olive tree; and that, there-
fore, some of the foregoing quotations may be
taken as results of not the best description of
its cultivation.
“Further, in weighing the value of olive
iltivation, it is fair, perhaps, not to overlook
the progressive and enduring character of the
yield. The reverse of laws usually governing
mundane existence seems to apply to the olive,
viz., that with its age its annual value increases.
The yield of to-day may be Is. lid. per tree, but
at a remoter date £6 4s; thus clearly exposing
the validity of an old Italian adage, that ‘he
who wants to leave a lasting inheritance to his
children should plant an olive.’ And equally is
it clear that, however truly an established olive
cultivation forms a main branch of agriculture
in countries suited for it, there has been in these
countries, and must be with us, an initiatory
period of its introduction, during which its
yearly revenue will be nil. The tree must be
taken as a promissory-note not discountable,
but certain of payment when it falls due.
But the recognition of this fact should, I think,
only stimulate us to early action. Some fruit
will be borne after six or seven years, but from
the moment of planting the trees add real
capital to the land they stand on. The promise
to pay at a fixed" date is on the face of them,
and when the Is. lid. per tree only becomes
the annual return on an acre of 60 trees, that
represents the interest on a £6O increased gross
value of the land, if nothing but a grazing
value still retained attached to it prior to
planting, and for ever after the value is in-
creasing, till our happy successors may thank
us for having vested funds for them in the
national estate on the dividends of which they
may live in comparative ease. This, in truth,
is the position at the present day of the for-
tunate inhabitants of Corfu and other olive
countries. They live at ease on the fruits of
the labour of their ancestors. No wonder the
ancient Greeks imposed a heavy penalty on the
man who destroyed an olive tree. Its annual
yield of sustenance to the inhabitants and
wealth to the State were too important to admit


of its destruction even to one tree. What
better legacy can a farmer in South Australia
leave to his son than an 80-acre section of
olives ?
Gathering and Stowage of the Fruit for
“ In gathering the fruit of the olive for oil,
that which has fallen from the tree is first
taken. It is the worst fruit, and should be kept
apart. The fruit on the tree is then picked by
the hand, or shaken down to sheets spread to
receive it, or beaten off by a long switch of hard
wood. Too flexible switches cut the young
boughs. Near Seville and Cordova, in Spain,
says Mr. Francis, the ripe fruit 4s easily whipped
off with a sort of flail, made of a light cane at
the end of a long thong, worked dexterously by
a handle 9 feet long.
“However, it is easy to see how greatly the
trees may be injured through the destruction of
the young fruit-bearing wood under the system of
beating, managed ever so dexterously; and its
practice is only admissible where hand-picking
or shaking is ineffectual. When the fruit is
well ripe, especially of some varieties, a slight
shaking brings it down.
“ At Grasse and Nice, and generally along the
Corniche-road, the gathering is paid for by
measurement; but the beating down the fruit,
when necessary, is confided to a trusty workman.
Here they say that a woman can gather from
80 to 100 litres (2£ to 3 bushels) a day.
llaiband L’Ange says in his department (Basses-
Alpes) an active man can scarcely gather 50 litres
a day (1£ bushels). The quantity gathered in a
given time by one labourer will depend greatly
on the variety of olive and the maturity of the
fruit. Where oil is sought, without regard to
flavour, the fruit may be left to fall, and is
simply gathered from the ground. The fruit
gathered during the day is picked over for the
extraction of leaves and sticks prior to its being-
laid out in a fresh and dry apartment ready for
the mill.
“ If the fruit has been gathered prior to full
maturity it is benefited by being stored, pro-
vided that by deposit in thin layers, or by daily
turning, any approach of fermentation_ is pre-
vented. And even if the fruit be quite ripe
when gathered a careful storing for a few days
will soften its structure and facilitate the
expression of the oil without injuring its quality.
To prevent fermentation Mr. Tocchi recom-
mends the spreading of the olives on beds with
©pen fissures, permitting access of dry air
through the mass from below, as well as allowing
any watery exudations to pass freely away.
“Whilst for good delicately-flavoured table
oil the fruit must be crushed before any fermen-
tation has commenced, for machine, lamp, or
soap oil it matters not how long an interval
exists. At Corfu I saw olives all in matted
cakes, like marc from a wine-press, taken out
of masonry bins, where I was told they had
been deposited for three or four months, after
which they were now being crushed.
“In confirmation of these principles I quote
from a record I happened to have by me of the
proceedings at a meeting of the Central Society
of Agriculture of the South of France, held at
Montpellier 12th February, 1852: —
“M. Cazalis Allut, the President, having
taken the chair, and the proceedings of the
previous meeting been read and adopted, called
the attention of the Society to the fact that his
olives, kept in the granary three weeks before
being crushed, gave a superior quality of oil to
his olives crushed at once. Clearly the olive
had ripened better by the housing, but great
care was necessary to prevent any fermentation
setting in.
“ M. Pagezy said the quality of the oil spoken
of by M. Cazalis Allut was also due to the kind
of olive. Thus the people of the Valley of the
Herault, who have long cultivated the Verdale
(this was the variety Cazalis Allut grew), say
that the best oil comes from the olives which
have been housed 20 days.
“M. Bouscaren insisted that the yield of the
olives was according to their full or imperfect
maturity. Thus that unripe olives gave bad oil,
acrid, and small in quantity. In truth, olives,
well ripened and non-fermented, yield all their
oil, and of good quality; whereas those well
ripened, but fermented, give all their oil, but
of bad quality.
Extraction of Oil.
‘•'ln extracting the oil from the olive, two
piocesses are needed—first, crushing; then
“The crushing is either complete, in the
sense of pulverizing both stone and kernel, so
that the entire fruit is reduced to a soft paste;
or it is partial, in the sense of only stripping the
pulp from the stone of the olive. This partial
work is effected by use of a smaller millstone,
set with sufficient interval between it and the
bed it acts upon.
“I can speak of the crushing to paste from
Eersonal observation; the stripping process I
ave not seen.
“ The merits of one or the other depend on
the balance of two issues—quality and quantity.
Without complete pulverizing of the stone, the
oil of the fruit will not all yield to the press;
there will be a loss of quantity. Whilst the oil
of the kernel is said by some to detract from the
delicacy of the oil of the pulp (the stone has no
oil), and that thus superior oil is obtained where
the stones are not crushed, others deny this.
Mr. Tocchi says. ‘ The oil in the stone is the
best oil.’
“ This question, however, need not now con-
cern us, for excellent oil is obtained either way;
and the complete crushing is the most simple for
beginners, and most effective as to quantity of
oil. The oil of Aix, reputed the best in Europe,
is, I believe, obtained by complete crushing.
“The Moors of Africa avoid this question.
In lieu of crushing-mills, they tread their olives,
as grapes have been trodden; and, in lieu of
presses, they make a vessel of a goat-skin,
leaving an opening at the neck for filling in the
trodden olive pulp, and then, by great and re-
peated efforts, squeeze out the oil through the
pores of the skin. So says “ Reynaud.” Tread-
ing the olive is ancient. It is referred to in the
sacred Scriptures.
“To better illustrate the crushing-mill and
the press, I am indebted to Mr. E. A. Hamilton,
who has kindly elaborated my sketches made at
Corfu in 1863. Here, also, is a plan of the mill
buildings of the same crusher and press, showing
their dimensions and arrangements, and which,
as a whole, forms a type of an ordinary farm, or
village mill, where animal power only is avail-
able. The whole is very simple and inexpensive.
The crushing-mill and the press are of the
common and approved plan of the olive districts
generally, and are as ancient as simple. In
Spain, however, both Mr, Busby and Mr.


Francis saw a ponderous lever substituted for
the screw-press, and they report it as the most
effective means. It resembles many a station
lever used for wool-pressing in this country. It
is only an overgrown common country lever
cheese-press.
“The crushing-mill is composed of two cir-
cular stones of hard grit—one (the lower) for
the other or upper stone to work on. The
lower stone is bedded on the ground hori-
zontally. Its diameter is 7or 8 feet; its thick-
ness from 2.) to 3 feet. Its surface is concave
from the outer rim to a level centre. The
upper stone is 9 or 10 inches thick, and of 5 or
6 feet diameter, and is made to work in a circle
on the level of the lower stone by means of a
vertical shaft of timber with pivoted ends to re-
volve in sockets, of which one is in the centre of
the lower stone, and the other in a beam of
timber overhead fixed in the wall-plates of the
mill building. The stone is attached to this
shaft by an axle-arm with linch-pin working in
a box in the stone, and forming the extremity of
the hauling gear, be it for animal or waterpower.
“ About Grasse no less than 40 of these mills
are worked by one little rivulet.
“ The crushing-stone having been set re-
volving, the olives are spread before it; and the
trituration is best done by a slow and regular
motion. This operation is considered done when
the resulting paste is soft to the touch, and
allows oil to escape on slight pressure of the
hand. A perfect crushing breaks all the cellules
of the pulp which contain the oil, and thus pre-
pares it for yielding to the subsequent action of
the press.
“The paste, as completed, is removed from
the mill and placed in the press-bags of Spanish
esparto grass called ‘ cabas’—(horsehair bags are
better) —which are half filled, and then stacked
evenly on the press with the open centre upper-
most, and to the number of from 10 to 18 cabas
in a stack. The pressing commences forthwith.
“ Surrounding each stack, at its base on the
bed of the press, is a gutter inclining to a spout,
which receives and conveys the oil, as expressed,
to a subjacent receiver or cistern, three-fourths
filled with cold water.
“ The first pressing should be done slowly, and
successively, in order to give the oil time to
disengage itself from the lacerated cellules;
otherwise the oil, not being able to find a clear
passage from its cells, is imbibed by the matted
paste, which becomes an elastic body, resisting
the press and rendering its efforts futile.
“The oil extracted by first pressure, if frem
olives of good quality, sufficiently ripe but un-
fermented, and passed through perfectly clean
mill, press, and cabas, is called ‘virgin oil, sur-
fine or fine.’ It is the best table oil.
“ But the paste further contains oil which has
not been able to come away, either from the
foregoing reason, or because it is entangled with
vegetable fibre, or mixed with the albumen of
the pulp, which increases its viscosity and im-
pedes its flow.
“ Therefore, to extract more oil, the press is
loosened, the flattened cabas are opened, their
matted paste is broken up and saturated with
loi/ing water ; then the cabas are refilled and
again stacked on the press, and the mass is
pressed a second time. In this operation the
boiling water dilutes the paste, and renders the
oil more fluid by disengaging the albumen which
was coagulated at a lower temperature. The
hotter the water the more rapid the separation
of the oil; and the more complete this separa-
tion, the more fine, sweet, aud perfect will be
the oil extracted.
“ Prior to this second pressing the virgin oil
of the first pressing should be skimmed off, so
as to be kept separate from the oil of the second
pressing ; or, if a sufficient time has not allowed
it to rise in its cistern or receiver, a second re-
ceiver should be at hand for the oil at the second
pressing,
“Repeating these operations with boilings’
water, a third pressing is made.
“The oil obtained by the two pressings with
boiling water is also fine oil, and most makers
subsequently mix it with the virgin oil.
“After the oils resulting from these three
pressings _ have been skimmed off, the water
from which they have been separated, and
which still retains much oil mixed with the
mucilage of the fruit, is run off by a tap, or
pumped out into a final cistern, called * enfer’
by the French, and generally constructed under
ground; and here it is left a time to repose, to
deposits its mucilage and allow its oil to rise and
float. This oil is collected from time to time.
Its colour is yellowish green, more or less trans-
parent, and the oil is employed in the manu-
facture of cloth and soap.
“ The better to give the oil time to rise in the
‘enfer,’its construction is often that of the
* Florentine receiverand the water which
flows from this is again caught in outside
cemented flats, like largo shallow beer coolers,
in a series of which, if the ground permits, the
first is constructed at a slight level above the
next, with one point of depression, so that its
overflow is received by the flat immediately
below it. These flats collect some oil, which is
sold to the soapmaker. Any gentleman visiting
Cannes may see many of these in the course of
a four-mile walk up the valley about the mouth
of which Cannes is built.
“ There is yet left the matted paste of the
pressed corbas, which also still retains unyielded
oil, notwithstanding the efforts of crushing-mills
and presses. To convert this to value largo
separate establishments exist in the olive
countries. These are called by the French
‘recense’ mills—literally, ‘verifying’ mills.
They test the residue of oil. Their operation
is, by repeated manipulations, to separate the
skin and the flesh of the olive, in its matted
paste, from its contact with the wood of the nut,
and to submit them to a fresh process for
extraction of the last fractions of oil, which
these soft parts had imbibed or held through
incomplete rupture of the oil cells.
“ So soon as the oil has been extracted it is
deposited in'clean stoneware jars or tanks, placed
in apartments or other localities sufficiently
warm to keep the oil fluid, and thus the lees
deposit. The oil should be stored in the dark,
excluded from the air. At farmhouses about
Athens large stone jars, for reception of the oil,
are sunk in the ground, so that their short necks
are alone seen above the surface. So soon as
the oil is well cleared and transparent (which
generally happens within six months), the top
and clear oil is racked off from the lees into
fresh jars. The lees, and any turbid oil with
them, are placed by themselves, or sold to the
soapmakers.
“Should any lees yet deposit, a second rack-
ing is made three months later.
“ Thus perfected, the oil should be kept in
places of moderate temperature. Extremes of
heat or cold injure its transparence and the
delicacy of its flavour.


io Cultivation of the Olive and Manufacture of its Fruit.
“Since light and the oxygen of the air
hasten the decomposition of the oil, each vessel
shculd be well filled and sealed, and, if need be,
darkened.
“ At large establishments the oil is stored in
immense cemented stone wells or tanks till
needed for distribution. These, at Gallipoli,
are cemented caverns hollowed out of the rock
on which the town is built. An interesting
statement is given of them in the article on
“ ‘Olive Oil’ of ‘ McCulloch’s Commercial Dic-
tionary.’ Artificial means of hastening the
clearing of the oil are sometimes used; but Mr.
Tocchi says that no clarifying is so good as that
accomplished by time.
“ Oil is exported in bulk, by sea or land, in
casks of various sizes. The French lay a coating
of plaster of paris over each end of the cask,
as security against leakage.
Picholine Olives.
“ Time will not allow more than the mention
of any other product of the olive tree, or I
should refer to its preserved fruit. The green
fruit, preserved and sold as ‘ Picholines,’ is, on
some olive plantations, productive of greater
annual value than that of the oil.
“ Mr, Davis, of the Reedbeds, and Mr.
Wurm, of Adelaide, have, among others, been
successful manufacturers of Picholine olives.
“ The ripe olive is preserved in mixtures of
a spiced and saline character, and is thus largely
consumed by the Greeks of Corfu; and, judging
from the healthy and athletic figures these
people present, and the quantity of preserved
fruit they are reported to consume, the preserve
is both palatable and nutritious.
“ Mr. McEwin tells me he has been informed
on good authority, that the workpeople em-
ployed in the manufacture of olive oil have
never been known to be affected with pulmonary
diseases.
Conclusion.
“In conclusion, I venture to affirm that in
this part of South Australia we possess all the
conditions requisite for a successful cultivation
of the olive. Its own visible growth, and the
ready growth of its compatriots—the almond,
the vine, the mulberry, the oleander, the
pomegranate, and even the illegal thistle (for
the Scotch thistle also came from Palestine),
endorse this affirmation.
“ The golden grain of our fine-skinned
wheat, the golden fleece of our merino sheep,
also climatically confirm our qualifications for
production of the golden olive oil.
“Let us declare that wheat, oil, wine, fine
wool, and silk are the chief natural agricul-
tural products of this part of South Australia,
and that we will vigorously promote their cul-
tivation.
“ The wheat of 1,000 bushels at 3s. gives the
cultivator £l5O the year. The fleece of 1,000
merinos at 3s. also gives £l5O for the year.
The oil of 360 olive-trees, at one gallon a tree,
would give an equal return ; and the ordinary
80-acre section of 20 chains by 40, with trees
planted in single line, at 22 feet apart on its
boundary, locates the 360 trees.
“ The 1,000 bushels of wheat will have taken
the area of, say, 100 acres. The 1,000 fleeces
will have needed 1,000 acres. The 360 olives
occupy four acres only.
“ On the same data, if 20 years back 5,000
Andrews, Thomas, & Clark, Printers, Grenfell Street, Adelaide.
eighty-acre sections had been thus planted
round with a single row of olive-trees, their
annual produce would now have equalled
£750,000. Yet, the total area they occupied
would be 20,000 acres only—a block eight miles
by four, or not larger than the Burra or Tung-
killo Special Surveys.
“If these 5,000 eighty-acre sections were
subject to about the average areas of our farms,
viz., 130 acres, 4,000 farmers would now be
receiving £lB7 10s. each per annum, in addition
to his present gross income.
“ But, allow to these calculations the weak-
ness of unnoted accidents, of diminished yields
and depressed markets, and of the thousand and
one contingencies which ever leave a margin,
more or less wide, between paper estimates and
actual results, we can still affirm that the com-
fort and confidence infused into the entire com-
munity by the reliable nature of such annual
returns as the olive, once established, would
ever maintain, may make its speedy and exten-
sive cultivation to be regarded by all classes
as an object of the utmost importance.
“ I am told that the Victorian Land Regula-
tions for a selector at credit require him to
plant trees along his fence wherever it forms a
boundary to a public road, and that the cost
will be estimated with improvements allowed
for on completion of the purchase. Now, if
such a regulation be desirable for shade and
shelter, and the admitted influence of timber in
attracting and retaining moisture, and there-
fore the value of checking wholesale denudation
of the country, how much better would it be to
require that such tree be one, like the evergreen
olive, productive of annual money.
“ Were the olive grown as it might be, a few
years would suffice to witness an olive mill in
every town and township. In itself, and in the
other industries it would create and sustain, it
would bear no unimportant part in finding re-
munerative occupation for the boys ‘we don’t
know what to do with.’ Whilst as a happy
result the farmer would handle more cash; the
capitalist his interest; the landlord his rent;
and additional employment be secured for men,
women, and children. At this moment Mr.
(Sheriff) Boothby ha.> a ton of olives waiting to
be crushed. He purposes the erection of a mill
for his own produce, and also to be able, at a
pro rata payment in money or oil, to crush and
express oil for others. This is a practical step.
“But after all the promotion of the cultiva-
tion of the olive for oil is, having regard to one
paragraph only, of—to us—a new but important
chapter in the developments of agricultural
products for manufactures.
“The olive is but one of numerous oil-pro-
ducing plants, greatly consumed, and therefore
of great value in the world. Some, like the
olive, are trees, and perennial—as, for example,
the castor-oil tree ; whilst others are herbaceous,
and annual, and beyond the value of their oil
would be of eminent utility to our farmers
as rotation cultures—restorative of overtaxed
wheat lands.
“ If the olive finds employment for the mill
during one, or, at the most, three months in the
year, why should not the seeds of the castcr-oil
tree (grown on odds and ends of land), of rape,
of poppy, of linseed, of seasame, and of the
sunflower, and others, make it useful and remune-
rative over the remaining months?”




■ f’
<r
*
. j ■
. V •
• *
