





ON
THE CAUSES
OF THE
DECLINE OF THE DRAMA,
AND THE MEANS BY WHICH ITS REPUTATION
MAY BE VINDICATED.
WITH A LETTER ADDRESSED TO THE
MANAGER OF THE THEATRE-ROYAL,
EDINBURGH.
BY F. M. I.
Cum tabulis animum censoris sumet honesti.
Horace.
EDINBURGH:
GEORGE ABERCROMBY DOUGLAS,
M.D.CCC.XXXIV.
Price Ninepence.


EDINBURGH:
Printed by R. Marshall, East Rose Lane.


PREFACE.
The writer of this Pamphlet, an enthusiastic admirer
of Tragedy, was induced to undertake the task of
writing a few words on the Causes of the Decline of
the Drama, by a conversation with a friend of his,
with whom on a benefit night, a short time ago, he
visited the Theatre, when the gross impropriety of
some of the performances could not fail to make him
surprised at seeing females form part of the audience,
and when he was not a little surprised and shocked
at seeing the profanations of the name of Christ by
praying to God on the boards of a Play-house. He
submits his task, however imperfectly performed, to
the judgment of the public, hoping that the goodness
of the intention may screen him from the severity of
the critic.
EDINBURGH,
5 Hi May , 1834.




LETTER
TO
WILLIAM MURRAY, ESQ.
Manager of the Theatre-Royal, Edinburgh.
Sir,
An occasional visitor at the Theatre, —a
constant reader of the Play Bills, and of the criti-
cisms contained in the periodical press on the previ-
ous nights performances at our Theatre, —I was in-
duced by your , and the public interest, to publish the
remarks contained in this Pamphlet. Many a time
have I perused with interest the complaints proceed-
ing from the Dramatic portion of the inhabitants of
Edinburgh, or their organs in the press, of the little
encouragement rendered by the town to the Stage,—
of the decline of Dramatic taste, and the like, and at
the same time that I have been interested in these


doleful lamentations I have been amused with the
strange inconsistencies attached to the Play Bills.
“ In consequence of immense applause from a crowd-
ed house, the same Play will be performed to-night
again ! ” And what is still more amusing, these Play-
Bills, which record this statement, are generally print-
ed two or three days previous !! ! Never, Sir, while
the public prints are allowed, instead of truth and
fair criticism, to insult the community by a system of
corrupt puffing, can you expect encouragement from
the public ; never while there are receptacles for pro-
stitutes within the precincts of the Theatre, can you
expect encouragement. Is it to be expected by you
that any respectable female will attend a place where
there is “an open unmasked, and shameless inter-
course with prostitutes ?” No ; it is not the public
whom I conceive to be blameable in not encouraging
the Drama ; they show an example which it would be
well if more generally followed elswhere. It is the
Manager whom I conceive to be the cause of all the
mischief. Besides the gross indecency which I have
mentioned in part of the audience, night after night,
the most disgraceful trash is forced upon the public.
Every thing adapted to the rising talents of Clowns,
Harlequins , Pantaloons, and Little Children, is
brought forward. If the present age does not furnish


pieces of greater merit than what are generally intro-
duced in Edinburgh, why not refer to the .unfading
labours of a Shakspeare, a Jonson, or an Addison,
—to those Dramatists who portray with so much
truth the variegated face of nature, unaided by exter-
nal show ? Why not act those scenes which have oc-
curred in real life, and which are calculated to elevate
the mind of man, by exhibiting to the “ age and body
of the time, its form and pressure ?” And in Scotland,
too, Scotland which boasts the priority in the univer-
sality of the literary and intellectual attainments of
her inhabitants. Will the Drama for ever remain in
its present degenerate state ? I trust not, but as it
is, Comedy! Comedy! nothing but Comedy !isto be
seen on the Edinburgh Stage, and this too, of a kind,
by which few can be amused, none improved, and by
which the modest ear is too often shocked. Need
we be surprised, or you, Sir, who are the sufferer, by
the present empty houses ? No ! those who pervert
the morals and taste of men receive a just retribution
when these practices impoverish them. 44 Whenever
the genuine Drama is w r ell cast and sustained, the
public will acknowledge it by their attendance.” It
is extremely true that a Manager has many tastes to
study, and many difficulties to contend with. It would
be illiberal in me not to bear this in mind; but surely


he does not choose the most prevalent in the present
day, in that which would prevent modesty from en-
tering within the precincts of a Theatre. Comedies,
such as the Careless Husband, Maid of the Oaks,
Suspicious Husband, &c., are fit amusement fqr fools
and prostitutes.
“ Let manly reason with these pleasures vie,
Let Shakspeare triumph, and may Opera die.”
But this has been quite reversed in the present
day. Let Opera live and reason die. I think it is
a maxim which the interest of the Drama itself would
dictate your abiding by. That
“ The Drama’s Laws, the Drama’s patrons give,
And they who’d live to please, must please to live.”
The public interest, as well as your own, would be
forwarded by giving us rational amusement. A great
effort is necessary to redeem the Stage from its pre-
sent degenerate state ; a state more degenerate and
more contemptible because in an enlightened age,
than when buffoonery and rope-dancing were alone
known to exist as theatricals. If you wish the fur-
therance of your own interest, and the utility of the
Drama, give us the productions of Dramatists pos-
sessed of the elegance and morality of Moliere, with
the just severity of Aristophanes. Give us the pro-


Auctions of men of genius possessing the beauty and fi-
delity, without the gross indecency of Plautus. Few will
regret the deprivation of those Oscianic farces which
have too long held their sway. You may tell us that
your duty to yourself requires your studying the pub-
lic corrupt taste. Exert yourself then to stem this
torrent of licentiousness and corruption. Let the
Theatre be the post of honour, and you as the guide
of the helm of the Edinburgh Stage, act like another
Menander, and for the honour of the human race,
try to prove “ that the human heart is easier moved
by conciliation than by menace.” If you must give
ns farces, give us Atellan ones. None, I can assure you,
ever wish to witness your Oscianic exhibitions, which,
without tending to improve, insult, by
“ Far o’erstepping the modesty of nature.”
To prove that the present state of the Drama argues
its speedy dissolution, I have referred the reader, in
the course of this pamphlet, to the history of the
Homan, Grecian, and Athenian Dramas, Read their
history and you will find that their own licentiousness
proved their downfall. Do what you can in your
official capacity to stem the muddy current of corrup-
tion, or it must remain a seminary for immorality. I
seize hold of this opportunity to say, that however I


condemn the state of the Edinburgh Drama, I shall
ever retain the opinion formed on the experience of
years, enjoyed in your acquaintance by others, of the
sincerity of your endeavours to please. I only point
out how that may be done more successfully, and in
a manner which will confer a more dignified character
on your profession. Accept these professions of my
sincerity, and, believe me, Sir, when I assure you,
that so long as you continue to withhold the nobler
part of Dramatic performance from the public, the
Stage will continue to descend. Gratify their desire
for
“ Randolph’s woes and Tancred’s youthful fire,”
and you cannot fail to interest the public, and meet
your deserved reward, —a reward to which he is justly
entitled, who can vindicate the reputation of the Bri-
tish Drama.
I am, Sib,
f ■'
our most obedient Servant,
F—D—K jVX —T—D I K S.


THE
CAUSES OF THE DECLINE
OF THE
BRITISH DRAMA CONSIDERED.
Lusit amabiliter, donee jam soevus apertam,
In rabiem verti caepit jocus.
Versus inopes rerum, nugaeque canorae.
Horace.




ON
THE CAUSES, &c.
Often when conversing on the Theatre, as a place
of public amusement, have I passed the remark, to
what a degenerate state it has descended in the pre-
sent day. Than the Stage Ido not conceive that there
is any place more calculated to afford us an idea of
the manners and customs of our ancestors in the olden
times, or of the maimer of occurrence of those events
most celebrated in the annals of history, and of im-
proving the morals of mankind by inculcating the
noblest principles to guide us, with honour to our-
selves throughout the voyage of life, and safely to
anchor us at the harbour of eternity. In Tragedy,
we see the most dignified and exalted rules of conduct
pointed out to us, and, as it were impressed upon us
by the force of illustrious example. Comedy, where
its original meaning is not perverted from just ridicule
ot our foibles into brutal obscenity and vulgar buffoon-
ery, I consider also to be eminently useful, for
“ Where moral precepts fail,
The sting of ridicule will oft prevail.”
Antecedent to the reign of Queen Elizabeth, the
Stage remained at an extremely low ebb. We have
an interesting description of it, and the nature of the
Plays in D’lsraeli’s Curiosities of Literature. “Plays”
says he, “ were thought to contribute so much to the
information and instruction of the people, that one of
the Popes granted a pardon of one thousand days to
every person who resorted peaceably to the Plays


performed in the Whitsund-week at Chester, begin-
ning with the 4 Creation,’ (!!!) and ending with the
4 General Judgment,* (!!!) These were performed
at the expense of the different corporations of that
city, and the reader may smile at the ludicrous com-
binations. In these pieces the actors represented
the person of the Almighty,* without being sensible
of the gross impiety. The 4 Creation* was performed
by the Drapers ; the 4 Deluge,’ by the Dyers ; 4 Abra-
ham, Melchizedec, and Lot,’ by the Barbers ; 4 the
4 Purification’ by the Blacksmiths; the 4 Last Sup-
per’ by the Bakers ; the 4 Resurrection’ by the
Skinners, and the 4 Ascension’ by the Tailors.” The
able Author of the 44 Curiosities of Literature,” be-
sides giving us an idea of the performers, amuses us
by a description of the performances in those days. In
France I should suppose the following P/«y(!) was
performed, it being translated from the French lan-
guage. From a dialogue between Anne and Caiphas,
who are conversing about St. Peter and John, he
takes the subjoined ;
Anne. —l remember them once; very honest peo-
* The author of this pamphlet being about four or five months
ago in the metropolis of Portugal, he was somewhat surprised at
the religious nature of the theatrical performances , in this country-
called amusements ; but still more was he surprised when a per-
son was introduced representing the Deity! Such blasphemy
can only be equalled by that of profaning the sacred gift allowed
by God to men to pray to him for Christ’s sake, being made use
of within the unhallowed precincts of a place allotted to such ex-
hibitions as the play of “ Secret Love, or the Maiden Queen.”
The last time he was in the Edinburgh Theatre, the Author was
glad to see that such profanations of one of the most sacred cere-
monies of religion did not fail to meet the hisses even of the
gods.


pie •, they have often brought their fish to my house
to sell.
Caiphas.—ls this true ?
Anne.— it is true. My servants remem-
ber them very well. To live more at their ease they
have left off business, or, perhaps they were in want
of customers. Since that time they have followed
Jesus, that wicked heretic, who has taught them
magic; the fellow understands necromancy and is the
greatest magician alive, as far as Rome itself.”
In Strutt’s Sports and Pastimes, also there is much
to amuse those who are fond of looking into the early
state of the English Drama. I will content myself,
after giving these amusing extracts, to pass on to the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, and her successor, King
James the I. During these reigns, the Stage rose to
a degree of unprecedented greatness. Then flourished
that Prince of Dramatists, Shakspeare.
“ With pleased attention midst his scenes we find
Each glowing thought that warms the female mind;
Each melting sigh, and every tender tear,
The Lover’s wishes, and the Virgin’s fear;
His every strain the smiles and graces own.”
I cannot help here making a remark, which if the
reader will follow me throughout these pages, he
cannot help seeing the truth of; how much the state of
the Drama borrows its complexion from the manners
of the times ; he will observe how much weight the
formality and austerity of the Romish Church, with its
spiritual and temporal powers, had on the amusements
of the people, when a Pope encouraged them by re-
ligious absolution, and now in the reign of Elizabeth,
when the liberty of the Reformed Religion was secur-
ed on a solid and rational basis, how it tended to en


courage letters and the arts; and furthei on in this
pamphlet, I will show how the profligacy of the court
affected the Drama by degrading it into buffoonery
and obscenity. But I anticipate my subject. I re-
turn to the great Elizabeth, great as a queen, indeed
she has been called, and it is in a public capacity
that the character of a king or queen chiefly affects
the empire. Of this Princess, a female historian has
said that “ her vices were such as could not exist with
a good heart, nor with a good head;
but to the unaccountable caprice of party zeal she
owes the reputation of qualities that would do honour
to a masculine mind.” Under the government of such
a person as Elizabeth, to an ordinary observer it
would seem quite unaccountable how the era rose
to such a degree of literary greatness as to be con-
sidered the Augustan age of English letters, when
the works of a Bacon, a Spenser, a Sydney, a Hooker,
a Taylor, a Barrow, a Raleigh, and a Napier, were
ushered upon the world in quick succession, as well
as the imperishable efforts of those geniuses whose
names are enrolled in the annals of letters, to exist -is
long as those productions of their adamantine intel-
lects continue to instruct and amuse the human race.
The memory of the Bard of Avon is every where re-
vered and cherished; all acknowledge the greatness
and the versatility of his genius, and the author in his
writings, the senator in his orations, and even the di-
vine in his sermons, borrows embellishments from the
works of this famed dramatist; but, 44 perfect beau-
ties often have a mole,” and Shakspeare seems to
have indulged in that dogma, fatal to many great
men, the lawlessness of genius, forgetting that self-
control is its highest attribute. I mean self-control


in his writings, among which there are some tinged
with indecency ; his beauties are more attractive, they
shine more brilliantly, because in contrast with his
faults. A modern critic, for whose judgment univer-
sal respect is entertained, says of him, “ If it be true
that no other man has written so finely as Shakspeare,
it is no less so, that no scribbler could devise more
contemptible ideas, and misplace them as he has done.”
•Little can be said regarding the Drama during the
civil commotions in the reign of the first Charles, or
the Protectorate of Cromwell. I therefore pass on to
the reign of King Charles the Second, long an outcast
from his country, and a resident on the Continent. He
there imbibed all the prevalent profligacies. In this
he was followed by his train, for the most part com-
posed of abandoned and profligate adventurers, who
were unable to obtain an asylum from party rage at
home during the Protectorate. With their return they
introduced all the wickedness and licentiousness they
had learned abroad. The Court of King Charles is
still celebrated as the seat of wit, of profligacy, and
of beauty, and himself as the merry monarch. In the
works of the most famed dramatic authors of that
period, instead of discovering nobleness of sentiment,
tenderness or fancy, we have ridicule and sophistry,
and what is worse, indecency. We see neither the spon-
taneous animations of genius, nor the universal lan-
guage of Shakspeare, but the buffooneries of Wycherly
and the beastliness of Dryden.
“ Had thy licentious pen but stirred in virtue,
With half the industry it raked in vice,
Now would thy Comedies have graced the Theatre ;
But as it is, what pages thou hast blotted.”
As Comedy flourished, Tragedy grew diseased.


“ Effutire leves indigna Tragedia versus,
Ut festis matrona moverl jussa diebus.”
We see that which was originally intended for the
noble and the serious, perverted into “ the low mi-
mic follies of a farce.” The Plays of that period,
to borrow the language of a Dramatic historian :
“ Among every outrageous and monstrous doctrine,
teach filial ingratitude, encourage adultery, and circu-
late such revolting and scandulous tenets, as would
thirty years previous, have been spurned at by an
English audience with ineffable indignation.” Some
writers on the history of the Drama tell us otherwise;
they cite as proofs of the Stage ability in those days,
the success which attended the efforts of many of their
actors, or rather the fortunes amassed by them ; but
I do not deem the public judgment thus expressed,
as proof against what I state. What Juvenal says is
extremely true.
“ Fortune can for her pleasure fools advance,
And toss them on the whirling wheels of chance.”
If Plays or Actors did succeed, it was for want of
judgment in the public.
“ Ut neque spectari neque cognosci potuerit,
It a populus studio stupidus in funambulo,
Animum occuparat.”
About the beginning of the eighteenth century, the
Stage began to regain its character, and Dramatic
Literature its respectability, by the writings of such
men as Gay, Foote, Young, Mallet, Dodsley, Shirley,
Moore, Garrick, and Addison. By the co-operation of
the latter, the respectability of the Drama was greatly
heightened. No one could be more fitted to vindicate
its reputation than Addison ; a moral philosopher and


a writer on Christianity. His style has been esteemed
the most perfect of the age; and of his literary per-
formances the tragedy of Cato has been esteemed the
most perfect. He fully understood the end for which
the Drama was intended when he said, it was to root
out of our minds every thing that is mean or little;
to cultivate that humanity which is the ornament of
our nature, to soften insolence; to soothe affliction ;
and to subdue our minds to the dispensations of Pro-
vidence. Dr. Johnson highly esteemed “ Cato,” and
every European country was soon benefited by a trans-
lation of it. It abounds with the finest imagery and
the noblest sentiment, clothed in the richest language
our tongue supplies. When Portius speaks, he says ;
41 The ways of heaven are dark and intricate,
Puzzled in mazes and perplexed with errors ;
Our understanding traces ’em in vain ;
Lost and bewildered in the fruitless search.
Nor sees with how much art the windings run,
Nor where the regular confusion ends.”
Addison divests that subject on which the muse has
long delighted to write, of foolish romance, and gives
to it the air of sober and dignified reason.
44 Too long had love engross’d Britannia’s stage,
And sunk to softness all our tragic rage.”
Says Tickell, the former corrected this error, and
how greatly superior is that love arising from admi-
ration of the moral and intellectual endowments, or
the kind and amiable disposition of a pious female, to
any other, as greatly superior as the mind is to the
face.
44 Tis not a set of features or complexion,
The tincture of the skin that I admire.
Beauty soon grows familiar to the lover,


Fades in his eye, and palls upon his senses.
The virtuous Marcia towers above her sex ;
True, she is fair, (Oh heaven divinely fair!)
But still the lovely maid improves her charms
With inward greatness, unaffected wisdom,
And sanctity of manner's.”
To exhibit all the beauties of this Tragedy would
be to exhibit the whole performance; in every line
there is something noble. That part in Act Ywhere
Cato reasons on the immortality of the soul, is one of
the finest passages with which dramatic literature
supplies us.
“ It must be so, —Plato thou reasonest well!
Else whence this pleasing hope, this fond desire,
This longing after immortality ?
Or whence this secret dread, and inward horror.
Of falling into nought ? Why shrinks the soul
Back on herself ? And startles at destruction ?
’Tis the Divinity that stirs within us.
’Tis heaven itself that points out an hereafter,
And intimates eternity to man.
Eternity, thou pleasing dreadful thought 1 ”
Can any thing more impressive than this passage
be conceived ? To speak of the Scottish Stage at
this period, is to speak of little better than the rude
buffoonery and rope-dancing, to be seen at the present
day at the country fairs, for the ammusement of the
rustic population. The only Theatre which the Scot-
tish Metropolis supplied may still be seen in the u Auld
Play-House Close.” Our countrymen believed that
the Actors were assisted by the devil himself, and for
this reason many avoided attending the satanic ex-
hibitions. Still, however, in these obscure places, one
or two pieces of Dramatic excellence were originally
performed proceeding from the pens of Scotchmen;
one was Allan Ramsay’s Gentle Shepherd, and the


other was the Tragedy of Douglas. The author of the
latter, a Scottish Clergyman, (I mention it as an illus-
tration of the times,) was severely persecuted by his
order for daring to contribute to such 4< profane”
amusement. This Tragedy is considered in the pre-
sent day among the best in the English tongue, except
that it in some degree justifies that crime which is
considered the greatest, and which God has sworn to
punish with eternal condemnation. I mean suicide.
I may be thought inconsistent in not saying the same
of “ Cato but the one being founded on Roman
incident, and the other on Scottish, quite alters the
case, from the wide difference between the religious
opinions of the former and the latter. In England,
towards the middle or end of the last century, many
great Tragedians have appeared upon the boards,
which have in some degree revived the taste for Tra-
gedy. We have had a Garrick, and a Siddons, and at
a latter date, a Kemble and a Kean. The first of these
was so highly esteemed, not only by his own country-
men, but by the French, that they familiarly designated
their chief actor, “ Le Garrick The
prevailing amusement now offered to the public at
the Edinburgh Theatre, and what has called forth these
pages, is Comedy ! Comedy ! Comedy ! nothing but
Comedy ! The obscenities of Dryden, the buffoone-
ries of Wycherly and Scarron, are there revived.
The beauties of Addison, and even of Shakspeare, lie
almost dormant. Were I a father, I would be ashamed
to allow a daughter of mine to sit in this School
of Immorality, under the same roof with the vilest
prostitutes. As it is, I would scorn to insult the mo-
desty of a virtuous female by inviting her to partici-
pate in the amusements to be derived from such


performances. There are to be seen the wiles of pros-
titutes, and the flattering seductions of the despoiler
of female virtue. Nor are these exhibited to us to
excite the cry of detestation and abhorrence at the ex-
istence of such follies and vices in real life. No !to
call forth the approving shouts of merriment. Often
have I been surprised to see modest females occupying
the boxes of a Theatre, and often have I felt for them
when I saw the crimson blush fly to their cheeks, on
seeing the weaknesses of their sex thus openly
bited to them. Still more have I felt for that sex to
which I belong, when I have seen their cunning and
intrigue to seduce the virgin from the paths of honour,
and deprive her of her chastity, without exciting one
blush, openly exhibited. I have included all man-
kind in my ejaculations of pity, when I have seen
these exhibitions of their baseness, instead of calling
forth the cry of shame, or the shouts of abhorrence
meet
“ The approving sanction of applause.”
It is extremely true what w r as said by a whole body
of men regarding Plays and Players in the last cen-
tury, that such entertainments, from what has been
usually exhibited at them, as well as from the in-
famous characters, for the most part of the Players,
is extremely prejudicial to religion and morality. Pity
it is that such powerful means for the improvement
of the morals of mankind, and enforcing dignified, pa-
triotic, and religious principles, should be prostituted
to the service of Satan, to the encouragement of ob-
scenity, and the subversion of good morals and virtue.
But it cannot be to look upon such scenes as I have
characterised those which are exhibited at the Edin-
burgh Theatre to be, that any female can attend j


to the encouragement of irreligion! vice ! obscen-
ity ! I say that any female can attend the Play-
House.
“ For many worthy and chaste dames,
Even thus all guiltless meet reproach.”
It is
“ To be themselves a spectacle they come”
to be associated with those in the Green Room,
whom they do not even consider respectable, and to
be among whose number they would scorn, to be asso-
ciated with these and base prostitutes in the lewd re-
marks of the other sex ! Rut happy am I that the
northern fair begin to understand the meaning of
those vulgar performances of which they may once
have been the spectators, and absent themselves from a
place which they could not continue to attend, and ex-
pect to retain a character for respectability. While
the Stage exhibits to us in its true light the manners
and customs of our ancestors, or shows us the man-
ner in which occurred those events most celebrated
in history, (not the Rape of the Sabines,) as long as
it continues to associate with Tragedy the inculcat-
ing of noble and dignified principles, and the encour-
agement of good morals in society; so long as Comedy,
without departing from the paths of decency, con-
tinues to correct our foibles; so long is it worthy sup-
port and encouragement; but if it degenerates from
this, and merely exhibits the follies and indecencies
of brutes for the mirth of the vulgar, then does it de-
serve to be shunned and contemned. Already forsaken
by all those possessed
“ Mentisque capacius altae,”
the Stage will continue to descend. Its present state.


it' we judge from the history of the ancient Drama,
argues its speedy dissolution. I refer the reader to
the Grecian Stage, if, before its fall, it was not in the
same state as the British is at present. I refer the
reader to the Roman Stage, if before its fall it was
not in the same state as the British at present; and,
lastly, I refer him to the Athenian. If any country
may be considered before us in the walks of letters,
I think it is Germany. A recent traveller there, says
whenever a Tragedy of Schiller is to be performed,
the Theatre is usuallyaad those
attending are not like people in
this country,: but citizens, who
feel truly what nature and The same per-
son tells us of other fovyn^inT Gehpdny where nothing
but Comedy was where there w r as
nothing but empty houses. I trust my anticipations
of the speedy fate of the Drama may be averted by
its own improvement; that the Stage divested of its
obscenities, and the Actors of their profligacy, it may
ere long exist, not a seminary of immorality and vice,
but as a school in which what is noble and good may
be inculcated, and in which what is bad, condemned.
In conclusion, I hope the Theatre may ere long become
a school of morality, or it is nothing.
FINIS.
EDINBURGH;
Printed by R. Marshall, East Rose Lane.




