

~~lir'Vt
•Ju%~ 7u&f &j/Ujr.^M*******/ks*




.
%
.
■ . — — '


I
r
ON
THE ABORIGINES
I
Australia .)
I
I
O
\
_ .. 1%
NEW HOLLAND AND VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
BARRON FIELD, ESQ.
i
V
{Read 2 d January, 1822, before the Philosophical Society of


Society will, by collecting and digesting all the
physiological facts which lie within its reach, con-
tribute in some degree, however inconsiderable, to
solve the mighty problem.
In the mean time, the most philosophical division
of tlie varieties of the human §pede§, is that of
Professor Blumenbach, into the Caucasian, the
Mongolian, the Ethiopian, the Malayan, and the
American; but, with no more light than that
which the residence of a few years in New South
Wales and Van Diemen’s Land has afforded me,
I am of opinion that the professor is wrong in
classing the natives only of the north-west coast
of New Holland, and of the island of Van Diemen,
in the Ethiopian or negro variety, and the rest in
the Malayan, together with the more civilized and
enlightened natives of the Indian Archipelago and
the South Sea Islands; and I think that all the
aborigines of Australia are of Ethiopian origin.
I am fully aware of the distinction between the
natives of New Holland and those of Van Die-
men’s Land, although I never before heard of any
reason for exempting the New Hollanders of the
north-west coast from this distinction; and I


cannot learn any from our associate, Captain King,
who has seen more of that coast than perhaps any
European: but I do not think the difference
between the New Hollander and the Islander of
Van Diemen by any means sufficient to class the
Australians into two varieties, like those of the
Birmanese and the Great Andarnaners*, or the
Malays and the negro races of the Indian Archi-
pelago t. The skull, the genius, the habits, of the
Australians appear to me, as far as I have been
able to investigate the subject, to have, in all of
them, the degenerate Ethiopian character, like
that of the Andarnaners, and the negro races of
the Indian Islands; and Professor Blumenbach,
and after him Professor Lawrence, have proved
that the accidents of straight or woolly hair, in
different families or tribes, are very insignificant
marks of diversity, and do not at all render it ne-
cessary, with Colonel Symes, on the origin of the
Great Andarnaners J, and Mr. M'Leod, on that of
* Syines’s Embassy to Ava, pp. 130, 131.
t Crawfurd’s Hist, of the Indian Archipelago* b. i. ch. i.
t Embassy* übi supra t


a woolly-haired Philippine Island near Luconia*,
to call down the trenchant machinery of a wrecked
* Voyage of the Alceste, p. 205. After all, I suspect that
Mr. M f Leod has confounded the woolly-haired pigmies of the
interior of Laconia, the negrettos di monte , with this ima-
ginary island.—See Blackwood’s Mag. vol. iii. p. 577. De
Ziißiga, VA hifc History of the Philippine Islands, is of opinion
that, from their common flat nose and their dialects of one
common language, the origin of both the Indians and the
negroes of these islands is nearly the same : but surely the
Malay nose is very different from the Negro 3 and I doubt
the fact of the resemblance of the two languages; and so does
Mr. Maver, his translator 3 but he seems to confound the
aboriginal negroes with the Tagalese. Zuniga’s theory is,
that both the Indians and the Negroes (especially the latter)
are of South American and not Malayan origin. Now, no
two things can be more different than the Ethiopian and the
American varieties of our species. The Malayan is nearer
to the American, and the Mongolian so similar, that the
peopling of the western world has generally been attributed
to the Tartars of the north-eastern parts of Asia. To derive
the Indian Islanders from America is going back again, and
reversing all the scriptural and philosophical pre-eminence in
antiquity of the East: it is to make population circumnavigate
the globe. But I will give the Spaniard the benefit of his ar-
gument* hflwevTf Uopliy§iBlBgical
“ No doubt can be entertained that the radical language,
from which all these dialects spring, prevails from Madagascar
to the Philippines, with local shades of difference. It is
spoken too in New Guinea, and in all the islands to the
southward, in the Marianas, in the islands of San Duisk
[]a strange corruption of Sandwich], in those of Otaheite^


African slave-ship, to “ account for the phoeno-
menon,” or “ explain the historical mystery.”
and in almost all the islands in tlie South Sea, as far as the
isle of Pasquas, which is not more than 600 leagues distant
from the coast of South America. On observing that the
proper names of places, about the middle of the continent of
South America, are very similar to those of the Philippines,
I endeavoured to procure a vocabulary of this country, and
did not fail to examine with great diligence and attention the
few words of the language of Chili which Ercilla mentions in
Ids Araucana, and which I found perfectly conformable to the
language of Tagala. The name Chili is a derivation from this
language : the cormorant is called cochile , and this is a name
which the Malays give to the sons of their kings. Chilian ,
which is a town of Chili, is a compound from the language of
Tagala, in which language the termination an gives the signifi-
cation iotvn. Thus, from Cachile we draw Cachilian , meaning
a town where there are cormorants. Mapocho , which is the
situation wdiere the city of Santiago stands, is another word
of Tagalic composition, signifying a town, and pocquiot being
a kind of herb, we form the name of Mapocquiot , a town in
which there is abundance of this herb. In Chili, they fre-
quently double the syllables in forming a word, as ytayta ,
biobio , lemolemo , coloco. A great many other words are either
actually of Tagalic derivation, or assimilate closely to that
language. In examining the structure of these two languages,
w T e are compelled to conclude that they flow from one and the
same source 3 and I dare affirm that the Indians in the Phi-
lippines are descended from the aborigines of Chili and Peru,
and that the language of these islands derives itself immedi-
ately from the parent source, those of the neighbouring islands
being dialects of this. Many will urge the absurdity.of this
i
■ |


5 f But sco postea , p. 219, note.
The difference between the Birmanese and the
Great Andarnaners, the Malays and the Papuans,
supposition, on the plea that the more immediate vicinity of
the Philippines to Malacca must have occasioned them to be
colonized by the Malays, as our historians generally assert.
I to fi6t deny that these islands could easily have been peopled
by the Malays 3 but how could they colonize the Isles de
Palaos and Marianas, which are distant more than 300
leagues ? And it is still more improbable that they colonized
the islands of San Duisk [Sandwich] and Otaheite, which
are distant 2000 leagues from the Philippines*. All these
people, however, have the same language, the same manners
and customs, and consetpiently the same origin as our Indians.
There is, in my opinion, this other reason for supposing these
latter islands could not be peopled from the westward, viz.—
that in all the torrid zone the east wind generally prevails t,
which, being in direct opposition to the course from Malacca
and the adjacent islands, it is fair to conclude that the inha-
bitants of all the islands of the South Sea came from the east,
sailing before the wind ; for we have seen it often happen that
the Indians from the Palaos have arrived at the Philippines
precisely under these circumstances. On the contrary, we
have no instance on record of any of the Philippine Indians
having been, even by accident, carried by the winds to the
islands to the eastward. Indeed, w 7 e know the reverse of this
to be true, since at times the most experienced pilots, in at-
tempting this navigation* liave \mm eampglled to return
without falling in with the islands they went in search of,
from the necessity there is, in the voyage, of being provided
with proper nautical instruments. Here, therefore, we appear
* But the whole Pacific, from Malacca to Easter Island, is thickly
studded with islands, for stepping-stones—B. F.


Maritime Geography , vol. iv. pp. 55, 56.
i
i
I
hi
> f
=*—-■•
the New Zealanders and the Australians, is radical,
and constitutes a variety in the human species.
The origin of each race must be looked for much
to have found the most probable solution of our difficulties,
that is, that the first settlers came out of the east (we may
presume from the coast of South America), and proceeding
gradually to the westward, through the Pacific Ocean, studded
as we find it with islands at no very great distance from each
other, and of course of easy access before the wind, it follows
that to whatever point in an eastern direction we can trace
the Tagalic language, we may conclude that at that point
emigration must have commenced.” History of the Philippine
Islands, Manilla, 1803, vol. i. c. 2.
« At Watteo, Captain Cook met three natives of Otaheite,
who had been driven by the winds and currents thus far to
leeward in attempting to pass in a canoe to Uliatea. Captain
Cook, after relating their story, observes : 4 The application
of the above narrative is obvious: it will serve to explain,
better than a thousand conjectures of speculative reasoners,
how the detached parts of the earth, and in particular how
the islands of the South Sea, may have been first peopled,
especially those that lie remote from any inhabited continent,
or from each other.’ But this fact, as well as others of the
same nature, proves directly the contrary of the inference
deduced from it by Captain Cook, namely, the peopling of
Polyaegia from the west 3 for in all these instances, the na-
tives have been driven from east to west by the trade-wind
and equatorial currents, and hence the real consequence would
seem to be, the derivation of the Polynesian race from
America 3 a consequence, how ever, which every physical and
moral feature of these people forbids us to adopt.” Tuckeys


* Ediob. Philo soph. Journal, vol. vi. p. 280.
I
higher up than in a wrecked slave-trader, and the
difference lies much deeper than (like Sampson’s
strength) in the hair. “ The distribution of or-
ganic beings on the globe (says Baron Humboldt)
depend§ not only on very complicated climatic
circumstances, but also on geological causes, with
which we are entirely unacquainted, because they
are connected with the original state of our
planet*.” The Birmanese, the Malayans, and
the New Zealanders, are all susceptible of civiliza-
tion. The Birmanese are referred by Blumenbach
to the Mongolian variety of our species, and their
civilization is of great antiquity: the Sumatrans,
Javanese, and other East Indian islanders of the
Malayan variety, have also their religious anti-
quities ; and the South Sea islanders are evidently,
from their persons, their aptness for civilization,
and their language, of Malayan origin likewise;
but the Great Andamaii§r§ ; the Papuans and the
Australians, like their superiors, the American
Indians, have never yet shown a disposition to
lead any other life than that of the hunter


and fisher, or to acknowledge any other govern-
ment than that of the strongest, and any other
law than that of nature After the attempts
* The best and latest account of the North American Indians
is given by Mr. Hodgson of Liverpool, in the Missionary
Registers for November and December, 1821. The American
Board of Missions have two schools or native institutions
in actual work, viz. Elliott among the Choctaws, and Brainerd
among the Cherokees 5 the former consisting of 80, and the
latter of 200 (Mr. Hodgson says 80) children ; and the Board
are forming other missionary settlements among the Indians ;
but what are these among a population of 258,909, as the
Indians of the United States alone are still stated to be ? It
is like the poor four black children that composed the Au-
stralian Native Institution (!) in 1823. But it is more pro-
mising to learn, that in 1819 the Council of the Lower Towns
of the Choctaws devoted their third of an annuity of 6000
dollars for seventeen years, which they have been receiving
since 1816 from the United States, for the sale of a tract of
country, to the establishment of a school in their district ;
and this example was followed in March, 1820, by the Six
Towns, and in June by the Upper Towns; 6000 dollars being
thus appropriated annually to this object by the nation. Mr.
Hodgson adds, that one of these districts had before requested
the United States not only to forbid the introduction of am-
munition into the nation, that the hunter may be compelled to
work, but to send their annuity in implements of husbandry;
that at a recent general council of the chiefs, 1000 dollars
in money, and upwards of eighty cows and calves, were sub-
scribed for the use of schools; and that the total contribution
of the Choctaws to this object exceeds 70,000 dollars. When
the farmer and his family begin to cut the corn themselves,
■j


of more than thirty years, by the constant neigh-
bourhood of colonies of Englishmen, to civilize
the fields will be cleared. On the other hand, the national
council of the Creek Indians refused to receive a mission.
The Cherokees are said to be making considerable advances
in civilization. They have divided their country into districts,
havB laid i\ tax on the people to build a court-house in each
district, and have appointed four circuit judges 5 and are
rapidly adopting the laws and manners of their white brethren.
The English language has been adopted as the official one, in
which the national records are kept, and is universally gaining
ground among the nation. Not a few individuals, and those
of influence, have altogether discarded the Indian language and
customs. It is a circumstance uncommonly favourable, that
so great a proportion of those who have already become Chri-
stians consists of mothers of families j because, according to
the manners of the Cherokees, with these resides the principal
influence on all the other members of a family, both as to
external arrangements and their way of thinking. By mar-
riage, the husband is considered as in some degree adopted
into the family of his wife, and the wife’s brothers are regarded
as, in some respects, entitled to more influence over the
children than their own father. As few of the Creeks are
rich enough (says Mr. Hodgson) to purchase many negroes,
all the drudgery is performed by the women, and it is melan-
choly to meet them, as we continually did, with an infant
hanging on their necks, bending under a heavy burthen, and
leading their husband’s horse, while he walked before them,
erect and graceful, apparently without a care.” Christianity
is the only religion that has ever equalized women with men 5
and if, with all this bodily slavery to the men, and mental
influence over them, the women of North America do not
y
’a


the natives of New Holland and Van Diemen’s
Land, they are exactly in the same state in which
we found them; and, lam afraid, the following
history of the Ethiopians of the Indian islands
will equally apply to those of Australia :
** The brown and negro races of the Archipelago
may be considered to present, in their physical and
moral character, a complete parallel with the white
and negro races of the western world. The first
have always displayed as eminent a relative supe-
riority over the second, as the race of white men
have done over the negroes of the west. All the
indigenous civilization of the Archipelago has
sprung from them; and the negro race is con-
stantly found in the most savage state. That
race is to be traced from one extremity of the
Archipelago to another; but is necessarily least
frequent where the most civilized race is most
numerous, and seems utterly to have disappeared
Where the civilization of the fairer race has pro-
ceeded furthest, as in Sumatra, Java, and perhaps
introduce Christianity with civilization in her hand, they do
not deserve to be other than they are.


Celebes; just as the Caribs and other savages of
America have given way to the civilized invaders
of Europe. The negro races of the Archipelago
increase in numbers in the inverse ratio of im-
provement, or, in other words, as we proceed east-
ward. In some of the spice islands, their extirpa-
tion is matter of history. They are the principal
races in some of the islands towards New Guinea,
and nearly the sole inhabitants of the portion of
that great island itself, which, from its physical
character, we have a right to include within the
limits of the Archipelago.
“ The east insular negro is a distinct variety of
the human species, and evidently a very inferior
one. Their puny stature and feeble frames are
not to be ascribed to the poverty of their food or
the hardships of their condition; for the lank-
haired race, living under circumstances equally
precarious, have vigorous constitutions. Some
islands they enjoy almost exclusively to them-
selves, yet they have in no instance risen above
the most abject state of barbarism. Wherever
they are encountered by the fairer races, they are
hunted down, like the wild animals of the forest,


and driven to the mountains or fastnesses, inca-
pable of resistance*.”
The difference between the New Hollander and
the Van Diemen’s-lander is slight in the skull,
and slighter still in the colour, genius, or habits.
M. Peron says, that the Van Diemen’s Islander
has a large head, especially remarkable for the
great length of the diameter from the chin to the
sinciput, and that that of the New Hollander is
less bulky and compressed in the back part, while
that of the Van Diemen’s Islander is elongated in
the same direction. The great difference consists
in the hair, which is either straight or curled in
the former, and woolly in the latter. The differ-
ence, in Africa, between the neighbouring tribes
of the Hottentots and the Kaffers (both Ethio-
pians) is infinitely greater; the former being short,
yellowish, with high cheek-bones and flat noses, and
the latter being tall, deep brown, with the high
forehead and prominent nose of Europeans. It ig
language and genius, and not shape or colour, that
are the only tests of affinity of the human race.
i
1
h I 1
* Crawfurd’s Hist. Ind. Archipel. vol. i. pp. 18, 24.


Language (says Mr. Horne Tooke) cannot lie 5 and
from the language of every nation, we may with
certainty collect its origin. The similitude and
derivation of languages (says Dr. Johnson) afford
the most indubitable proof of the traduction of
UIC liiUUUiUlUlt JviUOi. Wi
nations, and the genealogy of mankind. They
add physical certainty to historical evidence, and
often supply the only evidence of ancient emigra-
tions and of the revolutions of ages, which have
left no written monuments behind them. But
neither the analogy nor the diversity of language
(says Baron Humboldt*) can suffice to solve the
great problem of the filiation of nations. They
afford only simple probabilities. Mr. Marsden,
the author of the History of Sumatra, and Mr.
Crawfurd, of that of the Indian Archipelago, have
traced what they call the Great Polynesian lan-
guage, from Madagascar to New Guinea and the
South Sea Islands.
«j n the general character, particular form and
genius of the innumerable languages, spoken within
the limits of the Indian Islands (according to Mr.
Personal Narrative* Vo;. iii. p. *B5.


Marsden) there is a remarkable resemblance, while
all of them differ widely from those of every other
portion of the world. This observation extends to
every country, from the north-west extremity of
Sumatra to the western shores of New Guinea, and
may be even carried to Madagascar to the west, the
Philippines to the east, and the remotest of Cook’s
discoveries to the south The original clothing
of the Sumatrans is the same with that found by
navigators among the South Sea Islands, and in
Europe generally called Otaheitan cloth f.”
“ One original language (says Sir S. Raffles J)
seems in a very remote period to have pervaded
the whole archipelago, and to have spread (perhaps
with the population) towards Madagascar on one
side, and the islands in the South Sea on the
other; but in the proportion that we find any of
these tribes more highly advanced in the arts of
civilized life than others, in nearly the same pro-
portion do we find the language enriched by a
corresponding accession of Sanscrit terms, directing
us at once to the source whence civilization flowed
towards these regions.”
* Archaeologia, vol.'vi. p. 154.
t Hist, of Sumatra, p. 43. J Hist, of Java, p. 369.


Now we cannot find the smallest vestige of this
language in the thousand Babel tongues of the
New Hollanders and Van Diemen’s Islanders.
And so it is with the Ethiopian races of the Indian
Archipelago.
“ The negro races (says Mr. Crawfurd*) who
inhabit the mountains of the Malayan peninsula,
in the lowest and most abject state of social exist-
ence, though numerically few, are divided into a
great many distinct tribes, speaking as many dif-
ferent languages. Among the rude and scattered
population of the island of Timor, it is believed
that not less than forty languages are spoken.
On Ende and Flores we have also a multiplicity
of languages ; and among the cannibal population
of Borneo, it is not improbable that many hundreds
are spoken. Civilization advances as we proceed
westward; and in the considerable island of Sam-
bawa, there are but five tongues; in the civilized
portion of Celebes not more than four; in the
great island of Sumatra not above six, and in Java
but two,”
Mr. Crawfurd, in one of his pages, has given us
a specimen of the Great Polynesian language, in
* Hist. Ind. Archipel. vdl. ii. p. 79.


t Voyage to New Zealand, vol. ii. p. 267.
+ Not the Fejees, see p. 218, posted .
P 2
I
which I find that the words for eye*, die , bird , and
board , are exactly the same, and no fewer than
ten other words nearly the same, as those in the
Church Missionary Society’s New Zealand Grammar.
“ That the New Zealanders are of the same race
with the people of the tropical isles (says Mr.
Nicholasf) I think is unquestionable; and so
striking a resemblance do they bear in their man-
ners and customs, as well as in the conformation
of their bodies, to the natives of Otaheite, of the
Society Isles, of the Marquesas, the FejeesJ, the
Tonga or Friendly Isles, and of Easter Island,
that it is impossible not to consider them the off-
spring of the same primitive stock. They are
likewise identified with them in their superstitions
1 a
and their systems of theogony, which are only mo-
difications of a common belief, originally assented
to by the whole of them, and altered in the lapse
of time according to caprice and circumstance.
* The word for eye is the only one, out of a vocabulary of
forty, that is nearly the same in Port Jackson, Caledon Bay,
Endeavour River, and King George’s Sound 3 but it bears no
resemblance to the Polynesian word.


But what appears conclusive on the subject is,
that all these islanders speak one general language,
the variation in the words being only dialectical,
while in many of them no difference is perceptible.”
Of this similarity Mr. Nicholas has given an
example in his vocabulary, where the New Zea-
land and Tonga words are compared. He then
proceeds to deduce the South Sea Islanders from
the Malays, and adopts Dr. Francis Buchanan’s
and Sir Stamford Raffles’s derivation of the East
Indian Islanders from the Tartar stock.
« To judge from external appearance, that is to
say, from shape, size, and feature (says Dr. Buch-
anan*) there is one very extensive nation that in-
habits the coast of Asia. It includes the eastern
and western Tartars of the Chinese authors, the
Calrnucs, the Chinese, the Japanese, and other
tribes inhabiting wliat is called the peninsula of
India beyond the Ganges, and the islands to the
south and east of this, as far at least as New
Guinea.”
Professor Blumenbach sees physiological reasons
* Asiatic Researches, vol. vi. 21


to divide this “ nation,” as Dr. Buchanan calls it,
into two varieties of the human species, which he
calls the Mongolian* and the Malayan. Mr.
Nicholas then endeavours to trace the connexion
between the South Sea and the Indian Islanders,
and here I think he tries to avail himself of re-
semblances which are too general and unimportant,
and even descends to the absurd fancy, that the
Mosaic account of the creation may have been
transmitted from Egypt to Asia, and so (between
Siam and China) through the Indian Archipelago
to New Zealand, because the people of the latter
islands are generally impressed with the beliex that
the first woman was formed of one of the ribs of a
man, and because heevee is their word for hone.
This is like the fancy of many of the New Eng-
landers, that the North American Indians were
\ 1 1
the descendants of the ten tribes of Israel, because
in some of their songs they could distinguish the
word hallelujah. All our religious emigrants and
* Mongolia is about the latitude in Asia, where M. Bailly
places that still more ancient people than the Egyptians and
the Orientals, which he conceives to have existed, from the
knowledge and civilization common to both.


.
* Lawrence’s Lectures, p. 570,
*
[
'I
' V
\
missionaries are apt to assimilate the manners and
superstitions of their respective savages to Judaism,
the Old Testament being the ancient history with
which they are most familiar. The great principle
of Polynesian religion, the icihoo , is manifestly of
Asiatic origin.
“ But it is among the Batta nation (says Mr.
Nicholas), a people who inhabit that part of Su-
matra bordering on the Straits of Malacca, and
who have preserved their genuineness of character
from the first period of their origin to the present
time, that customs and institutions obtain, which
in the aggregate resemble those in New Zealand
almost to identity.”
Now it unfortunately happens that the Battas
are not of the Malay, but of the negro race of
Indian Islanders*, so that Mr. Nicholas, instead
of exalting the New Zealanders to the rank of
Asiatics by the laboured parallel which he draws, is
only demonstrating them to be Ethiopians. But,
in spite of their advocate, I believe the New Zea-
landers not to be of the savage negro, but of the


civilizable Malay race; and I adopt the following
paragraph from Mr. Crawfurd, as the truth of the
whole matter: —
« The common circumstance of affinity between
all the languages, both of the Indian Archipelago
and Australasia, is the Great Polynesian. I think
it will be found that the languages nearest to Java,
1
I
in geographical position, or which possessed in any
respect the easiest intercourse with it, will, in the
ratio of these advantages, be found to contain
words of the Polynesian. They are abundant in
the Malay and other cultivated tongues of the
west, decrease as we go eastward, and most where
there is most barbarism j until in the distant islands
of the South Sea a few straggling words only are
found in the languages of the more civilized tribes,
and even these do not reach the dialects of such
abject savages as those of New Holland*.”
“ In whatever way” (said the acute Bishop Wat-
son, long before these lights were shed upon the
subject!) “the islands of the South Sea may have
become inhabited, the similarity (J do not say the
* Hist. Ind. Archipel. vol. ii. p. 92.
t Anecdotes of his Life, vol. i. p. 411.


identity) of the languages spoken in them all*
leads ns to believe, that they have all had one
common origin, and the time (X conjecture) Will
come, when the mother language of all the various
dialects spoken in these islands, will be discovered
in some part of Asia.” ■
II
• i
■' Mr. Cfawfurd has now proved, with great learn*
ing ■ andingenuity, that the' parent seat of this
great Polynesian language was Java: and Professor
Blumenbach, with ' equally probable physiological
reasoning, has traced both the Indian and South
Sea Islanders to the Malayan variety of the
human species. The only object of the present
paper is to exclude the Papuans, the New Hol-
landers,- and' the' natives : of Van : Diemen's -Land
from this class, with which both he and Mr. 'Law-
rence have confounded them, and to place : them
among the negroes of the Indian Archipelago ; and
in that arrangement I am fortified by the following
passages from Dr. Prichard’s Inaugural Disputation
on the Varieties of the Human Species, pp. 85—
89, and from Captain .Tuckey’s Maritime Geo-
graphy, vol. iii. pp. 315, 316. ;
“ India is inhabited by a mixed race, made up


of the aborigines and of others, whom the pursuits
of war and conquest have at various times brought
there. The religion of Bramah seems to have been
introduced from the north, and at later periods
vast numbers of the Mongols have entered and
conquered the country. These mixtures have
effaced the peculiar characters of the original in-
habitants, which we must therefore seek for in the
islands protected by their situation from such visits.
The islands of the Indian Sea, as well as those of the
Pacific, contain two races of men, differing in many
respects. One of these approaches, and in some
instances equals, the blackness of the negro , the
hair is curled and woolly, the body slender, the
stature short, the disposition barbarous and cruel.
The other is more like the Indians of the continent,
has a fairer skin, larger limbs and stature, better
proportions, and exhibits some marks of humanity
and civilization. According to Forster , the former,
who are aborigines, have occupied the middle and
mountainous parts of many islands, leaving the
coasts and plains to the more recent colonists.
* Observations during a Voyage round, the 'World, pp,
281, 282.


They occupy the highest parts of the Moluccas,
the Philippines, Formosa, and Borneo, all New
Guinea, New Britain, New Ireland and New ..Cale-
donia, Tanna, Mallicollo (New Hebrides), New
Holland and Van Diemen’s Land [and, according
to the preface to the London Missionary Voyage,
Louisiade, Solomon’s Isles,. Santa Cruz and the
Fejees # ]h The more recent nation occupies Su-
matra and the other islands of the Indian Sea,
Otaheite, and the Society Islands, the Friendly
Islands, Marquesas, Ladrones [or] Marian and
Caroline Islands, New Zealand, Sandwich and
Easter Islands [to which may be added Navigator’s
Islands t]. The language of all the latter re-
* Mr. Mariner confirms the dissimilarity between the Figese
and the Tongese (Friendly Islanders).
f u At first we perceived no difference Between the lan-
guage of the people of Navigator's Islands, and that of the
people of the Society and Friendly Islands, the vocabularies
of which we had with us 5 but a closer examination taught us
that they spoke a dialect of the same tongue. A fact which
may tend to prove this, and which confirms the opinion of the
English respecting the origin of these people, is, that a young
Manillese servant, who, was ,born in the province of Tagayaii,
on the north of Manilla, understood and interpreted to us
most of their words. Now it is known that the Tagayan,
Talgal, and all the dialects of the Philippine Islands in ge~


sembles the Malay; and there can be no doubt
that they spring from that race, and have spread by
neral, are derived from the Malay; and this language, more
widely spread than those of the Greeks and Romans were, is
common to the numerous tribes that inhabit the islands of the
South Sea. To me it appears demonstrated, that these dif-
ferent nations are derived from Malay colonies who conquered
these islands at very remote periods; and perhaps even the
Chinese and Egyptians, whose antiquity is so much vaunted,
are moderns compared to these. Be this as it may, lam con-
vinced that the race of woolly-haired men, still found m the
interior part of the islands of Luconia and Formosa, were the
aborigines of the Philippine Islands, Formosa, New Guinea,
New Britain, the New Hebrides, Friendly Islands, &c.in
the southern hemisphere, and of the Carolines, Ladrones, and
Sandwich Islands in the northern. In New Guinea, New
Britain and the New Hebrides, they were not to be subdued;
but being vanquished in the islands further east, which were
too small to afford them a retreat in their centres, they inter-
mingled with their conquerors; and hence originated that race
of very black people, whose complexion still remains a few
shades deeper than that of certain families in the country,
who probably made it a point of honour not to contaminate
their blood. These two very distinct races appeared striking
to our eyes at the Navigator’s Islands; and I can ascribe
them to no other origin.
“ Perhaps it may be objected that it would hare been very
difficult for the Malays to pass from the west 'to the east, to
arrive at these different islands; but the westerly winds are
at least as frequent as those from the east, in the vicinity of
the equator, in a zone of seven or eight degrees north and
south; and they are so variable, that it is very little more
difficult to make a .voyage to the eastward than to the west-.
ward/* La Per onset Voyage, chap. xxy.
|
' I


their ships over those distant spots. The black
people are every where barbarous, and, according
to Forster, have languages not agreeing with each
other. In neither case can we perceive any traces
of the influence of climate*. The latter race.
* Cf All former navigators, and especially Captain Cook in
the Endeavour, found the immense continent of New Holland
very thinly inhabited, ■ The diminutive size of its inhabitants,
the peculiarity of their customs and habits, their total want
of cocoa-nuts, cultivated plantations and hogs, together with
the most miserable condition, of tbeir huts and boats, prove
beyond all doubt that tbe South Sea Islanders are not de-
scended from the natives of New Holland. But, what is still
more convincing, their language is totally different, as evi-
dently appears from the examination of a vocabulary obligingly
communicated to me by Captain Cook. We have therefore
nothing left but to go further to the north, where the South
Sea Isles are, as it were, Connected with the East Indian Isles.
Many of these latter are inhabited by two different races of
men. In several of the Moluccas is a race of men who are
blacker than the rest, with woolly hair, slender and tall, speak-
ing a peculiar language, and inhabiting the interior hilly parts
of the countries: in several isles these people are called Alfoorles .
The shores of these isles are peopled by another nation, whose
individuals are swarthy, of a more agreeable form, with curled
and long hair, and of a different language, which is chiefly a
branch or dialect of the Malayan. In all the Philippines,
the interior mountainous parts are inhabited by a black set of
people, with frizzled hair, who are tall, lusty, and very war-
like, and speak a peculiar language, different from that of
their neighbours. But the outskirts, towards the sea, are
peopled with a race infinitely fairer, having long'hair and


scattered in various parts of the vast island of New
Holland, which has such variety of temperature,
speaking different languages. They are of various denomina-
tions., but the Tangales, Pampangos, and Bissayas, are the
most celebrated among them. The former are the more an-
cient inhabitants, and the latter are certainly related to the
various tribes of Malays, who had overrun all the East India
Islands before the arrival of the Europeans in those seas.
Their language is likewise in many instances related to that
of the Malays. The isle of Formosa or Tai-ovan has likewise,
in its interior hilly parts, a set of brown, frizzly-haired, broad-
faced inhabitants. The isles of New Guinea, New Britain,
and New Ireland, have certainly black-complexioned inha-
bitants, whose manners, customs, habits, form, and character,
correspond very much with the inhabitants of the South Sea
Islands, belonging to the second race in New Caledonia, Tanna,
and Mallicollo ; and these blacks in New Guinea are probably
related to those in the Moluccas and Philippines. The La-
drones and new-discovered Caroline Islands contain a set of
people very much related to our first race. Their size, colour,
habit, manners, and customs, seem strongly to indicate this
affinity ; and they are, according to the account of some writers,
nearly related in every respect to the Tagalese in Lucon or
Manilla; so that we may now trace the line of emigration by
a continued line of isles, the greater part of which are not
above one hundred leagues distant from each other. We like-
wise find a very remarkable similarity between several words
of the fair tribe of islanders in the South Sea and some of the
Malays. But it would be highly inconclusive, from the simi-
larity of a few words, to infer that these islanders were de-
scended from the Malays; for as the Malay contains words
found in the Persian, Malabar, Braminie, Cingalese, Javanese,
and Malegass, this should likewise imply that the nations


every where retains its black colour* although the
climate at the English settlements is not much
unlike that of England* and in Van Diemen’s
Land* extending to 45° south latitude (it is well
understood that the cold is much more severe in
the southern hemisphere* at an equal distance from
the equator than in the northern)* they are.of a
deep black colour*' and have curled hair like the
[African] negroes.”
■“ In the inhabitants of this Grand Archipelago
we find two great races, totally differing in physical
appearance and in moral character: these are the
Malay* and the Papua or Oceanic Negro. The
Malay is no longer considered as aboriginal of the
little peninsula of Malacca*, into which* by his own
speaking the above-mentioned languages were the offspring of
the Malays., which w r ould certainly be proving too much. I
am therefore-rather inclined to suppose that all these dialects
preserve several words of a more ancient language* which was
more universal* and was gradually divided into many languages
now remarkably different. The words* therefore* of the lan-
guage of the South Sea Isles* which are similar to others in
the Malay tongue* prove clearly* in my opinion, that the eastern
South Sea Isles ■ were originally peopled, from the Indian or
Asiatic northern isles; and that those lying more to the west-
ward received their first inhabitants from the neighbourhood
of New Guinea.”— Forster s Observations, pp. 280—283. '


tradition, he is only a comparatively modern emi-
grant from Sumatra and Java. Neither is this
race confined to the archipelago, to which we have
assigned its . name, but is diffused throughout the
vast Polynesia, from the Mariannes to the solitary
Easter Island, and from Owhyhee to New Zealand.
Throughout this immense extent the Malay phy-
siognomy cannot be mistaken, and the Malay lan-
guage is universal, with no greater variations than
are found in European languages derived from the
same root. The wide dispersion of this race, in
islands sometimes separated by many hundred
leagues of sea,■ lias been a subject of much dif-
ficulty to the learned; some supposing it from
America; but. both the physical appearance and
language contradict this idea. Others suppose the
Malays to be the aborigines of a continent sub-
merged, while others have attempted to trace them
to an ancient civilized people of Java, connected
with India.
I
I
1
“" The second race,, the Papua or negro of the
Grand Ocean, is distinguished by the obtuseness of
the facial angle, the thickness of the lips, the hair
frizzled without being woolly, the' members dis-
* i


proportionately long and very slender, and the sooty
complexion. This race occupies New Guinea and
the neighbouring islands (except the Freewill
Islands of Carteret), New Holland, New Caledonia,
and the Fidgi Islands. Remnants of it are also
found in the Philippines, by the name of Yg olotes
and Negritos, and in the Moluccas, where they
are called Haraforus and A IJurezes ; the Guogoos
of Sumatra seem also to be of the same race. The
physical conformation of the Papua, and parti-
cularly the squareness of the head, distinguish him
from the African negro, and authorize the supposi-
tion of his being indigenous in these countries.
With respect to language, it affords no ground for
reasoning, every tribe having a jargon radically
differing from each other.”
The inference to be drawn from the above ana-
logies is certainly, that the Australians will never
be civilized, and that the South Sea Islanders will;
and experience is every day fulfilling the reasoning.
We have now lived among the former for more than
thirty years; and the most persevering attempts
have always been made, and are still making, to
induce them to settle, and avail themselves of the


arts of life; but they cannot be fixed, nor is it pos-
sible by any kindness or cherishing to attach them.
They have been brought up by us from infancy in
our nurseries, and yet the woods have seduced
them at maturity, and at once elicited the savage
instincts of finding their food in the trees, and their
path through the forest, —propensities which civil
education had only smothered *. They have been
removed from their native country, and in a foreign
land have they robbed and run away from their
fosterer and only protector t. They have quick
conceptions, and ready powers of imitation; but
they have no reflection, judgment, or foresight.
They have no wants but such as are immediate;
and they have therefore never become either
builders, or cultivators, or mechanics, or mariners;
nor had they ever any civil government or religious
superstition, like the Otaheitans, the Sandwich
Islanders, and the New Zealanders. They are the
only savages in the world who cannot feel or
* The Rev. Mr. Cartwright is my authority for this fact.
The same is said of the North American Indians by Dr. Fal-
coner, “ On Mankind/' p. 263.
f This happened to the Rev. Mr. Marsden, at Rio de
Janeiro.


“ know that they are nakedand we are taught
in the Scriptures that the eyes of man cannot be
opened to what we call a civilized or artificial life,
knowing good and evil, till he acquires a sense of
(perhaps false) shame or “ fear,” as it is called in
the Bible. The Payaguas and Mbayas are abo-
minated by the other South American Indians,
because they are unacquainted with modesty.
They have plenty of clothes, but they make a bad
use of them (says the historian of the Abipones *),
for they cover those parts of the body which may
be exposed, and bare those which modesty com-
mands to be concealed. This is precisely the con-
sequence of giving clothes to the Australians; and
twenty years’ daily commerce with European ladies
and gentlemen fails to shame them. The women,
however, (adds Martin DobrizhofFer) of both na-
tions wear that degree of clothing which modesty
requires ; and even the negroes of the Philippine
Islands (according to Zuniga) cover the fore part
of the body with a piece of bark. Now in Australia
* See an Account of the Abipones by Martin Dobrizhoffer,
translated from the Latin by Sara Coleridge, vol. ii. pp,
128,


they are both naked, the man and his wife, and are
not ashamed, with the exception on the part of the
women of the sitting posture, mentioned by Labil-
lardifere. And it is therefore lam of opinion that
our savages will never be other than they are. An
intelligent and experienced member of the com-
mittee of our Native Institution (the Rev. Mr.
Cartwright) feels this impediment to their civiliza-
tion so strongly, that he would compel them not to
come into our towns naked; but I doubt the prac-
ticability both of the means and the end. True,
“ Without black velvet breeches, what is man?”
but how could they be “ whipt from tithing to
tithing,” because their breeches are black epidermis?
Modesty is an innate feeling, that no human power
can inculcate—no government and general order
legislate. Yet not for this cause let us relax our
efforts in their favour; nor let us ever deny them
a compensation for the game which we have scared
from the confines we have usurped—“ the native
burghers of this desert city.” Still less let us treat
them as our Malayan brother-colonists do the ab-
original negroes of the Indian Islands, of whom Mr.
Q 2


Crawfurd says, that “ whenever they are encoun -
tered by the fairer races, they are hunted down like
wild animals of the forest, and driven to the moun-
tains or fastnesses, incapable of resistance*'*” Let
us continue to them the chance of receiving the
comforts of civilization and the blessings of reli-
gion, as an indemnification for the new vices and
diseases which they imbibe from us too readily.
And if, even with all our cultivation, the result
should be the same as that of the poor persecuted
Ethiopian, who is “ found guilty,” by the Indian
islander, “ of a skin not coloured like his own,” and
if decay or extermination of the simple race of
Australia should be the gradual end of our co-
lonization, —
Yet deem not this man useless.
But let him pass,—a blessing on his head !
And, while in that society, to which
The tide of things has led him, he appears
To breathe and live but for himself alone.
Unblam’d, uninjur’d, let him bear about
The good, which the benignant law of heaven
Has hung around him, and while life is his.
Still let him prompt the liberal colonist
To tender offices and pensive thoughts.
* Hist, Ind. Archipel. vol. ii. p. 26.


Then let him pass,—a blessing on his head!
And, long as he can wander, let him breathe
The freshness of the woods.
May never we pretend to civilize.
And make him only captive I
Let him be free of mountain solitudes;
And let him, where and when he will, sit down
Beneath the trees, and with his faithful dog
Share his chance-gather’d meal; and, finally.
As in the eye of Nature he has lived.
So in the eye of Nature let him die I


. ft
Jj
I 1/
f
.
\
. I .
I
)
■
I
M
I
I 1
-




3 1508 01512637 3
