

ON THE
EXPECTED WATER SUPPLY
OF THE
CITY OF MELBOURNE
FROM YAN YEAN.
BEING A PAPER READ BEFORE THE PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY
OF VICTORIA.
BY DAVID E. WILKIE, M.D.
Melbourne:
JAMES J. BLUNDELL & CO., 44, COLLINS STREET.
1855.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
PRINTED AT THE AGE OFFICE.








ON THE
EXPECTED WATER SUPPLY
OF THE
CITY OF MELBOURNE
FROM YAN YEAN.
BEING A PAPER READ BEFORE THE PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY
OF VICTORIA.
BY DAVID E. WILKIE, M.D.
jsleli>ourtte:
JAMES J. BLUNDELL & CO., 44, COLLINS STREET.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
1855.


PRINTED AT “ THE AGE 99 OFFICE, MELBOURNE.


ON WHAT DATA DOES THE CITY OF MELBOURNE
DEPEND FOR AN ADEQUATE SUPPLY OF WATER
FROM THE YAN YEAN RESERVOIR?
A PAPER READ BEFORE THE PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY OF VICTORIA,
BY DR. WILKIE, ON THE BTH MAY, 1855.
Several papers having been recently read before
the Society on the subject of the probable supply of
water derivable from Yan Yean, I think it of great
importance now to inquire upon what data we
depend for obtaining this supply.
I entertained the hope that the interesting ques-
tions treated of in the papers above referred to would
have induced some of our scientific men to devote
their attention to their elucidation, and I confess
that I am rather surprised that no one seems disposed
to investigate those questions further, although on a
correct solution of them must depend all our hopes
of securing a sufficient supply of pure and wholesome
water, which would contribute so largely to our
health and comfort, and the failure of which would
be so disastrous to the city.
The question of evaporation, from its great impor-
tance in relation to the subject of this paper, claims
our first consideration.
Our meteorological experience in this colony is
very limited, and little is known with respect to the
annual rainfall in different localities. Judging from
the tables that have been kept in Melbourne for some
years, there is reason to believe that there is consi-
derably less rainfall in Victoria than in England.
The geological features of the country are unfavor-
able for the production of rivers, much of the rain
water being held on the surface, and lost by evapo-
ration. Our high temperature also conduces greatly
to diminish the proportion of the rain that would
otherwise reach the rivers.
Thus the physical conditions of the country are
Different papers
g e 0 a C j e b t y ore “ e
interesting ques-
tions.
importance of
further investi-
c“ lon ‘
Evaporation,
Annual rainfall,
Geolo „ ieal for _
mat f on>
wigh tempera .
ture.


Great scarcity of
water.
Important ques-
tion.
Evaporation
little under-
stood.
Duty of Philoso-
phical Society.
„ ....
opinions!
Loss from evapo-
ration in the
reservoir.
very unfavorable for the preservation of water, and
a great scarcity prevails in many districts. Hence
the importance of arriving at a correct knowledge
of the subject of evaporation, in order that, in our
endeavors to preserve water in parts of the country
that are ill supplied, and to store it for the supply
of towns, we may adopt such measures as are really
calculated to attain these ends.
But the question of evaporation is especially im-
portant in relation to the subject of this paper, as
upon its decision depends at this moment the very
important question, whether the Legislative Council
ought to permit the Yan Yean works to be pro-
ceeded with, or to abandon them as a hopeless
failure.
It is to be regretted, however, that the subject of
evaporation is very little understood, and its im-
portance very little appreciated in this colony ; and
it is not a little singular, that Dr. Davy’s experi-
ments and observations, which in any other country
would be deemed sufficient to determine the rate of
evaporation, are here regarded with distrust, and
are thought to possess little practical value.
If those, therefore, whose duty it is to proclaim the
truths of science, and to vindicate their paramount
claim to consideration in the conduct of our great
public works, hesitate to do so, can we wonder that
the. members of the Legislative Council should
hesitate to interfere with matters involving scientific
questions which they cannot themselves resolve ?
But, independently of the great public importance
of having this question of evaporation satisfactorily
settled, there are other reasons which induce me
again to bring this subject before you. The different
papers that have been read on this subject contain
opinions, observations, and experiments of so oppo-
site and conflicting a nature, that it is altogether
hopeless to expect that the public will arrive at
correct conclusions, unless tbe members of the
Society can first agree among themselves.
Surely it must be possible for a body of scientific
men to determine the rate of evaporation in this
country, and this is really all that is wanted in
order to determine the success or failure of our water
supply, derivable from Yan Yean.
It is not too much to expect from the Philosophical
Society, that they should be able to inform the Legis-
lative Council what loss will be sustained from eva-
poration in the Yan Yean Reservoir, and I should be
sorry to think that a problem of so easy solution
elsewhere, should be deemed either difficult or im-
possible here. I trust, therefore, that it will not
again be said of us that we are unable to decide this


question. It surely will not be regarded as very
complimentary to this colony, that one. of our daily
newspapers should have published in its Summary
for England, that scientific men here were divided
on the subject of evaporation, and on the deficiency
that might result therefrom in the water supply of
the city.
In difficult scientific questions to whom are the
public and the Legislature to look, if not to the Phi-
losophical Society ? And shall it be said that they
have looked to us in vain ?
I am also induced, on other grounds to bring this
subject before you.
It will not be forgotten that Messrs. Acheson and
Christy, in their report on the Yan l ean Reservoir
scheme, assumed that IO'G9 inches of the rainfall ot
the Plenty basin would be available for the reser-
voir, while Mr. Hodgkinson clearly showed, by a re-
ference to Mr. Charnock and Mr. Howard, who are
the best recent authorities on the subject, that with
a rainfall varying from 24 to 36 inches, the available
rainfall for the average surface ot England varies
from 4-88 inches to 5-53 inches, the mean of which is
5-20 inches, with a mean rain of 30 ■ 6 inches. Thus
these gentleman have assumed for the Plenty basin
an available rainfall more than double that of Eng-
land.
I had Imagined, therefore, that Mr. Hodgkinson
had demonstrated the fallacy of “ the excessively
small rate of evaporation assumed by those gentle-
men,” and that their enormous estimate of the avail-
able rain was “ utterly at variance with the recorded
observations of all other meteorologists.” It ap-
pears, however, that they are by no means convinced
of their error, and that they congratulate themselves
in the belief that they have arrived at the very same
result with Mr. Hodgkinson, only by a different
method.
When the premises are so very opposite, it would
be singular indeed if the conclusions were the
same.
I cannot therefore understand how they have de-
ceived themselves into the belief that they have
arrived at the same results with Mr. Hodgkinson,
unless after this singular method.
They assume double the amount of available rain-
fall that he does, and at the same time they rely
on Dr. Davy’s estimate of the evaporation from the
reservoir, which is nine feet, while he rejects Dr.
Davy’s estimate of the evaporation, and assumes five
feet and a half from his own observations on a
Oar scientific
reputation.
Messrs. Acheson
and Christy.
Their estimate.
It’s fallacy.
Mr. Hodgkinson
Similarity in
their results.


Remarkable
differences.
Coincidence
proves nothing
May deceive
many persons.
The Reservoir
Scheme,
pond. But they altogether forget that, while they
generously leave 9386 gallons per minute for the use
ol_ the district, he only allows 500 gallons per
minute, or an equivalent to 8 inches in the reservoir,
which is less than one-eighteenth part of what they
allow j and they also forget that a mere coincidence
in their results proves nothing in their favor; on
the contrary, when similar results are obtained from
data which are altogether dissimilar and contra-
dictory, it rather proves that both the premises and
the conclusions are alike unworthy of confidence.
I could readily understand how Messrs. Aches on and
Christy might be right and Mr. Hodgkinson wrong,
or vice versa, but I cannot imagine how both could
be right. If Mr. Hodgkinson is correct in assuming
5 inches as the highest reliable amount of the avail-
able rainfall in the Plenty basin, then most assur-
edly Messrs. Acheson and Christy are egregiously
wrong in assuming 10-69 inches, or more than double
that amount; and if they are right in relying on Dr.
Davy’s experiments and observations on evaporation,
then, in like manner, Mr. Hodgkinson is wrong in
rejecting Dr. Davy’s estimate of nine feet, and pre-
ferring his own of five and a half feet.
I have thought it necessary to notice this supposed
coincidence, because it is very probable that many
persons may be deceived by it. Most people are
satisfied with merely looking to the results in any
inquiry, without examining the data or calculations
on which they are founded, and, in this instance,
being so positively assured of a very abundant sup-
ply of water in two different ways, they will regard
the supply as all the more certain on that account,
and will be contented to have it either way.
It is far more correct, therefore, to infer that both
are wrong than that either is right, since each denies
and controverts the premises of the other ; and it is
altogether a fallacy to suppose that the similarity of
their results will be of any avail in securing a more
certain or abundant supply of water.
And I trust to be able to show in this paper that
no confidence whatever is to be placed either in
theoretical estimates of the available rainfall of the
Plenty basin, or in experiments on evaporation con-
ducted on ponds and water holes, but that actual
measurements of the river, and Dr. Davy’s estimate
of the evaporation are alone to be depended on in
deciding the important question whether the Yan
Yean Reservoir scheme ought to be proceeded with,
or altogether abandoned.
This leads me to notice the confusion that seems
to arise from the use of the term “ available rain-


fall.’* As applied to the Plenty basin it has no in-
telligible meaning, because many thousand acres,
according to -Mr. Hodgkinson, are so swampy that
there is not ouly no available rainfall from them,
but they evaporate and absorb a large proportion of
the available rainfall of the rest of the basin, which
is thus rendered no longer available, although it
forms a portion of the rain water that is shed from
the drainage area. Therefore the expression avail-
able rainfall very incorrectly conveys the meaning
that is intended, and is of little use in any scientific
inquiry.
To obviate this difficulty I have made use of the
term “ watershed ” to signify the proportion of the
rain that is shed from any given area or tract of
country. This term has been ordinarily applied to
the area or tract of country that sheds water, but
this is so gross a corruption of the analogies of the
English language, that I have avoided using it in
this sense.
At the time that my paper on the Failure of the
Yan Yean Reservoir was published, I had only
heard Mr. Hodgkinson’s paper read, and, on its sub-
sequent publication, I was much surprised to find
that I had misunderstood him in several important
points.
While, therefore, I still regard his paper as a valu-
ble contribution to practical science, I regret
extremely to add, that I am compelled to differ from
him very materially in some of the scientific data
upon which he bases his conclusions.
Mr. Hodgkinson himself admits the necessity of
throwing more light on the question of evaporation,
in order that definite conclusions relative to the
probable supply of water derivable from Yan-Yean
might be arrived at and the extraordinary discre-
pance of opinion that prevails on the subject clearly
shows, that, until this question is determined by
scientific investigation, no definite conclusions can be
arrived at.
I proceed now to consider what are the grounds
upon which Mr. Hodgkinson bases his confident
opinion, that there will be a very abundant supply
for a population nearly three times greater than the
present population of Melbourne, while I have my-
self found, by a strict method of investigation, based
on actual measurements of the river, that, after de-
ducting the loss that is at present sustained from
evaporation in the marshes, and the probable loss
from evaporation in the reservoir, according to Dr.
Davy’s estimate, there will be no water for any popu-
lation.
Available fain-
talL
Watershed,
Mr Hodgkinson’s
paper?
Necessity of in-
vestigation.
His very confi-
dent opinion,


His theoretical
estimate.
His calculations.
Points of differ-
ence.
Theoretical esti-
mates unsafe.
Te« inches of
dew.
Mr. Hodgkinson’s theoretical estimate of the
watershed of the Plenty basin differs very little from
my own. In deducing the watershed from English
data, I assumed four and a-half inches as the nearest
approximation, while he assumes five inches. The
difference therefore amounts to half an inch, or one
tenth, which is equal to one foot in the reservoir.
How is it then that he is enabled to find a very
abundant supply for 191,500?
The following table gives Mr. Hodgkinson’s calcu-
lations reduced to feet, in the reservoir of 1450
acres.
SUPPLY.
Feet. In.
5 inches available rainfall over square miles,
equal to 40,000 acres .... II 6.16
7 inches do. over drainage area of reservoir, equal
to 3000 acres 1 2.48
Rainfall on reservoir of 1400 acres 32 inches. Dew
10 inches 3 4.55
Total . . i 16 1.19
DEMAND.
Feet. In.
Amount lost in the swamps 2 5
Left to maintain the flow in the river, 500 gallons
per minute ........ 8
Evaporation 66.6 inches over 1400 acres ... 5 4.33
Loss of flood water, and loss from absorption, equal
to 6 inches over 1400 acres .... 5.79
Balance equivalent to supply 191.500, at 40 gallons 7 0.52
Total .... 15 11.64
1. From the above table it will be observed that
Mr. Hodgltinson assumes 5 inches over 62 j square
miles, instead of 4| inches over 60 square miles,
and in this way gains 1 foot 7 inches.
2. He only leaves 500 gallons per minute, or 8
inches in the reservoir, for the use of the district*
instead of 900 gallons, or 14 inches, and thus gains 6
inches.
3. He assumes that the whole of the available rain-
fall, less 500 gallons per minute, will be available
for the reservoir ; whereas, I thought it unsafe to
rely on any estimate deduced from English tables*
and preferred an estimate based on the measure-
ments, which leaves a balance of 1 foot 5 k inches
in his favor, and which I considered unsafe to rely
on.
4. He assumes that 10 inches of dew will be con-
densed on the surface of the reservoir, whereas I
only allowed 2 inches, and in this manner he gains
8 inches.


5. He assumes the evaporation in this colony ai
5 feet 6.6 inches, rejecting Dr. Davy’s estimate ol
9 feet, and thus gains 3 feet 4 inches.
These amounts will stand thus :
1. Difference between 5 inch of rain over 62J square Ft. In.
miles and 4% in. over 60 sq. m. . 1 7
2. „ between 600 gall^m-and 900 gal. . 6
3. „ between my two estimates and not relied
on 1 5J
4. „ between 2 and 10 inches of dew . 8
5. „ between 6 feet 6'6 inches of evaporation
and 9 feet .... 3 4
Total 7 6£
Deduct loss of flood water, and loss from ab-
sorption 6
Balance to supply 191.500 . . . . 7 0J
This table, then, exhibits the data on which depend
all our hopes of an adequate supply of water from
Yan Yean.
If Mr. Hodgkinson is right in assuming these
data, we shall have a very abundant supply at least
for our present wants. If, on the other hand, I
shall succeed in shoving that he is wrong, then, as-
suredly, the Yan Yean scheme will prove a failure,
and we shall have to look elsewhere for our water
supply.
Having been induced, on public grounds, to
investigate the points upon which Mr. Hodg.
kinson differs from myself, I trust that,
in freely expressing my opinions on our points
of difference, he will give me credit for simply
wishing to arrive at the truth, and, as the question at
issue is a most momentous one for the public inte-
rests, both in a pecuniary and in a sanitary point of
view, I trust that he will see no impropriety in my
calling in question his opinions on subjects which he
himself admits require further elucidation.
1. What reason does Mr. Hodgkinson assign for
assuming 5 inches of the rainfall, instead of
4 inches or 6 inches ?
This is a very important question, as one inch over
621 square miles will supply 62.500, at 40 gallons,
per head, per day.
The evaporation tables of Mr. Charnock, the Vice-
President of the Meteorological Society, and Mr
Howard, have, according to Mr. Hodgkinson, been
chiefly relied on of late years, in estimating the pro-
portion of the rain that is available for water supply
in England.
The available rain, according to Mr. Charnock, is
4.88 inches out of a rainfall of 24*6 inches, and aC'
His estimate of
evaporation.
Very important
data.
On which de-
pends our
water supply.
The public in-
terests invol-
ved.
Important ques,
tioiis.


Mr. Charnock.
Mr. Howard.
Dr. Thomson.
Mr. Charnock’s
observations.
Hr. Howard’s.
Rainfall at the
Upper Plenty.
cording to Mr. Howard the proportion is 5-53 inches
out of 36 inches. Mr. Charnock’s observations have
reference to a pervious well drained soil in Yorkshire,
Mr. Howard’s apply to the average surface of Eng-
land, and it is interesting to remark that the obser-
vations of these gentlemen corroborate the previous
observations of the late Dr. Thomson, of Glasgow,
who estimated 4 inches as the watershed of Great
Britain, from observations and measurements of the
Clyde.
It is to be regretted that Mr. Hodgkinson has not
clearly stated on which authority he has based his
estimate of 5 inches, or.the precise method by which
he has arrived at this very important conclusion.
He describes Mr. Charnock’s observations as the
most extensive and minutely accurate ever made
in Britain, but they apply only to the Eastern Coun-
ties of England, where the rainfall averages 24
inches. They also apply exclusively to pervious
well drained soil, and are, therefore, not applicable
to impervious undrained lands which receive and
evaporate a large portion of the watershed from
lands that are pervious and well di ained. Mr. Char-
noch’s estimate is, therefore, too high for the average
surface of England, and, with a mean annual rainfall
of 36 inches, would give 7 inchesinstead of 5k inches,
which is Mr. Howard’s estimate.
It would be clearly wrong, therefore, to assume
Mr. Charnock’s proportion of available rain for per-
vious and well drained land in Yorkshire to deter-
mine the watershed of the Upper Plenty, where there
are. many thousand acres of impervious and un-
drained, lands; and, in computing the proportion of
the available rain for the average surface of England,
Mr. Howard has no doubt made the necessary deduc-
tion from Mr. Charnock’s estimate. Hence, while
the estimate of the latter is one-fifth of the rain, that
of the former is only one-sixth, and Dr. Thomson’s
estimate for Great Britain, excluding dew, is one-
eighth.
The mean rainfall for Melbourne, for a period of
six years, has been found to be 30-85 inches, and Mr.
Hodgkinson seems to have adopted this proportion
of rain for the Upper Plenty, as he regards the rain-
fall and dew taken together, as equivalent to 36
inches.
Without any correction, therefore, for tempera-
ture or dryness of the atmosphere, Mr. Charnock’s
proportion of the available rain would give 6-11
inches for the Upper Plenty, and Mr. Howard’s 4-73
inches,
On what principle, then, does Mr. Hodgkinson


adopt 5 inches to Represent the watershed of the
Plenty basin ?
He says “ I believe, therefore, that the propor-
tionate amount of the rainfall available in the Upper
Plenty district is less than the English proportion.
From the want of extended meteorological observa-
tions taken in connexion with the Upper Plenty
districts, or, what would have been much more
satisfactory, a complete series of stream gu agings to
determine the annual discharge, the available rain-
fall of the district can only be analogically elimi-
nated from the general data afforded by the most
trustworthy English observations on evaporation,
corrected for the average differences of temperature
for the various months of the year in London and
Melbourne, as given in the Statistical Register for
Victoria, Moreover, as wind and the hygrometrical
state of the atmosphere exercise a marked influence
over evaporation, independently of temperature, and
as their action is more intense here than in England,
some additional corrections must be applied to the
English data for this increased action. Having made
due allowance for all these contingencies, I have
arrived at the conclusion that the total annual rain-
fall and dew at the Upper Plenty may be taken
together as equivalent to 36 inches, and that the
amount thereof available for the supply of the
Plenty, in the present state of the natural surfaces,
would be about 5 inches.”
I entirely concur with the opinions expressed in
the above paragraph, but, in adopting for the Upper
Plenty district a larger proportion of available rain-
fall than is relied on for the average surface of
England, Mr. Hodgkinson has altogether forgotten
the principles which he has so ably inculcated.
He admits that the proportion of the rainfall in the
Upper Plenty District ought to be less than the
English proportion : Why does he not, therefore,
adopt less than the English proportion ? He admits
the want of Meteorological observations, and that
measurements of the river would have been much
more satisfactory : Why does he not base his calcula-
tions on the December measurements, making due
allowance for the winter rains ?
He tells us that his estimate of the available rain-
fall of the Upper Plenty District is only analogically
eliminated from English data, corrected in a very
complicated manner for temperature and dry winds.
How is it then that he places such implicit confidence
in an estimate so singularly enveloped in difficulties,
and uncertainties, and applied under novel circum-
stances to a new country, with a totally different
climate ? And after all he has not made the correc-
Mr. Hodgkin,
son’s method
of determining
the available
rain.
It’s amount.
He forgets his
own pmmiples.
His implicit con-
fidence not
warran •


His corrections
of English data
He should have
adopted four
inches.
Dr. Dalton’s esti-
mate corrected
for tempera-
ture.
Differences of
climate.
tions to which he attaches so much importance. He
has adopted a less proportion of available rain than
Mr. Howard’s, which is relied on as correct for the
average surface of England, and Mr. Charnock’s
tables, which are alone applicable to pervious well-
drained lands, give only 6'll inches as the proportion
of available rain for the Upper Plenty District, and
6-11 inches, if duly corrected in the manner described
by Mr. Hodgkinson, would give considerably less
than 4 inches. lamat a loss, therefore, to discover
by what method he has arrived at his conclusion that
5 inches of available rain represent the watershed of
the Plenty basin. There is nothing in his reasoning
to shew why he should not rather have adopted 4
inches, but the reverse.
If he has adopted Mr. Charnock’s proportion of
6-11 inches, then he has only allowed 1 11 inches for
all the contingencies to which he refers, and he has
given no reasons why he should not rather
have adopted Mr. Howard’s proportion which gives,
without any correction for temperature, only 4• 73
inches for the rainfall of the Upper Plenty. And,
as it appears to me, Mr. Howard’s proportion for
England, with adequate correction for difference of
climate, is the only safe proportion from which to
deduce the watershed of the Plenty basin.
I have not had an opportunity of correcting either
Mr. Charnock’s, or Mr. Howard’s tables of evapora-
tion, for difference of temperature, but I have in the
following tables corrected Dr. Dalton’s precisely in
the manner explained by Mr. Hodgkinson, and Dr.
Dalton’s estimate of available rain for England,
which is 8-41 inches, when thus corrected gives exactly
4’54 inches as the proportion of available rain for
our climate, without any correction for our very
dry atmosphere, for which half an inch in addition
may be very safely allowed. Thus the conclusion
is inevitable that the tables of Mr. Charnock, and
Mr. Howard, if similarly corrected, would give a
still less result.
Admitting, therefore, that Mr. Hodgkinson is
right in assuming Mr. Charnock’s proportion of the
available rain as applicable to the Upper Plenty
district, I not think that he has advanced any
good reasons to show, that the difference in the
evaporation of the two countries is so small, as
to v\ arrant the very small allowance he makes for
the differences of climate, in adopting 5 inches.
In my former paper I expressed a very decided
opinion that no confidence could be placed in theo-
retical estimates of the watershed of the
Plenty basin, deduced from English data,
at the same time, as a subject of scientific interest,


rather than Of any practical value, I assumed
Dr. Dalton’s estimate of 8.41 inches as the average
watershed for England, and by correcting this
amount for the difference of temperature, I con-
cluded that 4| inches would represent an approxi-
mation to the "watershed of the Plenty basin.
Table I.
Shewing the mean rain, the mean temperature, and
the proportion of the rain evaporated, and the
watershed, and the evaporation from water in
the different months in England, according to Dr.
Dalton’s tables.
Evaporation.
Mean Mean From From Water
Rain Temp. land water shed
inches. deg. inches, inches, inches.
January . 246 38. 9 1.01 15 i 1.45
February . 180 39.75 .53 2.00 1.27
March . . .90 42.65 .62 350 0.28
April . . 1.72 47.57 1.49 450 0.23
May . . . 4.18 55,26 2.69 4.96 149
June . . . 2.43 60.68 2.18 649 0.30
July . . . 4.15 63.17 4.09 5.63 0.06
August . 3.55 62.78 3.38 6.06 0.17
September. 3.28 57.00 7.95 3.90 0.33
October. . 290 50.37 267 2.35 0.23
November . 293 43.12 205 2.04 0.88
December . 3.20 40.09 1.48 1.50 172
33 5 5 25.14 44.43 8.41
Table 11.
Shewing the mean rain, the mean temperature, and
the proportion of the rain evaporated, and the
watershed, and the evaporation from water in
Victoria, deduced from Dr. Dalton’s tables, allow-
ing the same evaporation to the same mean
temperature in both countries.
« Evaporation.
Mean Mean From From Water
ram Temp. land water shed
inches. deg. inches, inches, inches.
January . 136 67.94 1.34 8.00 0.02
February . 0-95 67.31 0.93 8.00 0.02
March . . 160 63.92 157 6.49 0.03
April . . 3.13 60.56 2.75 649 0.38
May . . 3.67 54.91 236 4.96 131
June . . 241 51.00 2.21 4.50 0.20
July . . 2.18 49.34 188 4.50 0.30
August . . 3.61 50.66 332 4.50 0.29
September. 3.27 55.08 210 4.96 117
October . 2.54 68.87 2.28 4.96 0.26
November . 4.27 68,26 3.74 6.49 0.53
December . 1.86 66.29 1.83 8.00 0.03
36,85 26.31 71 85 4.54
The above tables shew that my conclusion is
arrived at in the manner described by Mr. Hodg-
kinson, and if a farther correction of half an inch be
Dr. Dalton’s Es-
timate corrected
for Temperature
Evaporation in
England.
In Victoria.
For dryness and
winds.


Result, 4 inches
of watershed.
Area of Plenty-
basin not sur-
veyed.
Abounds in
swamps.
S ?eft in the
river.
made for our very drying winds, 4 inches will repre-
sent the watershed as accurately as such a
calculation will permit of.
I think I am warranted, therefore, in concluding
that if we must place confidence in any estimate
analogically eliminated from English data, we are
not warranted in assuming a larger proportion ol
available rainfall for the Upper Penty district than
4 inches.
From Mr. Hodgkinson’s estimate of 11 feet 6.16
inches, we must therefore deduct one-fifth, or 2 feet
3.63 inches, which is equivalent to supply 62,500 at
40 gallons, per head, per day.
I also object to assuming 62 k square miles as the
area of the Plenty basin.
Messrs. Acheson and Christy in their report
thought it safer to assume 60 square miles, and I
followed their example in my estimate.
This area has never been thoroughly surveyed,
indeed the greater portion of the boundary line has
never been visited by any surveyor, being covered
with impenetrable scrub, and many thousand acres,
according to Mr. Hodgkinson, consist of swampy
and undrained lands, which are not only useless as
affording no watershed, but they evaporate the
watershed of many more thousand acres which drains
into them. As it was of great importance to arrive
at a safe and reliable result in this investigation, I
think Mr. Hodgkinson erred in assuming 62j square
miles, and for the reasons which I have assigned, I
think it will be readily admitted that it was much
more correct to have assumed 60 square miles as the
area of the Plenty basin.
On this account, therefore, I have to deduct from
Mr. Hodkinson’s estimate 4.60 inches in the reservoir,
which is equivalent to supply 10,454.
2. Mr. Hodgkinson only allows 500 gallons per
minute for the use of the district, and to maintain
the flow in the river, and this is only equal to 8
inches in the reservoir. Messrs. Acheson and
Christy in their report allow 12 feet 4 inches for the
same purpose ; so that they allow 18£ times the
amount that he allows.
They allowed this amount on the understanding
that the Commissioners of Sewerage and Water
Supply had entered into an arrangement with the
resident population not to abstract more than one-
half of the river, which was to be allowed to flow
for twelve hours out of twenty-four.
What will they say to the small amount accorded
them by Mr. Hodgkinson ? If his estimate of the dis


charge of the river is correct, he only allows one-
seventeenth part to remain, and abstracts all the
rest for the reservoir.
In this I feel persuaded that Mr. Hodgkinson has
also erred, and there can be no doubt that if the
Commissioners should ever attempt to carry out his
recommendation they would find themselves over-
whelmed with legal actions, and would be com-
pelled to make very heavy compensation to all
those whose interests might be affected by the loss
of the river.
In my estimate I allowed 900 gallons per minute,
or one-third of Mr. Blackburn’s December measure-
ment of the river at Yau Yean, and an idea of the
smallness of even this amount may be got by reflect-
ing on the circumstance, that, during the drought of
1851, when the Plenty had very nearly ceased to
flow, Mr. Blackburn’s measurement in February
gave 865 gallons per minute.
I think, therefore, that it will be readily admitted
that at least six inches must be deducted from Mr.
Hodgkinsou’s estimate on this accouut, and six inches
will supply 13,656.
3. I have stated that I place no confidence in
theoretical estimates, and this is the reason that I
preferred my estimate, that was based on measure-
ment to that which I computed at 4k inches of the
rainfall, merely as an approximation from English
data, hence I allowed the difference amounting to
1 foot 5 k inches in the reservoir, as a margin for
casualties.
In my preceding remarks it is, I think, clearly
shewn that I was wrong in assuming 4k inches, and
that I ought to have assumed 4 inches of available
rain as the best approximation that can be
arrived at from the most trustworthy English data.
There is thus a difference of only 6’43 inches between
the two estimates, and there can be no objection to
leave this small amount for casualties, and, there-
fore, it may be deducted from Mr. Hodgkinson’s
estimate ; but as he has allowed 6 inches for loss of
flood water and from absorption, I shall regard the
6-43 inches as an equivalent for his 6 inches.
4. I come now to consider the subject of dew. I
explained in my former paper that very little dew
could be condensed on the surface of water, and I
allowed 2 inches only because it was my firm con-
viction that, even without drawing off any water
from the reservoir, there would often be very little
in it; and when the water is very shallow, a small
quantity of dew may possibly be condensed on the
Legal actions and
heavy compen.
sation.
Drought of iBsi.
Theoretical Es
timates.
Four - neheg the
bes t approxi-
mation.
Very little dew
condensed on
water.


M soips ° e sti mate
Of dew on
water.
M ,
r - om -
Ilis opinions on
dew.
His available
rain for
Paisley.
surface in very cold or frosty nights, and I was
anxious that the reservoir should get every possible
advantage.
I must say. therefore, that I was greatly surprised
to find that Mr. Hodgkinson relied on 10 inches of
dew for the reservoir.
I have looked in vain for any authority to bear
out this extraordinary opinion respecting dew, and
I feel assured that Mr. Hodgkinson could not have
consulted the best authorities on the subject.
In England, from 4 to 5 inches of dew are sup-
posed to be condensed on the surface of the ground,
and its production is easily explained, and well
understood.
But Mr. Hodgkinson obtains 10 inches for the
reservoir, by assuming that this amount of dew is
condensed on the surface of water in this colony.
This is a very important assumption, as 10 inches
in the reservoir will supply 22,727, at 40 gallons,
per head, per day, and 100,000 at 9 gallons, which
some allege is really all that is required for ordi-
nary consumption. At this rate the dew condensed
on the surface of the reservoir would suffice to
supply Melbourne, with all its suburban towns and
villages.
Here, again, it is to be regretted that Mr. Hodg-
kinson does not say upon whose authority he assumes
this enormous amount of dew. He certainly states
that Mr. Thom, the eminent practical engineer of
the Paisley waterworks, and the energetic promoter
of the gravitation schemes of water supply in Scot-
land, considers that the evaporation in large re-
servoirs is counterbalanced by the condensation
of dew, but this is only to be regarded as his indi-
vidual opinion, and is certainly not based on ac-
curate observation, or experiment.
It is scarcely possible that Mr. Thom could have
directed much attention to the subject of dew at the
time that he uttered this opinion, and Mr. Hodg-
kinson himself shows that Mr. Thom’s statement is
altogether inconsistent with the production of salt
by the evaporation of sea water, which has been
carried on for ages.
Mr. Thom’s opinions, therefore, on scientific sub-
jects are not very remarkable for their minute
accuracy.
Mr. Hodgkinson quotes his estimate of the avail-
able rain on which he relies for the Paisley Water-
works, which is 39 inches out of an annual rainfall
of 54 inches. I can readily understand how low
swampy ground,_ that is throughly intersected with
catch-water drains, should yield a much larger
amount of water than the whole rainfall, because


such lands often drain large tracts of country, but
I cannot understand how Mr. Thom should imagine
that 54 inches of rain fall in Paisley. This town is
only seven miles distant from Glasgow, and, ac-
cording to the meteorological tables, the rainfall for
this city is 21 inches.
Mr. Thom’s observations and experiments, there-
fore, could not have been conducted with much re-
gard to scientific accuracy, when he computes the
available rainfall at 39 inches out of an annual
rainfall of 21 inches, and they contrast rather singu-
larly with Dr. Thomson’s observations and experi-
ments, which give 4 inches of available rain out of
21 inches for the Clyde district.
Since Dr. Wells published his well known Essay
on Dew, his theory of its formation has been almost
universally received as correct.
The production of dew occurs in the following
manner. The quantity of aqueous vapor that can
exist in the atmosphere depends entirely on tempe-
rature.
During a clear calm night, all bodies that are
fully exposed in the air become more or less rapidly
cooled by radiation of heat from their surface. The
air in contact with such bodies suffers a correspond-
ing los3 of heat, and, as soon as its temperature,
reaches the dew point, the moisture, which can no
longer retain the form of vapor, is condensed in
the form of dew. Thus, those bodies which radiate
most heat and conduct least, condense most dew, and
it is found that all bodies which are good conductors
and good reflectors of heat from their surface, are
bad radiators.
The metals therefore condense dew very sparingly.
Water, though a bad conductor of heat when ap-
plied to its surface, is from the extreme mobility of
its particles, the most rapid conductor of heat and
cold, when these are applied with due regard to its
peculiar laws.
Water in this sense may be regarded as strictly
analogous to the metals, and, being a good con-
ductor and reflector of heat, it is necessarily a bad
radiator, and the dew is not formed on any surface
whose temperature is not cooled by radiation below
the dew point, which ranges from 5° to 20 ° below
the temperature of the air. Unless, therefore, the
surface of water be cooled by radiation below the
dew point, it is quite clear that no dew can be con-
densed, but its density, which varies with every
change of temperature, and its fluidity operate to
prevent any reduction of its temperature until the
whole mass is similarly affected.
The temperature of water is thus very slowly re-
Contrasted with
Dr. Thomson’s.
Dr. Wells’ Essay
on Dew.
Radiation,
The metals bad
radiator*,
Water analogous
to metals


'“"’S:' 6
reduced.
water rentrasteti
•with grass
The dew point.
Dr. Well’s expe-
riments.
Temperature of
the ocean and
lakes.
Sea and Land
contrasted.
duced by radiation, because, as soon as tbe surface
particles lose any portion of heat, their density
is at the same time increased, and they
sink to a, lower level, being replaced by
warmer particles from underneath.
Thus water differs most materially from grass and
other vegetable bodies whose power of radiation is
very great, and which therefore cool very rapidly,
and, being very bad conductors, the heat that is lost
by radiation is very slowly restored from the ground.
Hence in clear calm nights they condense dew in
great abundance.
The greater the depth of water, the more slowly is
its temperature diminished, as the surface cannot
lose even l p of heat until the whole depth has been
reduced to the same temperature. And in this dry
climate the dew point or point of saturation is often
many degrees below the temperature of the air. It
is thus easy to see that when there is a depth of
more than a few inches of water no dew can be con-
densed on its [Surface.
But we are not left to determine this point by
reasoning on general principles. It is fortunately
one that can very readily be determined by experi-
ment.
Dr. Wells found that a thermometer laid on a
grass plot in a clear night, and in calm weather,
sunk 6° , 8° , 13 ° , and even 20 ° lower than a
thermometer hung at some height from the ground.
This explains the rapid extraction of heat from the
atmosphere in contact with the grass plot, and the
copious deposition of dew on grass. But no such
rapid reduction of temperature has ever been ob-
served in w?ter placed under similar circumstances.
The surface of the ocean and of inland lakes retains
a very uniform temperature, corresponding to the
seasons, and suffers little change from the ordinary
alternations of heat and cold during day and night;
indeed the difference in the temperature of the ocean
is scarcely perceptible.
In temperate regions, the difference in the diurnal
range of the thermometer in the air over the ocean
is very trifling, rarely exceeding from 4° to 6°,
while upon the continents the range often amounts
to a 2O °or3o ° , and between the latitudes ol 25 ° and
50 ° the air is rarely warmer than the surface of the
sea. And it is found by careful observation that
while the temperature of the air over the land is
rapidly cooled by the chilling influence of radiation
during the night, the air over the ocean is several
degrees colder than the surface of the water, and is
therefore heated, not chilled, by contact with its
warmer surface.


With cold winds the temperature of our inland
lakes would he much more quickly cooled, than by
radiation ; but for the formation of dew it is neces-
sary that there should be scarcely any wind. It is
also necessary that the water should abstract heat
from the air, and not that the air should abstract
heat from the water.
Dr. Wells also clearly proved by his experiments
that water fully exposed in a calm clear night in
shallow vessels lost weight from evaporation, while
dew was being largely deposited on the sur-
face of the ground. An increase of weight
from condensation of dew was only observed
when the cold was so great that ice was formed,
and in this case he found a slight increase in weight,
but the existence of ice proved that the temperature
of the water had been reduced far below the dew
point.
I am not aware that any subsequent experiments
have shewn any inaccuracy in the experiments of Dr.
Wells.
It is to this uniformity in the temperature of water
during day and night that our land and sea breezes
are owing. During the day, the air over the land
becomes heated, and a sea breeze is the result; during
the night, the land is chilled by radiation, and the
air being thus rendered much colder and heavier
than that on the surface of the ocean, a land breeze
is the result.
Iu this manner, the extremes of heat and cold are
very much moderated along the coast lines, and the
climate is rendered much milder and more agree-
able.
There can be no doubt that like atmospheric cur-
rents will take place at Yan Yean. The heated sur-
face of the surrounding ranges, during the day, will
produce currents of cool air from the reservoir.
During the night, the warmer air on the surlace of
the reservoir will give place to currents of cold air
which has been deprived of its moisture by the chill-
ing influence of radiation on the summits and slopes
of the ranges.
Mr. Hodgkinson’s theory, would, however, reverse
the whole order of things.
If the surface of the sea and our inland lakes be-
comes during the night so much colder than the sur-
face of the land as to condense double the amount
of dew, we should have land breezes in the day, and
sea breezes in the night ; and our summer watering
places would become inhospitable deserts.
But as it is physically impossible for our inland .
lakes to lose from 5° to 15 ® of temperature by
radiation during the night, so it is physically impos-
£ffect ()f cold
winds,
Water evaporates
while dew con-
denses
Sea breezes and
land breezes.
Currents at Yan
ean-
Mr Hodgkin _
son’s theory.
ly imp o Jibie.


Dew excluded
from English
data.
Mr. Hodgkinson,
Dr. Dalton, &
Mr. Glaisher.
Large deductions
from Mr.Hodg-
mat e° nS eSti ‘
is evaporation.
sible for any dew to be condensed on their surface.
And I feel persuaded that Mr. Hodgkinson could
not have reflected sufficiently on the general princi-
ples which regulate the production of dew, otherwise
he would certainly have omitted it altogether from
his calculations, and his extreme confidence in a very
abundant supply for 191,500, would have been con-
siderably diminished.
And there can be no objection to my deducting 10
inches from Mr Hodgkinson’s estimate, or an equiva-
lant to supply 22.727.
But there is another view of the subject equally
fatal to the assumption of 10 inches of dew. Mr
Hodgkinson has calculated the evaporation from the
surface of the reservoir from English data. Now,
these data represent the amount of water evapo-
rated as determined by actual measurement,
without any reference to dew, the conden-
sation and evaporation of which on the sur-
face of the evaporating vessels are re-
regarded as balancing each other. Therefore, if 10
inches of dew are assumed to be condensed on the
surface of the reservoir, this amount must be added
to the rate of evaporation deduced from English
data. But Mr. Hodgkinson has not done this, he
has allowed 1 inch for the three summer months in
estimating the evaporation of the pond, but it does
not appear that he has added 9 inches for the other
nine months.
If he has done this, his estimate of the evaporation,
; excluding dew, would be 4 feet 9-6 inches for twelve
months, which it will surely be admitted is a very
small allowance for this country, when Dr. Dalton’s
estimate for Manchester is 3 feet 8 inches, and Mr.
Glaisher’s estimate for Greenwich is 5 feet.
If Mr. Hodgkinson, therefore, insists on retaining
10 inches of dew in his estimate, he cannot object to
add 9 inches to his evaporation, which will thus
amount to 6 feet 3-6 inches; but in this case the dew
goes for nothing.
5. I have thus far endeavored to show that very
large deductions must be made from Mr. Hodgkin-
son’s estimate, ere we arrive at the amount that will
be available lor the supply of the city; and his
estimate for 191-500 has been reduced by an amount
that would supply 109-337, leaving still sufficient for
82.163.
I now proceed to consider what dependence is to
be placed on the amount gained by Mr. Hodgkinson,
from preferring his own estimate of the evaporation
from the surface of the reservoir, which is 5 feet 6-6
inches, to Dr. Davy's which is 9 feet.


This difference for an area of 1,450 acres is 3 feet
4 inches, and will suffice to supply 90,909, at 40 gals,
per head, per day.
The experiment on which Mr. ITodgkinson relies
to prove the evaporation from the surface of water,
during three of our summer months, has many
singular features.
It was co iducted on a pond on the banks of the
Yarra, very little above the sea level, and, there-
fore, in the most favorable position to. receive a
lateral supply from higher levels. Again, decom-
posed trap resting on stiff clay is exceedingly favor-
able to retain the winter rains from higher levels,
and to afford a large lateral supply to a pond 15
feet deep.
It cannot be doubted that a large amount of water
may be supplied in this way.
In many parts of Melbourne, and particularly at
the lowest levels, it is almost impossible to prevent
the cellars being filled with water. And, on the
Gold-fields, the difficulties that the diggers have to
contend with from influx of water at low levels, and
in deep excavations, is well known.
In selecting this pond for an experiment on evapo-
ration, especially when the justification of a vast
expenditure of public money depended on the result,
it was incumbent on Mr. Hodgkinson to show that it
contained no springs, and that there was no other
indefinite source of supply that could render the
experiment fallacious.
Springs are very often found in the ponds and
water-holes that form the beds of many of our
creeks. This is a well ascertained fact, and was
therefore deserving of careful consideration.
In some instances the springs gush out of the
rocks above the water line, but, in general, they are
principally distinguished by the small apparent loss
from evaporation in those ponds in which they
exist. . , ~
The difference in this respect is very remarkable,
where there are chains of ponds, all those without
springs dry up during the summer months, and I
have been assured by old colonists, and residents on
the banks of the Deep Creek, and other creeks, that
many of the ponds have from four to six feet of
water in them in November, and that they dry up
completely in three or four months.
Nor can this be accounted for by any loss that
might be sustained from cattle drinking at them.
Where there are continuous chains of ponds it would
be difficult to understand how so many should be
emptied in the same manner, and, where all are
equally accessible, how some should be emptied by
His experiment
on the Pond.
Sources of Fal-
lacy.
gp rin g S>
Other observa-
tions on ponds,
Effect of Cattle.


Evaporation or
Absorption.
Permanent water
holes.
Ratio of Ponds to
the surface
drained.
Size of English
Reservoirs.
New York.
cattle, while others, apparently, lose very little
water.
_ And this objection cannot apply to my observa-
tions with reference to the Deep Creek, as the land
is enclosed for cultivation.
The water of these ponds is lost, therefore, either
by evaporation, or absorption. Either admission
would be alike fatal to the prospects of the Yan-Yeaa
Res°rvoir.
If so much water can be absorbed through the
slate strata, which form the bed of the Deep Creek,
what reasonable grounds have we to expect that the
same amount of absorption will not take place
through the slate strata that form the bed of the
reservoir ?
It may be noticed that some settlers have great
confidence in the Yan Yean scheme from observing
that small artificial water-holes are often permanent
in the summer months.
If my reasoning is correct with regard to the
effects of evaporation in this country, we may
assume that the evaporation from the surface of
water is nine feet, and that one-ninth of the rain may
be relied on as the watershed.
The extent of drainage area necessary to give a
permanent supply of water to any pond can, there-
fore, be easily determined.
With a rainfall of 36 inches, the ratio of the drain-
age area to the surface of the pood must be greater
than 18 to 1, in order to secure a permanent
supply.
The ratio of the Plenty basin to the surface of
the reservoir is about 27 to 1, but more than one-
third of the watershed is not available for the re-
servoir, a large amount being lost in the swamp 3,
and it being necessary to leave a certain proportion
to maintain the flow in the river.
Thus the ratio is practically reduced to 18 to 1,
and there is, therefore, no more than sufficient to
cover the evaporation.
Reservoirs in England seldom exceed 50 acres,
and they are generally much smaller, hence the loss
from evaporation is very trifling, and the area of
surface drained very large in proportion.
The reservoir which supplies New York is 400
acres, with a depth of 40 feet, and an unlimited com-
mand of water, the loss from evaporation is, conse-
quently, not equal to one-third of that which will
be sustained at Yan Yean.
Had the Yan Yean reservoir not exceeded 400 acres
there would have been a saving of water equivalent
to supply 118,500, at 40 gallons per head per day,


with a depth of 15 feet 8 inches, instead of 4 feet
4 inches.
With 30 inches of rain the proportion would be
21£ to 1. and I have no doubt that, in all those cases
in which settlers have obtained a permanent supply
from artificial water-holes, the ratio of the surface
drained to that of the water-holes would be found
to correspond to the proportions indicated above.
Nor is it difficult to understand how with a large
area and steep slopes a small pond might be sup-
plied even from the summer rains.
Thus, according to the evidence of gentlemen
perfectly competent to describe what they have fre-
quently observed, the evaporation from the ponds
referred to is at least double what Mr. Hodgkinson
observed in his pond.
I might multiply instances of a very high rate of
evaporation that has been observed both in this
country, and elsewhere, by gentlemen whose cre-
dibility cannot be doubted, but at present I merely
allude to the fact for the purpose of shewing that
Mr Hodgkinson is not justified in making so momen-
tous a question as the rate of evaporation at Yan
Yean, and the whole water supply of Melbourne,
depend on a single experiment on a pond, attended
by many circumstances of doubt, and not conducted
with that minute accuracy of detail which could
alone command the confidence of scientific men, and
without the most distant reference to the experiments
and observations of others, who have arrived at very
different results from his own.
Mr. Hodgkinson estimates the area of his pond at
1£ acres, and the area of the surface which it drains
at 9 acres. The ratio is, therefore, only 1 to 6.
And he allows 15 per cent, of the rainfall for the
watershed, which gives 3.6 inches for the three
hottest months, from a rainfall of 4 inches.
In calculating the evaporation from the pond,
the 3.6 inches should have been omitted altogether.
If iwe refer to Dr. Dalton’s table we shall find
that, with a rainfall of 4.15 inches in July, 4.09
inches are evaporated, leaving only 0.06, or one
sixty-ninth part, to represent the watershed.
Instead of 3.6 inches, therefore, Mr. Hodgkinson
ought to have added only 0.34 inches, or one-third
o) an inch, as the watershed from the 9 acres.
Thus 3.26 inches must be deducted from the
supply of the pond, and, therefore, from the evapora-
tion, and there only remains 20.74 inches of evapo-
ration for our three hottest months, or 6.91 inches
for each month.
This is a very important deduction from Mr.
Hodgkinson’s premises, as it proves one of two
Summer rains.
High rate of eva-
poration.
A single experi-
ment of little
value.
Area of the Pond
Summer rain all
evaporated.
Important de-
duction.


Our liigh tempe-
rature and dry-
ness.
Nine" Acres
The Pond sup-
Springs?" 1
things. If his evaporation is right, then the 3.26
inches must he supplied from a spring, or from
some distant and higher level beyond the limits or
the 9 acres. If, on the other hand, the rainfall of
the 9 acres is the only source of supply, then the
evaporation for our three hottest months cannot ex-
ceed 6.91 inches. Either alternative would be suffi-
ciently embarassing.
Dr. Davy has shewn that the temperature of our
three summer months, during last season, exceeded the
temperature of the corresponding months in London,
according to the meteorological tables of the Royal
Society, by 10° of Fahr., and also that our dryness
exceeded that of London by 2| to 1. From these
data we are warranted, according to the tables or
Dr. Dalton, to compute our evaporation at nearly
three times the English evaporation j but, if we are
to trust Mr. Hodgkinsou’s experiments in the
pond, our evaporation will only exceed .Dr. Dalton’s
estimate for June by less than half an inch for each
of the three months. And, if we further deduct one
inch of dew, which Mr. Hodgkinson has allowed for
the three summer months, his estimate of the evapo-
ration accurately deduced from his own premises,
will almost exactly equal the English evaporation.
The watershed of the 9 acres for twelve months,
calculated at 15 per cent, of the rainfall, is equal to
27.76 inches, which, added to the rainfall of 30.85
inches, gives 4 feet 10.61 inches, as the available
supply for the pond, but Mr. Hodkingson’s evapora-
tion is 5 feet 6.6 inches. How is it then that the
pond does not dry up ? And how shall we account
for a depth of ten feet of water in the summer
months? It only receives 4 feet 10 61 inches, and it
evaporates 5 feet 6.6 inches, the difference amounting
to 7.99 inches. , „ , ,
The conclusion is inevitable that the balance is
made up from a spring, or some other source inde-
pendent of the rainfall.
And, this being proved, who is to compute tne
amount of water thus supplied ? or what confidence
can be placed in an estimate. of the
evaporation based on such uncertain data ?
Thus, to determine the amount . of this
lateral supply is purely an impossibility, and
to assume the amount is to beg the whole question.
After the explanation given above respecting dew,
it will be of no use to allege that the balance is made
up in this way. , , . , ,
If 9 inches of dew are assumed to be condensed
on the pond during 9 months, the same amount must
be added to the evaporation, and, therefore, nothing
is gained.


It is a singular fact that all our hopes of deriving
an adequate supply of water from Yan Yean, at this
moment, depend on Mr. Hodgkinson’s estimate of the
evaporation derived from the pond, and it must be
regarded as still more singular that his own data, on
which he relies to prove the correctness of his esti-
mate, have furnished the best proof of its fallacy, by
clearly shewing that the pond is supplied from
springs.
In calculating the evaporation of the other 9
months, Mr. Hodgkiuson has recourse to English
data, and computes the amount by “correcting these
for the average differences of temperature for the
various months of the year,” and by “ applying a
slight additional correction for the frequent occur-
rence of dry winds.”
He does not say whose tables he has employed for
this purpose, but, in order to illustrate the principle
upon which he proceeds, I have added to the fore-
going tables the evaporation from the surface of
water at Manchester, according to Dr. Dalton’s ex-
periments, and also the evaporation from the surface
of water in this colony, deduced from the English
evaporation by allowing the same proportion to the
same mean temperature in both countries.
For our three summer months I have adopted
Mr. Hodgkinson’s estimate of 8 inches,and the result,
as may be seen by reference to the tables, gives 5
feet 11.85 inches.
Thus it is seen that the corrections for temperature
alone, give 5.25 inches more than Mr. Hodgkinson
allows, having made all the additional correc •
tions that are necessary for our very dry atmosphere,
and the more “intense action” of our very dry
north winds.
But it is not necessary to adopt Mr. Hodgkinson’s
estimate in order to get eight inches of evaporation
for each of our three summer months.
Dr. Dalton’s tables give 6.49 inches as the evapo-
ration for June in Manchester, and they also point
out the method for correcting the evaporation for
temperature and dryness, by a simple formula.
Now, Dr. Davy has shewn that the temperature of
our three hottest months is 10° higher than the
temperature of the three corresponding months in
London, according to the tables of the Royal
Society. Thus, our increased temperature alone,
without reference to dryness, would give 9-73
inches as the evaporation from the surface of water
deduced from English tables, the rate of evaporation
being doubled with every increase of 20 ° of Fahr.
But Dr. Davy has also shewn that the mean dew
point of our three hottest months is 50°, thus
The fallacy of
Hodgkin,
t experi "
English data,
Corrected for
corrcc
tions fallacious
Simple formulae
for ascertain-
ing the evapo-
ration.


Dr. Dalton aud
Dr. Ure.
Mr. Hodgkin-
son's own
method of cal-
culation gives
nearly 9 feet.
Mr.Glaisher’s es-
timate for Green-
wich.
Dr. Dalton and
Dr. Davy.
Value of Dr.
Davy’s experi-
ments.
shewing a dryness of 19 ©, or in the proportion of 2 4
to 1 compared with London.
Now, according to the formulae of Dr. Dalton,
and Dr. Ure, 9-73 inches corrected for our dryness,
would give 16-22 inches for each month, or 48 -66
for three months.
The above table shows that the English evapora-
tion for the other nine months, corrected for tem-
perature alone, is 47 • 85 inches.
As there are no correct data to show our relative
dryness for these months, this correction must be
omitted, but, even without this, the rate of evapo-
ration deduced from English tables, in the manner
described by Mr. Hodgkinson, amounts to 8 feet 0 .51
inches.
Thus, if we make some additional corrections for
our greater dryness for the nine months, and for the
more “ intense action ” of our dry winds, I do not
see how Mr. Hodgkinson can escape from the con-
clusion, even according to his own method of cal-
culation, that the evaporation from the surface of
water in this colony is little short of 9 feet.
And it is of great importance to notice here that,
in the Year Book of Facts for 1854., it is stated that
the rate of evaporation at Greenwich, according to
Mr. Glaisher who is the highest authority on me-
teorological subjects in England, is 5 feet. So that
Mr. Hodgkinson’s evaporation for this colony is
very little more than Mr. Glaishers for the south of
England. And this higher rate, if corrected in a
similar manner for temperature alone, would give
7 feet 6 inches, without any additional corrections
for dryness and winds.
But why does he resort at all to English data in
order to deduce our evaporation in a troublesome
and unsatisfactory manner? Had Dr. Dalton any
peculiar method of determining the evaporation at
Manchester different from that adopted by Dr. Davy
in Melbourne? If it is correct to deduce our
evaporation from Dr. Dalton’s evaporation for the
nine months, why is it incorrect to depend on Dr.
Davy’s evaporation for the three months?
Both these gentlemen have adopted precisely the
same method of experimenting in determining then
respective rates of evaporation.
Dr. Davy’s experiments, which were conducted
daily during the period referred to, are in every
respect similar to those which are every where else
depended on for ascertaining the rate of evapora-
tion, and they were conducted with a degree of
care and minute accuracy which it would be diffi-
cult to exceed, pe carefully measured, in a
graduated vessel, each portion of water that was


exposed to evaporation, and thus every drop that
was evaporated was accurately registered.
Those gentlemen who question the accuracy of
his results ought to point out in what manner his
experiments differ from Dr. Dalton’s or Mr. Char-
nock’s, and how it is that his are fallacious while
they place implicit confidence in theirs.
The method commonly adopted for the purpose
of throwing doubts on the accuracy of Dr. Davy’s
results is to compare his scientific experiments with
observations on ponds and waterholes. But enough,
I trust, has already been said to shew that a more
fallacious test could not be applied.
But, if this question must be decided by observa-
tions on ponds, I have already mentioned other
observations which give nearly double the amount
of Mr. Hodgkinson’s estimate, and I do not see in
what manner he can dispose of these. And I
myself measured, with the greatest care, the evapo-
ration from the surface of a pond in the month of
February, and found that there was a loss of exactly
II inches in 28 days. Now, can Mr. Hodgkinson
point out any source of error in this experiment ?
unless it is that I omitted to add anything for rain,
or dew, or later il supply, for all of which he has
made a very liberal allowance in his experiment,
but this would have added to, not diminished the
rate of evaporation.
The only scientific objection that has been urged ,
against Dr. Davy’s estimate being applied to the
Yan Yean Reservoir is the great extent of surface.
It is thought that the air will become so saturated
with vapour that the rate of evaporation will be very
much diminished.
There can be no doubt that in the case of the ocean
this objection would have considerable weight, though,
even there, extended observations show that the air
'is very rarely near the point of saturation ; but with
regard to the Yan Yean Reservoir, I feel quite cer-
tain that the effect which extent of surface would
have in retarding evaporation has been greatly ex-
aggerated.
Being surrounded by an amphitheatre of hills, it
may, to a certain extent, be protected from strong
winds; but, on the other hand, this physical confor-
mation will render it more liable, in calm
weather, to atmospheric currents resulting from ■
the unequal effects of solar heat on the
surface soil of the hills, and on the water of
the reservoir. The latter will preserve a very uni-
form temperature, while the former will be subject
to great diurnal alternations of heat and cold.
Thus the vapor that is formed on the surface will
Ponds and water-
holes.
Only scientific
objection.
Extent of sur-
face.
Effects of solar
heat.


Law of diffusion.
Aided by dryness
ot the atmos-
p ere ’
Dr. Davy’s ob-
servations.
Mr. Brough
Smyth.
at all times be quickly removed, and replaced by
currents of drier air. And it is important to notice,
that the amount of water evaporated, other things
being equal, is exactly in proportion to the surface
exposed ; and it is not difficult to see that when the
water is agitated with winds and currents, the
extent of evaporating surface will at least be
doubled.
But, independently of winds and atmospheric cur-
rents, it appears to me that those gentlemen who
urge this objection have altogether overlooked the
law of diffusion, which applies equally to vapor and
all other gaseous bodies. In a still atmosphere, it
is true that diffusion will operate more slowly
than when aided by currents; but as the vapor of
water is lighter than air at the same temperature
and pressure, in the proportion of 62 to 100,
its diffusive powor is very great, even in a per-
fectly still atmosphere; and it may be confi-
dently concluded that the hygrometric condition
of the atmosphere a and the tension of its vapor will
not be materially affected by the evaporation from
the reservoir, which, notwithstanding its great
extent, is very limited compared with the ocean.
And, with our Australian atmosphere, which is so
remarkable for its dryness, and with the rapid diffu-
sion that will result thereform, it would be very
unwise to calculate upon a greatly diminished rate
of evaporation in the reservoir.
In his estimate of 9 feet of evaporation for the
reservoir, Dr. Davy has made ample allowance for
the retarding effects of extent of surface. His
observations have only extended over four months,
and the evaporation for these months is as follows :
Inches.
January, by approximate data 21.710
February, by daily observations 23.630
March do do 15.470
April do do 10.000
With respect to these amounts, as Dr. Davy is
absent from town, and as Mr. Brough Smyth thinks
that he intended to make some corrections on ac-
count of the evaporating vessel used in January, and
February, he advises me to assume at present, only
18 inches for December, January, and February ; the
amounts for March, and April, he thinks, do not re-
quire any corrections.
Now, in computing 9 feet as the evaporation from
the reservoir, it is only necessary to assume 12
inches for each of the four summer months, there-
fore, Dr. Davy has allowed at least 6 inches, which
is a very large deduction from the true evaporation,
to compensate for the extent of the reservoir, or any


other accidental cause that might operate to retard
the evaporation from the surface.
What possible reason, or excuse, then, can be
given for rejecting Dr. Davy’s estimate of 9 feet ?
According to my judgment the conclusion is irre-
sistible that his estimate is confidently to be de-
pended on, and I feel warranted in deducting the
3 feet 4 inches from Mr. Hodgkinson’s estimate,
which is equivalent to supply 90.909.
Having thus stated the points of difference between
myself and Mr. Hodgkinson, and which constitute
the data on which we depend for our water supply,
and having shewn that they are not based on correct
or scientific principles, and are, therefore, unworthy
of your confidence, and that, on a thorough investiga-
tion of the subject, there are no data to shew that
there will be any water for the city derivable from
Yan Yean, I have little to add.
I shall submit, therefore, that the Philosophical
Society has now a very important duty to perform ;
a duty to themselves, as the interpreters of science
in this colony ; a duty to the Government and the
Legislative Council, who look to them for a scien-
tific opinion to aid them in the decision of the ques-
tion, if it be proper to allow the Yan Yean works to
be proceeded with ; and a duty to the public, whose
health, and comfort, and pecuniary interests are so
seriously involved in the success or failure of the
Yan Yean Reservoir scheme ; and I trust that the
Philosophical Society will no longer hesitate to
pronounce an opinion on the subject.
Irresistible con-
clusion.
No water for the
City.
Dufy devolving
on the Philoso-
phical Society.


MELBOURNE : PRINTED AT “ THE AGE ” OFFICE.




