

Bonwick - Tasmanians
Trans. Ethnol. Soc. Vol VIII
1870




Ordinary Meeting, Jan. 25th, 1870.
Professor Huxley, LL.D., F.R.S., President, in the Chair.
New Members. —Lord Rosehill; J. W. Barnes, Esq.; Wal-
ter Morrison, Esq., M.P. ; and Robert Lucas Nash, Esq.
Dr. Hooker, C. 8., exhibited a collection of figures in unburnt
clay modelled by a native Zulu, and sent to this country by
J. Sanderson, Esq.
Col. Lane Fox exhibited two stone mullers, one from Tahiti,
and the other from the West Indies, together with a drawing of
a similar muller from New York.
The following paper was then read by the author: —
XIII. On the Origin of the Tasmanians Geologically consi-
dered. By James Bonwick, Esq., F.R.G.S.
(Abridged.)
The “ Origin of the Tasmanians ” has at this moment a painful
interest. The last man of the race has departed : an old woman
is the sole survivor of the island tribes.
The people were recognized as among the lowest of the human
form, and the most isolated and peculiar of the family of man.
Black and woolly-haired, they seemed allied to Africans seven
thousand miles away, while their manners and general physique
connected them with their Australian neighbours. How came
they where the early voyagers found them ?
Linguistic analogies, identity of customs, and assimilation of
habits of thought associate them with others scattered over vast
areas; but grave difficulties beset our way in seeking a common
origin for races so remotely situated from each other, and almost
all of whom may be reputed consistent landsmen.
In pleading, therefore, as I shall have to do, for the prior
existence of a continent with which these several peoples could
have been associated, I am conscious of placing myself in anta-
gonism to popular and established theories, and of confronting
those who would make the Aborigines literally “ Men of the
Soil,” —beginning an existence as a race in the country where
they are now observed.
Assuming sufficient time, it may be demonstrated that the
Papuan race, which we see at so many isolated spots, were for-
merly more associated geographically, and that they could have
had one common ancestry. Prof. Huxley sees reason to connect
the Tasmanian and his neighbours with the very old prehistoric
folk of Europe. “ I shall be inclined,” says he, “to look among
the Papuan races of New Guinea and New Holland for the
nearest allies of men to whom the Shell-Mounds once belonged.”


The migration took place at a period when civilization had
made little advance; and not only prior to the institution of
agriculture, but before the domestication of cattle.
It is in the highest degree probable that the site of the sunken
continent whence the various black races surrounding the
Indian Ocean, and extending into the Pacific and Southern
Oceans, may have radiated was the source of the Australian
vegetation. Dr. Hooker, in his valuable work on the Flora of
the South, has afforded us some remarkable data for this con-
ception. He indirectly supports the continental theory by
showing how very inadequate the powers of currents of air and
water are as propagators of species. In accounting for the
absence of certain forms in New Zealand, after that region was
isolated from New Holland, he demonstrates that it “is still
more incompatible with the theory of extensive migrations by
oceanic or aerial currents. This absence is most conspicuous in
the cases of Eucalypti and almost every other genus of Myr-
tacece, of the whole immense genus of Acacia , and of its nume-
rous Australian congeners.” The Blackfellows could no more
cross the sea than could the gum-tree.
But he proceeds to the origin of that flora. He found 273
genera of North Australia allied to those of India; and that, as
the proportion of peculiarity increased while going south-east-
wards, the maximum of home plants was obtained in the south-
western part of Australia. He sees “ a greater specific differ-
ence between two quarters of Australia, south-east and south-
west, than between Australia and the rest of the globe; and that
the most marked characteristics of the flora are concentrated at
that point most remote from any other region of the globe.”
But that quarter would be the one nearest the sunken conti-
nent ; to which, therefore, we trace the flora of Australia.
Dr. Hooker is led also to the old continent by the thought
that “ the many bonds of affinity between the three Southern
Floras (the Antarctic, Australian, and South African) indicate
that these have had a common origin, that the period of their
divergence antedates the creation of the principal existing gene-
ric forms of each.”
The extension of the country of the Blackfellows was neces-
sary to account for its vegetation, as the same botanical autho-
rity is convinced that facts prove “ not only the antiquity of the
flora, but that it was developed in a much larger area than it
now occupies ; ” and he elsewhere says, " the antecedents of the
peculiar Australian flora may have inhabited an area to the
westward of the present Australian continent, and that the
curious analogies which the latter presents with the South-
African flora, and which are so much more conspicuous in the


south-west quarter, may be connected with such a prior state of
things.”
Dr. Hooker declares that one-eighth of the plants of South
America may be found in New Zealand, while the Polynesian
flora generally has much sympathy with that continent. One-
tenth of the New-Zealand vegetation is common to Australia
and South America. The Oxalis Magellanica is found in New
Zealand, Tasmania, and South America, while the Edivardsia
grandiflora is detected in the first and third of these regions;
and yet the President of the Linnsean Society has affirmed that
“ the seeds of neither could stand exposure to the salt-water , and
they are too heavy to be borne on the air.” Mr. Andrew Mur-
ray says “ South America was most probably united to Australia,
if we may draw any inference from the presence of allied forms
of life common to both.”
The botany of South Africa is much like that of Australia, there
being, according to Dr. Hooker, 280 genera of 1000, or nearly
thirty per cent., identical. The wonderful egg of Madagascar,
14 inches long, proves that the land must have extended far be-
yond the present narrow limits when’the parent of such an egg
existed, and that most probably toward the east and north end,
as Mr. Wallace believes Madagascar has not been connected
with the African mainland since the Miocene period, at least.
Mr. Wake gives especial prominence to the island in his theory
of continental extension.
We may, then, conclude with Mr. Murray that “ a complete
circlet of land formerly crowned the southern temperate regions,
as now does the northern/ - ’
Mr. Pritchard admits that “an archipelago was originally
formed by the disruption of an ancient continent through the
invasion of the equatorial current.” D’Urville wrote of that
old continent. The learned Mr. Logan, of Singapore, has these
remarks :—•“ Asia cannot be severed, in a physical or geological
view, from the great insular region which lies to the southward
of it.” He has shown the continuity of geological formations
from Malaya across the Strait to Singapore, and onward to
islands southward and eastward. Mr. Oxley finds the four
great families of Casuarina, Myrtaceee, Melaleucea, and Pro-
teacece represented in India. The Australian flora, according
to Dr. Hooker, terminates with the Casuarina on the eastern
side of the Bay of Bengal, and the Stylidium on the western.
“In many cases,” writes Sir J. E. Tennant, “the faunas of
Ceylon and of Australasia seem more similar than those of Cey-
lon and Hindustan.” But Mr. Murray adds, “Both their
faunas and floras have to a considerable extent an Australian
character.” The traditions of Ceylon point to a time when the


country extended far southward. The Arabs still speak of the
Gate of Tears, which opened to let in the floods that tore their
land from Africa. The South-Australian blacks even now point
to the West as the source of Babydom. Prof. Owen thinks that
“ the Andaman Islands, like the Nicobar, Java, Sumatra, and
Ceylon, may have been parts of some former tract of dry land
distinct from, and perhaps preexistent to, that neighbouring
and more northern continent.” Prof. Huxley considers that
the Australioid and Negroid, of his ethnological nomenclature,
were in existence when there was land communication between
Australia and the Deccan on the one hand, and South Africa,
Malacca, and New Guinea on the other.
New Guinea has so many similarities with its greater neigh-
bour that we seem ready to regard the two in the likeness of
Dover and Calais, and with New Guinea may be brought into con-
nexion with Australia, the Melanesian group of New Hebrides,
Solomon Isles, New Britain, New Ireland, New Caledonia,
&c. Marsupialia still exist in the New Hebrides. The Rev.
John Inglis, Presbyterian Missionary, is disposed to con-
nect some of those with New Zealand, though regarding New-
Caledonian botany as kindred to that of New South Wales. Dr.
Hooker, however, classes the plants of New Hebrides and New
Caledonia with those of New Zealand and New Holland. Dr.
Sclater classes the birds of Polynesia with those of Australia.
Mr. Murray sees that the only mammals of Polynesia “ belong
to an order also found in Australia, the Bats; ” he observes
great affinity of genera in birds of Australia and Papua, and Dr.
Gunther noticed the same with reptiles and batrachians.
The geological history of New Zealand has some strong con-
nexion with that of New Holland. For example, the Coal-field
of Eastern Australia, one of the largest in the world, seems one
with that of New Zealand on the western side; whilst the gold-
fields of New Zealand are similar to those of Australia.
The existence of huge birds, like the Dinornis or Moa, is not
at all in accordance with the theory of an insular history. New
Zealand must, in all probability, have been then much greater
in extent. Although the Emu now strides over the plains of
Australia, and is of kindred family to the wingless birds so com-
paratively recently roaming over the fern-land, yet the latter
country may have stretched far eastward and northward, as well
as westward.
A most important additional evidence has been brought by a
recent mail from Australia. We learn that the diggers of the
Peak Downs Gold-field, Queensland, found what is pronounced
by Mr. Gerard Krcfft, the Curator of the Sydney Museum, to
be the right femur of a monster bird, allied to the Moa !


It may properly be asked, Why seek to prove the connexion
of New Zealand with the Australian shores, when no correspon-
dence of human race is known? The Blacks of New Guinea
and Australia are similar; but the inhabitants of New Zealand
are Polynesian, not Papuan.
The Maori confesses himself a stranger, an immigrant; he
has traditions of the canoes that brought his forefathers to the
foreign coast. But in those very tales are stray references to
the aboriginal inhabitants, most of whom the savage visitors were
said to have devoured. Five hundred years only are assumed
by the one great authority, the able and benevolent friend of the
coloured races, Sir George Grey, as the limit of the residence of
the Maories. Who were there before them ? Several travellers
have spoken of the presence of two distinct races; in spite of in-
termarriage, the dark skin, crisp hair, thick lip of the one would
indicate a Papuan character.
The islands to the south and east of New Zealand present
some interesting features that help out the theory. It is suf-
ficient now to allude to the Chatham Isles of the east; here the
volcanic element comes out in strong force, and furnishes us,
doubtless, with a key to the enigma of the present isolation of
the place. But the ethnological remains are more convincing
than in the parent island : Broughton and Dieffcnbach are clear
in their testimony that the inhabitants were dark, with crisp
hair, and with all the other peculiarities of a people wholly di-
stinct from the Maories.
There needs no argument to affirm the former connexion of
Tasmania with South-eastern Australia; the granite of the for-
mer is led to the granite of the latter by a succession of ocean
granite-steps, —the isles of Bass’s Strait. Raised beaches in the
Straits show other changes. Wilson’s Promontory has a flora
peculiarly Tasmanian. Even the distinctive Devil (the Dasyurus)
lias been discovered, with other remains of extinct Australian life,
in a cave of Mount Macedon, in Victoria; while both Devil and
Tiger ( Thylacinus ) have been seen among the osseous curiosities
of Wellington Cave, New South Wales, along with monster
Kangaroos and huge marsupial oxen. Its Ornithorhynchus is
seen in South-eastern Australia. By its isolation it retained
some original inhabitants a little longer than the continent did.
In proceeding to the specific object of the paper, the tracing
of the progress of the tribes geologically, I must assume the
now generally accepted belief of the allied character, at least,
of the dark race of the Indian hills, of Malaya, of Cochin China,
of the Andaman, and of the Papuan Isles proper, with the Abo-
rigines of New Holland and Van Diemen’s Land. But, as it is
well known that the natives of those two last-named countries


have peculiarities, especially of hair, distinguishing them from
one another, I would endeavour to indicate the probable path-
way of the woolly-haired Tasmanians in contradistinction to that
of the kindred, but more flowing-liaired, men of the continent.
Mr. Logan, who had so many opportunities at Singapore of
noticing a variety of races, teaches this respecting the two in
question : —“ The spiral-haired Papuans of South New Guinea
and Torres Strait are often more Africo-Semitic and South
Indian in their physiognomy than the Australians, while the
latter have the fine hair of the South-Indian and some Mid-
African nations, and a linguistic formation which resembles the
South Indian more than any other in the world.”
To raise the sunken continent, so as to connect the woolly-
haired men of the Southern Isle with the crisp-haired Hill-men of
India and Malaya, the Yeddas of Ceylon, the corkscrew-ringlet
men of New Guinea, the Blacks of New Caledonia, and the Ya-
zimbas of Madagascar, we may be obliged to go back through
the Pleistocene to the Tertiary, and even advance considerably
into the latter. But it should be borne in mind that geologists
place the Australian flora with the Oolitic age of Europe ; and
Mr. Huxley has prepared us for enlarged conceptions of anthro-
pology by asking, “Was the oldest Homo sapiens Pliocene or
Miocene, or yet more ancient ? ” At any rate, if unprovided
with this extent of time, we see no other way of deliverance
from the dilemma than that of the polygenestic theory of sepa-
rate creations of distinct species of man at various epochs. No
sea-migration idea, no climatic change, no intermarriages can
account for White and Black, for English and Tasmanians, dur-
ing the limited space of six, or even twenty, thousand years.
The so-called Oriental Negroes, having the crisp and woolly
hair, though found in New Guinea on the north and Tasmania
on the south, have left some representatives on the mainland of
Australia. Cape York, with the Murray Islands, show this pecu-
liarity. Mr. Earl has this striking report of Coburg peninsula,
to the north-west, —“ The aboriginal inhabitants of this part of
Australia very closely resemble the Papuans of New Guinea, or,
which is almost the same thing, the aborignes of Yan Diemen’s
Land.” Mr. Oldfield, the naturalist, has something similar to
relate of a part of Western Australia. “ The tribes,” says he,
“ inhabiting the country from Murchison River to Sharks’ Bay
possess more of the characteristics of the Negro family than the
aborigines of any part of Australia.”
Although the Tasmanians can be shown to be, excepting in
their hair, so much like their continental neighbours,—although
they live in the same manner, have similar customs, and cherish
the same superstitions,—yet they evidently form two distinct


streams of population. The interesting question to arrive at is,
whether the former took the same track as the New Hollanders,
and whether they were first or last on the field of their present
locality.
The Australians, as a rule, are physically different from the
Tasmanians; but the fact of some being found with, at least,
Tasmanian tendencies, and these at three corners of the conti-
nent furthest removed from Van Diemen's Land, may throw
some light upon the former distribution of the people. They
would thus appear to have come somewhat upon each other’s
track at one period. Had they approached, it would have been
without doubt to come into collision. In two places where the
curly-haired people remain on the mainland, they are in compa-
ratively inaccessible retreats, and in not too favourable a country,
thus furnishing as little opportunity as temptation for the Austra-
lians proper to dislodge them. It is just possible that the crisp-
haired race had been thrust outward on all sides by those who
possessed the rivers and the interior, as we find them all round
the Australian continent.
Mr. Logan is of opinion, chiefly on linguistic grounds, that
the Australian was a prior migration. I should feel disposed to
think it more probable that the Tasmanian and his kindred were
first, from their being discovered over a larger area, and at so
many distant, isolated spots. The New Hollander finds his allies
in India; but the Tasmanian has his in Africa, Ceylon, India,
Malaya, the Indian archipelago, and far onward in the Pacific.
When a comparison is made between the two, it is usually to the
advantage of the former, in point of civilization, as though he
had been more recently disconnected from the parent, or less
separated from his fellow tribes, than the other.
Australia is admitted by naturalists to be one, at least, of the
most ancient parts of the world. As its fossil mammalia have
been found identical in family with the present forms, and these
latter are pronounced to be more ancient than others, it may
reasonably be assumed that the land is of a greater relative an-
tiquity, and especially possesses the least changed developments
of life.
Again, if, as can be proved by references to both flora and
fauna, Northern Australia has no unknown types of life, it must
be more recent than other parts of the New-Holland continent.
As South Australia, according to Dr. Hooker, has such deficiency
of peculiar plants, and, as asserted by Mr. Murray, has only
four peculiar species of mammals out of twenty-eight, it would
surely be inferior in geological age to South-western Australia,
where the specific ones are as 28 to 39. Pursuing the argument,
Tasmania with part of Victoria and New South Wales would


streams of population. The interesting question to arrive at is,
whether the former took the same track as the New Hollanders,
and whether they were first or last on the field of their present
locality.
The Australians, as a rule, are physically different from the
Tasmanians; but the fact of some being found with, at least,
Tasmanian tendencies, and these at three corners of the conti-
nent furthest removed from Van Diemen's Land, may throw
some light upon the former distribution of the people. They
would thus appear to have come somewhat upon each other's
track at one period. Had they approached, it would have been
without doubt to come into collision. In two places where the
curly-haired people remain on the mainland, they are in compa-
ratively inaccessible retreats, and in not too favourable a country,
thus furnishing as little opportunity as temptation for the Austra-
lians proper to dislodge them. It is just possible that the crisp-
haired race had been thrust outward on all sides by those who
possessed the rivers and the interior, as we find them all round
the Australian continent.
Mr. Logan is of opinion, chiefly on linguistic grounds, that
the Australian was a prior migration. I should feel disposed to
think it more probable that the Tasmanian and his kindred were
first, from their being discovered over a larger area, and at so
many distant, isolated spots. The New Hollander finds his allies
in India; but the Tasmanian has his in Africa, Ceylon, India,
Malaya, the Indian archipelago, and far onward in the Pacific.
When a comparison is made between the two, it is usually to the
advantage of the former, in point of civilization, as though he
had been more recently disconnected from the parent, or less
separated from his fellow tribes, than the other.
Australia is admitted by naturalists to be one, at least, of the
most ancient parts of the world. As its fossil mammalia have
been found identical in family with the present forms, and these
latter are pronounced to be more ancient than others, it may
reasonably be assumed that the land is of a greater relative an-
tiquity, and especially possesses the least changed developments
of life.
Again, if, as can be proved by references to both flora and
fauna, Northern Australia has no unknown types of life, it must
be more recent than other parts of the New-Holland continent.
As South Australia, according to Dr. Hooker, has such deficiency
of peculiar plants, and, as asserted by Mr. Murray, has only
four peculiar species of mammals out of twenty-eight, it would
surely be inferior in geological age to South-western Australia,
where the specific ones are as 28 to 39. Pursuing the argument,
Tasmania with part of Victoria and New South Wales would


rank high in term of years, as the land holds 41 peculiar species
out of 60. Of Tasmania alone, twelve species of its twenty mar-
supials are peculiar to itself.
Geology substantiates the position of the naturalists. The
main chains of South-eastern Australia, with Tasmania, have
reared their bold fronts from very early times, forming, with the
angle of South-western Australia, the original islands of the
Australian seas.
Following the guidance of such observations, there seems no
occasion to halt in our supposition that the inhabitants of the
older portion, Tasmania, were older than those of most, if not
all, of Australia.
At the time of the existence of the former continent south-
ward of India, tribes would pass onward and outward. In all
probability the Hottentots of Africa and the woolly-haired
Papuans were the first to retire, followed soon by the Eastern
Africans; for Mr. Huxley has pronounced the similarity of the
three. The Hill-men of India &c., preserving so much of the
mental characteristics of the Tasmanians, may have then passed
into their present' homes. The New Hollander, who is conjec-
tured to have more of the South-Indian development than the
Tasmanian, may have proceeded later from the northern side- of
the old continent, through or near the country then inhabited
by the Dravidians, and so have subsequently passed overland
into New Holland on the western side. As, probably, a broad
sea separated Eastern from Western Australia, their possession
of the wdiole land was a work of time.
The curly-headed Papuans, with their strange African type,
had a wider range, as I have said, being now found east, west,
and north of the site of their supposed original seat. As the
more ancient, they would have had a longer time to ramble.
They are not found in Borneo and Java, as the flora and fauna
of those islands indicate a more Indian character, and that of
a more recent period than the time of the great dispersion.
From their presence in Papua proper, round to New Caledonia,
and most probably in New Zealand, the subsidence of the South-
western Pacific land took place subsequently to their arrival.
The New-Zealand flora may date after that period. They were
in Tasmania when that country had connexion both with New
Zealand on the one hand, and with the southern prolongation
of Western Australia on the other.
As the Rev. E. Woods assumed that the Murray country of
South Australia and part of Victoria was formed in warm, deep,
and tranquil waters, the current, doubtless, brought the material
from Northern Australia when partly a coralline sea. This would
make the land between Tasmania and Western Australia in early


days run southerly, so as to leave space for the deep South-
Australian Bay. Tasmania, being then part of Eastern Austra-
lia, the natives may be presumed to have passed upwards along
the cordillera there, as they had extended further eastward and
northward. It is true that, with the exception, as has been
stated, of some remnants of their blood at Melville Island, Cape
York, and Sharks' Bay, no Papuan tribe of crisp curly hair
exists on the main continent. They had been extirpated by
the subsequent migration of Australians, who had less of the
African and more of the Mongolian characteristics. The dis-
connexion of New Guinea, New Caledonia, and Tasmania from
the mainland preserved in those three islands the integrity of
the woolly-haired and aboriginal people, while the continent re-
tained its own homogeneous population.
May I be pardoned the indulgence of further speculation con-
cerning the lost continent, or continents, to the south ? Could
such possibly have been the birthplace of our race ?
It is somewhat singular that the most peculiar languages are
found with the Chinese, Hottentots, Australians, and Tasma-
nians ; these are all believed to be among the most ancient of
'human tribes, and they are flung around the lost continent. When
Prof. Owen examined the curious Andamaners, he was unable
to class them with existing peoples, and was compelled to range
them as, “ The representatives of an old race belonging to a for-
mer continent that had almost disappeared” The Andamaners
are the same as the Negritos; and of the latter Mr. Murray
informs us, “ The Negritos of the Philippine Islands cannot be
separated from the other Papuan Blacks." The latter, therefore,
of New Guinea, Australia, and Tasmania, may, as to origin, be-
long to the continent that has “ almost disappeared."
Assuming, then, that these races belonged to that lost land, to
what other conclusions are we led ? If the volcanic band, ex-
tending over so large an arc, from Arabia to the Philippines,
or to Melanesia, were the means of the gradual submergence
of the southern continent between Africa and Australia, and if
it were connected with those movements of India, which foot by
foot had elevated the Himalayas, declared by Owen to be “ the
site of one of the latest of the greatest systems of upheaving
forces that resulted in the formation of new continents," the
submergence of that southern region must have commenced at
a period when most parts of Europe and Asia were under the
ocean, and its former human inhabitants must have existed be-
fore the primitive men of the caves of France, or the wild hun-
ters of Kent's Cavern. While man is known to have lived with
Mammoths, Rhinoceroses, and Cave Lions in Europe, these very
VOL. 11.
K


animals are acknowledged to be of a less ancient type than
those associated with the Tasmanians.
Why, then, should it be thought merely a wild conjecture to
contemplate the lost continent (the early home of the Anda-
man, Hottentot, and Australian races) as one of the earliest
scenes, if not actually the first scene of man’s existence here ?
Discussion.
Dr. Hooker, C. 8., made some remarks on the floras of the south-
ern hemisphere.
The President showed that the conditions which affect the distri-
bution of plants and of animals are not the same. If, for example,
an island were separated from the coast of Australia by only a few
miles of sea, that island might become covered with Australian
plants, while the arm of sea, although extremely narrow, would form
an effectual barrier to the passage of any terrestrial mammal. But,
if the distribution of land-animals be compared with that of man, it
will be found that the argument tells in the other direction; for man
is a being capable of using artificial means to effect his distribution.
It is well known that the fauna of Australia is closely akin to that
of New Guinea and the neighbouring islands. Thus the genus
Casuarius is found in Australia, the New Hebrides, New Guinea, and
as far westward as “ Wallace’s line.” Facts such as these tbnd to
prove that New Guinea has recently been connected with Australia.
Turning to New Zealand, it is found that the fauna is extremely
different from that of Australia. In fact, New Zealand constitutes
a distinct province; it has no emus, no cassowaries, and none of
those types of mammals which would certainly be found had land-
communication existed between New Zealand and Australia. The
barrier of sea between the two may have been extremely narrow,
but there could not have been absolute contact. A similar argument
mmht be applied to the islands north-west of Australia, and would
tend to show that no direct communication could have extended be-
tween Borneo, Sumatra, New Guinea, and Australia.
The type of the Australian man is entirely distinct from that of
the Tasmanian. The speaker had seen the Australian at Cape York,
at Port Essington, on the south-east coast, and in Victoria. Every-
where the native presents similar characters, being distinguished
especially by his dark skin, heavy brow, and smooth hair, never crisp
or woolly. It is true that a Negrito type may be found at Cape
York and in the adjacent islands in Torres Strait; but this is evi-
dently due to a Papuan race which, having come to Australia from
New Guinea, has brought its civilization, and introduced the use of
the bow and arrow and the construction of canoes.
Although the speaker had not had an opportunity of seeing the
Tasmanians, there is evidence that they are extremely like the peo-
ple of New Caledonia; and these resemble the inhabitants of the
Louisiade Islands, whom he had often seen, and wdio are extremely


different from the Australians. The Tasmanian had no throwing-
stiek, and neither in language nor in appearance did he resemble the
Australian.
It seemed, therefore, physically impossible that the Tasmanian
could have come from Australia, and apparently the only way of
accounting for the presence of the Tasmanian was to assume his
migration from New Caledonia and the neighbouring islands. It
would appear that at one time a low negrito type spread eastwards,
and reached Tasmania not by means of direct and uninterrupted
land-communication between New Caledonia and Tasmania, but ra-
ther by means of broken land in the form of a chain of islands now
submerged, similar to that which at present extends between New
Caledonia and New Guinea.
The following paper was then read by the Hon. Secretary: —
XIV. On a Frontier-line of Ethnology and Geology.
By H. li. Howorth, Esq.
Buckle reduced many problems of history to questions de-
pending on fixed laws. Fanciful and crotchetty sometimes no
doubt, we cannot but follow him with approval in many of hi 3
speculations. He first taught as a system that man is the
creature of the physical surroundings in which he finds himself,
that his life is only the subject of choice within very narrow
limits, and that even these limits depend a good deal on his
culture, and while very appreciable in a philosopher, are
almost absent in the savage. If we confine this remark to one
subject only, namely, the migrations of different races, we shall
not be slow to accept it.
A very superficial survey of ethnology is sufficient to satisfy
any inquirer that its grand divisions coincide remarkably with
the great zoological and botanical provinces. I am, of course,
excluding at present the vast colonizations of different parts of
the earth which have taken place since the 16tli century. Neg-
lecting these, we find Australia (that remnant of one of the
most ancient land-horizons in geology, with a fauna and flora
of a very primitive type) occupied by the humblest and most
degraded type of man. The forests and hills of India, and
parts of South Africa, which form another province, are in-
habited by a black race which connects the Australian with the
purer negro. Central and South America, including Mexico,
have another type, as they form another province; China and
Indo-China another; Southern Asia and the Mediterranean
border-land another; Northern Europe, Siberia, and North
America vet another. I now wish to call attention to the
K 2


effects of the invasion of one ethnological province by a race
belonging to another—perhaps, rather, the coincident and ac-
companying circumstances than the effects. The readiest ma-
terials at our command for the purpose are furnished by the
wide- spread migration, in recent times, of that race collectively
known as Indo-European or Iranian. It is a trite and undeni-
able fact that this migration has been accompanied by a very
great change in the fauna and flora of the country to which it
has tended. A portion of the ancient fauna and flora has been
driven out or extinguished, and a portion of the rest is fighting
a losing battle. The victors are the invaders, —a new fauna
and a new flora, brought with them by the invading race, and
apparently as superior in vigour to the ancient fauna and flora
as the new race of men is to the old. It is not sufficiently con-
sidered that such*changes may not be the effects of maw’s mi-
gration at all, save in that he is the immediate instrument of
their being brought about, but that they are the results of an
invariable law to which man is as subject as the lower animals,
and which has held good in all geologic time, namely, that the
fauna and flora, including the higher and the humbler classes,
change together. The fact is no less true of other races than
the Indo-European. Indeed I hold it to be a general law,
that where the man of one ethnological province bodily invades
and drives out the former inhabitants, he is merely the fore-
runner of a great change in the fauna and flora of the new
country,—such a change as in geology would mark the advent
of a new period; and that, in fact, such a new period in geo-
logy is being at this moment inaugurated in every country
Avliere the Indo-European race is occupying the soil; and fur-
ther (but I am rather forestalling), that this new life-period is
coincident with new climatic and other conditions, not the mere
handiwork of man, but the necessary unfolding of a fresh leaf
in the history of the world, of which the creatures more im-
mediately dependent on man, and the plants and animals more
necessary to his existence and pleasure, are to form the palaeon-
tological differentia. I wish to apply this reasoning, which, so
far as I know, is new, to a more limited area of inquiry.
Siberia and North America form perhaps one of the best de-
fined provinces we have, zoologically and botanically. In these
respects it coincides almost exactly with the fauna and flora
of the prehistoric period*. The Megaceros hardly differs from
the Moose, or the Felis spelaa from the Mandchurian Tiger;
and the rest of the animals are equally related. It is, in fact,
* I use the word u prehistoric ” as Mr. Boyd Dawkins uses it, to repre-
sent the period intervening between the pleistocene deposits and the purely
historical ones.




