

TcJU.
hr* Uf *Jb~u B
ft£~d
I \ "■ ■ .
V W tv *•
vg£3S'
I — |, i ■ -
I I- I
I | AeoiLEcncK As-
% \ ** *0*
\ V *> 'V
mi -
v V' .
V'-r ;w->


A
.
'I
I W ' ' I


THE RIVERS
NEW SOUTH WALES.
BARRON FIELD, ESQ. PRESIDENT.
{Read 3d July, 1823, before the Agricultural Society of New
South Wales.)
"N
\. w W . \ V-
v V .• V N^
■• \ v


.
, r r 'pM
/ / J / A
//
4mEi»
A \


THE RIVERS,
That the two principal interior rivers of New
South Wales, namely the Lachlan and the Mac-
quarie, should both terminate in swamps or shoal
lakes, instead of finding their way to the sea, has
caused as Justly the surprise of the physical geo-
grapher, as the disappointment of the political
economist. The river Lachlan is, with its sinuo-
sities, the longer of the two, and yet it does not
receive a single auxiliary stream, after it issues
from the mountains, whence it has its source. The
Macquarie, in the first place, is formed by the
union of the Campbell and the Fish Rivers, and is
fed in its course by five or six others; and, although
the Campbell can never lay claim to the “ very con-
siderable magnitude” that Governor Macquarie
assigns to it *, and although the river Macquarie
E rivo rtumina magna fads.— Ovid.


itself is scarcely so large as the Fish River, yet a
great body of water must run through them all
somewhither; and the Macquarie, at about the
equal division of its course, is two hundred feet
wide. It is certainly very strange that all this
running water should end in a vast swamp. Yet
a similar flatness of country is found in South
America, spreading the rains into shallow lakes,
which evaporate before they form rivers. Such is
the celebrated lake of Los Xarayes, in the. vice-
royalty of Buenos Ayres, the length of which is
sometimes three hundred and thirty miles, and the
breadth one hundred and twenty ; but, although it
spreads over so large a space, it is not navigable in
any part except for canoes and small craft. So too
the interior of North America is filled with fresh-
water lakes; and there are internal seas, lakes,
and marshes in Asia, as well as in Africa and
America.
The Lachlan, at about the equal division of its
course, instead of displaying its greatest size and
vigour, like the Macquarie, is lost in a marsh, as it
is again at its termination; so that there is very
little probability that that river can ever reach the


sea. But the Macquarie was found to shoal sud-
denly, and to spread unexpectedly, wherefore the
sanguine have not yet given up all hope of its ulti-
mately finding its way to the sea-coast. The country
along the banks of the Macquarie being chiefly
good pasture, our stock-keepers will, one day, ascer-
tain whether there is any channel out of the shoal-
lake, in which Mr. Oxley found that river to ter-
minate, like the Niger, according to Major Ren-
nell. The Quarterly Review says, that “ the cir-
cumstance of the freshness of the water would de-
cide the question of the termination of the river in
a mediterranean sea, or of its course being resumed
beyond the expanse of waters.” There is no doubt
of the freshness of the lake. If it had been salt,
Mr. Oxley would have mentioned so singular a
change from the waters of the river, and a quality
so different from the lakes of Wagara, in which the
Niger is supposed to terminate. How could the
boat-party, which was victualled for a month’s voy-
age on the lake, have existed, if the water had been
salt ? But I cannot agree with the Quarterly Re-
viewer in his criterion, and am rather disposed to
adopt the theory of that great practical geographer.


the Baron Humboldt, as propounded in his Per-
sonal Narrative, even before the cases of the Lach-
lan and the Macquarie were known to him : “ It is
probable (says he) that in the lapse of ages, several
rivers of Soudan and of New Holland, which are
now lost in the sands, or in inland basins, will
open themselves a way towards the shores of the
ocean. We cannot at least doubt, that in both
continents there are systems of interior rivers,
which may be considered as not entirely developed,
and which communicate with each other, either in
the time of great risings, or by permanent bifurca-
tions This is no new theory: the Baron quotes
it from Carl Ritter; and it may be found in an
excellent article on rivers, in the Encyclopaedia
Britannica f. “ Herodotus, whom Strabo has not
* Vol. iv. Bvo. p. 150.
t “ The tracts of country, which are but newly inhabited
by man, such as great part of America, and the newly-dis-
covered regions of Terra Australis, are still almost occupied
by marshes and lakes, or covered with impenetrable forests ;
and they would remain long enough in this state, if popula-
tion, continually increasing, did not increase industry, and
multiply the hands of cultivators, along with their necessities.
The Author of Nature was alone able to form the ridges of
mountains, to model the hillocks and the valleys, to mark out


disdained to follow, relates a tradition that Thessaly
was originally one vast lake, without visible outlet,
the courses of great rivers, and give the first trace to every
rivulet 3 but has left to man the task of draining his own ha-
bitation, and the fields which are to support him, because this
is a task not beyond his powers. It was therefore of immense
advantage to him, that those parts of the globe into which he
has not yet penetrated, should remain covered with lakes,
marshes, and forests, which keep in store the juices of the
earth, which the influence of the air, and the vivifying warmth
of the sun, would have expended long ere now in useless ve-
getation, and which the rains of heaven would have swept into
the sea, had they not been thus protected by their situation
or their cover. It is therefore the business of man to open
up these mines of hoarded wealth, and to thank the Author of
all good, who has husbanded them for his use, and left them
as a rightful heritage for those of after days. The earth had
not, in the remote ages, as in our days, those great canals,
those capacious voiders, always ready to drain off the rain-
waters (of which only part is absorbed by the thirsty ground),
and the pure waters of the springs from the foot of the hills.
The rivers did not then exist, or were only in torrents whose
waters, confined by the gullies and glens, are searching for a
place to escape. Hence arise those numerous lakes in the
interior of great continents, of which there are still remarkable
relics in North America, which in process of time will dis-
appear and become champaign countries. The most remote
from the sea, unable to contain its waters, finds an issue
through some gorge of the hills, and pours over its superfluous
waters into a lower basin, which, in its turn, discharges its
contents into another 3 and the last of the chain delivers its
waters by a river into the ocean. The communication was


till an earthquake, rending Olympus from Ossa,
formed the colony of Tempe # .” The Edinburgh
Review says, “ it does not appear why Mr. Oxley
turned backand this just after it has quoted
the following words of his J ournal: “ there was
no channel whatever among the ocean of reeds
originally began by a simple overflowing at the lowest part of
the margin. This made a torrent, which quickly deepened its
bed; and this circumstance, increasing its velocity, would ex-
tend this deepening back to the lake, and draw off more of its
waters. The work would go on rapidly at first, while earth
and small stones only resisted the labours of nature ; but these
being washed away, and the channel hollowed out to the firm
rock on all sides, the operation must go on very slowly, till
the immense cascade shall undermine what it cannot break off,
and then a new discharge will commence, and a quantity of
flat ground will emerge all round the lake. The torrent, in
the meantime, makes its way down the country, and digs a
canal, which may be called the first sketch of a river, which
will deepen and widen its bed continually. The water of
several basins, united and running together in a great body,
will have a much greater velocity with the same slope, than
those of the lakes in the interior part of the continent, and
the sum of them all united in the basin next the sea, after
having broken through its natural mound, will make a pro-
digious torrent, which will dig for itself a bed, so much the
deeper as it has more slope and a greater body of waters.
The formation of the first valleys, by cutting open many
springs, will add to the mass of running waters, and contri-
bute to drain off the waters of these basins.”
* Mitford’s Hist, of Greece, vol. i. p. 43.


which surrounded us.” Our associate, Mr. Oxley,
although his health is broken by these two long
and unsuccessful expeditions, which make such
sport to Reviewers, is anxious to see how the end
of the Macquarie may look in a different season;
but economy is now the order of the day, and
liberal science must bend to national distress and
political system. Yet I cannot help thinking, that
since money can be found for Arctic and African
explorations, and as Great Britain expended no
less a sum than 34,296/. in making surveys of
North America, the labour of a few convicts and
spare horses might still be afforded by the Crown,
to see what becomes of the last drop of its own
singular New Holland rivers, the Lachlan and the
Macquarie,—alike in their apparent terminations,
but totally different in every other character, not a
single auxiliary stream falling into the former, in
a sluggish and winding course of four or five hun-
dred miles, whereas the latter is fed by half a dozen
other rivers, and its course is less winding: the
one spending the rains in flooding a barren country,
instead of improving even its own channel; the
other running a wide and deep course, as long as


its supplies last, and “ ever while it lives flowing
between its banks,” and fertilizing them, as a river
should do.
Supposing the Lachlan to run to the nearest
point of the sea, namely at Cape Jervis on the
south-west coast, it would give a fall of only a foot
and a third per mile for the whole river. Supposing
the Macquarie to find its shortest way, namely to
near Smoky Cape on the east coast, it would have
more than two feet of descent for every mile. One
foot for every mile is as great a descent as the
Thames has for its last forty miles, and perhaps
for its whole course, taking the Isis to be two hun-
dred feet above the sea’s level; and it is clearly
shown in the Encyclopaedia Britannica, that the
beds of rivers by no means form themselves in one
inclined plane, but that the continued track of a
river is a succession of inclined channels, whose
slope diminishes by steps, as the river approaches
to the sea *. But Mr. Cunningham the botanist
* This being the case, I do not see how the principle of the
Edinburgh Review can be true, though sanctioned by Hum-
boldt, namely, that the height of a river above the sea may be
determined by approximation, by measuring from time to time


says he has collected ample materials to demon-
strate, that the river Lachlan falls in a dip of in-
land country to the N.N.W. of the granitic hills
near Lake George, from which hills it rises, 1400
feet in 120 miles, which is nearly twelve feet per
mile. The current of the Macquarie Marshes (as
the Edinburgh Review calls them) was still north-
erly, and it is not probable that a river, the re-
gular course of which has been north-westerly for
three hundred miles, should suddenly turn due
east*; and Mr. Oxley (if we are to rely upon the
Surveyor-General’s heights) makes the Macquarie
fall 437 feet in little more than fifty miles, namely,
from near the head of the Fish River to Bathurst;
and 750 in about fifty miles, namely, from the
the velocity of the stream, and the extent of the section in
breadth and depth.— Humboldt, Personal Narrative, vol. v.
p. 637. “ Who can pretend to say (asks the Encyclopaedia
Britannica) what is the velocity of a river of which you tell
him the breadth, the depth, and the declivity ? If the waters
of onr rivers, which are two, three, and four hundred feet
lower than their sources, ran with the velocity due to that
height, they would, in a few minutes, lay the earth bare to the
very bones.”
* It is true, the Nepean makes such a turn, but that is on
this side of the Blue Mountain Range, which runs parallel
with the coast, and diverts the river into the sea.


head of the Campbell to its junction with the
Macquarie. Sir Thomas Brisbane makes a fall of
1140 feet from the Fish branch to Bathurst, which
is impossible in a distance of only thirty miles
without cataracts, and must be attributed to some
error in using the barometer. So that, as far as
the fall of the Macquarie waters has been ascer-
tained, it is highly improbable that either the
Lachlan or the Macquarie should ever reach the
ocean.
I have now before me a letter, which Mr. Oxley
did me the favour to address to me, dated from the
banks of the Macquarie, in lat. 31° 49' 40" S. and
long. 147° 59' 15" E., a fortnight before the river
was dispersed, and many days before it gave any
symptoms of failing, which letter runs in these
words:
“ I was in great hopes that, at a distance of
nearly 250 miles from Bathurst, I should have
been enabled to communicate to you some certain
information as to the termination of this river;
but I am just as much at a loss to conjecture it,
as I was the day I quitted Sydney. It has in no
respect disappointed me as to its continued magni-


tude and permanency, independently of rain ; but
its course has been so much to the westward, that
I have little hopes it can find its way to any part
of the east coast. My present opinion, founded
upon a careful examination of the character of the
country it waters, is, that it will terminate in an
interior sea; for such a stream, running, as it
doubtless has run, for ages, would of itself suffice
to fill up any vacuum that the sea-coasts of Australia
surround.”
I know not what is the least average fall that
rivers running into the sea require. Great rivers
will have a gentle motion, in spite of the obstruc-
tions of viscidity, adhesion, and friction, by an
almost imperceptible declivity. According to
Azara # , the great river Paraguay does not fall a
foot per geographical mile of latitude, between the
parallels of 16* 24*' and 22° 57 S. Humboldt
found the fall of the Apure and the Lower Oro-
nooko, from San Fernando to the Boca de Navios,
only three inches and a quarter to a nautical mile.
The Apure itself has a slope of thirteen inches to
* Voyages dans I’Amerique Mcridionale, depuis 1781
jusqu’en 1801, tom. i. p. 41.


a mile, and the average descent of the bed of the
whole Oronooko is thirteen inches to the mile of
950 toises (6 feet 4376 inches per toise*). The
Ganges was found by Mr. Hastings, in a course
of sixty miles, to fall only four inches to a mile,
although the mean swiftness of that river is, in
seasons of drought, three miles an hour, and in
those of rains six or eight f. La Condamine and
Major Rennel suppose the mean descent of the
Amazon and the Ganges scarcely four or five
inches to the mile, which is about equal to that of
the Mississippi, according to the most satisfactory
estimates Dr. James had been able to make J.
Major Long states 450 feet as the altitude of the
head of the Illinois above the ocean, which gives
that river and the Mississippi, into which it falls,
a somewhat greater descent 11. And the Mississippi,
according to Mr. Schoolcraft §, has an average
* Humboldt, Personal Narrative, vol v. p. 637, and vol. iv.
p. 455.
t Ibid. vol. iv. p. 455, vol. v. p. 75!.
X James’s Expedition from Pittsburgh to the Rocky Moun-
tains, vol. i. p. 323.
Ibid. vol. iii. p. 265.
§ Travels to the Sources of the Mississippi in the year
1820.


descent of a little more than live inches to a mile,
although the Quarterly Review thinks this con-
siderably over-estimated. The average descent of
the Ohio, which also falls into the Mississippi, is
nine inches per mile, as estimated by Dr. Drake of
Cincinnati*. The descent of the Nile, from Cairo
to Rosetta, a distance of fifty-nine leagues, is only
four inches in a league t. The head of the Volga,
a river which is 2600 miles in length, is not more
than 470 feet above the surface of the ocean, but
then it falls into the Caspian Sea, which is 306
feet below the level of the ocean; so that, if the
Lachlan and the Macquarie should ultimately end
in large interior salt-lakes, there is no saying how
small an elevation, from the ocean level, the rivers
need have. Mr. Oxley had not the means of mea-
suring the height of the rivers either during their
courses, or at their apparent terminations —only at
their heads, —the Macquarie giving 2669, and the
Lachlan 600 feet; but another expedition, baro-
metrically appointed, would perhaps set the question
at rest, whether these rivers, from their heights
* James’s Exped, vol. i. p. 39.
t Description dc I’Egypte Moderue, tom. i. p. 58,


above the surface of the ocean, can possibly fall
into the main sea.
If Government decline the honour of these dis-
coveries, some private individual will run away
with it, as was the case with the passage across the
Blue Mountains; for, in spite of its want of na-
vigable rivers, New Holland seems destined to be
one day a great pastoral country; and cattle have
a most insatiable curiosity after
fresh woods and pastures new.”


♦
*
#


*
t
