

€\)t KTnrb's Ittgger:
ROBERT ROSS, M.D.,
Cangrtgalimiai Riiiiistrr.
SYB^HEY:
whotieid m nSo &. ’toe.cMj, atoas ®ot©3E 3 i
(Next door to Piddin glen's, George Street .)
MDCCCLV.




Many mistaken ideas have been formed,
both of the meaning and design of the Lord’s
Supper. This work has been composed to
furnish right views of both. The Author
will be highly satisfied if he is able to assist
any in their enquiries after the truth in this
matter. He is brief in his statements, be-
cause he has no desire to make his own
thoughts the substitute for their meditations :
he merely indicates the track they ought to
pursue, assured, that if it is seriously followed
up by them, it will contribute greatly to their
spiritual improvement, and growth in grace.
n+~-7-'T7


CONTENTS.
I,—The Name.
ll.—When Instituted.
Hl.—Mode op Institution.
IV. —Meaning of the Ordinance.
V. —lts Design—Commemoration.
VI. The State of Mind to be Cultivated.
1. —Before T
2. —At > The Celebration.
3. —After J
Vll.— Views Entertained by some Anti-p®do
tists.
VIII. The Frequency of its Observance.
IX. —The Posture.
X— The Place of its Celebration.
Xl. —Conclusion.


THE LORD’S SUPPER.
I.—THE NAME.
The Lord’s Supper is called by different names,
such as, The Breaking of Bread—The Sacrament
of the Lord’s Sapper —The Communion —The
Eucharist. The passage in John vi, 52 —57,
does not refer to the Lord’s Supper, as is ad-
mitted by nearly all who have not a favourite
theory to support. “ The Jews therefore strove
among themselves, saying. How can this man
give us his flesh to eat? Then Jesus said unto
them, Verily, verily, I say unto you. Except ye
eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood, ye have no life in you. Whoso eateth ray
flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life - ;
and I will raise him up at the last day. For my
flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink in-
deed. He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my
blood, dwelleth in me, and lin him. As the living
Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father ; so
he that eateth me, even he shall live by me.”
lI.—WHEN INSTITUTED.
It was instituted by the Lord Jesus Christ in an
upper room at Jerusalem, after his celebration of
the Passover, and on the night previous to his cru-
cifixion. It is clear from the Evangelist John, that
Judas Iscariot, although present at the celebration


of the Passover, was not present at the institution
of the Lord’s Supper; before then he had agreed
to sell his Lord for thirty pieces of Silver to his ene-
mies ; and had gone out to seek an opportunity to
betray him. Look at his words, (xiii, 21—30)
“ When Jesus had thus said, he was troubled
in spirit, and testified, and said, Verily, verily, I
say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.
Then the disciples looked one on another doubt-
ing of whom he spake. Now there was leaning
on Jesus’ bosom one of his disciples, whom
Jesus loved. Simon Peter therefore beckoned
to him, that he should ask who it should be
of whom he spake. He then lying on Jesus’
breast saith unto him, Lord, who is it ? Jesus
answered, He it is, to whom I shall give a
sop, when I have dipped it. And when he had
dipped the sop, he gave it to Judas Iscariot, the
son of Simon. And after the sop Satan entered
into him. Then said Jesus unto him, That thou
doest, do quickly. Now no man at the table
knew for what intent he spake this unto him.
For some of them thought, because Judas had
the bag, that Jesus had said unto him. Buy those
things that we have need of against the feast;
or, that he should give something to the poor.
He then having received the sop went immedi-
ately out: and it was night.”, supported by
Matthew, xxvi, 25 “ Then Judas, which be-
trayed him, answered and said, Master, is it I ?
He said unto him, Thou hast said.” and Mark,
xiv, 18—21 “ And as they sat and did eat,
Jesus said, Verily I say unto you, One of you
which eateth with me shall betray me. And they
began to be sorrowful, and to say unto him one
by one, Is it I? and another said, Is it I ? And


he answered and said unto them, It is one of the
twelve, that dippeth with me in the dish. The
Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of him :
but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is
betrayed ! good were it for that man if he had
never been born.”
lII.—MODE OF INSTITUTION
In instituting the Lord’s Supper, our Lord took
Bread, and having given thanks for it, he brake
it, and gave it to the Disciples, saying, “ Take,
eat; this is my body, which is broken for you :
this do in remembrance of me.” He then took the
cup which had wine in it, and having again offered
up thanks, gave it also to the Disciples, saying,
“ This Cup is the New Covenant in my blood :
this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance
of me. For as often as ye eat this bread, and
drink this cup, ye do shew the Lord’s death till
he come.”—l Cor. xi, 24—26.
IV.—MEANING OF THE ORDINANCE.
In the institution of this Ordinance, our Saviour
evidently meant to hold out to his Disciples,
until the end of time, by means of the Bread and
Wine, the great doctrines of his incarnation and
sacrifice ; and the necessity of exercising faith
in his name, and cultivating likeness to him, in
order to their obtaining and enjoying a personal
interest in his great salvation.
Nothing can be more absurd than the idea that
the Bread which he then broke, and the Wine
which he then gave to all his Disciples, were his
own body crucified, and his own blood shed,


along with his soul anti divinity as Roman Catho-
lics say, at the very time that he was sitting be-
fore them, in the full possession of all his corpo-
real powers. The argument is indeed founded
upon the destruction of a figure of speech of the
most common kind, employed by all nations and
in all ages. Such are the views advocated in the
doctrine of Transubstantiation.
V.—DESIGN OF THE ORDINANCE.
The Ordinance of the Lord’s Supper is purely of
a commemorative nature. The language of our
Saviour in instituting it is, “ This do in remem-
brance of me.” We are therefore required
simply to remember his sufferings and death, and
all the circumstances by which they were at-
tended ; as well as to cultivate and cherish those
principles and feelings to which they legitimately
give rise. It is very evident that if these prin-
ciples and feelings do not previously exist, the
Lord’s Supper will not create them ; neither, if
they do not exist, will the observance of it ? al-
though this should take place a thousand times,
be of any advantage to the communicants; on
the contrary, it will only increase their condem-
nation.
Nothing can be more obvious than that the
Lord’s Supper can have no virtue in itself. It
has not our Lord’s presence in it, in any shape or
form, more than he is present in any other of the
means of grace t neither, as some suppose is it a
“ Seal of the Covenant,” but simply a comme-
morative rite; the whole efficacy of which de-
pends upon the state of mind with which it is
observed.


VI.—THE STATE OF MIND TO BE CULTIVATED.
In the first place before proceeding to, and
sitting down at the Lord's Table , its nature and
design ought to be made the subject of devout
consideration, so as to obtain a correct view of
all the circumstances connected with it. It
would be very strange and very inconsistent for
an individual to approach that table, without
having a clear idea of what he was about to do ;
without understanding what the Bread and the
Wine was meant to signify ; or how by them he
was to shew forlh the Lord’s death until he come.
Accordingly, the knowledge possessed by each,
will be in proportion to the length of time given
to such consideration; at any rate, a certain
amount of time will be required in all cases. It
is not ’probable that a heedless and thoughtless
observance of the Sacrament will be attended with
a blessing, nay the reverse may be expected. The
frame of mind which it is desirable to possess on
such an occasion will be rendered impossible;
and there is a danger of returning from the Or-
dinance in a much worse state than that in which
he went to its performance.
In the second place, It is of vast importance
that you should pay the strictest attention to the
state of your mind while sitting at the Lord's
Table. It is true that when the Minister speaks,
he endeavours to draw your attention to some
fact connected with it, and to illustrate its
bearing upon some points connected with your
principles or emotions; and to these it is your
duty to give earnest heed. But there are times
during the Ordinance, when the Minister is
silent, and on such occasions the Communicant


must exercise his own mind. He may do so, by
following out the track of thought which has
been suggested by the observations of the Min-
ister; or, he may do so by indulging in any
train of thought by which he may be benefitted;
such as, the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus
Christ; the obedience which he rendered to his
Father ; the sufferings he endured on man’s be-
half, and the cruel but vicarious death which he
died. So that by meditating upon all these sub-
jects, or upon any one of them, with its different
bearings, the Communicant may nourish his
Faith, or his Penitence, or his Love to God, and
his fellow Christians; or any, or all of the Chris-
tian graces by which he ought to be disinguished.
In the third place, After waiting upon Christ
in the Ordinance of the Lord’s Supper, some
time should be devoted to following up and
strengthening the results which were then pro-
duced, if of a spiritual and edifying character.
Prayer should then be especially offered up,
that the views of divine truth obtained may be
permanent; and that the heavenly feelings then
produced may be durable. Anxiety also should
be felt that the results of such an observ-
ance on the conduct and character may abide for
ever; results, such as will exhibit themselves in
the growing holiness of the communicant, and
will induce the world to say, “ Surely he hath
been with Jesus.”
VIL—VIEWS ENTERTAINED BY SOME ANTI
P(EDO BAPTISTS.
They maintain that the Lord’s Supper ought to
be admininistered only to those who have been


baptized by immersion; and who have been so
baptized upon their giving credible evidence of
their faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.
In reference to such statements, and the
grouuds on which they are founded, I beg to re-
mark,
Ist.—That Christian baptism is not dependent
on John’s baptism as is supposed by some;
his was not of the same kind as the baptism
of Jesus. He baptized into the belief of a
Saviour that was to come; Jesus commanded
that baptism should be performed after he
was dead and buried and raised again, into
the belief of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, and consequently into the belief of a
Saviour that was already crucified. It would
appear from Acts, xix, 3—5, That a person
might be baptized by John, or his Disciples, and
yet know nothing at all of the baptism of Christ,
or of the Holy Ghost to whom that baptism tes-
tifies. “ And he said unto them, Unto what
then were ye baptized ? And they said, Unto
John’s baptism. Then said Paul, John verily
baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying
unto the people, that they should believe on him
which should come after him, that is, on Christ
Jesus. When they heard this, they were bap-
tized in the name of the Lord Jesus.”
2nd —From the whole account with which we
are furnished in the Scriptures in regard to these
two ordinances, there is every reason to .believe
that the Lord’s Supper was instituted previous to
Christian Baptism. The first was instituted by
our Lord in Matt, xxvi, 26—28 “ And as they
were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it,
and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and


said, Take, eat; this is my body. And he took
the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them,
saying, Drink ye all of it; For this is my blood
of the new testament, which is shed for many for
the remission of sins.’’ The second was not in-
stituted until after his resurrection from the dead
as recorded in Matt xxviii, 18—20 “ And
Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All
power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.
Go ye therefore, and teach* all nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost; Teaching them to ob-
serve all things whatsoever I have commanded
you ; and, 10, I am with you alway, even unto
the end of the world. Amen.” So that if in
this matter we are to be guided by the time of
their institution, the Lord’s Supper is to be ob-
served Jirst. There is, however, a propriety,
arising out of the nature of the case, why the rite
of baptism should be administered before the ad-
mission of any one to the Lord’s Table. Persons
should be received into a profession of having
received the Christian faith, before being allowed
to sit down at the Ordinance. The one is an
introduction to Christianity ; the other is for the
Christian after he has received the truth in the
love of it, and become a new creature. This we
accordingly attend to in all cases.
3rd. — Although we do not, for good reasons
as already shewn, admit to the Lord’s Table
those who have not been baptized, we do not
exclude from the ordinance any that say that
baptism by immersion is. alone valid, or that
baptism should be administered only to adult
believers. As a Church we are firm in the con-
* “ disciple,” it should be.


viction and belief, that our Saviour’s injunction
is faithfully adhered to when infants are baptized
into the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, by
sprinkling ; but we are as firm in the belief, that
the Church is bound to receive at the Lord’s
Table, all whom he will receive into heaven—all
who think that they have obeyed his injunctions
to be baptized, whatever may be their belief on
this subject.
VIIL—THE FREQUENCY OF ITS OBSERVANCE.
There are churches by which it is celebrated
once a year only ; there are those by whom it is
celebrated every day. There are also those
by whom it is celebrated at different intervals
between these two. In Scotland, the Inde-
pendents generally observe it every Sabbath, In
England, the same body generally observe it once
a month. In the Sacred Volume it is not said
how often it is to be observed. The only words
with which we meet in the New Testament w-ith
respect to the frequency of its observance is in
I Corinthians, xi, 25—26, “ As oft’’ and “ As
often”; so that it is left in a considerable degree
with each Church to celebrate the Lord’s Supper
as often, and at such hour, as they conveniently
can. We think that once a month is a proper
and convenient period for the due and useful
celebration of it.
IX.—THE POSTURE,
Some observe it kneeling, and some sitting;
Some have it administered to them one by
one, and others in company; some have the


elements of Bread and Wine put into their
mouths by the Minister, and others have them
put into their hands by the Communicants.
We think it to be most in accordance with
the example of the Apostles to receive them
sitting. As to the Ministers giving the ele-
ments to each, we have the fullest evidence that
Jesus Christ did not do so, but that he gave
them to one who passed them on to another,
as in the celebration of the Passover. We
therefore conceive that we follow the example of
Christ and his eleven Apostles in our mode of
celebrating the Lord’s Supper. As to withholding
the wine from the laity there is not a passage of
Scripture by which such a practice can be jus-
tified.
X.—THE PLACE OF CELEBRATION.
It has been advocated very strongly, that when
people are very sick, and apparently dying, the
elements of Bread and Wine should be taken
to their chambers, and administered to them,
in the belief that thereby the dying are ren-
dered more fit for leaving this world, and as-
cending to heaven, thus cherishing a delusion the
most fatal. In reference to this custom, we
observe: Ist.—That the administration of the
Lord’s Supper to the supposed dying person has
no more efficacy in it than the offering up of a
prayer, or the reading of a portion of Scripture.
Salvation does not depend upon the observance
of any rite, but upon faith in the great sacrifice
offered on Calvary. 2nd. —That we have in the
New Testament no example of the Lord’s Supper
being administered to a supposed dying person


in his own chamber. 3rd. —That any examples
with which we are favored, always represent the
Lord’s Supper as being administered in the
Church.
XL—CONCLUSION.
Wherever the Lord’s Supper is administered in
a Scriptural manner, it proclaims amongst other
things to all, that the Incarnation and Death of
the Lord Jesus Christ is the only foundation of a
sinner’s hope,—it furnishes the only medium of
access to the Father, —and is the only ground upon
which the Communicant is at liberty to hope for
the pardon of his sins, and the justification of his
person.
But it is never to be forgotten by him who ob-
serves the Lord’s Supper, that the personal ad-
vantage to be derived from his doing so, depends
entirely upon the state of mind in which he com-
municates. The mere celebration of that ordi-
nance, irrespective of the state of mind, in which
he observes it, will not produce or keep alive either
his faith or holiness, or any of the emotions with
which it ought to be accompanied. These must
exist previously, and be in exercise in order to our
deriving any benefit from the celebration of the
“ Lord’s Supper.”
There are three classes of persons to whom I
would, in conclusion, address a few words. The
first consists of those who believe that they are in
possession of that faith which unites to Christ, but
who do not eat the Bread and drink the Wine in
commemoration of his death, while believing that
it is their duty to do both. To such persons I
would say, that you sin, and sin awfully, whilst


•
mr
P V JAf'l993 %
N \o.
refusing on any ground, to commemorate the
death, and obey the command of him to whom,
as you acknowledge, you are indebted for your
hopes of eternal life. The second class consists
of those persons who while they know that they
have no real faith in Christ Jesus, and no genuine
conformity to his image, yet eat and drink Bread
and Wine, in order to shew forth the Lord’s
death until he come. To these persons I would
say, you are inexcusably sinful; instead of doing
yourselves good, you do great harm ; you eat and
drink damnation to yourselves, not discerning the
Lord’s Body. The third class consists of those
who neither have faith in Christ, or conformity to
his image; nor commemorate his death by ob-
serving the ordinance of the Lord’s Supper. Alas,
alas, you are yet in the gall of bitterness and in the
bonds of iniquity. For you there is nothing but
a fearful looking for of judgment; and “ what
will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the de-
solation which shall come from far? to whom will
ye flee for help ? and where will you leave your
glory?” Repent all of you and be converted.
Turn unto that Saviour who still waits to be
gracious, and notwithstanding your iniquities, is
ready to receive you. Wash in the fountain of
his blood ; clothe in the garments of his sal-
vation ; be sanctified by his Holy Spirit, and you
will be permitted, and inclined to sit down with
Him at his table upon earth, in the certain hope
that ere long you shall sit down with him at
that table from which the guests shall never be
withdrawn.
