

pilSfes.
BY WILLIAM E. BEYSOY, ESQ., C.E.
IB elbourru :
MASON & FIRTH, PRINTERS, 16 ELIZABETH STREET SOUTH.
1 8 60.
. 5%
THEIR DEVELOPMENT.
I
(?>




K"b X 1 s tO
-a. *
[Reprinted from the Royal Society’s “Transactions.”]
Art. XIV. —On the Resources of Victoria, and their Develop-
ment. By William E. Bryson, Esq., C.E.
[Read before the Institute, sth October and 16th November, 1859.]
Your Excellency, Mr. President and Gentlemen—
In reading this paper before you, I think it necessary to
mention that the subject of Our Resources and their De-
velopment ” have occupied my attention for a considerable
time. It was about the 9th of last July, when the news
first reached this colony of war having broken out between
France and Austria, that the propriety struck me forcibly
of making no longer delay in contributing my mite to incite
the inhabitants of this colony to the necessity of increased
action in providing for their national wants, by making them-
selves as far as practicable independent of other countries for
articles of agricultural produce, and also for manufactured
articles.
I am sorry to say that, at the present time, the perusal of


the details of our exports and imports induces a painful
impression that we are doing for ourselves only a little of
what we could and ought; considering our capabilities.
On the subject of successfully introducing manufactures
among us, I was at first rather sceptical; considering the high
rates of labor; but I have not been satisfied with vague sur-
mises; and my researches after facts have put me in posses-
sion of many pieces of information, which only require to be
acted upon, to considerably enlarge the industrial resources
of this colony.
The introduction of manufactures is not the main feature
of this particular paper—it will form the subject of another.
It is glanced at here, however, because of its great import-
ance, and the firm conviction that we can manufacture many
kinds of articles here to compete with those imported ; I can
with confidence refer to some of the advantages which the
introduction of manufactures would confer upon us.
Besides the profits accruing from the establishment of
manufactures, the projectors and introducers of such would
serve a higher purpose, in the general advancement of the co-
lony. The class of artisans would be increased and encouraged.
We should have colonial designs suited to our colonial wants,
and these would require colonial designers. The amount of
popular intelligence would be elevated, and the now rising
generation of Australia, who inherit the mechanical genius
and inventive energy of their forefathers, would put the same
into practice ; while, on the other hand, the production of
raw materials alone, which is the present staple of colonial
industry, requires very little exercise of intellect, as it is
generally carried out with unskilled labor.
Only a few young Australians have now a chance of rising
in the world as merchants; and if the rest dislike going into
the interior to mine for gold, or to keep sheep or cattle, or
are above keeping a butcher’s or baker’s shop, or drapery, or
grocery, or public-house, their only resource is to obtain Go-
vernment employment, or enter a solicitor’s, land agent’s,
or broker’s office—most of which branches of business are
overstocked in the colony.
Manufactures would open an healthy outlet for colonial
industry, invention, and enterprise for the present and future
generations. And while the production of raw materials
gives employment to only a few in the lowest order of labor,
manufactures would require a division of skilled labor, and
diffuse benefits among the general population.


My aim in this paper is to show that an ample field exists
here for the further extension of our resources in raw
materials, and for the profitable introduction of manufac-
tures whose products can compete successfully with imported
articles.
Under ordinary circumstances the balance of trade would
he in favor of England, which produces the most value in
commodities at the least cost in labor; but in our very pe-
culiar circumstances, situated at the antipodes, though our
rates of labor are high, yet the long voyage of about fifteen
thousand miles of our raw materials to England, and the
similar voyage hack to us of those materials as manufactured
articles, with the interest of money during these two long-
voyages, and other detentions, Avith the double insurances,
the many commissions, storages and brokerages, and profits
of the various persons concerned—all these amounts, added
together, gives a natural protection to the industry of this
country. I say a natural protection, not a protection laid on
by Government, Avhich will enable us to successfully compete
with England and other countries in our own market, by the
conversion of many of our own raw materials into manufac-
tured articles.
Let us uoav consider the effect that Avould be produced on
these colonies by England being engaged in a war with
France, or any other nation Avhose fleet could interfere with
our commerce.
At the present time we are dependent for our supplies of
almost every manufactured article on England; and many
of these imports are our oavu raAv materials returned to us in
a manufactured state. These supplies now come to us regu-
larly in ships, several of Avhich arrive here every week. But
in time of Avar all’ this will be altered. Vessels leaving this
colony for England, and taking aAvay our raw materials,
such as gold, wool, hides, bark for tanning, will not leave our
•ports, as they do uoav, every feAV days, they will have to Avait
till a number of them can sail together, and then they Avill have
to sail under the convoy of a ship of war, as they did in the
Avars of the first Napoleon, Avhen our colonies furnished to Eng-
land much less valuable articles than gold, wool, and hides.
And vessels conveying manufactured articles to us from
England, Avill have to arrive here in our ports after similar
long detentions in English ports, till many of them can be
got to sail together, and they Avill be similarly escorted by
armed vessels.


Now, the certain consequences of this state of things must
be, as all experience has proved—first, the cost of transport
from here to England, and from England here, will be
enormously increased; and for months together there will he
delays in sending our raw materials out of the colony. This
will cause a reduced demand, and a fall in their value, which
will be a serious loss to the colony; while the manufactured
articles only arriving here at uncertain times, and after ex-
perience on onr part of much inconvenience for want of them
in onr market, will certainly rise enormously in price.
Thus those who now produce and export raw materials to
England will suffer greatly from depreciation in value of
such articles; while every one in the colony, without any
exception whatever, will suffer from the enhanced value of
all manufactured articles imported. This depreciation alone
in the value of our raw materials, will cause many persons
to be thrown out of employment; and thus, when manufac-
tured articles are much dearer, there will be less means to
purchase them. These disadvantages will tell upon us most
seriously in war times, as long as we are not a manufacturing
people.
Looking at the list of articles we import, there are no
importations which are so fatal to our interests as are the intro-
duction of wheat, flour, oats, barley, malt, maize, and gram.
We import these from countries, for the most part, which have
no manufactures, and we pay for them invariably in ready
money. All these articles we could raise ourselves, and we
ought to raise them; if we did, then the one and a half
millions of money which we pay for them would go into the
pockets of our Victorian farmers, instead of into the pockets
of the farmers of other countries. And therefore so much more
money would be in circulation among us, jfer the encourage-
ment of colonial enterprise and industry.
I say, in time of peace that the importation of these things
is had for us; hut in time of war dependence on such impor-
tations must reduce us to great straights, and panics, andPP
severe loss, and possibly even to plague and famine.
There is no commodity on which scarcity or precarious
supply has such an effect as on the price of corn. An emi-
nent writer says —“ In the case of deficient supply, every one
aiming to get what he requires, produces a disproportionate
advance in price. Thus, a deficiency of one-tenth of the
quantity of corn required, will raise the price three-tenths
beyond the usual rate. And a deficiency of one-fourth, more


than doubles the price of the article. And even in England,
the price of corn in a short time has fluctuated to 200 per
cent, advance/'’ But we can easily see what monopolies of
dealers there would be in this colony, and what panics, well
fed as we are now used to be, if such fluctuations in the price
of breadstuffs ever take place here, in conjunction with depre-
ciation in the value of our raw materials, and a heavy rise in
the price of manufactured articles, how deplorable will be the
condition of half the people of this colony.
I have now to direct your attention to our importations of
wheal, dour, oats, malt, maize, and gram, and shall mention
how much these articles cost us in the year 1858.
In that year we consumed 75,000 tons of flour; and of this
quantity we imported 31,000 tons (25,000 tons of this came
to us as flour ready milled, and 6,000 tons of it came as wheat,
which we ground into flour); and for these 31,000 tons of
imported grain we paid .£600,000. The greater part of this
flour came from Adelaide and Tasmania. Now, if the Adelaide
and Tasmanian people can afford to ship their flour here, with
all the heavy expenses attendant thereon, we ourselves ought
to be able to raise it at a considerable profit; and our farmers
do seem to be getting into a knowledge of this, for whereas
there were only 13,000 acres of land under wheat in 1854,
there were 87,000 acres under wheat in 1858—that is, about
seven times the quantity; and if we found it worth while
to raise 41,000 tons of flour, why not raise the 31,000 addi-
tional tons required, and which were imported ?
As to oats, in 1858, we imported one and three quarters
millions of bushels, at a cost of £530,000 ; and yet we raised
in the colony £420,000 worth, or one and a quarter millions
of bushels—that is, we raised nearly as much oats as we im-
ported. But we might as readily have pocketed the additional
£530,000 we paid away.
In the case of barley, in 1858 we produced 157,000 bushels,
worth about £33,000 ; and we imported 122,000 bushels, at a
cost of about £26,000. Now, barley is a grain which comes
to perfection in the greatest variety of climates, and is, con-
sequently, found over the greatest extent of the civilised
globe; it bears the heat and drought of the tropics, and ripens
at the torrid zone. There is, I believe, actually a strong
prejudice against the raising of this grain in Victoria, which
is a great misfortune ; for barley is better suited to Victoria
than, perhaps, any other grain. If sown at the proper time it
is not affected by the hot winds. It is admirably adapted for


horse-feed, as horses prefer it to hay, which, in Victoria, often
rises to enormous prices. It is most extensively cultivated
in New South Wales, and is considered a most remunerative
crop. In Spain two crops are reaped in one year —one in
spring, from seed sown the preceding autumn, and one in
autumn, from seed sownin spring. The practice of sowing clover
or ryegrass with the barley should be universal, as it is consi-
dered one of the great modern improvements in agriculture.
Now, what I have just said refers to the desirability of our
raising barley extensively, to do away with the necessity of
our importing it as horsefeed. A far more important use
of barley yet remains to be considered. Malt is barley
converted into the material for brewing. And of malt we
did not make 50 bushels in 1858; and Ave imported the
large quantity of 315,000 bushels, worth, at 11s. the bushel,
.€IIB,OOO. In the case of malt we made no effort to help
ourselves, yet the malt which comes to us from England
is deteriorated by the long sea voyage. One would almost
suppose that two-thirds of our farmers did not know that
malt was simply barley or other grain which has been steeped
in water till it swells, then is laid on floors till it heats and
germinates, at which period it has attained its maximum
of sweetness, and then it is kiln-dried. Now, all these are
simple operations (in fact, malting is considered as a change
of the starch of grain into sugar, preparatory to a further
change into spirit). There is rather a fine field here for our
farmers. We should raise annually 350,000 more bushels of
barley than we do, principally for conversion into malt.
In the case of maize, though our climate is admirably adapted
to grow this valuable grain, yet last year we raised only 7,000
bushels ; and we imported, to our shame be it said, the large
quantity of 150,000 bushels, for which we paid away in ready
money €53,000. Nearly all this imported maize came from
New South Wales, a gold colony like our own. This fact
speaks volumes on our inertness in taking advantage of our
colonial resources.
Of gram we imported in 1858 a quantity worth €37,000 ;
and this is a grain that grows to perfection in Victoria, and
only requires to be better known to come into universal re-
quest as an economical horse food.
Thus, in the year 1858, a year in which there was great
distress in this colony among the laboring classes, we actually
sent away for the above five descriptions of grain the follow-
ing sums, viz. : —•


For wheat and flour . . .. .. £600,000
For oats .. .. .. .. .. 530,000
For barley, and malt made from barley. . 144,000
For maize, imported principally from
New South Wales ~ .. .. 52,000
For gram . . .. . . , . .. 37,000
£1,363,000
That is, for the above five articles alone, our colonial farmers
in this colony of Yictoria kept out of their pockets nearly
one and a half millions of money in the year 1858 (and this
list does not include hops, potatoes, vegetables, &c., nor
many other items of agricultural produce, as the total amount
of agricultural produce imported last year into this colony
cost £3,000,000 of money).
Let us hope that our farmers will now bestir themselves,
especially as, in the opinion of many, we are on the verge of
a war which may make us almost wholly dependent on our
own resources; and it is proper to be mentioned that if our
imports for the remainder of this year continue in the pro-
portion they have for the last seven months, all our imports
for this year will exceed all our exports by more than two
millions of money.
In treating on agricultural produce, I will continue on a
little longer in connection with other wants than our own.
In England great attention is paid to the fattening of cattle,
and among such great beefeaters as we are, to provide a suf-
ficiency of food for the sustenance of our cattle is a subject of
great importance, especially as for many months in the year
our natural pastures are burnt up. Linseed cake is most ex-
tensively used for this purpose in England. Now linseed, or the
flax plant, grows here very well. The oil is easily expressed
from it quite cold ; and we import about 300,000 gallons of
the oil yearly for the use of painters and other purposes, worth
about £70,000. Were we to grow this plant, we could not oidy
save this £70,000 which the oil costs us, but we could pro-
vide about 60,000 tons of oil cake for cattle feed. The oil
would yield a profit, and the oil cake would be had for
nothing". 60,000 tons of oil cake would be worth £500,000
at the least.
Speaking of cattle-feed, I will also mention the sunflower.
This is a most prolific plant. One acre bears from thirty to
forty bushels of seed; each bushel yields one gallon of oil,


worth 65., which sells readily in the market; the refuse after
the oil is extracted is the oil cake, at the rate of 13 to
15 cwt. per acre, for the feed of cattle, poultry, &c. The sun-
flower derives its nourishment, in great measure, from the
air, and exhausts the soil very little. In this case also there
is much cattle-feed per acre for a trifling expense.
Both in England and France, within the last two or three
years, beetroot has assumed new importance, both for the
fattening of cattle and for the purposes of distillation. This
root has been always famed for its fattening properties as
cattle-feed. Until very lately many plans of distilling this
root have been adopted, in France and England; but all of
them, though they produced a satisfactory amount of alcohol,
left a residue of little value for cattle feeding purposes, until
a new method was discovered by a French distiller. This
system is simple, and is as follows. The beetroot is cut by a
common root-cutter into thin slices. These are put into
fermenting vats, with a little acid and some yeast and
water, by which they are brought into a high state of fer-
mentation. After this the slices are placed in layers on per-
forated plates, in iron cylinders; and steam is introduced
into the bottom of the cylinders, which steam passes through
the perforated plates and boils the beetroot; the vapor is then
received and condensed in worms, and is a spirit twenty per
cent, over proof, resembling whisky. In France, in the
year 1857, two and a half millions sterling of this spirit
was distilled, showing its value. But, best of all, the resi-
due is so useful for cattle food, that eighty per cent, of the
nutritive matter remains after distillation ■ and this residue,
after distillation, is not affected by heat or cold, and may
be kept for an indefinite time. Some of it, after lying two
years in an open tank, has been eaten with avidity by sheep
and oxen; and, mixed with chaff, it is their favorite food all
the summer. Thus, two tons of beetroot yield thirty-two
gallons of excellent spirit, equalling the best whisky, and
leaves one ton of pulp, which is equal in nutrition to 32 cwt.
of the original root, for cattle-feed. When it is remem-
bered that we import beverages yearly to the amount of two
and a half millions sterling, the importance of colonial dis-
tillation will be more fully appreciated.
Before leaving the subject of cattle-feed, I would refer to
the sorghum millet, or Chinese sugar cane. Most of the
varieties of the sugar cane flourish in Victoria. To show the
hardiness of this plant, it may be mentioned that in the most


northerly of the States of North America it grows to a height
o||purteen feet; and, while maize and other grain is killed
by frost alongside, the sugar cane remains uninjured. For
cattle-feed its nutritious powers, compared with hay, is as
three to one. Two crops of fodder can he grown in a season
from the same roots, irrespective of drought. In fact, as
green food for cattle, it is unrivalled, as it produces at the
rate of seven tons to the acre green, or two tons to the acre
cured.
I do not refer to the sorghum cane here with reference to
its saccharine qualifies for the manufacture of sugar, or for
distillation, but simply for its advantages for animal fattening,
it being freely eaten either in a green or dried state, by horses,
cattle, sheep, and swine. And the sorghum flourishes during
the summer season, when our natural pasture is suffering
much from drought.
As I have spoken of the linseed and sunflower plants in
connection with the production of oil, as well as cattle-feed,
I would now continue the subject, by referring to the suita-
bility of our soil and climate for the growth of the olive
tree. Olive oil, we all know, is much in request; and the
production of oil from the fruit of these trees is very easy.
The fruit is allowed to drop, which is preferred to beating
it from the trees, and would be better for us, as involving
less labor. The olives are collected in heaps, and taken to
a mill, where they undergo three distinct pressings or crush-
ings. The oil from the first pressing is the best; that from
the next is inferior ; and the last yields an oil inferior still.
A couple of men are able to express a fabulous number of gal-
lons per day. This is a business, I need not say, we have
not yet gone into ; but it would be desirable for our farmers
to see the importance of growing the olive tree in planta-
tions. These, after a few years, would be most remunerative.
There are few' in this colony who do not know the castor-
oil plant, but there not many who know its value. For the
first two years of its growth it is rather handsome; but its
beauty soon departs, and it is looked upon as an unsightly
cumberer of the ground, whereas in reality it is the more
valuable the older it is until it arrives at maturity. It is a
hardy perennial, and grows on year after year without re-
sowing, It is valuable principally for its oil, worth 10s. a
gallon. This oil is the only oil used for locomotive engines,
and for the journals of machinery. One locomotive engine
requires about ten pints a week, and other machinery in pro-


Under disadvantageous circumstance, trenching
and clearing ..
£40
3,000 plants, at £2 a thousand, is. .
6
Thirty days setting these 3,000 plants is..
16
Post and rail fence, per acre
50
Labor and management, and interest of money
for three years
130
Total for one acre
£242
portion. The consumption of this oil will increase rapidly,
and for many years to come it may he expected it Avill he re-
quired in larger quantities.
The next subject I would mention is the culture of the
grape. As I wish to bring original ideas only before the In-
stitute, and to tread in no man’s footsteps, at first I felt
tempted to pass over the grape; but I feel its importance
too strongly to do so. My convictions on this subject are
strong; and I think that if they have been considered be-
nefactors of mankind who have made tjvo blades of grass to
grow for one that grew before, so I should consider every
Victorian a benefactor to his country who either plants a few
vines himself or induces his neighbors to do so.
An acre of vines produces 10,000 lbs. of grapes; 15 lbs.
of grapes make one gallon of wine. The first cost of an acre
of grapes is as follows :
After three years this vineyard will produce 400 gallons of
wine, worth from £l5O to £200; and at least one and a half
tons of grapes worth £3O, at less than 2d. per pound.
In the fourth year this vineyard will produce 700 gallons
of wine, worth at the least £3OO, and two tons of grapes
worth, at 2d. a pound, about £3B; making £338 per acre at
the least: and every year after this the yield will increase.
Thus, a good vineyard, if it contains good vines, in a good
situation, may be fairly expected to yield £340 per year per
acre. As much as 1,400 gallons of good wine have been
produced in this colony from one acre of grapes, which was
worth £7OO, in the parish of Barrabool, near Geelong.
I may as well mention here that the application of sulphur
to the roots of the vines is a certain cure for the blight, to
which vines are occasionally subject; and a large reward has
been paid by the French Government to the discoverer. Still
there are difficulties in determining when the plants should


he sulphured, that being dependent on the soil, the tem-
perature, and the variety of grapes 1
In the process of wine-making, the grapes which get satu-
rated with wet are only fit to make brandy. But as there is a
revenue derived from the import of French brandies, the colo-
nist is practically prohibited from making brandy for sale from
his own vineyard, lest he should interfere with the importa-
tions from France. Thus we annually put £IBO,OOO at least
into the pockets of Frenchmen, which our own vine-growers
might transfer to their own. We have had lately, in the
daily papers, an instance of an insolvent who stated that his
insolvency had arisen from his being disallowed to rectify some
simple kind of spirit, after he had gone to great expense in
procuring the necessary plant and materials.
But this subject of wine and brandies is only part of what
the culture of the grape leads us into.
Why should we not produce raisins and dried currants,
such as we now import so largely? England imports from
Spain and Turkey annually 20,000 tons of raisins, worth
£BOO,OOO, exclusive of the duty of £ls a ton; and we in
this colony import of raisins about 300 tons annually, worth
about £35,000. For my part Ido not see why we might not
annually export 5,000 tons of raisins to England, as well as
meet our own requirements, 5,000 tons of raisins exported
would be worth at least £180,000; and, with the £30,000
which we pay for raisins here, would be £210,000 into the
pockets of our Victorian vine-growers; and if our Victorians
Avere pocketing this amount every year, it Avould still leave
15,000 tons of raisins to be imported into England, from
Spain and Turkey; so that avc need not be afraid of being
considered selfish. This curing of raisins is a simple affair;
and the quality of raisins depends more on the method of
cure than anything else. The finest raisins are cured in two
methods—either by cutting the stalks of the bunches half
through when the grapes are nearly ripe, and leaving them
suspended on the vines till the Avatery part has evaporated,
and the sun dries and candies them ; or by gathering the
grapes Avhen they are fully ripe, and dipping them in a ley
made of the ashes of the burnt tendrils, after Avhich they are
exposed to the sun to dry; those cured in the first Avay
being most esteemed, and being called raisins of the sun.
We might also do a large trade in Avhat are called grocers’
currants. These are not real currants, but a kind of very
small black grape, which is even noAv cultivated to a small


extent in this colony. I have had a receipt for the prepara-
tion of these currants for many years, which is as follows :
Preserve your vine-cuttings till the vines ripen, then make
charcoal of these vine-cuttings; mix one quart of charcoal
to four quarts of water, dip your currants (placed in a sieve)
three times in this; then expose them to the sun. These
precautions are most necessary, for if the weather is bad the
drying process takes a fortnight, and a thunderstorm will
often completely spoil the fruit.
Of tobacco I need not say that it is a most important article
of consumption. Nor need I say how admirably the climate
and soil of Victoria is suited to the growth of this plant. A
general idea prevails that tobacco requires a tropical cli-
mate. This is a great mistake; as it grows to perfection
both in England and Ireland; and its growth is prohibited
there only because imported tobacco yields the tremendous
revenue of five millions per annum, which revenue in the
home-grown tobacco it would be impossible to collect. I
believe we annually pay away about £200,000 a-year for
imported tobacco. Now the only objections that have ever
been urged against Victorian-grown tobacco are, that it is not
quite so strong as the imported, and has a slightly peculiar
taste. These objections, lam persuaded, could be removed,
by preparing the tobacco in the same way as in the countries
where our best tobacco comes from. And this method of
preparation is very different indeed from any method that
has been adopted here. The plan of preparation is as fol-
lows : —The tobacco is cut and taken to a shed affording
a free circulation of air. It is then placed on poles laid
horizontally, at a height of a few feet over the surface
of the ground, where it dries, and when hot weather comes
on it swells, which gives it a silky appearance. The tobacco
is then laid into heaps, and sprinkled with water, when it
ferments. Some refuse leaves are then infused in water
or very weak wine, and this infusion undergoes a species of
fermentation, after which the refuse leaves fall to the bot-
tom of the vessel. All the tobacco is then dipped into this
fermented infusion, and hung up to dry in a room almost air-
tight, when it begins again to sweat, which process is called
the calentura, or fever. And this process of dipping is re-
peated as often as the tobacco requires it. Now let it be
generally known that, on an average, in the best tobacco-
raising country oidy one good crop may be expected in three
years; and, in any case, all the tobacco will not be of the


same quality; only a small portion will be of the best de-
scription, and the remainder will be of different degrees of
excellence. The knowledge of this would deter many from
being discouraged who are now completely disheartened by
the failure of their first efforts; and the dipping process, I
am convinced, is absolutely necessary for the manufacture of
a strong tobacco.
The next subject I would direct your attention to is our
wool trade. England at present annually imports over one
hundred millions of pounds of wool; and about half of this
quantity, or nearly fifty millions of pounds, comes from this
and the neighboring colonies. The rest is supplied by Ger-
many and Spain, by the south of Africa, the south of
Asia, and the south of America. The wool trade of these
colonies is the growth of only thirty years ; as in 1830 the
colonies only exported three millions of pounds. The colonies
should certainly produce all the wool England requires;
and if we Victorians did our part, we could annually export
to England £900,000 sterling worth more of wool than
we do. Two millions sterling a-year is lost to these co-
lonies in the wool trade, which two millions goes into the
pockets of aliens. Seeing the rapid strides which our wool
trade has made in thirty years, I doubt not that ultimately
the export of wool from Australasia will equal one hundred
millions of pounds avoirdupois. But I think this result
ought to be brought about in the shortest time possible.
In this place I would remind you that at this advanced age
of the world’s history means are employed whereby, in agri-
culture, as in other vocations, the mere cost of labor is a small
item; and it has been predicted, and I think will be fulfilled,
that all harvest operations on land properly laid down will
shortly be performed in one-fourth the time now occupied in
hand labor. The truth is now beginning to be duly appre-
ciated, that sound theory in physical science consists simply
of facts, and the deductions of common sense from them re-
duced to a system. I would refer you to an article headed
“ Steam, and its Advantages to Agriculture,” which appeared
in Bear’s Weekly Circular of Saturday, September 3rd, 1859.
That article should be read and studied by every agriculturist
in the colony. Horse-power is twice as dear as steam, where
the latter can be employed; and on every farm of 150 acres,
or less, there ought to be a six-horse power engine to grind
corn, crush oats, break rape cake, cut and steam chaff, thrash
and dress corn, work pumps, saw timber, and cultivate the


soil, and perform the harvesting. Be it remembered, on a
farm of 150 acres there ought to be 150 tons of straw to be
cut into chaff, and to be steamed from the waste steam of
the engine. And the following are some of the operations,
such a machine as above will accomplish under competent
management: —Cut hay into chaff, roots cut for sheep, roots
cut for bullocks, roots pulped, thick oil cake broken, wheat
and barley thrashed and dressed.
Every hundred acres of arable land requires, according to
the present system, about five horses, and these consume an
enormous amount of the produce of the land; and we know
that time is money in agriculture as in every other indus-
trial occupation. I would refer these matters to your serious
consideration, convinced as I am that a more general use of
steam engines in agricultural operations, with our natural
advantages of climate and soil, would take away the shadow
of an excuse from us for squandering in this colony of Vic-
toria the large amount of over three millions annually, in
importation of agricultural produce, which we can and ought
to raise for ourselves.
In the matter of drugs and chemicals a good deal could be
done in the colony of Victoria —sarsaparilla, for instance ;
large quantities of this are imported into this colony from
America and Great Britain. Now this root is indigenous to
many of our mountainous districts, equal to the red sarsapa-
rilla of Jamaica, which is considered the best.
Saffron can be produced most abundantly in the colony ;
also rhubarb, equal to Turkey; with sassafras, quassia, and
such dyes as logwood, brazil wood, and sumach. Of this
last dyestuff, I may as well mention that the very large
quantity of 80,000 tons are annually imported into England.
It grows in Spain, Portugal, and Italy. The sumach tree,
or rather shrub, grows to a height of about eight or ten feet;
the stems are ligneous, the bark is hairy and brown in color.
The shoots of the shrub are cut down every year close to
the roots, and after being dried are reduced to powder in a
mill.
As to the numerous gums and resins of Australia, they have
been so carefully enumerated and described in a paper read
before this Institute in September, 1856, that I need only
refer to it on this subject. Opium and anodynes, such as
laudanum and morphine, could be manufactured here. Tim
opium poppy grows well, and by macerating and boiling
the capsules in water, and evaporating the decoction down to


a paste, a large quantity of extract is obtained. Tbe seeds
are not medicinal, but are fattening food for fowls.
But there are many reasons why w T e the colonists of Vic-
toria should not confine our exertions to Victoria, Victoria •
is the leading colony of Australia, and a very large propor-
tion of the capital and enterprise of this continent are pos-
sessed by us. Now there are some articles which might
become great staples of Australasian trade, which the climates
of New South Wales and Moreton Bay only would produce.
I refer more particularly to cotton and indigo. From time
to time enterprising individuals have imported small quanti-
ties of cotton seed from America; and cotton, as you all
know, I doubt not, of most excellent quality has been pro-
duced by white labour along from 500 to 700 miles of the Aus-
tralasian coast to the north of Sydney, water carriage being
everywhere available. To England, of course, the cotton
would be sent; but our distance from England is not a great
obstacle, as our freights for wool are only about to gd.
per lb., and cotton is easier packed. While cotton from New
Orleans to Liverpool costs fd. per lb., and though the
American cotton is raised by slave labour, I am convinced
Australian-grown cotton could compete in the English market
with it. Our wool has competed many years in the Eng-
lish market with wool grown in the cheap countries of
Spain, France and Germany; and though within the last few
years the rates of wages here on account of the gold disco-
veries have been more than doubled, yet our wool competes
now even as successfully with the wool of the cheap countries
as before; and if this is an eloquent fact in regard to wool,
it would be equally so with regard to cotton, in all probability;
and the mere cost of labour on an article worth 2s. per lb.
would prove insignificant. It is a well known fact that slave
labour is not economical, the labour of a white man being
always reckoned as worth the labour of several slaves, besides
the fact that appliances in the slave states are generally of
the rudest kind.
In many respects the example of the United States will be
instructive to us. Sixty years ago their population was only
three millions; they have now a population of twenty-six
millions, and now they manufacture nearly everything they
require.
In the cycle of human affairs events often repeat them-
selves; and the rapid increase of population and manufactures
in America may be equalled by a corresponding increase with


us. But even at the present day, though America is within
such a short distance of the cheap labour countries of Europe,
yet the rates of labour in all parts of America are double
what they are in England, yet America finds it profitable to
manufacture for herself. Nearly all her manufactories are
in the northern states, where there is no slave labour, and
where the rates of wages are highest. But after all, where
machinery and subdivision of labour are carried out practi-
cally, the mere item of dear manual labour is an inconsidera-
ble one, as a set-off against the expenses of long voyages,
interest of money, insurance, and many profits.
As many opinions are entertained on the value of our gold
deposits, I cannot but glance at the question.
Gold and silver, as mediums of exchange, act as a stimulus
to industry and invention; without these two metals we
should have to fall back on the obsolete .system of barter.
These metals also exercise a most decided influence on the
distribution of wealth, for having a certain relative value to
each other, we can offer much or little of these metals in
exchange for what we want, according to the value of the
articles; and our mode of payment will be acceptable all over
the earth, no matter what may be the race of our customers,
or their language or habits.
Looking upon gold and silver in the light of permanently
acceptable mediums of exchange, has opened up speculations
as to whether these two metals will continue to bear the same
relative value to each other as they do now. This must de-
pend on the quantities of each commercially available, and
on the quantities commercially required. This subject re-
quires breadth of treatment, and speculations founded on the
present limited commerce of the world cannot grapple with
it. As human beings become civilised, so do their wants
increase, and the imports and exports of all communities are
less or more, exactly in proportion to their industry and
intelligence. Africa has no gold-coined money, with near
two hundred millions of barbarous inhabitants, most of whom
in their uneducated condition, like the inhabitants of ancient
Nineveh, do not know their right hands from their left. Asia
has six hundred millions of pagan inhabitants, and even in
India and China, at this advanced period of the world’s
history, gold is not used as coined money, but is bought and
sold exactly as pearls, diamonds, and precious stones, for
personal ornamentation and barbarous display; and where
gold is not used to perform the functions of money, it has


proved of less real value when exchanged for other commo-
dities.
But even the civilisation of the greater part of Europe and
America is very imperfect, when compared with that of Eng-
land; and consequently as their trading transactions are
limited, so their gold currency is limited also.
But give any of the most barbarous inhabitants just enume-
rated, amounting to hundreds of millions, give any one of them
mental culture, and bring him up under such advanced human
institutions as we are privileged to possess, each one, except-
ing those mentally and physically imbecile, is fitted by nature
to long for and enjoy the thousand etceteras of civilised life
with as much zest as any member of this Institute; and these
etceteras are not to be obtained by individuals and commu-
nities without gold and silver as circulating mediums.
Gold is coming into use more extensively every day for the
purposes of gilding and jewellery. It is an undoubted fact,
that within the last ten years jewellers have increased two
and three fold. The sale of gold watches has increased enor-
mously; and if every one of the twelve hundred millions
of inhabitants in the world had but one single article of
jewellery each to supply them, it would nearly use up all the
gold we possess; while of these, few of the softer sex, if they
could manage it, would be satisfied with less than a pair of
gold earrings, gold necklace, gold watch, gold chain, gold
rings, gold bracelets, gold brooches, and gold pins, while
much gold is lost yearly by friction, and large quantities in
gilding.
The use of tea brought silver spoons into fashion, and only
a few years ago we had no silver forks; but the silver now
manufactured into teaspoons and forks amounts to many tons
annually. And thus new inventions may multiply the uses
of gold. But be this as it may, should Victoria, and New
South Wales, and California, and Russia furnish every year
for the next hundred years as much gold as is now annually
produced by them, I believe it would be all absorbed into the
general circulation of the world without any depreciation in
its value. And even now in this colony of Victoria gold is
being purchased in large quantities to send into China; but
the wants of China are now small compared with what they
will be.
In concluding this paper I would remark that the chances
and changes which may take place in the world within a short
time are incalculable. The annexation of a good part of


18 On the Resources of Victoria
*
China to our Asiatic empire is not an improbability. The'
history of the world for the last 360 years is most instructive
on the subject of great territorial changes. 360 years ago all
of our globe which was then known was Europe, Asia, and
Africa. 360 years ago Columbus discovered America, and
since that time this continent of Australia has become known.
Europe, Asia, and Africa contain about thirty millions of
square miles, and America and Australia about twenty mil-
lions of square miles; thus within 360 years the known earth
has been nearly doubled in extent.
But to come nearer to our time, the history of the world
for the last 103 years is more surprising still. In the year
1756 British soldiers fought and gained the first great battle
of India, by which England gained the province of Bengal,
and the base of our present gigantic Indian, empire. And in
the year 1759, three years later, and only 100 years ago,
British soldiers nobly fought and gained the equally great
and eventful battle of Quebec, by which England gained pos-
session of the greater part of North America; also within
100 years we have become possessed of this great continent
of Australia. Thus within about 100 years our British em-
pire has increased to forty times its former extent; and in
the same time Russia has increased over fifty times.
When we turn our attention to the events which have
taken place, we are struck with the definiteness of their lead-
ing features, and their suitability as an introduction to the
succeeding states of human progress. And I cannot but
look on the discoveries of gold within the last twelve years in
large quantities, first in California, which is on the west coast
of the Pacific, next on this, which may be called by distinc-
tion the great Australasian Continent of the Pacific; and
still later, in Oregon, Vancouver's Island, and Frazer’s River,
all on the west coast of the Pacific, and all these countries
bordering or in the Pacific. With the immense emigration
which is induced to these places, all of which are in the pos-
session of people of British descent, I say I cannot but look
on all these as indicative of a design manifested on the part
of the Ruler of the universe to found a series of new Pacific
empires—Pacific in more than name, where liberal institu-
tions, suited to this advanced period of the world’s history,
shall be planted down all at once in the Pacific, to exer-
cise ameliorating influence on the surrounding barbarous
and semi-civilized people of Asia and Africa, and the west
coast of South America, which contain a large part of the


population of the globe; and to exercise their just sway in
scenes.unpolluted by the many sad acts of human selfishness,
perfidy, despotical dominion, and carnage of the older por-
tions of the world.
This colony of Victoria will be added to the list of unex-
ampled strides made in the last half century, and will yet be
spoken of in connection with steam-power, gas, a hundred-
fold increased manufacturing capabilities, electricity, photo.
graphy, and the many other additions to human advantages,
which are the distinguishing characteristics of our age and
nation.


