

i>D x ' : "h
ON THE CONDITION
OF XUE
WIYES AND FAMILIES -
OF
/ MARRIED CONVICTS. . j
I , :|
r*r»r> T'ro 4 xri’.TTnH ITTfiV
WITH SUGGESTIONS FOR ITS AMELIORATION.
WILLIAM GILBERT,
Hon. Sec. of the Society for Relief of Distress.




ON THE CONDITION OE THE WIVES AND
FAMILIES OF MARRIED CONVICTS.
So much has already been written about our Convict System and
so many plans, all deemed impracticable, have been brought forward
to improve it, that I may, perhaps, be considered as only adding
another scheme to the many which have already failed; but I have,
while acting as Hon. Sec. of the Society for Relief of Distress seen
so much, and such abject misery, among the families of convicts that
I trust, even if I fail in my effort, I may still be the means of call-
ing the aid of abler pens than my own to the subject.
In the first place it must be borne in mind that great as the crime
of the married convict may have been, he has still been the bread
finder of his family, and when they lost his assistance, imperfect as
it may have been, a punishment almost as severe as his own, and
frequently scarcely less dishonorable, is too often inflicted on
his unfortunate family. To live, his wife must labor, but how
few will employ the wife of the convicted thief, and still fewer will
employ his child. Yet this repugnance to assist the unfortunates is
really without cause, for the women and children, unless driven by
necessity, generally avoid the associates of the father, for naturally
they can have but little faith in those whom they consider, rightly
or wrongly, as his misleaders. In the first phase of the poor
woman’s difficulty she generally applies to the parish for relief, and
what is her reception there? The first policy of the parochial


authorities is to get rid of her if they can, and for a time they
generally succeed. They offer her the house. They consider it as a
certainty that the poor woman will revolt at the idea of being
separated from her children, and they are right. She refuses the
offer and makes an attempt to support herself. She first seeks for a
lodging and generally finds it in some desperately poor locality
(none other will receive her), and possibly engages part of a room for
herself and family in some miserable back slum. Or very probably,
hospitality, as far as shelter goes, is offered to her gratuitously by
some one scarcely better off than herself, for charity seems to increase
as the state of society is the poorer. What in her present abode is
the fate of her children if they be young ? In such localities, for ex-
ample, as the courts and alleys about Farringdon Street and Field
Lane ; out of every five children born one only reaches five years of
age. How terrible is this mortality, may be shown by comparing
it with a wealthy locality, say Lewisham, where only one child in
five dies before arriving at that age. When not receiving parochial
relief, the mortality among the children of married convicts is far
greater than among the poorest of the honest poor, even when the
latter are found under the most unfavorable circumstances.
What is the lot of the wife if she is still able to avoid the parish ?
This she can only do when her family are few. If young, she
generally marries again or forms an illicit connexion; and the un-
fortunate convict when the term of his imprisonment expires, finds
his wife living with another man, and most probably having by him
an illegitimate family.
Let us now turn to what far more frequently happens, that she at
last accepts parochial relief, after having in vain attempted to sup-
port herself by her own exertions. The quality of the relief she
will receive depends upon the wealth and liberality of the parish she
belongs to : occasionally they will give her out-door relief, and if
she has but few children, she contrives as a hawker or cheap char-
woman to live; but she is most frequently obliged to accept the
house. There she becomes a fixture, and her children as well, for
none will employ them and they remain a continued expense to
the ratepayers and a misery to themselves.


A very erroneous idea appears to prevail as to the number of
married (male) convicts. From the great difficulty in obtaining in-
formation from the government authorities I am unable to give
their correct proportion, but by the courtesy of one, the Rev. Mr. de
Rienzi, Chaplain to the Millbank Prison, I find that there they
amount to about 33 per cent, or one-third of the whole number, and
I am inclined to believe this will be about the average of other pris-
ons. It is also extremely difficult to obtain the exact number of
their wives and families receiving parochial relief, but the following
returns supplied me by the relieving officers of four London Parishes
taken at hazard, will give some idea on the subject:
WIVES. CHILDREN.
St. George, Southwark - 57 134
Fulham .... 7 14
St. Mary, Islington 98 201
St. George in the East - 9 26
By these figures it may not only be shewn that for every male adult
married or unmarried, at present incarcerated, there is at least
one pauper thrown on the poor rate for relief. What the cost
of the married convict is on the public purse may to a certainty
be ascertained, when it is remembered that the average expenditure
on each, irrespective of house rent, is twenty-nine pounds a year,
above the value of his labour; and if to this be added the whole or
a great portion of the expense of maintaining his wife and family out
of the poor rate, the amount will certainly be sufficiently great to
prove that on the score of economy alone, some vast reformation is
required in our present system of convict management.
Let us now turn to the condition of the male married convicts’
children, for on them the principal injustice of the present system
falls. Their legal protectors, after the incarceration of their father,
are generally the parish officers, and to do them only justice, there is
no want of sympathy on their part when once the children are under
their management. I have frequently inquired of the guardians of


the poor of different parishes what they did with the children of
prisoners, and have invariably received one stereotyped answer,—
“What can we do with them, who will employ the child of a con-
victed thief.”
Nothing can possibly be more unjust to these poor creatures than
a feeling of the kind, and yet, the public are hardly to be blamed
for it. Whenever the subject of prison discipline is brought forward
by the public press, we are informed that there exists among us a
class, utterly irreclaimable, who make ‘evil their good,’ and who from
their degraded nature carry on war against the community at large;
whose children are brought up in infamy by infamous parents, to
infest society with the pertinacity of an incurable ulcer. Is this
really true as far as regards the children of thieves ? My experience
has induced me to come to a totally different conclusion, and if I am
wrong, lam certainly not wdthout plausible data for my error. I
hold, on the contrary, that among the most honest of our vagrant
population are’ the children of thieves, and when they turn out dis-
honest, utter destitution has been to a great degree the proximate
cause. Before hazarding this opinion I determined to investigate,
closely the cause of dishonesty in boys, and for that purpose I visited
and minutely inspected those two admirable institutions for the refor-
mation of criminal boys, the Red Hill Reformatory, and the County
of Middlesex Industrial Schools, at Reltham. In these I found more
than eight hundred convicted young thieves, all under sixteen years
of age; among them not five per cent, were the children of thieves—
more than sixty per cent, were the children of drunkards. This ex-
traordinary statement is easily explained. The thief generally con-
ceals his crime from his child, and the father’s punishment generally
acts as a terrible warning to the son—the vice of the drunkard is
daily brought before his offspring—for society looks with too far
lenient an eye on the filthy habit—and the boy’s mind first gets
demoralized by his parent’s example. The family of the drunkard
is generally in great poverty, and hunger acting on the already
demoralized mind of the boy, easily converts him into a thief. That
hunger and destitution form the great first cause of dishonesty
among a large proportion of our London thieves, is shewn by a fact


which was first brought under my notice by Dr. Tebay, Physician
to the Westminster Reformatory, and which has since been confirmed
by the statement of more than one police inspector with whom I
have conversed upon the subject: that all our London pickpockets
are of stunted growth, with narrow chests, and remarkably small
muscular development, tests which prove in the clearest manner the
great privation they must have endured in their early boyhood.
Among those young thieves whose parents have been convicted of
theft, I found several whose father or mother had been both a drunk-
ard and a thief, and many of these cases I have met with have been
singularly distressing. I will quote two.
About two years since a boy about fourteen years of age, called at
the offices of the Society for Relief of Distress, and asked me to help
him to go to sea, I told him he ought not to have called upon me, I
knew nothing of him, and of course I could not help him. He said he
was known to a tradesman in Leicester Square, who would speak
for him as being a very good boy. I asked how long the tradesman
had known him, and whether he had been in his employment. The
tradesman I found had known him about a fortnight, and had em-
ployed him on occasional errands. I hardly considered such a
recommendation sufficient, and I tried to get rid of the lad, but he
begged so earnestly that I would help him, that I told him to give
ms his address that we might enquire into his case. He replied
that he had no home.
“But have you no father, I asked?”
“ Yes, sir, but he is in prison,—for thieving.”
“ Have you no mother ? ”
Ho, sir, my mother is dead, and my father is married again.”
“ Where is your step mother ? ”
“ She is in prison for being drunk and disorderly,”
“ Have you ever been in trouble yourself, I enquired,—tell the
truth ? ”
“Yes, sir, twice.”
“What for?”
(After a moment's hesitation) “Thieving.”
“ I can do nothing for you, you must apply to your parish.”


The poor boy burst into tears, “Oh! sir, don’t send me away,
every body tells me [to go somewhere else. I don’t want to do any
thing wrong, but what can I do, I am almost starving, and I have
eaten nothing this day.”
“ Still your parish is the place for you to apply to. Where did
you sleep last night ? ”
“ Under a cart in St. John’s Wood.”
I thought I had detected him in a falsehood. His clothes though
ragged were perfectly clean and his shoes were well blacked. I
asked him to explain the state his shoes and clothes were in, if he
had slept under a cart the night before ? He told me he knew a
boy in the shoe black brigade, who had cleaned his shoes and clothes
to help him to get a situation. I thought [if the vagabond little
shoe black would, gratuitously, clean the young thief’s clothes,
polish his hoots, and possibly smooth down his hair with the same
brush, to help him to obtain respectability; it was my duty also to
assist in the good Avork I gave him a few halfpence to get his break-
fast, and a letter to a very bene\mlent lady, a member of our society,
requesting her to inquire into the lad’s statement and assist him if
it were found to be true. She found the boy’s story perfectly correct.
He was placed for a few weeks in a reformatory school, and in the
meantime the lady found a ship for him, the society provided him
with an outfit, and the boy has turned out admirably.
The second case relates to the family of a married convict who
Avas sentenced to a long imprisonment. His Avife, who was a no-
torious drunkard, had, in her turn, been several times incarcerated,
but for short periods. They had two children, a son and a daughter;
the former about fifteen years of age, the girl a year or lavo older.
The woman had trained her son up to be a thief. When he Avas
brought under the notice of the society’s almoner he was dying of
slow fever, perfectly repentant, in a miserable cellar in the neigh-
bourhood of Golden Square. All the help he had received during his
illness had been given him by his sister, who had supported him by
her earnings as a common prostitute. On inquiry it appeared that the
poor girl, had endeavoured strenuously to support herself respectably,
but in everv situation she had contri\ T ed to obtain, which Avere all


poor and hard indeed, the mother had discovered her and took from
her the trifle she earned. At last she obtained a situation in a really
respectable family, and behaved in it, in an unexceptionable manner,
but the mother again discovered her, and after one or two visits,
came one evening to the house quite drunk and created a most dis-
graceful riot. The poor girl was obliged to leave the next day, and
shortly afterwards was found plying the only profession apparently
open in this country to the daughter of drunken and dishonest
parents.
But the fact that the children of convicts are rarely thieves is
proved in a most extraordinary manner in the Australian colonies.
There, where perhaps the most unmitigated ruffians in Europe have
been transported, and, where, when liberated and even before, the
unlimited facility for obtaining rum in any quantities adds enor-
mously to the natural evil tendencies of the depraved; the convict
himself rarely relapses into dishonesty, and his children, if brutal
and degraded, are invariably honest. From the experience of Judge
Therry as shewn in his admirable work on New South Wales lately
published, as well as the testimony of all other Law Officers in
those Colonies, this fact is ftilly borne out, and my friend Sir
William a’Beckett, late Supreme Judge of Victoria (Australia),
kindly allows me to quote his experience on the subject. “That he
never knew the son of a transported convict turn out a thief, for in
Australia all boys may obtain employment, and the primary temp-
tation to the child’s becoming dishonest —privation —is wanting.”
But if the fate of the convict’s son is to be pitied, how much
more so is that of his daughter. If, with the energy and shrewdness
of the English boy stimulated by privation, with the fear of punish-
ment from his father’s example, before his eyes should he deviate
from the right path, he can with difficulty obtain an honest livelihood,
what deterrent power shall stand between his daughter and her ruin.
If she continues to keep out of the workhouse, with what associates
does she mix and in what class of localities will she reside ? This
subject is a most unpleasant one to touch upon, but any one acquaint-
ed with the immorality of the poorest in London, and other large
towns, will agree with me when I state that an amount of juvenile


female profligacy exists among us, which, is a scandal to us as a
nation. Fortunately, from the excessive mortality among the child-
ren of convicts, (not in the union schools) in their early youth, an
immense majority of them are snatched from a fate worse than death,
before they are old enough to be thoroughly contaminated, but of the
girls who remain their fate is truly to be deplored. With all the
vices of womanhood, while yet mere children in age, they drag on
a few years of shame and degradation, and then sink unregretted to
the grave. Of those who enter the workhouse their fate is scarcely
more to be envied. Those who obtain employment as domestic
servants, are generally engaged by cheap lodging house-keepers,
or small tradesmen, who, in both cases, try to make a profit of the
poor child’s labour. With a delicate constitution, she is unable to
lead such a life of drudgery, her labour being the greater when
compared with the little exertion exacted from her in the union
schools. She soon gets disgusted with her situation, and after two
or three returns to the workhouse, she at last forms some disreput-
able acquaintance and in the end is found recruiting the ranks of
the lowest of the fallen.
Although from the temper of the public mind in relation to con-
victs, it requires no little courage to take up their cause, still I
maintain that many, and especially married, convicts, are frequently
objects of pity. That the anger of the community was justly
aroused last winter against their class, I admit, but after all, the
atrocities complained of, were perpetrated by perhaps a dozen in-
corrigible scoundrels, and the conventional convict is generally
imagined to be fashioned after their model.* But that is far from
* Even among these ruffians redeeming points will occasionally de-
velope themselves. An almoner of our society, Mr. Barber, Radnor
House, Chelsea, a very energetic member of the City Mission, who has
taken great pains in reforming the vagabond population of the Metropolis,
and is in consequence well known to a great number of thieves, was one
evening in the early part of last December, returning home after attending a
ragged school meeting, at Deptford. About nine o’clock he was passing by
the arches of the Southwark bridge in the Borough, when he was attacked by
two garrotters who seriously illtreated him, besides robbing him of his watch
and some money. Enquiries were set on foot by the police to detect the cul-
prits hut without success. One morning a man called on Mr. Barber and
acknowledged himself to he one of the thieves. He gave for an excuse that
he had not recognized Mr. Barber, whom he had often seen at reformatory


being the fact. The cases of robbery, with violence are compara-
tively extremely rare among the married convicts. Again it should
be remembered that in many cases the married convict has had far
greater temptation to be dishonest than the unmarried. The poverty
of his wife and family, possibly brought on by his own imprudence,
is frequently found to have been a strong inducement to the act of
dishonesty which preceded his incarceration. Again the married
convict as a rule is far from indifferent as to the fate of his wife and
family, on the contrary, he generally shews the greatest anxiety
about their welfare. From the testimony of that much abused body
of gentlemen, in whom, by the bye, I have great faith, the prison
chaplains, the condition of their wives and families is a subject of
intense interest to every married convict. The poor wretch is not
callous to his situation, nor is his imprisonment, a tranquil sort of
seclusion, agreeable after the bustle of the life he has been leading _
I have often thought that the irreclaimable nature assigned to the
majority of convicts by the public is exceedingly unjust. They ap-
pear to consider the verdict of a jury to place an insurmountable
barrier against a prisoner’s return to respectability, while a crime,
equally as well known, and perhaps really more infamous, is passed
by with gentle common place disapprobation and nothing more, if the
perpertrator has not been subject to the ordeal of a trial.
I have endeavoured to shew the position of the married convict’s
wife and family during his incarceration ; now let me turn to their
condition when he is released, and comes again before the public as
a reformed character. It is more than probable that this description
of the ticket-of-leave felon will raise a smile of incredulity, if not of
ridicule, on the face of the reader, but I am one of those who do
believe in the reformation of the criminal during his punishment,
meetings. He was very sorry, he said, for what had taken place, and he had
brought hack the watch, which had heen his share of the plunder. Mr. Bar-
ber told him he was sorry to find a man who appeared to have the elements
of integrity in him, give himself up to a dishonest life. The man replied
that his character was lost and that nohody would employ him. If ever he
succeeded in obtaining work at his trade, a cutler, he was sure to be discovered
and obliged to leave. Mr. Barber obtained work for him with a master cut-
ler in the north, to him he explained all the circumstances of the case, and,
the man has continued, to the present time, to obtain his livelihood indus-
triously and honestly.


not from anything connected with the physical prison discipline
he has been under, relative to bars, bolts, handcuffs, dark cells, soli-
tary system, and all the appliances invented by unscientific directors,
and permitted without a word of remonstrance, and to their great
disgrace, by the prison surgeons and physicians, who are perfectly
well aware that both pyschologically and physiologically it is about
as injurious a system as could well be imagined, but due to the
admirable training and instruction of the prison chaplains. Ido not
dispute the fact that a portion of the chaplain’s doctrines may often
fall on barren ground, and that much of his spiritual teaching may
have little effect* That the convict has less interest in the “lively
faith in God’s mercy,” than might be wished is possible, but I
am persuaded that the majority of his class when liberated “stead-
fastly purpose to lead a new life.” And well and conscientiously
does the married convict often try to carry out his good resolve,
but with what difficulty does he accomplish it, if he succeeds?
Assume he is-able to join his wife and children, that she is not
married to, or the mistress of some other man, what then can
he do ? In the first place the Prisoner’s Aid Society assists him
as far as lies in their power, and well and nobly do they perform
their self imposed labour, —pity it is their means are not equal to
their good intentions. But after all their funds will not allow them
to do much for the married convict. With the single man the
case is different. He has learnt in prison the rudiments of a
trade (about the only part of the physical system of our prisons
which deserves to be complimented), and they can assist him to
emigrate. In the colonies the released convict generally does well.
He is away from his old associates, and he can there with but little
difficulty obtain remunerative employment, but, the emigration of
the married convict, with his wife and family, is an expense far
too great for the Society to accomplish, and he is obliged to
remain in England. Employment here is difficult for him to ob-
tain and he is soon in distress. He applies to the parish officers for
relief, and what does he obtain from them, but the lowest assistance
which our cruel poor law will allow a parish to give,' and the
best compliment that can be paid to that minimum relief, is that a


man has some difficulty in dying on it, and no sympathy when he is
dead. He is a released ticket-of-leave convict and that frequently is a
sufficient excuse in parochial minds for the perpetration of the most
uncharitable behaviour. It should be remembered, that especially in
large towns, the majority of all boards of guardians is composed of
retail tradesmen, and of all classes they have the most unflinching,
unforgiving hatred for every kind of dishonesty,—except adultera-
tion. The poor wretch is soon disgusted with the treatment he
receives from the guardians, and he again seeks for employment
which he cannot get, and is again in turn an applicant to the parish.
In my experience in the Society for Relief of Distress, some of the
cases of misery I have met with among released convicts is most
distressing, and the admirable manner the majority of them sup-
port with integrity their misery, shows how wrong is the view the
public is apt to take of the irretrievable nature of the crime the
poor wretch has been punished for. During the last week I have
met with two cases of the kind.
The first was a person who was employed in the Post office as a
letter carrier. He had been detected stealing money letters and was
arrested, tried and imprisoned. On leaving the prison he joined his
wife and four children, who were then living on the earnings ©f a step-
daughter employed in the Telegraph office, and a trifle contributed
by his wife’s exertions, at needlework. The addition of the libera-
ted prisoner, if in one sense a happiness to their family circle, is
on the other a terrible drawback on their scanty finances. As they
possess some little furniture still, they can receive nothing from
the parish, and if they sell it and live, for a short time on the pro-
ceeds, the administrators of the poor law know too well their duty
to the ratepayers not to apply the screw of “ an offer of the house,"
to drive them away as soon as they apply. The man has used
every exertion that human ingenuity can suggest to obtain employ-
ment but without success, starvation is already stamping its seal
upon him, yet he still continues unflinchingly honest, although every
week, in spite of the occasional charitable relief he obtains, is bring-
ing his unfortunate family still deeper into the hopeless misery
which surrounds them.


2. The next case is still worse. The man was found guilty of
obtaining a large quantity of goods under false pretences, and
sentenced to a lengthened imprisonment. He was a married man
with five children. His wife (as well as himself) was well educated
and in every respect a most amiable excellent woman on whom
not the slightest suspicion existed, of being either concerned in or
cognizant of her husband’s fraud. She was a delicate woman and
her children even more so than herself, having all a strong scrofulous
tendency. Upon the incarceration of her husband her future pros-
pects seemed bad indeed. With one or two friends occasionally to
assist her with small loans or rather gifts, and her own exertions as
a needlewoman, (such employment as a daily governess was im-
possible with her family of small children) she contrived to exist.
But the bitter privation she and her family were obliged to endure
began to tell upon their delicate constitutions, and scrofula devel-
oped itself on her children in its worst form. Still, rather than be
separated from her children, she refused parish relief, and through
every form of temptation and misery she worked on with untiring
energy and unblemished integrity. At the expiration of the third
year when the husband left prison he found one of his children dead
from starvation (protracted it is true), and three of the remaining
four, cripples. With some charitable assistance from the Prisoners’
Aid Society as well as our own, the man has now in his hands the
means of gaining a somewhat precarious livelihood, but, he is per-
petually living over a powder magazine. Small as his earnings are
they would in a moment vanish were his history to be known, and
then nothing but the parish workhouse, worse in itself than a prison,
remains for him and his helpless family ; yet I conscientiously
believe there is not among any class of society a person more re-
solutely determined to behave with integrity than that poor man.
Would space allow me I could bring forward many similar facts
but these which are by no means exceptional cases of misery and
privation endured by married convicts and their families, will suffice
to shew their position is frequently one deserving of far more
sympathy than they generally obtain.


It will be remarked that hitherto I have merely mentioned the
married convict in relation to crimes against property, or in other
words, those who are punished for dishonesty, but it must be re-
xnembered there are also many for offences against the person. Of the
possible reclaimable qualifications of many of these I have merely to
mention that at least sixty per cent, of crimes of this description are
caused, directly or indirectly, by the vice of drinking, and if the
released convict continues the sobriety he has learnt while in prison,
he will leave it in all probability a respectable member of society.
True, many of this class have undergone most severe punishments
for crimes of admitted proportionate atrocity, but there is in other
cases always;' the excuse of the temporary insanity caused hy in-
toxication to be brought forward in their favor. These, frequently
with moral characters hitherto unblemished, suffer with their wives,
a misery equal to that of the thief. Their innocent families, per-
haps, during their incarceration suffer even more than the man
himself. I know at this moment of two men at present in confine-
ment for atrocious assaults under the influence of drink, whose wives,
one in Fulham and the other in Soho, have fifteen children to sup-
port, and of these not four are old enongh to assist the mothers with
money or labour even to the smallest amount.
Even with the few facts I have mentioned can it be doubted that
something ought to be done to remedy the evils existing under the
present system of punishing married convicts. As the question now
stands, the man in prison, and his wife and family on the parish,
inclusive of rent, costs the country some fifty pounds a year, and this
beyond the value of his labour; and yet we are taught by political
economists that the value of a man’s labour ought to yield at the
lowest calculation more than the amount required for the absolute
necessary food, clothing and rent of himself, his wife and two
children. Severe as the punishment that he undergoes is, it is less so
than that inflicted on his innocent family, and his proportion of cost
to the country, is not more than that of his wife and family on the
pockets of the poorer ratepayers,—for it should be remembered that
the families of thieves generally inhabit the poorest and most
heavily rated parishes. The question then simply is, can the


present system be ameliorated ? I maintain that it can, and I trust
I can prove my assertion by, if not the following scheme, at least a
modification of it.
PART 11.
The principal causes of crime in this country are idleness, drunk-
enness and want, —but the greatest of these three is drunkenness.
The principal causes of relapse into crime, after the prisoner’s
term of incarceration is over, are—want of employment from loss
of character—old associates, and drink—the first of these three
almost invariably leading to the others, and as I have already stated
the liberated married convict has the most fearful difficulties to con-
tend with before he can obtain sufficiently remunerative employment
even for the barest necessaries for his wife and family. The records
of the Society for Relief of Distress, and still more, those of the
Prisoners’ Aid Society would produce examples of the endurance of
such extreme privation among liberated convicts, rather than return
to a dishonest course of life, which would go far to neutralize the
popular impression,—that the first wish of a prisoner on his liberation
is again to perpetrate the crime for which he has lately been so
severely punished.
To obviate the liberated married convict’s relapse into crime from
the causes I have stated: I would establish a community, where
the means of employment should be abundant, and industry com-
pulsive during the whole period of his sentence, where idleness
should be punished as a crime, where it shall be impossible to pur-
chase intoxicating drinks, and where old associates, unless reformed,
shall be difficult to find. These points obtained, want would soon
be unknown.
To accomplish this in England I admit would be impossible; I
propose instead to establish a reformatory settlement for married
convicts in one of the Australian colonies, if it could be accom-
plished without affecting the prejudices of those districts already
organized, and where in return it would be impossible to establish


the discipline and laws necessary for the advancement of the pro-,
posed undertaking. At first sight many of the Northern parts of
'Western Australia, especially in the vicinity of the Victoria river,
seem admirably adapted for the purpose.
The entire management, with the exception of the appointment
of a governor which would’rest with the Crown, should be placed
in the hands of an Administrative Committee, to whom the whole
tract of land for the reformatory colony should be assigned in trust.
To prevent either the escape of prisoners or the interference of
other colonies, the territory assigned should be of considerable mag-
nitude, certainly not less than two hundred miles square.
The Administrative Committee should consist of a body of gentle-
men noted, not only for their benevolence, but for their business
qualifications as well. As my plan is in some sort derived from the
admirable principle carried out at the Philanthropic Society’s Farm
Schools at Red Hill, but adapted for adults, I might quote the work-
ing committee of that Society as the nucleus, for the formation of the
Administrative Committee of the present project, which should be
enlarged by additions from the Prisoners’ Aid Society, and other
institutions of the same character. The principal seat of adminis-
tration to be in London,
The objects of the society should be the reformation of the married
convict and the future well being of himself and family. To ac-
complish this his industry should be compulsive as far as should enable
him, not only to maintain by his labour, his wife and family, but to
act as a pioneer for the non-criminal settler who may wish to reside
in the colony. His first duty should be to provide food, clothing and
shelter for those naturally dependant on him for support, and the
surplus should be applied to the use of the community at large. This
at first sight I admit appears a startling proposition, but upon a
little consideration, I think it will appear by no means difficult to
carry out. True, in England, the married convict is a source of
great expense to the country, but surely there must be something
extremely defective in our arrangements for such a result to be
arrived at. That an able-bodied man, his wife and two children
should yield by their labour nothing to the community, but be a


source of heavy continued expense as well, argues a state of things
in which hut little ability was shown at its organization. I submit
that by adopting the proposed system, after the expense of the con-
vict’s passage shall have been deducted and the salaries and passages
of officials paid for, not only might the exertions of the married
convict be sufficient to maintain himself and family but he might
be made, by his surplus labour, to establish the foundation of a
flourishing colony as well.
To begin then. As more than sixty per cent, of English crime
is caused by intoxication, and as one great object of the Society
would be to prevent the relapse of the married convict into crime
the first great fundamental law of the colony should be to prohibit
the sale, by retail, of all intoxicating drinks.
I am perfectly well aware that such a law is considered by many
impossible to be carried out, or if carried out, it would be tyrannical
and unjust. That it would punish the honest workman who wished
to obtain a pleasant and nutritive beverage at his meals, to keep a
dishonest man from crime. In England, or in an organized colony,
I admit such an objection would not be without some weight, but it
must be remembered that I propose to carry out a prohibitive liquor
law in a distant and as yet unpopulated country. There, at any
rate, the experiment of temperance may be tried without injury to
any one, for no free emigrant need settle there, should he object to
such a law. Again, I maintain that the establishment of a Tem-
perance colony would hold out an immense temptation to a vast
number of the better class of emigrants. I am well acquainted
with the working of the Temperance Societies in England, and, in
spite of all the abuse heaped on them, I am certain they are doing
a vast amount of good. I could easily prove that the principle of
total abstinence is rapidly on the increase among small capitalists
and the more intelligent class of mechanics, and that to them, a field
of emigration where the sale of intoxicating liquors is prohibited
would offer a great attraction. The settlement of Albert Land in
New Zealand is another proof of the wish of small capitalists and
mechanics to avoid the temptation of drink. Notwithstanding the
competition of other settlements, that of Albert Land still progresses,


and numbers of nonconformists, almost all to a man, teetotallers, flock
to it. It gathers strength with all the quiet energy and good or-
ganization of a temperance community, and there is every prospect
of its turning out one of the most flourishing districts of New Zea-
land. To recruit a staff of warders who shall be teetotallers would
be a very easy matter. The total abstinence movement is rapidly
gaining ground among non-commissioned officers of the artillery,
engineers and marines, and warders taken from discharged soldiers
of these three branches of the service are the best that can be
found, and the staff of trade instructors, &c., would quite as easily be
obtained among temperance mechanics. Of the physiological advan-
tages of temperance in a hot climate I need not speak; the most
ardent admirer of stimulants would not, I believe, advocate their
use in such latitudes.
To defray the expenses of convict management and reformation,
the government should pay to the administrative committee the sum
of thirty pounds per annum for each convict, during the whole
time of his imprisonment, with some extra assistance during the
first year of the settlement of the colony. For this sum the ad-
ministrative committee should engage to pay the salaries of staff, and
warders, and provide shelter, food, employment and instruction for
the prisoners. The passage of the staff and warders with their
wives and families to be paid by the government, as well as the
transport of the convicts, the passage of the convicts’ wives and
families, as soon as the colony is prepared to receive them, to be
paid from funds to be raised by the Administrative Committee. The
cost of temporary iron and wooden houses necessary for the shelter
of the officials and convicts during their first year’s residence in the
colony to be borne by the home government.
In the supervision and guardianship of the convicts I would in-
troduce a system vastly different from that in use in England. Here
walls with the strength of fortresses, bolts, bars, locks and keys,
dark cells, and iron doors form the principal precaution against the
escape of prisoners. In the reformatory settlement I would expend
but little on such objects, but a vast deal more than is allowed in
England, in obtaining a numerous and efficient staff of warders


at least one to every six convicts. Every married warder, and I would
have none others, would be a continued source of profit to the colony
so long as the labour of a man, directly or indirectly, yields more
than an equivalent to the cost of the bare necessaries of life for
himself and family, while costly buildings and their still more costly
accessaries, would be a continued source of profitless expense. The
interest of the money lavished in useless expenditure beyond the
necessary precautionary walls and simple substantial buildings in
the Millbank prison alone, would on a moderate estimate, pay to
perpetuity the salaries of eight hundred married warders in a new
settled Australian colony. By associating with or being daily under
the supervision of an expert artizan instructor, or steady respectable
warder; the convict would readily learn lessons of integrity, dis-
cipline, industry and skilful labour, but it would be difficult indeed
for him to extract a moral from the absurd complications which
surround him at Millbank. A curious specimen of the waste of
valuable time and labour is shown in the memoirs of a prison ma-
tron lately published, wherein she states that on fifty prisoners she
had to turn a lock more than five hundred times a day. Surely it
would require but little ingenuity to devise a more beneficial em-
ployment of time.
The first attention and exertions of the convicts on their landing
should bo the erection of temporary iron or wooden houses, barracks
and stores. These completed their daily routine should be organized
somewhat in the following manner. Under the inspection of skilled
agriculturist instructors, each convict without exception should work
at field labour or gardening three hours a day. This law should be
imperative during his whole residence as a prisoner in the colony.
It is considered that by three hours labour each day a man would
be enabled to raise sufficient food for himself, his wife and two
children. The remainder of the day after the cleaning of the bar-
racks should be applied to labour in the different departments of
the constructive or building arts, especially carpentry and furniture
making; a small number being told off for land surveying, &c., the
whole of their work to be done under the inspection and tuition of
expert artizan warders.


As soon as sufficient building materials either of cut wood or
stone and lime should be collected, the site of a township should be
surveyed and the plans for its buildings determined on. Among
the first executed should be good and substantial dwellings for the
families of the staff and warders. Afterwards edificies of greater
precautionary construction should be commenced for the wives and
families of prisoners. When dwelling rooms, say for fifty families
of convicts should be erected and sufficient corn for six months’
provision for them should be in store, they should be allowed to join
their husbands in the colony, and a succession of departures of the
families of others should take place in proportion as the funds of the
Society would permit. One great object for the attention of the
colonial branch of the Society’s administration would be the welfare,
spiritual and temporal, of these women and children, and on con-
sideration the task would not prove so diffcult as it appears at first
sight. In Moscow a very large proportion of the Emperor of Russia’s
guards are allowed to marry. All that the women receive from the
government is a room in the barracks for each and a ration of bread,
it having been satisfactorily proved that with bread and shelter being
given her, any industrious woman’s labour, even when the rate of
wages is at the lowest, is sufficiently valuable to find herself and her
children in the other requisites of life. It must not be supposed
that in the infancy of a reformatory colony of the kind proposed,
there would be no remunerative labour for women. In the first
place all the tailoring, shirt making, mending and general needle-
work, of the convict establishment might be performed by them at
just and reasonable rates of wages. As the value of the male con-
victs’ labour when applied to agriculture and the building arts
would be far higher than when absorbed in some of the smaller duties
of his domestic life, considerable utility and as well as economy
might be derived from an efficient staff of women. All the laundry
work might be performed by them, and thus another economy of
their husbands’ time be effected. Again the house service of families
of the staff, the cleaning and superintendence of the free emigrants’
barracks; the cooking in those establishments, and many other
occupations which would arise in a colony of the kind, would keep


these poor women from want and place them in a far more honorable
and comfortable position, than when relying on the scanty support of
their parishes and all the other evils attendant of their continued
residence at home.
It may reasonably be argued that it would be a source of misery
and degradation to the convict to be seen by his wife and children
in the infamous convict dress. To obviate this as well to encourage
the convict to ameliorate his own condition by allowing him to take
a step towards respectability, which he might keep during good
behaviour, I would allow him, before the arrival of his wife and
family, to enter a corps of Civil Engineers (for want of a better name)
which should wear a uniform of its own; simple but not degrading,
but, which would still identify his occupation as well as the uni-
form of the soldier tells his calling. This civil engineer corps should
be regulated and governed with the severity of ‘regiments de discipline'
in the French service. The occupation of the man being considered
honourable during good behaviour, but upon the slightest breach of
discipline, or any wilful fault, a severe punishment should be the
reward, and for a more serious offence, degredation to the felons’
barracks, society and dress.
On the arrival of the convict’s wife and children a room in the Civil
Engineer barracks should be allowed to each family. The elder
children should be placed in separate, male and female wards, pre-
paratory to finding them instruction and employment. Here again
the services of the women would be a great economy of time, as the
cleaning of the barrack rooms, as well as the cooking for their hus-
bands would be performed by them without expense to the colonial
establishment.
Although the convict engineer should not be allowed payment in
money for his work, a scale of remuneration for services performed
by the corps might be established and the amount set apart, in the first
place as security for his good behaviour, in the second, in proper
time and place to allow him to invest it to the advantage of himself
and family. After a moderate probation in the Engineer Corps, the
convict should be allowed, (if his savings should be equal to the
required sum) to purchase from the colonial stores enough building


material for the formation of a good cottage. To carry this out to ad-
vantage, a number of men, each having earned sufficient, should be
allowed permission to work for one month on their own account
under the instruction of proper warders. A spot of, say, two or
three acres of land should be allowed to each, in such positions as
would form the nucleus of the working population of a village.
Care should be taken to choose them from two or three trades so as
to be of use to themselves and others in the vicinity, under the
system of co-operation, which I would introduce as far as practic-
able in every enterprize in the colony, they should build their
houses under the guidance of an artizan builder, they should
also enclose and cultivate their gardens under the supervision of a
master gardener, with seed supplied by the government stores. In
these cottages they should dwell till the termination of their
sentence, their labour being used for the benefit of the colonists in
the district in which they may be located, at some moderate rate of
pay, the whole of which should be retained as a security for their
good behaviour. At the expiration of their sentence they should
possess the fee of their cottages and the accumulated arrears of pay
should be made over to them, to use as they may think fit. During
their residence in their cottages the value of the labour of their wives
and children would not be lost to them. The services of their wives
and families would be invaluable to the free settlers in the neigh-
bourhood, and especially if the children had undergone a short course
of instruction in any of the industrial schools in the colony. Again
in the garden itself a great source of profit might be obtained from
female labour. Cotton and silk, especially the latter, is admirably
adapted to female management. In the latitudes of North Western
Australia two crops of silk might be obtained in the year, and
taking the price of cocoons as low as five shillings per pound,
the profit would, at an Italian average of labour, yield annually
seven pounds sterling for each person employed.
To provide the necessary funds for the payment of the passage
money and outfit of the convicts’ wives and families, the Adminis-
trative Committee should have the power of selling surveyed lands to
intending free emigrants at a rate of not less than one pound per


acre. Should this eventually exceed the amount required for the
purpose,—a very probable result, —the surplus might be applied to
the establishing of industrial schools for children, thej payment of
school teachers, the formation of public libraries and other necessary
institutions for the success of a new settlement.
Respectable hotel and barrack accommodation having been erected
for the reception of free emigrants, and such sufficient store of com
having been accumulated as would prevent the possibility of famine,
small capitalists, of temperance principles, should be invited to settle
in the colony. To render their prospects as attractive as possible,
it would be advisable for the Administrative Committee to establish
a co-operative system, on the footing of those so advantageously
carried out in some manufacturing towns in the North of England.
In the colonial township, stores should be erected in which all home
manufactures, and colonial merchandize not the produce of Aus-
tralia, might be purchased at the wholesale cost price, with the
addition of ten per cent, to go towards the expense of management of
the stores. By such a system the emigrant might purchase in the
colony all those home necessaries of life at a price equal to or less
than he might obtain them at in England. This of itself would be
an immense boon to the newly arrived settler. House room on his
first arrival would also be provided for him at little or no expense
while all necessary articles of food should be supplied to him on the
most moderate terms, leaving him to cook it himself, or should he
wish it, by an arrangement made with one of the convict’s wives at-
tached to the establishment, at regulated charges to be fixed by the
Colonial Committee of Management. In these houses, for a most mode-
rate expenditure, the newly arrived emigrant’s family might live till
his own residence was ready for their reception. This need occupy but
little time, with building materials ready fashioned to his hand, and
skilled labour on the spot to complete the erection. Under such
arrangements it would be impossible to name an English colony,
notwithstanding its convict origin, that would offer greater advan-
tages to the emigrant possessing but a small capital. He would be
provided with shelter on his arrival, with food at a moderate cost,
building materials ready for his use, and all for a less sum than he


could have purchased them for at home, with skilled labour to assist
him at two third the wages of a workman in England, a fair
supply of domestic servants taken from the families of convicts and
hired on moderate terms; a fruitful soil, and above all the means,
through paid instructors chosen by the colonial committee, of a good
education for his children at little or no cost. To any one who has
given attention to the question of emigration such a system must
hold out a certainty of success.
The obj ection urged by Mr. Cohden and other political economists,
that it is unjust to send poor emigrants and men with little capital
to a colony not sufficiently settled to find them remuneratively paid
employment, is evidently without foundation. Many instances
might be quoted to prove the contrary, for example the Non-con-
formist Settlement of Albertland, but perhaps the strongest and most
convincing proof of all may he derived from the despicable sect of
the Mormons. Without capital, trade, credit, or manufactures, with
only industry, temperance and its natural result, good organization,
to assist them, they have succeeded, though against the physical
opposition of many powerful enemies and the unqualified contempt
and aversion of all good men. Seeking recruits for their colony,
principally in England, among the poorest and most ignorant, with-
out more funds to assist them than they collect from the hard earn-
ings of the worst paid and hardest worked of our population, they
provide for their admirably regulated passages across the Atlantic,
their journey through the settled States of America and also
the almost unlimited extent of wilderness which then separates them
from the Great Salt Lake, where they flourish and increase in
power to an extent hitherto unparalleled even in the history of
fanatical enterprize. And all this is due to their admirable system
of emigration. It developed itself even in the life time of the in-
famous Joe Smith. After his death when the Latter-Day Saints
determined to emigrate to the Great Salt Lake, the pioneer body
advanced several months before the second division were to start,
and after journeying some weeks they halted, to sow a considerable
tract of land with Indian Corn for the use of those who were to come
after them, who in their turns, when they had accumulated sufficient


food for their own use sowed the remainder for the use of those who
were to constitute the next division. What the result of their
organization and active proselytism may be in the next generation
it is impossible to divine. The point at which they have already
arrived is not only a disgrace to European civilization but a terrible
accusation against the teachers of all creeds and sects who profess
and call themselves Christians.
I am perfectly well aware I shall be told that the want of
success of our convict Emigration to Australia has been such as
should debar the government from again attempting the experiment,
but admitting the result to have been as unfortunate as it is stated
to be, I maintain it to have been caused by the want of efficient
arrangements on the part of government and not to be an objection
to my proposition. Fortunately I have but to turn to the success
of the Russian penal Settlement of Siberia to prove that a well
conducted system of convict deportation may not only ease the
mother country of her criminal population, but may prove to be
a source of profit and strength as well. Fortunately I have here
no occasion to offer my own unsupported statement in proof of
my assertion, I can quote almost every author who has written on
Siberia, that criminal transportation may be made the pioneer of
civilization. A few extracts from some of the best known authors
will suffice. In Sir George Simpson’s Journey, I find many corrobor-
ative statements. I offer the following.
“ For the reforming of criminals, in addition to the punishment of
the crime, Siberia is undoubtedly the best penitentiary in the world.
When not bad enough for the mines, each exile is provided with a
bit of ground, a house, a horse, two cows and agricultural imple-
ments, and also for the first year with provisions. For three years
he pays no taxes and for the next ten only half the regular amount.
To bring fear as well as hope to operate in his favour, he clearly
understands that his very first slip will send him from his home
and family to toil as an outcast in the mines. Thus does the govern-
ment bestow an almost parental care on all the less atrocious
criminals.”
vol. 2, p. 399.


« Through her system of deportation she has made good citizens
of thousands who in other countries would have been indirectly
condemned on their first conviction to a life of ignominy and dis-
grace, and thus has she virtually achieved the miracle of reconciling
the safety of the innocent, not merely with the impunity, but even
with the reformation of the guilty.”
ib. p. 442-3.
The next is from Mr. Edward Thompson’s Life in Russia. (It
must be remembered that this gentleman’s opinions are strongly
hostile to Russia.)
“ Much has been said on this subject; and terrors, which in fact
do not exist to the extent supposed, are ascribed to it. It is to the
system alone—the despotic dispensation of judgment—that the re-
proaches belong; and not to the punishment and its effects. The
terms whether of exile or transportation, as regards criminals, are
synonymous; and the effect of the sentence in all countries is to sever
every link of connection with society. But to the Russian the
extremity of the evil is comparatively unknown, his wife and child-
are allowed to bear him company, and to share his fortunes without
the compulsion of labour. The policy of this arrangement is obvious,
yet, whatever the motive may be, it is a boon which softens his lot
and is appreciated as an act of mercy. Many a noble spirit among
our own countrywomen would, if permitted, follow the fortunes of her
unhappy partner, and it is most certain that the extension of such
a privilege would do more to reclaim even the most hardened offen-
der, by making him sensible that even in his punishment the feel-
ings of humanity have not been lost sight of. Besides, under the
English system the punishment of the husband falls with crushing
severity on his wife, who thrown on her own exertions for support,
the scorn of her neighbours, and shunned probably as an infected
thing, she sinks into abject poverty and want, and finally under the
accumulation of evils is forced to throw herself on her parish,
and thus becomes a public burden. The subject is worth con-
sideration.”
page 288-89.


“ To the criminals of the worst class, alone who are condemned
to the mines for life, is exile clothed with terrors,”
ib. p, 290.
The next is from Erman’s (a Prussian) Travels in Siberia.
“ Among the various tales circulated in "Western Europe res-
pecting Siberia, may be quoted the statement that the political exiles
are obliged to hunt the Sable and other fur animals. But in truth
it is only in the Uralian mines and thoseof Merschinsk and in cer-
tain manufactures, that persons condemned to forced labour are ever
seen. All the rest, and the great majority of Russian delinquents
are condemned only to settle abroad, and if they belong to the
labouring classes, to support themselves. Political offenders how-
ever who belong to Russia, and also generally prisoners from the
higher classes, or those not used to manual labour are allowed to
settle in the towns of Siberia, because the support allowed by govern-
ment can reach them more easily.”
Again in another part of his work the same author states,
“ I have often heard Russians who were reflecting men mention
as a paradox, which hardly admitted of explanation, that the pris-
oners condemned to become settlers, all without exception, in a very
short time change their habits and lead an exemplary life, yet it is
certain that the benefit conferred on them by the system is the great
cause of the change. Banishment, subservient to colonization, in-
stead of close imprisonment, is indeed an excellent feature in the
Russian code; and although the substitution of forced labour in
mines for the punishment of death may be traced back to Grecian
examples, yet the improving of the offender’s condition by bestowing
on him freedom during good behaviour, is an original as well as an
admirable addition of the Russian Legislator.”
p. 495.
Again Sir George Simpson’s Travels, page 145—speaks of the
treatment of their criminals at the mines as very severe, but, in
those are employed offenders who would otherwise have been con-
demned to death.
Russia, according to Haxthausen, transports to Siberia nearly
10,000 annually, but this includes the wives and families of the


criminals who may wish to accompany them and who perhaps form
the majority of the number, “On the road from Kazan to Siberia,
he says, are continually seen columns of prisoners chained in couples,
and each carrying a bundle, their wives and families marching by
their sides. The march generally occupies two years.”
If Russia with the difficulties and expense of such an enormous
land journey can make transportation useful, not only as a physical
power to remove impediments in the march of colonization, but
also in transforming the convict himself into a pioneer of civiliza-
tion itself, surely England with her greater facilities of transport
need not allow her criminal population and their families to fester
and starve at home with such unlimited .extent of territory in her
colonies at present unpopulated and unproductive.
I am well aware of one specious argument which will be opposed
to my plan—that I am abolishing punishment for crime, and placing
the married convict in a far more advantageous position during his
sentence, than if he had remained an honest artizan at home. This I
deny and a slight retrospect of the system I have suggested will
prove that I am in the right—that I have not abolished the punish-
ment due to crime—but I have simply economized the convict’s
labour for the benefit of the community at large, while offering him
an inducement to be honest and well conducted. I oblige him in the
first place to build houses for those appointed to govern and instruct
him and a prison for himself without receiving for his labour any
remuneration. Up to the present time in England these have been
built at the cost of the honest portion of the community out of the
public purse. He should then till the ground to procure food for
his keepers, himself, and his wife and family. He would be obliged,
indirectly, by the sale of the land his presence and labour have made
valuable, to pay for the transport of his wife and family to the
colony, and to maintain them, by his labour when there instead of
allowing them to be a burden on their parishes in England, and
lastly after having smoothed the path for honest emigrants to follow
him, he will then have to build a house for the reception of his own
wife and family, and lay the foundation for his own future respect-
ability as well. Of course this amount of labour would not be


obtained in the manner the convict works in the government estab-
lishments at home. I would on the contrary rigorously exact
from him at least nine hours good labour each day,—such in fact as
is obtained out of an agricultural labourer or skilled mechanic. For
idleness, I would impose but one simple basis of punishment,—if the
convict would not work he should not eat.
Although as a general rule the convict should receive no immediate
pay, still after a certain portion of his sentence had expired I would
allow him, for especial good behaviour, to retain a part, say one
third, of the sum paid him when working, for private enterprize, the
remainder to be retained by the government as a further guarantee
against his relapse into crime. In no case however should the con-
vict be allowed to work for any private individual but by permission
of the government authorities and as a reward for industry and good
behaviour.
Another objection perhaps may be raised against my project,—the
possibility of offending the Australian colonies by creating a penal
settlement among them. In relation to Queensland, New South
Wales, Victoria, or in fact any of the already settled districts I can
easily understand the opposition which would be raised, but for them
to object to its formation in the Northern portion of Western Aus-
tralia where up to the present time there is not an acre of ground
inhabited by a white man, would be absurd. What possible dan-
ger could exist or threaten the inhabitants of Sydney by the presence
of a penal settlement three times the distance from London to
Constantinople ? Again that portion of Australia would offer great
securities to the government against the escape of convicts. To the
North there is no settlement nor population beyond the savage
aboriginal tribes. Inland to the East there is an enormous belt of
impenetrable scrubland, and to the South, the only outlet practicable,
there is the Penal Colony of Western Australia, where the convict
would be immediately recognized, taken and punished. Again the
proposed plan would have many features different from any hitherto
projected penal settlement attempted by the English government.
Instead of sending out the most ruffianly and incorrigible portion
of our criminals, I would send only those whose previous history, on


whose case, presented some strong probability of reformation. The
humanizing effect of the presence of a large number of married wo-
men and their children would also assist in restraining the convict
from committing any further offences against the law during the
time of his sentence, and also have the effect of retaining him in
the colony when liberated. Added to this, must be taken into
consideration that he will have, should his behaviour have been
unexceptionable, not only the accumulation of his pay in the
hands of the committee at the time of his discharge which till then
has been as a guarantee for his good behaviour, but also the
powerful negative restraint on his bad conduct, greater perhaps than
all the others put together,—the impossibility of obtaining intoxi-
cating drinks. "With these precautions and rewards in the hands of
the governing power there would be every prospect of the enterprize
turning out most advantageously.
In conclusion I admit the criticism which will be opposed to me, —
that my plan is not sufficiently explicit, and that there is too much
obscurity in it to be advantageously acted upon, but, it must be
remembered that I merely proposed on the outset offering some sug-
gestions for ameliorating the condition of the wives and families of
married convicts, and if I have failed in convincing the reader that my
suggestions may be adopted, at least he must admit the subject is
worthy of great consideration, and that the present system weighs
on the women and children in a cruel and unjust manner.
28, Kikg Street, St. James’,
July, 1863.
Printed by M. Snell, 6a, Newcastle Place, Edgware Road, Paddington.


