

ON THE
MODIFICATION OF ORGANISMS


ON THE MODIFICATION OF ORGANISMS


ON THE
MODIFICATION OF ORGANISMS
BY
DAVID SYME
MELBOURNE: GEORGE ROBERTSON AND CO.
LONDON : KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH AND CO.




CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
THE PROVINCE OF NATURAL SELECTION.
PAGE
What natural selection is not —What it is—Darwin’s explana-
tion unsatisfactory—Selection by nature and by man—
The province of natural selection—Variation a pre-
liminary to the operation of natural selection—A fatal
admission—Darwin’s definition misleading—His state-
ments irreconcilable —Advocates two kinds of natural
selection—Refutes his own theory—Summary .. .. 1
CHAPTER 11.
THE EFFECTS OF NATURAL SELECTION.
Natural selection not preservative—The case of protective
coloration—The facts admitted—The alleged cause dis-
puted—Action of light and heat in producing colour —
Only the more exposed parts of animals protectively
coloured—Voluntary protective coloration —The analogy
of vegetable coloration—A mechanical process not needed
—The case of instinct —Darwin’s definition of —His
theory of the origin of unsatisfactory —Dr. Romanes on
the incubating instinct —Primary and secondary in-
stincts— Theories of Herbert Spencer and Lewes —
The nature of instinct —Contrasted with intelligence—
Summary .. .. .. .. .. 17


CHAPTER 111.
THE EXTERMINATION OE THE UNFIT.
PAGE
The survival of the fittest—Natural selection demands the
extermination of intermediate forms —Absence of evi-
dence —The case of the foramini/era proves the contrary
—lnferior races not usually exterminated by the superior
Views of Malthus—Case of the human species—Effects of
the struggle for existence—Tendency of natural selection
—Herbert Spencer on the effects of competition—An
illustrative case —Causes which bring about the extinc-
tion of species—Summary . . .. .. .. 42
CHAPTER IV.
SEXUAL SELECTION.
Darwin’s definitions of —His views on the transfer of secondary
sexual characters —Size and strength —Weapons of offence
—Colour, sound, and odour —Other special secondary
sexual characters—For what purpose acquired—Darwin’s
views—Polygamous eared seals —Primitive marriage—
Selection of the male by the female—Want of harmony
between natural selection and sexual selection—Summary 59
CHAPTER V.
THE FERTILIZATION OF PLANTS BY INSECTS.
Relationship between plants and insects —Floral attractions —
The nectar and the nectary guides—The Coryanthes —
The argument from structure—Dichogamy—The law of
Use and Disuse —Proterandry and proterogyny —The
effects of cross-fertilization —Darwin’s experiments—How
vitiated —Ipornea purpurea—Mimulus lutem—Eschscholtzia
calif arnica—Petunia violacea —Darwin’s conclusions—
The distribution of seeds—Vigour and fertility of plants
from self-fertilized seed —Cause of uniformity in nature —
Comparative scarcity of entomophilous flowers —Occa-


I’AGE
sional failure of insect fertilization—lnconspicuousness
of tropical flowers Characteristics of alpine flora—
Injurious effects of insect visitations —What insects are
supposed to be useful—Action of humble bees—Of hive-
bees—The beauty of flowers—Summary . . 75
CHAPTER VI.
THE CAUSES OF VARIABILITY.
Action of external conditions on the organism-—Schman-
kewitsch’s experiments with Artimia —Semper’s experi-
ments with Lymnwa stagnalia —lnfluence of situation —•
Effects of intercrossing —Climate—Darwin and Wallace
on the origin of variations —The action of the organism
—Larua argentalus —Organic changes due to physio-
logical causes —Analogy of Language—Summary . . 118
CHAPTER VII.
THE MODIFYING AGENCY.
Difference between a law and a cause —The intelligence of
vegetative organisms—Movements in fertilization —Trapa
nutans—lntelligence in the lower forms of animals—The
Rizopod—The Amoeba —The Arcella —Intelligence of the
cell—in the construction of the organism—in expelling
foreign bodies —in restoring lost organs —Inadequacy of
reflex action to account for the phenomena—The cell the
source of variations —Lamarck’s theory—The cell the
biological and psychological unit —On the term Mind —•
Mental phenomena not the result of organization —Life
and Mind —Unity and diversity—The Ego and the Soul
—Development of the Ego—Summary .. .. 131
APPENDIX.
A. — Mimicry .. .. .. 158
B. —The Cell .. ~ .. .. 160
C. —Personal Identity .. .162




CHAPTER I.
THE PROVINCE OF NATURAL SELECTION.
After a review of all that has been said for and against
Natural Selection during the last thirty years, Dr.
Wallace expresses himself, in his recent work on Darwin-
ism, as having come to the conclusion that this principle
“is supreme to an extent that even Darwin himself
hesitated to claim for it.” * Notwithstanding the opinion
of this high authority, I venture to think there is still
something to be said on the other side of the question,
and I propose in the following pages to show that the
acceptance of this theory is still beset with difficulties of
a very formidable character.
The central idea of Darwin’s system is natural
selection, and it will therefore be necessary to start with
a clear perception of what natural selection is, and what
it is not. The necessity of this course will be the more
* Darwinism , p. 444.
2


apparent as we proceed in our inquiry; for we shall find
that Darwin himself did not always bear in mind his
own definition, and often allowed himself a latitude
of expression which led him to erroneous conclusions.
Although he has nowhere given us a precise definition
of the term natural selection, he has in various places
indicated, more or less plainly, what he means by it. He
tells us, in the first place, that it is not a creative process,
that it is not the cause of organic variability, but that,
as the term itself implies, it is a purely selective
process. Natural selection only preserves variations
already provided for it. Variations are “given by the
hand of nature.” * “Natural selection,” he says, “de-
pends on the survival under various complex circum-
stances of the best fitted individuals, but has no relation
whatever to the primary cause of any modification of
structure.” •(* Indeed, he distinctly and emphatically
repudiates the idea that natural selection is the cause
of variability. “ Some have imagined,” he says, “ that
natural selection induces variability, whereas it implies
only the preservation of such variations as arise.” ; And
again, “ Natural selection acts only by the preservation
and accumulation of small inherited modifications, each
profitable to the preserved being.” § These statements
* Origin of Species, 7th ed., p. 49.
f Variation of Animals and Plants, vol. ii., p. 272.
J Origin of Species, p. 63.
§ Variation of Animals and Plants, vol. ii., p. 75; see also p. 97.


are clear enough, and it will be well to bear them in
mind, for Darwin, strange to say, appears to have forgotten
them after putting them on record, and, in the course of
his work, announces a theory altogether inconsistent
with them.
Having cleared the way so far by showing, from
Darwin’s own words, what natural selection is not, we
shall now proceed to state, again from Darwin’s own
words, what natural selection is. “ The preservation of
favourable individual dilferences and variations, and the
destruction of those which are injurious, I have,” he
says, “ called natural selection.”* Natural selection is
therefore another name for the struggle for existence.
I cannot help thinking that the latter is much the better
expression of the two, being less ambiguous. For the
same reason it is preferable to another expression which
Darwin seems to regard as equivalent. “ The principle
of preservation, or the survival of the fittest,” he says, “ I
have called natural But the two expressions
are not exactly equivalent. Selection is a process ; sur-
vival of the fittest is not so much a process as the result
of a process. Here Darwin has inadvertently shown on
what a grave error his system rests. He has put the
effect for the cause. Variation is the cause, and selection,
or the survival of the fittest, is the effect. Natural
selection, then, according to Darwin, operates by pre-
serving the useful and by destroying the useless varia-
* Origin of Species, p. 63. t Ibid., p. 103.


tions, and it does this by leaving the useful and the
useless to struggle for existence as best they may.
It will be readily admitted that on one point Darwin’s
explanation is ambiguous and unsatisfactory. The point
happens to he most essential, for it refers to the province
or function of natural selection. Having assured us
that natural selection only preserves and accumulates
useful variations, he subsequently qualifies this state-
ment by another which is completely at variance with
it. Thus he tells us that “ when a variation is of the
slightest use to any being, we cannot tell how much to
attribute to the accumulative action of Natural Selection
and how much to the definite actions of the conditions of
life.”* Nothing, by the way, is here said about the
influence of the organism. According to this a useful
variation is, therefore, the result either of natural
selection, or of the conditions of life. In that case it
would he the antecedent, rather than the result, of
natural selection, and thus it is made to appear that
natural selection is not a selective process merely, but
also a creative process, which is in direct contradiction
to the principle already laid down. We shall find more
of this sort of ambiguity as we proceed, for it runs
through the whole of Darwin’s exposition.
We have now to determine what is the actual province
or function of this mysterious agent which Darwin
* Origin of Species, p. 107.


invests with such elastic powers. At first sight it might
appear as if there were some analogy between selection
by man and selection by nature. In both cases the
variations are provided; and, in a certain sense, the
struggle for existence may be regarded as selective, since
the fit are preserved and the unfit destroyed. But here
the analogy ends. The breeder starts with an ideal
form, and he selects the best animals for the purpose he
has in view; nafure, on the other hand, has no ideal,
and makes no choice. Having selected his pai'ticular
type of animal, the breeder takes means to prevent his
females from interbreeding with males of a different
type, and his males from herding together or fighting
with one another, and he is careful to provide his stock
in all seasons with a plentiful supply of food. Nature,
on the other hand, puts no restriction on intercrossing,
takes no steps to prevent the males from fighting and
injuring one another, and places no check on the increase
beyond the means of subsistence. Darwin describes the
action of natural selection as preservative and accumu-
lative, but, properly speaking, it is a purely destruc-
tive process. It is heredity, and not natural selection,
which is preservative and accumulative.
Darwin’s position, then, is this: “ Natural selection
can do nothing unless favourable individual differences
arise.”* Individual differences, however, are of two
kinds, the useful and the non-useful, the favourable and
* Origin of Species, p. 137.


the non-favourable, for if there were only one kind there
would be no material for natural selection to operate
on. Having got the variations, therefore, both the
favourable and the non-favourable, natural selection is
supposed to step in, and do—what ? Nothing, apparently.
Everything has already been done that requires doing.
The variations have been provided, the favourable as
well as the non-favourable; the superiority of the former
has already been proved by the fact that they have been
adopted by the organism, as otherwise we should not
have known them to be favourable. N atural selection
can only consist in the selection of the favourable varia-
tions, and these, as we have said, have been proved to be
such before natural selection appears on the scene. It
is not an independent force whose function it is to make
a choice between two or more variations presented to it.
Darwin calls it the struggle for existence ; but it is the
organism which struggles—not, however, to select this or
that variation, but to adapt itself to its environment.
It would seem, indeed, as if Darwin had a suspicion
that all was not well with natural selection, and that
it was not so potent a factor in organic modification as
he represented it to be, for in one place he ascribes to
the conditions of life all the potency which he, in other
places, claims for natural selection. “In one sense,” he
tells us, “ the conditions of life may be said, not only to
cause variability, either directly or indirectly, but like-
wise to include natural selection; for the conditions


determine whether this or that variety shall survive.” *
In another place he goes even farther, and makes the
following damning admission:—“ It should not he over-
looked that certain rather strongly marked variations,
which no one would rank as mere individual differences,
frequently occur, owing to . a similar organization being
similarly acted on. .. . . There can be little doubt
that the tendency to vary in the same manner has
often been so strong that all the individuals of
the same species have' been similarly modified with-
out the aid of any form of natural selection.” -f
If “ strongly marked variations ” (“ not mere indi-
vidual differences,” as he is candid enough to point
out), can be established without the aid of “ any form ”
of natural selection, of course less strongly marked
variations might also he established in the same way ;
and if “ all the individuals ” of one species can be modi-
fied in this manner, why may not all the individuals
of any or every species be similarly modified? Dr.
Wallace seems somewhat uncomfortable under this ad-
mission, and is of opinion that Darwin made a slip with
his pen when he wrote the word “all” in the state-
ment we have quoted.^
Had Darwin stopped here in his exposition, the prin-
ciple of natural selection would not have appeared to
* Origin of Species, p. 107. t Ibid., p. 72.
% Darwinism, p. 141.


anyone as a very great discovery. It would have been
looked upon merely as the old familiar theory of the
Balance of Nature under a new name. Just at this
point, however, Darwin makes a new departure. The
modest claim he put forth at the outset on behalf of
natural selection does not content him as he proceeds.
Gradually, and it may be unconsciously, he extends the
province of natural selection, and unfolds what is really
an altogether new theory, and a theory, moreover, utterly
inconsistent with the one he started with, and of which
an outline has been given. Darwin never acquired the
art of using precise language to convey his meaning,
consequently one never knows whether the terms he
makes use of are to be taken in their natural or in a
figurative sense. He admits that the expression natural
selection, as used by himself, is misleading—nay, that it
is false.* Had he substituted for natural selection the
expression “struggle for life,” there would, it is true,
have been less novelty about it, but there would also
have been less liability to error, both on his own part
and on the part of his readers. We have seen that he
defines natural selection as “ the struggle for existence,”
and again as “the survival of the fittest;” but while
thus identifying the two expressions, we find him also
distinguishing between them. In one place he en-
deavours to explain “how the struggle for existence
* In the literal sense of the word, no doubt, natural selection
is a false term. —Origin of Species, p. 63.


bears on natural selection,”* and in another he speaks
of “the struggle for existence and the principle of
natural selection.”-)- Such inaccuracies of expression
occur in almost every page of his writings.
Darwin is quite as loose in his statements as in his
terms. Thus, after assuring his readers over and over
again that natural selection only selects or preserves;
that it is not the cause of variability, and cannot even
induce it; that, in fact, it is absolutely- powerless to effect
anything until the variations are provided for it, he,
nevertheless, proceeds, and without notice, to show that
this same natural selection is a far-reaching and verit-
able transforming power, and capable of bringing about
the very changes which he had, in express terms, dis-
claimed in advance on its behalf. Thus, in one place, he
says:—“What applies to one animal will apply throughout
all time to all animals, that is, if they vary, for otherwise
natural selection can effect nothing.” | While, in another
place, he tells us that “it would be easy for natural
selection to adapt the structure of the animal to its
changed habits; ”§ that he sees no difficulty in being able
to prove that natural selection “ is competent to account
for the incipient changes of useful structures.”|| So far,
indeed, does he go in this direction that we find him
distinctly announcing that the production of protective
* Origin of Species, p. 48. t Hid., p. 143.
x Ibid., p. 88. § Ibid., p. 144.
II Ibid., p. 198.


coloration, the formation of the eye, and even of such
organs as are used only once in a lifetime, are all due to
the operation of natural selection. Thus, he says,
“ Natural selection might he effective in giving the
proper colour to each kind of grouse, and in keeping that
colour, when once acquired, true and constant.”* Speak-
ing of the eye, he says :—“ Although the belief that an
organ so perfect as the eye could have been formed by
natural selection is enough to stagger anyone, yet in
the case of any organ, if we know of a long series of
gradations in complexity, each good for its possessor,
then, under changing conditions of life, there is no logical
impossibility in the acquirement of any conceivable
degree of perfection through natural Of
organs used only once in a lifetime, such as the hard tip
to the beaks of unhatched birds, used for breaking the
egg, or the great jaws possessed by certain insects, used
for opening the cocoon, he contends that “ if of high
importance to the animal,” they “ might be modified to
any extent by natural selection.”! In fact, he tells us
that “ any change in structure and function, which can
be effected by small stages, is within the power of
natural selection.” §
It is evident that we have here two kinds of natural
selection. We have a natural selection which selects
or preserves only, and we have another which adapts,
* Origin of Species, p. 66. t Hid., p. 165.
1 1 hid., p. 68. § Ibid., p. 401.


modifies, or creates. According to the one ; variations
are produced without the aid of natural selection;
according to the other, they are the natural and direct
result of that process. It is needless to: say that if
natural selection be merely selective, it cannot at the
same time be transformative; and, if it be transforma-
tive, it would be absurd to call it merely selective.
The two systems are fundamentally different. Which
are we to accept ? He nowhere informs us.
We may here point out that Darwin is more than
inconsistent —he actually refutes himself. In his earlier
work he attempts to prove that species originated “ by
means of natural selection,” while in his Plants and
Animals uvder Domestication he lays down certain
principles which practically dispose of that theory.
Thus, in the Origin of Species, he starts with two
assumptions which he considers absolutely indispensable
to his system. The first is that variations must be
“slight,” or small in amount. “Natural selection,” he
says, “ acts only by taking advantage of slight successive
variations; she can never take a sudden leap, but must
advance by short and sure, though slow, steps.” * “If it
could be demonstrated that any complex organ existed
which could not possibly have been formed by numerous
successive slight modifications, my theory would abso-
lutely break down.”-]- This assumption has not been
verified; and there are many facts which seem to prove
* Origin of Species, p. 156. t Ibid., p. 227.


that it cannot be established, as, for instance, the meta-
morphoses of the embryo, the changes in insect develop-
ment, and the sudden appearance of new organs of which
not a trace can be found in the embryo or in the adult
forms lower in the scale. But this only by the way.
The second assumption is that favourably modified
individuals should be few in number, “ two or more ” *
being considered sufficient. Now, if natural selection
is not to be a merely nominal factor in the origination of
species, this assumption is absolutely necessary to his
theory, as it is obvious that if large numbers of indi-
viduals were spontaneously modified in the same manner
natural selection would be forestalled.-)- In’ his Plants
and Animals under Domestication Darwin completely
refutes these assumptions. With regard to the first, he
assures us that “ it is obvious that free crossing,” which
would be inevitable under the circumstances, “would
obliterate such small distinctions as those referred to; ” |
* Plants and Animals under Domestication, vol. ii., p. 7.
t To show that I am not misinterpreting Darwin by this re-
mark, I quote the following from Animals and Plants under Do-
mestication, vol. ii., p. 279:—“8y the term definite action, I
mean an action of such a nature that, when many individuals of
the same variety are exposed during many generations to any
change in their physical conditions of life, all, or nearly all the
individuals are modified in the same manner. A new variety
would thus be produced without the aid of selection.” Now, Dar-
win’s object is to prove that natural selection, and not the con-
ditions of life, is the main factor in the formation of species.
X Ibid., vol. ii., p. 90; see also p. 173.


while as regards the second he disposes of it by the
statement that “ when one of two mingled races exceeds
the other greatly in number, the latter will be wholly, or
almost wholly, lost,”* as in the previous instance, by
sheer force of numbers.
Darwin’s followers imagine they get over this difficult}-
by supposing that the modified individuals may become
isolated from the others. But Darwin effectually
blocks this way of escape. Let us suppose that a
pair, consisting of one of the modified and one of
the unmodified individuals, wandered away from the
parent stock and bred by themselves; the progeny,
in this case, would not partake of the character-
istics of each parent, for here the law of Prepotency of
Type Would come into force. The older a type the more
prepotent it is, or the greater its tendency to transmit its
character to its offspring; hence the importance which
breeders attach to a long pedigree. Darwin admits the
force of this when he says that “it is obvious that
a purely bred form of either sex . . . will transmit
its character with prepotent force over a mongrelized or
already variable form,” f such, for instance, as a casual
variation.
Would the result be any different if a pair of the
modified forms were isolated from the rest and reared a
progeny ? Not in the least; for here again, they would
* Plants and Animals under Domestication, vol. ii.. p. 247.
t Ibid., vol ii., p. 69.


be blocked by the law o£ Reversion. It is well known
among breeders of domestic animals and plants that
when the offspring of crossed parents breed with each
other, their progeny will usually be unlike either
parent, and if the intercrossing be continued that their
descendants will have a tendency to revert to some
archaic type. Darwin thoroughly endorses this opinion.
“ When two races or species are crossed,” he says, “ there
is the strongest tendency to the reappearance in the off-
spring of long-lost characters, possessed by neither
parent nor intermediate progenitor.”* If this is true
as regards races, it will also be true as regards variations,
which are even more unstable than the former, “ a new
character, or some superiority in an old character,” being,
he says, “ at first faintly pronounced,” and “ not strongly
inherited.” +■ But this is not all; for if two individuals
of the same race intercross with each other, and their
progeny go on intercrossing, as in the last mentioned
instance,. we should have interbreeding of the closest
kind, and Darwin affirms that “ interbreeding prolonged
during many generations is highly injurious,” resulting
in loss of vigour, size, and fertility, and tending to mal-
formations, j So that, whether the two forms mingle,
or whether they separate, the probability of any new
variety or species being established by the process of
* Plants and Animals under Domestication, vol. ii., p. 48; see
also p. 43.
t Ibid., vol. ii., p. 193. } Ibid., vol. ii., p. 143, 144.


natural selection is, according to Darwin’s own principles,
reduced to a minimum.
Summary.—We have seen that Darwin’s language is
wanting in precision, and his definitions and theories are
variable and contradictory. In one place natural selec-
tion is the “ struggle for existencein another, the
“ struggle for existence ” is said to “ hear on ” natural
selection; in a third place he speaks of the “ struggle
for existence and natural selection” as if they were
independent principles; in one place, again, he defines
natural selection as “the survival of the fittest,” thus
confounding cause with effect, and in another place
he says that natural selection “depends on” the sur-
vival of the fittest; while, to add to the confusion, he
tells us in another place that “the conditions of life
include natural selection,” inasmuch as they determine
whether this or that variety shall survive. In numerous
places he explains that the function of natural selec-
tion is merely selective, as the term implies, that it
operates on variations which are provided for it, and
is absolutely powerless to effect anything without them ;
in other places he insists that variations are created by
natural selection, and that, in fact, every change in
structure and function is within the power of natural
selection. Unless we are to assume that variations are
not changes in structure or in function, then these two
theories are irreconcilable. We have seen that the


principles laid down by Darwin with regard to breeding
are not in accord with his theory of natural selection;
and, finally, that Darwin has practically abandoned his
theory altogether, when he admits that the tendency to
vary in the same manner is so strong that whole species
may be modified without the aid of any form of natural
selection.


CHAPTER II.
THE EFFECTS OF NATURAL SELECTION.
We have seen what Darwin means by natural selection
—that it is the struggle for existence, the striving of
the organism to maintain itself against adverse con-
O O
ditions of life, animate and inanimate. The nature
of the struggle will of course depend on the nature of
the conditions. There is the struggle for life, and the
struggle for subsistence. Between the Carnivora and the
Herbivora the struggle is for life; between organisms
of the same or of allied species, the struggle is for sub-
sistence ; and, in addition to both of these, there is the
struggle against the inorganic forces of nature. Natural
selection is, in fact, a severe form of competition.
We have also seen that Darwin has put forth two
distinct and contradictory theories of the functions of
natural selection. According to the one theory natural
selection is selective or preservative, and nothing more.
According to the other theory natural selection creates
the variations, and we are left to infer that it afterwards
selects them, as we cannot conceive how it could select
at all before there were variations to select from. Of
these two views Darwin evidently favours the one which
affords the widest scope for the operation of natural
3


selection, and it would serve no good purpose for us to
bind him to the other and narrower meaning with which
he set out. We shall, therefore, set aside all Darwin’s
definitions and explanations which would limit the
functions of natural selection, and we shall assume
that it is a creative as well as a preservative and
destructive process.
It certainly seems absurd to speak of natural
selection, or the struggle for existence, as selective or
preservative, for the struggle for existence does not
preserve at all, not even the fit variations, as both the
fit and the unfit struggle for existence, the unfit naturally
more than the fit, and the fit are preserved, not in con-
sequence of the struggle, but in consequence of their fit-
ness. Suppose two varieties of the same species are
driven, by an increase of their numbers, to seek for
subsistence in a colder region than they have been accus-
tomed to, and that one of these varieties had a hardier
constitution than the other; and let us suppose that the
former withstood the severe climate better than the latter,
and consequently survived, while the other perished. In
this case the hardier survived, not because of the struggle,
but because it had a constitution better adapted to the
climate. I wish to ascertain if a certain metal in my
possession is gold or some baser metal, and I apply the
usual test; but the mere fact of my testing this metal
would not make it gold or any other kind of metal.
I venture to dissent altogether from Darwin on the


question o£ the functions and tendency of natural
selection. I maintain that natural selection does not
create the favourable variations, at all events in the sense
understood by him, and that it does not even preserve
them. Igo further than this and assert that it does not
even exterminate the unfavourable variations. I shall
endeavour to show that it is neither creative, preserva-
tive, nor greatly destructive; that it neither produces nor
preserves the fit nor exterminates the unfit, and that so
far from being beneficent in its operation, as Darwin
and his followers represent, that the struggle for existence
is, on the whole, pernicious, and tends to produce disease,
premature decay, and general deterioration of all beings
subjected to its influence. In support of my contention,
I shall first refer to certain facts or cases which Dar-
winists rely on to prove the truth of their theory.
That protective colouring is an advantage to the
animal possessing it no one will dispute; that it has
been acquired by natural selection no Darwinist enter-
tains the smallest doubt, least of all Darwin himself.
“ When we see leaf-eating insects green, and bark feeders
mottled grey, the alpine ptarmigan white in winter, the
red grouse the colour of heather, we must believe that
these tints are of service to those birds and insects in
preserving them from danger; ” hence, he says, natural
selection is “ effective in giving a proper colour to each
kind of grouse, and in keeping that colour, when once


acquired, true and constant.”* According to Darwin, the
process by which protective coloration has been brought
about is simplicity itself. We have only to suppose the
occurrence of an endless number of colour variations,
and the fortunate possession by one or more individuals
of colour of the right sort—that is, a colour similar to
that of surrounding objects—and the destruction of all
animals with non-protective colours will follow as a
matter of course, as animals with non-protective colours,
being conspicuous, will be picked off by their car-
nivorous enemies, while the protectively coloured will
escape observation and survive. According to Dr.
Wallace variations in colour are purely accidental.
Speaking of imitative coloration, he says :—“ To many
persons it will seem impossible that such beautiful and
detailed resemblances as those now described—and they
are only samples of thousands that occur in all parts of
the world—can have been brought about by the preser-
vation of accidental useful variations. But this will not
seem so surprising if we keep in mind the facts set forth
in our earlier chapters, the rapid multiplication, the
severe struggle for existence, and the constant variability
of these and other organisms. And, further, we must
remember,” he goes on to say, “that these delicate
adjustments are the result of a process which has been
going on for millions of years, and that we now see the
small percentage of successes among the myriads of
* Plants and Animals under Domestication, p. 66.


failures.”* Darwin also speaks of variations as
fortuitous or accidental, but he is careful to explain
that he uses such terms provisionally, as indicating the
unknown causes of phenomena.
But whatever opinion one may entertain as to the
cause, no one will dispute the fact that many animals
are protectively coloured. The rabbit, the hare, the
deer, are coloured like the cover which conceals them ;
and so are the lark, the quail, and the grouse among
birds. Carnivora, like the lion, the tiger, and the
panther have also protective colouring, and are thereby
enabled to steal upon their prey unawares. Insects
resemble the leaves or the bark of the trees or plants on
which they rest; fishes take the colour of the ground
they feed upon. Thus, flounders are of a motley brown
colour, like the gravelly bottom they frequent; eels live
in muddy water, and are mud coloured ; fish which feed
among rocks are coloured like the weeds which adhere
to them. Individuals of the same species also acquire
colours according to the nature of their environment for
the time being. Thus, trout which frequent a clear
stream with a gravelly bottom, are much lighter in
colqur than those which live in the same stream where
the water is less transparent. Many animals, again,
change their colour with the seasons—are grey, brown, or
black in summer, and white in winter. The Arctic fox,
* Darwinism, p. 205. See also p. 244, where he speaks of “the
accumulation of fortuitous variations ” in the same connection.


hare, and ermine, for instance, as well as many alpine
animals, are dark-coloured in summer and white in
winter. Some British insects change their colour in
summer and autumn, so as to resemble the vegetative
tints peculiar to those seasons. Caterpillars also have
their seasonal changes, some being brown in autumn,
O ’ O 7
corresponding to the fading foliage, and bright green in
spring, like the foliage of that period of the year.*
It is possible to conceive that permanent colours may
be acquired by natural selection, but the theory is
inapplicable to alternative or seasonal colours. Natural
selection is supposed to render a variation stable, but a
variation cannot be rendered stable and yet remain
unstable; it cannot be permanent and at the same time
be alternating. The struggle for existence is supposed to
* Referring to the various species of Phasmidse and Mantidse,
which he met with in Africa, Professor Drummond says : —They
are variously coloured according to season and habitat. When
the grasses are tinged with autumn tints they are the same,
and the colours run through many shades, from the pure bright red,
such as tips the fins of a perch, to the deeper claret colours, or the
tawny gold of port. But an even more singular fact remains to
be noted. After the rainy reason, when the new grasses spring
up with their vivid colour, these withered grass insects seem all to
disappear. Their colour now would be no protection to them, and
their places are taken by others coloured as green as the new
grass. Whether these are new insects, or only the same in spring
toilets, I do not know, but I should think they are a different
population altogether, the cycle of the former generation being,
probably, complete with the end of summer.— Tropical Africa ,
pp. 172-3.


exterminate the conspicuous animals, in this case the
unfit, and to preserve the non-conspicuous, in this case
the fit; but if all the brown-coloured animals, for
instance, were destroyed, and the white-coloured only
remained, the brown could not alternate with the white
in the same individual, as the brown has been wholly
eliminated; on the other hand, if all the white-coloured
animals were exterminated and the brown-coloured only
remained, the white could not alternate with the brown,
as the white has altogether disappeared. When a colour
has once been acquired by natural selection, it is estab-
lished to the exclusion of all other colours for all time.
The very principle of natural selection renders alter-
native coloration in the same individual an impossibility.
If it be said that natural selection might preserve the
individuals having a tendency to assume alternative
colours under certain conditions, as, for instance, brown
in summer and white in winter, then I answer that the
change in colour would depend on the change in the
conditions, and not on natural selection. The conditions
would, therefore, be the predisposing cause, and natural
selection would be inoperative.
The acquisition of protective colouring is not to be
explained on mechanical principles. Coloration is an
organic or a physiological process, and must, therefore,
have an organic or physiological cause. But the Dar-
winist looks upon organic phenomena as he would upon
the motions of an ingenious piece of mechanism. He sees


the mechanism in motion; he observes the cranks turn,
the cylinders move, the shaft revolve, and the big ship
propelled through the water, and he calls upon us to
admire the beauty of the whole arrangement. He never
inquires about the motive power. Had he looked below
the engine-room he would have seen, by the glare of
the furnace fires, rows of stalwart, perspiring, half-naked
men piling the fuel on the fires, which heat the boilers,
which supply the motive power, which puts the whole
machinery in motion.
It is highly probable that the coloration of animals
and of plants is produced in a somewhat similar manner
—namely, by the action of light, and, to a certain extent,
of heat, on the pigment and chlorophyll cells. The
colour of the human skin is black or dark brown
under the equator, olive in the sub-tropical, and almost
white in the temperate regions of the earth, while in the
Arctic regions, where the sun is not visible during a
great portion of the year, white is the predominant
colour of the animals which live there during that
period. Cavernous animals and ento-parasites, which
never see the light, are almost invariably white. In this
respect there is a close analogy between plants and
animals. It has been demonstrated that the green
colouring matter of plants cannot be produced without the
co-operation of sunlight; and it is well known that the
leaves of plants assume various shades of colour according
to the amount of light to which they are exposed.


We have next to observe that it is only those parts of
the bodies of animals which are most exposed to the
action of light that are protectively coloured, the less
exposed portions having, as a rule, no protective colouring
whatever. Thus, the upper surface of rabbits, hares,
and hawks is grey or brown, the under side is of a
whitish hue. In the case of certain butterflies, on the
contrary, it is the under side of the wings that is
protected and not the upper side; but this exception
rather proves the rule than otherwise, as butterflies,
when at rest, put up their wings and expose the under
side to the action of the sun. Thus it happens that
butterflies have their brilliant non-protective tints on the
upper surface of their wings, while the under side is
almost invariably protectively coloured.
In some cases protective coloration is produced by the
voluntary action of the animal. It is well known that
certain fishes, as the stickleback, the perch, certain species
of serranus and salmon, rapidly change their colour,
and apparently at will, for the purpose of escaping
observation. It has been ascertained that the pigment
cells have the capacity of expansion and contraction, and
that the colour of the animal varies according to the
manner in which this power is exercised. The experi-
ments of Pouchet and others show that the arrangement
of the pigment cells in some manner depends on sight,
as when the optic nerve is divided the activity of the cells
ceases, and no corresponding change in colour takes place.


The phenomena of protective or permanent coloration
cannot, however, be explained on this principle.
So far it is certain that light and heat are essential
factors in the production of animal colouring, and we have
now to ascertain how these operate. Here again the
analogy of vegetable coloration will assist us. It is well
known that when the chlorophyll cells are exposed to
diffused light they arrange themselves in planes perpen-
dicular to the direction of the incident ray (epistrophe),
hut when they are exposed to bright sunlight they form
in planes parallel to the direction of the incident ray
(apistrophe), with the result that in the former case the
leaves assume a lisht, and in the latter case a dark
o 1
green colour. That the action of light alone, or light and
heat combined, is not the cause of protective coloration,
is evident from the fact that wool, hair, and fur, when
removed from the skin of a living animal, react upon
these agencies in a different way, and become lighter in
colour instead of darker when exposed to the action of
the sun. A similar result is produced on dead vegetable
matter; the most brilliantly coloured seaweed, for in-
stance, becomes perfectly white when exposed for a few
days on the seashore. The action of sunlight on the
chlorophyll cells produces every variety of vegetative
tint, and we are justified in concluding that the sun’s
rays, acting on the pigment cells, produce a corresponding
effect on the skins of animals. In both cases, the process
is very similar. The chlorophyll and the pigment cells


display the same kind of movements; they react under
similar conditions ; and similar causes, acting under
similar conditions, should produce similar effects.
There are many facts which seem to favour this view.
Animals change their colour at the same periods of the
year that plants change their foliage; animals are
affected by the vicissitudes of the seasons as well as
plants, especially in spring-time and autumn; the
moulting of the feathers and the shedding of the hair,
wool, and fur, are concurrent with corresponding changes
in vegetation. Many Arctic animals change their coats
as many as four times during the year—are dark-
coloured in summer, white in winter, and an intermediate
colour in spring and autumn. Then, again, corresponding
with the seasonal alterations in vegetation, many animals
lose their protective colouring when in confinement,
owing, probably, to their being less exposed to the action
of the sun, as in the case of rabbits kept in hutches, and
plants grown under the shade or in a dark situation,
which have a less pronounced colour than when grown
in the sunlight. Gould was of opinion that birds of
the same species were more brightly coloured undef
a clear atmosphere than when living near the coast
or on islands; Darwin informs us that there are few
British birds that are not dull coloured, while shells,
according to E. Forbes, are more brilliantly coloured
under a clear sky and in shallow water, than under a
dull atmosphere and at a greater depth. But whether


our view of the matter be correct or not, it is obvious
that the alternative colours of animals, or of plants,
cannot have been produced by natural selection. We
might just as well suppose that the moulting of the
feathers, or the shedding of the hair in old age, or the
7 “ O 7
sudden whitening of the hair of young persons, which
sometimes takes place in a single night, are due to the
same process.
According to Darwin, the first protective colours were
acquired by a happy physiological variation, but if, in
the first instance, the change had a physiological origin,
why not in all instances ? If Nature in one instance be
capable of producing a single individual with protective
colouring, she is surely able to do the same thing for
other individuals. Why should we imagine that she has
put forth her last effort in producing one or more
individual specimens and no more, leaving it to natural
selection to continue her work ? If we are not to suppose
this, then we must assume that Nature will go on pro-
ducing other adapted variations in the same way, and
that new varieties and new species will continue to arise
in strict conformity with physiological laws. Indeed,
this assumption is, in my opinion, absolutely necessary to
the successful action of natural selection, for unless
there be a constant succession of similarly modified forms,
as would be the case under uniform conditions, there
would be no chance of a stable variety or species being
established at all, as any occasional variations that might


appear would inevitably be lost by intercrossing, and all
the more so if there were a tendency to indefinite varia-
tion. On the other hand, if we grant a tendency to vary
in a definite direction, under definite conditions, there
would be a constant succession of similarly modified
forms, and the basis would thus be laid for new species.
It is difficult to see how new species could otherwise have
become established.*
The formation of instincts is assumed to be another
of the achievements of natural selection. The claim is
put forth by Darwin himself, and every true Darwinist
endorses it. But first, what is instinct ? An action,
when it is performed by an animal without experience,
especially by a very young one, and when performed by
many individuals in the same way, without their know-
ing for what purpose it is performed, is, according to
Darwin, an instinct. - ! - There are many actions—habits
and tricks of manner, for instance—which Darwin and
others call instincts, which are improperly so termed.
Such actions may be, and often are, hereditary, but they
are not on that account to be classified as instinctive.
Darwin, however, seems to think that all actions which
are hereditary should be so classified, and he accordingly
discusses at great length various singular habits and
o o o
states of mind, which he calls instincts from the simple
fact that they are hereditary. Thus, he says:—“ Habitual
* See Appendix A. t Origin of Species, p. 205.


actions and states of mind do become hereditary, and
may then, as far as I can see, most properly be called
instinctive.”* But although all instincts are hereditary,
it by no means follows that whatever is hereditary is
instinctive. In speaking of instinct, I shall, therefore,
exclude all such habits, tricks of manner, and states of
mind as are merely hereditary, and shall include among
instincts those hereditary actions and affections only
which are indispensable to the existence of the individual
and to the maintenance of the race ; such as alimentation,
self-preservation, reproduction, and parental affection.
It is difficult to ascertain Darwin’s views on the origin
of instinct, as his utterances are so contradictory. Thus
he tells us that “ if it can be shown that instincts do
vary ever so little, then I can see no difficulty in natural
selection preserving and continually accumulating varia-
tions of instincts to any extent that was profitable. And
thus, as I believe,” he goes on to say, “ all the most
complex and wonderful instincts have So
far it would appear that Darwin considered that natural
selection has here acted in the ordinary way —namely,
by preserving existing and profitable variations. But
* Extract from Darwin’s MSS. in The Mental Evolution of
Animals, p. 264.
t Origin of Species, p. 206. Compare the following extract from
Darwin’s MSS. in the work of Dr. Eomanes on The Mental
Evolution of Animals, p. 264; —“ I believe that most instincts are
the accumulated result, through natural selection, of slight and
profitable modifications of other instincts.”


variations from what ? From other instincts ! Darwin
is here professing to explain the origin of instincts, and
he makes the innocent mistake of accounting for one
instinct by tracing it to another. It apparently never
once occurred to him that it was necessary to trace the
original instinct to its source. True, he refers to habit as
a possible factor in the formation of instincts, but he
expresses no definite opinion on the subject. “ I believe,”
he says, “ that the effects of habits are in many cases
of subordinate importance to the effects of natural selec-
tion of what may be called spontaneous variations, of
instincts; ” but immediately adds that “it can be
clearly shown that the most wonderful instincts with
which we are acquainted, namely, those of the hive-bee
and of many ants, could not possibly have been acquired
by habit;”* and he also agrees with F. Cuvier in com-
paring instinct with habit, and says that the comparison
“ gives an accurate notion of the frame of mind under
which an instinctive action is performed, but not neces-
sarily its origin.”-)" In another place he tells us that if
habit becomes inherited the resemblance between it and
* Origin of Species, pp. 205-207. Dr. Wallace says that Darwin
“gave very little weight” to the view of instincts being acquired
habits.— Darwinism, p. 441.
t Judging from the following extract, quoted from his MSS. in
The Mental Evolution of Animals, p. 377, Darwin seems at one
time to have believed that habit was a real factor in the formation
of instincts, as he anticipates an objection to this view, and replies
to it as follows : —“ An instinct performed only once during the


instinct “ becomes so close as not to be distinguished,”*
and further on he speaks of “ habit or instinct,” as if
they were one and the same, •f
It is thus exceedingly difficult to get at his views on
this question. We are told that instincts originated in
natural selection by the preservation of other instincts;
that they originated also in habit; that habit when
hereditary is undistinguishable from instinct; and lastly,
that such habits are instincts. Darwin devotes a con-
siderable amount of space to the discussion of this
question, and has a great deal to say about instincts of
a secondary character, which, however, throws no light
upon the origin of the primary or fundamental instincts,
with which alone we are concerned.
Darwin’s failure to explain the origin of instincts on
the principle of natural selection has not deterred
some of his followers from renewing the attempt. Dr.
Romanes considers that instincts originated in natural
life of an animal appears at first sight a great difficulty on our
theory; hut if indispensable to the animal’s existence, there is no
valid reason why it should not have been acquired through natural
selection, like corporal structures used only on one occasion, like
the hard tip of the chicken’s beak, or like the temporary jaws of the
pupa of the caddis-fly.” In this passage we have exhibited a
singular mental process ; instinct originates in habit; but a habit
cannot he acquired by only one performance of an act; neverthe-
less if the instinct be indispensable to the existence of the
animal, there can be no good reason why it should not have so
been acquired.
* Orit/in of Species, p. 206. t Ibid., p. 209.


selection and habit, but, like Darwin, he concerns himself
only with the former. “ The first mode of the origin of
instincts, and with this only we are concerned,” he says,
“ consists in natural selection, or the survival of the fittest
(sic), continuously preserving actions which, although
never intelligent, yet happen to have been of benefit to
the animals which first chanced to perform them. Thus,
for instance, take the instinct of incubation. It is quite
impossible that any animal can ever have kept its eggs
warm with the intelligent purpose of hatching out their
contents, so we can only suppose that the incubating
began by warm-blooded animals showing that kind of
attention to their eggs which we find is frequently
shown by cold-blooded animals. Thus crabs and spiders
carry about their eggs for the purpose of protecting
them; and if, as animals gradually became warm-
blooded, some species, for this or for other purposes,
adopted a similar habit, the imparting of heat would
become incidental to the carrying about of the eggs.
Consequently, as the imparting of heat promoted the
process of hatching, those individuals which most con-
stantly cuddled or brooded over their eggs would, other
things being equal, have been most successful in rearing
progeny; and so the incubating instinct would be de-
veloped without there ever having been any intelligence
in the matter.” * Why, may we ask in passing, does the
* Article Instinct in Encyclopedia Britannica, ed. 1888. That
this is Dr. Romanes’ mature opinion on the subject may be
4


writer so carefully exclude the element of intelligence
from his process ? It is “ quite impossible,” he tells us
to begin with, that any animal could ever have kept its
eggs warm with the intelligent purpose of hatching out
their contents, and he ends by triumphantly declaring
that the whole process can be gone through “ without
there ever having been any intelligence in the matter.”
Dr. Romanes evidently wishes it to be clearly understood
that natural selection is a purely mechanical process
from first to last.
Dr. Romanes takes his readers a long way back, but
he does not take them back quite far enough to account
for the origin of the incubating instinct. This instinct,
he tells us, began with the cold-blooded animals and was
continued by the warm-blooded animals, the latter “ show-
ing that kind of attention to their eggs that we find is
frequently shown by cold-blooded animals.” This, we
say, is going back a long way, but not far enough, for
already he assumes what he undertook to prove. To
begin with, he assumes the existence of the parental
instinct when he affirms that his hypothetical animals
showed “ attention to their eggs; ” next he assumes
intelligence, notwithstanding his disclaimer, for does he
not say that the cold-blooded animals carry about their
eggs “ for the purpose ” of protecting them ? Again,
assumed from the fact that he reproduces the above extract word
for word in his subsequent work on The Mental Evolution of
Animals


before the incubating process could have begun there
must have been material for it to operate upon—that is
to say, there must have been eggs; the sexual instinct
must also have been formed before eggs could have been
produced; so that, in order to show how one instinct
originated, Dr. Romanes assumes the existence of a
o '
whole series of instincts, all of them co-operating towards
a definite end, yet all purposeless and non-intelligent.
This can hardly be said to be the proper way to treat of
the origin of things. Dr. Romanes should have begun
at the beginning, and explained the origin of the first of
the whole series of instincts which he started with.
Let us take his own standpoint, however. He affirms
that this particular instinct originated in natural
selection; but, according to his own showing, habit had
something to do with it. Cold-blooded animals carry
about their eggs for the purpose of protecting them,
and as cold-blooded animals “ gradually became warm-
blooded, some species, for this or for other purposes,
adopted a similar habit.” “ Some species ” —were there
then different species of animals in existence at this early
stage, and did only “ some ” of these species adopt the
habit of cuddling their eggs? What became of the
other species which did no cuddling ? And during the
period which it took for the cold-blooded animals to
become warm-blooded animals, what became of the eggs,
3 oo ’
and the egg-layers ? How could the “ species ” continue
to exist if the eggs were not hatched ? But supposing


that “ some species ” had chanced to discover that eggs
required heat, they had still to learn how much was
wanted, the number of hours, days, or weeks they would
require to sit (for the eggs of some species take much
longer time to hatch than others); they had also to
discover that eggs required moisture and how much;
that they had to turn them over regularly, so that each
egg would receive its due amount of heat and moisture
on all sides; and, before and above all this, these egg-
laying and would-be egg-incubating animals would have
to know (and how know except instinctively?) that
when they had passed successfully through these various
stages the eggs, if so manipulated, would develop into
animals like themselves. And be it understood, all this
experience would have to be acquired by each individual
for himself, or rather herself, and not by the exercise of
intelligence, which we have seen is carefully excluded,
and acquired, be it also remembered, not gradually through
long geological periods, as the writer assumes, or even
during the lifetime of the individual, but in the course of
the few hours during which the eggs will keep sound and
fit for hatching. What possible chance would the poor
egg-laying animals have of leaving any progeny behind
them ?
Instincts are usually divided into two classes, namely,
primary and secondary. The primary are those which
are supposed to be indispensable to life. They are ori-
ginal, primordial endowments, and are contemporaneous


with life itself. Secondary instincts, on the other hand,
are acquired, and their origin in most, if not in all cases,
can be traced to intelligence or habit. The use of arti-
ficial combs by hive-bees, the pointing and retrieving of
dogs, the homing of pigeons, nidification, the fear of man,
and the feigning of death, are instances of secondary or
acquired instincts. The difference between primary and
secondary instincts may be illustrated by the case of the
Megapodes of New Guinea, which collect into a mound
large quantities of leaves, grass, and other vegetable
matter, in which they deposit their eggs, leaving them to
be hatched by the heat generated in the mass by fermenta-
tion. This is a modified or acquired instinct; but had
the bird not possessed the primary incubating instinct
in the first instance it could never have acquired this
modified form of it.
At the most, natural selection, as we have seen, only
accounts for the origin of secondary instincts, and fails
altogether in the matter of the primary instincts. There
are two other theories of the origin of instinct which
claim consideration; the first is that of Mr. Herbert
Spencer, who advocates the theory of reflex action,
and that of Lewes, who adopts the principle of lapsed
intelligence. According to Mr. Herbert Spencer the
order of development is—first, reflex action; secondly,
compound reflex action; thirdly, instinct; and, last of
all, intelligence. Lewes, on the other hand, begins with
the last, and evolves instinct out of intelligence. Reflex


action is known by the uniformity of the reaction which
occurs on the application of any stimulus. In reflex
action the same reaction will take place whatever the
stimulus applied. The criterion of intelligence, on the
other hand, is that the reaction is adaptive or discrimina-
tive. Instinct, therefore, is not, according to this test,
reflex action, or any form of reflex action, for in instinct
there is invariably adaptation of means to ends, and Mr.
Herbert Spencer has not shown how any compounding of
reflex actions can make them discriminative. According to
Lewes, instinctive actions were originally intelligent, and
have become automatic from repetition, and ultimately
hereditary. There are many facts which give support
to this theory. Actions which at first are performed
with great difficulty become habitual and automatic
when often repeated. Thus, in learning to play the piano
a vast amount of labour has to be expended in learning
the notes, and in adjusting the fingers of the player to
the instrument, but an expert pianist will play a piece
without any effort and almost without consciousness.
And actions which become automatic in the individual,
also tend to become automatic in the race.
What we have to imagine is a condition of things in
which instant action follows sensation. This may be said
to occur in all cases of true or primary instinct—that is to
say, of instincts which are indispensable to life. The
peculiarity of instinct, and which is in so striking a con


trasfc to reason, is that it is prompt in its action. It never
deliberates, never wavers, never hesitates. The newly
hatched chicken picks up the grain the instant it sees it ;
the newly-horn foal makes straight for its darn’s teats as
soon as it can stand upright; ducklings hatched under a
hen rush headlong to the pond in spite of the most
frantic effort of their foster mother to prevent them; and
the broody hen is perfectly incorrigible, and will persist
in sitting, even if deprived of her eggs.
In man and in the higher vertebrates there is not only
organic but also mental division of labour. The mental
functions —sensation, perception, and volition—lead up
to action ; but experience shows that perception does not
always follow sensation, nor volition perception, nor
action volition. As often as not there is a break in the
connections, or action may follow after a longer or shorter
interval. But in instinct there never seems to be any
break at all, or any interval between sensation and
action; the perceptive faculty is in abeyance, and the
organism appears to be under the control of an inner
force which it is incapable of resisting. When instinct
is strong', reason is weak. Dr. Wallace has remarked
that the most perfect and the most striking examples of
instinct are those in which reason and experience seem
to have the least influence.* The invertebrata, in which
mental activity is at the minimum, are almost entirely
under the control of instinct; the lower classes of verte-
* Natural Selection, p. 201.


brata, which display more intelligence than the former,
have less perfect instincts; among mammals instinct
gradually diminishes till in man it reaches the minimum,
while mental activity is at its maximum. In the cell or
in unicellular organisms, which have no special organs and
no division of functions, sensation, perception, volition
and action would appear to occur simultaneously, forming,
as it were, one instinctive act. Among the higher grades
of organisms mental development corresponds with
organic differentiation, while among the higher verte-
brates, as in man, the perceptive faculties predominate
over instinct. In the order of development, it would
appear that instinct comes first, and reason afterwards;
but reason never entirely supersedes instinct, even in
man. Man is the creature of his instincts even in the
exercise of his highest functions. His intuitions are
not his in the sense of having been reached by him
by any process of reasoning. They come to him he
knows not how or whence. How could the orator
move the masses if these had not an untaught logic to
o o
which he could appeal ? There is a striking similarity
between instincts and the higher manifestations of mind ;
our purest actions are impulsive ; our best thoughts are
intuitive. The fact that instinct is strongest when intel-
ligence is weakest would not lead us to conclude that
the former was developed out of the latter. Only on the
supposition that the lower order of organisms originally
possessed much higher intelligence than they appear to


have now, can we imagine instinct to be lapsed intel-
ligence.
Summary.—l have attempted to show that natural
selection—understanding hy that term the struggle for
existence, or severe competition—can have no effect in
producing new organic forms. For this purpose I have
taken for illustration the two cases usually put forward
by Darwinists in support of their views—namely, pro-
tective coloration and instinct, and I have endeavoured
to show that neither of these can be regarded as the
product of natural selection. So far as the latter is
concerned, 1 have contended that Darwin and his
followers have failed to prove that either the primary or
the secondary instincts have originated in natural
selection; while, as regards protective coloration, I have
pointed out that it is not possible for an animal to
acquire a seasonal or alternative colouring by that
process, and that as protective coloration was, in the
first instance, acquired through a physiological process,
and without the aid of natural selection, there is no
necessity for resorting to a mechanical process, such as
natural selection, for its subsequent extension.


CHAPTER III.
THE EXTERMINATION OF THE UNFIT.
Natural selection is supposed to select the fit, but, at
best, it only selects the unfit. Nature brings into the
world more beings than she has made provision for,
and, as all cannot live, she selects the unfit for destruc-
tion, and, according to Darwin, she uses the fit as her
instrument for that purpose. “As in each fully stocked-
up country natural selection acts by the selected form
having some advantage in the struggle for life over the
other forms, there will be a constant tendency in the
improved descendants of any one species to supplant and
exterminate in each stage of descent their predecessors
and their original progenitors.”* And this struggle for
life which spares neither predecessors nor progenitors
is said to be most severe between allied species or near
relations, “as having the same structure, constitution,
and habits,”and presumably consuming the same kind
of food, and, as a necessary consequence of this, we are
told that “ all the intermediate forms between the less
and the more improved states of the same species, as
well as the parent species itself, will generally tend to
become extinct.”! Do we really find that the “ improved
* Origin of Species, p. 93. f Ibid., p. 86. f Ibid., p. 93.


descendants” exterminate their predecessors, and that all
“ intermediate forms” of the same species become extinct ?
Darwin’s hypothesis requires that such a result should
take place, but he has supplied us with no proofs in
support of it. The fact is, all the evidence proves the
contrary, for not only do intermediate or less improved
forms exist now side by side, but they appear to have
so existed from the remotest ages.
Thus, if two kinds of organisms are competitors for the
same means of subsistence, the more highly organized
being would, according to Darwin, prove itself the more
fit of the two, and would exterminate the less highly
organized being. If, therefore, we can show that two
species, or two varieties of the same species, the one
more highly organized than the other, and both com-
peting for the same subsistence, are yet living side by
side, then we shall have a clear case of the survival of
the unfit under natural selection.
The Foraminifera furnish just such an instance. In
some of the groups of this order the shell consists of a
single chamber, and the animal is nothing more than a
little mass of protoplasm enveloped in a calcareous cover-
ing. In the more complex groups the protoplasm under-
goes a subdivision into partially separated segments. In
these polythalmous varieties the shell consists of a series
of chambers, separated by the partitions of the test, and
filled with sarcode. The forms assumed by this order
are extremely diversified, and in regard to size they vary


from a mere microscopic speck to an inch or more in
diameter. Now, all these various forms are found to exist
together at the present day in all oceans, in almost all
seas, in shallow water as well as at great depths, and
these various forms lie so contiguous that a single
dredging will often bring up several distinct species
and genera. They appear also to have been quite as
numerous in former times, as they abound alike in
Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and Kainozoic formations. Whole
beds of the carboniferous limestone in Europe, Asia, and
America are composed of the shells of the Foraminifera;
and in the secondary rocks they also occur in great
abundance, the formation known as the chalk being
almost wholly composed of them. These organisms are
therefore not only amongst the oldest, but they are, and
have been during vast geological periods, the most widely
distributed in the world. Now, it cannot be supposed
that the larger and more complex structures had any
advantage in the struggle for existence over the smaller
and simpler structures, for as has been pointed out*
they are as fully incapable of escaping from their enemies
by any movement as the latter, and show no difference
in aspect such as would enable them to escape observa-
tion, but rather the contrary, as their greater size renders
them more conspicuous to their enemies. May we ask
then, where, in the case of the Foraminifera, is the
extermination of the unfit ? In other words, does not
* Nature and Man, by Dr. Carpenter, p. 458.


the continued existence of low forms of animal life in the
same locality, and presumably subsisting on the same
kind of food, show that natural selection has failed in
its operation ?
Darwin anticipates our argument, and evades it in a
characteristic fashion. “ What advantage,” he asks,
“ would it be to an infusorian animal—to an intestinal
worm—or even an earthworm, to he highly organized ?
If it were no advantage, these forms would he left by
natural selection unimproved, or but little improved,
and might remain for indefinite ages in their present
lowly condition.”* Why does he not finish his sentence
by stating the alternative ? Suppose it were an advan-
tage, what then ? If some of these lowly organized
animals were improved and others not, are we to be told
that the improved individuals would not have any ad-
vantage over the unimproved ? Have we not been
informed that natural selection leads to “ the exter-
mination of the less improved and intermediate forms of
life,” -f and that “ the very process of natural selection
implies the continual supplanting and extermination of
preceding and intermediate gradations ?” J Dr. Wallace
has also a reply. He tells us that low forms exist be-
cause they “ occupy places in nature which cannot be
filled by higher forms,” and because they have “ few or
no competitors.”§ But this does not meet the case we
* Origin of Species, p. 98. t Hid., p. 103.
X Ibid., p. 164. § Darwinism, p. 114.


have cited, for the lower forms of life not only exist, but
they exist side by side with higher forms, and that they
are not without competitors must be obvious, as every
gradation of form is represented, and, according to
Darwin, it is just among individuals of the same or of an
allied species that the struggle for existence is most
severe and destructive.*
A superior race does not usually exterminate an
inferior one. The former seldom pushes his victory to
the point of extermination, while the latter, after a trial
of strength, accepts his defeat with good grace, and sub-
mits to take a subordinate position, the contest generally
ending in the amalgamation of the two races. This, at
all events, is what happens with the different races of
mankind, and with plants and animals of the same or of
an allied species. Everywhere we find them living
together in the same place, and subsisting on the same
kind of food. Even Carnivora do not fly at each other’s
throats whenever they chance to meet, although, know-
ing the consequences of an encounter, they are careful to
keep at a respectful distance from each other. But if
Darwin’s contention be correct, we would never find an
inferior and superior race living together; in every
locality there would only be one species, and that the
most highly organized; and thus a few superior races
would partition the earth amongst them to the entire
* Origin of Species, pp. 59, 86.


exclusion of the innumerable varieties, species, genera,
and orders which now inhabit it.
On this question of the extermination of races Malthus
is a safer guide than Darwin. Epidemics, improvidence,
and disease—“ famine, pestilence, and sudden death”—
are what have struck terror into the heart of man-
kind in all ages, because they have been the most
destructive to human life, and it is to such catas-
trophes as these that Malthus ascribes the periodical
decimination in times past of the population in certain
countries. “As savages,” he says, “ are wonderfully
improvident, and their means of subsistence always
precarious, they often pass from the extreme of want
to exuberant plenty, according to the vicissitudes of
fortune in the chase, or to the variety in the produce
of the seasons. Their inconsiderate gluttony in the one
case, and their severe abstinence in the other, are equally
prejudicial to the human constitution, and their vigour
is accordingly at some seasons impaired by want, and at
others by a superfluity of gross aliment and the disorders
arising from indigestion. These, which may be con-
sidered as the unavoidable consequence of their mode of
living, cut off considerable numbers in the prime of life.
They are likewise extremely subject to consumptions, to
pleuritic, asthmatic, and paralytic disorders, brought on
by the immoderate hardships and fatigues which they
endure in hunting and war, and by the inclemency of the
seasons, to which they are continually exposed. The


missionaries speak of the Indians of South America as
subject to perpetual diseases, for which they know no
remedy.”*
There is no case on record where one race has deprived
another of the means of subsistence. In recent years the
superior and inferior races of mankind have come in
contact all over the world, to the manifest advantage of
the latter, so far at least as the means of existence are
concerned. For proof of this, one has only to read the nar-
ratives of Cook, Vancouver, and La Perouse, and compare
them with the accounts of modern travellers in the same
regions. It is true that many of the aboriginal races are
dying out; but this result is not due to any antagonism
of the superior races towards the inferior, or to any com-
petition for the means of subsistence. Their disappear-
ance is entirely the result of constitutional causes.
Almost everywhere the aboriginal races exhibit a strong
tendency to contract disease, and an inability to throw
it off when once contracted. It has been remarked that
the natives of the South Pacific Islands on the Queens-
land sugar plantations give up all hope of recovery as
soon as they are attacked by any illness, and never make
any attempt to throw it off, and as a natural consequence
many of them die from slight attacks which Europeans
would get rid off without any trouble. Contact with
civilized man seems also to have a disastrous effect on
savage races in various ways. Bates, for instance, men-
* Principles of Population, p. 62, sth ed.


tions a tribe of Indians on the Amazon—the Fasces,
which he describes as a gentle, industrious, and intelli-
gent people, which were formerly most numerous, but
are now almost extinct. He says ;
The principal cause of their decay in numbers seems to be a
disease which appears amongst them where a village is visited by
people from the civilized settlements—a slow fever, accompanied
by the symptoms of a common cold (“ defluxo,” as the Brazilians
call it), ending probably in consumption. The disorder has been
known to break out when the visitors were entirely free from it;
the simple contact of civilized man, in some mysterious way, being
sufficient to create it.*
It is possible to conceive that the antagonism between
Carnivora and Herbivora might lead to improvement of
a functional kind, such as increased alertness, speed, and
combativeness, the effect to some extent of the law of
use and disuse; but any struggle between the same or
between allied species is almost invariably injurious to
the individuals engaged in it. It has become the fashion
amongst political economists of a certain school to speak
in unqualified laudatory terms of the advantages of
competition ; but no authority in political economy has
yet hazarded the assertion that competition benefits the
competitors. That it often is of advantage to the con-
sumers is beyond a doubt; but it is difficult to see the
gain to the competitors. As a rule, competitors when
severely pressed call for a truce ; they combine to reduce
* The Naturalist on the Amazons, p. 257.
5


the output and to raise prices, so that severe competition
in the end does not invariably benefit even the consumers.
The struggle for existence cannot possibly benefit com-
petitors on both sides, while it is probable that both
will suffer from it. A labour strike is a struggle
between workmen and employers, but, whoever wins in
the end, it is certain that both suffer as long as the
struggle lasts, the workmen in wages and the employers
in profits. Traders compete in order to secure a market,
animals in order to obtain the means of subsistence ; but
unless the struggle comes to an end by the retirement or
extermination of one of the competitors no benefit will
accrue to either side. For the full development of any
organism there is required the proper quantity of
nourishment, and the due amount of exercise of all the
organs and the abuse of none. In the struggle for
existence all these conditions are absent, and in place of
these there is privation and suffering in every case, even
to the survivors, and if the struggle be protracted the
result will be stunted growth, disease, premature decay,
and a weakened constitution to transmit to posterity.
What is the general tendency of natural selection ?
Are its effects relative or absolute? Does it lead to
the general advancement of the individuals subjected
to its influence, or has it sometimes a contrary effect ?
Here, again, we find Darwin unsatisfactory. He says:—
“ There is no good evidence of the existence in organic
o O


beings of an innate tendency towards progressive de-
velopment, yet,” he adds in the same sentence, “ this
necessarily follows . . . through the continued
action of natural selection.”* If it “necessarily follows,”
surely that is good enough evidence. Again, we are
told that “ the ultimate result ” of natural selection is
“ that each creature tends to become more and more
improved in relation to its conditions. This improve-
ment inevitably leads to the gradual advancement of
the organization of the greater number of living beings
o o o o
throughout the world.” f But if the gradual advance-
ment of organization is the “ inevitable ” result the im-
provement would be more than relative—it would be
absolute; and here again he is confronted with the
principle laid down by himself, and repeatedly insisted
on —namely, that structures are adapted to the conditions
of life and may therefore occasionally assume degraded
forms.
But if Darwin speaks hesitatingly on this subject, Mr.
Herbert Spencer’s generalization is, as usual, sweeping
enough. Speaking of the struggle for existence, he
says; —“ The pressure of population on the means of sub-
sistence has produced the original diffusion of the race.
It compelled man to abandon predatory habits and take
to agriculture. It led to the clearing of the earth’s
C? O
surface. It forced men into the social state ; made social
organization inevitable, and has developed the social
* Origin of Species, p. 176. f Ibid., p. 97.


sentiments. It has stimulated the progressive improve-
ments in production, and to increased skill and intelli-
gence. It is daily thrusting us into contact and more
mutually dependent relationships.” * We cannot accept
such an optimistic view, even from Mr. Spencer. Wo
draw a distinction between incentives to action and the
struggle for existence, between the hope of reward and
fear of punishment. The former is stimulating, the
latter depressing in its effect. So far from being an
incentive to civilization, the struggle for existence has,
in my opinion, rather been a hindrance to it. What
possible chance has the savage of improving himself,
physically or mentally, if his whole time and all his
energies are engaged in a ceaseless endeavour to procure
the bare necessaries of life ? Even if he succeeded in
occasionally satisfying his hunger, how could he take
even the first step towards an improved social condition
without entering into some sort of tribal contract, and
so, to that extent, abandoning the principle of competi-
tion ? Except by concert with others, how could he
secure the benefits of division of labour, which is as
necessary to social as the separation of functions is to
organic progress ? Such advantages are not to be ob-
tained by competition, but by co-operation, which is a
principle of an altogether different kind. An agricul-
tural life, which is so essential to social advancement, is
impossible among rude tribes about equally matched
* Principles of Biology, part vi., p. 376.


(when competition is most severe), and constantly at war
with each other. Before a man will sow he must see
some probability that he will also reap. An increase in
strength in one tribe gives it an advantage in contend-
ing with another tribe, while a decrease in strength at
O ’ O
once lays it open to the attack of its enemies. It is only
when the principle of co-operation is carried out on a
large scale, as by the amalgamation of numerous tribes,
and the community is thus enabled to protect itself,
that opportunity is afforded for social advancement.
Were the struggle for existence as beneficial as it is
OQ
represented to be we should expect to find a high state
of civilization in those countries where the inhabitants
were subjected to the severest form of competition. Do
we find it so, as a matter of fact ? Did the various tribes
of North America, for instance, who, before the advent
of the white man amongst them, were always at war
with each other, ever attain a high state of civilization ?
7 O
The natives of Terra del Fuego, who cannot find time
even to provide their bodies with covering against the
rigorous climate of those regions, so incessantly are they
occupied in attempting to procure even the barest supply
of food, are they not the most wretched specimens of the
human race in existence?
I have said that it would be impossible for civilization
to make a beginning under pressure of severe competition;
I go further, and maintain that an existing civilization
under such conditions, so far from progressing, is more


likely to retrograde. No one will dispute that the
Chinese race are inferior to the Anglo-Saxon. Yet when
those two races come into competition, as they have in
California and in Australia, the result has been detri-
mental, not to the former but to the latter; and a
moment’s consideration will show that it could not be
otherwise. The Anglo-Saxon has more wants, or, what
O ' ’
is the same thing, has a higher standard of comfort, and
a higher social and intellectual position to maintain than
his Chinese rival, and he cannot therefore work at the
same rate of wages, or for the same number of hours as the
latter. The Chinese labourer lodges in a hovel, spends
little on food, which is of the simplest and cheapest kind,
and less on clothing, and as his intellectual resources are
limited, he finds it little hardship to work for long hours at
low wages. When two such races come into competition
one of two things must happen; either the Anglo-Saxon
must lower his standard of living, and relapse into a
lower social and intellectual position, or he must emigrate,
or starve. If he accepts the first alternative he Mali
lower himself physically, morally, and intellectually, to
the condition of his rival; if the latter, his rival will
supplant him, and thus prove himself to be the “ fittest ”
for that condition of existence. One has only to
look at the wretched condition of the shirt-makers
and tailors of the East-end of London to obtain
evidence of the pernicious effects of severe com-
petition. We do not find that the struggle for


existence has had an elevating influence upon this
class of people, but we have proof in abundance of the
evil effects of adaptation to degrading and depressing-
surroundings.
Do we, then, assert that there has been no extinction ?
By no means. There has been extinction on a vast
scale, as the geological records testify; but we have yet
to ascertain the cause of this. According to Darwin the
extinction of species is -wholly, or almost wholly, due to
the struggle for existence. I venture to dissent from
this opinion. Here, however, it will he necessary to
have a clear understanding as to the meaning we attach
to the term “ struggle for existence.” The struggle for
existence is of two kinds; organisms struggle with one
another, hut they also struggle against the adverse forces
of nature. The former is competition; the latter is a
struggle for existence, properly so called. It is the
latter rather than the former that, in my opinion, is
the chief cause of the extinction of species. Nor is it
necessary that we should have to resort to the theory of
great cataclysms or extraordinary convulsions of nature
to explain the phenomena, as, I believe the ordinary
climatic and geological changes that are going on at the
present time are quite sufficient to account for the great
proportion of the destruction of life that has occurred
on the earth. Take, for instance, sudden variations of
temperature. These have had a most disastrous effect
on all kinds of organisms. The change from a very


warm to a cold temperature, or, conversely, from an
extremely cold to a warm temperature, is uniformly
attended with great loss of life. Darwin mentions a
case within his own experience, when in one severe
winter (1854-5) he discovered that four-fifths of the
birds on his grounds had been destroyed by the cold,
and I am informed that the excessive heat of the present
year (1890), in the southern portion of Australia, has
had a very destructive effect on the parrot tribe. Indeed,
so impressed was Darwin by the injurious effect of
climatic changes that he distinctly states that “ periodical
seasons of extreme cold seem to be the most effectual
of all checks in determining the numbers of a species.”*
But does not competition also lead to the extinction of
species ? No doubt it does ; but, in my opinion, only to
a limited extent. If one species be better endowed
than another species, it will undoubtedly have an
advantage in the struggle for life; but it will seldom
happen that the less gifted species has not a set-off of some
kind, such as greater prolificacy, or greater numerical
strength, which will enable it to hold its own against a
race the individuals of which are stronger or better
armed. And if the competitors belong to the same or
to an allied species, the improved individuals, being
numerically inferior, will be absorbed by the less
improved but numerically superior section of the
species. On the other hand, if a species be suddenly
* Origin of Species, p. 54.


confronted by a new and better gifted competitor or
enemy, whether of the same or of a different species
or genus, the consequences are likely to prove serious
to the less gifted species—witness the progress of the
N orwegian or brown rat, which has almost exterminated
every variety of rat in Europe. The advent of a new
competitor, or a new enemy, usually proves disastrous
when it appears suddenly on the scene, and before its
victims have had time to adapt themselves to their new
relations.
Summary. I have here attempted to show that
natural selection, or the struo-oie for existence, is not com-
> DO '
petent to preserve variations, the struggle for existence
not being in its nature preservative; that an organism
does not survive in consequence of the struggle, but
because it is adapted to the conditions of life, as otherwise
the greater the struggle the greater would be the chance
of survival, whereas the unfit probably struggle more
than the fit. Natural selection is a purely destructive
process. Nature brings more beings into existence than
she has made provision for, and she preserves the fit
only by destroying the unfit. Natural selection is of
two kinds ; in the one case there is a struggle against
the adverse forces of Nature, in the other there is a
struggle between the organisms themselves. This latter
is competition. Darwin informs us that competition is
always more severe between varieties of the same or of


allied species—that is, between near relations—because
they are competitors for the same kind of food, and
consequently there is greater destruction amongst the
latter than amongst species less closely related. He
also maintains that the more improved form of a species
exterminates the less improved; but he has produced
no evidence in favour of this view, and we have
shown, as in the case of the foraminifera and the
human race, that this theory cannot be maintained, as
in these instances we find the intermediate, or less
improved, forms of the same species existing side by
side with the more improved. It would rather appear
that a less improved variety, being the more numerous
at the start, absorbs the more improved, to the benefit
of the former. The chief cause of the extinction of
species seems to be sudden changes of climate, and,
in a lesser degree, the sudden appearance of an enemy
not indigenous to the country, and for which the natives
were unprepared. If climatic and other changes were
brought about gradually, and if the species had only to
contend against enemies which were indigenous to the
country, extinction would proceed on a much less exten-
sive scale than it appears to have done in the past, as
the organisms would then have time to adapt themselves
to their new conditions and their new enemies.


CHAPTER IV.
SEXUAL SELECTION.
Sexual selection, according to Darwin, is not a struggle
between the sexes, but between individuals of the same
sex. “ The sexual struggle,” he says, “is of two kinds ;
the one is between individuals of the same sex, generally
the males, in order to drive away or kill their rivals, the
females remaining passive, whilst in the other the struggle
is between the individuals of the same sex, in order to
excite or charm those of the opposite sex, generally the
females, which no longer remain passive, but select the
more agreeable partners.* The superior strength and
the weapons of offence possessed by the male have there-
fore, according to this view, no direct relation to the
' o '
opposite sex, whereas the personal attractions of the
male, such as bright colours, plumage, and so forth, have
direct relation to the opposite sex, having been acquired
for the purpose of alluring the female, and the selection
of a partner, after all the efforts of the male to allure the
female is, at the last, left to the weaker sex.
Darwin also contends that secondary sexual characters
are transmitted by the male to both sexes, the male,
* Descent of Man, 2nd ed., p. 209.


being, in his opinion, more variable than the female
(which is surely contrary to all human experience), is
modified first and subsequently transmits his modified
form to both sexes.* Secondary sexual characters, he
informs us, comprise “ the greater size, strength and pug-
nacity of the male, his weapons of offence or means of
defence against rivals, his gaudy colouring and various
ornaments, his power of song, and other such characters.” - ) -
Many facts and arguments are adduced by Darwin,
some of them of a very singular kind, in support of his
theory of the transfer of secondary male characters to
the female. He tells us, for instance, that “ when the
male is brilliantly coloured, and differs conspicuously
from the female, as with some dragon-flies and butter-
flies, it is probable he owes his colours to sexual selec-
tion, while the female has retained a primordial or
very ancient type of colouring. ... In other cases
in which the sexes resemble each other and are both
brilliant, and especially when the colours are arranged
for display, we may conclude that they have been
acquired by the male sex as an attraction, and have
been transferred to the female.”); If we admit the prob-
ability of the latter statement we should not be asked
at the same time to admit the former; and if we assume
* Descent of Man, 2nd ed., p. 319.
t Ibid., pp. 208, 471, 543, 631-4, and elsewhere; in fact, the
greater portion of the Descent of Man is devoted to the proving of
this point.
J Ibid., p. 328.


that when the sexes are both brilliantly coloured, the
brilliant colouring “ having been acquired by the male
sex as an attraction,” wo shall have to ask what becomes
o£ the attraction when it has been “ transferred to the
female ? ” Again, he says : —“ In no case have we
sufficient evidence that colours have been thus acquired
[by sexual selection] except when one sex is much more
brilliantly and conspicuously coloured than the other,
and when there is no areat difference in habits between
the sexes sufficient to account for their different colours.
But the evidence is rendered as complete as can be only
when the more ornamented individuals, almost always
the males, voluntarily display their attractions before
the other sex; for we cannot believe that such display
is useless, and if it be advantageous, sexual selection
will almost invariably follow'.”* We should have
imagined, on the contrary, that wdien one sex, say the
male, is much more brilliantly or conspicuously coloured
than the female, it w r as a proof that this colouring w r as
advantageous to him in a sexual point of view, and,
being so, should not be transferred to the opposite sex,
otherwise he would cease to be attractive, and would,
therefore, lose any advantage which he might have
possessed. The fact that the most ornamented males
display their attractions before the females show r s that
they consider them advantageous in their sexual
relations; and if they are advantageous in this respect
* Descent of Man, p. 260-1.


that is a sufficient reason why they should not be trans-
ferred to the other sex. The very fact of the male
displaying his attractions before the female, in our
opinion, renders the evidence “as complete as can be ”
that no such transfer has taken place, or otherwise the
purpose for which they had been acquired would be
defeated. According to the principles of sexual selection
(and, of course, the same holds good of natural selection)
no character could be preserved by one sex unless it
were in some way advantageous to that sex, and it is
evident if it were transferred to the opposite sex it could
no longer be an advantage to the sex which originally
acquired it. If we imagine the muscular form, the
sonorous voice, and hirsute appendages of the man
transferred to the woman, we would better understand
the nature of the transformation which Darwin alleges
has taken place in the animal world generally. Secondary
sexual characters, which are becoming in the man, would
be hideous in the woman.
The intimate connection between the reproductive
organs and secondary sexual characters, as proved by
the effect of castration, also precludes the possibility of
any transference. All the secondary sexual characters
of the male disappear, or are greatly modified, after this
operation has taken place. If performed on the male
early in life, secondary sexual characters never appear
at all. On the other hand, all these characters are
intensified during the breeding season—colours become


brighter, plumage more brilliant, odours more pungent,
and the voice sweeter or louder—while some animals,
like the sea-elephant and the bladder-nose seal, acquire
extraordinary vocal appendages, which appear only in
the males, and in the males only during that season.
The question we have to determine is, for what purpose
have secondary sexual characters been acquired by the
males ? For the purpose, says Darwin, of driving off or
killing their rivals, and for alluring the females. But
cD ’ O
this explanation will not apply in all cases, as we shall
see when we ascertain what these secondary sexual
characters are.
There is, first, size and strength. The male is almost
invariably both larger and stronger than the female. In
many species the male is very much larger than the
female, especially among polygamous animals—as, for
example, among whales and seals ; in one of the latter
species, Callorchinus ursinus, the male is as much as
six times larger than the female. The exceptions to this
rule are far from being numerous, and comprise certain
species of insects, fishes and birds.* It is a remarkable
* Among birds Darwin includes the emu, the females being, he
says, larger and more pugnacious than the males, the latter also
performing all the duties of incubation, and have even to defend the
young from the fury of the mother, who is represented as a per-
fectly ferocious character. In confirmation of this, he quotes the
following observations of Dr. Bennett, of Sydney, on the habits of
this bird; —“As soon as she catches sight of her progeny she
becomes violently agitated, and notwithstanding the resistance of


fact that when the male is smaller or weaker than the
female he is also effeminate in his character, while the
larger or stronger female has all the pugnacity of the
male.
Weapons of offence or defence are also, as a rule, peculiar
to the male, such as horns, tusks, incisor teeth, spurs,
and so forth. Among many families of beetles the males
are furnished with extraordinary horns projecting from
the father, appears to use her utmost endeavours to destroy them.
For months, also, it is unsafe to put the parents together, violent
quarrels being the inevitable result, in which the female generally
comes off the conqueror.” It is almost a pity to spoil such an
interesting story, but truth compels me to say that it is not
founded on fact. I learn from Mr. Eichard Bennett, of Victoria,
a gentleman who has spent nearly half a century in the Australian
bush, and has carefully watched the emu in its native haunts, that
‘‘the male differs in no respect from the female, and that the
latter is very attentive to her young.” Mr. Le Souef, Director of
the Melbourne Zoological Gardens, has also kindly supplied me
with the following information : —“ We have a good many of these
birds here. One pair bred regularly every year, last season rearing
five young ones. My experience of these birds agrees with Mr.
E. Bennett’s. The male and female birds sit alternately, and
when the young are hatched, the female takes the most care of
them. The male is the more pugnacious of the two, and is unsafe,
especially with children, during the breeding season. The male
has a little more colour about the head than the female, and has
also a long bunch of feathers on the breast, which it is fond of
displaying; but otherwise it is most difficult to tell a male from a
female when apart, the male being slightly the larger of the two.
A few years ago we had a female bird killed by a leopard while
sitting on her eggs, and the male bird took her place and hatched
the young out unassisted and reared them up.”


the forehead, in some cases longer than their bodies—as.
for instance, the Lamellicorns —which are entirely absent
in the females. The teeth of the male salmon are sharp-
pointed, while those of the female are broad and flat.
The males among reptiles have usually very formidable
weapons, as in the case of Gamoeleon Oivenii, which has
a snout and three horns as well, of which the female has
not a trace. The males of most species of birds are pro-
vided with powerful beaks and spurs, the latter being
absent in the females. Among deer the stags only have
horns, the females being entirely destitute, except in the
case of the reindeer. Among many of our domestic breeds
of goats and sheep, the males alone have offensive
weapons, while among almost all wild animals of the
same species the females have horns, but they are much
smaller than those of the males. Stallions have also
canine teeth, which are either smaller or altogether
' O
absent in the mares. These teeth are freely used on the
mares during the breeding season. Many male rumi-
nants also possess canine teeth, of which the females are
destitute, which are probably used for the same purpose.
Colour is another sexual character. The males are
almost always more distinctly marked than the females ;
sometimes, as in the case of birds, they are gorgeously
coloured, while the females are plain. Among Diptera
the males are darker than the females, as are also spiders,
moths, and field-bugs ( Hemiptera ). Male beetles are
often splendidly coloured, as are also male butterflies
6


especially in the tropics, while the females are plainly
marked. Among fishes the male is usually more bril-
liantly coloured than the female, especially during the
breeding season. Everyone knows how conspicuous are
the colours and plumage of the male pheasant, and the
marked contrast between the sexes in this respect. The
males of the Antarctic goose, the silver pheasant, and the
hell-bird of South America are white, while the females
are obscurely coloured. Among mammals the colour of
the male is usually more pronounced than that of the
female.
The sexes also differ in the sounds they utter. These
are of two kinds —pleasant and harmonious, and harsh
and discordant. Among Homoptera and Orthoptera the
males alone possess the power of song, or make stridu-
lating sounds. Among birds the vocal organs are de-
veloped to their greatest pitch, the male being usually
the best songster. Almost all mammals make frequent
use of their voice during the breeding season, especially
the males, and the male voice is usually much louder and
harsher than that of the female.
Odour is another male sexual character almost peculiar
to the male. In many animals the males alone possess
scent glands, and in those cases where the sexes have
them in common they are more highly developed in the
males.
Generally speaking, when the sexes do not differ in
any of the foregoing characters, the male possesses some


other peculiarity, either by way of ornament, distinction,
or utility, which is absent in the female. But in
addition to these the males of some species of animals
have secondary sexual characters of a very special order.
The males of certain species of ants, for instance, possess
wings, which Darwin supposes to he used for the purpose
of enabling them to pursue the females. These appen-
dages are, of course, peculiar to the male. The males of
some species of beetles have instruments of various kinds
for seizing and holding the female when she is reluctant.
O O
These, also, are peculiar to the males, and under no
circumstances can we imagine them to be transmitted to
the other sex. Although Darwin in numerous places
refers to these organs and explains their uses, he seems
to have overlooked their bearing on the question before
us. Speaking of insects, he says:—“ The mandibles or
jaws are sometimes used for this purpose [that is seizing
the females]; thus the male Corydalis cornutus has
immense curved jaws, many times longer than those of
the female, and they are smooth instead of being toothed,
so that he is thus enabled to seize her without injury.
One of the stag beetles of North America (Lucanus
elaphas) uses his jaws, which are much larger than those
of the female, for the same purpose, but probably like-
wise for fighting.”* Again, referring to the extra-
o n o } £5
ordinary size of the horns of other beetles, he observes
that “ their widely different structure in closely allied
* Descent of Man, p. 273.


forms indicates that they have been formed for some
purpose; but their excessive variability in the males of
the same species leads to the inference that this purpose
cannot be a definite one. The horns do not show breaks
of friction, as if used for any ordinary work. Some
authors have supposed that as the males wander about
much more than the females, they require horns as a
defence against their enemies ; but as the horns are often
O '
blunt, they do not seem well adapted for defence. The
most obvious conjecture is that the} - are used by the
males for fighting together, but the males have never
been knoivn to fight, nor could Mr. Bates, after careful
examination of several species, find any evidence in their
mutilated or broken condition of their having been thus
used.”* Darwin brings a long array of facts to prove
that the females, especially among birds, show a prefer-
ence for certain males, but the authorities he quotes are
not with him in this view. Mr. Brent, for instance, gives
it as his opinion that “ old hens, and hens of a pugnacious
disposition, dislike strange males, and will not yield
until beaten into compliance."
Darwin is probably correct when he states that cer-
tain sexual characters have been acquired by the male
for the purpose of charming the female, amongst which
may be included bright colours, handsome plumage,
wattles, tufts, and so forth, and also the power of song,
and probably pungent odours; but why should we
* Descent of Man, p. 297.


suppose that size, strength, and weapons of offence
should have been acquired by the males for the purpose
of driving off or killing their rivals ? All the other male
O O
sexual characters have relation to the opposite sex, and
why not these also ? The secondary sexual characters
of the male may be divided into two classes: those
which are attractive, and those which are dominant.
To the former belong brilliant colours, ornaments, odour
and song; to the latter size, strength, and weapons of
offence. Vocal sounds belong to both divisions: those
which are soothing and musical being attractive, and
those which are harsh and dissonant being dominant.
Male sexual characters are, in their very nature, co-related
with the opposite sex, otherwise they cannot be regarded
as sexual characters at all. And why, for instance, should
the males be endowed with greater physical strength and
with weapons of offence for the purpose of fighting with
other males ? It is evident that if all the males of the
same species were equally well armed, no advantage
would be gained, as all would be equally matched ; the
only difference would be that if they were powerful and
well armed they would be able to inflict greater injury
upon one another. There would, however, be good
reason for the males possessing these characters if we
supposed them to have reference to the opposite sex.
The female is known to be coy, variable in temper, and
often reluctant to accept the advances of the male. As
these peculiarities of the female might prevent the pro


pagation of the species, and the propagation of the species
being the main object for which the sexes exist, it seems
not altogether improbable that the dominant characters
of the male have been acquired for the purpose of over-
coming the reluctance of the female.
Dai'win’s theory assumes that an advantage would be
gained if the stronger and better armed males killed off
the weaker and worse armed, and that it is the object of
sexual selection to bring about this result. In such a
case we should expect to find everywhere fewer males
than females, since the latter, not having been subjected
to this species of natural selection, would not be dimin-
ished in numbers, while the former would ; but Darwin
admits that he can find no satisfactory evidence that
such is the case.* But this is a very one-sided sort of
an argument altogether, for, if the weeding out of the
O O’’ o
inferior males is an advantage to the race, I fail to see
O '
why the same process should not be extended to the
females. If size, strength, and beauty be the results of
the struggle between the rival males, why should not
the females be allowed to participate in it also, and thus
reap the same advantages ?
Nothing could better illustrate the purposes for which
the males of certain animals use their strength than the
following extract from Captain Bryant’s narrative,
quoted by Darwin. Speaking of the polygamous eared
seals, he says :
* Descent of Man, p. 282.


Many of the females, on their arrival at the island where they
breed, appear desirous of returning to some particular male, and
frequently climb the outlying rocks to overlook the rookeries,
calling out and listening as if for a familiar voice. Then,
changing to another place, they do the same again. ... As
soon as the female reaches the shore, the nearest male goes down
to meet her, making meanwhile a noise like the clucking hen to
her chickens. He bows to her and coaxes her until he gets between
her and the water so that she cannot escape him. Then his
manner changes, and with a harsh growl he drives her to a place
in his harem. This continues until the lower row of harems is
nearly full. Then the males higher up select the time when their
more fortunate neighbours are off their guard to steal their wives.
This they do by taking them in their mouths and lifting them
over the heads of the other females, and, carefully placing them
in their own harem, carrying them as cats do their kittens. Those
still higher up pursue the same method until the whole space is
occupied. Frequently a struggle ensues between two males for
the possession of the same female, and both seizing her at once
pull her in two, or terribly lacerate her with their teeth. When
the space is all filled, the old male walks around complacently
reviewing his family, scolding those who crowd or disturb the
others. This surveillance always keeps him actively occupied.*
This is undoubtedly a rough sort of courtship. The
attractive and the dominant sexual characters of the
male are used by turns, the tender clucking suddenly
changing into a harsh growl according to circumstances.
Having- filled his harem in this rude fashion the male
seems to have had ample opportunities afforded him
afterwards of exercising his marital power in establishing
order among his numerous wives.
* Descent of Man, p. 523.


Curiously enough, primitive marriage amongst man-
kind was not much different from this. Either the
female was forcibly abducted by the husband from
another tribe, or she was at the absolute disposal of her
nearest male relative, who save her in marriage to whom
’ O O
ho chose, without consulting her wishes in the smallest
degree. If she refused to accept the husband offered to
her, she was simply beaten into compliance. The treat-
ment the females have received from time immemorial at
the hands of the stronger males seems to have had a per-
manent effect on the mental character of the weaker sex,
as they will continue to be attached to men who use them
ill, but whose brutality goes along with power, more than
they will continue to be attached to weaker men who use
them well.*
If the purposes for which secondary sexual characters
have been acquired by the male be what we have described,
there can be little difficulty in deciding as to the likeli-
hood or otherwise of their being transferred to the
opposite sex. I do not think the transfer probable, or
even possible, without a reversal of the order of nature.
It is true there are instances where the females of some
species of animals have acquired secondary sexual
characters, as in the case of the domestic fowl, for in-
stance ; but this only occurs when the female has become
old or diseased, and such characters are not transmitted.
* Spencer’s Study of Sociology, p. 377.


One ot‘ the most singular of Darwin’s conclusions is,
that it is the female that selects the male, and not the
male that selects the female. The male, he alleges, is too
ardent to make a selection, so he leaves it to the more
passive female to choose her mate. One would imagine
that the very eagerness of the male shows that he is the
active agent in selection. Why otherwise does he dis-
play his attractions before the females ? Why does he
drive away or kill his male rivals ? And if the stronger
or better armed males succeed in driving- off or killing
O ~
the weaker or worse armed, what choice is there left for
the females ? But, unless mankind are to be excluded
from the operation of sexual selection, what is the
lesson which human experience teaches in this respect ?
Is it the male or the female that selects in this case ?
Nor are the males among animals without their likes
and dislikes, as anyone may see who carefully observes
the habits of our domestic animals. Stallions, for
instance, will often reject certain mares which are
brought to them, and take to others, as every breeder
knows. Turn a stallion into a paddock with a number
of brood mares during the season, and he will cut out a
few whom he favours, and will drive off the rest, and
will not even allow the latter to come near his favourites.
Darwin regards sexual selection as supplementary to
natural selection, but the two theories do not harmonize.
Natural selection looks only to the present, never to the
future; to immediate utility, never to future require


merits ; to the relative, never to the absolute. Variations
are appropriated when advantageous for the time being,
hut a variation that enables an animal to escape the
observation of its enemies, or to subsist on a less quantity
of food, or food of an inferior quality, may thereby
survive, hut it does not follow that it will he improved
by the change; on the contrary, it may be very much
the reverse, as the probability is that it will have
become less beautiful and smaller than it was before.
Sexual selection proceeds on different lines. Size,
strength, and beauty for themselves are what sexual
selection makes for. The female selects the handsomest
and most valiant male. Dull colours are affected by
natural selection, because they are useful; bright colours
are preferred by sexual selection, because they are
beautiful, utility being the criterion in the one case and
beauty in the other.
The facts here presented lead me to the conclusion
that the sexual struggle is not what Darwin represents
it to he—a struggle between individuals of the same sex,
namely, the males —but rather a struggle between the
opposite sexes; that all male sexual characters, secondary
as well as primary, must necessarily have relation to
female sex, and consequently that such characters cannot
be transferred from the one sex to the other.


CHAPTER V.
THE FERTILIZATION OF PLANTS BY INSECTS.
What is the relationship between plants and insects ?
The Darwinist believes it to be of a most amiable and
intimate character, and mutually advantageous. He will
by no means admit that it is a one-sided affair. According
to him both are benefited, especially the plants. They
are supposed to have formed themselves into a sort of
mutual benefit society. The insects obtain nectar from
the flowers, and the flowers get fertilized by the insects.
Fertilization is brought about only in a casual sort
of way, and quite unintentionally on the part of the
insects, the latter not having the remotest idea of bene-
fiting the plant. Nevertheless we are told the plant
is benefited, and that is the main thing; or, rather,
it is not the actually existing plant but the progeny
of the plant, which is, or rather is to be, benefited ;
which shows what a disinterested creature the plant
must be to give away its nectar and ask for nothing
in return, but goodnaturedly accept as a gift what was
never intended for it, or even for its unborn progeny, if
it could be said there is any intention at all in the matter.
Of course it would be rank heresy to believe that the
insects had the best of the bargain.
Nevertheless the plants, we are informed, highly


appreciate the arrangement entered into with their
insectivorous friends, whom they endeavour to attract by
donning their brightest colours, and rendering themselves
beautiful, in order that the insects may be induced to
come and enjoy themselves. Thus says Darwin :
“ Many flowers have been rendered conspicuous for the
sake of guiding insects to them.” * “We certainly owe
the beauty and odour of our flowers and the storage of a
large supply of honey to the existence of insects.” f We
are further informed that the plants exercise discrimina-
tion in offering their attractions. “It may be admitted
as almost certain that some structures, such as a narrow,
elongated nectary, or a long tubular corolla, have been
developed in order that certain kinds of insects alone
should obtain the nectar.” \
Nectar, it seems, is the great, but as we shall see
further on, not the sole attraction. Nearly all flowers
contain nectar, and to obtain this, we are told, is the
main object of the insects in visiting them, and that this,
nectar has been provided for the special purpose of
supplying their wants ; and in order that they may have
no difficulty in finding their way to the nectary “ not
only do the bright colours of the flowers serve to attract
insects, but dark-coloured streaks or marks are often
present, which Sprengel long ago maintained served as
* Cross and Self-Fertilization of Plants and Insects, 2nd ed., 1878,
p. 386.
f Ibid., p. 383. \lhid., p. 384.


guides to the nectary.” * We may here remark that the
conclusion is not strictly logical, as these marks are
found on many flowers which have no nectar at all.
We are also informed that many flowers are rendered
odoriferous for the purpose of attracting certain kinds of
insects ; while other flowers “ emit their odour chiefly,
or exclusively, in the evening in order that they may
not be visited by ill-adapted diurnal insects.” -f* Why
diurnal insects should be objected to as “ ill-adapted ”
is somewhat puzzling, especially when no explanation
has been supplied.
But we have not yet exhausted the list of pleasing-
attractions which the flowers put forth in order to
ensnare their insectivorous friends. Having discovered
that not only the flowers but also the leaves of certain
plants secrete nectar, and that this outside deposit, as
well as that inside the nectary, was sought after by
insects, a difficulty arose as to the connection of this
peculiarity with the fertilization of the flower. What
purpose could be served by the nectar on the leaves ?
In searching for honey stored in the nectary, which is in
the interior base of the flower, insects might, perchance,
get dusted over with pollen, which they might carry to
other flowers and thus fertilize them ; but how could
this result be brought about if the insects never entered
the flower ? The question was a difficult one to answer ;
* Cross and Self-Fertilization of Plants and Insects, p. 373.
t Ibid., p. 375.


nevertheless the reply comes promptly and without a
shadow of hesitancy. The nectar in this instance served
a different purpose from that stored in the nectary. It
had nothing' to do with floral fertilization but was in-
tended for purposes of defence ! “In some cases,” Darwin
tells us, “the secretion seems to attract insects as defenders
of the plants, and may have been developed to a high
degree for this special purpose, I have not the least
doubt.” * Strange to say this view is entertained by
such writers as Delphino and Kerner, as well as by Dar-
winists of all shades of opinion.
Perhaps the most extraordinary instance of “ purpose ”
on record is that given by Darwin on the authority of
the late Dr. Criiger, director of the Botanical Gardens at
Trinidad. The Coryanthes and an allied species of
orchid provide a bucket, and fill it with a limpid
and slightly sweet fluid, not for the insects to drink,
but for them to disport in; and it is necessary that
the insects should be twice immersed in this fluid,
and that they should twice emerge from it again, and
then crawl along a certain track, before fertilization can
be accomplished. On this point we must again quote
Darwin’s own words, which will be intelligible without
the accompanying woodcuts to which he makes refer-
ence :
The flowers (of coryanthes) are very large, and hang down-
wards. The distal portion of the labellum is converted into a
* Gross and Self-Fertilization of Plants and Insects, 2nd ed., p. 406.


large bucket. Two appendages arising from tbe narrowed base
of the labellum stand directly over tbe bucket, and secrete so
much fluid that drops may be seen falling into it. This fluid is
limpid, and so slightly sweet that it does not deserve to be called
nectar, though evidently of the same nature ; nor does it serve to
attract insects. When the bucket is full the fluid overflows by the
spout. This spout is closely overarched by the end of the column
which bears the stigma and pollen masses in such a position that
an insect forcing its way out of the bucket through this passage
would first brush with its back against the stigma, and afterwards
against the viscid discs of the pollinia, and thus remove them.
We are now (he goes on to state) prepared to hear what Dr.
Criiger says about the fertilization of an allied species, the C.
macrantha, the labellum of which is provided with crests. I may
premise that he sent me (Darwin continues) specimens of the
bees which he saw gnawing these crests, and they belong, as I am
informed by M. R Smith, to the genus englossa. Dr. Criiger
states that ‘ ‘ these bees may be seen in great numbers disputing
with each other for a place on the edge of the hypochial {i.e. , the
basal part of the labellum). Partly by this contest, partly, per-
haps, intoxicated by the matter they are indulging in, they
tumble down into the bucket, half-full of a fluid. They then
crawl along in the water towards the anterior side of the bucket,
where there is a passage for them between the opening of this and
the column. If one is early on the look-out, as these Hymenoptercv
are early risers, one can see in every flower how fecundation is
performed. The humble-bee, in forcing its way out of its
involuntary bath, has to exert itself considerably, as the mouth of
the opichil (i.e., the distal part of the labellum) and the face of the
column fit together exactly, and are very stiff and elastic. The
first bee, then, which is immersed will have the gland of the pollen
mass glued to its back. The insect then generally gets through
the passage, and comes out with this peculiar appendage, to return
nearly immediately to its feast, when it is generally precipitated a
second time into the bucket, passing through the same opening,
and so inserting the pollen masses into the stigma while it forces


its way out, and thereby impregnating the same or some other
flower. I have often seen this ; and sometimes there are so many
of these humble-bees assembled that there is a continual procession
of them through the passage specified.” There cannot be the
least doubt that the fertilization of the flower absolutely
depends on insects crawling through the passage formed by the
extremity of the labellum and the overarching column. If the
large distal portion of the labellum or bucket had been dry, the
bees could easily have escaped by flying away. Therefore, we must
believe that the fluid is secreted by the appendages in such an
extraordinary quantity, and is collected in the bucket, not as a
palatable attraction for the bees, as these are known to gnaw the
labellum, but for the sake of wetting their wings, and thus com-
pelling them to crawl out through the passage.*
I do not for a moment dispute the facts here narrated.
That the structure of plants is as described, that the
bees act in the manner stated, and that the plants are
fertilized by the bees in this extraordinary fashion I
have no reason to doubt: but that the whole of this
complicated apparatus of fluid-secreting glands, append-
ages, baths, and passages has been provided for the
purpose of securing fertilization by insects is simply
incredible. It is far more probable that the insects made
use of the existing apparatus than that it had been
expressly provided for them in order to get the alleged
purpose effected.
It will be observed that Darwin uses the term “ pur-
pose ” when describing the relations between plants and
insects. It is necessary, therefore, to explain what he
* The Fertilization of Orchids , p. 173-4, 2nd ed., 1885.


means by “ purpose.” He does not use the term in the
sense ordinarily understood by it. Purpose implies fore-
thought, deliberation, and intention ; it is the conception
of an intelligent agent. But Darwin uses the term in an
O O
altogether different sense. His theory demands, in the
first instance, two formidable conditions. The first is
unlimited variations ; the second, unlimited time; and to
these he adds, as we have seen, “ a capacity for change ”
on the part of the organism. Thus, if among billions of
variations a plant happily produced a flower with a
plumose stigma, the flower would be what is called
anemophilous —that is, it would be capable of being-
fertilized by the wind; and having acquired this, let us
say, advantageous form, it would leave behind it a larger
progeny than other plants not so well endowed. Sup-
pose, again, that among innumerable plants, in some far
remote time, one of them happened to secrete honey in
the interior base of the flower which attracted the visits
of insects (supposing them to have been in existence at
this period), a race of plants bearing entomophilous
flowers—that is, flowers capable of being fertilized by
insects—would be the result. In all this there is no fore-
sight, deliberation, or intention, nothing but mere chance.
The use of the term “ purpose ” in the Darwinian sense
is, therefore, incorrect and misleading. Small wonder
that ordinary readers are puzzled when they meet with
the term so often in the literature of this school. Even
Lange was misled by the term, as in describing the
7


process of natural selection he compares it to the sports-
man who, in order to shoot a hare, goes out into the
fields and fires at random in every direction, thus imply-
ing a purpose or object, hut showing utter want of skill
or intelligence on the part of the agent, which was what
Lange wished to point out by his illustration. \o
doubt intelligence is a superfluity in the Darwinian
universe.
From the extracts given above, it appears beyond
doubt that Darwin maintained that certain species of
plants have acquired a certain structure, and secrete a
certain product for the purpose of attracting certain
species of insects. I do not dispute the fact of the
structure, or of the product, but I take leave to doubt
whether the structure has been acquired or the pro-
duct secreted for the purpose alleged. Further on
I shall point out that the structure has in some instances
been misunderstood; and that in other instances both
the structure and the presence of the nectar are
capable of a different interpretation from what has been
put upon them. That certain insects visit certain flowers
and in penetrating to or returning from the nectary they
get their bodies dusted over with pollen, a portion of
which may get carried to other flowers of the same
species, and that in this manner the ovules of one plant
may be fertilized with the pollen from another, or what
is called cross-fertilization takes place, no one nowadays
disputes. But what is not admitted, though the Dar


winist insists on it, and what has to be proved by better
evidence than has yet been adduced is—(1) that certain
flowers produce nectar for the purpose of attracting
insects ; (2) that certain flowers have acquired a certain
structure, and that certain other flowers, called dicho-
gamous, have their pollen and stigma matured at different
times in order to ensure cross-fertilization ; and (3) that
cross-fertilization is necessary or beneficial.
1. That flowers produce nectar for the purpose of
attracting insects is very far from being proved. Were
insects attracted solely by the presence of the nectar, the
fact might be accounted for in the manner stated ; but
the nectar is not the sole attraction; and here the
Darwinist does not deal quite fairly with his facts. It
is well known that the same kind of insects which eat
the nectar also devour the pollen. The pollen must there-
fore be an attraction as well as the nectar. How is it,
then, that the Darwinist, while so eloquent about the
attraction of the nectar, is so reticent about the pollen ?
If insects are attracted by the pollen as well as by
the nectar —and Darwin himself admits it—and if the
nectar is produced for the purpose of attracting insects,
why does he not acknowledge that the pollen might also
be provided for the same purpose ? The reason is obvious.
Darwin believes that the nectar is provided for the
insects because he has not yet discovered any other use
for it in the economy of the plant; but he cannot possibly
believe that the pollen has been produced for the purpose


of being devoured by insects, if he keeps in mind the
obvious fact, which he so constantly enforces and so
often forgets, that “ the production of seed is the chief
end of the act of fertilization.” *
Without the nectar no insect visitations, according to
the Darwinist, and without the insects no cross-fertiliza-
tion ; so that the nectar is the all-important thing for
him. It is a fact, nevertheless, that many species of
flowers have no nectary, and produce no honey, and are
yet constantly visited by insects. Thus, Lupinus luteus,
the poppy, the common broom, the potato, the sweet
pea, and numerous other species, have no nectary, and
secrete no honey, and yet are constantly visited by both
hive and humble bees. On the other hand, many species
of plants, as Eptpactus latifolia, have a copious supply
of honey in the nectary which is never touched by
insects. In such cases, therefore, it cannot be said that
the honey is the attraction. The fact of the matter is
that in these, and in most other cases, the insects are not
allured by the nectar at all but by the pollen. Darwin
is of opinion that insects were originally attracted by
the pollen, and subsequently by the nectar. This may
or may not have been the case; but whether or not this
much is certain, that if they commenced by eating the
pollen and afterwards acquired a preference for the
nectar, they have not yet lost their liking for pollen.
2. The argument from structure—the general form of
* Cross and Self-Fertilization of Plants, p. 3.


the flower, the position of the anthers and stigma, and
the existence of dichogamous flowers—seems, at first
sight, a strong one. Yet many species of plants, which
appear to be specially adapted for cross-fertilization, are
self-fertile, although constantly visited by insects. Thus,
the sweet pea (Lathyrus odoratus ) and the common pea
(Pisum sativum) are constantly visited by insects, yet
they are never fertilized by them. Of the latter, Mr.
Farrer says that its structure peculiarly fits it for
cross-fertilization—“ The open blossom, displaying itself
in the most attractive and convenient position for
insects ; the conspicuous vexillum, the wings forming an
alighting place; the attachment of the wings to the keel,
by which any body pressing on the former must press
down the latter ; the staminal tube, enclosing nectar, and
affording, by means of its partially free stamen, with
apertures on each side of its base, an open passage to an
insect seeking the nectar; the moist and sticky pollen,
placed just where it will be swept out of the apex of the
keel against the entering insect ; the stiff elastic style,
so placed that on a pressure being applied to the keel it
will be pushed upwards out of the keel; the hairs on
the style placed on that side of the style only on which
there is space for the pollen, and in such a direction as
to sweep it out; and the stigma, so placed as to meet an
entering insect—all these become correlated parts of one
elaborate mechanism, if we suppose that the fertilization
of these flowers is effected by the carriage of pollen from


one to the other.”* Notwithstanding these manifest
provisions for cross-fertilization, Darwin has to admit
that varieties of this plant, which have been cultivated
for many successive generations in close proximity,
although flowering at the same time, continued to
remain pure.
Indeed, the argument from structure may be used on
the other side of the question, and with much greater
force. While the Darwinist is perpetually expatiating
on the wonderful contrivances for ensuring cross-fer-
tilization, he carefully ignores the facts which point
unmistakably in an opposite direction. He omits, for
instance, to inform us that there is a larger number of
species which are more adapted for self-fertilization than
for cross-fertilization by insects, while many species have
their flowers so formed that cross-fertilization is an
absolute impossibility. Thus, hermaphrodite plants have
the anthers and stigma on the same flower, and these are
often so situated that it is almost impossible for self-
fertilization not to take place. There are numerous
species with small and inconspicuous flowers, which are
seldom or never visited by insects ; and may we not
infer that if flowers have acquired size and conspicuous-
ness in order to attract insects, that small and incon-
spicuous flowers have been so constructed to deter
insects from visiting them ? Then there are other
species which have neither small nor inconspicuous
* Nature, 10th October, 1872, p. 479.


flowers, but have a narrow elongated nectary, or a long
tubular corolla, sometimes with hairs inside, which pre-
vents the admission of any except the smallest, and from
the Darwinist point of view, the most useless kinds of
insects. And, lastly, we have plants with cleistogamic
or closed flowers, which no insect whatever can pene-
trate. Why does the Darwinist omit mention of such
structures as these ? There can he no mistake about
their bearing on the question before us. If some flowers
have, or appear to have, a structure adapted for cross-
fertilization, here we have others which are unmistak-
ably adapted for self-fertilization, and others again
which it is impossible that insects can fertilize under
any circumstances. What is the inference to be drawn
from these facts ? In the one case the adaptations
must be regarded as imaginary, as we have seen it to
be with the sweet pea and the common pea; in the
other cases the adaptations are real because they are
effective, cross-fertilization being rendered impossible.
No one who has carefully observed the reproductive
organs of plants can fail to have been struck by the
overwhelming amount of evidence in favour of structural
adaptation for the purpose of ensuring self-fertilization.*
The existence of dichogamy in plants no doubt favours
cross-fertilization. Dichogamous plants are of two kinds.
* Darwin admits that “the greater number of flowers present
structures which are manifestly adapted for self-fertilization.” —•
Cross and Self-Fertilization of Plants, p. 381.


those, namely, in which the pollen is matured before the
stigma, called proterandrous; and those in which the
stigma is matured before the pollen, called proterogynous,
the latter form being not nearly so common as the
former. The question which concerns us here is, whether
dichogamy has been acquired in order to ensure cross-
fertilization by insects, or has been the result of insect
visitation. lam of opinion that the latter view is the
correct one. A plant accustomed to be fertilized by out-
side agency would not make any effort, and would not
require to make any effort, to fertilize itself, and the
mechanism would, consequently, no longer be adjusted to
its proper functions, and the flower would adapt itself to
its new conditions of existence. Most open flowers are
adapted for either self or cross-fertilization, and circum-
stances will determine the action of the plant. If it has
been in the habit of fertilizing itself there will be no
necessity for insect visitation; on the other hand, if it
has been accustomed to be fertilized by insects, insect
visitation will be necessary, or sterility will be the result.
Thus, Mimulus luteus fertilizes itself by bending down
the pistil to the stamen; but if visited by insects the
plant would be spared the effort of fertilizing itself, and
would in course of time cease to make it. Ipomea
purpurea, when full grown, fertilizes itself by brushing
its anthers against the stigma; Viola tricolor by curling
its petals inwards when the flower is mature; Lobelia
ramosa by pushing the pollen out of the conjoined


anthers ; buttercups by closing themselves at night, thus
bringing the stigma in contact with the anthers. But if
flowers are habitually fertilized by outside agency they
will lose their functional activity in this respect, their
organic equilibrium will be disturbed, and in order to
adapt themselves to their changed conditions, they will
acquire certain modifications in their structure which
will sometimes assume, as in the case of orchids, the
most curious and even fantastical shapes.
And here comes into operation the law of Use and
Disuse, or, as I should prefer to call it, of Effort and
Abstinence, and of the inheritance of functionally pro-
duced modifications. This law Darwin insists on as
firmly as does Mr. Herbert Spencer, notwithstanding its
apparent contradiction to the theory of natural selec-
tion. “It is probable,” he says, “ that disuse has been
the main agent in rendering organs rudimentary. On
the whole we may conclude that habit, or use and disuse,
have in some cases played a considerable part in the
modification of the constitution and structure.”* If disuse
has been the main agent in rendering organs rudimentary
or abortive, there can be little doubt of its application
to the case before us. If from disuse our domestic ducks
and geese have almost lost their power of flight; if
with the domestic pigeon the length of the sternum, the
prominence of its crest the length of the scapulae and the
furcula, and the length of the wings are all reduced
* Cross and Self-Fertilization of Plants, p. 114.


relatively to the same parts in the wild pigeon; if the
shortened legs and snout of the domestic pig and the
reduced size of the lungs and liver of our domestic cattle
are due to disuse, as Darwin maintains—l say if all these
modifications have been so caused, it is easy to compre-
hend how it is that disused functions in the sexual
organs of plants may produce partial sterility and cor-
relative modifications of structure.
On this principle we may account for proterandry
and proterogyny. The reproductive organs being most
sensitive, the constant visits of insects, especially of the
larger species, will cause the parts of the flower on
which they alight, and crawl over on their way to the
nectary to mature early.* This also explains how it is
that proterandry is much more common than proter-
ogyny. As a rule the anthers are about five to one of
the stigmas, and the former being more in the way of
the insects when forcing their entrance into the nectary
than the latter, which are in the centre, the former
would be matured earlier than the latter. That plants
have become proterandrous or proterogynous in order
that they may not be self-fertilized seems to me most
improbable.
3. In order to ascertain whether self or cross-fertiliza-
tion is most beneficial, Darwin commenced a series of
experiments, which he carried on for several years, the
* Mr. Henslow has some remarks on this subj ect in his able and
suggestive work on Floral Structures.


results of which he has embodied in his work on Cross
and Self-Fertilization of Plants. Since the publication
of that book other botanists, both in England and Ger-
; O
many, have entered the same field of inquiry, but as
they have all taken the same view as Darwin, and
have not added anything material to our knowledge
on this subject, I shall confine myself to an examina-
tion of the results given in the work referred to.
The general conclusion which Darwin arrived at is
this, that “ cross-fertilization is generally beneficial, and
self-fertilization often injurious ; ” but he adds that “ the
most important conclusion at which I have arrived is,
that the mere act of crossing by itself does no good. The
good depends on the individuals which are crossed differ-
ing slightly in constitution, owing to their progenitors
having been subjected, during several generations, to
slightly different conditions, or what we call in our
ignorance spontaneous variation.” * Darwin conducted
his experiments in the following manner: —He sowed
the seed of various species of plants, taken respec-
tively from flowers which had been cross-fertilized,
and from others which had been self-fertilized, and
these he grew under the same conditions; when they
were fully grown he measured their height, counted
the seeds which they had produced, and in some
instances cut down and weighed the plants.
Darwin’s experiments, however, have been seriously
* Cross and Self-Fertilization of Plants , p. 27.


vitiated —(1.) By his selecting for experiment almost
exclusively plants which had long been cultivated in
our gardens and nurseries, which had large open flowers
which had been habitually fertilized by insects. It was
to be expected that a plant which had been accustomed
to be fertilized by insects would react very differently
towards its own pollen from what it would towards
pollen brought to it from another plant by an agency
outside itself. (2). By cross-fertilizing by hand, instead
of allowing fertilization to take place by insects in a
natural way. The difference between the two processes
is material. In cross-fertilizing by hand the operator
makes sure that the pollen is taken from a distinct plant,
probably from a fresh stock altogether ; but there is no
such guarantee if fertilization is left to insects. In the
latter case the pollen is almost sure to be gathered from
the nearest plant, or from the same plant. It has been
observed that insects, and especially bees, which are the
chief agents in this process, almost invariably visit all
the flowers of the same species which are adjacent, one
after the other, before going to others of the same species
at a distance. By this means the last-visited flower
would, almost to a certainty, receive the pollen from the
same or some adjacent plant. (3.) By not extending his
experiments with individual species for longer periods.
As a rule he was content with one trial only, or one
generation of plants. When he departed from this rule
the results were sometimes remarkably different.


A few illustrations will show the importance of this
last objection. Thus, with Ipomea purpurea, a self-
fertile plant, but which is often crossed by insects,
Darwin experimented for as many as ten successive
generations, and in each generation, from the first to the
tenth inclusive, the seedlings from the crossed plants in
each trial were on an average taller than those from the
self-fertilized plants of the same stock. But the difference
in growth between the intercrossed and self-fertilized
seedlings did not continue to increase with each succes-
sive generation, as we should expect if self-fertilization
were injurious and cross-fertilization favourable. For
the difference between the two sets of plants in the
seventh and eighth generation was actually less than it
was in the first and second. But although the seedlings
from the intercrossed were, on an average, superior in
height to those from the self-fertilized plants, a remark-
ably vigorous plant appeared among the latter in the
sixth generation, which Darwin named “ Hero.” He was
O ’
so surprised at the appearance of this plant that he
resolved to ascertain whether it would transmit its
power of growth to its progeny. Several flowers on
“Hero” were accordingly fertilized with their own pollen,
and the seedlings thus raised were put into competition
with seedlings from intercrossed plants of the corres-
ponding generation. The result proved, much to
Darwin’s astonishment, the great superiority of the seed-
lings from the self-fertilized “Hero” over the seedlings


from the intercrossed plants ; and, what seemed to the
experimenter still more extraordinary, all succeeding
self-fertilized descendants of “ Hero,” to the number of
seven generations, continued to show their superiority
when put into competition with seedlings from inter-
crossed plants of the corresponding generation. Thus
Darwin was forced to admit not only that the descendants
from “Hero” had inherited “ a power of growth equal to
that of the ordinary intercrossed plants,” but also that
they had “ become more fertile when self-fertilized than
is usual with plants of the present species.”*
The only other species which Darwin experimented on
for a number of generations was Mimulus luteus, a
species which is said to tear flowers “ peculiarly
adapted for insect fertilization,” and a result similar
to the last followed, only more decisive. In the first
four generations the seedlings from the cross-fertilized
were superior in height to the seedlings from the
self-fertilized plants ; but in the fifth generation the
position was reversed, and the latter gained the
superiority, not in height only, but also in fertility.
In the fifth generation the crossed plants were in
height to the self-fertilized as 100 to 126, in the sixth
as 100 to 147, in the seventh as 100 to 137; and “in the
sixth generation the self-fertilized plants of this variety
compared with the crossed plants produced capsules
in the proportion of 147 to 100,” and in the seventh
* Cross and Self-Fertilization of Plants, p. 50.


generation the self-fertilized plants were equally
fertile.*
Even the results of experiments carried on for only
one or two generations did not always prove the
superiority of seedlings from crossed plants. Thus he
experimented with Eschscholtzia Califomica for two
generations; in the first the seedlings from crossed
exceeded in height those from self-fertilized plants as
100 to 86, but in the second generation the crossed stood
to the self-fertilized as 100 to 101. But what is even
more remarkable is that seedlings from plants crossed
with fresh stock (which Darwin considers to be
immensely beneficial), proved inferior to the seedlings
from self-fertilized plants in the proportion of 100 to
116 in height and 100 to 118 in fertility. Petunia
violacea is another case in point. In the first and second
generations the seedlings from crossed were decidedly
superior in height to those from self-fertilized plants, but
in the third generation the latter beat the former in two
trials, first when the plants were young, when the crossed
were to the self-fertilized as 100 to 186, and next when
they were, fully grown, when they were as 100 to 131.
Seedlings from these self-fertilized plants were next
tested for fertility, when they proved superior to the
crossed in this respect also, although in the two pre-
vious generations they had been inferior. Every breeder
of domestic animals knows that a first cross is usually
* Cross and Self-Fertilization of Plants, p. 79.


beneficial, but that a second or subsequent crosses are
almost certain to be the reverse.
On the whole it appears that in 86 out of 54 species
the crossed exceeded the self-fertilized in height, while
in the remaining 18 the position was reversed, the self-
fertilized in these instances exceeding- the crossed. As
regards fertility, also, Darwin’s experiments show that
the cross-fertilized plants had the advantage.*
* In some respects, indeed, Darwin has not put the results of his
experiments quite fairly. He recommends the general reader in
the introduction to skip the details of his experiments and read
his summaries and observations at the end of his work ; but I find
the summaries at the end do not always agree with the details at
the beginning. For instance, he made two experiments with
Eschscholtzia Californica ; in the first the crossed were to the self-
fertilized in height as 100 to 86, in the second as 100 to 101, and
he puts the former in his summary and omits the latter. He
made experiments with Mimidus luteus for several generations,
but in his summary he only gives the results of the first three,
which supported his views, and omitted all subsequent results,
which were adverse. With Digitalis purpurea he made two
experiments, in both of which the crossed plants had the advantage
in height, but one more than the other, and ho omits from his
summary the one which was least favourable to his own views.
Two experiments were made with Brassica oleracea, the same
plants on each occasion, one before they were fully grown and the
other after they had seeded. In the first trial the self-fertilized
exceeded the crossed in height, in the second the result was reversed;
he omits the first measurement altogether, and gives only the last.
In two experiments with two different sets of plants of Viscaria
osculata, the first showed the crossed to be inferior, and it is
omitted; the second showed the reverse, and it is given. With
Lobelia fulgens he made two experiments on the same sets of plants.


Darwin’s experiments show one very important result,
which has not received at his hands that attention which
it deserves. I refer to the fact that continuous self-
fertilization does not produce deterioration. The experi-
ments, so far as they go, show not only that the latest
generations of plants, whose ancestors had long been self-
fertilized, suffered no injury from the process, and also
that cross-fertilized plants, whose ancestors had long-
been crossed, received no benefit in the later generations.
Ipomea purpurea and Mimulus luteus, as already
stated, were the only species which were experimented
on for long periods, and the self-fertilized plants of the
former species showed no deterioration in height, as
In the first the crossed were to the self-fertilized as 100 to 127,
and being, as he says, much surprised at this result, he determined
to try how they would behave during a second growth. In this
second experiment the crossed were to the self-fertilized as 100 to
167. The results of the first experiment are given and those of
the second omitted. In the case of llrassica oleracea, given above,
it will be observed that he adopted exactly the opposite course.
Three experiments were made with Nenwphila insignia, the two
first on the same sets of plants at different stages of growth, in
which the crossed were to the self-fertilized as 100 to 49 and 100
to 60 respectively; in the third experiment the crossed were to
the self-fertilized as 100 to 133. The results of the two first are
given and the third omitted. With Petunia violacea of the third
generation he made two experiments with the same sets of plants,
the first when young, when the crossed were to the self-fertilized as
100 to 186; the second when fully grown, when the proportion
was reduced to 100 and 131 respectively, and the latter measure-
ment only is given.
8


compared with the crossed plants of the corresponding
generation—in fact, rather a steady improvement —and
very little in fertility; while the self-fertilized plants of
the latter species compared with the crossed showed a
marked and steady improvement from the first to the
tenth generation, both in height and in fertility. Now,
if self-fertilization is injurious, each generation of self-
fertilized plants should have been worse than the pre-
vious one, and each generation of the crossed should
have been better.
The result of his experiments Darwin sums up in the
statement that “ the mere act of crossing by itself does
no good; ” the good, he says, depends on the individuals
which are crossed differing in constitution, from being
grown under different conditions. A cross with indivi-
duals growing for any length of time on the same soil
will therefore be of little or no advantage. The reason
is obvious. Plants, when they remain for a long time in
the same place, exhaust the soil of certain constituents
which are necessary for their well-being, and the longer
they remain there they will become less and less vigorous,
and less and less fertile, and, in course of time, even al-
together sterile, for sterility is one of the results of low
vitality. The deterioration of the plants is entirely due
to the exhaustion of the soil. Change the soil, or remove
the plants to another situation where the soil has not
been exhausted, and the plants will at once recover their
wonted vigour and fertility. But no permanently good


effect will be obtained by crossing plants which are
suffering from want of proper sustenance, not even by
crossing with a fresh stock. At best a cross will only
produce a temporary improvement under such circum-
stances.
For this state of things nature has provided a remedy,
not by transporting the pollen from one flower to another,
but by transporting the seed to fresh soil. For this pur-
pose many kinds of seeds are of extraordinary lightness,
and can he carried by the wind great distances ; some
kinds are provided with plumes and wings for floating
in the air; others have hooks and spears which fasten on,
or penetrate into, the bodies of animals and are thus
carried far and wide ; while others, again, have capsules
with peculiar mechanical contrivances, which explode
when the seed is ripe, and scatter it to a distance from
the plant. The- seeds of many water plants are also
endowed with locomotive power, by means of vibratile
hair-like processes, called cilia. Similar provisions have
been made in the animal world for the distribution of
seed. All stationary marine and freshwater animals
produce young, which, by means of flagella and cilia,
have the power of moving about freely. The air, the
earth, and the water are full of the germs of vege-
table and animal life. If a handful of soil be exposed
to sun and air a number of plants will immediately make
their appearance, many of which belong to distant locali-
ties, the seed having been transported hither by the


agencies referred to. That the air we breathe is full of
the germs of organisms, both animal and vegetable, has
O o 7 o’
been amply proved by the researches of Pasteur, Prank-
land, and others ; and not near the surface only, hut
at great elevations ; and at sea, more than a hundred miles
from land.
There is no evidence whatever of want of vigour or of
sterility in plants which either have not been or cannot
be fertilized by insects. On the contrary the evidence is
all the other way. Darwin admits that some plants,
owing to their structure, have almost certainly been
propagated in a state of nature for thousands of
generations without having been once intercrossed. *
o o
Plants with cleistogamic or inconspicuous flowers are, of
course, self-fertile ; and if self-fertilization were injurious
we should look for some evidence of it in this class
of plants. We should expect them to be weak and
unfertile, and consequently x - are. But the contrary is
the case. As a rule such plants hold their own against
all competitors, and are vigorous and prolific to an
extraordinary degree. They seem to flourish everywhere—
no temperature being too hot or too cold, no soil too poor
or too rich for them. The great majority of weeds belong
to this class. Malva rotundifolia has established itself
in every part of the world; Stellaria media, or the
common chickweed, is to he found not only all over
Europe, but in Australia, New Zealand, Tasmania, South
* Cross and Self-Fertilization of Plants, p. 442.


Africa, North and South America, India, and the Auck-
land Islands.
There can he little doubt, I think, that cultivated
plants, like domesticated animals, are more subject
to variation than plants in a state of nature. Almost
all our domestic animals (the goose and the guinea-
fowl being almost the only exceptions)—rabbits, fowls,
pigeons, and cattle—have varied extensively both in
form and colour ; and it is a singular fact that all of
them when allowed their freedom revert to their
aboriginal type. Although it has not been observed
that plants show this tendency, it is well known that in
their wild state their colours seldom vary. It is also a
fact, which is amply confirmed by Darwin’s experiments,
that cultivated plants, which vary excessively in colour
when crossed, lose this tendency when self-fertilized
for a number of generations, and become absolutely
uniform.
With most plants which have been long cultivated for the flower
garden, no character is more variable than that of colour, except-
ing perhaps that of height. . . . The variability of plants in
the above respects is due, firstly, to their being subjected to some-
what diversified conditions, and secondly, to their being often
intercrossed, as would follow from the free access of insects. Ido
not see how this inference can be avoided, as when the above plants
were cultivated for several generations under closely similar con-
ditions, and were intercrossed in each generation, the colour of
their flowers tended in some degree to change and become uniform.
When no intercrossing with other plants of the same stock was
allowed—that is, when the flowers were fertilized with their own


pollen in each generation—their colour in the latter generations
became as uniform as that of plants growing in a state of
nature. *
No doubt self-fertilization is a great factor in pro-
ducing uniformity of colour. That this uniformity is
not due to the plants having been “ subjected to some-
what diversified conditions,” as Darwin intimates, is
shown by the fact that wild plants grow and maintain
their uniform colour in all sorts of soils and in all
kinds of situations. But if self-fertilization be the
cause of uniformity, the converse will also hold good,
and variation must be regarded as the result of cross-
fertilization. This may account for the excessive
variations alike in domesticated animals and cultivated
plants. We know that with regard to animals in a
state of nature consanguinity is no bar to marriage.
Here the most closely related animals pair with one
another; and among polygamous animals the male mates
freely with his own progeny and drives away or kills
every strange male that ventures near his females.
With domestic animals it is different. Here in-breed-
ing is the exception; and it is not till he has produced
the type of animal that he wishes to propagate that
the breeder permits in-breeding, and this he does
ultimately in order to establish his type. Now, to
what do these facts point ? Darwin insists upon it that
cross-fertilization is beneficial; but if we take into
* Cross and Self-Fertilization of Plants , pp. 310-311.


account the indisputable facts as to the uniformity of
colour of plants in a state of nature, and their diversity
under cultivation, and if we further admit that this
uniformity and this diversity are brought about in the
manner indicated, I do not see how we can avoid the
conclusion that natural selection has failed, in the case
of wild plants, to appropriate the advantage offered to it
by cross-fertilization. Either we must accept this con-
clusion or refuse to admit that cross-fertilization is
beneficial.
Assuming, however, that cross-fertilization is bene-
ficial, and that it is brought about by means of insects,
we should expect, in accordance with the principle of
natural selection, to find that wherever honey-eating
and pollen-devouring insects were abundant, there the
flowers would he large and conspicuous, and, as a conse-
quence, cross-fertilization would take place to a large
extent, and the progeny from the intercrossed plants
would he so vigorous and so fertile that they would in the
course of time outnumber, if they did not take the place
of, self-fertilized plants. In other words, we should have
entomophilous flowers everywhere prevalent. But as a
matter of fact we find no such results. Entomophilous
flowers, whether reckoned by species or by individuals,
are by no means numerous, compared with other flowers
which are not visited by insects. They are common enough
among our cultivated plants, it is true, and that is how we
come to know them so well; hut they are comparatively


rare in a state of nature. The list of non-entomophilous
plants, on the other hand, is extremely large, including
not only all those classed as hermaphrodite, many of
which are also fertilized by insects, amenophilous (which
in the number of individuals, if not in species, alone
exceeds the entomophilous plants), the cleistogamic, and
such as bear small and inconspicuous flowers, but also
whole groups of species and genera which do not produce
seed at all, and are, therefore, incapable of being inter-
crossed, but propagate by means of rhizomes, soboles,
conns, cloves, and bulbs. There is no special virtue in
seed any more than there is in a cross. Many species of
plants produce both seeds and bulbs, and propagate more
freely by the latter than by the former, and yet show no
loss of vigour or fertility—as, for instance, potatoes, and
tubers of almost every description. Our common fruit
trees have also been propagated for thousands of years
by cuttings, and yet we have no reason to believe that
they are not as fruitful as ever they were. The grape
vine is even a better illustration, for it has been pro-
pagated by cuttings from time immemorial, and as far
back as we can trace it has been subjected to the hardest
usage by severe pruning, and yet it gives no sign of
deterioration.
But I shall probably be told that the process of con-
version of plants from non-entomophilous to entomophilous
is still going on, and that in course of time the latter
will possess the earth. True, I forgot that the Darwinist


demands immeasurable time in the future as well as in
the past. It is difficult to deal with questions involving
what are practically infinite quantities, hut even an
immeasurable future will not serve him in the present
instance, as entomophilous plants never can be very
numerous, for many reasons, for—l. They can only ad-
vance in masses ; all straggders from the main body will
die and have no progeny, as they cannot be fertilized in
the absence of other plants of the same species. 2. The
masses are liable at any time to die without progeny if,
from any cause, there should be no insects to fertilize
them. 3. Throughout a great portion of the globe, as in
the Arctic and Antarctic and the colder temperate and
alpine regions, insects are either comparatively rare or
altogether absent. 4. Even where insects are abundant,
as in the tropics, insect fertilization does not invariably
take place. Darwin himself admits that fertilization of
insects, even under the most favourable conditions, is
often a failure. Thus he says :
The frequency with which throughout the world members of
various orchid ecus tribes fail to have their flowers fertilized,
though these are excellently constructed for cross-fertilization, is
a remarkable fact. Fritz Muller informs mo (he goes on to say)
that this holds good in the luxuriant forests of South Brazil
with most of the Epi dendrite and with the genus Vanilla. For
instance, he visited a site whore vanilla creeps over almost every
tree, and although the plants have been covered with flowers, yet
only two seed capsules were produced. So, again, with Epiden-
drmn, 233 flowers had fallen off unimpregnated, and only one
capsule had been formed; of the still remaining 136 flowers only


four had their pollinia removed. In "New South Wales, Mr. Fitz-
gerald does not believe that more than one flower out of a thousand
of DemlroMum speciosum set a capsule, and some other species there
are very sterile. In New Zealand over 200 flowers of Coryanthes
trilobia yielded only five capsules, and at the Cape of Good Hope
only the same number were produced by 78 flowers of Disa grandi-
flora. Nearly the same result has been observed with some of the
species of ophrys in Europe. The sterility in these cases is very
difficult to explain. It manifestly depends on the flowers being
constructed with such elaborate care for cross-fertilization that
they cannot yield seed without the aid of insects. ... In
these cases in which only a few flowers are impregnated, owing
to the proper insects visiting only a few, this may be a great
injury to the plant, and many hundred species throughout the
world have been thus exterminated. *
We should also expect to find the number of ento-
mophilous and bright-coloured flowers to he in propor-
tion to the number of nectar and pollen eating insects.
As a matter of fact we find that wherever insects are
most numerous, conspicuous flowers are rarest, and
wherever conspicuous flowers are most abundant, insects
are comparatively scarce, or altogether absent. Con-
spicuous flowers are comparatively rare in the tropics,
where insects are abundant, and they are numerous in
temperate zones, where insects are scarce. Drs. Wallace
and Spence, Mr. Bates, and others have expressed
their disappointment at the sparseness of the floral
display in tropical regions. Nowhere are brilliant
masses of colour to be met with, such as are of
* Cross and Self-Fertilization of Plants, pp. 280-82.


common occurrence in temperate or alpine regions. Dr.
Wallace says: —
It is when we come to the vegetable world that the greatest
misconception in this respect prevails. In the abundance and
variety of colour the tropics are almost universally believed to be
pre-eminent, not only absolutely, but relatively to the whole
mass of vegetation and the total number of species. Twelve years
of observation among the vegetation of the Eastern and Western
tropics has, however, convinced me that this notion is entirely
erroneous, and that, in proportion to the whole number of species
of plants, those having gaily coloured flowers are actually more
abundant in the temperate zones than between the tropics.*
Mr. Bates, speaking of the forests of the Lower
Amazon to the same effect, asks—“ But where were the
flowers ? To our great disappointment we saw none, or
only such as were insignificant in appearance. Orchids
are rare in the dense forests of the lowlands, and I
believe it is now tolerably well ascertained that the
majority of forest trees in equatorial Brazil have small
and inconspicuous flowers.”-f- Dr. Spence assured Dr.
Wallace that by far the greater number of plants
gathered by him in equatorial America had incon-
spicuous green or white flowers, and Dr. Wallace
acknowledges that his own experience in the Aru
Islands and in Borneo is quite in accordance with this
view.|
* Tropical Nature , p. 165.
t 'The Naturalist on the River Amazon, 2nd ed., p. 38.
X Tropical Nature, p. 61.


Notwithstanding the paucity of conspicuous flowers
in tropical regions, the abundance of insect life is
remarkable. “ Wherever in the equatorial zone,” says Dr.
Wallace, “ a considerable extent of primeval forest re-
mains, the observer can hardly fail to be struck by the
abundance and the conspicuous beauty of the butter-
flies,” * and he says the number of species ‘‘ everywhere
very much surpasses the number in the temperate
zone.” -f - Nor are other insects wanting. “ The hymen-
opterous insects of the tropics are,” he says, “ next to the
butterflies, those which come most prominently before
the traveller, as they love the sunshine, frequent gardens,
houses, and roadways, as well as the forest shades, never
seek concealment, and are many of them remarkable for
their size or form, or are adorned with beautiful colours
and conspicuous markings;”! elsewhere § he says of
bees and wasps, which are supposed to be the chief
agents in cross-fertilization, that they are “ excessively
numerous ” in the tropics.
In the temperate and alpine regions just the opposite
of all this occurs, the flowers being conspicuous and
insects rare or altogether absent. “ The beauty of alpine
flowers,” says Dr. Wallace, |[ “is almost proverbial. It
consists either in the increased size of individual flowers,
as compared with the whole plant, in increased intensity
of colour, or in the massing of small flowers in dense
* Tropical Nature, p. 73. f Ibid., p. 74.
I Ibid., p. 80. § Ibid., p. 90. || Ibid., p. 232.


cushions of bright colour; and it is only in the higher
Alps, above the limits of forests, and upwards towards
the perpetual snow line, that these characteristics are
fully exhibited.” * Dr. Wallace, singularly enough,
considers that this conspicuousness may be traced
“to the comparative scarcity of winged insects in
the higher regions.” -f - He further explains that not
only do the flowers in the alpine regions differ from
those on the low-lands, but even the leaves and
fruit. “We find,” he says, “ the yellow primrose of the
plains replaced by pink and magenta-coloured alpine
species ; the straggling wild pinks of the lowlands by
the masses of large flowers in such mountain species as
Dianthus alpinus and D. glacialis; the saxifrages of the
high Alps, with bunches of flowers a foot long, as in
Saxifraga longifolia and S. cotyledon, or forming masses
of flowers as S. oppositifolia ; while the soapworts,
silenes, and louseworts are equally superior to the allied
species of the plains.”:); The further we advance towards
the north the more the leaves increase in size; the fruits
of cultivated plants acquire a deeper hue, and the green
colour of the leaves becomes more intense than on the
plains. It is evident that these changes are due to
climatic influences; but whatever may be the correct
explanation of the phenomena, the facts we have
adduced ought to dispel the idea that conspicuous colours
* Tropical Nature, p. 232.
t Ibid., p. 232. X Ibid., p. 232.


have been acquired for the purpose of attracting the
visits of insects.
There is another aspect in which this question may be
viewed. If plants gain more than they lose by the visits
of insects, we can understand how natural selection
would come into operation. But suppose the reverse to
be the case, what then ? Darwin has distinctly laid
down the principle that if it can be proved, by a single
instance, that one organism exists for the benefit of
another organism, his whole system would fall to the
ground. The question is, Do the losses which plants
sustain from insects outweigh the benefits derived from
them, or do they not ? Or, to put the question in another
way, Are insects the friends or foes of plants ? They are
certainly not the friends, if we may judge of them by
their acts. They destroy the bloom and scratch the
petals of the flowers with their hooked tarsi; they eat
the leaves and stems, and even the roots of plants; they
bore holes in the stem and branches, and kill the plants
by eating out their cores ; they devour almost every kind
of vegetable organism which comes in their way, and
what they do not devour they deface or destroy. There
is not a plant in existence which escapes their ravages,
and scarcely a species which has not its special insect
parasite. Insects are in general so utterly destructive of
vegetable life that it is difficult to believe that anything
but evil can result from their visits.
I shall of course be reminded that it is only certain


species of insects that are claimed as useful—those,
namely, that are attracted to the flowers by the honey
in the nectary. But the visits of even these are not
altogether an unmixed good, for in order to get at the
nectar they often do incalculable injury to the plant,
even if we leave out of account the loss of the nectar,
which we must assume to be in some way necessary to
the maturing of the seed. The insects known to fertilize
flowers are hive and humble bees, butterflies, moths,
wasps, flies, and thrips. The three last are of compara-
tively little use in cross-fertilization; butterflies and
moths are more effective in this respect, but many species
can reach both the pollen and the nectar by means of their
long proboscises without entering the flower, and of course
without fertilizing it, and can therefore be of no service
to the plant. Hive and humble bees are undoubtedly
the chief agents in the distribution of the pollen; but
in order that the pollen may be of use it must reach the
stigma of the flower, and in order that it may reach the
stigma the insects must enter the flower in the proper way.
The nectar and the pollen are the attractions—the former-
being stored away in the nectary for the purpose, as we
are told, of inducing the insects to crawl in and leave
some pollen on the stigma and take away some fresh
pollen from the anthers to distribute elsewhere. But
unfortunately the nectar is placed in a somewhat inac-
cessible position, the silly plant having rather overshot
the mark in placing it so much beyond the reach of the


insects, so that humble bees (and hive-bees, too, if we are
to believe Herman Muller and Darwin),* not being-
troubled with scruples of conscience, appropriate the
nectar in a burglarious way. Although the door is open
for them to walk in and help themselves in a proper
manner, they frequently make an aperture in the calyx
or the corolla, and in this way extract the honey from
the outside. When they do this cross-fertilization can-
not take place, and thus the very object for which the
whole of the elaborate machinery was set in motion is
defeated. It appears, also, that other insects, hive-bees
in particular, finding a convenient entrance to the
follow the example of the humble bees, and steal the
honey through the aperture, and, of course, do not
fertilize the flower any more than the humble bees.
The damage done in this way by humble bees is some-
times enormous. Darwin relates that he had seen whole
fields of Trifolium pratense rendered infertile by the
humble bees cutting the calyx of the flowers in order to
get at the nectar,j- and that in an extensive heath of
Erica ; tetralix every flower he examined had been per-
* Cross and Self-Fertilization of Plants, pp. 430-433.
t Darwin says that T. pratense will not produce seed unless it
has been visited by humble bees. The statement has been accepted
without question, and some settlers in New Zealand have imported
humble bees into that colony, in order to secure seed from the
flowers, which bloom freely enough, but were believed, on Darwin’s
authority, to be infertile. But this is quite a mistake. Red clover
seed had been grown and exported from New Zealand long before


forated by bumble bees.* Mr. Belt states that he saw a
late crop of Phaseohis multifiorus near London which
had been rendered barren by humble bees cutting holes
in the bases of the flowers. Humble bees have been
seen to perforate both the calyx and the corolla of the
same flower ; indeed, they are not at all gentle creatures,
for in their eagerness to get at the nectar they sometimes
tear the flowers to pieces. The list of plants whose
flowers they are known to perforate includes a great
variety of species, too numerous to be given here; enough,
I think, has been said to show that humble bees are of
doubtful advantage to the plants they favour with their
visits.
Hive-bees are, in some respects, even greater pests
than humble bees, for they are robbers in a double sense ;
they not only eat the nectar but they also devour the
pollen. Now, pollen is necessary for the production of
seed, and the production of seed is the great end of the
act of fertilization. Many insects, and especially hive-
bees, are known to visit the flowers for the pollen alone,
but the most pronounced advocate of insect fertilization
will hardly contend that pollen was intended to be eaten
Yet hive-bees eat it greedily, and in large quantities ;
the humble bee was introduced there ; and I am informed by one
of the leading Melbourne seedsmen that he has been supplied with
this seed, grown in the Western District of Victoria, for the last 17
years, although no humble bees have ever been introduced into
that colony.
* Cross and Self-Fertilization of Plants, p. 429.
9


they also collect and store it for the purpose of feeding
their young. By means of the pencil of hair on their
tarsi they gather the pollen, which they knead into a
ball, and place it in the space situated in the joint or
tabia of the hinder leg, termed the basket, and in order
to carry away large quantities they roll their bodies on
the flowers, which they seriously damage by the process,
and then brush off the pollen which adheres to their
bodies with their feet—the very pollen which is sup-
posed to be carried away to fertilize other flowers. It is
evident that the quantity of pollen which they carry on
their body bears a small proportion to what they eat or
destroy, while their incessant raids and their action in
rolling on the flowers can hardly be regarded as beneficial
to the plants. Darwin has noted the number of flowers
bees visit in a given time, and here is the result of his
observations :
In the course of fifteen minutes a single flower on the summit
of a plant of Oenothera was visited eight times by humble bees,
and I followed the last of these bees whilst it visited, in the course
of a few additional minutes, every plant of the same species in a
large flower garden. In nineteen minutes every flower on a small
plant of Nemophila insignia was visited twice. In one minute six
flowers of Campanula were entered by a pollen-collecting hive-
bee ; and bees, when thus employed, work slower than when
sucking nectar. Lastly, several flower stalks on a plant of
Dictamnus fraxinella were observed on the loth June, 1841; during
ten minutes they were visited by thirteen humble bees, each of
which entered many flowers. On the 22nd the same flower stalks
were visited within the same time by eleven humble bees. This


plant bore altogether 280 flowers, and from the above data, taking
into consideration how late in the evening humble bees work, each
flower must have been visited at least thirty times daily, and the
same flower keeps open during several days. The frequency of
the visits of bees is also sometimes shown by the manner in which
the petals are scratched by the hooked tarsi. I have seen large
beds of Mimulua, Strachys, and Lathyrm with the beauty of their
flowers thus sadly defaced.*
Just imao-ine the effect on a delicate flower of thirteen
C>
visits from humble bees in ten minutes, or six visits a
minute from hive-bees ! It gives one a pretty good idea
of the activity of bees, no doubt, but it suggests a con-
clusion which Darwin has omitted to draw. Are we to
believe that these hordes of intruders which deface the
beauty of the flowers in the manner here described are
friendly visitors ?
I am aware that the view here presented does not
account for the beauty of flowers, which Darwin main-
tains we owe to the visits of insects. But neither does
Darwin’s theory account for the beauty of open, self-
fertile flowers, nor for double flowers, which are infertile
and yet are more beautiful and conspicuous than single
flowers. Nor does it account for the beauty of the leaves,
the bright green in the spring, and the scarlet colours in
autumn, nor for the graceful forms of tree, shrub, and
flower.
Summary.—l cannot believe that flowers have ac-
* Cross and Self-Fertilization of Plants, p. 428.


quired their nectar, their present structure, and then-
conspicuous colours in order to attract insects with a
view to cross-fertilization, as we have seen that pollen,
as well as nectar, is the attraction ; that the adaptation
of structure to the visits of insects is often illusory, and
when real is not always effective for the purpose alleged ;
that dichogamy is not produced in order to ensure cross-
fertilization, but is caused by the visits of insects. I
have endeavoured to show that Darwin’s experiments to
test the effects of cross and self-fertilization were not
satisfactory, inasmuch as he selected the wrong kind of
plants, and did not test them for a sufficiently long-
period ; that, even with the plants selected, the results do
not show that cross-fertilization is beneficial; that there
is no virtue in a cross, and that even a cross with a fresh
stock produces only a temporary improvement; that the
offspring from parents which had been self-fertilized for
a number of generations did not show a gradual degene-
ration, nor the progeny from parents which had been
cross-fertilized for a lengthened period a gradual im-
provement; that on the whole the offspring of self-
fertilized plants maintain their vigour and fertility
equally with the progeny of intercrossed plants; that
many self-fertile plants were more vigorous and fertile
than many which were intercrossed, and that several
species, more particularly orchids, which appear to be
specially adapted for insect fertilization, are exceedingly
difficult to fertilize by insects, and are consequently


comparatively infertile. I have also shown that insects
of all kinds are in various ways destructive to plants,
and that even those species which assist in fertilization
destroy the beauty of the flowers they visit, perforate
holes in vital parts, and devour the pollen which they
are supposed to use for fertilizing purposes. I also
maintain that if insects were as beneficial to the plants
as they are supposed to be, natural selection would
have made use of them to a greater extent than appears
to have been the case, and that entomophilous plants,
instead of being less would have been more numerous
both in species and individuals than all the other plants
put together; and I argue that if, as Darwin contends,
flowers owe their conspicuous colour to insects, we
should have expected that wherever insects were most
abundant flowers would be most conspicuous, and
wherever insects were scarce that flowers would be in-
conspicuous, instead of the reverse, which we found to be
the case. And, lastly, I point out that plants which
depend on insects for fertilization can never become
numerous, because they can only advance in masses;
that masses are liable to die off in the absence of insects
from any cause ; that throughout a great portion of the
globe, as in the arctic, antarctic, temperate, and alpine
regions, insects are comparatively rare or altogether
absent; and that even where they are abundant, as in
the tropics, they fail in fertilizing the flowers, which are
barren to a degree, and neither beautiful nor conspicuous.


CHAPTER VI.
THE CAUSES OF VARIABILITY.
Professor Huxley has somewhere said that what we
want is a good theory of variability. There can be no
doubt that a sound theory would dispel many existing
illusions on the subject of natural selection. Generally
speaking, the factors concerned in the production of
variations are of two kinds—namely, internal and ex-
ternal, or the nature of the organism and the nature of
the conditions under which it exists. It is not to be
supposed that the organism, in the absence of an inciting
cause, would spontaneously modify itself; and it would
bo absurd to imagine that the external conditions would
directly produce variations without the co-operation of
the organism. Both factors must concur in order to
produce any effect.
That the external conditions, as food, climate, and
situation, have great influence in modifying organisms
is beyond a doubt. Plants and animals vary in a re-
markable manner according to the quantity or quality
of the food on which they subsist, the temperature in
which they live, the atmosphere in which they breathe,
and the dryness or dampness of the locality which they


inhabit. But we have no precise knowledge as to the
effects which any one of these various conditions, far less
any combination of them, have in producing variability,
as no experiments, on an adequate scale, have been
carried out in order to test their individual or collective
influence on living organisms. Of this much we may be
certain, however, that if any organism be placed under
conditions to which it has not been accustomed it will
endeavour to adapt itself to these conditions, whatever
they are, and a certain amount of variation will conse-
quently take place; and if no variation occur we may
conclude either that the external conditions were not
uniform or powerful enough, or that they had not
existed for a sufficiently long period to leave any per-
manent effect behind them.
Schmankewitsch’s experiments on Artimia show the
remarkable influence which external conditions exercise
on organic life. There are two species of this crustacean,
Milkausanina and Salina, the former a freshwater
and the latter a saltwater species, and Schmankewitsch
showed that it was possible to raise a brood of A.
Milhausenii from A. salina, and, conversely, a brood of
A. salina from A. Milhausenii, by gradually raising or
lowering the percentage of salt in the water from a
minimum of 4° B. to a maximum of 25° B. The trans-
formation from the one form to the other was, however,
very gradual, having taken several generations to effect.
Schmankewitsch was able to carry his experiments to a


still further issue, for he kept gradually diluting the
salt water in which he kept A. salina till at last it was
perfectly fresh; the crustaceans had in the meantime
gone through several generations and had so gradually
and completely changed their nature that they finally
acquired the characteristics of the genus Branchipus.
Semper’s experiments on the common pond snail
(Lymnaoea stagnalis) are also highly interesting. In
order to ascertain if the volume of water had any effect
on these animals, he instituted two series of experiments
—one by separating the animals from the same mass of
eggs immediately they were hatched, and placing them
simultaneously in unequal bodies of water; the other
by placing two different lots of animals, from the
same mass of eggs, in two aquaria of equal size. All
the conditions of existence, and above all the supply of
food, were kept at the optimum, consequently all the
animals were under equally favourable conditions, irre-
spective only of the volume of water which fell to each
animal’s share ; this varied between 100 and 2,000 cubic
centimetres. In both experiments the results were simi-
lar ; the smaller the volume of water which fell to the
share of each animal, the shorter its shell remained. *
The effect of food in inducing variations may be ob-
served in the case of cultivated plants, which, being well
nourished, show greater variability than those in a state
of nature. There is a similar tendency to vary among
* Animal Life, pp. 160, 161.


animals in the state of domestication, and from the same
cause, as witness the numerous varieties of domestic
pigeons, fowls, and dogs. So strong is this tendency to
vary with our domestic animals that scarcely two of a
litter or two of a brood are alike in colour, form, size, or
disposition. Facts such as these justify the conclusion
that the struggle for existence which takes place in a
state of nature prevents the free development of any
latent qualities in the organism which is subjected to
this process.
Situation also exercises a modifying influence. A plant
growing in a damp place usually has its leaves less
divided, is more glabrous, and has smaller and darker
coloured flowers than one grown on dry porous soil.
Thus in a damp soil Dianthus alpinus is transformed, in
the second generation, into deltiodes; in a dry and
porous soil Hutchensia breircaulis passes into H. alpina,
and Arabis ccerula into helliafolin.
The intercrossing of varieties and of species is another
cause of variation. The offspring of hermaphrodite plants
seldom vary from the parent type. Plants propagated
from tubers, stolans, and buds also remain true to type,
and so also are the progeny of animals which propagate
by flsion. Plants and trees grown from cuttings never
vary from the parent, no matter how long they may
have been cultivated; our fruit trees and vines have been
propagated in this manner for hundreds of generations,
yet they have never changed their character since the


first cutting was put into the ground. It is altogether
different with dioecious plants, and animals which are
propagated sexually ; these vary in a remarkable degree,
so much so that it is seldom we find two plants or two
animals exactly alike. Still they do not vary indefinitely.
Half the flowers produced by seedlings from a plant
which has been fertilized by another plant will probably
be coloured like the one parent, and the other half like
the other parent, or they may all have varying shades
of colour intermediate between that of the two parents.
Extreme crosses, as between well-marked varieties or
between two species, will, however, prove a fertile cause
of variation.
Plants and animals do not readily accommodate them-
selves to extreme changes of climate. Even seeds grown
in a tropical and planted in a temperate climate rarely
do well in their new situation, but their progeny are
usually more accommodating. The peach tree did not
thrive in Greece in Aristotle’s time, but it now flourishes
in the severe climate of North Germany. The first
orange trees introduced into Italy were repeatedly cut
down by the frosts, and it was only when plants were
raised from seed grown in the country that the orange
became established. The common domestic fowl, if
transported from a temperate to a tropical climate, or,
conversely, from a tropical to a temperate climate, will
seldom long survive the change, although its progeny
will in course of time adapt themselves to either climate.


These facts seem to point to some power in the repro-
ductive system which modifies the organism only at
birth.
Are organic variations purposive, or are they mere
aimless deviations from the original type ? He would
be a rash man who would affirm that anything in
nature was aimless or purposeless. We may not be
able to discover what Nature’s purpose is any more than
we may know the means through which she operates,
but it is as certain that every action of Nature has an
aim as that every effect has a cause. Darwin speaks of
variability as “ spontaneous ” and “ accidental,” leading
one to believe that he held the opinion that it was sub-
ject to no law, but be explains that he uses these peculiar
terms to express that it is brought about by “ unrecog-
nized or unassignable ” causes. Nor is he less vague in
describing the conditions under which variations arise.
All that he contends for is that organisms should have
“ a capacity for change,” or “ a tendency to ordinary
variability,” which is a somewhat odd explanation.* On
the other hand, Dr. Wallace boldly asserts that variations
are fortuitous. He no doubt sees clearly enough that
if certain variations arise under certain conditions, and
proceed in definite lines, there would be no case for the
plaintiff, and natural selection would be out of court;
he therefore insists that variations are indefinite, or that
* Origin of Species, p. 210.


they break out “ in every direction”*—we presume, like
the bristles on the hide of a hedgehog or buds on the
stalks of Brussels sprouts.-f*
It is evident, however, that if variations were mere
accidental or “ sportive ” occurrences (to use one of
Darwin’s expressions), and the organism had no hand in
shaping its own destiny, it would inevitably become a
mere agglutination of parts or organs and modifications
of organs, without symmetry and without harmonious
action. Darwin admits that an organism is affected by
the conditions of existence; but he fails to state what
action is taken by the organism under such circumstances.
Now, the organism does take action ; it responds to the
conditions when these affect it, whether favourably or
unfavourably, by adapting itself to these conditions. In
every instance in which there is a change in the condi-
tions of the life of an organism there is not only a
struggle to live, as Darwin maintains, but (and this is
the main point) there is a struggle to adapt or to
modify itself to the new conditions. According to the
Darwinian theory there is no struggle in the latter sense
at all, for the variations are supposed to occur quite
promiscuously, not to say accidentally, and the favourable
ones are few in number and slight in degree.; But an
* Natural Selection , p. 290. f See ante, p. 24.
f Dr. Wallace, in his latest work, admits the force of the objec-
tion that has been often raised against the theory of slight varia-
tions—namely, that they would be practically useless to the


occasional variation, even if favourable, and more
especially if a slight one, would stand a poor chance
of surviving, as it would almost inevitably he lost by
intercrossing in the course of a few generations. On
the other hand, if the conditions were uniform and pro-
longed, and the tendency of the organism to adapt itself
to these conditions were persistent, there would be a
constant succession of favourable variations, from which
new races and new species might he evolved; hut
without a constant succession of variations of the same
kind the formation of new species would he an impossi-
bility.
We have said it is not to be supposed that the
external conditions have any direct influence in pro-
ducing variations, or that variations can arise indepen-
dently of the organism. The directing power in every
instance must proceed from the organism itself, the
external conditions being only the occasion for, not the
cause of, the variations. The organism is the active
agent of its own transformation. It cannot defy the
laws of its environment, hut it can accommodate itself to
them. A tree growing in a sheltered spot will send its
stem straight up into the air, a tree in an exposed
situation will expand horizontally instead of vertically,
individuals possessing them ; and lie has brought forward a mass
of interesting facts which show that variations are not slight, but
that the various parts and organs vary from 5 per cent, to 25
per cent, under or over the average.— Darwinism, chap. iii.


and a leaning tree will throw up buttresses from its roots
in order to enable it to withstand the force of gravitation.
Not only the organism as a whole, but every part of it,
possesses this power of adaptation. Thus, as Mr.
Henslow points out, if a large fruit, like an apple or a
pear, hang vertically it grows symmetrically, but if the
pedicle projects obliquely from the branch it thickens
along the upper side, forming a sort of buttress running
down the stalk, which also tends to thicken.* John
Hunter fed a sea gull (Larus tridaotylus) on grain for a
year, and succeeded in so completely hardening the inner
coat of its stomach, which is naturally soft and adapted
to a fish diet, that in structure it resembled the horny
skin of the gizzard of a pigeon. Dr. Edmonstone informs
us that another species of gull, Larus argentalus, of the
Shetland Islands, changes the structure of its stomach
twice every year, according to its food, which consists of
grain one half the year and fish the other half. These
cases prove that the stomach of a carnivorous bird may
be transformed into that of a grain-eater; and Dr.
Holmgren’s experiments with pigeons show that the
converse is equally true, and that if a pigeon be fed on
meat for a sufficiently long period its gizzard can be con-
verted into a carnivorous stomach. It is this power of
self-adaptation that is the key to organic modification.
The cuticle of the rower’s hand, the muscles of the
blacksmith’s arm, are both enlarged by use; but, although
* Floral Structures, p. 623.


the enlargement follows from the friction and the strain,
the latter is not the cause of the enlargement. If the
hand or the arm were inanimate bodies the friction and
the strain would produce erosion, whereas in living
bodies we see the effect is precisely opposite. The law
of Use and Disuse is a mechanical law to which the
organism has to conform, and it conforms by strengthen-
ing the parts subjected to wear and strain. What is it
that the law of Use and Disuse teaches us ? The wing-
bones of the domestic duck weigh less than those of the
wild species, the result of disuse; the diminished snout of
the domestic pig is the consequence of the diminished use
of that organ; the drooping ears peculiar to our domestic
animals are due to the disuse of the muscles of the ear; the
muscles of the wings of the homing pigeonarestrongerthan
those of the bard or the pouter, because the former have
been subjected to greater strain than the latter. For the
same reason birds inhabiting islands where there are no
beasts of prey lose the use of their wings; the eyes of the
mole are rudimentary in size ; animals which inhabit dark
caves are wholly or partially blind, as are ento-parasites.
Nor can we exclude man from the operation of this law.
From the time when quaternary man crouched in a cavern
and tore the raw flesh from the bones with his teeth,
how much of the improvement which he has since
achieved is due to his own unaided intelligent efforts ?
In all those cases the organisms have been the active
agents in the modification of their own structures with


out the aid of any form of natural selection. They
have not only exhibited “ a capacity for change ” but a
capacity for change in a definite direction. These facts
are familiar enough, yet their full significance has not
been sufficiently appreciated. The terms use and disuse
hardly convey all that the facts express. Use and disuse
simply mean function and its absence, but the facts imply
more than that; they indicate intelligence, pui'posiveness,
and effort. The terms Effort and Abstinence would better
designate the law in the matter.
Organic changes are the result of physiological—not
mechanical—causes. The external conditions only affect
the organism by way of stimulating it to action, but
there must be a response on the part of the organism
before any organic change can take place. The nature
of the response will depend on the nature of the stimulus ;
if the latter is favourable the organism will react by
unfolding itself to its utmost capacity, and if in a
vigorous condition it may develop latent capabilities
which might to us appear to be new variations; if, on
the other hand, the influence is adverse, the organism will
react in a different manner. If it cannot overcome an
adverse influence it will endeavour to adapt itself to it.
A plant will react upon sunshine and rain, which are
favourable conditions, by a vigorous growth ; when ex-
posed to strong biting winds, which are adverse, it will
expand horizontally, and assume a stunted form of
growth. In the one case it will unfold, and in the other


case it will modifiy itself. In the latter instance the
modification will not be the effect of natural selection
but of what we should rather call Self Adaptation. The
external conditions affect the organism, and the organism
effects the modification.
Customs, usages, and language come into existence
and survive or disappear much in the same manner as
organic modifications. They are adapted to meet certain
conditions of society, and they endure or perish with the
conditions which call them forth. Thus a language, like
an organism, is variable and perishable ; it grows, decays,
and dies ; it has its rudimentary and abortive stages, and
its fossil remains; it is subject to constant changes—words
in common use to-day become obsolete to-morrow, old
words take new meanings, and old meanings find expres-
sion in new words. As new conditions of life evolve
new variations in structure, so new events, new dis-
coveries, and new habits call forth, but do not create,
new phrases. And, to pursue the analogy further, it
would not be one whit less absurd to say that language
was the result of natural selection than that organic
modification was due to the same cause.
Summary.—l have attempted to show that there are
two factors concerned in organic modifications, the ex-
ternal and the internal, or the nature of the conditions
and the nature of the organism, and that the one factor
can have no effect without the co-operation of the other.
10


The external conditions, as food, climate, situation, have
great influence in modifying organisms, but only by way
of inciting or stimulating them to action. The conditions
of life can of themselves effect no organic change; in
every instance there must be a response on the part of
the organism before any modification can take place.
These conditions, if uniform, pronounced, and prolonged,
will, according to their nature, invariably incite the
organism to change in a definite direction. If the con-
ditions are favourable, the organism will respond by
expanding itself to its utmost capacity ; if unfavourable,
it will respond by adapting or adjusting itself to its new
conditions. The modifying action will, in every instance,
proceed from the organism, not from the external condi-
tions, which are merely the occasion, not the cause, of the
modifications. I have also indicated that it is not only
the organism as a whole, the personality as it were, that
possesses this power of modification, hut every part of it,
so that no organ or part of an organ is deprived of this
power of self-adjustment. The law of Use and Disuse,
or, as I prefer to call it, of Effort and Abstinence, prevails
throughout the organic world, modifying each organ or
part of an organ as circumstances require, and always in
a manner calculated to enable the organism to maintain
life and to carry on its functions to the best possible
advantage.


CHAPTER VII.
THE MODIFYING AGENCY.
When one discovers what he imagines to be a law of
nature, he is apt to believe that he has arrived at the limit
of knowledge on the subject. This, however, is a mistake.
A law throws no light on the origin of phenomena.
A law is only a relation—a regular concurrence of
phenomena, the precedence and sequence of certain events
in relation to other events. Thus we often speak of the
law of use and disuse, as if the mere statement of the
law was a sufficient explanation of the phenomena. That
the use of an organ, for instance, is followed by certain
results, only explains the fact of the concurrence, not
the cause of the phenomena. Having ascertained the
law of Adaptation, we shall now proceed to inquire by
what process adaptation is brought about. As it is not
a mechanical process it would be vain for us to attempt
to explain it, as Darwinists do, on mechanical principles,
and therefore natural selection will be of no assistance
to us here. That it is a physiological process admits of
no doubt; but this admission brings us no nearer to the
origin of the phenomena in question. We say that
external conditions influence the organism, and that the


organism responds ; but how is it that the organism
comes to respond ? Reflex action will not account for
the phenomena, for we have still to account for reflex
action.
Are the actions of organisms guided by intelligence,
or are they the result of mechanism ? If the former,
then such actions will be purposive, like those of
human beings, and will be subject to the same mental
laws. If the latter, we shall have to ask, Whence the
mechanism ? As we cannot suppose it has come by
accident, it must have been designed; if designed we
shall have next to ask who is the designing agent; and
as we cannot speak of a self-acting mechanism we shall
still have to ask what sets the mechanism in motion.
Although Darwin, as we have seen, often makes use of
such terms as “ contrivance ” and “ purpose ” when
speaking of organic phenomena, he says not a word that
would lead one to suspect that he believed the phenomena
in question to be a manifestation of purposiveness or in-
telligence, either on the part of the organism or on the
part of some ah extra power acting through it. We
cannot, however, draw a line arbitrarily at man, or at
mammals, or at the higher vertebrata, and say, below this
there is only reflex action or automatism. On the other
hand, if we admit that animals possess intelligence we
cannot logically deny the same attribute to vegetative
organisms, as many of the higher orders of plants exhibit
greater intelligence than many of the lower animals.


Some plants indeed display wonderful intelligence
in their movements. Look, for instance, at what
takes place in fertilization. As soon as the pollen is
mature, the stamens move towards the pistils, or the
pistils towards the stamens, or both towards each other.
These movements never commence till the pollen is
mature, and cease the moment fertilization has been
accomplished; and what is still more extraordinary,
if it should happen that fertilization has already been
brought about by artificial means or by the visits
of insects, these movements, being then unnecessary,
never take place. Fertilization is impossible if the
pollen should by any means become wet, hence plants
take the greatest possible care to prevent this occurring.
Many plants close their corolla when it is about to rain,
or when the air is moist with dew; others hide their
flowers under their leaves at night. Even aquatic plants
have to keep their pollen dry—almost an impossible thing
for them, one would imagine, yet they contrive to accom-
plish it. The water-nut (Trapa natans), for instance,
lives under the water till flowering time, when the petioles
become filled with air, which raises the flower buds to the
surface, when florescence and fructification take place.
Immediately this has been accomplished the petioles
discharge the air, which is replaced by water, and the
plant sinks again to the bottom. All this may he put
down to mechanism; but we may just as well ascribe
human action to mechanism, as man has a far more


complicated structure than is possessed bj* the poor
water-nut or by any known species of plants.
We find abundant evidence of intelligence in the
lowest forms of animal life. A rizopod, for instance, is
to all appearance, though not actually, a formless speck
of albuminous matter, without even a cell wall. It lives
in water, and it puts forth processes of its body (pseudo-
podia) to suck the chlorophyll out of minute plants, or
to seize its prey, for some species are omnivorous, by
enclosing it with its processes. Yet this apparently
formless microscopic animal leads an independent life,
and performs all the functions of a complex organism.
It has no special organs of prehension, no mouth, no
stomach, no intestinal canal, and yet it can seize, swallow,
digest and assimilate its food ; it has no organs of loco-
motion, and yet it can move about at will; it has no
sense organs, yet it can distinguish light from darkness,
and, judging from the manner in which it selects its
food, it can discriminate aliment from what is not
aliment. Referring to the amoeba, which is also a mere
jelly speck, Dr. Carpenter confesses that we can “scarcely
conceive that a creature of such simplicity should possess
any distinct consciousness of its needs,” nevertheless goes
on to say: —
Suppose a human mason to be put down by the side of a pile
of stones of various shapes and sizes, and be told to build a dome
of these, smooth on both surfaces, without using more than the
least possible quantity of a very tenacious but very costly cement


in holding the stones together. If he accomplished this well,
he would receive credit for great intelligence and skill—yet this
is exactly what these little ‘jelly specks’ do on a most minute
scale, the ‘ test ’ they construct, when highly magnified, bearing
comparison with the most skilful masonry of man. From the
same sandy bottom, one species picks up the coarser quartz grains,
cements them together with phosphate of iron secreted from its
own substance, and thus constructs a flask-shaped 1 test ’ haying a
short neck and a single large orifice. Another picks up the finest
grains, and puts them together with the same cement into perfectly
spherical ‘ tests ’ of the most extraordinary finish, perforated with
numerous small pores, disposed at pretty regular intervals.
Another selects the minutest sand grains and the terminal portions
of sponge spicules, and works these up together, apparently with
no cement at all, by the mere ‘ laying ’ of the spicules, into per-
fect white spheres, like homoeopathic globules, each having a
single fissured orifice. And another, which makes a straight
many-chambered ‘ test,’ that resembles in form the chambered
shell of an orthoceratile—the conical mouth of each chamber
projecting into the cavity of the next —while forming the walls
of its chambers of ordinary sand grains rather loosely held to-
gether, shapes the conical mouths of the successive chambers by
firmly cementing together grains of ferruginous quartz, which it
must have picked out from the general mass. To give these
actions the vague designation 1 instinctive,’ does not in the least
help us to account for them; since what we want is to discover
the mechanism by which they are worked out; and it is most
difficult to conceive how so artificial a selection can be made by a
creature so simple.*
The arcella, another marine animal, is a minute .speck
of protoplasm with a shell in which are fine perforations
through which it protrudes itself by pseudopodia, like the
* Principles of Mental Physiology, 4th ed., p. 42.


rizopod. This animal, which also leads an independent
life, has the extraordinary power of forming cavities in
its protoplasm into which air is admitted or withdrawn,
whereby it can increase or reduce its specific gravity, and
so lower or raise itself in the water at pleasure. The air
hubbies are seen to be continually changing their size and
position when the animal is in motion, showing that they
are regulated by a will within.*
There is evidence that the semi-independent cells which
go to make up a complex organism—what we call organic
cells —are not destitute of intelligence. A complex
organism may be said to be a community of cells. Every
organic structure consists exclusively of cells and the
products of cell action—that is to say, of tissue. A
complex organism is developed out of a germ cell, which
propagates by fision, the divided cells forming new cells,
which again divide and form other cells, and so on till a
sufficient variety and number are produced to form the
several kinds and qualities of tissue required for its con-
struction. The cells are the sole agents employed in this
work. When we see a colony of bees constructing their
combs on a concerted plan, we say that they exhibit in-
telligence ; why should we deny to organic cells the like
attribute, more especially as they exhibit far more con-
structive power than the insects ? When we see an
orderly system of government carried on in any com-
munity we naturally conclude that its members are
* Pfliiger’s Archiu fur Physiologic, vol. ii.


intelligent beings. There is ample evidence of such an
orderly system of government in organic communities.
They have a complete system of division of labour.
Every kind of tissue has its special cells for its pro-
duction ; and besides these constructive cells there are
others which are set apart for more special work—re-
presentative cells we may call them, as they receive and
convey impressions from and to all parts of the organism
and regulate all its functions. These are the nerve cells.
We find them distributed throughout the organism in
groups and masses—some presiding over local organs ;
some in large masses in important centres and lines of
communication ; some in still larger masses, as in the
brain, which exercises correspondingly large functions.
Each group is subordinate to the centre immediately
above it, but is at the same time capable of determining
and maintaining certain movements or functions of
its own without the intervention of the supreme
centre.*
In the case of the constructive cells, when any injury
happens to a complex organism of which they form apart,
they immediately proceed to repair it. When a bone
which has been fractured does not unite, they will absorb
the smaller portions and round off the two ends ; if the
ends unite but overlap they remove the projecting parts,
thus showing that they possess the faculty of discrimina-
tion. Supposing a breach occurred in the embankment
* Maudsley’s Physiology of Mind, p. 109.


of a canal or a river, and we saw hundreds of men at
work shovelling earth into the gap made by the overflow
of the water, we should say that these men showed pur-
posiveness and intelligence. The microscope reveals to us
the fact that organic cells co-operate for similar purposes.
When a fision takes place in any part of an organic
structure, masses of cells congregate around the spot, and
industriously set themselves to work to close the wound.
Why should we refuse to acknowledge intelligence in
this case while accepting it in the other ? *
Again, when any foreign body gets lodged in any part
of a living organism, the local cells at once set themselves
to work in order to expel it. This they do by a process
of suppuration. If any secretions accumulate from any
cause in the interior of the organism, and there is no
natural outlet for these to escape, the cells at once pro-
ceed to open a new passage, and the remarkable thing is
that such passages remain open only so long as is necessary
for the expulsion of the secretions, when they are imme-
diately closed.
The cells have also the power of restoring lost organs.
Crabs, lizards, tortoises, salamanders, and other cold-
blooded animals, and many species of annelids and insects,
have this power of reparation. If a worm be cut in
two, it will reproduce a tail on the one section and a head
on the other, and, according to Spallanzani, if divided
into three parts the centre portion, which is deprived of
* See Appendix B.


both head and tail, will reproduce both, but the head
first, as if the cells were conscious that this was the more
important of the two. In certain fishes the restoration
of fins is effected in the order of their importance, the
caudal taking the precedence, then the pectoral and
ventral, and lastly the dorsal fins. Yoit records the case
of a pigeon which had its brain restored after five
months’ deprivation; after the fifth month a white mass
began to show itself where the hemispheres had been
removed. This white mass possessed the appearance and
consistency of hrain substance; it united with the
peduncles which had not heen removed, and the animal
gradually recovered its intelligence. Blumenbach men-
tions an instance where an eye had been restored within
a year from the time of deprivation, the optic nerve not
having been injured, and the complete restoration of the
crystalline lens has often been observed in animals from
whom it had been removed.*
Mechanism, chemical affinity, or reflex action throws
no light upon the subject, as these always hehave in a
definite manner, according to their nature; but the
process of restoration varies according to circumstances,
and the cells turn aside from their ordinary functions to
perform work of a totally different kind, which they
perform according to the exigencies of each particular
case. In every instance they allow for complicated or dis-
turbing relations. “If a limb be amputated half-way up
* Bee Appendix B.


the thigh, for instance, the cells near the surface of the
stump work together by dividing and developing in
various ways, so as to reproduce the limb. Supposing
now that the line of amputation is oblique or irregular,
this does not affect the result. The cells concerned in
the process allow for the irregularity. If, for example,
two-thirds of the extensors of the knee, half the thigh
bones, and a third of the hamstring muscles, are ampu-
tated, the missing part of each of these structures is
nevertheless reproduced in its proper proportion.” * If
actions of this kind do not exhibit intelligence, what does ?
O 7
That a simple cell should have this constructive
capacity is certainly extraordinary; but it is not more
so than that a lowly organized cold-blooded animal
should have the power of restoring lost organs, while
the more highly organized warm-blooded animals do
not possess it, or only to a very slight extent; while
this again is not more wonderful than the action of the
ganglion cells which preside over the viscera. The
ganglia, which are dispersed through the muscles of
the heart, the stomach, the intestinal canal, and other
organs, control the actions of those organs altogether
independent of the Ego. So far, indeed, from the Ego
having any direction of these organs, it is not even
conscious of their action or even of their existence. In
this case there is complete subdivision of labour : the Ego
takes the general control of the external movements
* J. S. Haldane in Mind, yol. ix., p. 30.


of the organism, while the cells are the active agents
of all internal movements and of all organic modifi-
cations.
The bearing of all this on organic modifications will
now be obvious. The cell is the source of all change.
As a modifying agent, its power exceeds that of the
complex organism of which it forms a part, just as cold-
blooded animals have reparative power which the higher
warm-blooded animals do not possess. In growth
and decay, in the increase and decrease in size, and in
complexity of structure, the cell is the controlling agent.
A slight pressure or friction, causing irritation, or a
stimulus on a particular cell or a group of cells, will
often produce the most unexpected results. An insect
alighting on a stamen or pistil of a flower will, as we
have seen, often modify the functions of the sexual
organs, and change the whole system of reproduction.
The irritation caused by the visits of insects will also,
according to Kerner, produce hairs or sticky glands on
the stems or flower stalks of certain plants, while the
browsing of bushes by mammals will induce the growth
of prickles and thorns, and only on those portions of the
plants which are within reach. Pressure on the cells of
any part of a plant will lead to a special formation of that
part; friction on the skin will result in an increase in
the number of epithelial cells, and a thickening and
hardening of the epidermis ; excessive heat, acting on the
epidermic cells, converts the wool on the sheep’s back into


hair ; light, acting on the chlorophyll cells of plants and
the pigment cells of animals, produces changes in the
colour of the foliage and flowers of plants, and of the
wool, hair, and fur of animals.
Lamarck’s theory of organic evolution differs materially
from that here presented. According to Lamark, it is
the wants and efforts of the organism which effect
changes in its structure.* Unfortunately, the experience
of mankind shows that no want, however severely felt,
no effort, however protracted, ever produced a new
organ or modified an old one, and we have no reason to
believe that the experience of other organisms differ from
our own in this respect. On the other hand we have
seen how skilfully the cells manipulate a fractured
bone, how they close wounds, get rid of internal
secretions, and even restore lost organs, so that it does
not require a very great stretch of imagination to
suppose that they also possess the power of adapting
themselves to new conditions of life.
The cell is the biological unit. It is the irreducible
vital entity; it is the seat of life and energy; it is the
* “ The production of a new organ in an animal results from
the supervention of a new want fbesoinJ continuing to make
itself felt, and a new movement which this want gives birth to and
encourages;” and he illustrates this law by the case of the gastero-
pod mollusc finding “ the need of touching the bodies in front of
it, makes efforts to touch these bodies with some of the foremost
parts of its head,” hence the flow of nervous and other liquids to
these parts and the extension of the nerves abutting on them.


key that unlocks the mystery of organic modifications.
And here we may observe that if the cell he the biological
unit, Life cannot be a synthesis, or the sum of all the
activities of the organism, as many physiologists main-
tain. Lewes defines Life to he “the expression of the
whole organism.” In a certain sense it is so, as the
whole organism is animated by the cells which permeate
its structure ; and so it may be said that a multicellular
organism exhibits more life than an unicellular organism.
A monad can move about, hut its movements would be
much expedited if it were provided with special organs
of locomotion. But, on the other hand, special organs
would not confer upon the monad the power of locomotion,
as the creature already possesses it, hut only afford greater
facilities for movement. Instead, therefore, of Life being
the expression of the organism, the organism is rather
the expression of Life, or of the vital force inherent in
the germ cell. Lewes scoffs at the idea of a vital force
or principle; “ why not have a crystal principle,” he
asks, “to personify the conditions of crystallization ? ”
Curiously enough, this is precisely what we already
have, the term Affinity being called upon to do duty
here, as Gravitation in physics. Both terms are used
to personify the causes of certain phenomena which are
incapable of more definite explanation. The fact of the
matter is that Lewes has misunderstood the whole ques-
tion in dispute by not bearing in mind the twofold
signification of the term Life. He regarded Life as an


effect ; but Life is also a cause. The phenomena ex-
hibited by a living animal may be called the life of that
animal; but all phenomena must have a cause, and the
cause of vital phenomena we, in the absence of more
definite knowledge on the subject, call vital force. To
say that the cause of life of a complex organism is the
organism itself, would be to confound cause with effect,
o 3 '
as life already existed in the germ cell out of which the
organism was formed. He also objects that the vital
principle is a special force called up for the occasion. I
reply, so are the phenomena also special. A living-
organism is unlike any other known body. It grows,
decays, dies ; it increases in size not by the addition of
matter to the outside, like crystals, but by converting
matter into its own substance; it is distinguished by its
tendency to cyclical changes, whereas inert matter is in a
state of stability and repose ; it has the power of repro-
duction ; it can transmit to its progeny its own character-
istics to the minutest shade, and it is capable of adapting
itself to adverse conditions of existence. These pheno-
mena are peculiar to living- bodies, and are sufficiently
marked to distinguish them from all phenomena of
whatever kind.
The cell is also the psychological unit. It is the irre-
ducible element which feels, thinks, and wills. The
term Mind., like the term Life, is also liable to be mis-
understood, as it has a twofold signification. It is used
to denote—(l) what Descartes called “ the thinking sub


stance,” or the soul, and (2) the product of that sub-
stance or soul, namely, thought.* In the former sense
Mind is the psychological unit, in the latter it is the
product of that unit. The psychological unit is a marvel
and a mystery. It possesses potentialities beyond any-
thing in nature. What a wonderful body it fashions for
itself; what vigilance it exercises in maintaining this
body in health and vigour, in repairing injuries, in
adapting it to new conditions of life ! Look at the
process which goes on from the birth of the germ-cell till
its development into a full-grown and complex organism :
how the ovum becomes a cluster of cells; how these send
out processes which, in a few hours, days, or weeks, take
the form of a spinal column, a head, legs, arms, wings, or
fins, according to the type of animal to be formed, till
the whole complicated organism is gradually constructed.
And this germ-cell has within it the accumulated ex-
perience of untold generations. It inherits and trans-
* The term Mind is also used in a third sense, as denoting a
something that is not matter, as immaterial or non-exteuded; but
now when force is identified with matter this meaning is very
properly going out of use. It is obvious that we cannot deter-
mine what mind is unless we have first ascertained what matter is.
We can only speak of things relatively, as causes or as effects.
Moreover, wo cannot speak of mind, which is projected in space,
as non-extended. Mind may be a property of matter, or matter
may be a property of mind, just as force may be a property of
matter, or matter a property of force ; but to speak of a thing as
not-matter or immaterial, when we do not know what matter is,
seems somewhat absurd.
11


mits the smallest physical and psychological peculiarities.
Quite extraordinary, for instance, is the inheritance and
transmission of mental maladies. These maladies may
lie dormant for generations, and yet they may break out
in the organism at the same period of life, and actually
in the same manner, in successive generations as they
have done in some remote ancestor. Lucas mentions a
case where all the members of a family in Hamburg, dis-
tinguished through four generations for great talents,
went mad at the age of forty. Esquirol gives an
instance where father, son, and grandson committed
suicide at the age of fifty; and Voltaire knew a man
whose father and brother died by their own hands at the
same age as the man himself, and in precisely the same
manner.
Many courageous attempts have been made from time
to time to explain mind in terms of matter, but all such
attempts assume the existence of a sensitive organism,
which is surely the thing that has first to be accounted
for. It has been contended, for instance, that the original
element of all psychical experience is a nervous shock ;
that it is by the differentiation and combination of
nervous shocks that sensation in its simplest form arises
and that by the agglutination and agglomeration of
simple sensations are ultimately produced all the complex
phenomena of mind. If by sensation is here understood
a physical event, then we have not yet reached the
simplest mental state; if, on the other hand, sensation is


a mental event, how has the physical nerve-shock been
converted into a mental sensation ?
Sensation is again supposed to be a something inter-
mediate between matter and mind (with a great deal
of the former in it), out of which mind is, by some
unexplained process, developed. “ Sensation is so con-
spicuously a physiological process,” says Lewes, “that
many writers exclude it from the domain of mind.”*
J. S. Mill says —“ The immediate antecedent ”of sensation
“is a state of body; ” -f - Mansell, that “it is not an
affection of the mind alone, but of an animated organism
—that is, mind and matter united.”| No doubt sensation
is an affection of the organism, but so also are the emotions,
and so are perception and volition. The term sensation
conveys the idea of passivity, but it includes far more than
this. From its nature it must include consciousness;
indeed, consciousness is its very essence. Sensation must
be the property of a conscious subject. When I say “ I
feel,” I assert that this is my mental condition; I dis-
criminate between what is self and what is not self;
between what is feeling and what is not feeling. Thus
the very thing we profess to evolve out of sensation—
namely, mental activity—already exists. Even granting
that sensation is an intermediate something, and that
mental phenomena are evolved out of it, we have still to
explain how we come to have sensation at all, so that the
* Physical Basis of Mind, p. 335. f Logic, ii., p. 436.
J Metaphysics, p. 92.


question of the origin of mental phenomena remains
unsolved.
Nor can it be maintained that mental phenomena are
the result of organization. No doubt organization is
necessary for the fuller development of the phenomena
in question, just as a high-class instrument is necessary
for the accomplishment of high-class work of any kind ;
but as work of a certain kind can be done with very
inferior tools, or with no tools at all, so can mental
operations be carried on without a highly specialized
organism. The steam engine, to which a living
organism has been compared, has no function unless
its mechanism be perfect ; but psychical force can
operate without a brain or a nervous system. A
highly specialized organism exhibits a greater amount
of intelligence than a microscopic cell, just as we have
seen a multicellular organism shows more vitality than
an unicellular organism ; but here the question is not one
of quantity but of kind. The production of mental, any
more than of physical phenomena, is not the exclusive
function of large masses. The atom as well as the
mountain, the smallest satellite as well as the largest
planet, has its attractive force. If the phenomena of
mind are not the product of the germ cell, at which
period in the history of the organism do they come upon
the scene ? Mental phenomena are by many supposed
to be the product of organization ; but organization is an
effect rather than a cause. If organization were the


cause of mental phenomena we should have to ask, What
is the cause of the phenomena of organization ? Organi-
zation, however, is no more necessary for the perfor-
mance of mental functions than are special organs for
the purpose of locomotion. The hydra are sensitive
to light although they have no eyes ; many zoophytes
have no ears, yet they contract themselves when vibra-
tions of sound are propagated through the medium
in which they live ; polypes, which have neither
nerves nor brain, feel and move without a nervous
system. Every physiologist is familiar with cases in
which the loss of one sense-organ is followed by the
increase or intensity of the other sense-organs which
have been left intact. Many blind and deaf people
acquire such a wonderful delicacy of touch as to be able
to dispense with the organs of sight and hearing, of
which Abercrombie gives numerous instances. Laura
Bridgman, with only the tactile sense left her, but which
was very acute, and the sense of smell very imperfectly
developed, could nevertheless acquire impressions of
objects which are ordinarily obtained only through the
sense-organs she was deprived of; and Kruse, who was
completely deaf, had a bodily feeling of music. Modern
science has demonstrated that Democritus was correct
when he said that “ all the senses are but modifications
of touch.”
But we may be asked if mental phenomena are not
evolved from a nerve-shock, are not developed out of


sensation, and are not the result of organization, how
have they originated ? We have anticipated the answer
to this question: they are the product of the psychical
unit. We cannot get behind the psychical unit, any
more than we can get behind the biological unit, or the
physical unit or atom. We may reduce the cell to its
chemical elements, but by no combination of these
elements can we produce the phenomena in question.
I have attempted to draw an analogy between Mind
and Life, and I have assumed them to be two independent
agencies. But why this dualism ? Are there really two
agents of this mysterious sort, one producing mental
phenomena and the other biological phenomena ? The
functions of Life and of Mind are so much alike that it
is often difficult to distinguish between them. Maudsley
admits that mental processes closely resemble vital pro-
cesses, but, like most physiologists, he assumes that the
former are the result of the latter.* Johannes Muller,
defines Life to be “a rational creative force,” which is
equivalent to saying that the phenomena of life are
due to a psychical cause. The same agent often
produces both mental and organic phenomena. When I
will to move my arm, the willing is psychical, the move-
ment is organic. It may be proper enough to describe
the one set of phenomena as subjective or mental, and the
other as objective or organic, but we are not justified in
ascribing to them different origins, the one set to a
* Physiology of Mind, p. 43.


psychical and the other to a vital force. The idealist will
have no hesitation in determining which should have the
precedence.
But how, it may he asked, can the many become one,
unity arise out of diversity, the permanent Ego out of
an aggregate of conscious, unstable units, without some
unifying agent ? Nothing seems so certain as my
personality, and yet nothing is so evanescent. In the
first place, let me remark, the Ego is a synthesis; it
dissolves itself into a series of sensations and memories
as soon as we attempt to grasp it. How often has one
to ask oneself in the course of his life, Can I really be the
same individual I formerly was, when my views of life,
my aspirations, and my sentiments generally are now so
utterly unlike what they were in times past? It is only
by pulling oneself together by a strong effort of memory,
that one can believe in his own past continuity. What
ideas or sentiments has a man of mature age in common
with those of his youth ? Our mental being has been
described as a series of states of consciousness—a con-
stantly flowing stream, not a stagnant pool—and this is
what we should expect to find from the nature of our
organization. The grouping and massing of nerve cells,
with their connections ramifying through all parts of the
organism, permit of a succession of sensations to be
transmitted to the supreme centre or brain. This organ
we may suppose to be the seat of the Ego, a view which
receives confirmation from the fact, which has been


demonstrated by Ferrier, Fritch, Munk, and others, that
the organs of sense, which are indispensable to the Ego,
are represented in the brain and nowhere else.*
In the second place, there need be no incoherence in an
aggregation of units organically united. The human
brain is composed of two distinct hemispheres, but though
divided we have not a divided consciousness, at any
rate in our normal state. The social community is
made up of independent units, yet we personify this
community when we speak of Public Opinion and the
National Conscience. Here, however, as we have said,
the units are independent; but in a complex organism
they are united by nerve fibres, and are at the same
time in such close proximity in the brain that they
appear as if they were fused together. It has been often
observed that when two individuals have been long- and
intimately associated together they unsconsciously adopt
each other’s mode of looking at things; in the case of
twins there is often an extraordinary mental and physical
similarity between the two, extending in some instances
to identity and simultaneity of action. Ribot says;—
It has been observed, that when there is perfect physical
similarity between twins, which is not rare, it is always accom-
panied with moral similarity. Moreau saw at Bicetre two young
men who were so much alike that one would be taken for the
other. They both possess the same monomania, the same dominant
ideas, the same hallucinations of hearing ; they never speak to any
one, nor do they communicate with one another. An exceedingly
* See Appendix C.


curious fact, often observed by the attendants and by myself, is this :
from time to time, at irregular intervals of two, three, or more
months, without appreciable cause, and by the entirely spontaneous
action of their malady, a very marked change occurs in both
brothers at the same period; often on the same day they quit
their habitual state of stupor and prostration, and earnestly en-
treated the physician to give them their freedom. I have seen this
repeated even when the two brothers were separated from one
another by a distance of several miles.*
Moreover, as cells are reproduced by fision of the
parent cell, which divides itself into two parts, both
of which continue to live, being, according to Weismann,
practically immortal,'f as there is thus a continuity in the
life of the organic cells there is also a continuity or identity
in the organism. On the physical side we find the organic
cells, nerve cells, and nerve fibres distributed throughout
the body, and in connection with these a mass of minute
nerve cells and nerve fibres in the brain ; on the mental
side, we have a corresponding diffusion and concentration
of psychical units more or less intimately associated. But
the facts adduced do not lead up to the conclusion that
the concentration of psychical units, which we may call
the Ego, and the diffusion of psychical units, which we
* Heredity, p. 266.
t The process of fision in the amoeba has been recently much
discussed, and I am well aware that the life of the individual is
generally believed to come to an end with the division which gives
rise to two new individuals, as if death and reproduction were the
same thing. But the process cannot truly be called death.
Where is the dead body ? What is it that dies ? Nothing dies.
—Weismann’s Heredity, p. 25 (English trans.)


may call the Soul, are identical, although they are
undoubtedly closely connected. In one sense, the Ego is
the Soul, inasmuch as it represents the Soul, being in
direct communication with each of the psychical units of
which the latter is composed ; in another sense the Ego,
being only a part of the Soul, or a synthesis of psychical
units, cannot he the Soul itself. All roads lead to Rome,
and all mandates are issued from there, and therefore
we say Rome is the empire ; but Rome is not the empire,
but only a part of it, although a very important part.
The fact that the brain alone is in direct communi-
cation with the organs of sense has important bearing
on the question of the evolution of the Ego. We know
self only when we are able to distinguish between the
subjective and the objective, and the objective we
know only through the medium of the senses.
We have no reason to believe that the Ego exists in
the embryo, although the latter possesses an elaborate
nervous system long before birth. Even after birth
the Ego of the infant is non-existent, although the
evolution of its brain has far advanced. For weeks after
birth the infant seems to have no definite idea of self,
and even when it begins to prattle it speaks of itself in
the third person. With the continuous growth of the
organism increased mental capacity will follow in the
ordinary course, by the multiplication, differentiation,
and combination of the psychical units; the slow process
by which the co-ordination of sense impressions is brought


about corresponds with the gradual development of the
Ego after birth ; but the turning point is reached when
the power of distinguishing between what is subjective
and what is objective, between what is self and what is
non-self, has been acquired.
But, although the Ego has its own mode of being, it
does not lead an independent existence. Its relation to
the Soul is that of the stem to the root. That part of a
plant that is above ground leads a very different life from
that which is below. Some species of plants have even
separate reproductive systems, the roots producing tubers
and the flowers seed. The part above ground can only
live in the sunshine and by breathing the free oxygen of
the atmosphere, while the part below supplies it with
moisture and nourishment. In like manner the Ego
lives its own conscious life, has its own sphere of action,
its own pleasures and pains, its own hopes and fears, its
own sentiments and aspirations ; but it nevertheless leads
a dependent life, for, as by a process of capillary attrac-
tion the stem and branches draw their aliment from the
x’oot, so the Ego draws its instincts, its intuitions, and its
inspirations from the Soul. The Ego has supreme control
of the external relations of the organism, and is entirely
unimpeded in its movements ; the Soul presides over the
internal relations, maintains the functions of the organism,
every part of which it pervades, and every part of which
it modifies when modification becomes necessary.


Summary.—We have in this chapter endeavoured to
trace, as far as our ignorance will permit, organic modifi-
cations to their source. This we found to be the organic
o
cells. These apparently formless and semi-independent
organisms exhibit intelligence, and have the power of
self-modification and recuperation to an extent possessed
by no other living being. They are the sole agents em-
ployed in the construction, and afterwards in the main-
tenance, of the most complex organisms, and their
economic and social organization is both comprehensive
and complete. When an injury occurs to any part of
the organism they collect in force on the spot for the
purpose of effecting repairs, which they execute with
singular skill and judgment, varying the means employed
according to the circumstances of each particular case.
We have seen wherein this view differs from that put
forward by Lamarck, who ascribes modifications to the
wants and efforts of the organism as a whole, and
O '
not to the biological units in the parts affected. As we
have seen that the germ-cell exhibits the phenomena we
call mind, it cannot be said that mind is the result of
organization ; we should say that organization is rather
the result than the cause of mental activity. There is,
first, the action of the environment, and, secondly, the
reaction of the organism. This action is either stimu-
lative or irritative ; if stimulative, the organism reacts
by expanding itself, and this often results in the develop
ment of latent qualities; if irritative, the organism


reacts by modifying those parts which are injuriously
affected. But the system of division of labour requires
that local wants should be provided for by the local
cells, so that when the action of the environment (which
is purely mechanical) adversely affects an organ, or any
part of an organ, the modification which follows would
not be brought about by the Ego (which has only a dim
idea of something being wrong somewhere, and knows
nothing of the changes that may be necessary or how to
effect them), but would be due to the local cells, whose
special function it is to repair, replace, and to modify the
parts immediately under their control. On the physical
side we have the germ-cell, which, by a process of division,
becomes a community of organic and nerve cells, a mass
of the latter forming the brain; on the mental side we
have a corresponding distribution of psychical units, and
a concentration of a proportion of such units forming
the Ego. The community of psychical units within the
organism we may call the Soul; a synthesis of these
psychical units we may call the Ego, and the functions of
these two are so distinct that the latter not only does not
direct, but is not even conscious of, the operations of the
former.


APPENDIX.
A.-MIMICRY.
Note to page 29.
There is not only a general resemblance between animals and
tbeir environment, but there is sometimes also a special likeness
(often greatly exaggerated), between certain animals, especially
insects, and some particular objects to which they may resort in
order to escape observation, such as a flower, a piece of moss, a
green or withered leaf, or even the droppings of birds. Many
insects are reddish on red soil or on red sandstone, speckled on
granite, white on chalk or limestone, sometimes even shaded to
suit the colour of a particular stone wall or a small patch of
gravel, while other varieties of the same species, only a few yards
off, will be coloured to match some other kind of background.
One species of insect may also be found associated with another
species of a totally different character, but to which it may have a
general resemblance, as, for instance, an edible caterpillar with a
kind which is non-edible, by which means the former may often
escape from the depredations of insectivorous birds, which avoid
non-edible species. In such cases the edible species is supposed to
imitate or mimic the likeness of the non-edible. Can we imagine
such resemblances to be brought about by the action of natural
selection ? Why should we have recourse to a process involving, as
this does, the sacrifice of innumerable species, and requiring for its
operation almost infinite time, when the same result might be
brought about at once, and without any sacrifice whatever P It is
only amongst insects whose hahits are sluggish, and who have no


means of defence that these extraordinary resemblances occur.
Many such animals when they find themselves helpless will feign
death. Touch a woodlouse, for instance, and it will roll itself up
into a ball and remain perfectly still. The common speckled
weevil rolls off the leaf it is sitting on at the approach of a possible
enemy, and drawing in its legs and antennse, it will thus become
undistinguishable from the pellets of earth among which it falls.
A butterfly will attempt to escape capture by alighting on some
object to which it has a general resemblance, and will thereupon
remain motionless till the danger is past. Butterflies are pro-
tectively coloured only when at rest; when in flight their slow
fluttering motion renders them very conspicuous ; hence, as every
collector knows, when chased they suddenly disappear by
alighting on some object coloured like themselves, whereby they
escape observation. To account for these likenesses to special
objects, animate or inanimate, we have only to assume that these
defenceless insects have intelligence enough to perceive that their
safety lies in escaping observation. That such animals possess
colour-perception is evident from the fact that they invariably
select an appropriately coloured background when pursued by an
enemy; and that they make their selection with the view of
escaping observation is manifest from the confidence they exhibit
by remaining motionless even when an enemy approaches within
a few inches of them. There is a wide difference between this
kind of selection, however, and that with which the name of
Darwin is identified. In both cases a certain amount of colour
variation is assumed; but in the one case the organism selects an
environment to suit itself, in the other the organism is modified to
suit the environment.


B.—THE CELL.
Note to page 138.
Sikce the discovery of the cellular theory by Schleiden and
Schwann it has become more and more apparent that the cell is a
factor of supreme importance in physiological investigation.
Yirchow even goes the length of saying that if we have to choose
between the (multicellular) organism and the (individual) cell
that we should prefer the latter to the former. Why should we
hesitate to acknowledge the significance of the cell in the
province of psychology also ?
“ All life is bound to the cell, and the cell is not merely the
vessel of life, but it is itself the living part. . . . What is the
organism ? A community of living cells, a little state, well
provided with all appurtenances of upper and under officials, ser-
vants and masters, great and small.”—Virchow’s Vier Reden, p. 55.
“ The whole protoplasmic system must be conceived as an
individualized organism— i.e., a living, moving, proper being, con-
sisting of nucleus, peripheral envelope, and radial or net-like
uniting members, and found w-ithin its self-formed shell, the
cellulose wall, in continual motion, which consists in a gliding
hither and thither, and a consequent shifting and constant
remodelling of the internal articulation. As the mollusc not only
constructs its own shell, but moves within the same, so the
protoplasmic body within its cellular membrane. Not the currents
in the bands, not the cell nucleus, not the primordial sac per se,
are the seat and cause of the movement. The whole protoplasmic
body, which is not a substance but an organism, moves in all its
parts, now simultaneously, now alternately, as indivisible,
amoebiform, vitalized, proper being, which of course in the higher
plants is only partial existence of a larger whole.”—Hanstein’s
Botanische Zty., 1872, Nos. 2 and 3.
“So certain and intimate is the sympathy between the individual
nerve-cells in that well-organized commonwealth which the
nervous system represents, that a local disturbance is soon felt
more or less distinctly throughout the whole state. When any


serious degeneration of the ganglionic cells of the cord exists,
there is not only an indisposition or inability to carry out as sub-
ordinate agents the commands which come from above, but there
is a complaint sent upwards; a moan of discontent or pain roaches
the supreme authority. That is the meaning of the feelings of
weariness, heaviness, achings of the limbs, and utter lassitude
which accompany disorder of the spinal centres ; and the con-
vulsive spasms and the local contractions or paralysis of muscles
are the first signs of a coming rebellion. If the warnings do not
receive timely hoed, a riot may easily become a rebellion; for
when organic processes, which normally go on without conscious-
ness, force themselves into consciousness, it is the certain mark of
a vital degeneration. If the appeal is heard in vain, then further
degeneration ensues. Not only is there irregular revolutionary
action of a subordinate, but there is pro tanto a weakening of the
supreme authority ; it is less able to control what is more difficult
of control. When due subordination of parts exists, and the
individual cell conforms to the laws of the system, then the
authority of the head is strengthened. A foolish despot, forget-
ting in the pride of his power that the strength and worth of a
government flow from and rest upon the well-being of the
governed, may fancy that he can safely disregard the cry of the
suffering and the oppressed ; but when he closes his ears to com-
plaints, he closes his eyes to consequences, and finally wakes up
to find his power slipped from him, and himself entered upon the
way of destruction. So it is with the nervous system : the cells
are the individuals, and as in the state, so here, there are in-
dividuals of higher dignity and of lower dignity; but the well-
being and power of the higher individuals are entirely dependent
upon the well-being and contentment of the humbler workers in
the spinal cord, which do so great a part of the daily work of life.
The form of government is that of a constitutional monarchy, in
which every interest is duly represented through adequate
channels, and in which, consequently, there is a proper subordina-
tion as well as co-ordination of parts.”—Maudsley’s Physiology of
Mind , p. 180.
12


The action of the amoeboid cells (leucocytes) in inflammation is
thus graphically described by Dr. Sutton :
‘ 1 If we summarize the story of inflammation, as we read it
zoologically, it should be likened to a battle. The leucocytes are
the defending army, their roads and lines of communications the
blood-vessels. Every composite organism maintains a certain
proportion of leucocytes, as representing its standing army.
When the body is invaded by bacilli, bacteria, micrococci,
chemical or other irritants, information of the aggression is
telegraphed by means of the vaso-motor nerves, and leucocytes
rush to the attack : reinforcements and recruits are quickly formed
to increase the standing army sometimes twenty, thirty, or forty
times the normal standard. In the conflict cells die, and often are
eaten by their companions ; frequently the slaughter is so great
that the tissue becomes burdened by the dead bodies of the
soldiers in the form of pus, the activity of the coll being testified
by the fact that its protoplasm often contains bacilli, &c., in
various stages of destruction. These dead cells, like the corpses
of soldiers who fall in battle, later become hurtful to the organism
they in their lifetime were anxious to protect from harm, for they
are fertile sources of septicaemia and pyaemia—the pestilence and
scourge so much dreaded by operative surgeons. The analogy
may seem to many a little romantic, but it appears to me to be
warranted by the facts which have been placed before the reader.”
—General Pathology, p. 127.
C. —PERSONAL IDENTITY.
Note to page 152.
This theory of the Ego may help to explain certain abnormal
phenomena, such as hallucinations, as when one person supposes
ho is another person; and double consciousness, of which there are
many known instances. Professor Janet has astonished the
scientific world by his recent investigations, which go to show


that there are sometimes as many as three distinct states of con-
sciousness, or three different personalities, in the same subject.
He made observations on several hysteric patients in the Havre
Hospital who exhibited this extraordinary peculiarity. The case
of Leonie, a peasant woman of the ordinary French type, and 4 o
years of age at the date of observation, is particularly interesting.
We give Professor Janet’s own remarks about this singular case :
When in her normal state this poor peasant woman is a serious and rather
sad person, calm and slow, very mild with everyone, and extremely timid.
To look at her one would never suspect the personage which she contains-
But hardly is she put to sleep hypnotically than a metamorphosis occurs. Her
face is no longer the same. She keeps her eyes closed, it is true, but the
acuteness of her other senses supplies their place ; she is gay, noisy, restless,
sometimes insupportably so: she remains good-natured, but has acquired a
singular tendency to irony and sharp jesting. Nothing is more curious than
to hear her after a sitting when she has received a visit from strangers who
wished to see her asleep. She gives a word portrait of them, apes their
manners, pretends to know their little ridiculous aspects and passions, and
for each invents a romance. To this character must be added the possession
of an enormous number of recollections, whose existence she does not even
suspect when awake, for her amnesia is then complete. . . . She refuses
the name of Leonie, and takes that of Leontine (Leonie 2), to which her
lirst magnetizers had accustomed her. That good woman is not myself, - ’
she says ; “ she is too stupid.” To herself Leontine (or Leonie 2) she attri-
butes all the sensations and all the actions—in a word, all the conscious
experiences—which she has undergone in somnambulism, and knits them to-
gether to make the history of her already long life. To Leonie 1, on the other
hand, she exclusively ascribes the events lived through in waking hours. I
was at first struck by an important exception to the rule, and was disposed
to think that there might be something arbitrary in this partition of her
recollections. In the normal state Leonie has a husband and children, but
Leonie 2, the somnambulist, while acknowledging the children as her own,
attributes the husband to “ the other.” This choice was, perhaps, explicable,
but it followed no rule. It was not till later that I learned that her mag-
netizers in early days, as audacious as certain hypnotizers of recent date, had
somnambulized her for her first accouchements, and that she had lapsed into
that state spontaneously in the later ones. Leonie 2 was thus quite right in
ascribing to herself the children, since it was she who had had them, and
the rule that her first trance state forms a different personality was not


broken. But it is the same with her second state of trance. When, after the
renewed passes, syncope, &c., she reaches the condition which I hare called
Leonie 3, she is another person still. Serious and grave, instead of being a
restless child, she speaks slowly and moves but little. Again she separates
herself from the waking Leonie 1. “ A good but rather stupid woman,” she
says, “ and not me.” And she also separates herself from Leonie 2. “ How
can you see anything of me in that crazy creature,” she says. “ Fortunately
I am nothing for her.”*
It is a singular feature of the case that Leonie 1 knows only of
herself ; Leonie 2 knows of herself and of Leonie 1 ; Leonie II
knows of herself and also of both the others. Professor Janet also
discovered that these different personalities not only appeared in
succession but actually existed simultaneously. Thus he found
when Leonie 1 was fully absorbed in conversation with a visitor
that Leonie 2 would hear his voice when he addressed her in a
whisper, and tvould respond by obeying his orders or by gestures
or by writing, Leonie 1 meanwhile going on with her conversation
quite unconscious of what Leonie 2 was doing as it were behind
her back. Professor Janet explains these phenomena by suppos-
ing that the unifying or co-ordinating power of the ordinary
personality was unable to grasp all the facts of consciousness
(hysterical subjects being often extremely distraites, and unable to
attend to more than one thing at a time), and that the residuum
which it could not synthesize formed other personalities. Be this
as it may, there can bo no doubt that a plurality of consciousness,
whether successive or simultaneous, is capable of explanation on
the theory we have presented, as any alteration in the grouping
of the psychical units would involve a change of personality, and if
the total possible consciousness wore split up into parts these parts
would arrange themselves into separate personalities, which might
successively or simultaneously assert themselves.
* Be L'Automatisms Psychologirpte.
v.i x)i gv f.niK:r! .oil aim ' 0,, i.[i lif- r imuers-sureer, Jieiuonnw.


BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
OUTLINES OF AN INDUSTRIAL SCIENCE
London : MESSRS. KEG AN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO.
PRESS NOTICES.
The Westminster Review says :
His work is closely and aptly reasoned throughout, and in a mode
which Mr. Mill, of all others, would have admired.
The Ed'mhurtjh Daily Review says :
The dissatisfaction with the current doctrines of political economy is
evidently on the increase. The number of attacks from different
points of view is already considerable, and they are likely to be more
numerous in future. The name and the thing are alike disagreeable to
many writers, and both the method and results of former investiga-
tions are called in question. One of the most vigorous attacks made in
recent years is that contained in this volume by Mr. Syme. He is,
however, more successful in the destructive than in the constructive
part of his work. It is a book which may be read with thorough
enjoyment. Mr. Syme is master of a clear, vigorous, and incisive style.
No greater contrast could there be than between the transparent
English of this volume and the clumsy, lumbering sentences of many
former writers on this, which Carlyle calls the dismal science. Mr.
Syme’s polemic is most enjoyable—a healthy breeze of moral
indignation breathes through the book ; nor do we think the indigna-
tion out of place when we consider the revelations which he makes.
. . . In attack Mr. Syme is often irresistible. . . . No more
vigorous polemic have we read for a long time than the attack on
competition. . . .


REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT IN ENGLAND:
Its Faults and Failures.
London ; MESSRS. KEG AN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO.
PRESS NOTICES.
The Melbourne Review says :
One very pleasing feature of this book is its finished literary
workmanship. Mr. Syme strictly circumscribes the limit of his
argument, and refuses to be tempted beyond it by any hazy vistas of
possible discovery. He does not touch upon any of the abstract
reasonings for or against representative governments. He assumes, as
a first principle, that the more representative a government is the
better it is. He starts with the axiom that in legislation the electors
only are to be considered, and not the elected ; and that the majority
of the electors are entitled without any hindrance to the absolute
mastery of all affairs of State. Questions of the franchise are excluded,
and problems such as the representation of minorities are eschewed,
simply because they lie outside of the straight path of his argument.
He does not treat, as Mr. Harrison does, of the procedure of legislative
bodies, but concentrates all his attention upon the relations which
subsist between the electors and their representatives on the one hand,
and between membei-s and their representatives, the Ministry, on the
other. To elucidate these conditions, English constitutional history
from the very earliest times has been laid under contribution. But the
work is not historical, and the facts of history only appear either as
illustrations or as furnishing the material for an induction. In general
style and manner of handling his subject Mr. Syme resembles J. S.
Mill. There is the same calmness, the same lucidity, the same reserve
of strength. There is a severe conciseness of expression, which leads
to a condensation and crystallization of thought. The book is inter-
esting in itself, and pregnant in suggestions ; written without the
technicality which might terrify the general reader, and still thought-
fully enough to merit the attention of the philosophic student.
The British Quarterly says ;
Mr. Syme is favorably known to us by a fresh little work, “ Outlines
of an Industrial Science,” in which he took a new departure in the
“ dismal science.” In his hands political economy received thoughtful
yet lively illustration, and we looked forward with some degree of
expectancy to his next venture. We have it before us in a treatise on
“ Representative Government in England,” which is alike interesting
and instructive. . . . Mr. Syme has the happy knack of writing
on abstruse topics with force and felicity. He is master of an excellent
style, not too ornate for the discussion of political principles, yet
pointed, forcible, and clear. He writes, too, with ample knowledge of
his subjects, so that it is impossible not to recognize that he has
investigated as well as thought for himself.
