

Royal Society
of Victoria
ON THE CAVES PERFORATING MARBLE
DEPOSITS, LIMESTONE CREEK.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
By JAMES STIRLING, F.L.S.




ON THE CAVES PERFORATING MARBLE
DEPOSITS, LIMESTONE CREEK.
By James Stirling, F.L.S.
[Read 12th April, 1883.]
During a recent examination of some marble deposits at
the head of the Murray River (Limestone Creek), it occurred
to me that a few measurements and observations on the
interior of the caves by which these deposits are perforated
might prove interesting. The following descriptions and
diagrams are the result of such examination: —
Topography of Limestone Creek Valley.
Forming the most southern source affluent of the Murray,
the Limestone Creek presents many important physio-
graphical features. The southern and eastern watershed
line is formed by the Great Dividing Range, culminating on
the east in the rugged Cobboras mountains, 6025 feet above
sea-level; while the western watershed line is formed by a
high lateral range at a mean elevation of 4500 feet above
sea-level. The general direction of the course of the
Limestone Creek, from its source in the Dividing Range to
its confluence with the Indi or Hume River, is north north-
easterly, and the area of its catchment basin about 240
square miles.
Most of the small tributary streams have their source
runnels in fine grassy upland flats, on the crests of the
ranges forming the watershed lines, but as they near the
parent stream traverse deeply eroded gorges in the
mountain flanks, frequently forming cataracts and water-
falls of great beauty. This is more particularly the case
with the eastern affluents, which are much shorter than
the western.
The view obtained when descending the valley from the
west, on the main route from Omeo to Maneroo, N.S.W.,
is very grand and impressive. Away to the north, just
discernible in the distant horizon, looms the snow-capped
peaks of the culminating ranges of the Australian Alps,
Mount Kosciusko, and the Bugong Ranges, over 7000 feet
above sea-level; in the middle distance rises the coned peak


of Mount Pilot, 6020 feet; to the east tower the serrated
rocky ridges of the Cobboras mountains, 6025 feet; while
intervening and winding amid bold, wooded ranges lies the
gorge formed by the Limestone Creek valley. Along the
course of the stream are a series of richly grassed open flats,
backed in many places by low bluffy spurs, giving in their
undulating contour and other appearances unmistakable
evidences of calcareous deposits in situ.
Geological Structure.
The eastern watershed (with the exception of the locality
hereinafter mentioned as Stony Creek) is composed of
masses of porphyries, fragmental and compact, the former
from grains as fine as sand to blocks weighing many tons;
while the western watershed is made up principally of
slates, and interbedded bands of whitish marble and dense
blue limestone. The slates merging on the western water-
shed line into a class of schistose rocks, bearing a strong
resemblance to the metamorphic schists of the Omeo
District.* Although the Limestone Creek may generally be
said to have eroded its course along the contact of the
sedimentary rocks with the porphyries, yet the latter, in
the lower part of the stream, have been cut through, leaving
precipitous banks on either side.
In order that the stratigraphical relation of the porphy-
ries to the sedimentary rocks may be better understood,
the following sectional notes and diagrams are given. The
section was determined from personal observation, and
crosses the Limestone Creek valley at right angles to the
course of the stream.
Starting from the level of Marengo Creek (an eastern
affluent of the Mitta Mitta), and proceeding easterly, we
have, first, a mass of granitiform rock exposed on the bed
of Marengo Creek; ascending Mount Pendergast coarse
metamorphic schists, gneissic in character, are seen, showing
apparently a vertical dip. As the crest of the range is
reached these rocks become more micaceous, full of thin
quartz seams, and corrugated along the line of strike, which
is here seen to be N. 20'W. Descending towards the Lime-
stone Creek some upland alluvial flats are passed over, with
* “The Diorites and Granites of Swift’s Creek, and Their Contact Zones.”
By A. W. Howitt, F.G.S. Royal Society of Victoria, pp. 9to 15.


No. 1


here and there, on the crests of the dividing ridges,
contorted schistose rocks protruding. These are both argil-
laceous and silicious in character, and generally finely
laminated, showing a dip of from 70° W. to vertical at
N.N.W. At lower levels a mass of diorite is met with,
presenting in the weathering rounded boulders traces of its
igneous origin. The soil formed by the disintegration of
the latter is shown to be very fertile by the rich carpeting
of grasses at this place. So far as I could judge from the
altered indurated appearance of the rocks at contact, this
mass has been protruded, or rather intruded, from deep-
seated sources along the line of section, and not, as might be
suggested, either interbedded with the sedimentary rocks,
or the remnant of a once larger mass intruded elsewhere.
The rock appears to be a mixture of felspar and hornblende
principally. On the spurs descending the valley of the
Limestone Creek the normal Silurian slates are seen, inclined
at high angles, generally 70' to W., and vary in colour from
yellow to bluish grey —soft, yellowish sandstone, and
micaceo-argillaceous slate, thin bedded or finely laminated.
On the creek flats are deposits of tertiary gravels, frequently
auriferous, and which may hereafter be profitably sluiced
for gold. Several of the western tributaries of the Lime-
stone Creek are also auriferous, and one, Slaty Creek, contains
titaniferous ironsand with cassiterite.* On the east bank of
the creek is a bluffy outcrop of what appears to be thin-
bedded blue limestone, the beds varying from a few inches
to as many feet thick, and inclined at an angle of 70' to W.,
with strike to N.N.W., in fact, parallel with the slates with
which they are interbedded. These apparent blue lime-
stones, however, when broken, exhibit a crystalline, some-
what saecharoidal texture, and vary in colour from milky
white to shades of light grey, and are found to be more or
less full of thin yellow seams parallel to the bedding planes.
The quality of this marble, on an analysis of hand specimens,
seems good, yielding a small percentage of earthy matter,
and a large percentage of carbonate of lime; yet even where
the beds are thickest these seams would probably deteriorate
from the commercial value of the deposit. Whether these
seams are in any way due to the percolation of surface
waters holding colouring matter, such as one of the oxides of
* Geological Survey of Victoria , Vol. IV., p. 189.


iron, limonite, H 6 Fe 2 0 9) in solution; or represent thin seams
laid down during the deposition of the calcareous sediments,
and which have not been obliterated during the processes of
consolidation by which it is probable these beds were meta-
morphosed from marine limestones into crystalline marbles,
I am unable to decide ; although, from the evident regularity
and parallelism of the seams and their continuousness,
together with the facts noticed when examining the structure
of the marble in the interior of the caves, it is probable
that the latter is the more correct explanation of their
origin. The apparent thickness of this marble bed when
crossed by the line of section does not exceed 250 feet. To
the east the slates again appear, but, at contact with the
marbles, very much contorted along the line of strike.
Crossing an eastern affluent of the Limestone Creek (Painter’s
Creek), the porphyries are first seen, and the change is marked
both in regard to the character of the soil and the vegeta-
tion.
On examination the rock is found to have a somewhat
granular felspathic base, in which are scattered numerous
irregularly-shaped patches of felspar, the dimensions of
which may generally be about a quarter of an inch by an
eighth of an inch in width. On ascending the hill side
similar rocks are to be found, nearly to the first summit, but
in places becoming more compact* On descending towards
Stony Creek similar rocks are met with, until at lower levels
the slates again appear, presenting the same strike and dip,
and without any more than the normal state of alteration
as seen generally on the eastern watershed near the marble
deposits. On a small spur abutting on Stony Creek are
seen the deposits of fossiliferous blue limestone from which
specimen No. 1 was taken.
At lower levels a tributary of Stony Creek —Round
Mountain Creek —has laid bare another narrow band of
finely laminated slates, which are succeeded by the Stony
Creek marbles, consisting of rather amorphous or thick-
bedded masses of whitish, greyish, pinkish, and variegated
marbles, as seen in specimens Nos. 2,3, 4, and 5.
In one place a ridge of undenuded porphyry remains
overlying the marble deposits, as shown in sketch; while on
* Progress Report, Geological Survey of Victoria, 1876, p. 196. A. W.
Howitt, F.G.S.


No. 2


No. 3
DIAGRAM
SECTION A to B


the eastern bank of the creek the marble beds are capped by
blue unaltered limestones containing fossils (molluscs).
In ascending the steep and rugged ranges to the east, the
porphyries become more compact and silicious, having a
greyish or reddish felsitic base, with small translucent
quartz-crystals, patches of pink-coloured felspar a,nd
fragments of other rocks, the whole forming a breccia-like
mass, as seen in specimen No. 6. On the summit of Mount
Cobboras, and on the rocky-crested ridges near it, the rock
masses weather into vertical layers with a northerly strike.
Descending the eastern slopes of Mount Cobboras, the por-
phyries previously described give place to salmon-coloured
quartz-porphyries, almost granitic in structure and weather
in rounded masses.
EXAMINATION OF CAVES.
Cave No. 1.— Pendergast’s Cave.
The first examined is that perforating a marble deposit
near the Limestone Hut (an out-station of Mr. James
Pendergast, of Mount Leinster). For reference this may
be called Pendergast’s Cave. In examining the ground plan
of this cave (Diagram 8), it will be seen that it traverses gener-
ally the line of strike of the strata. This is the case with
most of the caves examined, and would appear to indicate
their origin to be by percolation of water from the adjoining
creeks. Wliat I mean by this is that the present water
channel of the Limestone Creek, although in some cases at a
lower level than the orifices forming the entrances to the
caves, originally stood at a much higher level, and washed
the bases of the limestone bluffs; then, percolating along the
lines of strike, gradually eroded a channel to a lower level;
and, owing to the calcareous mass being traversed by joints
and lines of shrinkage, the water charged with carbonic acid
gradually decomposed the hard crystalline masses, and by
the further mechanical action of silt and small stones eroded
a larger passage. The action of rain water from above,
acting similarly by its carbonic acid, derived from the decom-
posing vegetable matter covering the calcareous deposits,
would probably form many of the curiously-shaped holes
and crevices seen on the surface.*
* Vide Boyd Dawkins’ Gave Hunting, p. 53.


The entrance to this cave is fully twenty feet above the
level of the Limestone Creek, and is exceedingly narrow.
The difficulty encountered on entering is, however, amply
recompensed for by the pleasure experienced when the
interior beauties are brought into view—pendent crystalline
stalactites of innumerable forms of beauty stud the ceiling,
while the floors and sides, in addition to numerous stalag-
mital pillars, are here and there fretted with a rich deposit
of glittering calcitic crystals. The rough sketch is a faint
endeavour to portray the characteristic cave scenery.
In many places the floor is made up of thick deposits of
silt, covered by a thin stalagmital coating; while in others
the original silt has been removed, leaving a thin floor of
stalagmite.
In many places where fissures exist to the surface from
the uppermost cavern, the sides of the latter are covered
with a mass of soft, milky-white substance, fully three
inches thick, which I cannot describe better than by calling
it calcareous froth. The substance hardens upon exposure
to the external air, and is most abundant after a heavy rain-
fall, when the interior of the cave is in a moist condition.
The marble, where examined on the sides and roof of the
cave, although the bedding was more obscure and apparently
of greater thickness than seen on the weathered surface,
yet still retained the objectionable yellow seams discernible
at the surface. The only fossils obtained in the vicinity
of this cave were impressions of encrinites, too obscure for
palaeontological identification. A section through the caves,
and the deposit in which they are situated, gives the features
shown in Diagram No. 4, and in following the deposit along
the line of strike the beds are seen to be flexured to a
considerable extent, and narrow at their extremities to thin
bands of corrugated calcareous shale, as in Diagram 4.
Cave No. 2.—Sheean’s Cave.
This is, perhaps, the largest cave in the series, and is
situate at the base of an extensive bluff of marble on the
western side of Limestone Creek, about half-a-mile below
Pendergast’s Cave (see sketch). The general direction of
the cave conforms to the existing drainage system of the
Limestone Creek, and is nearly parallel with the strike of the
beds themselves. Where the ramifications are rectangular
to the general direction, they are, I think, produced by the


N° 4
DIAGRAM SECTION ACROSS limestone: cV
at pendergasts cave


No. 5
DIAGRAM
SECTION A to B
THROUGH
CAVE


percolation of acid-laden waters from the interior— i.e., as the
main channels became choked up by the accumulation of
debris, silt, and gravels, etc., the rushing waters caused by an
annual flood would endeavour to find a passage along the
lines of joint or shrinkage. At present the water traverses
from A to B (see plan), and from B finds its way
through narrow or flattened orifices to lower levels, re-
entering the Limestone Creek about 200 yards below
the entrance to the cave. The roof of the entrance, and for
some distance inward (about 20 feet), consists of a mass of
whitish marble beautifully scalloped by the action of running
water. The entrance is very nearly on a level with the
Limestone Creek, from which it is distant about 70 feet,
and separated by the alluvium and an accumulation of
debris (see plan). After the first 33 feet are traversed
the narrow entrance passage gives place to a large chamber,
from which start various ramifying passages. Those through
which the water runs are narrower than that which I have
shown traverse lines. The floors of 2t03,4 to 5, and 7to
8 are simply masses of soft and hardening silt with, in some
places, stalagmital covering. These present many favour-
able spots for fossil hunting, but owing to the limited time
at my disposal I could not undertake any examination.
However, the plans and sections submitted may prove useful
as a basis for further examination by any one disposed
to undertake such interesting work. Many of the roof
fissures extend almost up to the surface of the deposits,
quite 60 feet in some "places, and their sides are frequently
covered with stalactical drapery of every conceivable shape
and of very beautiful appearance. The rate of accumulation
of these stalactites depends, apparently, on two principal
causes—viz., the quantity of percolating water holding car-
bonate of lime in solution, and the rate of evaporation of the
carbonic acid from the surface of each drop of water, the
latter depending upon the temperature, accessibility of the
air, and other conditions. During my last visit to Pender-
gast’s Cave, No. 1 (there had previously been a rather heavy
rainfall), the stalactites were covered at their extremities
with bright, clear drops of water, some indeed were dripping
and there was also a visible increase in the quantity of
matter I have denominated calcareous froth. It is probable,
therefore, that the rate of stalactital growth depends largely
on the seasons, a wet season being most favourable. The
lines of bedding are well seen in the interior of the cave,


although frequently covered with reddish and yellow earthy
sediment. Throughout this cave, at about 6 feet above the
present bottom and water-level, are masses of mud conglo-
merates, with waterworn pebbles and boulders from |-inch
to 3 inches in diameter, and made up of the porphyries and
slates which exist in situ on the surrounding hills. These
mud conglomerates evidently are the undenuded remnants
of what was for a long time the original deposit forming the
floor of the ancient cave, and may yet be found to contain
fossils of scientific value. I have indicated their position on
Diagram No. 5. The beds, where visible within the cave,
seem to be much thicker than on the weathered surface,
and are still full of the parallel earthy seams before re-
ferred to.
TEMPERATURE OF THE CAVES.
During two visits I made some observations on the tempera-
ture of the caves examined. On the first occasion, in August,
1882, when the surrounding hills were covered with snow,
the thermometer at the entrance to caves Nos. 1 and 2 stood at
50° Fahr.; at a distance of 100 feet within the caves it rose
to 58° Fahr. During November of same year the thermo-
meter at entrances registered 62°, and at the same place as
before, within the caves, it fell to 54°, thus giving a difference
of 8° between the external and internal air in each case.
This seems to agree with the result of observations recorded
elsewhere, “ that the air in caves is generally of the same
mean temperature as that of the district in which they occur,
and consequently cool in summer and warm in winter.”*
For instance, during August, the minimum degree of cold
registered during a severe frost at the Limestone Creek was
20°, or 12° below freezing point, while in November the
maximum registered was 80°. Taking the mean of these
observations as an approximate mean annual temperature,
we have 50°, which I anticipate is about that of the regular
mean temperature of the caves, and also that of the Lime-
stone Creek valley in which they are situated. Of course
this determination is not to be taken as strictly correct, as
a more extended series of observations are required to ascer-
tain the mean temperature of the place, and it is probable
that the maximum and minimum heat is greater and less
* Boyd Dawkins’ Cave Hunting, p. 71.


than that recorded, but from the altitude and latitude of the
place it is not improbable that this approximate determina-
tion may be found to be correct within reasonable limits,
the latitude of the caves being about 37° 7', and the altitude
3000 feet above sea-level.
Cave No. 3.—Dry Cave.
This is situated close to No. 2, in the same bluff, and is
probably connected with it by narrow orifices. The interior
caverns are more lofty, and the stalagmital floors quite dry,the
scenery being similar to No. 2 Cave, and the general direction
parallel to the strike of the beds it perforates. The entrance
is very flat, and at a higher level than No. 2.
Stony Creek Caves.
These are, so far as I could examine them, unimportant;
flat, low-roofed orifices, through which the flood-waters of
Stony Creek find their way, and are of limited extent, being
apparently younger than the Limestone Creek caves. And
in regard to the latter, it is probable that they are not
greater than Pliocene age, and have been hollowed since the
partial denudation of the once superincumbent porphyries,
for, as previously stated, the mud conglomerates within the
caves are made up of rounded waterworn fragments of the
rocks found in situ. I was unable to find anywhere in the
whole series of calcareous deposits evidences of cavities
which might have existed and have been filled up by mineral
constituents during any consolidation of the mass prior
to the deposition of the porphyries. There are certainly
numerous small veins of calc spar, but no break in the general
continuity of the beds. The greater hollowing out of the
caves on the Limestone Creek are, I think, to be accounted
for by the more lengthened periods of exposure to subaerial
influences and the percolation of acid-laden waters; the
Stony Creek calcareous deposit having been more recently
laid bare by denudation of the porphyries. So far as a
superficial examination would enable me to judge, I think
the marbles at this place will prove of considerable com-
mercial value, the texture and colour being excellent, and
the beds more homogeneous than at the Limestone Creek.
However, this is a matter for determination by commercial
enterprise, and outside the objects of this paper.


In concluding this sketchy article on the caves, a few
remarks on the beds they perforate may be interesting. It
has been shown with reference to the Limestone Creek
marble beds that the surface outcrops, and also those within
the caves, are intersected with thin yellow seams parallel
to the bedding planes, and it is conjectured that these seams
can hardly be due to the percolation of surface waters
holding colouring matter in solution, because of their regu-
larity and parallelism. Whether the intense subterranean
heat, which it is probable caused the metamorphism of the
calcareous sediments into crystalline marbles, has obliterated
all traces of bedding at a depth, and so produced a homo-
geneous mass of saccharoidal marble, I am unable to suggest;
but in regard to the origin of the marbles the evidences are,
I think, in favour of their having assumed their crystalline
form during shrinkages in the earth’s crust at the close of
the Silurian or at the beginning of the Devonian periods,
when the whole series of sedimentary rocks were inclined at
high angles— i.e., folded and bedded together by the dynamic
and metamorphic agencies of nature —and, after long-con-
tinued periods of subaerial or subaqueous denudation, were
again submitted to the influence of plutonic forces, during
which the fragmental porphyries which at present rest on
the upturned edges of the sediments were deposited. That
the latter are the results of either subaerial ash, or sub-
aqueous tuff, grouped round such probable volcanic centres
as Wombargo and Cobboras mountains,* is, I think, evident
enough from their lithological character and their strati-
graphical position. It is hardly probable that the deposition
of the porphyries over the palmozoic sediments would cause
such extensive metamorphism of the calcareous beds; in
fact, the proof that such is improbable is seen at Stony
Creek, for here the unaltered fossiliferous beds are in direct
contact with the overlying porphyries, while the crystallisa-
tion of the rock masses appears to increase with the depth
below the surface.
In my examinations of the Stony Creek marble beds I was
fortunate in finding some fossils, which Professor M‘Coy has
been good enough to examine, and has identified one shell,
spirigina reticularis, which he states is one of the few
* Vide A. W. Howitt in Progress Report , Geological Survey of Victoria,
1876, p. 200.


fossils common to the Devonian and Silurian systems. He
also states that some crinoidal stems —which are very
abundant in the Stony Creek beds—are apparently “ Acti-
nocrinus,” and that there is a small undescribed species of
Atrypa and a species of Beyrichia. He also remarks that
the evidence points to these specimens being either Upper
Silurian or Lower Devonian, the geological interval between
these two being very small. Among many highly scientific
problems arising out of an examination of the rock masses
in this rugged portion of our Australian Alps, that which
relates to the metamorphism of the sedimentary rocks into
crystalline schists is, perhaps, one of the most important.
Of the relations between the palaeozoic sediments of the
Limestone Creek and the regional metamorphic schists of
the Mitta Mitta source basin, I shall, I hope, have more to
say when dealing with the geological structure of the Indi
River and the Mitta Mitta source basin. The facts elicited
in this paper may pave the way for more extended observa-
tions and determinations in that respect.






