

ON THE HYDROIDA OF SOUTH-
EASTERN AUSTRALIA, WITH
DESCRIPTIONS OF SUPPOSED
NEW SPECIES, AND NOTES ON
THE GENUS AGLAOPHENIA.
By W. M. BALE.
From the Journal of the Microscopical Society of Victoria.
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.




ON THE HYDROIDA OF SOUTH-
EASTERN AUSTRALIA, WITH
DESCRIPTIONS OF SUPPOSED
NEW SPECIES, AND NOTES ON
THE GENUS AGLAOPHENIA.
By W. M. BALE.
From the Journal of the Microscopical Society of Victoria.
(Bead 30th June, 1881.)
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.
1881.




ON THE HYDROIDA OF SOUTH-EASTERN AUS-
TRALIA, WITH DESCRIPTIONS OF SUPPOSED
NEW SPECIES, AND NOTES ON THE GENUS
AGLAOPHENIA
By W. M. Bale.
(Read 80th June, 1881.)
The South-Eastern portion of Australia possesses a hydroid
fauna, differing so much from that of any other region as to have
induced Professor Allman, when dealing with the general distri-
bution of the order, to rank it as a distinct province. At the
time of the publication of the “ Monograph of the Gymnoblastic
Hydroids,” in which his remarks on distribution occur, only a
small number of species had been recorded as common to this
province, and any other part of the world; and these consisted
principally of two or three widely-distributed forms, such as
Sertularia operculata; but several have since been added to the
list, most of which occur in Australia and New Zealand. So far
as I am aware, not a single species is known to be common to the
north and south coasts of Australia, but this may be owing, in
some measure, to the want of fuller investigation, especially among
the smaller members of the order.
Though the profusion in which some zoophytes are cast on the
British coasts, as depicted by Mr. Hincks and other authors,
is almost without parallel in this country, and few of our
species usually occur in large quantities, our seas are by no means
deficient in number and variety of forms, as compared with those
of Britain. In Mr. Hincks’s “British Hydroid Zoophytes” there
are described about twenty-four species of Sertulariidce , and
fourteen of Plumulariidoe; while from South-Eastern Australia
and Tasmania there are already recorded, of the same two families
respectively, at least thirty-six and twenty-one species, including
those in the present paper, and I have recently obtained four or five
additional ones, while doubtless many still remain to be discovered.
A number of Australian species are included in the works of
Lamouroux, Lamarck, and others of the older naturalists, but as
it is, in most cases, impossible to identify them with any certainty,
owing to the insufficiency of their descriptions, and as it is not
usually stated whether they occur on the north or south coasts, I
have not taken them into account; neither have I included eight
or nine species of Kirchenpauer’s, which are merely described as


coming from Australia. It is somewhat remarkable that so few
Flumulariidce have been previously recorded from this province
by recent authors, though these beautiful forms are by no means
rare. Only two or three Campanularians and no Aihecata have
been described, which is, however, easily accounted for by the
delicacy of the polypary in the former, and its rudimentary con-
dition in the latter, rendering the study of them difficult, except
to those who have facilities for observing them in the fresh state.
If these groups bear anything like the same proportion to the
Sertularians that they do on the British coasts, any observer
living at the sea-side, especially if provided with facilities for
dredging, will find an extensive and almost untrodden field
open to him in the study of these perishable forms and their
development.
With the object of facilitating the labours of any who may be
disposed to enter upon the study of our Hydrozoa , I subjoin a list
of species already described by recent authors, so far as they are
known to me, with their synonyms and localities, and references to
the books or papers in which they are described; and I trust to
give, in future papers, descriptions and figures of such of these
species as I have obtained, especially those which, like Mr. Busk’s
species, have been briefly described but never figured.
The following is a list of the principal authors who have pub-
lished descriptions of Australian and New Zealand Hydroida :
Lamouroux. Histoire des Polypiers Corallines Flexibles, 1816.
Lamarck. Histoire Naturelle des Animaux sans Yertebres.
Krauss. Beitrage zur Kentniss der Zoophyten der Sudsee, 1832.
Gray. Dieffenbach’s “New Zealand.”
Busk. Voyage of the “ Rattlesnake,” vol. I. App.
Busk. Sertularians and Zoophytes of South Africa. British
Association Reports, 1850.
Hincks. On New Australian Hydrozoa. Annals and Magazine
of Natural History, 3rd series, vol. YII.
Allman. New Genera and species of Hydroida. . Journal of
the Linnean Society, Zoology, vol. XII.
Hutton. New Zealand Sertularians. Transactions of the
New Zealand Institute, vol. Y.
Coughtrey. New Zealand Hydroidece. Transactions of the
New Zealand Institute, vols. YII. and YIIL


Coughtrey. Critical Notes on the New Zealand Hydroida.
Annals and Magazine of Natural History, 4th
series, vol. XYII.
D’Arcy W. Thompson. New and rare Hydroids from Australia
and New Zealand. Annals and Magazine of
Natural History, sth series, vol. 111.
Kirchenpauer, Neue Sertulariden, &c. Yerhandlung der
Kaiserlichen Leopoldino-Carolinischen deutschen
Akademie der Naturforscher, 1864.
Kirchenpauer. Ueber die Hydroidenfamilie Plumularidce, &c.
Abhandlungen herausgegeben von dem natur-
wissenschaftlichen Yerein zu Hamburg.
Aglaophenia —Y., 1872.
Plumularia and Nemertesia —YL, 1876.
To these may be added Johnston’s “ British Zoophytes ” and
Hincks’s “British Hydroid Zoophytes,” for the five or six British
species which have been found in Australia.
The species mentioned below have all been recorded from
South-Eastern Australia or Tasmania by recent authors; those of
Lamouroux and Lamarck not being usually described minutely
enough for certain recognition, I have not inserted them; and I
have, unfortunately, been unable to obtain Krauss’ work on the
“ Zoophytes of the South Sea.” The localities now given for the
first time are printed between brackets. For the synonymy, &c.,
of the British species, see Hincks’s “ British Hydroid Zoophytes.”
Sertularia operculata. Lin. Europe; South Africa; Australia;
New Zealand; &c. &c., Johnston, Brit. Zooph,; Hincks,
Brit. Hyd. Zooph., &c.
Sertularia hispinosa. Australia and New Zealand ; (Brighton,
South Australia.)
Dynamene hispinosa , Gray. Dieffenbach’s “New Zealand.’’
Sertularia hispinosa , Coughtrey. Trans. N.Z. Inst., YII.
Sertularia operculata ? D’A. W. Thompson. An. Nat. Hist.,
sth series, 111.
Sertularia trispinosa, Coughtrey. New Zealand; (Yictoria).
Trans. N.Z. Inst., YII.
Sertularia minima. Adelaide; Gulf of St. Yincent; New Zealand;
(Williamstown, profusely investing sea-weed.)


Synthecium gracilis , Coughtrey. Trans. N.Z. Inst., VII.
Sertularia pumila , Coughtrey. Trans. N.Z, Inst., VIII.
Sertularia minima , D’A. W. Thompson. An. Nat. Hist.,
sth series, 111.
Sertularia australis. Sealer’s Cove ; George Town ; Cape
Lefebvre ; Port Phillip.
Dynamona australis , Kirchenpauer. Yerhand. Akad. der
Naturforscher, 1864.
Sertularia australis , D’A. W. Thompson. An. Nat. Hist.,
sth series, 111.
Sertularia penna. Bass’s Straits, Tasmania.
Dynamena penna , Kirchenpauer. Loc. cit
Sertularia elongata. George Town; Bass’s Straits; Cape
Wilson ; Port Phillip ; New Zealand ; &c.
Sertularia elongata , Lamouroux. Hist. Polyp. Flex.
Sertularia lycopodium , Lamarck. An. sans Vert.
Dynamena abietinoides , Gray. Dieffienbach’s “New Zealand.”
Sertularia abietinoides , Coughtrey. Trans. N.Z. Inst., VII,
Sertularia jiexilis , D’A. W. Thompson. Sealer’s
Cove.
Sertularia jtosculus , D’A. W. Thompson. Near
Adelaide; (Williamstown). An. Nat.
Sertularia pulchella , D’A. W. Thompson. Hist.,
George Town; (Williamstown).
sth series,
Sertularia insignis , D’A. W. Thompson. HI-
George Town.
Sertularia sp ., D’A. W. Thompson. Gulf of
St. Vincent.
Sertularia ( Diphasia ?) sub-carinata , Busk.
Bass’s Straits; (Griffiths’ Point; Wil-
liamstown).
Sertularia patula, Busk. Bass’s Straits; Voyage of
(Williamstown).
Sertularia loculosa, Busk. Bass’s Straits : “ Battle-
(Queenscliff). snake.”
Sertularia tridentata , Busk. Bass’s Straits.
Sertularia {Sertularella ?) divaricata , Busk.
Bass’s Sts.; Patagonia; Magellan’s Sts.


Sertularella ramosa, D’A. W. Thompson. \
New Zealand; Bass’s Straits? An. Nat.
Sertularella sp., D’A. W. Thompson. Brown’s 1 Hist.,
River. f sth series,
Sertularella neglecta , D’A. W. Thompson. Aus- 111.
tralia, probably Bass’s Sts.; (Queenscliff). ,
Sertularella simplex. New Zealand ; (Williamstown).
Sertularia simplex, Hutton. Trans. N.Z. Inst., V.
Sertularia simplex , Cough trey. Trans. N.Z. Inst., VII.
Sertularella Johnstoni. Tasmania; New Zealand; (Queenscliff.)
Sertularia Johnstoni, Gray. Dieffenbach’s “N. Zealand.”
Sertularia Johnstoni, Hutton. Trans. N.Z. Inst., V.
Sertularia Johnstoni, Cough trey. Trans. N.Z. Inst., VII.
Sertularella Johnstoni, Allman. Jnl. Lin. Soc. Zoology, XII.
Diphasia attenuata, Hincks. Port Adelaide; England; &c.
Brit. Hyd. Zoophytes.
Diphasia pinnata {Sertularia pinnata), Pallas. Europe ; South
Africa; Sydney ; &c. Hincks, Brit. Hyd.
Zoophytes.
Thuiaria ambigua, D’A. W. Thompson. New Zealand ; Sealer’s
Cove ; (Queenscliff; Griffiths’ Point.)
An. Nat. Hist., sth series, 111.
Sertularia sp. 1 Coughtrey. An. Nat. Hist., 4th ser., XVII.
Plumularia obliqua, {Laomedea obliqua ), Saunders. England ;
Tasmania. Hincks, Brit. Hyd. Zoophytes,
Plumularia campanula, Busk. Bass’s Straits ; (Griffiths’ Point),
Voyage of the “ Rattlesnake.”
Aglaophenia divaricata, [Plumularia divaricata), Busk. Bass’s
Straits ; (Queenscliff; Griffiths’ Point;
Williamstown ; Brighton, S.A.), Voyage
of the “ Rattlesnake.”
Obelia geniculata, {Sertularia geniculata ), Lin. Europe ;
New Zealand ; Port Phillip ; Glenelg ;
King George’s Sound. Coughtrey, An.
Nat. Hist., 4th series, XVII. Hincks,
Brit. Hyd. Zoophytes.
Lafoea fruticosa, Sars. Bass’s Straits. Hincks, Brit. Hyd.
Zoophytes.


Campanularia tincta, Hincks. Port Phillip. An. Nat. Hist.,
3rd series, VII.
Lineolaria spinulosa, Hincks. Port Phillip. An. Nat. Hist.,
3rd series, VII.
The following species are only described as from “Australia,”
and I cannot ascertain which of them, if any, are from this
province, and which belong to the very dissimilar fauna of the
tropical seas to the north of the continent. I have not succeeded
in obtaining Kirchenpauer’s papers on Aglaophenia and Plumularia ,
and the species of the former genus described in the following
pages must be considered as provisionally named till it can be
ascertained whether any of them are identical with those of
Kirchenpauer. The difficulty of obtaining isolated papers which
have appeared in various journals, frequently of small circulation,
especially when such journals are issued in foreign countries,
forms the most serious obstacle which the student of nature in
these colonies has to encounter.
Sertularia (Dynamena) grosse-dentata, Australia, Kirchen-
pauer. Verhand. Akad. der
Naturforscher, 1864.
Aglaophenia avicularis
~ ramulosa
„ hrevicaulis
~ longirostris
„ longicornis
~ squarrosa
„ ruhens
Australia, Kirchenpauer,
Abh. ver. Hamb., V.
i
Plumularia badia , East Australia
Singapore. _, ,
7 . . .. Kirchenpauer.
~ oocomcn , AustraJia. V. . . Tr . TT
77 . . 7 . Abh. ver, Hamb., VI.
„ obhqua, var. Australis,
Australia.
Antennularia cymodocea, Busk. Australia and S. Africa,
Brit. Ass. Report, 1850.
Of the species described in this paper, those from Queenscliff
were obtained by me during a few days’ stay at that place; those
from Williamstown have also been collected by me at various
8


times ; while the species from Griffiths’ Point were all collected
and given to me by Mr. J. B, Y. Goldstein, whom I have also to
thank for much valuable assistance in other ways. Sertularia
acanthostoma , S. recta, and Plumidaria compressa are described
from specimens in a collection of South Australian species, for-
warded to Mr. Goldstein by Mr. T. B. Smeaton, of Adelaide. This
collection also contained specimens of several of the other species
here described, which are noted in their respective places.
Family, Hincks.
Sertularia, Linnaeus.
The gonothecse of some of the species are unfortunately absent;
it is therefore possible that they may belong to the genus Diphasia.
From the general aspect of the polyparies, however, it appears
most probable that they are true Sertularice.
S. minuta. n. sp. Plate XII, fig. 1.
Shoots simple, minute, divided by constricted joints into inter-
nodes, each bearing a pair of opposite hydrothecae. Hydrothecae
tubular, those of a pair adnate to each other in front, slightly
separated behind; base expanded outwards, forming a somewhat
angular projection; upper part abruptly divergent horizontally,
with a fold or crease in the angle; divergent part short, free ;
aperture directed outward, and slightly forward, somewhat ex-
panded, with three teeth, one superior, and two lateral; emarginate
below.
Gonothecse large, thick, oblong, springing from behind the basal
part of the proximal internode, about equal in height to four
internodes of the stem, operculate, mouth surrounded by minute,
scattered denticles.
Colour, brown. Hah. Sorrento (Mr. J. B. Wilson).
Though the sea-weed on which these species occurred bore a
considerable number of shoots, several with gonothecse, I failed to
find any exceeding one-twenty-fourth of an inch in height, or
consisting of more than four internodes.
S. pumiloides. n. sp. Plate XII, fig. 2.
Hydrorhiza reticulate, with the margins irregularly scalloped or
zig-zag, shoots simple, about one-fourth of an inch in height, con-


sisting of from ten to sixteen internodes, each springing by a
narrow base from the one below, the summit of which is continued
upwards into a point behind it, forming, with the part between
the divergent hydrothecae, a rhomboidal figure. Hydrothecae
opposite, a pair on each internode, tubular, adnate nearly to the
aperture; those of a pair adnate or closely approximate for half
their height in front, slightly separated behind; upper part
divergent, ascending; aperture directed upwards and outwards,
and a little forwards, with two prominent lateral teeth, the outer
larger.
Gonothecse large, pyriform or sub-globular, about five times
as long as the internodes of the stem; aperture operculate,
surrounded by small irregular denticles; only one on a stem,
springing from behind the basal part of the proximal internode.
Colour, yellowish brown. Hah. Queenscliff.
This species closely resembles S. minima , D’A. W. Thompson,
(which occurs plentifully at Williamstown), but is larger, and
differs in the hydrorhiza, which in S. minima is nearly uniform in
width, with a series of short transverse markings along each
margin, of which there is no trace in the present species. Both
differ from S. pumila in having only one gonotheca on a stem, the
position of which is constant; in the close approximation or
adnate condition of each pair of calycles ; in the cell-apertures
being directed more upwards and furnished with longer teeth;
and in never having more than two calycles in an internode,
while S pumila often has four.
S. bicornis. n. sp. Plate XII, fig. 3.
Hydrorhiza slender, shoots pinnate, about one-fourth of an inch
in height, stem somewhat zig-zag. Pinnae alternate, each jointed
obliquely to a process given off, at right angles from the base of
one of the long, slender internodes of the stem; each internode of
the stem and pinnae springing by a slender base from the summit
of the one below, which is continued upwards into a point
behind it; internodes of the pinnae of a broad triangular form
below the hydrothecae, slender above; the proximal one on each
pinna short, without hydrothecae. Hydrothecae short and broad,
opposite, one pair on each internode, and a single one in each


axil; those of a pair adnate to each other, divergent, adnate by
the base only to the hydrocaulus, from which they project forward
almost horizontally; aperture tubular, transversely oval, with
two small lateral teeth; directed forwards and outwards and a
little upwards; a large, erect, tubular process at each side of the
mouth.
Gonothecse 1 Colour, yellowish. Hah. Queenscliff,
S. acanthostoma. n. sp. Plate XII, fig. 4.
Stem pinnate, pinnae opposite, not jointed to the stem, distant,
each pair separated from the next by three pairs of hydrothecae.
Hydrothecae on the stem opposite, on the pinnae sub-alternate;
one pair to each internode, except the proximal internodes of the
pinnae, which bear a single one on the lower side ; divergent,
ascending, sinuated on the inner side, expanding upwards.
Aperture wide, with three large and four small teeth on each side,
two of the latter rising from within the margin, and two small
teeth springing from the inner side of a small chamber or
invagination of the wall of the hydrotheca at the front (outer)
margin. A small process projecting horizontally into the
hydrotheca from about the middle of the inner side, with a
double line continued from it across the cell; a second process
projecting into the cell from the outer side, near the base.
Gonothecse 1 Colour, light yellowish. Hah. Pobe, S.A. ?
(Mr. Smeaton).
S, recta, n. sp. Plate XII, fig. 5
Stem flexuous, alternately pinnate, each internode bearing near
its base a pinna with an axillary hydrotheca, and above, a pair
of hydrothecse. Hydrothecse sub-alternate, one pair to each
internode, large, smooth, flask-shaped, upper side projecting at
right angles to the hydrocaulus; aperture small, directed upwards
and outwards, with two rounded lateral teeth, one of which
almost or quite conceals the other in a front or back view of the
polypidom.
Gonothecse ? Colour, brownish-red, hydrothecse pale, except
towards the mouth. Hah. t Brighton, S.A. ? (Mr. Smeaton).


Sertularella. Gray.
The Sertularelloe described below are all small, simple species,
with three marginal teeth to the hydrotheca, in which latter
characteristic they resemble our other species, S. Johnstoni,
S. neglecta , &c, I have found only one four-toothed species, which
seems identical with S. simplex , Hutton, a native of Hew Zealand.
S. LiEVis. n. sp. Plate XII, fig. 6.
Shoots simple, twisted at the base, about one-third of an inch
in height, divided by narrow twisted joints into internodes, each
bearing a hydrotheca on its upper part. Hydrothecae divergent,
long, smooth, slightly narrowed towards the aperture, each
forming, with its internode, a sub-fusiform body ; aperture with
three marginal teeth, one superior and two lateral.
Gonothecae about twice as long as the hydrothecse, borne on the
stem or on the hydrorhiza, ovate, with a few large, tranverse
rugae, and a short, tubular neck, with three teeth on the summit.
Almost colourless. Hah. Williamstown.
S. indivisa. n. sp. Plate XII, fig. 7.
Hydrorhiza slender, shoots simple, twisted at the base, about
one-third of an inch in height, divided by narrow twisted joints
into internodes, each bearing a hydrotheca on its upper part.
Hydrothecae divergent, with two or three faint transverse rugae,
sometimes nearly smooth \ narrowed upwards and contracted neai
the aperture, which is furnished with three marginal teeth, one
superior and two lateral; also with three internal, compressed,
vertical teeth, alternate with the marginal ones.
Gonothecae three to four times the length of the hydrothecae,
borne on the hydrorhiza or near the base of the hydrocaulus,
usually not more than one on a stem ; ovate, with distinct, not
close, transverse rugae, and a tubular neck; summit with from
three to six teeth (generally four).
Colour, yellowish-brown. Hah. Williamstown ; St. Kilda,
S. solidula. n. sp. Plate XII, fig. 8.
Hydrorhiza matted, sometimes so closely as to form a con-
tinuous expansion in parts; shoots simple, about half an inch in
height, twisted at the base, and divided by slightly-twisted joints


into swollen internodes, each bearing a hydrotheca on its upper
part. Hydrothecae divergent, smooth, contracted near the
aperture, swollen below ; aperture with three marginal teeth, one
superior and two lateral, also with three internal, compressed,
vertical teeth, alternating with those on the margin.
Gonothecae borne on the stems, frequently three or four in a
row, twice or three times the length of the hydrothecae ; ovate,
with strong transverse rugae and a tubular neck, with three
indistinct teeth on the summit.
Colour, light brown; the polypidom thick and solid. Hah.
Williamstown.
The gonothecae vary much in the number and distinctness of
the transverse rugae, sometimes bearing a strong resemblance to
those of the last species.
S. PYGM.33A. n. sp. Plate XII, fig. 9.
Hydrorhiza delicate, shoots simple, twisted at the base, about
one-fourth of an inch in height; divided by twisted joints into
internodes, each bearing a hydrotheca on its upper part. Hydro-
thecse divergent, tubular, or sub-conical, smooth; aperture not
contracted, with three teeth, one superior and two lateral.
Gonothecse about three times the length of the hydrothecae,
borne two or three on a stem; with close, strong, double transverse
rugse their whole length, and a short, tubular neck, with entire
margin, rising from within the uppermost of the transverse rugae;
the narrow interspace between the double costae closely striated.
Colour, yellowish-brown. Hah. Queenscliff; Griffiths’ Point,
(Mr. Goldstein).
This species closely resembles S. Johnstoni , Gray, in the form
of the calycles, but differs in its minute size and simple habit.
S. macrotheca, n. sp. Plate XIII, fig. 1.
Shoots simple, about half an inch in height, twisted at the base,
divided by twisted joints into internodes, each bearing a hydro-
theca on its upper part. Hydrothecae very large, close, smooth,
slightly divergent, both series directed towards the front ;
aperture contracted, with three inconspicuous marginal teeth;
three internal, compressed vertical teeth within the front margin,
extending about one-third across the cell, the central one largest;


similar teeth, but single and narrower, within each of the other
two sides of the aperture.
Gonothecae sub-globular, between two and three times as long
as the hydrothecae, with a few distant, transverse rugse; summit
truncate.
Colour, brown, very dark and opaque before preparation.
Hah. Griffiths’ Point (Mr. Goldstein.)
Each gonotheca was surmounted by a globular body about
equal to it in size, which is probably an external marsupium, but
which could not be seen distinctly, owing to its being coated with
sand and other foreign matter.
Thuiaria, Fleming. T. lata. n. sp. Plate XIII, fig. 2.
Shoots pinnate, sometimes branched, one or two inches in
height; stem fascicled towards the base, divided into
each of which bears a single hydrotheca on one side, and a pinna
between two hydrothecae on the other. Pinnae alternate, not
close, long, straight, narrow at point of junction with the stem ;
divided into internodes of various lengths. Hydrothecae tubular,
adnate their whole length; base not divided off from the cavity
of the hydrocaulus; aperture oblique, with two lateral teeth,
sometimes nearly obsolete.
Gonothecae 1 Colour, whitish. Hah. Griffiths’ Point (Mr. Gold-
stein).
Family, PlumulariiDjE, Hincks.
Halicornopsis. n. gen.
Hydrothecae unilateral, uniserial, with a single sarcotheca
attached to the front of each; no other sarcothecae on the poly-
pidom.
Gonothecae without corbulae.
H. avicularis. n. sp. Plate XIII, fig. 3.
Polypidom irregularly branched, five or six inches in height,
pinnate ; pinnae alternate, nearly straight, ascending; one or two
on an internode. Hydrothecae cup-shaped, shallow, set at an
angle of about 45°, the margin expanding, with three spine-like
teeth, two lateral and one anterior; the latter long, beak-like in
lateral view, tubular, with the front produced downwards into the


hydrotheca, forming an intrathecal ridge. Sarcothecae short,
bract-like, situated about the middle of the front of the hydro-
theca, and subtending an aperture in it; completely open on the
inner side.
Gonothecae entire, ovate, borne in long rows on the stem at
the bases of the pinnae, directed slightly towards opposite sides
alternately.
Colour, light or dark brown. Hah. Griffiths’ Point (Mr. Gold-
stein) ; Robe and Point Elliott, S.A. ? (Mr. Smeaton).
The sarcotheca in this species differs from those of some A glao-
;phenice, in which a wide opening is formed by the confluence of
the lateral and terminal apertures. It is not an incomplete tube,
but a mere bract, placed opposite the orifice in the hydrotheca,
and is attached by its base only. It may sometimes be seen
projecting at right angles from the hydrotheca, having been
accidentally pushed out of its proper position. The long anterior
tooth of the hydrotheca somewhat resembles the anterior sarco-
theca of Aglaophenia. I have seen a true Aglaophenia in which
the anterior tooth was similarly elongated, while the sarcotheca
was quite small.
Aglaophenia, Lamouroux.
The different species of Aglaophenia which I have obtained on
our shores have all many characteristics in common. They are
mostly furnished with a long mesial sarcotheca, often double the
length of the calycle; and whether long or short, this sarcotheca
has, except in A. parvula , two distinct external apertures ; besides
which, in some species, there is a third aperture, communicating
with the cavity of the calycle. Kirchenpauer’s sub-genus
Macrorhynchia was formed to include those species distinguished
by a long mesial sarcotheca, with two external apertures, and also
by having the gonothecae unprotected by corbulae. Professor
Allman has pointed out that these characteristics are not always
combined, as his A. acanthocarpa possesses the long sarcotheca,
with two apertures, but has the gonothecae protected by well-
developed corbulse. A. plumosa and A. McCoyi , described in this
paper, agree in both these points with A. acanthocarpa. More-
over, some of our species are furnished with sarcothecae only about
as long as the calycle, which, nevertheless, have two apertures,


and one of these — A. divaricata , Busk—has open corbulae resem-
bling those of A. McCoyi. An interesting form from Port
Darwin has a lenticular gonotheca on every third pinna of each
series, borne near the base ; the pinna, which bears, instead of
hydrothecse, two series of sarcothecse, being recurved and directed
forwards in such a manner as to generally overarch the next
gonotheca in front, the separate elements of the corbula being
thus scattered along the stem, instead of being combined on a
single branch. This species also is provided with sarcothecse
with two orifices. A. parvula usually has the mesial sarcotheca
channelled in front ; in other words, the lateral and terminal
apertures are united by an opening more or less wide. Some"
times, however, this opening is represented by a mere crack in
the chitinous tube. The transition to this form from those with
two distinct apertures is well shown in A. prolifera. In that
species the mesial sarcothecse are normally somewhat longer than
the hydrothecse, and have two distinct orifices; but when, as
often happens, they are considerably shortened, the two apertures
become completely confluent, forming the so-called canaliculate
nematophore. In those of intermediate length, the two orifices
are connected by a crack or slit.
I am not aware whether any author has alluded to the presence
of more than one aperture in the lateral sarcothecse, but nearly
all the species that I have been able to examine are furnished
with two, or in some cases with three. Usually there is a sub-
tubular terminal orifice, with a lateral one less distinct, which in
A. parvula and A. Thompsoni is continued forward till it unites
with the terminal one, the circular outline of which is interrupted
at the point of junction. A small species, parasitic on A. divari-
cata, shows the transition in the laterals exactly as A. prolifera
does in the mesial sarcothecse. The laterals in A. superha and
A. ascidioides are provided with two sub-tubular orifices, in
addition to which, the whole front of the sarcotheca is completely
free, forming a wide aperture, extending even beneath the part of
the margin which bears the tubular ones. A. prolifera is
similarly formed, except that in the laterals there is only one
tubular aperture instead of two ; but in the cauline sarcothecse of
this species as many as three of these sub-tubular orifices are
found bordering the free margin. In forms like these the wide


opening in front appears to represent the ordinary lateral aperture,
and the repetition of the terminals is similar to what occurs in
A. plumosa, where the proximal sarcothecse of the gonangial
pinnules frequently bifurcate about the middle, thus presenting
two terminal orifices.
Altogether, I have ten species from our own shores and two
from Port Darwin, and in all, except A. parvula , the lateral and
terminal apertures are separate in the mesial sarcothecse, while in
the laterals they are separate in all except A . parvula and
A. Thompsoni; and in both these species the form of the aperture
shows plainly that they are the result of the union of the ordinary
terminal and lateral orifices. I have seen only one species in
which the sarcothecse show no indication of the lateral aperture—
a species closely allied to A. myriophyllum , if not identical with it.
Its locality is unknown, but it probably came from the seas to
the north of Australia. The absence of lateral orifices in this
form is explained by the fact that the sarcothecse are all truncated
so far down that the terminal orifices are below the point at
which the laterals are usually found. On the whole, it would
appear that the species with lateral and terminal openings to each
sarcotheca represent the typical aspect of the genus, and that the
lateral apertures are only wanting when the shortness of the
sarcotheca causes them to be completely merged in the terminal
ones. Even in species which have usually more than one orifice
to the sarcothecse it frequently happens, when these are short,
that the orifices are united by a fracture-like opening. The
lateral apertures appear to be the more constant of the two, as, in
several of our species, the sarcothecse of both kinds near the
distal ends of the pinnse are frequently found with the ends closed
and entire, while the lateral orifices are open. In these cases, the
mesial sarcotheca is usually shorter than the ordinary open-
pointed ones on the other portions of the polypidom, but the
laterals, on the contrary, are apt to be much longer and stouter,
either with or without the suppression of the terminal orifice.
The form which I have described as A. parvula is peculiarly
interesting from the structure of the corbula, which, in some
cases, is formed on the type of A. pluma, or rather A. tubulifera,
and in others consists of free leaflets or broad pinnules, with a
series of sarcothecse fringing each margin. These different modi-


fications, which form the bases of Mr. Hincks’ sections of the
genus, are found in shoots of the same cluster, which in all other
points of structure are identical, and they enable us to trace with
ease-the transition from one type to the other, though I can see
no indication to show whether development has proceeded from
the closed to the open corbulne, or vice versa. The closed forms
consist of two series of pinnules, or leaflets, which bear a row of
sarcothecse on their distal edges only, and which are completely
united to each other throughout their whole length, forming a
pod-like receptacle. When, however, each leaflet is separate and
free, the sarcothecse are developed on both edges, though not
always to the same extent, the proximal margin often being
nearly free from them towards the base, while the pinnules
occasionally appear to be slightly attached to each other at one or
two points in the same part, though free throughout the rest of
their length. It is noticeable that the pinnules in the open
corbuhe of A. plumosa and A. McCoyi, also of A. divaricata, Busk,
are always devoid of sarcothecse on the proximal side, near the
base.*
Another point which I have not seen mentioned is the existence
in certain species of minute, claw-shaped denticles, projecting into
the cavity of the hydrotheca at or near the base, and forming two
small groups or series. They appear to partly surround the
opening which connects the cavity of the hydrotheca with that of
the pinna, and may possibly serve as points of attachment for the
hydranth. To distinguish them, it is sometimes necessary to heat
* I have recently received from Mr. Goldstein a beautiful little Aglao-
phenia from Fiji, which I mention principally on account of its peculiar
corbula. The species is about an inch in height, light brown, branched,
with straight, approximate, alternate pinnse ; the stems without distinct
joints, though towards the summit there are faint indications of them. The
calycles are peculiar in form, lying along the pinnae, and deeply constricted
in the middle of the upper side, the constriction representing the intrathecal
ridge, which in some species occupies the same position, and which is simply
a constriction with its walls coalescent, forming a partial septum. The anterior
sarcotheca is rather long, rising principally from the calycle, and directed
forwards and slightly upwards; the laterals are tubular, pointing forwards,
and springing from under the calycle, so that their position is further towards
the back of the pinna than is usually the case; in both kinds the terminal
and lateral orifices are united by a narrow sht. The aperture is somewhat
expanding, with three teeth on each side and an incurved one in front, and


the polypidom for a few minutes in diluted liquor potassse, after-
wards agitating it in pure water to get rid of the remains of
animal matter.
Every species of Aglaophenia which I have seen has two sarco-
thecse on the stem, near the base of each pinna, and A. parvula
and an English species differing little from it [A. pluma ?) have,
in addition, a single small one on the pinnae, near the base. These
cauline sarcothecse, which are similar to the laterals, caused me
considerable perplexity on my first examination of these forms,
as, in Mr. Hincks’ “ British Hydroid Zoophytes,” it is repeatedly
stated that in Aglaophenia the nematophores are appendages of
the hydrotheca only , this being the principal characteristic by
which the genus is there distinguished from Flumularia.
The name “ Aglaophenia ” is applied in this paper to all such
forms as would be included under it in Mr. Hincks’ classification.
A. Thompsoni , and probably several other species here described,
would come under the genus Halicornia, Busk, as modified by
Mr. Allman; but as the gonangia are in most cases absent, it is
more convenient to follow the older system, and class them as
Aglaophenioe.
A. superba. n. sp. Plate XIII, fig. 4.
Polypidom irregularly branched, pinnate, about six or eight
inches in height; pinnae close, long, straight, ascending, sub-
alternate, a pair to each internode. Hydrothecse set at an angle of
of about 60°, upper part somewhat bent upwards from the pinna;
is separated from the anterior nematophore by the constriction mentioned
above. There is also a slight constriction on the under side of the calycle,
near the proximal end, with wrinkles proceeding from it partly across the
cell and the pinna. The corbula, however, is the most remarkable feature
of the hydrosoma. It consists of four or five pairs of broad leaflets, lobed at
the margins, those adjacent being united to each other by the lobes, leaving
the interstices open ; a very large lobe is near the base of each leaflet, on the
distal side. The edges of the leaflets may be serrated with nematophores or
free from them, and on the upper part the nematophores are not confined to
the margins, but are scattered over the surface, usually, however, being
arranged in two or three short linear series. Below the large lobe of each
leaflet there is a deep sinus, in which is seated a hydrotheca, resembling
those on the ordinary pinnae, except in the absence of the anterior sarco-
theca. The gonangial pinna bears a single hydrotheca below the corbula.
If undescribed, I would propose for this species the name of A. heterocarpa.


a strong intrathecal ridge proceeding from the middle of the front
of the cell obliquely downwards to its centre; aperture with
three everted teeth on each side, a broad, rounded tooth or lobe
behind, and usually a minute tooth in front; a group of several
minute denticles within the front of the cell near the base,
directed upwards, and a similar group a little above, pointing
downwards. Mesial sarcotheca stout, rising from the pinna,
about twice the height of the hydrotheca, to which it is adnate up
to the margin, upper part curved and generally produced forwards
parallel with the pinna, with terminal and lateral apertures, the
latter sub-tubular. Lateral sarcothecse short and broad, with two
sub-tubular orifices, one directed forwards, the other upwards ;
front margin completely free, forming a wide aperture. Cauline
sarcothecse similar to the laterals, two on the stem at the base of
each pinna.
Gonothecse ? Colour, brown. Hah. Griffiths’ Point (Mr. Gold-
stein).
The anterior sarcothecse are generally produced as in the next
species, but not quite to the same extent. Those resembling the
figure are mostly found near the ends of the pinna, the transition
being gradual. The teeth of the calycle vary somewhat in size
and relative position.
A. ascidioides. n. sp. Plate XIII, fig. 5.
Shoots from one inch and a half to two inches in height, pinnate ;
pinnse close, opposite, straight, ascending, a pair to each internode-
Hydrothecse set at an angle of about 60°, a strong intrathecal
ridge proceeding from the middle of the front of the cell obliquely
downwards to its centre; aperture with two everted teeth on each
side, a small incurved one in front, and a long upright one behind ;
a group of several minute denticles within the front of the cell
near the base, directed upwards, and a similar group a little above,
pointing downwards. Mesial sarcotheca stout, rising from the
pinna, adnate to the hydrotheca up to its margin, rising consider-
ably above it, and then continued forward parallel with the pinna
till it nearly reaches the next sarcotheca in front; slightly
tapering, with terminal and lateral apertures, the latter sub-
tubular. Lateral sarcothecse short and broad, with two sub-
tubular orifices, one directed downwards, at right angles to the


hydrothecse, the other pointing upwards in a line with it; front
margin completely free, forming a wide aperture. Cauline sarco-
thecse similar to the laterals, two on the stem at the base of each
pinna.
Gonothecse 1 Colour, bright reddish-brown. Hab. Queenscliff.
This form is closely allied to A. superha , but is much smaller,
and differs in the number and arrangement of the teeth of the
calycle, &c. I have met with but few specimens, and do not
know whether it occurs with a branching habit. The name was
suggested by the ascidian-like form of the lateral sarcothecse.
A. ilicistoma. n. sp. Plate XIY, fig. 4.
Shoots in clusters, one to two inches in height, pinnate; pinnae
curved towards the tips, close, sub-alternate, two on each internode.
Hydrothecae cup-shaped, set at an angle of about 55°; aperture with
six teeth on each side; the first, fourth and fifth from the front
everted, the second, third and sixth incurved ; the sixth on each
side placed towards the back of the hydrotheca, and curved
forwards, so that the two appear in lateral view like one median
tooth; a single broad, incurved tooth in front: a group of two or
three minute denticles within the front of the hydrotheca near
the base, and a smaller group just below. Mesial sarcotheca
stout, slightly tapering, rising from the pinna, adnate to the
hydrotheca up to its margin, rising vertically above it, then curved
forward and continued parallel with the pinna till it nearly
reaches the next sarcotheca in front; with terminal and lateral
orifices, the latter sub-tubular. Lateral sarcothecse short, ovate,
with a sub-tubular orifice directed forwards, and a lateral one on
the inner side. Cauline sarcothecse similar to the laterals, two on
the stem at the base of each pinna.
Gonothecse ? Colour, light brown. Hab. Queenscliff; Robe,
S. A. ? (Mr. Smeaton;.
The teeth of the calycle, pointing in different directions, and
somewhat resembling holly-spines, suggested the specific name.
A. Thompson!. n. sp. Plate XIY, fig. 1.
Shoots in dense tufts, about two inches in height, pinnate,
usually branched, stems with short internodes, each bearing a pair


of close opposite or sub-alternate pinnae, curved towards the tips.
Hydrothecae cup-sbaped, tapering towards the base, set at an
angle of about 50°; aperture with three slightly everted teeth on
each side, and a slender incurved tooth in front: three or four
minute denticles in a group at the base of the hydrotheca, and a
similar group a little above. Mesial sarcotheca, a long slender
tube, not tapering, rising from the pinna to double the height of
the hydrotheca, to which it is adnate up to the margin; upper
part curved and generally produced forwards parallel with the
pinna; two orifices, lateral and terminal. Lateral sarcothecse
short, ovate, pointed behind, truncate or sub-tubular in front,
canaliculate. Cauline sarcothecse similar to the laterals, two on
the stem at the base of each pinna.
Gonothecae, borne in rows at the bases of the pinnae, small,
membranous, somewhat pyriform, truncated above.
Colour, light brown. Hah. Griffiths’ Point (Mr. Goldstein);
S. Australia (Mr. Smeaton).
I have named this species after Mr. D’Arcy W. Thompson, who
has described a number of Sertularians from Australia and New
Zealand. The mesial sarcothecse are rather variable in length,
often being produced forwards like those of the last two species.
The gonothecae resemble those of A. pennatula.
A. prolifera. n. sp. Plate XIY, fig. 5.
Stems thick, six or seven inches in height, pinnate, sometimes
giving off small branches, especially near the summit; pinnae
close, straight, ascending, alternate or sub-alternate, two on each
internode. Hydrothecae deep, cup-shaped, tapering towards the
base, set at an angle of about 35°; aperture with a nearly erect
tooth in front, and three on each side, the first and second from the
front everted; two series of minute denticles in the basal part of
the cell. Mesial sarcotheca generally somewhat longer than the
hydrotheca, rising mainly from it, but continuous with the pinna
by a small part of its base; adnate to the hydrothecae up to its
margin, and projecting from it, tapering, with lateral and terminal
apertures, which are sometimes united. Lateral sarcothecae flask-
shaped, adnate by their base to the hydrotheca, with a tubular
orifice directed downwards at right angles to it; the front margin


completely free from tlie pinna, forming a wide aperture. Cauline
sarcothecse, two on the stem at the base of each pinna, similar in
structure to the laterals, the upper one larger; the lower usually
with two, and the upper with three small sub-tubular orifices close
to the upper margin, which is completely free, as in the laterals.
Gonothecse h Colour, brown. Hob. Queenscliff.
(See the remarks on this species in the preliminary note on the
genus.)
A. parvula. n. sp. Plate XIY, fig, 3.
Hydrorhiza stout, shoots attaining a height of nearly an inch,
pinnate; pinnae close, alternate, straight, ascending, each springing
from the lower part of an internode, and both series borne
towards the front of the stem. Hydrothecae urceolate, narrowed
towards the base, set at an angle of about 35°; a fold or constric-
tion crossing the back part of the cell in a direction vertical to the
pinna; aperture sub-plicate, with five teeth on each side, the first
from the front everted, and an incurved slender one in front.
Hydrothecal internodes narrowest at the proximal end, with two
folds or constrictions partly surrounding them ■ one transverse,
opposite the fold in the hydrotheca, the other directed obliquely
forward from the base of the lateral sarcothecse. Mesial sarcotheca
about as long as the hydrotheca, and projecting from it, adnate to
the hydrotheca to within a short distance from the aperture, and
mainly rising from it, but continuous with the pinna by a small
part of its base ; obliquely truncate, canaliculate, with an orifice
communicating with the hydrotheca immediately below the external
aperture. Lateral sarcothecse short, canaliculate, directed forwards,
the teeth of the hydrotheca projecting beyond them. Cauline
sarcothecse, two on the stem at the base of each pinna resembling
the laterals; one on the basal part of each pinna, small, tubular,
not open at the side.
Gonangial pinna bearing a single hydrotheca below the corbula,
with a joint above and below it, the rest of the pinna not jointed.
Corbulse of two kinds—(a), with six or seven pairs of broad
leaflets completely united and forming a closed pod, as in
A. pluma, the distal edge of each leaflet fringed with short, stout,
tubular, canaliculate sarcothecse ; a free pinnule springing from the
proximal rib of the corbula on one side, directed forward parallel


with the pinna, and near it, with a series of sarcothecse on each
side; (6), with all the leaflets free, bordered with sarcothecse on
both edges, forming an open corbula.
Colour, yellowish brown, upper part very pale. Hah. Queens-
cliff (W. M. 8., Mr. Goldstein).
This species very closely resembles a British one sent to me by
Mr. Barnard, and said to be A. pluma, though I cannot identify
it with Mr. Hincks’ figures of either that species or A. tubulifera.
It agrees with A. parvula in the form and size of the lateral
sarcothecse, in the two constrictions of the hydrothecal internode,
and in the opening from the calycle to the mesial sarcotheca; and
in all these points they differ from Mr. Hincks’ figures of A. pluma,
especially in the lateral sarcothecse, which he shows very minute.
In both species these organs appear in front view like those of
A. tubulifera in form, but they are almost entirely concealed
beneath the hydrotheca, and can only be seen by focussing down
through it; while in A. tubulifera , as represented by Mr. Hincks,
they are free from the calycle, and project in advance of it. In
the English species referred to, the front of the calycle is incurved
between the mesial sarcotheca and the aperture, and all the
marginal teeth of the latter are much everted ; in A. parvula the
median tooth is incurved, and the two next to it are the only ones
noticeably everted \ in the English species there are four teeth
on each side, in A. parvula five; in the latter, the two posterior
teeth on each side are large, generally projecting considerably in
advance of the lateral sarcothecse ; in the former, these teeth are
much smaller than those near the front, the last one usually
proceeding parallel with the sarcotheca, and close to it, and not
projecting beyond it. The lateral sarcothecse seem a trifle more
erect in the English species, and being opposite to the incurved
front, the calycle appears in lateral view more narrowed below the
aperture than in A. parvula. Both species agree in the cauline
sarcothecse. A. parvula is usually about half an inch in height,
and principally remarkable for the different modifications of the
corbula which it presents.
A. McCoyi. n. sp. Plate XIY, fig. 2.
Shoots nearly an inch in height, pinnate ; pinnse approximate,
nearly straight, ascending, alternate, one to each internode, both


series borne towards the front of the stem. Hydrothecse set at
an angle of about 35°; urceolate, with an intrathecal ridge rising
from a little below the centre of the lower side, and extending
nearly half across its cavity, parallel with the aperture, and
continuous with an incomplete septum extending into the
hydrothecal internode ; the part of the hydrotheca Ibehind the
intrathecal ridge not separated from the pinna ; aperture with
four teeth on each side, the first and second from the front more
everted than the others ; a slightly incurved tooth in front with a
delicate, compressed, secondary tooth rising erect from it. Mesial
sarcotheca rising from the pinna and hydrotheca to nearly double
the height of the latter, to which it is adnate up to the margin ;
free part curved slightly forwards, the summit widened transversely,
with the extremities curved forwards in a crescentic form; two
orifices, lateral and terminal, and a third communicating with the
cavity of the hydrotheca immediately below the external lateral
aperture. Lateral sarcothecse tubular, rising as far as the margin
of the hydrotheca, directed forwards and upwards, those at the
distal ends of the pinnae usually much enlarged ; two orifices,
lateral and terminal. Cauline sarcothecse similar to the laterals,
large, two on the stem at the base of each pinna.
Gonangial pinnae, with ten or fifteen pairs of alternate pinnules,
each borne on a short internode, and furnished with two lateral
series of sarcothecse, resembling the laterals on the hydrothecae,
but much larger; sarcothecse opposite, the two proximal ones on
the distal side of each pinnule without corresponding ones on the
opposite side; pinnules with obscure joints, plainer above the
first and second sarcothecse; two sarcothecse on the pinna at the
base of each pinnule. The two series of pinnules much arched,
meeting at the tips, and forming an open corbula. A single
hydrotheca on each gonangial pinna below the corbula.
Colour, brown. Hah ., Queenscliff: Robe, S.A. ? (Mr. Smeaton.)
This species is dedicated to Professor McCoy. It does not
usually exceed three-quarters of an inch in height, but I have seen
a branched variety attaining a height of an inch and a half.
A. plumosa. n. sp. Plate XIV, fig. 6.
Shoots in clusters, pinnate, about an inch in height; pinnse
alternate, recurved, approximate, one on each internode. Hydro-


thecae parallel with the pinna in their longest diameter, crossed in
in the back part by a fold or constriction vertical to the pinna ;
aperture nearly parallel with the pinna, each side forming a broad
sub-angular lobe, everted ; a long, nearly erect tooth in front.
Hydrothecal internodes smaller at the proximal end, with two
deep constrictions extending almost round them, one transverse,
opposite the constriction of the hydrotheca, the other directed
obliquely forwards from the base of the lateral sarcothecae,
generally a third midway between them. Mesial sarcotheca rising
partly from the pinna, but mainly from the arched front of the
hydrotheca, to which its base is adnate as far forward as the
aperture \ projecting forward at an angle of about 70° with the
pinna, the free part about equal in length to the shorter diameter
of the hydrotheca ; narrowed near the lateral orifice, and somewhat
swollen between that and the terminal one, with an orifice
communicating with the cavity of the hydrotheca immediately
below the external lateral aperture; base in front produced
downwards into a short septum or ridge in the hydrotheca.
Lateral sarcothecae somewhat similar to the mesial in form, rising
considerably above the margin of the hydrotheca, to which they
are adnate ; divergent, directed upwards and slightly forwards,
with two apertures, lateral and terminal. Cauline sarcothecae?
two on the stem at the base of each pinna, conical, with lateral
and terminal apertures united.
Gonangial pinnae usually two or three on a shoot, recurved,
bearing about fifteen or twenty pairs of alternate pinnules, each
springing from a short internode, and furnished with two lateral
series of sarcothecae, resembling the mesial ones of the hydrothecae j
sarcothecae opposite or sub-alternate, the two proximal ones on
the distal side of each pinnule without corresponding ones on the
opposite side \ pinnules jointed above the proximal sarcotheca,
which is larger than the others and often bifid. Two conical
sarcothecae on the pinna at the base of each pinnule. The two
series of pinnules slightly arched, meeting at the points, and
forming an open corbula, surrounding the delicate ovate gonothecae.
A single hydrotheca on each gonangial pinna below the corbula.
Colour, light brown. Hah., Queenscliff; Aldinga, S.A A
(Mr. Smeaton).


Plumularia. Lamarck.
Our native species of Plumularia differ considerably from the
British. One is simple in habit, two or three possess more or less
developed intrathecal ridges, and several belong to that section of
the genus which is distinguished by bearing only one calycle on
each pinna, and which is represented by P. ohliqua only among
British species. Another form which I have found at Williamstown
appears not to be specifically distinct from P. ohliqua. Its stem is
nearly half an inch in height, and is often produced upwards into
long thick tendrils, having a similar structure to that of the
hydrorhiza.
P. indivisa. n. sp. Plate XY, fig. 1
Shoots flaccid, simple, rising from a dense network of filiform
radical fibres, and obtaining a height of one-half or three-fourths
of an inch ; proximal part naked, upper part divided by oblique
joints into long internodes, each bearing a hydrotheca near its
lower extremity. Hydrothecae distant, cup-shaped, set at an angle
of about 40°, base wide and rounded, aperture entire. Sarcothecae
bithalamic, one at each side of the hydrotheca, pedunculate; one
in front, and one about midway between every two hydrothecae,
on the same internode as the lower.
Gonothecae : female, ovate, nearly three times as long as the
hydrothecae ; male, as broad as the female, but shorter, flabelliform .
both kinds with two lateral sarcothecae near the pedicle.
Hydrorhiza and proximal part of the shoots brown, upper part
transparent and nearly colourless. Hah., Williamstown.
P. producta. n. sp. Plate XY, fig. 3.
Hydrorhiza stout, shoots about one-third of an inch in height,
pinnate ; pinnae alternate, one borne about the middle of each
internode. Hydrothecae set at an angle of about 30°, cup-shaped,
but with the back part much produced upwards ; front wall of
the cell doubled inwards just below the aperture, and continued
into a transverse septum or intrathecal ridge, which extends
more than half across the cavity of the cell ; aperture entire,
expanded in front. Sarcothecae bithalamic, one in front of each
hydrotheca only.


Gonothecae 1 Transparent, almost colourless, shrivels when dry.
Hah. Queenscliff.
P. setaceoides. n. sp. Plate XY„ fig. 4.
I 'Hydrorhiza stout, with waved margins, shoots pinnate, from
one to three inches in height. Pinnae recurved, alternate, borne
near the summits of the internodes, and transversely wrinkled.
Hydrothecae distant, set at an angle of about 40°, cup-shaped, with
entire margins. Sarcothecae bithalamic, with slender pedicles, two
abreast behind and one in front of each hydrotheca, one on a
separate short internode between every two hydrothecae, one at
the base of each pinna, and one on the lower part of each stem-
intemode. A short proximal internode on each pinna without
appendages.
Gonothecae large (eight or nine times as long as the hydrothecae),
obliquely truncated a little above the broadest part, transversely
rugose, borne at the bases of the pinnae, often forming two rows
extending half-way up the stem.
Pale yellowish brown, or colourless and transparent. Hah.
Williamstown, Queenscliff.
There appear to be two varieties of this species, one very lax
and delicate, two or three inches in height, and resembling
Mr. Hincks’ figure of P. setacea , the other not more than an inch
in height, with setaceous pinnae, equal all up the stem, and only
about one-twenty-fourth of an inch in length. This small form
was from Queenscliff, and so closely resembles the other in minute
structure that I do not think they can be separated, unless the
gonothecae, which I have not yet seen, should prove different from
those of the larger form. The trophosome of this species seems
scarcely to differ from that of P. setacea , except that the nemato-
phores of the latter are more slender, and the laterals are raised
higher above the margin of the calycle. The gonothecae somewhat
resemble those of P. halecioides.
P. delicatula. 7i. sp. Plate XV, fig. 2.
Hydrorhiza with waved margins, stems slender, pinnate, about
an inch in height; pinnae alternate, one borne near the summit
of each internode, transversely wrinkled. Hydrothecae nearly


parallel with the pinna, urceolate, contracted towards the oblique
entire aperture. Sarcothecse bithalamic, with slender pedicles, two
abreast behind and one in front of each hydrotheca, one on a
separate short internode between every two hydrothecae, one on
the lower part of each stem-internode, two in each axil, and a
few slender, tubular ones on the hydrorhiza. A short proximal
internode on each pinna without appendages.
Gonothecse? Colour, yellowish brown, pale, transparent. Hah.
Griffiths’ Point (Mr. Goldstein).
P. Goldsteini. n. sp. Plate XY, fig. 7.
Hydrorhiza delicate, flat, with transverse markings at short
intervals along the margins; shoots pinnate, about one-sixth of an
inch in height; pinnae alternate, gracefully recurved, one borne
near the summit of each internode. Hydrothecae, three or four
on a pinna, rather distant, the base raised on a vertical process of
the pinna, and the body of the cell thence directed downwards to
the pinna, where it is recurved and terminates in an aperture
looking directly upwards \ the base of the hydrotheca separated
from the process of the pinna by an oblique septum, which is
continued for a short distance into the cell, forming a rudimentary
intrathecal ridge; three or four slight constrictions in the pinna,
radiating from the hydrotheca. Sarcothecse bithalamic, with slender
pedicles, one slightly below the middle of each stem-internode, one
in each axil, two abreast behind, and one in front of each
hydrotheca, and one between every two hydrothecse, on a separate
short internode. A short proximal internode on each pinna
without appendages.
Gonothecse % Colour, pale yellowish, transparent. Hah.
Queenscliff.
A very beautiful species, the back part of the calycle, with the
process from the pinna, forming together an erect, nearly conical
body, with a rounded summit.
P. hyalina. n. sp. Plate XY, fig. 9.
Hydrorhiza delicate, stems flexuous, pinnate, from one-third to
one-half an inch in height; each internode usually with from one
to four transverse wrinkles; pinnae rather distant, alternate, one


borne close to tbe summit of each internode, wrinkled transversely,
and bearing each a single hydrotheca; distal part curving from
under the hydrotheca, smooth ; proximal internode short, without
appendages. Hydrothecae ventricose, the back bent inwards at
the summit of the pinna, forming a cavity which is occupied by
the sarcothecae; aperture at right angles to the hydrotheca and
pinna, broadly notched behind. Sarcothecae bithalamic, with
slender pedicles, two abreast behind each hydrotheca, and one in
front, the latter often obsolete.
Gonothecae % Almost colourless, transparent. Hah. Queenscliff.
P. spinulosa. n. sp. Plate XY, fig. 8.
Hydrorhiza delicate, flat, with transverse markings at short
intervals along the margins ; shoots pinnate, about one-fifth of an
inch in height; pinnae alternate, each springing from about the
middle of an internode, and bearing a single hydrotheca; distal
portion curved, and abruptly contracted behind the hydrotheca to
half the thickness of the lower part, contracted portion slightly
constricted at two or three points on the inner side, and pro-
longed upwards into an incurved spine above the margin of the
hydrotheca; proximal internode short, without appendages.
Hydrothecse compressed laterally, attached to the pinna by the
back and part of the base; aperture at right angles to the cell
and pinna; an intrathecal ridge springing from the back of the
cell near the aperture, curved forwards and downwards nearly to
the base of the cell. Sarcothecae bithalamic, with slender pedicles,
two abreast above the hydrotheca, one in front, one in each axil,
and one on the lower part of each stem-internode ; those in the
axils and above the hydrothecse with the upper chamber com-
pressed, flabelliform.
Gonotheca ? Colour, pale yellowish, transparent. Hob
Queenscliff.
P. pulchella. n. sp. Plate XY, fig. 6
Hydrorhiza dense, shoots crowded, pinnate, about one-fourth of
an inch in height, transversely wrinkled; pinnse alternate, each
rising from about the middle of an internode, and bearing a single
hydrotheca; distal part curving abruptly from under the hydro-


theca, and widening towards the summit, with from one to three
constrictions on the inner side ; proximal internode short, without
appendages, Hydrothecse campanulate; margin entire, slightly
everted, rising a little above the summit of the pinna, at right
angles to it and the hydrotheca. Sarcothecse bithalamic, with
slender pedicles, two abreast above and one in front of each hydro-
theca, and two in each axil.
Gonothecse six or seven times the length of the hydrothecae,
ovate, obliquely truncate, the orifice surrounded by large, smooth
internal teeth.
Colour, pale yellowish, transparent. Hah. Queenscliff.
P. compressa. n. sp. Plate XY, fig. 5.
Shoots pinnate, stem smooth, about one-fourth of an inch in
height, pinnae alternate, wrinkled transversely, each borne close to
the summit of an internode, and bearing a single hydrotheca ;
distal part curved from under the base of the hydrotheca, smooth;
proximal internode short, without appendages. Hydrothecse
much compressed laterally ; aperture at right angles to the pinna
and hydrotheca, sinuated behind down to the summit of the
pinna. Sarcothecse, two above and one in front of each hydro-
theca, bithalamic, with slender pedicles ; one in each axil, tubular,
slender, very inconspicuous.
Gonothecse about four times the length of the hydrothecse, very
convex behind, slightly concave in front; aperture in a line with
the front, margin everted.
Colour, pale yellowish, transparent. Hah. Robe, S.A. 1
(Mr. Smeaton).


EXPLANATION OF PLATES.
(The figures on these plates are from camera drawings of specimens
mounted in Canada balsam.)
Plate XII
Fig. 1. Sertularia minuta.
„ 2. ~ pumiloides.
„ 3. „ bicomis.
4. M acanthostoma, a pair of calycles from the main stem.
~ 5. „ recta, part of pinna.
„ 6. Sertularella laevis.
„ 7—7 a. „ indivisa,
„ 8. „ solidula
„ 9. „ pygmasa,
Plate
xm.
Fig. 1. Sertularella macrotheca.
~ 2, Thuiaria lata, part of pinna.
~ 3—3 b. Halicornopsis avicularis (3b, gonotheca).
„ 4—4 b. Aglaophenia superba.
~ s—sb.5 — 5b. ~ ascidioides.
Plate XIY.
Fig. I—la. Aglaophenia Thompsoni.
2—2 c. „ McCoyi (2c, a pair of sarcothecse of the corbula)
„ 3— 3 b. „ parvula.
4 — 4 b. ~ ilicistoma.
„ s—sa. „ prolifera.
t g 6b. ~ plumosa (6b, sarcothecae of the corbula).
Plate XY.
Fig. 1 Ib. Plumularia indivisa (la, female gonotheca; Ib, male do.)
2 2a. ~ delicatula.
’’ 3. „ producta.
4 4b. „ setaceoides (4b, gonotheca).
5 sa. „ compressa (sa, gonotheca).
6 6a. ~ pulchella (6a, gonotheca).
7 7a. ~ Goldsteini.
” B—Ba. „ spinulosa.
„ 9. hyalina.
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.


W: M Bale Bel




Plate JCJH








WMBale Bel






