

't> ■ /
/ .
5-S-Sa




THE
SOUTHERN SCIENCE RECORD.
MELBOURNE, MAY, 1881.
On the Collection and Preservation of Insects.
By Fred. Barkas,
[Read before the Naturalists’ Field Club, School of Arts, Sydney, N.S.W , Ist April
1881.] ’
The collection of Moths and Butterflies having been for many
years my special hobby, I thought I could not do better than put
together a few practical hints on that pursuit, not addressed to
accomplished and scientific entomologists, but offered for the help of
any tyros who may wish to take up what may be styled a health-
giving and fascinating branch of Natural History studies.
To hunt butterflies appears to be almost an instinct in the boyish,
if not in the adult, human mind; for who amongst us does not
remember those joyous days when the sight of a butterfly caused us
to forget at once every consideration except the desire to catch the
floating flower. If we had not a properly constructed net, what of
that! Was not our cap or even our coat a good enough instrument
of capture? Knocking the dust off the wings, even breaking the wings
outright was of little consequence if we only succeeded in getting the
lovely creature between our clumsy fingers to hold it up to & the
admiring gaze of our envying companions.
Then some of you doubtless will have experienced the next stage:
the boy begins to keep caterpillars in all sorts of boxes in places
where they are sure fo crawl out and frighten the womenfolk of the
house ; he learns to set the insects, to rear from eggs or from larvae :
he gradually gets together a collection, and has even dreams of a
cabinet with his prizes arranged under their Latin names, —when
the time comes for him to go to shop, or the office, or the university,
as the case may be, and he soon learns to look upon moths and butter-
flies with all the contempt of a man seventeen years old. Now if
there be any real love for Nature and Science in him, he loses that
feeling at much the same period as he begins to see that it is not a
very dreadful thing to carry a paper parcel. I have often been amused
at the dislike displayed by boys of from 17 to 20 to the carrying or
a paper parcel in the streets, and how they lose that feeling as thev
begin to think more of their pursuits and less of the impression their
personal appearance may make on the street passengers. Through
these various stages we come to the time when we become members
of a INaturalists Club and feel a deep and varied interest in all thiuo-g
created, in birds and beasts, fishes and insects, in the loveliest flowers
of the field, and in the humblest weed of the wayside—in a word we


have arrived at that stage when the wondrous beauty and infinite
variety of this great Universe is of more interest than the important
matter of personal appearance. And what has all this to do with
insect hunting, you may ask P A good deal; for the insect hunter,
scientifically the entomologist, must study convenience before con-
ventionality : his coat must be of ample capacity, and have many
pockets; he has a strong bag for boxes over his shoulder; his net is
in his hand : his unmentionables must be of strong material, so that he
need fear “nor bush nor briar,” and his boots must be of the good
solid kind made for use and comfort, and not to show into how small
a space the human foot can be pinched.
Now let us imagine that we are all interested in studying the
butterflies and moths, which are both plentiful and beautiful in this
country, and that we are about to prepare for the field. What appur-
tenances shall we require, and how shall we manage to make them as
portable as possible.
There is the net —Well of course you can go to a Naturalist, i.e. y
a person who deals in such things, and buy one ready made, with
brass mountings and everything neat, complete, and dear ; but if you
take my advice you will always prefer to make your apparatus for
yourself whenever that is possible, and any one can make a net:
get a piece o*f stout iron wire of about 4ft. 6in. to sft. long; bend it
into a circular form with legs some four inches long and little toes
turned inward. Next buy a yard of strong gauze of dark green or
brown colour, these being least conspicuous; if you are clever with
needle and thread you may make the gauze bag yourself, but usually a
lady’s help is called in : the bag is cone-shaped, with one straight
side; the apex has a round piece of gauze sewn in, leaving no seam at
that part: a strong calico tube is made for the ring to slip through,
to which the gauze is sewn. The handle or stock is commonly two feet
long : you might think that a longer handle would give you a wider and
more useful sweep. In practice this is found not to be the case because
of the unwieldiness of a long stick : notches are cut to admit the legs
of the iron ring and a hole bored through the stick for the turned-in
points; a brass slide like that which is used on a fishing-rod jambs the
legs lightly into the notches, or it may simply be bound round with
twine. A net ring of a foot and a-half diameter is not a very portable
article, so that a ring which will fold up to allow of its being carried
in a bag is desirable, but not so easily made as the above.
Now suppose our net is made and tightly secured to the handle,
and we are out in the hunting field: a butterfly we would like to
capture is hovering from flower to flower at a little distance off, ex-
citement overcomes discretion, we make a rush at our intended victim,
and wildly swing our net: then we hold up the net to the light to
admire our captive and, “ Missed it, by Jove” is all the result: there
away some 100 yards off flits the butterfly in a most unconcerned
manner; we make up our mind to run it down, and away we go under a
sweltering Sun only to learn how fast and how easily a butterfly can
fly, I used to go hunting with a very old gentleman at one time, and
it often puzzled me how he was so successful in his captures; so I
asked him how he managed it? “Never be in a hurry, my boy, he said.


‘‘ and never run after an insect if jour first shot is a miss,” —and his
advice you’ll find very good.
We will suppose you have gone up quietly to the insect and gently
placed your net over or caught it by one carefully considered sweep: a
sweep of the net is always necessary so as to get your captive right to
the bottom of the bag; you turn the ring one fold, and you have it
safely imprisoned ready for inspection. If it be in damaged condition,
or of a kind you don’t want, let it go at once, but if you wish to
secure it the question at once arises, How am I to get it out of the
net without knocking the scales from the wings? Have some chip
boxes with you, —those known to druggists as salve boxes; they are
sold in nests of four sizes: as they are rather liable to be broken it is
advisable to gum paper or muslin round the joints. Take a box of a
sufficient size for the insect in the net: slip the box over the insect
with the right hand while the left keeps the apex of the net uppermost,
as most insects in trying to escape fiy upwards ; then slip the lid over
the box by scraping along the gauze so as to compel the captive to fly
into the box.
I’m afraid I can’t explain the operation very clearly, but it is soon
learned in practice. The box can now be put into the proper pocket,
and a new victim looked out for. There are some insects which, when
put into a box, dash about so violently they break themselves to pieces:
these must be at once killed, either by a sharp nip in the thorax or by
means of thp poison pot, familiarly known as a “ stink-pot.” The
killing bottle I have found best suited for use is made thus: —Get
a wide-mouthed stoppered bottle of, say, 4in. high, place at the bottom
a few pieces of cyanide of potassium, and cement them in tightly with
a |in. of dryish plaster of Paris ; smooth off the surface, and carpet it
with a round of blotting paper. The cyanide of potassium gives off
slowly prussic acid in sufficient quantity to poison the air of the
bottle and to kill any butterfly or moth in a few seconds. There are
many other poisons used, such as chloroform, crushed laurel leaves, and
benzine.
You next require some entomological pins : the name is much more
formidable than the thing; they are fine and rather short pins, and are
sometimes plated with gold to prevent corrosion; they can be bought
of various sizes, or in assorted packets, from any good naturalists’
dealer. You want a strong box, 6in. by 4in. by 2|in., lined on the inside
with cork to enable you to stick in the fine pins. In the meanwhile
the moth in the stink-pot is quite dead : shake it into the palm of the
left hand, and manage as best you can to stick a pin perpendicularly
through the centre of the thorax, and pin your treasure into the cork
box. It is advisable to take one or two empty \ or £lh. mustard tins
to carry any caterpillars you may find and wish to rear: and a little
cotton wool is useful in packing any pup* you may find; a small
bottle is often useful.
ISow that we have the full equipment for the field, a many-pocketed
coat, a shoulder bag, net complete, killing bottle, cork box, and a good
supply of chip-boxes, where are we to go, and whejt ? Well, broadly
speaking, anywhere out of town, in the day-time for butterflies and at
night for moths. lor day hunting choose a still sunshiny day and go
out of the town; go to rough land by the sea-side, or into the grassy


flats in the openings of well-wooded country, in the paddocks, gardens,
or by the road-side, anywhere, and you are sure to find butterflies
flitting about. Of course various species love various situations, and
the observant hunter soon learns the favored localities. Then there
are always some moths which fly in the day-time, though I know of
no night-flying butterfly. It is difficult to say with certainty which is
the best time of day—the time most favored by the butterflies: for my
own part I have found that from 10 to II in the morning they are most
usually on the wing; still I must say I have seen many actively in
search of flower-sweets soon after sunrise, while our plentiful and
widely dispersed friend the Painted Lady may often be seen on the
wing in the evening twilight.
Many moths are caught in the day-time by beating bushes and
shrubs with a short stick held in one hand while the other hand holds
the net ready to catch any insect which may fly out to see what the
matter may be. I have caught many rare moths of the class Geometer
by this method, and I can highly recommend it. But the great time for
moth-hunting is the twilight, or in the stillness of night. It is one
of the pleasantest occupations I know of, that of strolling along
the road-side in the cool twilight netting now and again a moth as
it flits across the dimly-lit path, or as it appears a dark speck
against the western sky: then as the night advances we follow
another plan, —the net is laid aside, and the sugaring-pot taken up
instead.
Sugaring consists in smearing any convenient fence or tree with a
sweet alcoholic odoriferous mixture: it may be coarse treacle with rum,
or a syrup made by boiling common brown sugar with sour beer, I
have always used rum and treacle, the commoner the quality and more
powerful the smell the better does it suit our purpose. lam sorry to
confess it, but it is nevertheless a fact that moths, without exception,
are awful drunkards, and their weakness for rum is often their ruin.
Sugaring is most successful on a warm, close, cloudy night, and there
must be no moon. You choose your field of operation and proceed to
smear a ring round a picked number of fence-posts and tree-trunks;
then you have an idle time until about 9 o’clock, when you begin to
make your rounds of the baits. It being dark you had better have a
companion with you to carry a dark lantern: go cautiously up to the
bait and flash the light upon it; you will in most cases be rewarded
with the sight of a number of shining eyes and active probosces; most
of the insects will be too drunk to fly away, and, by placing a box
under one and touching the head with the lid, it will in most cases fall
into your box. You proceed after this wise until you are tired or
until all your boxes are filled ; I have, for my own part, many vivid
recollections of great captures from sugaring, having sometimes caught
from 150 to 200 insects before midnight.
There is a plan which Mr. A. R. Wallace found most successful
when in the Islands of the Malay group: he chose a dark night, and
placed a good glass-enclosed lamp on his verandah, and awaited his
visitors, and he had, as he so charmingly tells in his work on the
Malay Archipelago, visitors in thousands: they came so fast and so
numerously to the light that he was unable to catch one half the


specimens he would have liked. He found one strong objection to
this lamp invitation: not moths alone crowded to his verandah, but
all kinds of beetles, mosquitoes, and winged beasts, who were not too
refined in their manners.
On the hunter’s return home he must, at his earliest convenience,
set his captures* First, those not already killed are consigned to the
killing-pots, and those already dead and pinned are carefully gone
over and the worthless ones weeded out. In a warm climate like this
the legs and wings will soon become rigid and stiff, so that they must
be softened or relaxed before being set.
Relaxing is done by steaming in an ordinary stearmpan, or better
and more slowly by placing the stiff ones in a tightly-closing box
having some damp sand in it and kept in a warm place until the joints
of the legs and wings are quite flexible*
The operation of setting or mounting is perhaps the most difficult
business the insect collector has to accomplish, as it requires a steady
hand, neat fingering, a true eye, and a mature judgment. In this
work I have olteu found that a woman’s deft fingers turn out the best
results, and I knew one lady who became so expert that she thought
nothing of setting 100 insects in a morning*
For mounting you require setting boards, paper, and card braces*
some ordinary short pins, and a setting needle.
I. —Setting Boards are rectangular pieces of pine about lOin.
long by from lin. to Sin. broad, faced with cork and covered
with thin white paper, somewhat raised longitudinally, with a
deep grove in the centre from end to end.
2- Braces, small, rectangular pieces of cream-laid note paper and
long acutely triangular pieces of cardboard.
3. Setting Needle , the handle of a camel hair pencil with a needle
inserted into one end.
Having got your insect dead but flexible, and a properly sized pin
straightly put through its thorax without much damage to its plumage,
you now pin the body in the cork groove so that the wing joints are
just on a level with the edges, press the right wing down with the
setting needle, and place a paper brace with one pin over it; with the
point of the needle in the strong muscle of the wing, gently push until
it is at a sufficient height: this can only be learned by actual practice;
tighten the brace over the wing by pinning the loose end, and place
the lower wing in proper position. Ho the left wing in a similar way,
so that the two are evenly balanced. Place one of the long card*
board triangles on each wing so that the ends may not curl up. Pin
out the legs and antennae to the best of your judgment, and put the
insect away to dry in a safe place as free from damp and dust as
possible.
In a few days the insects will be quite dry and stiff, and the legs
and wings will maintain their set position when removed from the
setting boards to their proper place in the collection.
And here comes in a sore trouble to the entomological beginner,
how' to name and arrange his specimens, for good books are neither
plentiful nor cheap, descriptions are difficult of application, and good
accurate figures are often unprocurable, so what is one to do ? I can


only recommend patience and a full utilisation of what opportunities
may offer, —such as comparing your specimens with those in museum
and private collections and making yourself as well acquainted with
the principles of classification as possible, and you will soon find it
perfectly easy to distinguish butterflies from moths, and gradually
the Nocuce will be easy to separate from the Geometrce ; and I
doubt not that before many seasons you would be versed in the
Finece and Tortricce.
One often hears it said by impatient and little-thinking youth—
“ What a bother those Latin names are; why can’t we have English
ones?” Last as if the Lepidoptera were confined to countries in-
habited by English-speaking people; or would they have Russian, and
French, and German names, and be obliged to learn all these before
being able to make any comparative or comprehensive study of the
subject ? I fancy they would find it much more convenient, as it is
at present, for all nations to use Latin names. And they are not
difficult to learn and remember, —at least this should not be so to
Australians, wdio have such names as Illawarra, XJUadulla, Bogamildi,
Gunyerwarilda in every-day use.
As to what sort of boxes or cabinet the collection when made is to
be kept in, will much depend on the means or ambition of the collector,
but they are necessary ; they should be dry and dust-proof, as nearly
air-tight as possible, and w T ell supplied with camphor to keep away
vermin.
In concluding this very sketchy paper, I w r ould just say that I know
of no more delightful pursuit than this branch of natural history; it
adds a zest and delight to one’s journeyings about the world: on a walk
through a flowery English meadow, over a bleak Scotch moor, by the
loveliest lake in beautiful Switzerland, or high up on the mountains
near the line of eternal on a ride through the bush, or over the
rolling plains of the West, you will always find some winged com-
panion to arouse your interest and admiration, the perceptive faculties
are quickened, and healthfulness of mind and body are induced by
the fresh air and exercise. Then w r hat w r ondrous studies of colour
and harmony may be made from Nature’s wing-painting. Mr. H. H.
Emmerson said to me once that he learned much of his skill in con-
trasting and harmonising the colours in his pictures from a careful
study of the tints on moths’ wdngs. Again, how useful a link the
Lepidoptera form in the great study of the distribution of species, age
of islands, &c.; in fact moths, like many other little things, may be
made the small beginnings of great ends.”
Collection and Preservation of Insects.
