

Ford tb Son. Printers. Cirrltnn, Melbourne.
hl ,H






Art. XXLI.— On the Country between Melbourne and the
Dandenong Greek
T. S. HART, M.A., 8.C.E., F.G.S.
[Eead 14th November, 1912].
The area whose features are now dealt with extends from the
Yarra, near Toorak and Hawthorn, south-easterly to the Dandenong
Creek. A part of it is included in quarter sheets Nos. I. S.E.
and I. N.E. of the Geological Survey of Victoria. The Lands
Department contour maps of Melbourne and suburbs extend to
beyond Box Hill and Oakleigh, and further contour maps of the
same department cover the parish of Moorabbin, and the country
south of the Gippsland railway as far as Dandenong. Mr. Saxton
kindly directed my attention to the latter map, and also furnished
me with levels of several other points.
In 1910, Mr. J. T. Jutson 1 in “ A Contribution to the Physio-
graphy of the Yarra and Dandenong Creek Basins,” dealt with
a part of this district, but not so much with the southern part.
His conclusions, so far as relevant to the present subject, may be
summarised as follows :
The general slope of the country from about Surrey Hills and
Mitcham is south-westerly. The name of the Mitcham Axis is
given to a line of high land through these two places turning north-
east from Mitcham.
Main Creek, and another further west, follow down the general
slope to Gardiner’s Creek. Gardiner’s Creek flows from lower
country about Murrumbeena through higher country north of
Malvern.
He considers that Main Creek may have originally continued
south-west, and that Gardiner’s Creek has cut rapidly back and
captured the upper part of the original Main Creek.
He admits difficulties in the north-westerly courses of Scotch-
man’s Creek and the Elsternwick Creek. Alternatively he suggests
that Gardiner’s Creek and its tributaries may be antecedent
streams.
1 Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, vol. xxiii. (New Series), pp. 469-514.


He suggests also that the “ Croydon Senkungsfeld ” includes the
Carrum Swamp, and possibly part of Port Phillip, and that the
west boundary fault of this sunk area is replaced by a gentle
tilting about Scoresby and Springvale.
1 propose to show that a north-westerly course of the valleys and
ridges is the rule south of Gardiner’s Creek, and that a north-
west and south-east trend of the surface features extends as far as
Dandenong, with great regularity in Brighton and Moorabbin, but
affected by the southward fall to the Carrum Swamp in the more
easterly parts. An important axis extends from Mitcham to the
vicinity of Cheltenham and Blackrock, on the line of the continua-
tion of the north-east end of Jutson’s Mitcham axis. Another im-
portant divide extends from South Yarra to Dandenong, and no
outlet can have existed for Main Creek to the south-west. At
Murrumbeena, on the contrary, there is a recent diversion of waters
north into Gardiner’s Creek. The mimerous closed and ill-drained
hollows and some other points will also be referred to.
General Description of the Area.
A part of this district drains to the Yarra, either direct or by
way of Gardiner’s Creek. South of this the outlet is direct to
Port Phillip by the Elsternwick Creek, and a series of parallel
valleys through Brighton and Sandringham. Between Cheltenham
and Dandenong the waters run naturally to the Carrum Swamp.
With the assistance of shallow drains, waters from near Oakleigh
are discharged through this area. The Springvale valley runs
south-east, and turns south near Dandenong. It receives tributaries
from the north from a little beyond the Fern Tree Gully-road. A
small area about Glen Wa verier discharges into Scotchman’s Creek,
ahead of Gardiner’s Creek. From Wheeler’s Hill to Mitcham a
triangular area falls direct to the Dandenong Creek.
The chief dividing line extends from Mitcham south-westerly
through Notting Hill to Cheltenham. Parallel to this is the
highland from north of Surrey Hills to Malvern, broken by the
outlet of Gardiner’s Creek. Transverse to these is the divide from
South Yarra to near Dandenong, on the south-west side of the
valleys of Gardiner’s Creek, and the Springvale Creek. The south-
west limit of the Elsternwick Creek is a parallel line, as are also
the divides between the Brighton valleys. The high land from
Wheeler’s Hill north-westerly is parallel to these, and in the same
line is the Reservoir Hill at Surrey Hills, and the south limit of
the Rooming Creek further to the north-west. South-east from


Wheeler’s Hill are the Police Paddock Hills, and the Dandenong
Creek contracts its valley to pass between these and Wheeler’s Hill,
as well as changing to a south-easterly direction. The simplicity
of such a rectangular plan is broken by the way in which the
Gardiner s Creek catchment is enlarged at the expense of its
neighbours.
Gardiner's Greek.
North-west of the Malvern Camberwell highland, the fall is
direct to the Yarra. The valley from near Malvern railway sta-
tion has a very direct north-west course. The outlet of Gardiner’s
Creek has also a north-west direction, and a valley no doubt con-
tinues under the basalt to join the buried valley of the Yarra.
The fall would be steeper than is now seen in Gardiner’s Creek.
From the junction of Gardiner’s Creek and Main Creek the fall is
from 85 to 25 above sea level in three miles. A mile and a-half.
lower, Gardiner’s Creek joins the Yarra at 2 feet above sea level;
the probable junction of the buried valleys is a mile or a mile and
a half further on, and about 60 feet below sea level. Even allow-
ing the buried valley to extend some distance up Gardiner’s Creek,
the fall will still be greater than the 20 feet to the mile higher up
the valley.
The natural continuation of the Gardiner’s Creek valley is by
Scotchman’s Creek through Oakleigh; a little valley can be followed
south-east to Notting Hill. But by far the greater part of the area
drained by Gardiner’s Creek and Scotchman’s Creek is to the
north of the main line of Gardiner s Creek. The contributions
from the south are insignificant in amount, and the most important
of these, the little creek at Murrumbeena. will be shown later to
be new.
The mouth of Gardiner’s Creek must be a quite- early feature.
Probably the whole system developed soon enough to secure the
waters of the area about Blackburn, which might have gone to
Rooming Creek, and to capture Black Flat (Glen Waverley) from
the eastern valleys. Throughout the Gardiner’s Creek area the
streams have cut down to the bedrock. A much larger proportion
of the rainfall must be immediately discharged than by a system in
the absorptive tertiary rocks. The excavating power of the streams
is thereby increased, and the higher levels allow deeper dissection
than in the country to the south. No undrained areas of the
kind common further south occur. Detail of the course of the
creeks is influenced by bedrock structures, which no doubt con-
tribute to the numerous small irregularities.


Area draining to Balaclava and, Elsternwick.
A short distance south of the Malvern railway station is a
swampy area formerly known as Paddy’s Swamp. The 140 ft.
contour runs round an area about 40 chains by 10, leaving an
outlet at the west end, which, however, cannot drain away all
the surface water. Thence the valley falls south-west and west to
the flat at Balaclava, reaching the sea to the south of the St. Kilda
Hill. South-east from Paddy’s Swamp is the flat in the Caulfield
Racecourse, and again south-east, another area of difficult drain-
age, to be referred to later.
The trend of the lowest ground of the Elwood Swamp is from
south-east to north-west. Up stream the valley can be followed
almost straight to its head north of Cheltenham. The south-west
limit of the Elsternwick Creek waters is a ridge from near the
power house of. the Brighton electric tram south-east in an almost
straight line. It is close to the Point Nepean-road from North
Brighton to Moorabbin station; thence a little east of the road,
which has turned a little more southerly. This may conveniently
be called the Moorabbin Ridge. The Elsternwick Creek lies close
north-east of this ridge, a small parallel valley intervening at
North Brighton. The creek then receives practically nothing from
the left bank, but on the right or north side it receives two im-
portant tributaries; one of these runs south from near the Caul-
field Town Hall, and turns west to join the creek near Gardenvale
station. The other flows south, near the Mordialloc railway, re-
ceiving much water from its east side, including that from the
swamp south of Carnegie station. Here the 140 ft. contour almost
surrounds a long narrow area stretching for a mile and a quarter
south-east to north-west. The outlet is south-west to the Elsternwick
Creek tributary, but at a point a long way back from the north-
west end of the elongated hollow. At its south-east end it merges
in an ordinary valley from the south-east.
A remarkable broken valley line lies north-east of the Elstern-
wick Creek. One portion of it runs through the entrance to the
Brighton Cemetery, and extends south-east for some distance lower.
This part and another north-west of it fall into one of the
Elsternwick Creek tributaries. On the same line further south-
east, a pair of similar valleys falls into the next tributary, and a
fifth section, reaching the Elsternwick Creek by another route,
occurs further on, east of the Bentleigh station. It is either a
valley broken up by three captures, or indicates a marked tendency
to produce valleys along one line. -


The head of the Elsternwick Creek is in a broad open valley
north of Cheltenham. On each side of the valley the 120 ft. con-
tour runs in two nearly parallel lines from south-east to north-
west, 20 to 30 chains apart. The 110 ft. contours come in at the
two ends of this flat, a mile and a half apart. Most of the flat
drains to the Elsternwick Creek, but the south-east end falls to the
south-east and the outlet is steeper than the other end.
The Elstermvick Creek and its tributaries nowhere cut down to
the bed rock; probably much of the main valley at least is in less
permeable beds low in the tertiary series. The average fall over
4A miles from 110 to 10 ft. above sea level is about 22 ft. to the
mile.
A north-westerly trend of the valleys is the rule throughout this
area, but the two tributaries from the north bring nearly all the
waters down to the south-west side of the system. The more im-
portant of these tributaries receives nearly all its water by north-
westerly valleys. The levels along the divides on the north-east
and south-east of this system range from 190 to 150. The Moor-
abbin ridge, however, only reaches 150 at its highest point, and
the actual head of the Elsternwick Creek is below 120.
The Brighton and Sandringham Valleys.
These are six parallel valleys with a north-westerly direction.
The first is very straight and regular, starting east of the Point
Nepean-road, not far north of Cheltenham, running close to the
Moorabbin Ridge, and entering the sea at the foot of North-road,
North Brighton. The second heads close to the railway between
Highett and Cheltenham, but after running north-west for a mile
and three-quarters, turns south-west into the third valley. Another
valley starts within half a mile of the angle, and continues to
the sea oh the second valley line. The third extends practically
straight from the swamps in Cheltenham Park to Middle Brighton.
The fourth heads a mile west of Cheltenham, but after running
north-west to a point north of Hampton station, turns south-west
into the fifth. On the line of the fourth low r er down two other
little valleys occur. This series is well seen on the Brighton rail-
way, the first just south of (North) Brighton station; the second
and third on each side of Middle Brighton. The fourth is here
only represented by a very slight hollow. The railway follows the
fifth from Brighton Beach to Hampton, and the sixth is seen
inside the Beach-road below Sandringham.


Levels
E. Ck.
1
2 upper
Brighton Valleys.
2 lower 3 4 5 upper 5 lower
G
130 to 120 -
-
—
-
21
- n -
— -
29
-
11 - — -
— .
—
120 to 110 -
-
—
-
38
- 27 -
— -
60
-
11 - 18 -
— -
—
110 to 100 -
-
39
-
44
- 50 -
— -
26
-
47 - 16
— -
—
100 to 90 -
-
28
-
19
- 41 -
4 -
18
-
74 - B -
12 -
—
90 to 80 -
-
44
-
48^
- 85 D -
14 -
65
-
4 - — -
11 -
—
80 to 70 -
-
52
-
50
. _ -
41 -
25
-
18 - — -
37 -
—
70 to 60 -
-
23
-
23
. _ .
37 -
29
-
32 - — -
12* -
15
60 to 50
-
25
-
23 s
. — .
43 -
40
-
23 - — -
12 -
14
50 to 40 -
-
25
-
35
. — -
34 -
19 2
-
27 D - — -
12.2 -
16
40 to 30 -
-
35
-
32
. _ .
47 -
29
-
. — -
16 -
—
30 to 20 -
-
52
-
26
. — -
12 -
29
•
. _ .
13 -
—
20 to 10 -
-
54
-
38*
. _ .
14 -
20
-
— - — -
— -
—
10 to sea -
-
90
-
3
. — -
3 -
3
-
— - — -
— -
—
Average 1 (X) to 20
10 ft. fall in
35
32
29 -
32
.
24 - — -
16 -
Fall in feet
mile -
per
23
25
27 i -
25
.
33* - — *
50 -
_
Above the apparent head of the fifth valley east of Sandringham
station, there is on the same line a long valley with no outlet,
terminating in a lagoon east of the golf club house. A flattening
of the grade of all these valleys occurs about the line of the Bluff-
road, and on the same line occurs the flattest part of the Elstern-
wick Creek (except its head and swamps at the mouth). The
grades of the valleys are shown in the accompanying table in which
the letter D indicates that the valley is here diverted south-west,
and the letter B that it is blocked with no free outlet.
On the sixth or Sandringham valley the 40 ft. contour is the last
above the cliffs.
Elsternwick Creek and Brighton Valleys. Distances in Chains
between Successive Contours.
The ridges between the valleys show a gradual descent with
few irregularities. On a section at right angles to the valley the
south-west side is nearly always lower than the north-east. Taking
the general level of the ridges the fall is on the whole west, not
north-west. All the departures from regularity in these valleys
are the few diversions to the south-west and the loss of grade,
producing swamps. Numerous ill-drained or undrained areas
occur about the heads of the valleys near Cheltenham, and as far
west as close to the Red Bluff, Sandringham. These are usually
very closely related to, or actually part of, the valleys. The high
land at the head of the series reaches 170 at one point at Chelten-
ham. The heads of the first valley, and less distinctly the second


and fourth, are continuous with valleys on the opposite fall. The
tertiary rocks are never cut through, but less permeable beds are
probably often reached, and the waters of the permanent lagoons
may be taken as representing the level of permanent saturation
about 120 ft. above sea level near Cheltenham,
Parish of Mordialloc and adjacent parts of Moorahhin and
Dandenong.
At Mordialloc and Mentone, and east of Cheltenham, and thence
north-east to near Clayton, the valleys falf to the south-east off the
highland at the heads of the Brighton valleys and the Elsternwick
Creek. They commonly show a very regular south-easterly direc-
tion, but ultimately their waters reach a channel which runs south
from near Clayton to the main drain east of Mordialloc. This is,
how T ever, for the most part the natural course of the waters. A
valley starts on the South-road, a mile and a half east of Moorabbin
station, and runs south-east through the Benevolent Asylum
grounds. Another parallel to this starts near the Centre-road, east
of Bentleigh, and runs south-east into Reedy Swamp. Another
valley starts about a mile west of Clayton station near the Centre-
road, and after running south-east for a little distance turns south
through Heatherton, becoming the main channel. The fall from
160 to 60 feet above sea level extends over two and a half miles,
about 40 feet to the mile, and thus considerably steeper than the
Brighton valleys.
A south-easterly valley starts between Oakleigh and Clayton, and
its waters are also turned south by an artificial channel into this
main channel, but a definite south-easterly trend of the valleys is
seen to the east of this made drain.
111-drained and swampy places are common within this area.
From Heatherton the old Dandenong-road continues south-easterly
close to the 70 ft. contour, touching 60 in some of the valleys, but
never again reaching 80. Three shallow valleys with a southerly
trend cross the road, but in the country between this road and
the Gippsland railway a south-easterly trend' is often seen and
just south of the railway a definite south-easterly ridge marks the
south-west limit of the Springvale valley.
Near the main channel south of Heatherton, the contours begin
to show the effect of recent alluviation as high as the 40 ft. level,
but in the neighbourhood of Mordialloc the well-defined south-
easterly ridges and valleys can be seen as low as the 10 ft. contour.


Spring vale. —A valley runs in a south-easterly direction near
the Gippsland railway from a little beyond Clayton to about a
mile before Dandenong. It receives very little from the south; on
the south side of the railway is the ridge just referred to gradually
descending in three miles from 170 to 100 above sea level. This
Springvale valley receives tributaries from the north; the most
westerly of the tributaries receives valleys falling south-east off
the high land about Netting Hill. A fall of 20 feet to the mile in
the Springvale valley seems to be sufficient to allow recent scouring
out of the channel, necessitating the protection of bridges. This
is in agreement with Gardiner’s Creek. The Brighton valleys,
though slightly steeper on the whole, show little tendency to scour,
a difference which is no doubt due to the slow delivery of rain
from the highly absorptive tertiary sands. The valleys of Spring-
vale and its tributaries are often comparatively broad and open.
East of Notting Hill one of the heads of this system runs south-
south-west across the Fern Tree Gully-road. It starts about three-
quarters of a mile to the north-east where a low ridge separates it
from Glen Waverley.
Glen 11 averley. —This is an open valley with gentle slopes near
the crossing of Springvale-road and the Waverley-road. Its west
end is highest, being formed of the hills north-west of Wheeler’s
Hill. Beyond these there is a rapid fall to the Dandenong Creek.
The outlet from Glen Waverley is now by a steep narrow valley
to Scotchman’s Creek. The open valleys could have been formed
if this outlet were maintained for some time at a higher level. The
present outlet crosses the high land north of Notting Hill, and it is
probable that the original outlet was south-easterly across the low
ridge which now separates Glen Waverley from the valley falling
to Springvale.
Northward from Glen Waverley the Springvale-road crosses a
number of gullies which fall east to the Dandenong Creek. A line
drawn north-west from Wheeler’s Hill and another south-west from
Mitcham would mark the approximate limits of this area. Further
north, at the corner of Canterbury-road, there is a valley which
forms one of the heads of Main Creek. The above description is
sufficient to show clearly that the north-west and south-east valleys
are the rule throughout the country south of Gardiner’s Creek and
the Springvale valley. There is no reason to exclude these two
creeks from this regular system. North of Gardiner’s Creek the
south-westerly fall of, its principal tributaries is the prominent
feature,, but this it to some extent anticipated in the tributaries
of the Elsternwick Creek. Main Creek receives most of. its waters


from the east. That the north-west valleys have not ceased is also
shown in the course of the north-east head of Main Creek and of the
Koonung Creek.
North of the Springvale Valley the southerly fall is conspicuous,
but a north-westerly ridge again appears through Wheeler’s Hill.
The Notting Hill Cheltenham Axis. —The importance of this
divide is shown in the description. It is not a narrow ridge, but
a broad elevation or flat arch in shape, with a gradually decreasing
elevation to the south-west. Hence the actual heads of valleys are
not, and need not ever have been, on a straight line. The heads
are sometimes nearer to one side and sometimes to the other. The
general form of the axis is well shown by the 200, 150 and 100 ft.
contours. They run in a southerly direction on the Avest side, cross
the axis and run away to the north-east. The fall in levels on the
croAvn of the axis is not, however, uniform. At Mitcham the
elevation is about 500; at Notting Hill 320. Thence the fall is
somewhat rapid to the Centre-road, Avhere the 200 ft. level is
passed, but at Cheltenham the highest point is still 170. This is
certainly an isolated summit, but the part of the axis north of
Cheltenham has probably suffered more severely, as the valleys are
near together, and in some places nearly or quite cross the axis.
The open valley at the head of Elsternwick Creek suggests that
perhaps this divide Avas not original, but that valleys once headed
clear of it and ran across its position. But though the eastern fall
may have been steepened a little, there is no indication of any
general alteration of direction of flow even in those valleys Avhich
nearly cross the high land. The head of the Elstermvick Creek
alone might have been thought to have once started further east,
and to ha\ T e lost its upper part by a subsidence in this direction,
but the valley of Reedy SAvamp has certainly ahvays been an
easterly valley, and generally the Avhole series of valleys gives no
support to any other vieAv than that this axis is original. The flat
at the head of Elstermvick Creek is no doubt due to the great
poAver of Avidening that a valley in these permeable beds acquires
as soon as it reaches an impermeable bottom. The permanent
Avater in brick holes east of Moorabbin station indicates that here
at least the permanent water Wei is practically at the surface
(110 ft. above sea level), and the mere existence of the brick pits
shows that the bed of the valley is not in the purer and more
permeable sands.
x The northward part of the axis beyond Notting Hill is indeed
broken by the outlet from Glen Waverley, but this is obviously
new, not an original feature.


The Coast Line. —Ormond Point (Red Bluff, St. Kilda), lies on
the extension of the ridge south-west of the Elsternwick Creek.
The coast soon curves and runs nearly south, crossing the Brighton
valleys at a small angle. The projecting points are due to the
greater resistance of the lower beds of the tertiaries, and do not
correspond in position to the ridges. The Elsternwick Creek
enters the sea through the Elwood Swamp; there is a flattening
of its gradient, but in all the Brighton valleys the reverse occurs.
There is, to put it otherwise, never room for the fall to continue
to the sea at the same rate as the fall from 30 to 20 above sea level.
All of them must be regarded as slightly encroached upon by the
sea. From Brighton Beach the coast runs in general nearly south-
east, curving out to the west at points due to the greater resistance
of the brown rocks. The attack of the sea is evidently more power-
ful here than at Brighton, as is seen also in the nature of the
beach sand. At Brighton also, where‘the coast crosses a ridge,
there is a steep rise, usually back in the tea tree scrub. At Sand-
ringham the cliffs rise higher and direct from the beach. Towards
Bickett’s Point there again seems to be a less rapid advance, but
here the outcrop of the resistant rocks is much more continuous.
From Elwood to this point most of the best dip observations give
a north-westerly strike in the brown rocks with low dips 10 degrees
or less. Joints are often prominent, and in these north-westerly
strike is most common, though others are also frequent.
Near Beaumaris the coast turns north-east for a mile with con-
tinuous cliffs to 70 feet high forming one side of Beaumaris Bay.
At the head of the bay is seen a comparatively steep dip in the
tertiaries 25 degrees south-easterly. By this the resistant rocks
are carried well below water level, and a vertical cliff in the soft
upper beds follows, the coast having resumed a south-easterly
direction. The fold is not seen all along the north-west side of the
bay. At the end, where the water appears deep and the beds do
not seem to be curving, it is possibly replaced by a fault or has
been crossed by the marine encroachment.
The upper beds of the tertiaries are not seen on the north-west
side of the bay. The highest hill near reaches 100 feet, but its
top is wind-blown sand. As the removal of the upper beds does
not seem to be connected with the subaerial denudation, it was pro-
bably achieved by marine action during emergence. As usual, in
a very short distance from the coast, the valley system is quite
independent of the coast line.
The fold at Beaumaris Bay is no doubt a part of the structure
giving rise to the Cheltenham axis, its strike passing along the east


flank of the higher ground not far from several places where the
east fall is steeper than usual.
Beaumaris Bay is no doubt due to marine attack favoured by
the structural character. Further to the south-east the sea has
had to give place to the material brought down from the east
side of the Cheltenham axis, and by the Dandenong Creek. Recent
marine fossils occur at the mouth of the main drain at the head
of the creek at Mordialloc just above sea level.
The relation of the rocks to the valleys.
The tertiary rocks may be divided for the present purpose into two
parts—the upper, very weak sandstones, usually pale coloured,
but occasionally more ferruginous and then stronger; the lower
usually brown and often more clayey, with ironstone bands and
some strong coarse ferruginous beds. The upper parts are highly
permeable, they readily lose their iron cement in weathering; pro-
bably even the more ferruginous and stronger, beds yield fairly
easily to soil waters. These form the bulk of the higher cliffs, and
are exposed in every railway cutting of any depth in the tertiary
areas. The lower less permeable beds are seldom touched in the
artificial cuttings, but probably form the floor of many of the
valleys. They are seen at many points on the coast, and some of
the springs can be seen to occur at their upper edge.
On a catchment consisting of the upper parts of the tertiaries,
a very large proportion of the rainfall must be absorbed, and if
the valleys have not reached less permeable beds, may never reappear
on the land surface in the vicinity. The erosive power of the
stream would be correspondingly reduced, and when, in addition,
there are small catchments, low grades, and only a moderate rain-
fall, the streams must be very weak. When the stream reaches the
less permeable lower beds it will receive additions from springs.
These springs must produce a. local weakening, and hence greatly
increase the power to widen the valley or to cut out a channel of a
branch gully on the line of a spring. A steeper slope can be seen
sometimes behind a spring at the foot of a hill. This
power of widening has already been referred to, and is
no doubt of general application. It will evidently give
increased power to the stream which first reaches the
less permeable beds, that is, other things being equal,
to the stream on or near the anticline. A someAvhat similar effect
could be produced by any stream reaching the permanent water
level, but in this district the two causes are probably practically
coincident.


The valleys about Cheltenham have very little power to re-open
their channels if blocked by any cause. For example the swamp
east of the Golf Club House, at Sandringham lies at the north-
west end of a hollow below the 100 ft. contour, about 50 chains
long and of an a tea of 50 acres. The whole catchment up stream
from the swamp is only about 300 acres. If a barrier below the
swamp were only to reach 102 ft. above sea level, it would require,
neglecting the depth below the 100 ft. contour, two feet of Avater
over more than 50 acres to surmount the barrier, or over 4 inches
of rain delivered into the hollow so rapidly that absorption could
be neglected. A very low barrier is evidently insurmountable in
such a case. The valley Avould be re-opened by the stream cutting
back from the loAAer side of the barrier, and as the direct catch-
ment here is very small, the chief agent wouid be the oozing of
water along the old bed. If the old bed had reached impermeable
material this Avould be much more poAverful. A stream which has
reached less permeable beds is therefore much more able to keep
its channel open. AVind action or the Avash from adjacent slopes
might make a barrier, especially after a portion of the heath had
been SAvept by fire and the sand left unprotected. It may be noticed
that Avhile tAvo and a half feet to the chain can be regarded as
moderately steep in the tertiaries, some hillsides reach as much as
10 feet to the chain, and might rapidly supply much material from
these relatively unstable slopes.
As has been noticed, strikes of beds and of joints are often
north-Avesterly in the tertiaries. Any actual inequalities of surface
produced by slight folding before emergence of these beds would
be liable to be largly or AA’holly levelled by marine action during
the elevation. Relatively weak parts might even be excavated, and
these Aveaker parts Avould probably be nearer anticlines. Hence
there is no probability of the production of anticlinal ridges, but
there is a strong probability of lines of easy excavation parallel to
the strike of the folds. The north-Avest and south-east valleys there-
fore, besides being near the direction of steepest slope from the
axis, are probably structurally in a strong position. The relation
of the unusual fold at Beaumaris to the Cheltenham axis is already
noticed.
Explanation of Surface Features.
The Brighton valleys from their simplicity and regularity are no
doubt the only system which has ever existed on this area. They do
not exactly follow the present general slope, but this may ,have been
altered, either, by a general depression to the south or, dess likely, by


the process of denudation. But to form such a series of parallel
valleys, so close together, merely as consequent streams, seems to
require a very regular original surface. Small irregularities can
scarcely be negligible with valleys so close to one another. Therefore
it is probable that the valleys have been from the first guided by lines
of easy erosion. Actual inequalities of surface to guide them need not
here be required.
Further north, however, we begin to have evidence of a more
important south-west fall of the country. The Netting Hill-Chel-
tenham axis itself falls to the south-west; so does the high land
from East Camberwell to Malvern. The tributaries from the north
are necessarily more important. Yet they have not been able to
continue south-west. Either Elsternwick Creek and Gardiner’s
Creek are on lines of weakness which gave them an immediate
advantage, or there was originally an irregularity in the south-
west fall. There is actually no reason why the original elevated
surface should not possess regularly arranged inequalities.
Ordinarily streams have been able to do so much work that
minor features have been lost, but here we are dealing with the
weakest of streams. It must be remembered, however, that all
these creeks had to start as weak streams in the upper beds of the
tertiaries. It may have needed no more to determine the courses
of Gardiner’s Creek and the Elsternwick Creek than those of the
Brighton valleys. It may be noticed, however, that Malvern Hill
is a little higher than we would expect if the ridge is falling
uniformly to the south-west, and that the correspondence between
Gardiner’s Creek and the Springvale valley on the opposite fall,
favours the idea of an original structural character or inequality.
The Elsternwick Creek system is a further development of a system
like the Brighton valleys with the addition of the influence of the
south-west fall as soon as the main axis is loft. In Gardiner’s
Creek and its tributaries these characters are further developed.
If the tertiaries north of Gardiner’s Creek are mostly terrestrial,
and those to the south mostly marine, this would involve an
original slope of deposition in the terrestrial part and original
streams before the emergence of the southern area, but these streams
would all be in shallow valleys.
Area south of Carnegie and Murrnmheena. —lf Main Creek ever
continued to the south-west it must have been across this locality.
Tlie comparatively low levels of the ridges, somewhat lower than
the hills near Caulfield station, and also than the high land to the
south-east, at first suggest a broad valley. But the detail of the
surface is not easily explained on this supposition. By examining


the course of the 150 and 140 ft. contours, it will he seen
that the little -creek at Murrumbeena takes the water from a long
hollow with a distinct north-westerly trend. This is the lower end
of valleys which head some distance to the south-east. The present
outlet is a mile back from the north-west end, and is evidently
well able to cut deeper. It seems to be clearly a new diversion of
the waters of a valley flowing north-west. Immediately to the
south of this hollow is another, also elongated in a north-westerly
direction, and making the down stream end of a valley from the
south-east. The present outlet is to the south-west, and again is a
mile back from the north-west end. The outlet is more developed
than in the other hollow, but is still narrow compared with the
size of the hollow, and actually did not naturally drain it com-
pletely. Again it seems clearly a new diversion. The ridge south-
west of this hollow, which is breached by the present outlet, is a
well-defined ridge from the south end of Caulfield Racecourse to
the higher land east of Bentleigh. Nor does the country to the
south-west further on show any sufficient evidence of an old valley
of Main Creek. There is indeed the southward tributary to the
Elsternwick Creek, but eventually a south-westerly stream would
reach places where the north-west valleys and ridges run right across
its line. The idea of a south-west continuation of Main Creek would
necessarily involve the supposition that some character of the rocks
so strongly favoured easy excavation on the usual north-westerly
lines as to make an earlier south-west fall a matter of little conse-
quence, so that later valleys sometimes entered the old valley at an
acute angle, heading up stream. Nor does the general run of
the surface levels in Caulfield and Brighton favour the idea of an
old valley, even if a broad one, crossing this area.
This argument evidently does not exclude the possibility of a
stream somewhere near Main Creek before the emergence of the
land south of Gardiner’s Creek, but this would be antecedent to
the development of the present topography. Such a stream may
possibly have had its mouth about this locality, but it might almost
equally have been anywhere else.
It remains to find an explanation of the absence of any outlet to
these valleys to the north-west. They are not alone in this respect;
on the same line are the flat in Caulfield Racecourse, with a poor
outlet, and Paddy’s Swamp. The most probable explanation seems
to be a continued or renewed warping of the surface subsequent to
the establishment of the present valley system.
There is no doubt that the elevation was accompanied by defor-
mation of the surface.


The deformations and elevations would not be likely to cease sud-‘
denly. The flattening of the grades of all the Brighton valleys
near Bluff-road has been referred to. This admits of two explana-
tions : either that there is something which the valleys found it
hard to cut through,, or that there has been an elevation against
the grade of the valleys which they have not yet been able 1 to
smooth out. The former explanation receives slight support from
the occurrence of the flattest part of the Elstermvick Creek near
the ferruginous rock of the “gravel ’’ pits west of Bentleigh. On
this view the complete obstruction of the valley east of the Golf
Club House at Sandringham would be due to the flat grade allow-
ing this stream, one of the weakest, to be completely obstructed
by other causes. On the view that there has been a late deforma-
tion of the surface, the flattening of all these valleys, and the com-
plete loss of level in the case just mentioned are the direct result
of the deformation. But the diversion of the second valley of the
Brighton system into the third is probably due to an earlier slight
irregularity on the same line. Following the same line north such
a wmrping would increase the power of the southward valley near
McKinnon as compared with the north-west valleys, and would at
the same time account for the blocking of the two hollows south of
Carnegie, and facilitate the formation of a south outlet from the
southern one.
The same explanation may be further extended to the course of
Gardiner’s Creek through the high land north of Malvern. Gar-
diner’s Greek probably preceded the present elevation of the land.
This receives some support from the levels of the base of the ter-
tiaries, which is lower up stream than it is at this high land, and
apparently falls much lower on the Yarra side of the high land.
If we suppose that deformations, and not mere elevations and
depressions took place, there is no reason to suppose that Malvern
and Hawthorn were equally affected with the Yarra valley, in the
depression which is known to have taken place there.
A similar explanation might extend to the steep fall smith of
the Dandenong-road at Armadale, and to the steep fall on the
Netting Hill-Cheltenham axis near the Gippsland railway. It
would then also explain why the southern divide of the Gardiner's
Creek area is lower at Murriunbecna. It also introduces a cause
with a general power of forming lagoons and closed hollows such
hs are numerous at and about Cheltenham and many other places.
Wheeler’s Hill. —The north-west line of hills through Wheeler’s
Hill may be either a more uplifted area or a rblic of earlier fea-
tures. Jutson remarks (p. 492) that a fault scarp is. suggested at


Wheeler's Hill, that is, to the east of the hill; but also that the
hill seems to rise above the general height of the plateau in this
locality. Possibly there may be a fault on the north-east of this
group of hills, but the deflection produced in the Dandenong Creek
may be sufficient cause for the steep slope along the north-east
fall. My suggestion that there has once been a continuous ridge
to beyond Surrey Hills may raise the objection that it would seem
that the country about Blackburn should have had its easiest outlet
to Rooming Creek, which, with a direct course, now joins the
Yarra at 2-1 ft. above sea level. But if we imagine the low vallev
of Rooming Creek filled in, and the ridge from East Camberwell
continuous to Doncaster, the outlet of this area is difficult by any
route, and Main Creek might at some stages in the development
be the easier in Spite of the necessity to cut through the ridge.
Jutson (p. 479) mentions a decreasing throw of the Brushy Creek
fault from north to south till it is no longer traceable as a fault,
and appears to be represented by a gentle tilting on a line con-
tinuing south-westerly toward Springvale (with a possible fault for
a short distance at Wheeler’s Hill). Following this idea it seems
better to consider this fault line as replaced by a wider easterly
tilt from the Netting Hill axis. Then the course of the Dandenong
Creek at Wheeler’s Hill is in accordance with the direction of tilt
till it finds its way through the hills. The Springvale valley also
lies within the tilted area and further south the tilt extends from
Beaumaris across the Carrum Swamp.
The slope on which the formation of swampy land appears at
the lower parts of the creeks is in close agreement in the three
examples in this district. The Dandenong Creek begins to be
swampy below the 50 ft. contour, falling from 50 to 40 in 50
chains, or a grade of 1 in 330. The channel from Dingley south-
ward falls from ST) to 30 in 65 chains, and from 30 to 10 in about
105 chains; this brings it into the once swampy land north of the
main drain from the Dandenong Creek to Mordialloc. The Elstern-
wick Creek falls from 50 to 30 in 60 chains, and from 30 to 10
in 106 chains; thence to the outlet is much flatter.
/
In considering the lagoons, the question suggested itself as to
whether there was any cause acting to keep them from silting up
or even to increase their size. In spite of statements about running
sands in some w r ells, there does not seem much likelihood of under-
ground channels by which sand could move; and actually the
closed hollows usually hold water. There seems a slight possi-
bility that under peculiar circumstances some of the upper sand
might slip in mass on an inclined clayey bed either down a valley


or sidewise. As the slopes which stand are sometimes about 10
degrees on the surface, it would probably want a steeper slope than
this. It might possibly occur at a time of ground movements or
warping or elevation, but would be exceptional. Wind action
would tend rather to fill than to excavate, as the moist bottom of
the hollow must be less acted on even if the wind blew up the
valley. The existing closed hollows may then be regarded as mostly
newly closed.
General Summary.
The detail of the drainage system is not to be regarded as
developed on a simple sloping surface. A south-westerly fall is
noticeable across the Gardiner’s Creek, and, to a less marked
degree, the Elsternwick Creek area. Slight indications of it are seen
even in the Brighton district. A south-westerly and southerly fall
is also seen in the Springvale area; and the parish of Mordialloc
(i.e., from near Clayton to the main drain of the Dandenong
Creek) is under the influence of the southerly fall to the Carrum
Swamp. But the drainage system is largely controlled by the
Netting Hill-Cheltenhara axis, parallel to which is a subordinate
axis through East Camberwell. An easterly tilt from the latter and
other late warping movements are probable. But primarily the Netting
Hill-Cheltenham axis divided the north-western from the south-
eastern streams. The south-westerly tributaries, though important,
in many cases seem to be definitely blocked at certain lines,
especially that on the south-west sides of Gardiner’s Creek and the
Springvale Valley. This feature, combined with the extreme re-
gularity of the Brighton system, and the structures of the rocks
so far as seen, favours the idea that the streams are guided or
strengthened on their south-east or north-west courses by lines of
weakness or by structural features, and that there may even have
been original reversals of slope against the south-west fall in some
cases.
All the valleys in their earlier stages were in the weak and
absorptive tertiary sandy beds. On reaching impermeable beds
such a valley would receive additions from springs, and weak
places would be produced on the lines of springs which might
result in a great power of widening the valley or cutting a tributary
vallev.
Closed hollows are of frequent occurrence, and are easily pro-
duced owing to the extreme Aveakness of the upper parts of the
streams. Small local causes may have possibly produced some, but


some of the larger ones more remote from the valley heads are
probably due to warping after the development of the valleys.
There is no necessity to regard the late depression, known to
have occurred in the Yarra valley, as uniformly affecting a large
area, hut rather as part of a movement which acted unequally in
different places even a short distance apart.






