



MUNDUS ALTER ET IDEM.¹
THIS anonymous romance of the time of James L— the scene
of which is laid in the unexplored Terra Australis and Nova
Guinea—though now commonly attributed to Bishop Hall, does
not appear to have been assigned to him by name until 1674, 2
eighteen years after his death (1656), and nearly seventy years after
the date of its first publication in 1605. It is included in three
collected editions of Hall’s works, 3 and the good Bishop’s bio-
graphers, Jones 4 and Lewis, 5 both take it for granted that the work
is his, apparently without the knowledge that it had been claimed for
any other writer. Four separate editions were printed in Latin, and
three or four translations and adaptations of the work, or parts of it,
in English and one in German. This German translation, which
was issued in Leipzig in 1613, about eight years after the Latin
original, bears upon the title-page an author’s name—that of Alberico
Gentili, a scholar whose reputation was greater in his day even than
that of Joseph Hall. Another claim has been made by Crenius, the
Dutch philologist, on behalf of the Reverend Jonas Proost, of
Colchester. 6
For a bibliographical purpose it is necessary to consider the re-
spective claims thus advanced. With that object I have brought
together, in as concise a manner as is consistent with clearness, all
1 Mundus Alter dr 3 Idem sive Terra Australis ante hoc semper incognita longis
itineribus peregrini Academici nuperrime lustrata Auth. Mercurio Britannico,
i.e. Another World and the Same ; or, the Southern Land hitherto unknown by
long journeys of a travelling Academic quite lately passed through. Author ; A
British Mercury.
* Hyde, Catalog. Impress. Lib. Biblioth. Bodleiana, 1674.
* (1) Works of Bishop HalI(io vols.), London, 1808. Vol. X, (2) Works of
Bishop Hall, edited by Rev, Peter Hall (12 vols.), London, 1837-39* Vol. XII.
(3) Works of the Right Rev. Joseph Hall, D.D. Edited by Dr. Philip Wynter.
Oxford, 1863 (10 vols.). Vol. X. p. 401.
4 Bishop Hall, his Life and Times , by Rev. John Jones, 1826.
* Life of Joseph Hall , by Rev. George Lewis, 1886.
* Crenius, Animadversiones Philologies et Histories , Pt. VIII. p. SS»
Amsterdam 1701.


the evidence I can find, new and old, from rare works practically in-
accessible to the majority of readers, in the hope, if possible, of
eliciting further, and perhaps unpublished, evidence. At the same
time I have taken the opportunity of correcting some misappre-
hensions and misstatements of eminent writers, who have criticised
the work without having read it.
The little book is sufficiently important to have received special
notice from our own literary historians and many eminent foreign
critics, and has been classed with More’s “ Utopia ” and Campanula's
“ City of the Sun.”
Hallam, treating of prose fiction, 1 writes :
I can only produce two books by English authors in this first part of the
seventeenth century which fall properly under the class of novels or romances,
and of these one is written in Latin. This is the ‘ ‘ Mundus Alter et Idem ”of Bishop
Hall, an imitation of the latter and weaker volumes of Rabelais. A country in
Terra Australis is divided into four regions : Crapulia, Viraginia, Moronea, and
Lavernia. Maps of the whole land and of particular regions are given ; and the
nature of the satire, not much of which has any especial relation to England [!],
may easily be collected.
Warton, after a long criticism of Hall’s poetry, 2 adds :
With Hall’s satires should be ranked his “ Mundus Alter et Idem,” an ingenious
satirical fiction in prose, where, under a pretended description of the Terra
Australis, he forms a pleasant invective against the characteristic vices of various
nations, and is remarkably severe on the Church of Rome(!). This piece was
written about the year 1600, before he had quitted the classics for the fathers, and
published some years afterwards against his consent.
The book itself is prefaced by an “ Epistle,” signed “ Gulielmus
Knight.” Dr. Philip Wynter, Hall’s latest editor, accepting this
epistle as bona fide, remarks :
To William Knight, in whose hands . . .the MS. had been placed, we are
indebted for its preservation and ultimate publication. It is one of the Bishop’s
earliest works, certainly prior to the year 1600 ; and though the humour is perhaps
a little too broad, and its general character coarse and indelicate, it is by no means
unworthy of the reputation which he subsequently attained. . . . How this
William Knight came to be so intimately acquainted with the Bishop we are not
informed. There is, however, an epistle addressed to him by the Bishop
[Dec. v. ep. 10] which shows that their acquaintance was of early date, and he
was probably the author of “A Concordance Axiomaticall . , .of Holy Scrip-
ture.”* . . . He is said to have edited Hall’s “ Virgidemiarum.”
* Literature of Europe , 1839, Vol. 111. p. 684.
2 Warton, Hist, Engl. Poetry , London, 1781, Vol. IV. p. 52 ; London, 1840,
Vol. 111. pp. 439-440; London, 1871, Vol. IV. p. 397.
» Knight, A Concordance Axiomaticall, London, 1610.
F 2


Knight matriculated at Christ’s College, Cambridge, July 1,1579,
went out B.A. 1582-83, was afterwards elected Fellow, and in 1586
commenced M.A. On July 12, 1603, he was incorporated M.A. at
Oxford. 1 His “Concordance” published in 1610, was begun about
fourteen years before. He allowed copies to be made for his friends,
“ with faithful promise never to let them pass without his consent; ”
but they gave him “no rest,” and he had to set to and print it. This
in his preface, which is dated July 20, 1610. Hall’s Epistle to Knight
(Dec. v. ep. 10), commending his “variety of tongues and style of
arts,” and encouraging him to “persist in the calling of the
ministry,” was not published till October 4, 16 10, 2 when Hall was
thirty-six, and Knight about fifty. In the same collection of letters
Hall includes one (Dec. iv. ep. 8) addressed to another friend, Dr.
Thomas James, 3 Oxford, who compiled the first two Bodleian Library
catalogues of 1605 and 1620. In the latter “Mundus Alter” is
entered, not under Hall’s name, but under “ Mercurius Britann[ic]us.”
Naude, Cardinal Mazarin’s librarian, in a work treating of books
on Political Philosophy (1641), remarks :
Lastly, there has been lately published a book written by an Englishman,
whose name I do not know, and entitled, “Another World and the Same,” or rather
a satyr on the corrupt morals of this age. The uthor gives a particular place to
every vice, and calls the nations that inhabit those places, and the places them-
selves, names that are wittily composed, and adapted to the very nature of every-
thing ; thus he lays before us an account of Poneropolis (the Wicked City) proper
both to divert us and to persuade us to a virtuous life ( Translation). 4
A part of the country “ Lavernia,” in “ Mundus Alter,” is occupied
by rogues, thieves, cutpurses, and suchlike, but there is no city in it
called “ Poneropolis.” Naude was “ nodding; ”he had been reading
Rabelais. The next reference to “ Mundus ”is by Dr. Peter Heylyn,
theologian, historian, biographer of Laud, and fellow-sufferer with
Hall during the Rebellion. Heylyn, no doubt, in the following para-
graph refers to Hall. He is describing “Terra Incognita” and
imaginary countries in the fourth book of his “ Cosmography ” (1652),
three or four years before Hall’s decease : J
“ Mundus Alter et Idem ” is a witty and ingenious invention of a learned
prelate, writ by him in his younger days (but well enough becoming the austerity
of the gravest head), in which he distinguisheth the vices, passions, humours, and
ill affections most commonly incident to mankind into several provinces; gives
the character of each, as in the descriptions of a country, people, and chief cities
1 Thompson Cooper, Diet. N. Biog. XXXI. 1892, p. 266.
* Arber, Transcript of Stationers' Registers, Vol. 111. London, 1876.
* James, Catalog. Bibl. Bodl. Oxon. 1620.
* Naudeus, Bibliograph. Polit., Witteberge, 1641, pp. 41, 42.


of it, and sets them forth unto the eye in such lively colours that the vitious man
may see therein his own deformities, and the well-minded man his own imper-
fections. The scene of this design is laid by the reverend author in this Terra
Australis ; the decorum happily preserved in the whole discovery, the style acutely
clear, the invention singular. Of whom and his New World I shall give you that
Eulogie which the historian doth of Homer, “ Nec ante ilium quem ille imitaretur,
neq’ post ilium qui eum imitari posset, inventus est. ,, 'l “There was none
found before him whom he could imitate, none after him had invention.”
Thomas Hyde, Bodley’s librarian, in the third catalogue of the
collection printed in 1674, gives a reference from “ Mercurius Bri-
tannicus” (p. 451, col. B) to Joseph Hall (p. 319, col. B), where
“Mundus Alter et Idem,” &c., is included among Hall’s works, ac-
knowledged and unacknowledged. This is the earliest reference of
the work to Hall by name—eighteen years after his death. Blaufus, 2
German critic and theologian—who will be referred to later on 3
points out that Cave, the ecclesiastical historian, as well as Hyde,
believed Hall to have written the book. Placcius 4 and Serpilius 5
give it to Hall upon the same evidence. I have searched Cave’s
writings without finding any reference to the “ Mundus Alter.” Was
Cave’s name written inadvertently by Blaufus instead of that of the
ecclesiastical historian Heylyn ?
J. A. Bosius, 6 German philologist and professor of history, is
sometimes given as an authority, but he merely repeats Naude, with
Naude’s blunder :
“Mundus Alter et Idem” ab Anglo quodam antepaucos annos conscriptus
in deprauatos huius saeculi mores, ac veluti poneropolim quandam, sive ciuitatem
vitiis omnibus infectam, exhibens.
Bayle, art. “ Hall (Joseph),” after giving a resume of Hall’s life
and works, adds : 7
The catalogue of the Oxford Library ascribes to him a book entitled “ Mundus
Alter et Idem,” i.e. “Another World and the Same; or, the Southern Lands,
1 Heylyn, Cosmographie, London, 1652. Appendix, lib. iv. p. 195 ; 6th edit.,
lib. p. 16 1, London 1682.
s Blaufus, Vermischie Beytrdge zur Enveiterung der Kentniss seltener und
merkwiirdiger Biicher, Bde. 11., Jena, 1756, pp. 328-356.
8 See post, pp. 75 and 86.
* Placcius, Theatrum Anonymorum et Pseudonymorutn, Hamburg, 1708.
Script. Pseud. Detectis, p. 441.
4 Serpilius, Lebens-Beschreibung der hiblischen Scribenien, Leipzig, 1708,
Theil IV. p. 314.
6 Bosius, De Comparanda Prudentia Civili, Jena, 1679.
7 Bayle, Diciionnaire hist, et crit., Rotterdam, 1720, Tome 11. p. 1392.
English translation by DesMaizeaux, &c., London, 1736, Vol. 111. p. 345 ; trans-
lated by Bernard, &c., London, 1737, Vol. V. pp. 714, 715.


formerly always unknown, lately travelled over by a foreign Academician, by
Mercurius Britannicus,” and footnote :
It is an ingenious and learned fiction, in which he described the wicked morals
of several nations, the drunkenness of some, theleudness of others, &c. He does
not spare the Court of Rome. He composed this book whilst he cultivated polite
literature, and, having applied himself afterwards to Divinity, he neglected that
work, and looked upon it as a mere trifle ; but his friend, William Knight, had
not the same opinion of it; he judged it so worthy to be published that he caused
it to be printed, though he feared thereby to displease the person who composed
it, and trusted him with the manuscript. This is what he lays before the reader
at length in the preface. I cannot tell in what year it was first published. I have
only the edition of Utrecht of the year 1643, to which the publisher added Cam-
panella’s “ City of the Sun” and Chancellor Bacon’s “ New Atlantis, 1 ' because
these works are upon a subject much like that of Bishop Hall’s. The reader will
perhaps see here with pleasure Naude’s judgment of it (quoted above, p. 68).
The editors of the Amsterdam edition (1725) of Baillet’s
“Jugemens des Sgavans” 1 supply a list of disguised authors, amongst
which is included
“Mercurius Britannicus : Joseph Hall.”
Thus far there is no further external evidence of Hall’s author-
ship than is afforded by Knight’s preface, Hyde’s Catalogue, and
Heylyn’s reference of the book to “ a learned prelate ” —Hall with-
out doubt.
Some years before the appearance of “ Mundus Alter ” there had
been published “ Yirgidemiarum : Three Tooth-lesse Satyrs ” (1597) ;
and “Three Byting Satyrs” (1598), reissued with the initials I. H.,
1602. This was known as Hall’s and acknowledged. Arber 2 notes
an “ order ” for Hall’s “ Satires,” and several works by other authors, to
be burnt (June 1, 1599), but three of these with Hall’s “ Satires ”
were afterwards “ staied.” He who had already satirised the loose
morals of his time in verse could no doubt do so in prose, and in
Latin for scholars unacquainted with English. Hall had not, how-
ever, at that time been out of England, and did not go abroad until
he accompanied Sir Edmund Bacon and Lord Hertford’s embassy
to Brussels in 1605, after “Mundus” appeared. Whoever the
writer, whether he had travelled or not, he was well read in works of
travel and geography, and knew how to use his “ Mercator ” and
“ Maundeville,” and later travellers and voyagers. Hall used them in
his “ Satires ” (Book IV. Satires vi. and vii.), as well as his local
1 Adrien Baillet, Jugemens des Sfavans sur les principaux otwrages ds
auteurs, nouv. edit., Amsterdam, 1725, tome v. p. 332.
2 Arber, Transcript of Stationery Registers , VoL 111. London, 1876.


knowledge of London and Cambridge (Book V. Satire i.), with which
passages in the “ Mundus ” may be compared.
Despite Hallam’s remark that “ not much of the Satire has any
especial relation to England,” “ Mercurius Britannicus ” needed not
to have left England or to have gone far beyond the walls of London
for examples of the manners he has described in “ Mundus Alter et
Idem.” The names of persons and places are easily identified. Ram
Alley, a notorious passage leading to the Temple, Petticoat Lane,
the Fleet Prison, the feasting at Guildhall, drinking at the taverns,
and other incidents are thinly disguised. There is also a humorous
reference to tobacco and the habit of smoking (so much abhorred
by James I.) as having been introduced by one Topia Waralladorem,
an ungodly fellow of this country, who had been taught to smoke by
an Indian devil. This can refer only to the people’s favourite, Raleigh,
lodged in the Tower since December 16,1603. The author tells the
story of a poor man who is drugged and carried away in his sleep to
wake up in a palace of pleasure and delight, and afterwards carried
out again, a story older than Boccaccio. Although “Mercurius
Britannicus’’wanders through the newly discovered “Terra Australis,”
“Nova Guinea,” and the “Psittacorum Regio,” with their imaginary
cities, rivers, and mountains, underlying the whole is the London
of Elizabeth and James I. The same Alsatia is reflected in the
“ Mundus ” as was long afterwards discovered to us by Scott in the
“ Fortunes of Nigel.”
In the state of “Crapulia” the inhabitants are given over to eat-
ing and drinking; their laws are against fasting, and cooks, bakers,
tavern-keepers, the well-fed, greedy, and jolly only are eligible for
citizenship, the highest offices being reserved for such as have
attained a certain “rotundity.” In “Viraginia” the government is by
the women. Here as in Erasmus, later on in Neville, and in our own
time, in Trevelyan, the ladies have their assembly or parliament. In
the “ Mundus Alter ” the women’s parliament is perpetual, so that
what is voted to-day may be repealed to-morrow. “Moronia” is
the'-country of fools, and “ Lavernia ” that of thieves, cutpurses, and
rogues. The work of a scholar, it is also that of a scholar whose
acquaintance with continental speech was very considerable, as there
are scattered over its pages nearly two hundred proper names of
persons, places, and things of which thirty-nine are Spanish, thirty-
five Latin, twenty-nine Italian, twenty-eight Greek, twenty-eight
French, fifteen German, six English, and one Hebrew. At the end
(p. 214) it is subscribed thus ;


Hos ego homines, hos mores, has urbes vidi stupui, visi; annoque demum
tricesimo itineris tanti laboribus fractus in patriam redii.
Peregrinus quondam Academicus.
(I.e. these men, [their manners, their cities, I have seen with wonder. After
thirty years of travelling I returned, broken by toils, into my native country. A
traveller, formerly an Academic.)
If this subscription is bona fide, and the native country is England
or Germany or France, the work cannot be Gentili’s.
The “ Dedication ” is to Henry, Earl of Huntingdon :
Honoratissimo Domino nec minus virtute sua quam splendore generis illustri
Dom Henrico Comiti Huntingdonke Mundum suum supplex vouet Mercurius
Britannicus.
Hall’s father had, in an official capacity, served Henry, third Earl
of Huntingdon ; this Earl was also a benefactor of Hall’s College
(Emmanuel), and Hall was himself indebted to him for his fellowship.
The Earl, however, dying suddenly, only two days before the election, 1
this dedication must be intended for his grandnephew, Henry, the
■fifth Earl, who succeeded to the title in 1604, unless (according to
Knight’s preface) the work had been written before the death of the
third Earl, December 14, 1595, and the dedication was allowed to
stand uncorrected, which is unlikely.
Many years after, Hall dedicated two other works to the fifth Earl,
viz. his fifth book of “Contemplations” (1612), and “Heaven upon
Earth” (1627). In the former Hall addresses him as “a bountiful
favourer of all good learning,” and “ the first patron of my poor
studies.”
Besides the editions of “ Mundus ” in Hall’s collected works
there are, as before stated, four separate editions in Latin, four
translations or adaptations in English and one translation into Ger-
man. Three of the original Latin and two English editions are in
the British Museum. Of the Latin one was published at Hanau,
dated 1607 ; another at Frankfort, undated ; a third at Utrecht
1643; and I have note of a fourth at Munich 1664. The date upon
the engraved title of the Utrecht edition is indistinct, and* has
sometimes been printed in catalogues as 1648. The undated Frank-
fort edition is printed in the B.M. catalogue [1640?], but corrected
to [1635?], one of the four copies of this in the museum bearing a
former owner’s name and that date upon it. Internal evidence shows
that the Frankfort edition is earlier than that of Hanau. The title
1 Some Specialities in the Life of foseph Hall, Bishop of Norwich. Written
with his own hand, prefixed to h : s Remaining Works, London, 1660, p. 2 j
Works, London, 1863, Vol. I.


was moreover entered in the “Stationers’ Registers” 1 by John Porter,
June 2, 1605. This must have been the Frankfort edition, because
the Hanau edition (dated 1607) is included in the “ Frankfort General
Catalogue of Books,” published in the autumn of 1606 2 — an example
of the postdating of books at the beginning of the seventeenth
century, of which instances at the end of the nineteenth are to biblio-
graphers so inconveniently frequent. Turning over the leaves of the
Stationers' Registers 1 to August 4, 1608, there is another entry — the
transfer from Porter (or his representatives) to Leonard Green —of
eleven different publications, including three of Hall’s books and
“ Mundus Alter.” Mr. Arber, in his index, queries the address of
John Porter. He was printer to Cambridge University from 1593. 3
I have examined seven copies of the undated Frankfort edition
and three of the Hanau edition (1607) :
F I. My own, formerly Dr. Doran’s copy.
2. Mr. Lawrence’s copy —Brixton Free Library.
3. The Grenville copy—British Museum, G. 16138.
4. Another copy —British Museum, 684, d. 5.
5. Another copy—British Museum, 1079, c-
-6. Another copy —British Museum, 123x6. aa. 35.
7. Duke of Devonshire’s copy in the Chatsworth Library.
H I. My own copy, bought in Paris.
2. Mr. S. W. Silver’s copy —York Gate Library, bought in Paris.
3. British Museum, 980. b. 36.
A copy of the Frankfort edition is in the Huth Collection, and a
note in the catalogue states that there is a copy of the Hanau
edition in the library of Mr, R. S. Turner; also that “ the letterpress
is precisely the same ”in both. This is a mistake. The title-pages
and maps are different (as noticed by Mr. Huth’s cataloguer). The
pagination is the same, even where incorrect. Pages 65 to 80
(sig. D) are numbered 66 to 81. Sig. Eis correctly paged 81 to 96,
so that in both editions there are two pages numbered 81, but no
page 65 in either. But both editions are different in the type
throughout and in other minutiae : the headpieces and initial letters
are all different. The marginal notes are not only reset, but some-
times lettered and sometimes figured, the lettering being in Roman,
Greek, and Italic, and no uniformity in this respect in either edition.
The Greek, Hebrew, and German characters are different. Catch-
1 Arber, Transcript of Stationers' Registers , Vol. 111. London, 1876.
2 Catalogus Universalis pro Nundinis Francofurtensibtis autumnalibus de
anno 1606, sect. Hist. Polit. et Geogr. B.M. PP. 6513, d.
• Bigtnore and Wyman, Bibliog. of Printing, Vcl. I. p. 100.


words are at the foot of every page in the Frankfort edition, but only
on the left-hand pages of the Hanau edition. The “se ” diphthong
of the Frankfort edition is sometimes “e ” in the Hanau edition ;
the spacing, hyphenating, abbreviating, and general setting of the
Hanau edition, as well as the maps and title-page, are superior to
the work in the Frankfort edition. Comparing the copies of the
Frankfort edition with each other, I discover in F i that the dedica-
tion, preface, and index of chapters, as also sig. D, pp. 49-64, belong
to the Hanau edition. I supposed, at first, that this copy (F 1)
might have been an imperfect one, and “made up,” but I have since
noticed that the Grenville copy of the Frankfort edition (F 3) has
also sig. D of the Hanau edition ; that F 4 and F 5 have the pre-
fatory matter (that is dedication, preface, and index) of the Hanau
edition. The stock of the two editions was therefore interchanged.
That both were common property and authorised is implied in the
respective imprints:—
(F) Francofurti apud hceredes Ascanij de Rinialme.
(At Frankfort, the house of the heirs of Ascanius de Rinialme.)
(H) Sumptibus hceredum Ascanij de Renialme. Hannovice , per Gulielmum
Antoniii, Ao. 1607.
(At the cost of the heirs of Ascanius de Renialme. At Hanau, by
Wilhelm Antonium, in the year 1607.)
Other variations, however, must be noticed :
(1) The original Frankfort preface (in F 2, F 3, and F 7, of
the above-mentioned copies) gives the editor’s name, “ Gulielmus
Knight.” The Hanau preface (F 1, F 4, F 5, Hl, H 2, H 3)
is signed “Gu/lielmus Knight.” The publisher’s name, Gulielmus
Antonium, is correctly spelt. Was there any motive for this mis-
spelling of the editor’s name ?
(2) Lib. HI. c. 2 (correctly Lib. 11. c. 2) in the index of the
Hanau copies (also used in the Frankfort copies F 1, F 4, F 5)
reads :
Quid Alberico Gent Hi a Gyncecopolitis factum fuerit.
(What to Alberico Gentili by the womenfolk was done.)
In the Frankfort copies F 1 and F 5 (copies probably imported
for sale in England ?) the name “ Alberico Gentili” is struck out and
the word “ mihi ” written in the margin. F2,F 3, and F 7 have
the correction made in the type, which reads :
Quid mihi a Gyncecopolitis factum fuerit
(What to me by the womenfolk was done);
and this is the heading of that chapter on page 92 in both editions.


It should be understood that the word “ Gynsea ” has a double
meaning : the chapter treats not only of the government of women-
folk but of their country —that part of the Terra Australis then
called “ Nova Guinea.” The appearance of Alberico Gentili’s name
in the index of chapters is the ground upon which Blaufus claimed
the work for him. Upon Knight’s preface, Blaufus 1 remarks that
prefaces to anonymous works are not to be trusted, and in this
instance he thinks the coincidences supposed to indicate that Hall is
the author are not to be regarded. Examining the book he dis-
covers in the “ index of chapters ” the name of “ Alberico Gentili,”
and that, he says, settles the question. Apparently Blaufus had
not seen the German translation, with Gentili’s name upon the title-
page.
The son of the Protestant refugee Matteo Gentili, Alberico 2
was born and educated in Italy. He had already taken his degree
of doctor of laws at Perugia in his twentieth year (1572), when,
pursued by the Inquisition, he accompanied his father into Carniola.
The Papal authorities having excommunicated them, the fugitives
had to leave Austrian territory. Alberico came to London ; a
brother Scipio went to one of the North German universities; the
father subsequently followed Alberico. Alberico had therefore
more reason for satirising the Church than Rabelais or Erasmus.
However, in England the influence of Dr. Tobie Matthew (Bishop
of Durham, afterwards Archbishop of York), Vice-Chancellor, and
the Earl of Leicester, Chancellor of the University, obtained for
Alberico admission to Oxford, and soon after, being appointed
lecturer on law, he there greatly increased his reputation, and was
consulted by the Government. When the Spanish Ambassador was
discovered to be plotting against the Crown, by Gentili’s advice,
Mendoza was merely requested to leave the country. In 1586
Gentili accompanied the English embassy to the Elector of Saxony.
His writings were voluminous, and comprehended lectures and
treatises upon civil, canon, and ecclesiastical law. He was frequently
engaged in discussions with the champions of the Church and others
in controversial subjects, such as the marriage of divorced persons
and the lawfulness of play-acting. Others of his numerous publi-
cations treat upon witchcraft, casuistry and Biblical exegesis, the
Vulgate, classical philology, and the prerogative of the Crown. He
1 Blaufus, Vermischte Beytrdge zur Erweiterung der Kentniss seltener und
merkivurdiger Bucher. Bde. 11., Jena, 1756, pp. 328-356.
2 Prof. Holland, Diet. N. Biog. XXI. pp. 124-127; Lecture on Albericus
Gentilis, Oxford, 1874.


had taken up his residence in London in 1590, his Oxford duties
being performed by deputy. In 1600 he was admitted to Gray’s
Inn, and in 1605 retained by the King of Spain as perpetual advo-
cate for Spanish subjects in England. He died in 1608. An
incident of his life is worthy of record in connection with the present
subject. When Tobie Matthew, the “Son Absolom ”of the Bishop
of Durham, was in the Fleet Prison, Gentili visited him there at the
father’s request, to try to win him back to the orthodox faith.
Tobie had been granted a licence to travel for three years (July 3,
1604), but returned in a few months. There was a close intimacy
between Gentili, the two Matthews, the young Lord Hastings (after-
wards Huntingdon), Dudley Carleton, Bacon, and others. It was
the time of James’s accession, the Gunpowder Plot, the war in the
Low Countries, the siege of Ostend, &c.; the young and adventurous
spirits of the period were constantly going to and from the Continent.
This is, however, no argument for Gentili’s authorship of the
“ Mundus Alter.” But did he in his peregrinations through some
of the lanes or alleys of London meet with any adventures among
the womenfolk, which at the time amused the populace? If he
did, it would explain the reference to him in the table of con-
tents, which appeared only in the “ Index,” and was struck out in
some copies and corrected in the Frankfort copies imported for sale
in England. Assuming that such a man as Gentili had the time and
did write the work, would he have referred to himself by name, or
have used such an expression as “What the womenfolk did to
me ” ? On the other hand, would Hall have made the mistake of
openly mentioning so important a personage ?
A copy of Foster’s “ Gray’s Inn Admission List ” accidentally
falling in my way, curiosity prompted me to look at the entry of
Gentili’s name, when, unexpectedly, I came upon that of
Ascanius Rialme, an Italian. August 3, 1592.
This would be the Ascanio Renialme, or Renialme, at whose
expense the work was published.
Turning over the leaves these entries appear in rapid succession:—
1597-8. Mar. 17. Henry Lord Hastings, heir-apparent to the Earl ol
Huntingdon. (He succeeded as fifth Earl, Dec. 31, 1604.)
1599. May 15. Tobias Matthew, gent., son and heir-apparent of Tobias
Matthew, Bp. of Durham (afterwards Archbp. of York).
1600. Aug. 14. Albericus Gentilis, Doctor of Civil Law, Regius Prof, at
Oxford, son of Matthew Gentilis, by blood ‘ ‘ Picenus. ”
1602. Aug. 10. William (Herbert) Earl of Pembroke, Lord Herbert of
Cardiff, Lord Parr and Rosse of Kendal, Earon Marmion and St.
Quintin.


(The earliest translation of the “Mundus” is dedicated to the Earl of Pem-
broke, and he is supposed to be “W. H., the only begetter” of Shakespeare’s
sonnets.)
Joseph Hall was admitted to Gray’s Inn upon his elevation to
the bishopric of Exeter, thirteen years later (November 1, 1615),
the same day with Laud, Archbp. of Canterbury. Referring to the
original MS. Admission Book at Gray’s Inn Library, I find a very
indistinct and abbreviated entry, only part of which I have as yet
been able to decipher:—
Aschanius Rialme Italus admissis Sen ...... quia illustris.
Yillord (?) ix Malines (?) libros et opera studios (?) et suis
impensis admittis Cant
Here at Gray’s Inn we find one of the alleged authors—Alberico
Gentili—the author’s patron —the Earl of Huntingdon—and Ascanio
Rinialme, publisher, or son of the publisher, whose heirs bear the
expense of both editions of the publication. The publisher of the
Hanau edition, “ Gulielmum Antonium,” was (curious coincidence !)
the printer of at least four others of Gentili’s books —two issued prior
to the “ Mundus Alter ” and two afterwards. Strange, if Hall was the
author, that he or Knight should go to Gentili’s publisher; or, if
Gentili was the author, that he should arrange for its sale in England
through Hall’s publisher, the Cambridge printer John Porter, as
shown by the entries in the “ Stationers’ Registers.” When Gentili died
he left instructions for his papers to be destroyed, but about forty
volumes were preserved, and have recently found a resting-place in
the Bodleian Library. Do they contain any information on the subject?
Gentili used to pride himself on the habit of keeping a diary in
which he entered not only the conversations in which he took a part
but those also which he happened to overhear. 1
Lastly there is the claim for Jonas Proost. Crenius, 2 referring to
the original work, writes :
Ut vero scias qvis ille Mercurius Britannicus, sive scriptor sit faceti illius libri,
adscribam verba, qvse Auctor sua manu in fronte mei exemplaris, qvod h magni
librorum amatoris Bibliotheca nactus sum, scripsit:—
Reverendo fratri in Christo ac Symmistce percharo D. Johanni Pannelio,fideli
Ecclesice Christi , qua est apud Caletenses, Pastori , els t)]v t rjs fSvoias re (mali
evvoias re scribendum) na\ <pi\las afudvrov teal dirtpurirdaTov iun\p.oai)vi\v hocca
qvalecumque munusculum dono misit Jonas Proost. 15. Jul. 1607. Colcestrice.
Angl. That indeed you may know who that British Mercury or writer of that
1 Prof. Holland, Diet. N. Biog. XXI. pp. 124-127; Lecture on Albericus
Gentilis, Oxford, 1874.
a Crenius, Animadverfiones Philologica et Historica. Pt. VIII, p. s^.
Amsterdam, 1701.


clever book is, I will write down the words which the author, with his own hand,
on the front of my copy, which, from the library of a great lover of books, 1
obtained, wrote;—
“To the reverend Brother in Christ, and my beloved fellow initiate, John
Pannelio, faithful Pastor of the Church of Christ which is at Calais, in token of
sympathy and friendship sincere and firm, this little present, such as it is, Jonas
Proost has sent as a gift, 15th July, 1607. Colchester.”
I can find nothing further relating to Jonas Proost, but this does
not say that he wrote “ Mundus Alter et Idem.”
We have now to consider the evidence afforded by translations
and adaptations, of which, as previously mentioned, there are four in
English and one in German. The earliest of these, viz.—
The Discovery of a New World, or a Description of the South Indies
Hetherto unknowne. By an English Mercury. Imprinted for Ed. Blount and W.
Barrett —
is undated. The title (in a circle, surmounted by figure of Mercury)
is imitated from the Frankfort edition (1605) of “Mundus Alter et
Idem.” I have seen two copies only :
D 1. British Museum, Grenville copy, G. 16409, dated in B.M.
Catalogue [1620?].
D 2. My own copy.
The text of both copies is alike, but the introductory matter is
different. D 1 is the earlier issue, and is, no doubt, that entered in
the “ Stationers’Registers ” by Thomas Thorpe, January 18, 1609. 1
This copy of the book has a “ Dedicatory Epistle ” and note from
“I. H., the Translator, unto I. H., the Author,” v which, with the
title, occupies four leaves; “A Table of the Chapters,” “The Occasion
of this travell, and the pre-instruction for it ” (corresponding with
“ Itineris Occasio ” of the original Latin), twelve leaves unpaged.
Then follows the text, “ Discovery,” &c., pp. 1-244, the numbering
of p. 96 and pp. 145-160 (sig. L) being incorrect.
The “ Discovery ” has been described as an “ imitation ”of
“ Mundus Alter.” It is more, and follows the original very closely
from beginning to end. The translator’s subscription at foot of
p. 244 reads :
These men, townes, and manners, did I behold, admire, and laugh at; and
after thirty yeares travell, growing weary of wandering, I returned into my native
country.
THE CAMBRIDGE PILGRIME.
1 Arbcr, Stationers' Registers, Vol, 111. p. 400,


The following is the “ Epistle Dedicatorie : ”
To the Trve Mirror of truest honor, William, Earle of Penbroke.
If it be an offence (my noble Lord) to shew our Affections vnto those wee
honor in any obiect of dutyfullnesse whatsoever : then have I offended, and must
kneele for remission. But if love and gratitude be lawdable effects, in what
forme soever they appeare, then have not I broken any condition of decorum , in
consecrating this worke to your illustrious honour. It bare the badge of an
honorable Patron in the originall; and I could make it do no lesse in the transla-
tion. And for mine election, the worlds general decay of the esteeme of learning,
in those breasts that have best meanes to support it, and the farre-spread fame of
your glory, by that Phoenix-bounty that hath left all the land to build her nest in
your bosome, these motives have more then induced mee to approache so neere
that bright lustre your Honour lights the world with, as to beare one part in the
Hymnes of your prayses, by this dutifull dedication. And (good my Lord) herein
bee you my seaven-fold shield against the shott of those blistered mouthes, whose
most felicitie is to mis-interprete most maliciouslie. Or doe but giue mee foote-
holde, and then let mee alone to beate all their disgraces about their owneeares, and
the whole worlds, in a true satyrick furie; in an Aristoes Swanne, that shall
snatch their names from times all-wasting skirt, and beare them vp to everlasting
recorde in the Temple of Infamie. But for my dutie to your sacred vertues, let
this expresse mee: I will bee that Bolognian dogge, whose faith purchased him
this Epitaph : that hee did alwayes
Latrai a’ ladri, & a gli amanti tacqui, &c.
Barke lowd at theeves, and make them ever fade ;
But whS friends came, lay down, & wagd his taile. 1
Such am I; consecrated to your Lordships service : and vnder the protection
of this mine owne zeale, aduenture to present you with A discouerie and no dis-
couerie, of a world and no world, both knowne and vnknowne, by a traveller that
never travelled. Written first in Latine and no Laiine, and now translated,
and yet not translated , by the same man , yet not the same man that first of all
pend it.
Your Honours most zealously devoted
I. H. ¹
The following is the translator’s note :
I. H. the Translator, vnto I. H. the Author.
Sir, —If the turning of your wittie worke into our mother tongue doe distast
you, blame not any but your selfe that wrote it: Language doth not alter the
sence of anything. I had as leeve one called me knaue in English as in Italian.
Where I varye from your Originall, it is either to expresse your sence, or preserue
your conceit. Thus I hope to heare you satisfied ; for others, if any snarle. He
bite as deepe as they : since that
1 MS. in margin.
Latratu Fares excepi, mutus Amanti:
Sic placui Domino, sic placui Dominae.
At Thieves I bark’d, was to a Lover mute ;
Thus did my Master, thus my Mistress suit. ’
8 A note in bandwriting of this century says that I. H. is Joseph HalL


Wrong, & Revenge infuse more feruent spirit,
Then all the Muses can ; in right of merit.
Your gravity and place, Enuie as well as I must reverence : if you but rest
vnmoou’d, let any man else kicke, He scorne him : let the whole world of fleering
Critiques traduce mee, or no, it skilles not whether : Both, I am arm’d for, one I
looke for, neither I care for. Thus, from him that ever will bee yours.
Resolute, J. H.
So far the British Museum copy of “ The Discovery” (D i).
The foregoing dedication and translator’s note are omitted from
my copy of the book (D 2), but in its place there is substituted
a long and apologetic address of eight pages, from which the following
is abridged :
To the Readers, Instructions for their voiage into this new world.
. . . Inquisitiue Sceptiques . . . have out-runne their owne judgments in
descanting farre otherwise of this worke, then a fauourable censure would ever
haue held it to deserue, and being either lead with too much zeale to the well
deseruing vertues of that Reiierend man that long agoe laid the first project of this
Discouery, or with (it may be a true) obseruation of some imperfection in mee that
now of late haue raised this new building vpon that old foundation : haue taken
occasion both to thinke him lesse worthy of their good conceites, and also to pro-
claime me a iust deseruer of the seuerest and most exemplary censures. Which
wrong done vnto him (whome I must euer reuerence) hath bound mee to make an
ingenuous acknowledgement of mine owne forgetfulnesse in the first edition of
this present worke, rather than to sit still and see his reputation exposed to the
misconstructions to which my negligence is (and in some iudgements, iustly)
imagined to haue giuen the first and originall cause. But let this protestation be
(if it may be) sufficient to remooue the weight of sinister imputations from his
grauity, and lay them vpon mine owne youthfulnesse, that I dare engage my life,
there is no man in the whole world, who hath either conuersed with himselfe in
person, or his workes in print, that euer will surmise this present copy to have
had any testimony of his acknowledgement, or approbation to bee any way
befitting his place, or (which is more) his profession. Wherefore to giue a full
answere vnto that gross misprision of theirs, who imagine the worke it selfe to
haue beene of his writing and publishing in the forme wherein it now passeth;
whereby they take occasion to taxe him of diuers (in their iudgement) immodest,
light, scurrilous, and ridiculous passages therein. I doe here absolutely auerre,
and give notice to all that shall hereafter take view hereof, This worke was
neuer his, he neuer saw it, neuer dreamed of any such matter, vntill he met it in
the hand of another man. There was indeed a little booke some Bor 9
yeares agoe that came from Franckford, which some few (I know not upon what
illumination more then ordinary) affirmed to have passed the file of his muse,
which if it be true, it can be no way in the world either prejudicial! to his
learning (seeing it hath all perfection fitting an absolute poeme), nor to his
grauity or profession, seeing it was a birth of his youth ; wherein neuertheless I
will avow that hee hath towred above the capacities (at least aboue the imitation)
of all those ouer-weening iudgements that dare any way to traduce his originall.
In iust defence of which worthy worke, I cast defiance in the teeth of all that
malice or traduce him, that it is neither any way scurrilous, immodest, light, nor
ridiculous : and I will give the proudest Critique that lives, as many yeares as hee
and his fellowes haue bin fooles, either to parallell it, or to pick any the least


touch out of it, which cannot be defended even till his wittes that shall oppose
be drawne as dry as ever Dutchman left cup.
But as touching this present pile of English, it is mine, it hath no further
alliace to his, then chalke hath to cheese ... no more doth this worke any way
resemble his in fashion, stile, or discourse, but only in the inuention and project.
. . . That these weakenesses ... in mee, should be made as staines to the repu
tation of another, of one whose learning, life, and workes now extant may serve
as purging fires whereat all those that hence have taken occasion to wrong him
thus, might long agoe have lighted their ignorance were it neuer so immense ;
that my lightnesses should bee reputed as births of his worthines ! Oh that my
pen (whereby since I have ignorantly iniur’d him, I doe thus willingly and freely
cleare him) could but make them see what an uniust construction they have made
of an ignorant (and I protest vtterly unwilling) offence ! But since mine owne
vnwarinesse gave first occasion of those vnkinde, and more then foolish, callumnia-
tions which ignorance draweth from mine error, to staine his goodnesse with ; all
the satisfaction I can give him is to shew myselfe willing to make a faire way
againe for his deserts, in the bosomes of such as hence take their occasio of dis-
like, by proclaiming this truth to all that shall read it, that this present Discovery
cf the South Indies is none of his, but had this forme given it, without his
knowledge, by one who will euer acknowledge his worth and grauity to haue
beene vtterly ignorant of any vnfit phrase whatsoever included in the whole booke.
Hee whom my contrition and this satisfaction (collaterally) cannot content, is
without mercy, and I assure my selfe will dye without merit, if hee bee not quickly
shipt away for this new Continent, with letters of commendation to all our friends
in Cockscombaya. . . . You (right loviall spirits), and none but you, are they
to whom I consecrate these my trauels, since none but you can discerne the sence
which they include. . . .
And know all you that have not yet scene these Lands, but intend to take a
view of the hereafter, that you must first of al take one of that French Doctors
pills, Despouillez vous de tout affection, and this will enable you fully to endure
the alteration of all ayres in this clime. Secondly you must neuer trauell single,
but two, or three in a company. . . . Thirdly, you must go ouer the country
thrice, ere you shalbe able to make any exact platforme of it: Once for Strabo,
once for Socrates, and once for Merlin Cocaius ; the First for the Geography, the
second for the Morality, and the third for the Language and Etymology. No
more at this time, but aboord when you please and a good gale of wit go along
with you.
His, that is his,
JOHN HEALEY.
From this address (somewhat abridged) it will be seen that the
dedication in Di, which is signed “I. H.,” cannot be Hall’s. The
address in D 2 shows that the author disapproved of the transla-
tion or did not sanction it. 1 “Healey” speaks of his own “youth-
fulness,” and claims any lightness or faults in it as his own. The
original, he says, came from Frankfort eight or nine years before,
which would imply that the Frankfort edition was published in
1600 or 1601. We have seen that “Mundus” was entered in
“Stationers’ Registers,” June 2, 1605.
Healey may not have known the date of the publication. He
VOL. CCLXXXI. NO. 1987. G


refers it, however, to “a reverend man. . . “No man will sur-
mise this [“ Discovery ”] to have had any testimony of his acknow-
ledgement or approbation to be fitting his place or profession,”
Then, as if he had not expressed himself clearly, he adds; “ This
work was never his ; he never saw it, never dreamed of any such
matter, until he met it in the hand of another man.” Again,
“ this pile of English is mine . . . this present ‘ Discovery ’ is none
of his.” I. H., the dedicator, and I. H,, the translator, are therefore
the same person.
Who was John Healey? There was John Hele, serjeant-of-law,
who opened the indictment of Raleigh at Winchester, and was noted
in other ways. There are numerous publications of that period
bearing the same initials. Some of these are unquestionably Hall’s,
and have been included in his collected works. Some are given
to John Hayward, and some may with good reason be given to Sir
John Harington. Four publications, all of them translations, are
credited to Healey ;
1. “ Discovery of a New World,” 1609.
2. “Plessis de Morney: Tears on the Loss of his Son,” 1609.
3. “Epictetus his Manual,” 1610.
4. “St. Augustine, City of God,” 1610.
Both the first and the last are dedicated to the Earl of Pembroke ;
the last, on Healey’s behalf, by Th. Th., i.e. Thomas Thorpe, the
publisher.
To the Honorablest Patron of Muses and Good Mindes, Lord William Earle of
Penbroke, Knight of the Plonourable Order, &c.
Right gracious and gracefull Lord, your late imaginary, but now actual
Trauailler, then to most conceited Viraginia {vide “Mundus”], now to almost con-
cealed Virginia ; then a light, but not lewde, now a sage and allowed translator ;
then of a scarce knowne nouice [author of “ Mundus”], now a famous Father [St.
Augustine]; then of adeuised country scarce on earth [“Mundus”], now of a desired
Citie [of God] sure in heaven; then of Vtopia [no place], now of Eutopia [a happy
place], not as by testament, but as a tesimonie of gratitude, observance, and
hearts-honour to your Honor bequeathed at hence-parting (thereby scarce per-
fecting) this his translation at the imprinting to your Lordships protecting. He,
that against detraction, beyond expectation, then found your sweete patronage in
a matter of small moment, without distrust or disturbance in this worke of more
worth, more weight, as he approoved his more abilitie, so would not but expect
your Honours more acceptance.
Though these be Church-men, and this a Church-matter, he vnapt, or vn-
worthy to hold trafique with either ; yet heere Saint Augustine and his Commenter
Vives, most savour of the secular: and the one accordingly to Marcellinus, the
other to our King Henry, directed their dedications ; and as translators are only
tyed to have and give true vnderstanding, so are they freer then the authors to
sute them-selves a Patrone. Which as to Scipio, the staffe and stay, the type
and top of that Cornelian stemme, in quam , vt plura genera in vnam arborem,


videtur insita tnultorum illuminata sapientia , your poore Pacuuius, Terence, of
Ennius (or what you list, so he be yours), thought most convenient to consecrate.
Wherefore his legacie, laide at your Honours feete, is rather here delivered to
your Honours humbly thrice-kissed hands by his poore delegate.
Your Lordships true-devoted,
TH. TH.
From the first paragraph it has been supposed that Healey was
dead. But the words “ Your late imaginary, but now actual traveller,
then to most conceited Viraginia [ in “ Mundus Alter,” but the word
is not used in the “ Discovery ”] now to almost concealed Virginia”
imply rather that J. H., or John Healey, had left England in the May
of 1609 in one of the eight vessels carrying emigrants to the new
colony, which was now in extreme peril, owing to the shipwreck and
detention of Government officials and supplies. Neither “ Colonial
State Papers ” nor Hotten’s “ Original Lists of Emigrants ” give a
list of these earliest colonists, but a reference to the “ Domestic State
Papers,” James 1., introduces one John Healey, alias Vavasour, who
had been arrested in the North of England after the Gunpowder
Plot. This Healey was a Recusant, and had been heard to say that
“ there was yet another barrel to broach.” From his evidence when
under examination in York Castle (March and April 1606), we learn
that he was son of Richard Healey, servant to Lord Sheffield, and,
then not being of full age, would have been born about 1585-6.
After four years at St. John’s College, Cambridge, being about
seventeen (that is, in April or May 1603), he travelled into France and
Italy. Being asked, he said that he was converted to Roman
Catholicism at Florence. He afterwards proceeded to Rome, and
thence to Naples and Otranto, intending to go to Africa. He
travelled without money and as a poor scholar dependent upon
charity. When asked the names of those of his own countrymen
whom he had met in Rome and elsewhere, he said that he had been
warned not to inquire lest he should be treated as a spy, and that he
did not know. From Otranto he came through Apulia and Campania
to Loreto, thence to Ravenna, Ferrara, and Venice, thinking to go
to Greece and Jerusalem ; but, after waiting for shipping seven weeks
in Venice, where he lodged with the Capuchins, with whom he might
have remained as long as he would, he came back to Verona and
Vicenza, passing next into Switzerland to Basle, whence he travelled
into Saxony. Meeting with six Englishmen who were going to the
war against the Turks, he accompanied them into Bohemia. From
Prague he came to Rheims and Cambray, and so to Lille, Malines,
and Calais, where fie took shipping for London, arriving there in
December 1604. After a few weeks in London and six months at
g 2


his mother’s house at Sawbridge, in Lincolnshire, he travelled to the
North, finding a situation as servant and tutor in the family of Mr.
Lawrence Carnaby at Walton, in Northumberland, and so forth.
While detained in York Castle, Healey wrote penitently to the Earl
of Salisbury, acknowledging that since his return to England he had
been in the company of a priest who had spoken of murdering the
Earl. Healey begged forgiveness, and gave information about other
suspicious persons, their places of resort in London, their manner of
bringing in passengers and “ great store of books ” from the Con-
tinent. 1 This, no doubt, is the young scholar and “ Cambridge
Pilgrime ” who afterwards translated “ Mundus Alter et Idem ” and
other works above mentioned, and who wrote the dedication of
“ The Discovery ” to the Earl of Pembroke, as well as the prefaces
signed “J. H.” and “John Healey.” His time from April 1606,
when he wrote to Lord Salisbury, until 1609, was probably taken up
with his translations. The dedication of the “ City of God,” above
quoted, clearly states that the translator was in trouble over “ The
Discovery,” and that his patron, the Earl of Pembroke, befriended
him. This dedication, it will be noticed, is signed “ Th. Th.,” who
had recently dedicated another volume—“ Shakespeare’s Sonnets ”
to the same patron (?) —“To W. H.,” i.e. William Herbert, Earl of
Pembroke.
This earl, according to Clarendon, was more loved and esteemed
than any other man of his age, and was always ready to advance worthy
men. He was friend of Donne, Daniel was his tutor, and George
Herbert his kinsman ; William Browne lived with him, Massinger
was son of his father’s steward, Ben Jonson also dedicated his
“Epigrams” to the Earl, who every New Year’s Day sent Jonson
£2O to buy books. To him also Chapman inscribed a sonnet;
Davison his “ Poetical Rhapsody,” 2 and Hall long afterwards
(September 21, 1623) a sermon. 3 The Earl was, moreover,
deeply interested in New England, and was a member of the King’s
Council for the Virginia Company from May 23, 1609. He may
have obtained some appointment for Healey in the colony. I know
nothing of Healey’s later history.
Sixty years afterwards a very coarse adaptation of “Mundus”
was published under the title of—
P<uttacorum Regio, the Land of Parrots; or, the Shelands. With a description
of other strange adjacent countries in the Dominions of Prince de I’Amour, not
1 State Papers, Domestic , James 1., Vols. XIX., XX.
* Sidney Lee, Diet. N. Biog. Vol. XXVI. pp. 226-231.
1 Bp. Hall, Works (1863), Vol. V. p. 174.


hitherto found in any geographical map. By one of the late most reputed wits
„ . . London, 1669.
Again, fifteen years later, the following appeared :
The Travels of Don Francisco de Quevedo through Terra Australis Incognita.
Discovering the Laws, Manners, and Fashions of the South Indians. A novel.
Originally in Spanish. . . . London, 1684.
These are reproductions of Healey’s “ Discovery,” rewritten to
suit the taste of the Restoration period and slightly abridged.
Needless to add, despite a very pretentious address to the reader,
the latter is not the work of Quevedo.
In Dr. William King’s “Miscellanies,” London, 1732, there is a
fragment entitled “ Crapulia, or the Region of the Crossicks,” which
the editor calls a satire upon the Dutch. This was also included in
Dr. William King’s “Original Works” (3 vols.), Vol. 111. London,
1776, and has been recently reprinted by Prof. Morley as “A Frag-
ment of Bishop Hall’s ‘ Mundus Alter ’ ” [Book I.], in “ Ideal
Commonwealths” (1885).
Beyond Healey’s apologies there is no reference to the author of
“ Mundus,” in these translations, other than in the headings to the
second chapter of the second book or part: —
Discovery. “ How the Gossipingo-esses used the author of this discovery.”
Fsittacorum. This adaptation is not in chapters.
Quevedo. “ How Quevedo was used by the Gossip-Ingoesses.”
The long war in the Netherlands, resulting in the foundation of
the Dutch Republic and conflicts in other countries—bringing about
various constitutional changes—systems of political government,
became as much a subject for common discussion in the seven-
teenth century as theological systems had been in the sixteenth.
Gentili, Bacon, and other writers in England, Bodin, Gregoire,
Grotius, and a host of Spanish writers on the Continent contributed
to the subject. In 1612 a Leipzig publisher issued a German
translation of More’s “ Utopia,” and in the following year he brought
out what he called the second part, viz.—
UTOPIA PARS 11. Mundus alter & idem. Die heutige newe alte Welt.
Darinnen aussfiirlich vnd nach notturfft erzehlet wird/was die alte numehr bald
sechstausendjahrige Welt fur ein newe Welt geboren/Aus derer man gleich-
sam in einem Spiegel ihrer Mutter vnd Gebarerin Art/Sitten/Wandel vnd
Gebrauch augenscheinlich mag sehen vnd erkennen, Allen Liebhabern der
Gottseligkeit/Tugenden vnd Kiinsten zu beharrlicher Fortsetzung vnd continuirung
in ihrem loblichen vorhaben : Den Weltkindern aber zu getrewer Wamung von
allem bosen/vnd denen hierinnen furgebildeten Lastern abzustehen: Erstlich in
Lateinischer Sprach gestellt/durch den Edlen vnd hochgelerten Herrn Albericum
Gentilem in Engelland: Nun aber mit besonderm fleiss verteutscht/vnd mit


newen Kupfferstiicken vnd Landtaffeln gezieret/Durch [Utopian characters :
Gregorivm hvemvmervivm], . . . Leipzig. . . . Henning Grossen des Jungcm*
Anno 1613.
In English :
The New Old World . . . wherein is related what the . . .six thousand*
year-old World has produced . . . that all lovers of Piety, Virtues, and Arts
may persevere in their laudable purpose . . • and Children of the World be
warned to abstain from all evil and vice. Written firstly in Latin by the noble
and very learned Alberico Gentili in England. Now . . . done into German
» . . with maps . . . Leipzig . . . 1613.
The only copy which I have seen is a small octavo of 232 pages
without preface or table of contents. The name of Gentili is also
given in the heading of Book 11., chap, ii., in the body of the book,
thus :
Wie die Weiber zu Frawenheim mit mir Alberico Gentili seind vmbgangen.
To sum up: this chapter heading and the entries in the tables of
contents prefixed to the Frankfort uncorrected edition and that of
Hanau may be (?) the origin of the claim made on behalf of Gentili.
Blaufus considered that it settled the question and dismissed the
preface of “ Gulielmus Knight” as not to be regarded. 1 Is it, how-
ever, probable that Gentili would have mentioned his own name in
an anonymous and satirical work ? On the other hand what motive
could Hall have had for mentioning Alberico Gentili by name?
That it was an oversight or a blunder is shown by the corrected
copies F 1,2, 3, and 5, a blunder due to the compiler of the
table of contents, who may have been the printer. If so, it must be
•taken as evidence that the compiler, or printer, believed Gentili to
be the author. The other circumstances, already recited, which
connect the work with Gentili are its dedication to the Earl of
Huntingdon and its publication at the cost of Ascanio Rinialme,
both members of Gentili’s Inn, and further coincidence that the
improved edition, Hanau, 1607, bears the same imprint as at least
four others of Gentili’s acknowledged works. Assuming the preface
to be bona fide , Knight, as an Oxford M.A., may have been as much
the friend of Gentili as of Hall.
For Hall there is (a) the address of “J. H., the translator, to
J. H., the author,” (b) the translator’s apology to the “reverend man ”
to whose muse some few attributed the little book from Frankfort,
{e) Heylyn’s assignment of it to a “learned prelate”—unquestionably
Hall is intended—and ( d) the Bodleian Catalogue (1674) referring
1 Blaufus, Vermischie Beytrdge zur Erweiterung der Kcniniss seltcner und
merkwiirdiger Biichcr, Bde. 11. Jena, 1756, pp. 328-356.


“ Mercurius Britannicus ”to Hall. Upon which an advocate for
Gentili might further argue that, accepting all that the critics say about
the book, there is nothing in it of which a scholar need be ashamed;
( e) Hall never claimed it himself, as far as is known ; (/) his friend
James did not claim it for him in the Bodleian Catalogue of 1620,
while (g) Gentili is mentioned as the author in the table of contents
prefixed to the book ; and (h) his name appears as author of it
upon the title-page of the German translation (1613) within eight
years of the original publication, not more than five years after
Gentili’s death, three years before the death of his brother, Scipio
Gentili, and without his or Hall’s contradiction (?).
There is one other question. Was Healey’s reference to the
“ reverend ” author bond fide, or was it a disguise intended to throw
suspicion off the real author or authors ? At the time of the pub-
lication of “ Mundus Alter ” there were many about town who
could have satirised in good Latin the Court, the Universities, the
Corporation of the City of London and its aldermen, and have
interlarded the narrative with references to circumstances, habits,
and customs of Continental peoples. There was more than one
William Kempe—Knight, I had almost written—“ dancing ” about in
England, into Germany, and “over the Alps,” who, to use the
player’s own words, found it better “ to make a fool of the world, as
I have done, than to be fooled of the world, as,” he adds, “ you
scholars are.” 1
EDWARD A. PETHERICK.
1 The Return from Parnassus (1601), London, 1606.


NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA




