

n
i
/ i
HYDE CLAEKE,
ON THE LANGUAGES OE AUSTRALIA IN THEIR CON-
NECTION WITH THOSE OE THE MOZAMBIftUE
AND OF THE SOUTH OF AFRICA.
Vice-President, Anthropological Institution, London, &c., &c., &c.


•
•


On the Languages of Australia in their connection
with those of the Mozambique and of the
South of Africa.
By Hyde Clarke, Vice-President, Anthropological Institution,
London, &c., &c., &c.
[Read before the Royal Society of N.S. W., 1 October, 1879.]
In Mr. R. Brough Smyth’s great work —The Aborigines of
Australia (Melbourne 1878) —there will be found in the second
volume much matter on the Languages of Australia. Among
these there will be found a very long vocabulary of the Yarra
dialect, of the Yarra River of Melbourne, composed by Mr.
John Green, Inspector of Aborigines.
Unfortunately many common words are left out, so that com-
parison can only be imperfect. However, I found on examina-
tion that it compares directly with a body of languages in
Portuguese Africa, being class xi of Koelle’s Polyglotta Africana ,
and comprising Muntu, Kirimau, Marawi, Mete, Matatau, and
Nyambau, being the languages of Mozambique. The words
outside of class xi are found in class x, being Bantu or Kaffre
languages of Portuguese, Western and Central Africa, being
Congo, &c. Some words are found in class iv, which is related
to class x.
The following list will show this, the class x being thus
marked—[ ] :
Yarra. Africa.
Man kolin [akala, Mugentandu]
(koli)
Woman bazarrooki [baketo, Nyombe]
bajor [badshento, Kabenda]
Daughter munggip moanaka
Father marmun (mama, mother)
Mother baboop (baba, father)
Brother banggannoo pangiandenge
Sister latingata ndengetu
Eye mee, merring meso
Tooth leeang leeno
Navel moondok matoku
Knee barreng bondo
Bone ma-lingo likuwa
Skin morrok [mungoto, Lubalo]
4 o 8-80


Yarra.
Beak
Knife
Africa.
poono
mu-kalo
mbene
barrgin-boon
kal-been
karrgeen
goeeon
Spear
Stone
Coal
koangoa
[ngaya, Lubalo]
moara
moojerr
kanendurr
woodel
Rope
Stick
Leaf
Yam
Cat
[wondi, Mbamba]
[koko, Kabenda]
[jish, Bumbete]
[mbala, Kabenda]
[budi, Minboma]
[ngomgu, Mbanba]
tabarrada
jerrang
barrm
bede-dil
gogook
tourroop
wy-krook
lam-borreen
woo-gar-ring
boop
loom-badin
yani
Mosquito
Lizzard
Little
White
Black
Young
Warm
Go
[watola] [Kasanj] to-kieve,
[a-pfurau]
woo-ripa
[biop, Kanyika]
[a-domu, Melu]
[yami Lubalo]
Bumbete
Come
Cough
Die
War
wandeat
pooningoon
wykit
[ekona, Orangu]
ukoa
ngatong
ngondo
koto
ngumi
[ekombi, Bugela]
[nkima, moon, Lubalo]
[moanya, sun, Lubalo]
wa-molukn
[muini, Musentandu]
[buila, Kabende]
epula
[ewuru, Sobo]
[buidi, Kabenda]
Kala
Moon
Sky
meene-an
woorwarra
harremeen
booren
Day
Night
Rain
Don
warrong
baderin
ngalimbe
yiock-gen
woonga
Dream
Give
bundi
wunya
[batura, Kasanj]
[quata, Kasanj]
beli peli
Catch
Two
banga-gat
bollo-ween
To the Yarra model belong Kabi, Gunbower, Tyntyndyer,
Glenorchy, Horsham, Upper Richardson, Balmoral, Hamilton,
Wickliffe, Avoca, Daylesford, Goulburn, Witoure, Jajowrong,
Kuen-koren-werro, Burapper, Ta-oungurong, &c.
As a further test, being the one Mozambique language answer-
ing to the Yarra, if we take other Australian roots we shall find
their correspondents in the other languages of the Mozambique.
Thus five roots for man and three for hair admit of being so
compared.
The Echuca, Morcovia, and Sandford particularly show this,
and the results are obtained from Moreton Bay in North
Australia, New South Wales in the East, and from Western
Australia.


The following table illustrates this :
Man Echuca
Australia. Kirimandi. Africa,
moanit moanna Marawi
maalee mulo Kiriman
Yelta
Morcovia nunna nona Nyamban
Balmoral beng boana Marawi
Head Gunbower moorun mum Kiriman
Hair Wickliffe marah mnrit Kiriman
Yarra yarro ikarare Muntu
Gippsland leet lefu Mutsaya
lefu Mutsaya
Echuca boka [mbeta Kisama]
Ear Echuca marrmo maro Matabau
Yarra wooring nyaru Marawi
Tooth Echuca derra dino Nyamban
Sandford tungung
Yarra lecang leene Marawi
Mouth Sandford mullong malagu Meto
Morcovia moun [munua Kabenda
Hamilton kone
Sun Bulloo
[li-kano Lubalo
etana Muntu, day
[tangu Kabenda]
Yarra ngume [ekombi Pangela]
Two Moreton Bay bullae beli Kiriman
Yarra bollo-ween peli ~
N. S. Wales pulla
I Victoria ngie ni Muntu
ngan ne Nyamban
S. Australia ngu
It is very seldom that we can so distinctly lay down languages
which are really related but widely distributed. There is, there-
fore no mistake that the language of the Melbourne tribes is of
common origin with those of Mozambique.
A curious circumstance will be noticed,—that though the words
may differ internally, they commonly begin with the same con-
sonants in both continents. This serves to mark them, for in the
class of languages to which they belong, the Bantu or Kaffre, the
initial syllable is of great import.
This brings us direct to papers of great authority on the
Bantu languages, by the late Dr. W. H. Bleek, contributed by him
at the request of Professor Huxley to the Anthropological Society
and Institute, and to be found in Yol. I of the Journal of the
Anthropological Institute.
From the consideration of the grammatical points, Dr. Bleek
was fully convinced that the Australian languages were related to
the Bantu, and this he develops in a most remarkable paper on
general philology.
Here, too, he examines what another great comparative philolo-
gist, Bishop Caldwell, had done in the Comparative Grammar of
the Dravidian Languages, as to the wonderful identity of the
Australian first personal pronoun with the Dravidian and some


other Indian languages. Caldwell was however unable to trace
detailed resemblances. The observations of Dr. Caldwell are, how-
ever, as worthy of careful perusal as those of Dr. Bleek.
The latter was near seizing the whole truth as to the Austra-
lian languages, but missed, first from devotion to a theory he had
laid down of six denoting languages as a type for classification.
Next he failed from the besetting mania of philologists of regard-
ing chiefly grammatical forms and disregarding words.
Were it not for these circumstances, Dr. Bleek, with his inti-
mate knowledge of the Bantu family, must have identified the facts
here given. Strangely enough, in the same volume of the Anthro-
pological Journal is a paper and comparative table of Australian
languages, by the Bev. Geo. Taplin, which contain the words.
Dr. Bleek recognized the connection of mythology with lan-
guage, and the fact that the mythology of Australia is related to
that of other regions.
The practices and culture of Australia are well enough known
to present many features in common with those of the rest of the
world, and the relation of an Australian mummy was only a few
weeks ago illustrated by Professor W. H. Flower, at the Anthro-
pological Institute.
In order to explain the ground on which the observations of Dr.
Caldwell and Dr. Bleek rest, it may be useful to refer to those
which were made by me on the 22nd November, 1870 (Journal,
p. Ixxxix). It results from the course of inquiry then instituted
by me, that the Australian belong to a group of languages (and in
this term I conform with Dr. Bleek) to which also belong the
Bantu and the Dravidian.
These languages although developed in common and form the
same sources, constitute a group. Thus the result is that roots
may be differently selected in Australian Bantu and Dravidian,
and will not fit in together in each case notwithstanding their
common origin. The resemblance between the Yarra languages
and the Mozambique languages is, as already stated, much closer
than is commonly found.
It has been the opinion of some distinguished anthropologists
that Australia is a centre of the human race, from which India and
Africa were peopled. However, this may be, the facts now brought
forward are, so far as language is concerned, in proof of the direct
contrary. Africa, so far as this evidence is concerned, is the great
centre of languages, of mythology, and of civilization.
As, in another paper contributed by me, High Africa has been
treated on as a centre of culture, it is not necessary to go into the
whole subject here.
The Australian languages will be found to belong to one of the
earliest epochs of development of language in this group, but I am


of opinion that the testimonies brought forward in Mr. Brough
Smyth’s work, as to Australia having been at some former period
under the influence of a white race, are correct.
As such, I should class, which I cannot now account for, though
I have an hypothesis not yet tested, the curious circumstance that
the names of languages in Australia are negatives. Now, a whole
section in my Prehistoric, and Protohistoric Comparative Philology
and Mythology is devoted to the exemplification of this remax’kable
characteristic of a negative series. Now one language is called
the Kabi, and Kaba figures largely in many languages of the old
world as a negative.
Mr. R. Brough Smyth, in the The Aborigines of Victoria , vol. 11,
page 8, (Triibner, 1878) says:—“A great many of the languages of
Australia are named after the word ‘no.’ The late Mr. Bunce
states that the Melbourne people used to designate their language
by the words N’uther galla, N’uther meaning ‘no’.”
The late Mr. E. S. Parker corroborates Mr. Bunce’s statement.
He says:—“ The natives distinguish the different table or languages
by their negatives. Thus there is the Burapper dialect spoken by
the Mallegoodneet ; the Utar dialect, on the Murray and Lower
Goulburn ; these words, Burapper and Utar, being respectively
the negatives of each language; and so of others.”
This system of nomenclature appears to prevail in the eastern
and southern parts of the continent.
“The Rev. W. Ridley, M.A., eminent amongst the philologists
of Australia, says the following are the names of some languages
spoken in the interior : —“ 1. Kamilaroi ; 2. Wolaroi ;3. Wiraiaroi ;
4. Wailwun ; 5. Kogai; 6. Pikumbul; 7. Paiamba; 8. Kiugi.
The first five of these are named after their negatives. In the first
Kamil signifies ‘no’ ; in the second, Wol is ‘no’; in the third
Wira is ‘no’; in the fourth Wail is ‘no’; in the fifth Ko is ‘no.’
In Pikumbul, on the other hand, Piku means yes.”
Indeed the whole evidence is in confirmation of what has been
stated by me (Prehistoric, Comparative Philology and Mythology,
London, Triibner), that under the doctrine of the Four Worlds,
taught in the School of Pergamos, the ancients preserved a know-
ledge of what was known to their predecessors in Babylon. The
Austral world, which in the globe balanced our world, was
Australasia, as in the other hemisphere the north and south worlds
were North and South America.
Thus the knowledge of this intercourse was long lost, until now,
we can restore a passage of many thousands of years old in the
history of Australia. .
Sydney : Thomas Richards, Government Printer.— lBBo.


■
■
■
