

U Vg\A Ci\rV
ON THE THEATMENT OF FEMALE CONVICTS.
A Paper Bead at the Social Science Congress at Edinburgh.
Mary Carpenter.
Nine years have now eLipsed since the Reformatory Act received
the royal assent. Long and unwearied efforts were required to
obtain it, and after many painful and difficult struggles made
by its supporters, it passed, almost unnoticed by the public,
through the houses of Parliament. Even more difficult was it
to enlist society to co-operate in the measure. The enterprise
of reforming guilty children, and eventually transforming them
into useful members of society was supposed to be that of
amiable enthusiasts. Scepticism as to the possible results
widely prevailed, and we were sarcastically asked what we
should do with our children when we had reformed them!
We persevered; we were nothing daunted; we believed that we
were establishing our work on principles which were based on
immortal truth,—truth which was great and must prevail;—
that the work was of God and must succeed, when freed from
all the imperfections and errors which are inseparable from
every human undertaking. And the progress of the work in
these few years has surpassed what would have been then our
most sanguine anticipations. We were asked where we should
find voluntary effort equal to the task of grappling with the
juvenile crime of the country? Yet it abounded to the full
extent of our needs; for wherever a Reformatory has been
required, there it has sprung up. We were asked where we
should find Teachers able and willing to undertake so repulsive
and untried a work? We had faith that the very necessity
would call forth those who were able to supply it, and we have
not been mistaken, for there is no lack of men and women
peculiarly qualified for this especial work, and who devote their
heart and soul to it, delighting in it, and therefore doing it as
it should be done. We were told that there would always hang
about our children, when we had done our best for them, that
taint of crime which must unfit them to be received into society;
we find that they are willingly and even gladly received into it,
when a course of training and instruction for a sufficient time
in a Reformatory has prepared them to do their duty in life.
We have had the happiness of seeing them maintaining a
respectable position in society—young persons snatched from
the most dissolute and degraded families, who had themselves
commenced a career of crime. Public opinion has endorsed
our reformatory work, and we have had the satisfaction of hearing
the highest civic authority openly bear testimony to the impor-
tance and success of it, even in a district where formerly the
utmost scepticism prevailed.


Gladly would we consider ottr task completed. Gladly would
we believe that we have now only to go on steadily and perse-
veringly doing our work, ever striving towards perfection. But
we cannot. What we have been permitted to do, only reveals
to us what has not been done, —what at present we cannot do.
Among the hundreds sent to our Reformatories, —and in this
paper we will speak only of girls,—there are failures; there
must always be so. Some are snatched from us by abandoned
parents, who use the influence of parental authority to drag
their daughters back into the vortex from which we had
endeavoured to rescue them. Some, after but a short stay with
us, return to low and dissipated homes, from which they cannot
extricate themselves, and they fall. Some have come to us so
deeply sunk in crime, at an age which in the higher classes
would be called girlhood, but which in this is experienced
womanhood, that in a Home-School, such as we wish ours
to be, nothing more can be done than curb their evil propen-
sities during the limited period which they can pass with us.
They must be expected to fall again, though we may hope that
some seed has been sown in their hearts, which may eventually
spring up under the healthy discipline of adversity. Others
are brought before our notice as applicants for admission, whom
we are compelled to refuse; they have entered too fully into
mature vice, and have become too completely sunk into the
worst corruption, to be safely admitted into communication
with the younger and less depraved girls whom we have under-
taken to reform. Yet we grieve to refuse them, for our past
experience, with all its discouragements and failures, has only
increased our faith that even they might be saved, if only they
were placed in proper circumstances, and under the guidance of
those who would devote not only their time and labours, but
their heart and soul to the work.
Where will a large proportion of these poor girls be sent?
Most of them, we fear, will find their way, ere long, to the
Female Convict Prisons at Millbank and Brixton! But a few
weeks since one poor girl of 13 was sentenced at assizes on her
third conviction to penal servitude, because it was believed that
she was so bad that no Reformatory would receive her; and in
the Convict Prisons she would probably meet her wicked
mother who was already an inmate of them. From time to
time we have heard with grief that one or another of our old
scholars, for whom indeed we had anticipated such a fall, has
already incurred that doom,—is already a government convict.
What are these Convict Prisons ? What system is adopted
in them? Is there any hope that the women committed to
them can be reformed there ?
These are questions which must often have anxiously occurred
to us Reformatory Managers, who ever feel an almost parental


interest in our scholars, even the most obdurate and the worst.'
Does the Heavenly Father ever forget His most erring children?
Until lately, however, we have had hut little opportunity of
knowing anything of the true nature of these establishments.
Society has gazed with amazement and alarm at the fearful
outbreaks and rebellions which have, from time to time,
occurred in the Male Convict Prisons, and shuddered at the
murder or suicide which the public prints announce as having
taken place in those which mere supposed by the public to be
model reformatory as well as penal prisons. But the Female
Convict prisons have not thus ostentatiously attracted public
attention. We may indeed have visited them, and under the
apparent order and discipline may have noticed indications
which to the experienced eye have excited grave suspicions
that all was not as satisfactory as it seemed. We may have
felt a painful astonishment when we learnt that the elder sister
of one of our scholars had but recently emerged from her
confinement in those dreaded abodes, when she again received
a sentence of penal servitude. We may have heard the cry of
wild despair which she uttered, when looking forward, bereft of
all hope, to her long sojourn there. But we knew nothing
more than such indications afforded us.
The last two years, however, have unlocked the secrets of the
prison house, and revealed some of the results of the system
adopted there.
The town of Liverpool presents us with very striking and
definite information on this subject. The Report of the Gov-
ernor of the Boro’ Gaol, presented to the Mayor, Recorder, and
Magistrates of Liverpool on Nov. 3, 1862, gives us the following
appalling facts respecting the state of female crime, as indicated
by the Gaol statistics. The total number of commitments of
female prisoners during the year ending with Sept. 30th, 1862,
was 4440 adults and 78 juveniles. “ The number of persons
committed last year,” he adds, “are more than have been
committed during any year since we have occupied this prison,
except the year 1857.” * * * “Up to the 18th of August
last, the numbers of cells on both sides of the prison were
sufficient for the separate confinement of all prisoners in custody
here, and for all the past year the cells on the male side of the
prison have continued sufficient for the male prisoners; but on
the before-mentioned day, and for several days afterwards, the
number of female prisoners became greater than the number of
cells on that side of the prison; so that I have been occasionally
compelled to place two women together in such a number of
cells as the excess of numbers required.” The excess of adult
females committed over the preceding year, he tells us, is no
less than 712, while there is a decrease in the juveniles of 5,
indicating the continued good effect of reformatories, without


which as in former times, the juvenile convictions would
probably have shown even a more rapid increase than the
adults. “ The number of adult females, who were committed
here last year,” he adds, “ exceeded the number of adult males
by 21, viz., 4440 adult females against 4419 adult males.”
Such facts deserve careful consideration, and especially as the
proportion of female commitments to male throughout the
kingdom does not generally exceed, we believe, one-third of
that of males, certainly not one-half, while here in Liverpool
there is not only a great increase over former years, but the
actual number of women'in gaol exceeds that of men, instead
of being one-third or one-half. Now we know that all large
towns present numberless temptations to vice, and we believe
that in Liverpool dens of iniquity of the most dangerous
character abound. We know too that sea-port towns, espe-
cially one so situated as Liverpool, are much exposed to be the
residence of large numbers of dissolute characters. We are
aware also that the very elaborate Police as well as Gaol reports
which are prepared in Liverpool, do not often in other places
come before the public eye, to startle it with an enormous
amount of female depravity. Liverpool must not therefore be
held up as peculiarly entitled to unenviable notoriety, and we
must endeavour to ascertain some special reason for this
immense increase of female crime there. We are enabled by
the report of the Chaplain of the Gaol, Rev. T. Carter, to form
some idea of the share of this which may be given to our
Female Convict prisons.
“ The large number,” he says, “ of re-commitments of adults
of both sexes cannot but have attracted your notice : and those
gentlemen who have been more immediately connected with the
administration of justice, in your police and sessions courts,
will no doubt have had their attention drawn from time to
time to the great number of otfences committed by returned
penal servitude prisoners and holders of tickets of leave. The
full extent of this evil, however, does not lie upon the surface.
Some little investigation is needful to discover its proportions.
I have not gone very minutely into the question, nor am I able
to state in precise figures the number of returned convicts who
have been committed to this gaol during the last year. Some
idea, though, may be formed when I say that of the sessions
cases alone 71 (40 males and 31 females) were returned
convicts, in many instances holders of tickets of leave even at
the time of their further conviction; and on the last day of the
official year there were under conviction in this gaol 55 who
were recognized as belonging to that category.
“ Further, I have inquired into the present doings and mode
of life of all the females who have been sentenced to penal
servitude between the Ist of June, 1856, and the 31st May,


1859, and I beg to submit the following as the result:—24l
were sentenced to various periods of penal servitude during
those three years, of whom 34 are still under detention in
convict prisons, leaving 207 who are supposed to have under-
gone their sentences; of these 207, 97 cannot be traced, because
many have only just received their liberty; others may in all
probability have emigrated or passed to other localities beyond
the reach of my enquiry; * 73 have been re-committed, several
* Of those “ not known” others were committed shortly after this Report
was written.
subjected to second like sentences; 17 are known to be living
disorderly lives and maintaining themselves by crime; 7 have
been pardoned on medical grounds, dead, or lunatics; 4 are
known to have migrated to other localities, and all trace is lost;
lisin a refuge in London; whilst only 8 are known to be so
far doing well.
“ Now, these figures exhibit a fearful state of things. I give
them as plain facts, and leave others to draw their own deduc-
tions from them. One conclusion, however, cannot be evaded,
namely, that the present mode of treatment adopted in our
convict prisons is a complete failure. Nearly the whole of those
women—certainly a large proportion of them —have been re-
turned to Liverpool to mix again with our population and to
spread the leaven of their pernicious influence with this condition
in their hands endorsed on their license —‘ To produce a
forfeiture of the license it is by no means necessary that the
holder should be convicted of any new offence. If she associ-
ates with notoriously bad characters, leads an idle or dissolute
life, or has no visible means of obtaining an honest livelihood,
&c., it will be assumed that she is about to relapse into crime,
and she will be at once apprehended and re-committed to prison
under her original sentence.’ But this intimation is a dead
letter—a mere idle threat. Ido not know of a single instance
wherein it has ever been enforced; indeed, how is it possible
that it should be carried into effect where there not only exists
no machinery, no organized arrangements for enforcing the
condition, but whilst the heads of the convict department, with
singular inconsistency, discountenance all interference.”
Here then we have one most important cause of the great
increase of female crime in Liverpool.
Now in the figures given us by Mr. Carter, there can be no
mistake, because they are founded not -on vague report or
supposition, but on positive information obtained through a
well-organized police and other official aids. The conviction
he expresses of the “complete failure” of the present system
adopted in our Female Convict Prisons is not one founded
alone on the conclusive statistics just quoted, which shew that
only 8 women are known to be doing well out of 241 sent to


the Convict Gaols. The conclusions he has arrived at are
founded on very long and close personal observation of the
results, as well as causes of female crime, and all of us who
have been working at the Reformatory cause know well how
important and valuable have been the contributions he has
made to it from the very first, founded on his daily work in the
Liverpool Boro’ Gaol for a long course of years. This testimony
and the conclusions he has arrived at, are founded on actual
results. If the Inspector of our Reformatories discovered such
results in the scholars of our schools, criminal convicted children
as they are, would he not at once infer, either that the system
adopted in them was bad, or that the officials were inefficient
and neglectful of duty. We cannot believe that such extraor-
dinary failure arises from any inefficiency in the officials of the
Convict Prisons, respecting whom high testimony is borne by
the Directors in their reports. We believe, therefore, that the
system adopted must be completely wrong , and can never do
what is intended, i.e. reform female convicts. In support of this
conclusion we might quote the statistics of other prisons, where
the same careful investigation has been made; we might bring
numberless cases from Police Reports, where peculiarly accom-
plished thieves and female pickpockets prove to be ticket-of-
leave women, or some that have received a long training in a
Convict Prison. We might even take the evidence of one of
the Directors of the Female Convict Prisons before the late
Commission, and show his utter hopelessness of effecting any
beneficial change in their very unsatisfactory state, except
indeed the use of the stocks! The stocks for women under
reformatory treatment! We have ample evidence to prove that
the whole system is wrong.
The subject of Convict discipline, and especially what con-
cerns Female Convicts, their condition and treatment, has, until
recently, been quite beyond the scope of popular knowledge
or consideration; and while the public has been lately forced
into some attention to the male convicts and their management,
few have known anything about the women who are in Millbank
and Brixton. The extraordinary book which has this year
reached a third edition, “ Female Life in Prison, by a Prison
Matron,” has however startled the public by its extraordinary
revelations. Its authenticity has not been questioned even by
those who may most regret its publication. It is written in no
unfriendly spirit to the Directors, to one of whom it is gratefully
dedicated, and the chief object apparent is to have a better
position secured to the u Prison Matrons,” many of whom are
“ young ladies ” who have been compelled, by want of more
suitable means of obtaining a livelihood, to undertake the
painful and arduous task of controuling these wretched women.
Now the general impression excited in the public mind by these


volumes is that these women are so remarkably and incredibly
bad that any attempt to improve them must be hopeless. It
must be confessed that in the condition there described, and
under the existing system , improvement may be impossible.
But these women do not exhibit any features of character which
may not be observed by experienced officials in ordinary gaols,
and which indeed may be noticed in a nascent state in the
inmates of our own Reformatories. The extraordinary and
ridiculous, vanity displayed may seem incredible when exhib-
ited in a degraded convict woman, but it does exist in our
criminal population, and even in our reformatory girls, more
strongly than in well-educated persons. The extreme self-
consideration, selfishness, wilfulness, excitability, deception,
pourtrayed in these volumes are common to all ill-regulated
women; the passionate and violent excitement manifested
when they are placed under the controul of the other sex may be
witnessed at our police courts and in our streets, when females
maddened by liquor and inflamed passions find themselves in
the grasp of a policeman; it is appalling to see what super-
natural strength even a young girl can put forth when so
excited. In ordinary Gaols, even in our Reformatories, such
scenes might occur, such characters be developed if there were
not a proper controul steadily exercised under a judicious system,
which prevents it. The wilful destruction of property called
“smashing” so common in these Convict Prisons, or the
frightful scenes of violence described by the Prison Matron,
do not occur in well-ordered gaols, as we have heard on good
authority! Whence this difference ? Why are those establish-
ments which are supported by the country at so large a cost to
remain in this unsatisfactory state? Surely the closest inves-
tigation should be made ; for are not these women, if discharged
unreformed, certain to become centres of evil influence to
those around them, as they have been at Liverpool, thus
increasing crime, and becoming perhaps the mothers of a
progeny of convicts ?
We might be expected to feel a hesitation in offering any
suggestions respecting the re-organising, of the system of
treatment of female convicts which ought to be made, know-
ing well what difference there must be between the treat-
ment of children and of adults, between a government and a
voluntary institution. Confident as we feel in our principles of
management and believing them applicable both to young and
old, we might hesitate to obtrude them on public notice, did
we not know how successfully they have been carried out in
the Irish Convict Prisons, on a system which has stood the test
of the severest scrutiny, the closest investigation. It would be
superfluous here to say what has there been done, what
triumphant victories over vice have been achieved; lor two
years ago this Association had the privilege of being eye-


witnesses of the whole, and of endorsing with their strong
approbation the system as carried out by the Board of Directors,
under their admirable Chairman, Sir Walter Crofton, whose
remarkable union of the varied talents needed for the work,
with a benevolence and devotion which enlisted those under
him to labour with them planned and executed a work
which will benefit by its example not only Ireland but distant
countries.
The management and treatment of convict women, he found
more difficult than that of men. But he surmounted the
difficulty. The Director has not there to complain of the
outrageous and disorderly conduct of the women. They are
under steady firm controul, and any instances of insubordination
do not therefore rise to the frightful excesses described in the
volumes we have alluded to. There is no such complaint
there, as we find in the Report of the Lady Superintendent
of Brixton Prison for the last year, that “36 have been trans-
ferred to the penal and probation classes at Millbank, of
whom 13 had assaulted officers, for which outrageous and
cruel offence,” she says, “no punishment in this prison could
be adequate!” There is a very different spirit existing in
Mountjoy prison, and no specially severe treatment is there
required for the “ savage conduct of ferociously injuring
their fellow creatures,” of which complaint is made at
Brixton. The schoolmistress has not to lament as at Brixton,
the impossibility of alone controuling women who have no
interest in learning and of infusing into them a real desire
to improve their minds. We have ourselves witnessed the
striking and most gratifying spectacle of the lesson room at
Mountjoy, where the various classes were going on and
improving to the mutual satisfaction of teacher and taught;
even grey-headed women learning for the first time to read,
and submitting to the drudgery involved in the task with
cheerful and grateful alacrity. The results of the system are
tested by the voluntary institutions into wffiich well-disposed
convicts are drafted on license, and from which the public
willingly receive them. To these the Four Yorkshire Magis-
trates have borne their strong testimony, a testimony which we
can endorse from personal observation. Why should not
efforts bo made to induce the government to alter the system
for w'omen which has been so unsuccessful, and to construct it on
the principles and method which have proved so successful
elsewhere? Why not enlist in the work the voluntary efforts
of true-hearted women, as has been done in Ireland, and in our
Reformatories? Surely such may be found here as there!
Thus and thus only do I believe that these women can be
rescued from their evil ways,—thus may they be restored to
society, and instead of becoming as they do now its bane, may
be made to become its blessing.
