

472 m
ON THE MIGRATIONS OF THE
KURNAI ANCESTORS.
A. W. HOWITT, ESQ., F.G.S.,
Cor. Memb. Anthrop. Inst.
LONDON:
HARRISON AND SONS, ST. MARTIN’S LANE,
Printers in Ordinary to Her Majesty.
1886.




F fo^io
On the Migrations of the Kurnai Ancestors.
By A. W, Howitt, Esq., F.G.S., Cor. Memb, Anthrop. Inst.
Introductory Note.
It might well be thought an almost impossible task to indicate
with any probability of certainty the directions followed by the
early Australian tribes during their migrations. Savages keep
no records except such as are handed down by word of mouth,
and which in the process of transmission become so distorted
by age and by imaginations of the transmitters that it is only
very rarely that such legendary tales can be recognised as refer-
ring to events which probably once happened.
This is the case with the Australian tribes. Of their legends
and tales there are but few which can be reasonably, believed
to relate to past events. Such are the Deluge legend of the
Kurnai, Woiworung, and Coast Murring tribes ; the Woiworung
and Kurnai legend of Loan, 1 and perhaps also the legend of the
migration into Gippsland of the “ first old man Kurnai.” 2 Such
legends as these only throw a dim and doubtful light on some
parts of the tribal history, such as their early migrations, and it
is in this aspect that I now refer to them.
On this view I have thought it might be well to draft a pre-
liminary memoir, which should have for its general object the
broad delineation of some main lines of migration and for its
special object the question, “ From which stock did the some-
what abnormally developed Kurnai tribe spring ? ”
I do not propose to consider whence was derived the original
stock, the Australian aborigines, but I start from the assump-
tion that their distribution over Australia was from its northern
shores, if not from an earlier continental extension still further
to the north.
The Migratory Process.
The existing distribution of the class-systems, so far as I have
yet been able to collect and compare them, leads me to think
that the migrations have not been in an undivided stream
advancing in an unbroken front across the continent, but in
several streams which spread out on either hand of the main
1 See p. 416.
2 See p. 416.


routes wherever the conditions of water and food were favour-
able.
In other words, the migration has been diverted into various
routes by meeting with obstacles such as waterless tracts or
mountain barriers.
It seems to me that the most probable process by which this
continent has been peopled has been this. It is reasonable to
suppose that whenever a group of the aborigines, who were
settled in some favourable spot, became too large for the natural
resources of the locality, its younger members would spread
outwards in search of new centres, from which in time new
departures might again be made. It may, perhaps, be more
correct to describe such a process of settlement by saying that
from time to time “ swarms left the parent hive ” to take up a
quasi independent existence on their own account, in some
favourable locality, either already known to or to be sought
out by them. 1
Besides this, which may be called the regular and orderly
process of settlement, there must have been also what may be
termed the irregular and disorderly process. Intertribal wars
would tend to send forth “ war-driven ” emigrants ; broken men
escaping from individual or tribal vengeance, and couples who
had broken the moral laws of their tribe, would seek safety in
flight; and even, perhaps, the wreck of a “ totem ” may have
escaped from a feud which involved it in an unequal strife with
a related group far stronger than itself. 2 Instances illustrative
of such causes have been made known to me, and in the past
there must have been many fertile but unoccupied tracts into
which the guilty or the unfortunate might flee and find a safe
refuge from the pursuer. I shall have occasion to point out,
when speaking later on of the Bidweli tribe of Eastern Gipps-
land, that there is evidence that out of such materials new
tribes have been formed on the ancient social lines.
Whatever may have been the mode of settlement, there are
1 According to Taplin, the Narrinyeri had a tradition that their ancestors
were led by Nurundere, the Supreme Being, down the Darling and Murray
Rivers, and thence east and west along the coast, where they were settled when
the white men first arrived. “Native Tribes of South Australia,” pp. 3, 55, 61.
Wigg, Adelaide, 1879.
2 Such a case might have arisen in the Wotjobaluk tribe of the Wimmera
River. A “ white cockatoo ” man had killed one of the “ black snake ” totem,
and according to the tribal custom he had to submit to spear-thro wing by the
kin of the deceased. He was speared during this ordeal, and, quoting my in-
formant’s words, “ the old head-man of the Gartchukas (white cockatoo) threw
up the piece of lighted bark he was carrying, and the fight ceased.” To my
question, “ Supposing that the Wulernunt (black snake) men had continued
their attack, what would have been done ?” be replied—“ If they had not
ceased there would have been a war between all the Gartchukas and all (he
W ulerniints.”


two main lines of march clearly indicated, namely, the eastern
and western coast-lines. Others probably lay along the well-
watered and generally fertile downs of the great dividing range,
and perhaps also followed approximately the direction of the
transcontinental telegraph.
Assuming that when the migration began, the physical
features of the Australian continent were much as they are
now, one line of advance would clearly be indicated as extend-
ing southwards from Carpentaria and the country extending
eastwards to the sea. So far as the country proved favourable,
population would spread, ascending the streams to their sources,
and thence descending by other waters flowing on the one hand
into the Pacific Ocean, and on the other into the great and arid
expanse of Central Australia.
As the streams proceed further from the great dividing range
of Queensland into the central depression they become more
widely separated from each other by generally waterless and
often almost desert tracts, until at length they are lost in the
great saline depression in which lie a vast series of salt lakes,
such as Lake Eyre.
Still further to the southward where the great dividing
range approaches and finally enters into New South Wales,
the rivers still flow widely separated from each other by dry
tracts, but finally, as the Darling, Lachlan, and Murrumbidgee,
contribute to the perennial stream of the river Murray.
Migrations in early times most certainly would extend down
such great waters, and would thus become more or less com-
pletely isolated from their kindred who occupied adjoining
rivers. Thus, in time, well-marked groups of tribes have arisen
having certain characteristics in common; usually recognising
kindred with each other, and also joining in the same initiation
ceremonies. They are distinguished from each other by dialect,
by variation of custom, often by variation of initiation cere-
monies, and frequently from all other tribes by applying to
themselves some special word meaning “ man,”
Such large groups are recognisable in the better watered parts
of Eastern Australia, and even also in Victoria.
I have said just now that such great aggregates of tribes are
frequently marked by the use of a common word meaning
“ man,” which is restricted in use to their own males. Thus
a very large group of tribes having the Kamilaroi organisation
might be spoken of as the “ Murri Nation,” and this designation
would bring them properly into relation with their southern
and south-eastern neighbours, who use the word “ Murring
or “ Murrln” in the same sense. Similarly, a great group ot tribes


occupying the country surrounding Lake Eyre, in South Aus-
tralia, might collectively be spoken of as the “ Kurna Nation.” 1
In Eastern Victoria there would be found a large “ Kuhn
Nation,” and a smaller in the south-west of the colony to which
the term “ Mara ” might be applied.
I suggest that these words signifying “man” may he con-
veniently used for distinguishing the great tribal aggregates
referred to, and in this sense I use them in this paper.
My preceding remarks will have shown my views as to the
general process of migration. A few more are now necessary
before I proceed to consider of which migratory stream the
Kurnai ancestors were most likely an offshoot.
One stream of settlement seems to have followed down the
waters which unite to form the Darling, and to have thence
traced the Murray River from the junction of the two, until,
reaching the sea-coast, it spread east and west along it.
Its eastern termination may perhaps he recognised in the
Mara Nation, which in Victoria coalesced with the Kulin, some-
where, so far as I can make out, about the southern slopes of the
Grampian Mountains, and more to the east about Colac. 2
Another stream which had followed the well-watered country
southwards from the sources of the Darling River seems to have
divided 'when meeting with the great block of mountains of
which the Australian Alps are the culminating points. These
people spread round the northern and western flanks of the
mountains into Victoria, where they are represented by the
Kulin Nation, wdiose termination in the south was in the Bun-
woriing tribe, in the extreme south-eastern part of the Western
Port District. The Kulin seem to have occupied all the flanks
of the mountains from the Ovens River to Cape Patterson, and
westwards as far as Geelong, Ballarat, and the sources of the
Richardson River. Another branch of the same stream flowed
round the eastern flanks of the mountains on to the Maneroo
tableland, and down the southern coast of New South Wales,
where as one of the Katungal tribes it formed, near Tow fold Bay
1 The Kurnai Tribe of Gippsland must be distinguished from the Kurna
Nation of the Barcoo Delta. The term “Nation” which I now use must be under-
stood as meaning no more than an aggregate of kindred tribes, without implying
any kind of confederacy between them. I take this opportunity of pointing out
that there is no warrant for the use, which I have observed, of the word Murri or
Murrai , as meaning “Australian aborigine.” There is no word in the native
languages having that meaning. Such words as Murri, Kulin, Kurnai, Mara, have
a strictly local meaning. A male aborigine of Victoria is no more a “ Murri ”
than a Scot is a Welshman. •
2 The Narrinyeri tradition quoted by Taplin (“Native Tribes of South
Australia,” p. 61) says: “Nurundere . . . led his sons, i.e., his tribe, down
the southern shore of the Lakes, and there turned up the Coorong. There he
appears to have met another tribe coming from the south-east.”


and Cape Howe, the extreme south-western termination of the
great Murri (or Murring) Nation.
Between the south-eastern termination of the Kulin Nation,
at about the Tarwin River in South-west Gippsland and the
south-western termination of the Murri Nation at about Malla-
goota Inlet in Eastern Gippsland, there was the Kurnai tribe.
This remarkable tribe can be shown to be neither Kulin nor
Murring, and an inquiry now arises of which of the advancing
lines to which those people respectively belong it has been an
offshoot. In seeking for a reply to this question, 1 have met
with some curious facts which are worthy of notice.
The Kurnai Ancestors.
The Kurnai acknowledge no kindred with any of the tribes
adjoining them. In olden times they were hostile to all, and
applied to them a name as distinguished from themselves of
“ Wild men.” It is therefore necessary, in attempting to trace
out from which migratory stream of those I have mentioned the
Kurnai ancestors were derived, to turn to the customs and the
beliefs of the tribes for light.
I am not in a position to compare the languages of these tribes
in a satisfactory manner, for to do this it would require one to
have a competent knowledge of the languages of at least three
of the tribes adjoining the Kurnai country. Besides this, it
would also be necessary to have a good acquaintance with the
three Kurnai dialects, the Muk-thaug, the Thang-quai, and the
Nulit, of which the former only is familiar to me. It is there-
fore necessary to have recourse to the aid to be derived from the
comparison of vocabularies, and of such slight knowledge of the
neighbouring Murring languages as I have obtained.
The result has been to prove that the Kurnai dialects are
most nearly allied to those of the Kulin, and differ as much on
the other hand from those of the Murring, both of the coast and
of the mountains. Yet I must also note that the Thang-quai,
as spoken by the most easterly of the Kurnai, namely, the
Krauatun, has words which are no doubt due to the intimate
relations of this clan with its Murring neighbours.
The customs of the various tribes do not in comparison afford
much light, but what little there is shows a greater resemblance
in details between those of the Kurnai and Kulin than between
those of the Kurnai and Murring.
Two illustrations will suffice as examples of this part of the
evidence. As I have elsewhere shown, the Kurnai Jeraeil has
no resemblance to the Murring Kuringal, excepting in the first


principles which underlie both. The Jibauk of the Kulin were
probably the survival of more complete ceremonies, which, if
resembling either of the others, did so more as to the Jeraeil
than as to the Kuringal.
The practice of sending messengers was common to all the
tribes, but the practice of the Kumar and Kulin agreed most,
even to the name applied to the messenger, 1 and to the method
of enumerating the number of camping stages to which the
message might refer.
This resemblance is still further and more strongly supported
by a comparison of the local organisation of the tribes, as I have
now evidence to show. The imperfect remains of the class-
systems of the Wolgal, Ngarego, and Coast Murring point to
a derivation of their social organisation from systems of the
Kamilaroi type. Indeed, that of the Wolgal preserves two of
the four classes in precisely the form of name which still obtains
in the neighbouring Wiraijuri tribe. Nothing in these systems
throws any light upon the mere traces of the class organisation
which the Knrnai have retained.
On turning to the Kulin tribes* however, the case is very
different. The very names of the two primary classes suggest
an explanation of the peculiar designation which is applied to
many of the Kurnai men when reaching mature age. In ex-
plaining this, and in illustrating the comparisons possible, I
must now note a few facts as to the Kulin, and for this I use
the Woiworung tribe, which is indeed the only one as to which
anything like complete data are now obtainable.
In all the tribes of the Kulin Nation which were settled in
the country extending from the Upper Goulburn River south-
wards to the sea-coast in the Western Port District, there obtained
a class system having only two main divisions with totems.
Together with agnatic descent there was this peculiarity, that
each local division consisted only of men of one or other of the
two class-names, the wives of these men being all, of course, of
the other class, and the children all of the class to which their
fathers belonged. Thus it was that each local division was
perpetuated by men of the same class-name. The people who
spoke the* Woiworung language afford an illustration. They
were divided into five clans, one of which, the Urunjeri-Baluk, 2
claimed the country lying between the Yarra and Saltwater
Rivers, and it is to this clan that my information particularly
refers. All the people of Urunjeri descent were of the Waa
(Crow) class. Of the other four clans, two were likewise Waa
1 Paiava with the Kurnai, and Baiaur with the Kulin.
2 Urun— white gUm-tree ; haluk = a number of people


and two were Bunjil (Eaglehawk). The class system of this
tribe, as I have said, has these two primary class divisions,
Eaglehawk and Crow. In addition to these, there is one totem,
Hawk, which belongs to Bunjil, while Waa has not any totems
The folklore of this tribe, however, has a more complete list of
the totems of Bunjil. A legend relates that long ago, “in the
beginning,” the great Supreme Being, Bunjil, lived on the earth
with his sons, Thara (Hawk), Yukope (Musk Lorikeet), Jurt-jurt
(Nankeen Kestrel), Dan tun (Blue Mountain Lorikeet), Tumung
(Brushtailed Phascogale). Bunjil being at feud with Balaiang
(the Bat), sent his sons to burn all the country towards the
Murray River, and in this conflagration the Bat was scorched so
that he has remained bare and grinning ever since. This enter-
prise having been successfully accomplished, Bunjil and his
“ sons” ascended to the sky, where they now are as stars. 1 We
may, I think, surmise from this legend that the “ sons of Bunjil
represent the totems formerly existing in that class. I have
not learned any corresponding legend as to the “ sons ” of Waa.
Now it is to be noted that with the Kurnai the term Bunjil
has no significance as “ Eaglehawk/ but is a name which is
applied to many old men, in conjunction with some term ex-
pressing some characteristic or quality, lor instance, an old
man who had a deep growling voice became known as Bunjil
Gworiin (thunder). The crow is regarded by the Kurnai as
being one of the “ Muk-Kurnai,” or ancestors, and they reverence
it, and think that it watches over them and can answer their
questions by its cawing {Nga, Yes; or Ngat-bun, No). As the
Kurnai have no true totems, it is not possible to make a satis-
factory comparison, but it is not perhaps without significance
that one of the Woiworung “ sons of Bunjil ” (the Brushtailed
Phascogale) is called by the Kurnai in the Nulit language,
Bunjil' wadtun, that is to say, “ Bunjil opossum.” The Hawk,
which is one of Bunjil’s sons, and also the sole remaining totem
of that class, also appears in the Kurnai folklore as a Muk-
Kurnai, who prevented the supernatural female “duality,”
Bulum-Baukan, from stealing the fire of the Kurnai. 2
I have elsewhere noted the peculiar bird totems of the Kurnai
1 Among the 'VVotjo-balluk of the Wimmera River, in North-western Victoria,
Bunjil is a sub-totem of the Garchtika totem of the Krokitch class. It is
related that long ago he was a very powerful man who ascended to the sky with
his two wives, who were sisters, Gtinawara (swan), of the class Gamtitch.
2 I use this word “ duality ” as the only one I can think of which expresses
the peculiar conception of the supernatural being “ Bulum-baukan. Iwo
Baukans are always spoken of, but at the same time as if inseparable, and
having one son, “ Bulum-tut,” common to both. Baukan is in some respects
analogous to the Ngalalbal of the Murring Kuringal ceremonies, to the two
wives of Bunjil, of Baiame, &c.


which divide the community into a group of males and a group
of females. But these totems are not of a kind peculiar to this
tribe, for I find them throughout South-eastern Australia, and
they probably have a wider range. They are not true totems
in the sense that these represent subdivisions of the primary
classes, yet they are true totems in so far that they are regarded
as being the “ brothers ” or “ sisters ” of the human beings who
bear their names. I cannot now enter into a further considera-
tion of the very interesting subject of Australian totems, which
requires a separate memoir for its treatment, but must confine
myself to such facts as have a bearing upon the questions with
which I am at present concerned.
The bird totems of the Kurnai are the Emu wren and the
Superb Warbler, which are respectively the “ man’s brother ” and
“ woman’s sister.” With the Coast Murring the Emu wren is
also the “ man’s brother,” but the “ woman’s sister ” is the Tree
creeper (Climacteris scandens), and this is the only totemic con-
nection which I can trace out between these tribes. When,
however, we turn to the Kulin we find both the Kurnai totems
in just the same position. In addition, there are also a second
male and female totem, namely, the Bat and the small Nightjar,
and these two are found to extend to the extreme north-western
confines ol Victoria as the “man’s brother” and the “woman’s
sister.” 1
In the Woiworung language the Emu wren is called “Bunjil
Boroin,” and possibly this may have a connection with the legend
of the Kurnai “ Adam ” —for it is related that the “ first Kurnai
old man,” Bunjil Borun, walked across the plains from the north
to the sea, carrying his wife in a canoe on his head. I feel a
difficulty in connecting the two names, as in the Kurnai dialects
Borun means “ Pelican,” and not “ Emu wren.”
There is another legend, however, which is found in what I
may call its complementary parts in the Woiworung and Kurnai
tribes, and to me it seems to speak of an early migration of the
Kurnai ancestors in unmistakable terms.
The Woiworung say that long ago a gigantic being like
a blackfellow lived on the banks of the Yarra River. He was
named Loan, and is now pointed out as one of the stars. Observ-
ing that pieces of swan’s-down were carried to the Yarra by the
south-east wind he journeyed in that direction and discovered
the Inlets at Western Port Bay, where he settled down for a
time- By-and-by he again wandered onwards, following the
swans in their migrations, and thus discovered Corner Inlet in
1 Mr- A. L. P. Cameron has shown that these totems extend still further
into New South Wales.


Gippsland, where he permanently took up his abode, living in
the mountainous recesses of Wilson’s Promontory.
The Kurnai on their part say that a great being called Loan
lives in a cave at Wilson’s Promontory, where he has at times
been seen wandering armed with an enormous spear. 1
It is to this Loan that is attributed the institution of the
remarkable formalities which attended the admission of alien
but friendly blackfellows into his country. By the Kulin of
Western Port and Melbourne, and by the Kurnai, the country for
some distance on each side of Wilson’s Promontory was known
as “ the Bad ground.” 2 It was believed that any blackfellow
other than a native of it who should enter it, without being
under the charge of a Brataua man and the protection of the
proper formalities, would certainly become ill, and most likely
die.
From what I have heard of this belief, and of the formalities
connected with it, I suspect that at the bottom lies the liability
to some kind of fever by blacks from warmer and dryer parts
of the country if they come and camp in the damp and swampy
forests of the “ Bad ground.” 3
The legend of Loan and the belief in the “Bad ground”
connect the Kulin and Kurnai tribes and strengthen the views
suggested by the class-names. It seems to me more than pro-
bable that the Kurnai are of the same stock as the Woiworung
Kulin, and that the legends which I have noted refer to one, if
not more than one, immigration into Gippsland; one migration by
way of Western Port, and another, if the story of the Kurnai
“ first old man ” has any reference to the facts of the past, by
way of the Macallister Kiver valley, which even since the
whites have settled in the country has been the war-path of the
Kurnai when making a raid upon the Kulin ot the Mansfield
district. 4
It is now well to consider what were the relations of the
Kurnai with their immediate neighbours to the east, that is to
1 The name Loan seems properly to belong to the Brataua Kurnai clan, which,
Hying in his country, were supposed to be protected by him. The other Kurnai
knew of him from them, but also spoke of him by the name of “ Kftltingrttk.”
Both these names are applied to white men, and white women have received the
designation of the wife of Loan, namely, Loan-tuka. Old men tell me that these
names have been used for the supernatural being in the Brataua country
“ from the beginning,” that is, the origin of these names is unknown to them.
2 In the Nulit dialect = Wia-wek; in the Woiworung = Marine-bek.
3 Mr. James McAlpine, who has lived in South Gippsland almost since its
settlement, tells me that when he first came there he became acquainted with
a very old blackfellow w'ho gave him much information, and who said that “ his
fathers came from the West, and the country to the East was at that time
empty ol people.”
4 These Kulin were also divided into Bunjil and Waa.


say, with the Coast Murring. The language spoken by the
Krauatun, who were the most easterly clan, was a dialect of the
Kurnai language, and was quite unintelligible to the adjoining
Murring. 1 Yet there are a few peculiarities which show that
the language of the latter has influenced it.
The Krauatun Kurnai occupied the country along the coast
from near Lake Tyers eastward to Mallagoota Inlet. The
Tatung Kurnai extended along the strip of country westwards
from the entrance to the Gippsland Lakes, and between them
and the sea. The full names of these two clans are Krauatun-
galung and Tatungalung. The termination “ galung ” is a
possessive suffix which slightly differs from the form which I
find in the Mukthang, where it is “ lung,” as in the clan name
Brahralung, which may be translated as “ manly,” or “ belonging
to that which is manly; ” another example is in the possessive
pronoun ngitalung, = “ mine,” which is properly and in full,
when not colloquially abbreviated, that is to
say, “I, belonging to,” or “ of.” In the termination “ galung ”
I find a common possessive suffix of the Murring language,
“ gal,” added to that used in the Mukthang, As examples of
the use of “ gal ” I take the local names of the Coast Murring
tribes as “ Bemerin-gal ” and “ Katun-gal,” where Bemering =
Mountains, and Katun = Sea. The term Katungal, as meaning
those “ of ” or “ belonging to ” the sea coast, is applied by the
Murring to all those thus located on each side of them, in one
direction into Gippsland, and in the other beyond Sydney. I
cannot but think that the name Tatungalung of the Kurnai is
in fact this word with the “ K ” altered to “ T,” and the Kurnai
possessive suffix added.
The word “ Tat ” is by them used as meaning “ south.” Hence
a southerly rain is “ Tatung-wfllung,” but there is a second word
in use also meaning “ south,” namely “ kater.” This, I think, is
merely a variation of the same root.
The Krauatun consider themselves to be, and are recognised
by the other clans as, Kurnai. But they do not participate in
the Jeraeil of their own tribe, nor in the Kuringal of the
Murring, except in rare cases, such as where a man’s mother
belonged to that tribe, and he might be admitted to what may
be called an “ honorary membership.” The Tatung had con-
1 There were three dialects in Gippsland—the Nulit, spoken by the Braiaka
and Brataua; the Mtik-thang, by the Brabra; and the Thang-quai, by the
Krauatun and Tatung. The difference between these three dialects and the
Murring language can be shown by the statement which a Krauatun man might
make. He would probably say, “ I can understand the Mtik-thang, and speak
it a little ; I can understand the Nulit, though I cannot speak it; but I cannot
understand the Murring language at all.”


nubium only with the other clans of the Kurnai. The Krauatun
had this, but also in addition with the Murring.
This connubium, existing between the Krauatun, Kurnai, and
the Coast Murring, leads to an interesting conclusion. It was
not the alliance of two local divisions of the same tribe, but of
divisions of two totally distinct tribes. It shows that even when
two groups such as these met in the past as complete strangers
to each other, permanent hostility was not necessarily the conse-
quence. It even suggests that unless impassable natural barriers
intervened between tribes, their outlying members would be sure
to become more or less connected by the bonds of acquaintance
and of kindred formed by inter-marriage. This would, it seems
to me, be the case even when two tribes were, as entities, in a
chronic state of feud with each other.
Who can say, or even conjecture, how long the two migratory
streams had been separated when in olden times the ancestors of
the Kurnai and of the Murring met first at Mallagoota Inlet ?
It is not possible to say, but the period must have been sufficiently
long to admit of their customs having diverged, the initiation
ceremonies of one branch having been lost, and of their languages
having become mutually unintelligible. Yet, in spite of all
this, we find the two migrations not only on as friendly a footing
with each other as were the Kurnai clans to each other, but also
in some respects having undergone a partial fusion.
On the grounds I have now stated, it seems to me almost if
not quite clear that the Kurnai ancestors entered into Gippsland
from the westward, or perhaps also from the north-westward, in
one or in more than one migration.
The Bidweli Tribe .
The discussion of the preceding questions brings into view a
subject of much interest, namely, the Bidweli tribe. 1
Between the country of the Krauatun Kurnai at the Snowy
River and along the coast, and that of the Murring of the
Maneroo tableland to the north and of the sea coast Murring to
the east, there lies a large stretch of country which was occupied
by the now almost extinct Bidweli tribe. This tract is one of
the most inhospitable that I have seen in Australia, I have
traversed its scrubs, mountains, and swamps four several times,
and I observed little in it of living creatures excepting a few
wallaby, snakes, leeches, mosquitoes, and flies, "iet the Bidweli
inhabited the few small open tracts in it and called themselves
“ men ” ( maap ).
1 Sometimes spoken of as the Bidwel, or Bidwelk. I cannot give any trans-
lation of this word.


After lengthened inquiries from the few survivors, and from
those of their neighbours who knew them, I have ascertained
as follows:
Their language is compounded from the surrounding dialects.
The class-names and totems are similarly derived from their neigh-
bours, for I have found them to be Yeerung (Krauatun Kurnai),
Yukembruk = Crow, and Tchuteba = Babbit Eat (Ngarego), and
Yalonga = Eock Wallaby (Coast Murring). I even found one
family bearing the name of Bunjil. Their relationship terms
are also derived from the same neighbouring tribes, some being
Kurnai and some Murring, as might have been forecast from
their compound language. Further, the Bidweli had no initia-
tion ceremonies, and the last survivors are not, as I have
observed, even admitted to those of the neighbouring tribes with
whom there was connubium. This prirnd facie case of a mixed
descent is strengthened by the case of a Bidweli man claiming
as his country the upper valley of the Brodribb Eiver. 1 He
stated to me that his “ father’s father ’’ was a Kurnai of Buchan 2
who left his country and settled in the small open tract known
as the Goungra Valley, west of Mount Ellery. His son obtained
a wife from the Thedora of Omeo, and the son of this marriage,
my informant, married a Ngarego woman. This pedigree ac-
counts for both Yeerung and Yukembruk.
Such a case as this of my informant’s grandfather is just on
all fours with one mentioned by me elsewhere 3 of a man who,
having broken the moral law of his tribe, escaped out of reach
of its vengeance, and only reappeared when the whites had
settled the country, and he could thus find protection against
tribal vengeance.
I can feel no doubt that the Bidweli country has been an
Australian “ Cave of Adullam,” and that its tribe has been built
up by the refugees from tribal justice or individual vengeance,
who have organised themselves so far as they could do so on the
old accustomed lines. It is a good example of what Dr. Hearn
has called the formation of a non-genealogical tribe.
The general conclusions which may be drawn from preceding
statements are these :
1 So far as I can learn, it was only about fifteen years back that this man
“ came in,” that is to say, abandoned his wild life and went to live among the
stations of the Maneroo tableland. He was the last wild blackfellow in
Gippsland.
2 This is not, as might be supposed, a Scotch name given to the locality by
some of the early settlers, who were mostly from North Britain, but a native
word, which should be properly written Bttkan, meaning the large net-bag in
which the blackfellows carried their things. The proper name of the place is
Btikan-mQnji, meaning “Bag-there,” or the “Place of the Bag.”
3 “ Kamilaroi and Kurnai,” p. 348, footnote.


(1) The early aborigines of Australia in spreading south-
wards over the continent followed the well-watered
tracts along the coasts and the rivers.
(2) The spreading population gradually became separated
into groups of tribes having certain common features,
one of which, namely, the use of a word meaning
“ man,” conveniently affords a means of marking the
extent of such of these groups as may be termed
“ nations.”
(3) Where migratory streams again met, the tribes which
formed their extreme terminations coalesced and es-
tablished connubium, in spite of difference in custom
and language.
(4) The Kurnai tribe is an offshoot from such a migratory
stream which spread round the northern and western
flanks of the Australian Alps, and penetrated to G-ipps-
land in two or more immigrations.
(5) Tribes have been formed not only by the regular process
of growth of groups separated from genealogical tribes,
but also by the organisation on the accustomed lines of
aggregates of “ broken men.”
oo O
[Reprinted from the Journal of the Anthropological Institute, May, 1886.]
Harrison and Sons, Printers in Ordinary to Her Majesty, St. Martin's Lane.






.


'
■
.
.
■
A


1
