

OO ' o af j
e .jjQ y
Pern
f K
SlgA
Sift
ON THE PARASITIC ORIGIN OF PLEURO-
PNEUMONIA IN CATTLE.
C* Acephalocysts having been found in animals
<« affected with pleuro-pneumonia, and also in a few
n cases echinococci, strongyli and distomata, it may be
oasked whether any of these parasitic animals cause
«,this disease. In reply to this question we may
«state, first, that in many cases of pleuro-pneumonia
«no parasites have been found, although carefully
♦docked for by us ; and, secondly, that they have
♦♦each been commonly observed in animals which had
♦♦no pleuro-pneumonia. Farther, in a diseased
which we caused to be examined after death,
«*such parasites were found in the healthy lung, while
t.fhe inflamed lung did not contain them. Parasites
ucan only act as local irritants, or as drainers of
if they were sufficiently important to
♦♦cause death in either of these ways, we should not
♦♦expect that there would be any difficulty in their
♦'detection.” (* Note.) “On the 2nd of December,
♦, since this report was drawn up, a paper of evidence
*«(dated 23rd September) was submitted to the corn-
emission by Mr Ralph, in which he announces his
■■ m-iicf tb? t animals withqdeuro-pneumonia have either
♦'hydatids in the liver, or distoma in the hepatic
*.ducts; and the cysts, sometimes assuming the
••echinococcus form, he believes to be due to the
♦♦distoma, and that the contents of distoma cysts
M (ova, cells &c.) may be introduced by inoculation to
•ithe system, and so produce pleuro-pneumonia.
♦(Bodies resembling some of the contents of the
<« cysts being occasionally found in the blood, and
*• constantly in the lung.” “ As, however, distomata
♦♦were known long before pleuro-pneumonia; and,
•♦in many animals which have never any
♦♦affection like this disease, the commission is of
♦•opinion that not only no connection in the way of
♦♦cause and effect between the appearances referred
vto and the disease has been shown, but that any
ksuch connection is, for many reasons, in the highest
improbable,” See report of the Royal
Commission on pleuro-pneumonia, 1864.
In the above statements there are several
points which require careful consideration.
First, that “in many cases of pleuro-
pneumonia no parasites have been found,”
&c. Now, the parasite to which attention has been
directed is one which usually inhabits the ducts of
the liver, and has, I believe, never been found in
the lungs of an animal; and, the above asser-
tion, in order to be of weight, should cover the
fact of this organ (the liver) having been fully
explored, and with special view to the presence or
absence of this particular parasite, in all the
cases alluded to. Second, that there were no
traces of any enlarged hepatic ducts—a fact of
nearly equal importance; thirdly, that such cases
should also have been free from any cysts in Ihe
liver or lungs. When all the conditions have been
fully made out in an animal which has died from
plearo-pneumonia, then, and not till then, will such
a statement as this be of force as an objection to
the view advanced. Without questioning the ac-
curacy of the examinations, which show that no
parasites have been found in some cases of pleuro-
pneumonia, I wish to observe that I consider the
occurrence of such cases possible (for some reasons),
without invalidating what has been advanced re-
garding the parasitic nature of this disease. I
think also too much value has been attached to ne-
gative in place of positive evidence ; the absence
of parasites in a few cases having been considered
to be of more value than their occurrence con-
jointly with other important phenomena. I have
up to the present time had nineteen post mortem
examinations of cases of pleuro-pneumonia; in
seventeen of these the conditions of parasitism were
fulfilled ; the remaining two I consider I did not
fully explore—one. from want of time, and the
other having been examined it a period when I
had no idea of the parasitic nature of the disease,
nor any knowledge of its vav ing conditions.
The other assertion, that “ ach of the above-men-
tioned parasites, (i e., ac> .ahcysts, echinococci,
strongyli, and distomata or nukes), have been found
in animals which have had no pleuro-pneumonia,”
is one which loses weight and importance as an ar-
gument against the views I have advanced, when we
understand other condilions besides the mere in-
habitation of an animal by the parasite in question
are needed to be fulfilled in order to give rise to
pleuro-pneumonia. These conditions will be men-
tioned farther on.
Next, it is stated, that “in a diseased ani-
mal, such parasites (acephalocysts, echinococ-
cicysts, strongyli, and distomata —the report
does not specify which) were found in the
healthy lung, while the inflamed lung did not con-
tain them. V Now, in the first place, distoma inhabits
the liver only (or intestines), consequently this para-
site could not be the one to which the above state-
ment refers ; the other parasites, echinococci (cysts)
and strongyli, which last chiefly inhabits the bron-
chial tubes or air passages, have nothing to do with
pleuro-pneumonia, as far as my statements go. The
other form of cyst, acephalocysts, which I accept as
likely to have originated from diatoma (supposing
by acephalocysts the hard caseous cysts are meant),
having been found in an acknowledged case of
pleuro-pneumonia, only tends to confirm my view,
inasmuch as its presence is evidence of non freedom
from some parasitic taint. Thus these general


statements fail to establish anything in opposition to
the views advanced regarding the parasitic nature of
the disease. Moreover these statements show that
the mode and action of parisitism which I have in-
dicated as peculiar to pleuro-pneumonia in cattle
have not been understood or entertained.
“Parasites act by irritation,” &c. This passage
shows that the view advanced has not been pro-
perly understood. That distoma (or fluke) acts
injuriously by causing irritation is true only
of the organ which the parasite inhabits, ie,
the liver, as evidenced by the enlarged condition
of the hepatic ducts; but t assert that only the
derivatives, or organisms obtained from distoma, are
the cause of pleuro-pneumonia, and the above state-
ment in no way deals with the view I have advanced,
nor touches the question, when it goes on to assert
that there would be no difficulty in the way of
detecting such irritating agents as parasites.
Next comes the note. The line of opposing argu-
ment runs thus ; “ That as distomata (flukes) have
been known long before pleuro-pneumonia, the
opinion can be entertained that no connection between
the appearances of the disease has been shown.''This
argument is of the same character, and exhibits the
same want of application to the view propounded
as the passages already discussed.** I admit that an
animal may have flukes without undergoing the
disease (P.P.), because the farther necessary condi-
tions may not have been fulfilled for its production.
The final portion, that any connection between the
appearances and the disease, is for many reasons
[not stated) in the highest degree improbable, is an
argument in futv.rn. and the widest platl-will be to
wait for it.
The report I have furnished bears on the
face of it that it is a history of work
done ; that the facts were first ascer-
tained, and then an explanation of them
sought out; so that the theory has been second to
the facts. The other feature in the document is
that it does not extend to an explanation of the
bearing of all the facts adduced ; the importance of
these facts, however, ought to have sufficed to have
led to a general acceptance of the view enunciated,
and to an endeavor rather in the direction of corro-
borating them, in place of objecting; at any rate,
no doubts have been thrown on the facts brought
under consideration ; nor can it be said any attempt
of the kind has been made.
The objection regarding the prevalence of
distomata (flakes) in animals, without the pro-
duction of pleuro-pneumonia, can be met.
Distoma may exist in the liver, producing
only the enlargement of the duct it inhabits ; but,
as we know, these ducts can be obstructed, and are
oftentimes so, by the presence of gall concretions,
and thereby causing jaundice ; so it is rationally
conceivable how, under circumstances similar to
those which cause the bile to pass into the circula-
tion, namely, the obstruction of a hepatic duct
inhabited by a fluke, a condition not merely favor-
able to the transmission into the blood of minute
organisms (1-10,000 th to 1-20,000 th of an inch),
derivable from the body of the distoma would be
set up, but one in which it would be rather a necessity,
and from which there could be little chance of escape.
The history of several cases of pleuro-pneumonia
presents the feature of yellowness of skin ; a
symptom indicating bile has been admitted into
the circulation, and which symptom has been ob-
served to pass away during the progress of re-
covery. Inflammation of the lung is an essential
part of pleuro-pneumonia in cattle. Examining an
affected lung, the products of inflammation will be
found in and about the air-cells ; bat, besides these,
there are present objects which are not the results
of inflammation, and at the same time are decidedly
abnormal. A careful investigation of these objects
will show that they are identical in size, form,
color and chemical re-action with the contents of
most cysts in the lungs; these cysts are identical
in structure and contents with those found in the
liver. A careful comparison between the lung
contained objects—lung cyst objects, liver cyst
objects—with the organisms found in the body of a
distoma inhabiting a hepatic duct of an animarwhich
has died of pleuro-pneumonia, will show that they
are similar. A careful examination of the blood
taken during life and after death from the large
vessels will exhibit a number of objects or organ-
isms which are not present in healthy blood (or
what is considered as such) ; form, size and
chemical re action show that they agree with the
minuter organisms encountered in the lung tissue,
lung cysts, liver cysts, and with some of the
organisms in disoma. That there should be some
difference between the objects in the blood
and lungs, as regards size, compared with
those in the lung and liver cysts, is
quite in accordance with what might be expected,
in that the minuter organisms should be those
transmitted in the majority of cases, from the dis-
toma into the blood ; the larger objects in the dis-
toma being fewer in number, and when transmitted
to an organ, likely to remain impacted there, and
develope in a manner different to what they would
have done in the body of the fluke, from whence
they were derived.
Thus, I maintain, distomata may prevail in
cattle for a time, and, not transmitting their
contents to the lungs, or only undergoing the
process of encysting prove harmless ; that, possibly,
the injurious effects of distomata iu the ducts are
prevented by the carrying off of these noxious ma-
terials by transmission to the gall-bladder, and
thence by the bile to the intestines ; —biliary diarr-
hoea : any occlusion of the inhabited hepatic duets
would be the first step to the internal transmission
of distoma contents. On stations in this country, it
has been remarked that an animal will appear to be
ailing for a day or two, and then get well; the symp-
toms and general appearance resembling those of
pleuro-pneumonia. Such a condition lam disposed
to regard as one indicative of the earliest stage of
the disease, and consequent upon the transmission
of some distoma organisms into the blood. The
febrile attack having passed off, the animal is re-
garded as having recovered. The subsequent history
may be, that no further mischief shows itself,
or, according to the intensity of the attack, the
foundation be laid for a second.
Thus, the obvious line of observation in
the report appears to have been over-
looked. I show that certain abnormal organ-
isms are present in hepatised lungs, and in the


blood ; that these abnormal objects are not the re-
cognised products of inflammation. Next, that the
contained matters of cysts and distomata are similar,
the only difference being that all the organisms of a
distoma are not to be found in a cyst. That the
major part of the cyst contents are similar to the ab-
normal objects in the lungs and blood. If in
pleuro-pneumonia we consider only the presence of
objects of an abnormal character found in the
blood, there is difficulty enough to account for the
phenomenon ; but this difficulty is increased when
the identity of the cjst contents and lung contents
is (of necessity) brought to bear on the question—
How are these objects produced in the blood, it not
from distoma or cyst contents ? The whole weight
of these views rests on the facts adduced ; and, under
present circumstances, we are not likely to obtain
much clearer evidence (fuller we may get) or one of
a different character as to the origin of this disease.
If —in place of making direct experiments and fur-
ther observations confirmatory of, or disproving these
views—we wait for a very different cause and
effect evidence, we may wait long enough.
If the parasitic nature of the disease can be estab-
lished, it will go a long way to persuade many of
the communicability of this, at present, intractable
malady; and we shall do well to bear in mind what
has been recently brought before the medical sec-
tion of the British Association, by Dr. Budd, on the
investigation of epidemic and epizootic diseases.
“In order to render inquiry comprehensive, it
would be necessary to conjoin with the study of
epidemics that of the diseases in man and animals
by living parasites, external and internaland he
gives the reasons for putting the “ parasitic and
contagious diseases together : first, at many points,
the two blend insensibly one into the other ; second,
that, with the advance of knowledge, diseases are
constantly being transferred from the group of
common contagious to the group of parasites;
third, that there already exists among the most ad-
vanced thinkers on these topics, a shrewd suspicion
that the two groups wiil eventually coalesce, and be
found to be in their essence identical.”
The subject is by no means exhausted ; but I
shall take a future opportunity of showing that the
study of the parasitic nature of pleuro-pneumonia
in cattle helps us to understand that some diseases
affecting the human economy now present a high
probability of their parasitic origin. The subject,
being a professional one, will be noticed in the pro-
per channels.
TiuynAjj Jimypp* an
F\
