

XT.— On the Trade of the Eastern Archipelago with New Guinea
and its Islands. By Alfred R. Wallace, Esq., f.e.g.s., &c.
Bead , January 13, 1862.
The portion of New Guinea with which trade is regularly main-
tained from the Eastern Archipelago extends from the eastern
extremity of the great Geelvink Bay on the north coast in about
long. 137° E. to very nearly the same longitude on the south coast,
a little beyond the river Utanata. Besides this coast-line of more
than 1200 miles it embraces also the large island of Jobie and the
smaller ones of Biak and Sook to the north of it, the islands of
Waigiou, Batanta, Sal watty, and Mysol at the north-western
extremity, and the islands of Ke and Aru in the southern portion.
These islands are all inhabited by portions of the same great
Papuan race, and are (with the single exception of the Ke Islands)
geographically and zoologically a portion of New Guinea.
The only articles of commercial value procured from the interior
of New Guinea are Mussoi bark and wild nutmegs. From the
coasts and islands tripang or beche-de-mer, mother-of-pearl shell,
and tortoise-shell are all produced in abundance; and as they are
all articles which command a ready sale, and at high prices, the
trade is a very important one. The articles of less importance
are pearls, birds of Paradise, sago (raw and in cakes), mats, palm-
leaf boxes, and rice in the husk, or paddy.
The destination of these articles is various, and but few reach
Europe. The Mussoi bark, which contains an aromatic oil of a
rather pungent odour, is sent to Java, where the natives buy it at
a high price to rub on the skin as a remedy for rheumatic and
many other diseases. It is probably from a tree of the cinnamon
family. The tripang or sea-slug is all bought up by the Chinese,
who are the only consumers of this repulsive article. The tortoise-
shell is mostly bought by the Manilla traders, and I presume much
of it is manufactured in the Philippines into combs and orna-
ments. Finely-spotted shells with much white in them are very
highly esteemed, and command high prices. These the richer
natives often keep in their houses as ornaments, and as articles
always convertible into cash. Some tons of tortoise-shell must be
produced annually on the coasts of New Guinea, and, as it is
worth here 12s. to 20s. per pound, it becomes of itself an im-
portant trade. The pearl-shell and the wild nutmegs go all to
European markets. Of the less important articles, the birds of
Paradise are dispersed over the world ; the greater part, I believe,
now go to China. The pearls—which are few, and seldom fine—
are also mostly bought by the Chinese. The sago and rice being
very local productions, and the former being the staple food of the


surrounding districts, they are a great medium of exchange over
all the Papuan countries, a little being also taken to Ternate.
The mats and palm-leaf boxes are in great demand all over the
Moluccas.
The goods with which these various products are purchased are
iiot very diversified, the principal being bar-iron, calico, and thin
red cottons from England, choppers made in Singapore or Macassar,
Bugis cloths, cheap German knives and Chinese plates and basins,
brass-wire, white and coloured beads, and silver coins. Arrack is
indispensable in some districts, opium in others; but these are not
in such general demand as the preceding.
The trade is mainly carried on in native prahuws, a few small
schooners only being now engaged in it from Ternate, Menado,
Amboyna, and Macassar. They, however, form quite an unim-
portant feature in the trade of New Guinea, which is essentially
native.
A Malay prahuw is a vessel so unique as to deserve a brief
description. It is a short vessel with bow and stern nearly alike.
The deck (when it has one) slopes down towards the bows. The
mast is a triangle, and consequently wants no shrouds, and, being
low, carries an immense yard much longer than the vessel itself,
which is hung out of the centre, and the short end hauled down
on deck, so that the immense mainsail slopes upwards to a con-
siderable height. A full-rigged prahuw carries a smaller similar
sail abaft, and a bowsprit and jib. It has two rudders, one on
each quarter, with a window or opening on each side for the
tillers considerably below the deck. These vessels can only sail
8 points from the wind (so that it is impossible to make any
way by tacking when the wind is ahead), and make their voyages
only with the favourable monsoon—accomplishing, therefore, gene-
rally but one voyage a year. They are of all sizes, from 1 to
100 tons’ burden, and are built some with regularly nailed
planks, some fastened only with rattans—but so ingeniously and
isecurely as very well to stand a sea-voyage. When I first went
from Macassar to New Guinea, a distance of 1000 miles, a
small prahuw of about 10 tons which had not a single nail in its
whole structure kept company with us all the way. The largest
prahuws are from Macassar and the Bugis countries of Celebes
and the island of Boutong. Smaller ones in great numbers sail
from Ternate, Pidore, East Ceram, and Goram, which I shall
have occasion again to allude to.
I will now give a short notice of the chief districts of New
Guinea and its islands, with the most important particulars re-
lating to the trade carried on there, and the condition and cha-
racter of the inhabitants.
Great Geelvink Bay. —The centres of trade for this district are


Dorey and the little island of Roen. The inhabitants of the
mainland and of the island of Jobie are very ferocious. At Jobie
vessels at anchor have been attacked, and sailors on shore have
been frequently murdered. A schooner from Ternate comes
every year to Roen and the district of Wandamen, at the head
of the bay, to load Mussoi bark, which is found here only. One
or two prahuws from Ternate also go along the coast of Jobie and
round the bay, buying tortoise-shell and tripang. The natives of
Dorey, in small boats, visit Mafor, Sook, and Biak, and the west
end of Jobie, buying tortoise-shell, birds of Paradise, and crown-
pigeons, which they sell to the traders who touch at Dorey. The
inhabitants of Dorey, Roen, and some of the other coast villages
have a little sprinkling of Malay blood, are beginning to use
clothing, and thus make the first step in civilization. Jobie is
celebrated for its birds of Paradise, the only product of its inte-
rior. Dorey produces rice, which the natives take to Salwatty
and exchange for sago. The Dorey people also go to Amberbaki,
100 miles westward, to buy vegetables and birds of Paradise, for
which that village is celebrated.
Salwatty and Waigiou. —Salwatty is a great sago country, sup-
plying all the neighbouring districts with this necessary of life.
It is the centre of the trade of the western extremity of New
Guinea, a Bugis trader having an establishment in the chief
village of Semeter, and most of the trading prahuws and schooners
touching there. Tortoise-shells, pearl-shell, and tripang are pro-
duced in great abundance on the shoals and islands round about,
and the coast of New Guinea to the eastward produces the
greatest number and variety of birds of Paradise.
Waigiou possesses but few inhabitants, and no true indigenes.
It is remarkable for its deep inlets and narrow, rocky channels,
but imperfectly represented on the charts. The village of Wai-
gioti is situated at the head of the deepest inlet, and, being the
only part of the island producing sago, is much resorted to.
Pearl-shell is also found there.
The productions of Waigiou. are taken either to Salwatty or to
Tidore, few trading prahuws visiting it. The inhabitants of all
this part of New Guinea may be divided into two classes ; the
coast people, who have more or less mixture of Malay blood, are
mostly nominal Mahometans, build their houses on stakes in the
water, and occupy themselves almost entirely with fishing; and,
secondly, the inland people, commonly known as Alfurus, who are
of more pure Papuan blood, live on the mountains, cultivate vege-
tables, and catch birds of Paradise. They are considered as
inferiors, and almost as slaves, by the coast people, and have in
almost every district a distinct language, while the coast people
from Dorey and the islands of the Great Geelvink Bay to Salwatty,
VOL. XXXII. K


130 Wallace on the Trade of the Eastern Archipelago
Waigiou, and Mysol, all speak the same language—or so nearly
the same that they can understand one another. In their villages
one always finds some people who can speak Malay, which is
generally quite unknown to the Alfurus. The inhabitants of
Waigiou have slaves who cultivate their vegetable grounds, but
they have been originally brought fromj the mainland of New
Guinea, and are not true indigenes. They now speak the same
language as the coast people.
The districts south-east of Salwatty and the coasts of McLuer
Inlet produce abundance of wild nutmegs, and a schooner comes
annually from Ternate, and generally obtains a full cargo of
them. The natives of this part are dangerous.
Mysol or Misool. —This island produces a great deal of sago
and Mussoi bark, and abundance of tripang, with tortoise-shell,
pearls, and birds of Paradise. A number of Goram and Ceram
prahuws visit it annually to load sago, which they take to Ternate.
The largest village is Lilinta, on the south coast, in the chief sago
district. The inhabitants of the coast are Mahometans, governed
by native rajahs, and speaking the common North Papuan lan-
guage. In the interior are true indigenes, having a very distinct
language.
This island is mountainous, but not very lofty. The rocks are
sandstones and limestones. One of the latter much resembles
hard chalk, and contains flints and belemnites. If geologically
contemporaneous with the Cretaceous formation, it is the only in-
stance I am acquainted with of true secondary strata occurring in
the Moluccas or New Guinea. I have before only met with
highly crystalline rocks, volcanic, coralline, or alluvial formations.
C Coast South of McLuer Inlet —The peninsula south of McLuer
Inlet is known to the native traders by the name of Papua
Onen. The people of Goram chiefly trade there ; but the natives
are very treacherous, and, when not satisfied with the barter offered
them, will frequently attack and murder the traders. On the coast
are a few villages of Mahometans, who are also subject to constant
attacks of the indigenes of the interior. The productions are wild
nutmegs and Mussoi bark, in small quantities, with the usual tortoise-
shell and tripang on the coasts.
Farther south from Adie Island to Utandta is the Papua
Kowiyef of the traders. The Goram and Bugis traders have
almost the monopoly of this district, which produces much Mussoi
bark, with the other usual products, and is celebrated for the number
of lories, cockatoos, and other birds procured there. Even these
are not of trifling value, as every prahuw returning from any part of
New Guinea is sure to bring some dozens or scores of them, and
they all sell readily in the ports of the Moluccas at from 2s. to 10s.
each, or even more. Many hundreds —I might perhaps say thou-


sands—are brought from the Papuan countries every season, yet
the supply seems never equal to the demand. The. natives of many
parts of this coast are also very dangerous.
While 1 was at Goram (in May, 1860), the crews of two pra-
huws, including the Rajah’s son, were attacked in this part of
New Guinea, in open day, while bargaining for some tripang, and
all murdered except three or four, who escaped in a small boat
and brought the news. The shrieks and lamentation in the village
when the news was brought w r ere most distressing, almost every
house having lost a relation or a slave.
Farther east than Uta, as well as the eastern parts of the Geel-
vink Bay, go by the name of Papua Talanjong, or “ Naked Papua,”
because the natives are absolutely without clothing, or any apology
for it. These parts, however, are seldom visited.
The Aru Islands. —Of all parts of the New Guinea district, the
Am Islands are the most productive. Ten or twelve of the largest-
sized Macassar and Bugis prahuws go there annually, and generally
get a full cargo of pearl-shell, tripang, and tortoise-shell. Besides
these, scores of smaller boats flock there from Goram, East Ceram,
Banda, and Amboyna; while the natives of Kd, of Temimber, of
Babber, and of some parts of New Guinea, come there as to a fair
to dispose of their products, or to fish for the supply of the traders.
The village of Dobbo, on one of the western islands, is the centre
of the trade, where the large prahuws are hauled up and repaired,
smaller ones being sent among the islands to collect produce. The
village is situated on a narrow spit of sand, on which are crowded
three streets of rude thatched houses, while a larger population live
in their boats or under mats on the beach. In the height of the
season I calculated that Dobbo contained TOGO inhabitants—some
from almost every chief island in the Archipelago. Chinamen from
Macassar opened stores, tempting the motley population with gaudy
china, glass, and trinkets. Even the European luxuries of sugar,
biscuit, preserved fruits, and wine, were to be obtained in small
quantities, but at very moderate prices, and there was generally no
advance made on the Singapore or Macassar rates, the dealers
trusting to the profit obtained on the produce taken in exchange
from the native buyers. Cockfighting and football-playing (in
which the Bugis are very expert) took place almost every evening
in the widest part of the street; and though quarrels sometimes
occur and creeses are drawn and used, yet, considering there is no
government, and the mixture of races and religions crowded to-
gether, all eager for gain, order and harmony generally prevail.
This is in part due, however, to a Dutch* official, who makes an
annual visit for a few days to hear and decide disputes and punish
offences.
Aru is one of the places in which arrack is indispensable to
k 2


purchase produce. A native who has accumulated a good lot of
tripang or pearl-shell, besides the cloth, crockery, and ironware,
will always have one or two cases of arrack (of about 7 gallons
each) in payment. He then calls together his particular friends
and has a grand drin ing bout, which continues day and night till
the whole is finished. During these orgies they frequently break
or burn half their scanty moveables, or even pull their own house
down about their ears, of course fighting occasionally ; but, as the
women remove all weapons, lives are seldom lost.
The natives with whom I resided in the interior boasted of these
exploits, saying they did not do things by halves, and that they
would rather have no arrack at all than not enough to get tho-
roughly well drunk while they were about it.
Owing to the great competition in Aru, articles are sold very
cheap, and a high price given for all native produce. It thus
happens that these remote and savage islanders obtain calicoes,
handkerchiefs, and other articles, which are to them more orna-
ment than clothing, at a far cheaper rate (estimated in labour) than
the inhabitants of the towns where they are made, or the workmen
who produce them. This is one of the anomalous results of that
immense commercial and manufacturing system of which we are so
proud, and whose continual increase we look upon as an unmixed
blessing to mankind.
The trade of Aru is perhaps more considerable than that of any
other part of the Papuan district. In the year 1857, when I visited
the islands, there were 15 large prahuws from Macassar, and more
than 100 small ones, of various sizes, from Ceram, Goram, and the
Ke Islands. The Macassar cargoes were worth about 200,000
rupees (15,000/.), and the small boats about 50,000 rupees more.
The great bulk of this consists of pearl-shell and tripang, all other
articles of produce being in much smaller quantities. The Goram
and Ceram men bring cargoes of sago-cakes, which the natives of
Aru eagerly buy; and there are many natives of the island of
Babber who devote themselves to fishing, while the inhabitants of
the interior bring large quantities of sugar-cane, plantains, and
other vegetables. Dobbo, therefore, is well supplied with provi-
sions, and is on that account a much more agreeable residence than
any other part of the Papuan district, where provisions are very
scarce, and the obtaining anything to eat is a daily-recurring
problem.
Several of the villages of Aru are Christian, and have native
schoolmasters from Amboyna: others are Mahometan; while the
natives of the interior have nothing that can be called a religion.
As is generally the case in the far east, the latter are the most
industrious of the three, and are therefore the least miserable, *and
by far the most pleasant to reside with. , ......


Ke Islands. —The natives of Ke are the boat-builders of the far
east. Several villages are constantly employed in this work, in
which they are unequalled in the Archipelago. Their forests pro-
duce excellent timber of many different kinds; and the workmen
are so expert in the use of the axe and adze, that with these alone
they produce vessels of admirable form and most excellent work-
manship. In a good Kd prahuw the model is perfect; the planks
are as smooth as if planed, and fit together so exactly that from
end to end a knife cannot be inserted between them. The planks
are all cut out of the solid wood, with a series of projections left on
the inside, to which the inner timbers are attached by rattans.
The planks are all pegged together along the edges with pins of
hard wood, so that it is impossible they can spring. After the
first year the rattan-tied ribs are generally replaced by new ones,
fitted to the planks and nailed, and the vessel then becomes fully
equal to those of the best European workmanship. The Papuan
traders and the natives of Goram and Ceram all buy their prahuws
and small boats at Ke, and lately several fine schooners have been
built there. Very excellent ship-building timber may be purchased
here at cheap rates—muskets, gongs, and cotton cloths being the
principal articles taken in exchange : good carpenters’ tools are also
much appreciated. Besides boats and timber, cocoa-nut oil is the
chief export of the Ke Islands. The original inhabitants of Banda
have emigrated to Ke since the Dutch took possession of that island,
and they now inhabit separate villages, having preserved their
language, and are known as Ke Banda people.
Between Ke and Ceram are a range of islands, inhabited by
natives of Papuan race, but becoming lighter in colour as we
approach Ceram. About midway is Teor, a small hilly island
inhabited by a fine race of brown-skinned frizzly-haired people, who
cultivate vegetables and seek tortoiseshell, which they bring in their
little open boats to Goram and Ceram. The Matabello Islands
are raised coral reefs, 300 to 400 feet high, covered with fruit-trees
and cocoa-nuts, from which the natives manufacture oil, which is
the principal article of trade. They are wealthy, the women all
wearing massive gold earrings, and the chiefs dressing on state
occasions in flowered satin gowns and scarfs. In their villages,
too, are dozens of small brass guns, which must have cost a great
deal of money ; yet their houses are most miserable and filthy, and
their food most precarious and scanty. Cocoa-nuts and oil-refuse,
with an occasional sago-cake, form their principal subsistence, and
cutaneous diseases, as the necessary result, everywhere abound.
A little farther to the north-west is the Goram group, consisting
of three islands, and very thickly inhabited by a race allied to the
Ceram Malays. They are the great traders of the far east, visiting
all the coasts and islands of New Guinea, and selling the product


of their voyages to the Bugls and Chinese traders, who have their
general “ rendezvous ”at Kilwaru, in the Ceram Laut Islands. In
their voyages they are most enterprising; in other respects very
inactive and lazy, depending for food almost entirely on the labours
of their Papuan slaves. Many of the inhabitants are much addicted
to opium-smoking. The only manufactures of Goram are coarse
mat sail-cloth, a little cotton, and ornamental boxes made of sago-
pith and pandanus-leaves, which are much esteemed all over the
Moluccas as clothes-boxes. The Goram men visit Banda, Amboyna,
and Ternate; but seldom extend their voyages farther, as the
Bugis traders give them a good price for their tripang and tortoise-
shell.
The great “rendezvous” for the New Guinea traders is Kilwaru,
a little island scarcely 50 yards across, situated between Ceram-
laut and Keffing. On both sides of it is a good anchorage in all
weathers, which is probably the reason why it has been chosen.
Though scarcely raised above high-water mark, and with not two
acres of surface, it possesses wells of very good drinking water—a
fact which I could hardly have believed had 1 not examined it
myself. When I visited Kilwaru there were a native schooner
from Baly, and several Chinese and Bugis prahuws from Macassar,
in the harbour; and there were stores open on shore, in which
almost every article requisite for New Guinea trade could be pro-
cured. Sugar, tea, coffee, rice, arrack, and wine were also to be
purchased here, and a large assortment of cotton-cloths, both of
European and native manufacture, as well as muskets, gunpowder,
china, crockery, German knives, opium, and tobacco.
Sago being so intimately connected with the trade of New
Guinea, and forming the staff of life for so large a portion of the
natives engaged in it, a short account of its growth and manu-
facture may be appropriately given.
The sago-tree is a palm, thicker than the cocoa-nut-tree, but not
so tall, with immense spiny leaves, which completely cover the stem
till it has arrived at a considerable age, when the lower ones rot
and fall off, leaving the bare stem. It has a creeping root, or
rhizoma, like the Nipa palm, and bears an immense terminal spike
of flowers at about ten or fifteen years of age, after which the tree
dies, being thus allied to our annual and biennial plants, and to
the aloe. It grows in swamps or in swampy hollows on the rocky
slopes of hills, where it appears to thrive equally well as when
exposed to the daily influence of salt or brackish water.
The midribs of the leaves form one of the most useful products
of these lands, supplying the place of bamboo, to which, for many
purposes, they are superior. These midribs are 12 or 15 feet
long, and often as thick as one’s leg at the base. They are very
light, consisting entirely of a firm pith, covered with a hard brown


skin. Entire houses are built with them. They form admirable
roofing poles for thatch; split and well supported, they make
flooring; and when chosen of equal size and pegged together,
they form excellent walls and partitions to framed wooden houses;
carefully split and shaved smooth, they are formed into hoards,
with pegs cut out of the hard skin, and are the foundation of the
leaf-covered boxes of Goram and New Guinea. All the insect-
boxes I have used in the Moluccas are thus made in Amboyna;
and when covered with paper inside and out are quite strong
enough, exceedingly light, and carry insect pins remarkably well.
The leaflets of the sago folded and tied side by side on the smaller
midribs, or to strips of bamboo, form the “ attap,” or thatch, in
universal use; while the product of the stem is the daily food of
some hundred thousands of men.
When sago is to be made, a full-grown tree is cut down and
cleared of leaves, and a broad strip of bark on the upper side is
taken off, exposing the pith, which is of a rusty colour near the
base, but pure white higher up, as firm as a dry potato, but with
woody fibres running through the substance and branching in every
direction, about a quarter of an inch apart. The pith is beaten
into powder by means of a hard and heavy piece of wood, with a
bit of quartz or flint fixed into the end. At each blow this cuts
away a narrow strip of pith, which falls down into the hollow
cylinder formed by the trunk, and is packed into baskets, made of
the sheathing bases of the leaves. It is then carried to the nearest
water, when a washing-machine is constructed, composed entirely
of the tree itself, with strainers of the cloth-like sheaths of the
cocoa-nut leaves. Successive washings dissolve and carry away
all the starchy matter, which settles in large hollows formed in the
water-troughs. This is packed cylindrically in sago-leaves, and is
the raw sago of commerce.
Haw sago, simply boiled with a little water, forms a thick starchy
mass, called “ papeda,” eaten with chop-sticks, in the Chinese
fashion. More commonly, however, it is baked into cakes, in
small clay ovens, containing six or eight
vertical slits, side by side, about three-
quarters of an inch wide, and forming
cakes six or eight inches square. This
is thoroughly heated over a clear fire,
and the sago, first dried, powdered, and
finely sifted, is filled into it. It is
covered with a piece of flat sago-bark
for a few minutes, and the cakes are
baked. The hot cakes, with the addition of a little sugar or
grated cocoa-nut, are very agreeable, something resembling maize-
bread. When required to be kept, however, they are dried for


136 Wallace on the Trade of the Eastern Archipelago , s•<?.
several days in the sun, and tied in bundles, of 20 to 50 each,
when they can be kept for years. When thus dried they are very
hard, and taste rough, like sawdust-bread; but the people are used
to them from infancy, and little children may be seen gnawing
them as contentedly as our own with their bread and butter.
It is truly an extraordinary sight to see a whole tree-trunk,
perhaps 20 feet long, and 5 in circumference, converted into food,
and with no more preparation or labour than is required to make
flour from wheat or maize. A good-sized tree will produce
30 tomans, or bundles of 30 lbs. each ; and these when baked
will give 60 cakes, of 3to the pound. Two of these cakes are a
meal for a man, or about 5 a day; so that, reckoning a tree to
produce 1800 cakes, weighing 600 lbs., it is food for one man for
a year. The labour to produce this is as follows:—Two men
working moderately will finish a tree in five days, and two women
will bake the whole in about five days more; hut the raw sago can
be kept any time, and baked as wanted, so that we may estimate
that in ten days a man may produce food for the whole year.
This is, however, if he possesses trees of his own, for all are now
private property, and poor men have to buy a tree for 5 or 6
rupees (about 95.). The ordinary price of labour here is 25 doits,
or 4c?., a day; so that the total cost of 1800 cakes, or a year’s food
for one man, is about 125.
This excessive cheapness of food is, contrary to what might be
expected, a curse rather than a blessing. It leads to great laziness
and the extreme of misery. The habit of industry not being
acquired by stern necessity, all labour is distasteful, and the
sago-eaters have, as a general rule, the most miserable of huts and
the scantiest of clothing. In the western islands of the Archipelago,
where rice is the common food of the people, and where some
kind of regular labour is necessary for its cultivation, there is an
immediate advance in comfort, and a step upward in civilization.
This limited observation may be extended with the same results
over the whole world ; for it is certainly a singular fact that no
civilized nation has arisen within the tropics. That rigour of
nature which some may have thought a defect of our northern
climes has, under this view, been one of the acting causes in the
production of our high civilization. We may, indeed, further
venture to suppose that, had the earth everywhere presented the
same perennial verdure that exists in the equatorial regions, and
everywhere produced spontaneously sufficient for the supply of
men’s physical wants, the human race might have remained for a
far longer period in that low state of civilization in which we still
find the inhabitants of the fertile islands of the Moluccas and New
Guinea.
These scanty notes on the commerce of a very remote and little-


known region have been collected during three voyages to various
parts of New Guinea and its islands. They are offered to the
Royal Geographical Society in the belief that no authentic and
connected information on the subject has yet been published,
and with the hope that their crudeness and deficiencies will be
pardoned.
Xll. —Report on the Brazilian Province of the Parana. By the
Hon. H. P. Yereker, H.M. Consul at Rio Grande do Sul.
[Communicated by the Foreign Office.]
Read, February 24, 1862.
This province was formerly the fifth comarca or county of the
province of St. Paul, in territorial extent comprising nearly half
of that province, but thinly peopled and much neglected. By the
Brazilian Law No. 701, of the 29th August, 1853, this division
of St. Paul was formed into a separate province, under the name
of the Province of the Parand.
Boundaries. —The Province of the Parana is situated between
22° and 28° of south lat. Its limits are not yet clearly determined,
but it may be stated generally that it is bounded on the south by
the province of Rio Grande do Sul; on the south-east by that of
St. Catherine; on the east by the Atlantic Ocean; on the north
by the province of St. Paul; on the west by the province of
Matto Grosso and the republic of Paraguay ; and on the south-
west by Corrientes, a portion of the United Provinces of the River
Plate. The defined boundaries are those of the river Parana on
the west, the river Paranapanema to the north, the ocean on the
east, and the river Uruguay to the south. Other portions of the
limits are determined, but with regard to almost all the remainder
there exist unsettled questions: even the limit with Rio Grande
is disputed by the province of St. Catherine, which claims the land
lying between the river Yguassti and Uruguay.
Divisions. —For judicial and ecclesiastical purposes the pro-
vince is divided into four comarcas or counties, viz., Curityba,
Paranagua, Castro, and Guarapuava.
Towns. —The chief towns are Curityba, the capital, situated in
a central locality; Paranagua, Antonina, Principe, Castro, Gua-
rapuava, Morretes, and Guaratuba.
Rivers. —The province of the Parana is well irrigated by rivers,
the principal of which, according to their local importance, are the
following: Rivers Parand, Paranapanema, Uruguay, Tibagy,
Ivahy, and Yguassu; also the smaller rivers Itarare, Piquiry,
Pirapo, Yguape, Negro, Cinzas, Jopim, &c. There are, besides, a
