

ON THE
PROGRESS AND PRESENT STATE OF ASTRONOMICAL
SCIENCE IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
(BY JOHN TERBUTT, ESQ.)
New South Wales can hardly he expected to have contributed
much hitherto to the advancement of astronomy. Eighty-two
years only have elapsed since Sydney, its metropolis, formed part
of one vast forest, in which the aboriginal, the emu, and the
kangaroo roamed in all their native freedom. In that brief
period its progress in commercial prosperity has been rapid and
astonishing, and the time is now probably at hand when it will
take its place creditably among the old countries of Europe as a
contributor to the arts and sciences. Now, that we are possessed
of an excellent University, opportunities are afforded to young
men for the necessary training, in order to distinction in scientific
pursuits. And in so far as the science of astronomy is concerned,
the Colony can now boast of a national Observatory, comparing
favourably with many on the Continents of Europe and America.
The object of the present paper is to show, in as brief a compass
as possible, that New South Wales is not without her associations
in connection with astronomical science, and has in some measure
contributed to its advancement. Her astronomical history com-
mences with the establishment in 1822 of the Parramatta Obser-
vatory —an institution founded and liberally supported by the
private munificence of General Sir Thomas Brisbane, who was
Governor of the Colony at the time. He was distinguished for
his enthusiastic love of astronomy, with the theory and practice of
which he was familiar. Its cultivation was always a matter of
interest to him, even in the midst of the turmoil and adventure of
a military life. During the warlike operations in the Peninsula
he regularly supplied the army with the local time, by means of a
pocket sextant, chronometer, and artificial horizon ; but it was
not till his appointment as Governor of this Colony that he had
an opportunity for contributing in any marked degree to the
advancement of his favourite science. He at once perceived the
ample opportunities which an Observatory in the clear southern
skies of Australia would have for extending our knowledge of the
heavens. The labours of Lacaille, at the Gape of Good Hope,
are well known to astronomers, and formed hitherto the chief con-
tribution to our knowledge of the southern heavens. Under these
circumstances the Observatory of Parramatta, in conjunction with
5/ 182-71




■Quit at the Cape of Good Hope, whose establishment was nearly
contemporaneous with it, would have a wide and brilliant field for
tie development of its efforts. Sir Thomas Brisbane arrived in
tie Colony in tie year 1821, and no time was lost in carrying Lis
scheme into execution. lam informed iy an old colonist, that
previously to the erection of a fixed Observatory, occasional obser-
vations were taten in a temporary building in the town of Parra-
matta. An excellent site was found for the proposed Observatory
on the highest point of what now _ constitutes the Parramatta
Park. The structure being complete’d, the work of observation
was carried on with great assiduity under the able management
of Mr. Carl L. Eiimher, a German, afterwards the distinguished
Director of the Hamburgh Observatory, and Mr. James Dunlop,
a gentleman of considerable natural talent as a mechanic and
astronomer. The principal instruments employed were a transit
instrument of 64 inches focal length, and 3f inches aperture, a
2-feet mural circle (both by Troughton), a 16-inch repeating circle
by Eeicbenbaoh, and a small equatorial of 42 inches focal length.
The two first-named instruments were fully employed in forming
a catalogue of southern stars ; and in this work Sir Thomas
himself, as a relaxation from his governmental duties, took a
large share. The first fruits of tie labours of the Observatory
consisted of observations of tbe summer solstice of 1821, the
results of which were made known to the astronomical world
through the Astmnomische Nachrichten of Schumacher. Deter-
minations of both the solstices of 1822 also appeared in that
j onrnal, and those of the solstices of 1823 were communicated
to the Astronomical Society, together with an extensive series
of observations of the principal stars in both hemispheres. The
observations underwent a careful reduction in the hands of
Dr. Brinkley, “ the details of which,” says Sir John F. W.
Herschel, in an address delivered by him before tbe Astrono-
mical Society, in February, 1828, on the occasion of the pre-
sentation of tie Society’s honorary medals to Sir T. Brisbane
and Mr. Dunlop, “ as well as tbe original observations, are printed
in the first part of the second volume of the Transactions of the
Society ; and which justify, in the eyes of that experienced
observer, as they must in those of every practical astronomer, a
decided opinion of the great care and skill with which they have
been made.” Of occasional observations a great number were
furnished by the Observatory. Among these may be mentioned
observations of planetary conjunctions and oppositions, of comets,
and of eclipses and occnltations. One of the most interesting
circumstances in connection with the Parramatta Observatory is
the fact that we owe to it the verification of one of the most
remarkable investigations in physical astronomy. I refer to the
elaborate investigation by the late Professor Encke into the


movements of tlie comet discovered by Pons in 1818, but which,
now universally bears the name of the distinguished professor.
The comet had been seen on several occasions previously.
Although the, parabolic elements calculated for it at the different
apparitions were identical, and showed beyond doubt that they
belonged to one and the same body, yet no attempt had been
made, previously to 1819, to determine the period in which its
revolution was performed round the sun. The investigation of
this element, which was a work of profound difficulty in the then
comparatively unadvanced state of physical astronomy, was ably
conducted by Encke. Erom the series of observations made
during its visibility from the earth in 1818-19, he arrived at the
conclusion that the comet was moving in an ellipse, with a period
of about 3| years. This announcement marked the first discovery
of a comet of short period (there being only one comet of known
periodic character hitherto discovered, namely, Halley’s), and
formed a very important epoch in the history of physical
astronomy; Encke proceeded to investigate the perturbations
which the comet would undergo during its next revolution round
the sun, from the combined influence of the planets, and fixed
May 24th, 1822, as the time of its next perihelion passage. An
ephemeris was computed from the resulting elements, showing
the apparent track which the comet would pursue among the
stars. Encke had the greatest confidence in the result of his
investigations; hut unfortunately for the gratification of the
ardent expectation which every astronomer shared with him, it
was found that the comet would traverse the southern hemisphere
below the horizon of the European Observatories. It is necessary
thus to enter briefly into the early history of this comet, in order
to show the interest which the Parramatta Observatory had in
the matter. It was, now that the means for the verification of
this important investigation was quite out of reach of European
astronomers, that the establishment at Parramatta stepped in and
supplied the want. On the evening of the 2nd June, 1822, the
wanderer was detected by Mr. Eumker. A series of observations,
extending to 29th June, was made, which enabled Encke to
correct his elements, and predict the next apparition with increased
accuracy. The only observations obtained were those made at
Parramatta. The investigation was indeed a triumph, and no
small credit is due to our Observatory for the part it performed
in its verification. Observations of the length of the seconds
pendulum were also made at Parramatta, and published in the
Transactions of the Eoyal Society for 1823. “ The remainder
and indeed the great mass of the observations made with the
mural circle and the transit instrument,” says Sir J. Herschel, in
the address before referred to, “ have at different periods been
communicated to the Eoyal Society, and are for the present


deposited in its archives. Forming our judgment only upon those
of which an account has been publicly read at the meetings
of that illustrious body, but which are understood to constitute
only a comparatively small part of the whole, they form one of
the most interesting and important series which has ever been
made, and must ever be regarded as marking a decided era in
the history of southern astronomy.”
, Besides the useful catalogue of 7,385 stars, which has already
been published as the result of the labours of the Parramatta
Observatory, we have also Mr. Dunlop’s catalogue of upwards of
600 southern nebulae and clusters of stars, together with a large
and valuable collection of double stars. Independently of the
detection and observation of Enche’s comet, the Observatory was
not behind-hand in cometary discovery. The fourth comet of
1822 was observed by Etimker, for which he calculated elliptic
elements with a period of 1,816 years. On the Isth July, 1824,
the first comet of the year was discovered by the same astronomer,
It was seen only in the southern hemisphere, and its elements
were computed by its discoverer. The first and fourth comets of
1825 were also observed by Eiimker, the last observation of the
first-mentioned body being obtained at Parramatta. Mr. Dunlop
also had his share in cometary discovery. The comet of 1833
was detected by him ou the Ist October, and observed to the 16th.
Ho other observations, I believe, are recorded. The comet which
appeared in the following year, and was first discovered by
G-ambart at Marseilles on the 7th March, was also found
independently by Dunlop at Parramatta. The Observatory was
dismantled in 1847. Its roofless brick walls are still to be seen,
but nothing remains to testify to the character of the ruins, except
the stone piers which once formed the support of the meridian
instrument. Before every vestige of this interesting building
disappears, I think it would be advisable to determine, by the
means now so readily available, its position with reference to
the Sydney Observatory. It would also not be inappropriate if
an obelisk were erected on the spot, commemorative of the institu-
tion and its founder. Prom the time that operations ceased at
Parramatta to the arrival of Sir "William Denison, the Colony
did not contribute anything worth recording towards the promo-
tion of astronomy. Sir William expressed his regret at the discon-
tinuance of the Parramatta institution, and drew attention to the
importance of establishing in the Colony an Observatory wholly
supported by the Government. A memorandum was addressed
by His Excellency to the Executive Council in March, 1855, on
the subject. The Council concurred in the views of His Excellency,'
and the matter was immediately brought before the Legislature.
A liberal sum was voted for the erection of a Hational Observatory,
and the Eev. W. Scott, M.A., of Sidney Sussex College, Cam


bridge, on the recommendation of the Astronomer Eoyal of
England, was appointed to the important office of first astronomer
to the establishment. He graduated as Third "Wrangler in 1848,
had continued to reside in Cambridge as Eellow, and afterwards
as Mathematical Lecturer of his College. Mr. Scott arrived in
Sydney on the Ist November, 1856, and proceeded with as little
delay as possible to select a site for the proposed Observatory.
For purely scientific purposes some site in the country would have
been preferable for the building, but it was requisite that it should
be within easy access of the public institutions of the metropolis.
The hill occupied by Fort Philip was selected for the purpose, as it
commanded the best view of the horizon and of the shipping in
the harbour, for whose interests it was proposed to erect a time-
ball. In June, 1858, the building was so far advanced as to
admit of meridian observations. It is a handsome and com-
modious stone structure. The eastern portion comprises the
Astronomer’s residence, the library, and the computer’s room.
From the centre rises a square tower, 58 feet high, which carries
the time-ball. Next follows the transit-room, provided with two
meridian openings, and an octagonal building covered by a dome,
and intended for the reception of an equatorial instrument, com-
pletes the western end of the Observatory. The Observatory
being completed, the only instruments at the disposal of the
Astronomer were those formerly employed at Parramatta. The
principal ones were the transit instrument and mural circle, a
meridian circle, and a portable equatorial. In the absence of the
meridian circle, which had been sent to England for repairs,
observations were carried on with the transit instrument, simply
for the determination of local time, and of the longitude by the
moon and moon-culminating stars. Contemporaneously with the
establishment of the Observatory, meteorological stations were
formed throughout the Colony. About this period occurred
several astronomical phenomena of great public interest, which
drew the attention of the Colonists generally to the claims of
astronomical science, and, as a consequence, to the high value of
the newly-formed Observatory. Among these were the total
solar eclipse of March 26th, 1857, and the appearance of the
comet of Donati, in October, 1858. Calculations of the former
phenomenon were published in the Sydney Morning Herald
several days previously to its occurrence, by the Government
Astronomer, Mr. F. Napier, and the writer of this paper. Unfor-
tunately, however, no part of the total phase was seen at any
station where instruments were available for its observation.
Nothing could be recorded beyond a few meteorological and
terrestrial observations. The Sydney Observatory, not being yet
completed, the Astronomer had prepared a temporary observatory
at the South Head of Sydney Harbour, in which a portable


equatorial, lent to him by the Governor, formed the principal
instrument. In the meteorological department he was assisted
by Capt. Ward, E.E. The sun was seen for about fourteen
minutes after its appearance above the horizon, during the pro-
gress of the partial eclipse. In addition to the meteorological
observations at South Head there was a series made at St.
Leonard’s, in its vicinity, by the Eev. "W. B. Clarhe, which were
published in the Herald of April 9th, 1857. The grand comet of
Donati was an object of intense interest to the colonists. It was
for some time supposed to he the illustrious body which appeared
in 1264 and 1566, and whose reappearance was expected about
this time. Onr national Observatory, then in its infancy, and in
an incomplete state, could not furnish any accurate information
respecting the interesting stranger. Approximations to the
orbit were severally computed, from sextant observations, by the
Government Astronomer, Mr. Hawkins, of the King’s School,
Parramatta, and the writer, which proved the comet to be quite
a different body from the expected great comet. Its appearance
showed the absolute necessity of furnishing the Observatory with
an instrument of a high class for extra-meridian observations.
The Astronomer accordingly submitted a report on this subject
to the Government, and the Legislature, with their accustomed
praiseworthy liberality, granted the sum of 8800 for the purchase
of a large equatorial telescope. At the close of 1858 the transit
circle was received from England, and was mounted with all
possible dispatch. Its graduated limb is 42 inches in diameter,
and its telescope has an aperture of 3} inches, and a focal length
of 62 inches. Begular observations were commenced with it in
June, 1859. These consist of determinations of the right ascen-
sion of the moon for longitude, and of the positions of stars, a
large proportion of which culminate near the zenith of Sydney.
The latter results will hereafter be found useful for the deter-
mination of the latitude of other points in the Colony. The
attention of the colonists was again strongly drawn to the claims
of astronomical science by the appearance in 1861 of one of the
most splendid comets of modern times. The newspapers of the
day teemed with correspondence respecting the stranger, and the
predictions of its movements created much excitement, It was
detected by the writer on the evening of the 13th May, and its
position determined with great difficulty by means of a telescope
of 1| inches aperture and a sextant. The discovery was com-
municated to the Sydney Observatory as soon as he was convinced
of its cometary character, and a letter announcing it appeared in
■the SeraM of 25th May. Eor some days after its discovery its
apparent motion was extremely slow. Mr. Scott’s first observation
of the comet was obtained on the evening of the 22nd, with the
old Parramatta equatorial—the only instrument immediately at


his disposal. A new equatorial, by Merz & Son, of Munich, had
just arrived, of 10 feet 4 inches focal length, and 1\ inches clear
aperture, but was not yet mounted. Observations were continued
with the old equatorial, and it was not till the 9th June that the
first observation was obtained with the new instrument. On the
15th June the writer published his first determination of the orbit
in the following communication to the Sydney Morning Herald
“The Comet’s Obbit.
“ Sir,—The following is a rough approximation to the orhit of the comet
now visible. It is based on the observation made at the Sydney Observatory
on the 24th May, and sextant observations made here on the mornings of the
3rd and 11th June—
Perihelion passage, Jane 13, 7233, 1861, Greenwich mean time.
Perihelion distance 0'82033
Longitude of ascending node 280° O' 44"
Longitude of perihelion on the orhit 252° 13' 39"
Inclination of orbit 86° 18' 42"
Heliocentric motion Direct.
“ The above results will doubtless hereafter require considerable correction,
as it is difficult to obtain an approximate orbit from a few observations made
at the commencement of a comet’s visibility. This fact was exemplified in the
ease of Donati’s comet, the earlier orbits computed for it being afterwards
found to be very incorrect. I have some doubts as to the direction of
the present comet’s heliocentric motion, as in the case of an almost per-
pendicular orhit small errors in the adopted positions of the comet might
produce an error of several degrees in the inclination, and thus convert a
retrograde into a direct motion. The true numbers will be approximated to
as observations accumulate. My calculations show that the comet will soon
move rapidly towards the north, and that on the 29th instant the earth will
be at no great distance from the extremity of its tail. There is some pro-
bability of the comet becoming visible in full daylight about that date.
“ Windsor, June 13th.”
This was supplemented by the following more particular state-
ment in the 'Empire of June 22nd: —
“ The following particulars, deduced from the rough orhit I have already
computed, will perhaps not he uninteresting to your readers. On the night of
discovery the comet was distant about 124 millions of miles from the earth,
and 96 millions from the sun. It arrived at the perihelion point of its orbit
on the I3th instant, its distance from the sun at that time being 78 millions
of miles. Although the comet is now increasing its distance from the sun,
its distance from the earth is diminishing at the rate of about 2J millions of
miles daily. This diminution will go on till about the time of the comet’s
passing its ascending node, namely, on the 29th instant, when the distance of
the nucleus from the earth will be about 14 millions of miles. Its distance
from us at this date (June 20th) is 35 millions of miles. On the last two or
three mornings I have observed the tail to be divided into two branches, which
emanate from the main part of the tail at a distance of about six degrees from
the head. The upper or western branch was the more distinct, and I could
trace it to a distance of 42 degrees from the head. The tail, supposing it to
point directly from the sun, will cross the earth’s path about the 29th instant,


at a point vrliicli -will ba occupied by the earth on the 2nd July, so that it
appears the earth will hare a narrow escape from being enveloped in the more
diffused part of that appendage. The comet will be in conjunction with the
sun about the beginning of next month, and will shortly afterwards become
"visible in the evenings in the north-west.”
The remarkable announcement of tlie near approach of the
comet’s tail to the earth was received with confidence by some,
hut with extreme distrust, and even ridicule, hy otters; and it was
not till determinations of the orbit were published respectively
tj the Government Astronomer and Mr. Hawkins, that the public
mind was assured of the correctness of the prediction. On the
evening of the 30th June this wonderful body made its appearance
above tbe European horizon, and employed the efforts of the most
distinguished Observatories. A few days after its sudden appear-
ance in England, Mr. Hind made the following annonneement in
the newspapers, which was received with the highest interest: —
“ It appears not only possible, but even probable, tbat in tie course of Jane
30th 'tie earth passed through tie tail at a distance of perhaps two-thirds of
its length from tie nucleus. I tlinh tie earth would very probably encounter
the tail in tie early part of that day; or, at any rate, it was certainly in a
region which. had been swept over hy the cometary matter shortly before.”
If does not appear to be generally known in Europe that
this remarkable circumstance of the comet’s movements was
predicted in Hew South ’Wales. In the Eev. "W. Webb's account
of the physical appearance of this comet, he noticed the gradual
closing np of the branches of the tail in the evening immediately
succeeding the earth’s passage through that appendage. The
opposite of this perspective effect was remarked by the writer on
the mornings immediately preceding the event. It is worthy of
remark, tbat a display of aurora was witnessed by several persons
in the Colony on the evening of the 28th June. Tbe comet was
seen in full daylight in England in the afternoon of the 30th, and
was re-discovered at Windsor, on the tv.n.w. horizon, in tbe
evening of the 2nd August, thus fulfilling completely the
predictions of its movements, made some time previously. Tbe
observations of the comet in both hemispheres are numerous, and
together extend over a period of twelve months. Those made at
the Sydney Observatory were published by the Eoyal Astronomical
Society, together with an accurate set of parabolic elements by
Mr. Hawkins, of Goulburn. The observations were also published
by Professor Peters, the distinguished Director of the Altona
Observatory in the Astronomische Waehrichten. In the year 1861
tbe Government Observatory wag complete in many respects.
The total number of meridian observations made and reduced
during the year 1860 was 2820, of which 2507 were published.
Tlemnnbermade inlß6l was2loo, being fewerthan in 1860, owing
to the efforts of the Astronomer and Ms assistant being partly


devoted to the employment of the new equatorial. Occupations of
fixed stars, approximately computed by the writer for the purpose,
were observed with this instrument, and also a few of Sir J.
Herschel’s double stars. The comet observations, made at the
Observatory during Mr. Scott’s superintendence, consist of those of
comet 111, 1860, comet 11, 1861, and Encke’s comet in the beginning
of 1862, all of which have been communicated to the astronomical
institutions of Europe. Mr. Scott contributed several useful
papers to the Colonial Philosophical Society ; and, in his official
capacity, he endeavoured to form a class of amateur astronomers.
It is, however, much to be regretted, that this attempt did not
meet with the support it deserved. His labours are, however,
chiefly represented by four volumes of observations, published in
the Colony, and embracing the period from the middle of 1859
to the middle of 1862. The observations comprise moon-culmi-
nations, transit and zenith distance determinations of stars,
differential comparisons of comet 111, 1860, and comet 11, 1861,
and the meteorological results at the Observatory, and the
stations connected with it. The transit-circle employed in the first
two classes of observations is described as only a second-class
instrument, but, considering the care and shill employed in the
use of it, the volumes referred to will be found to be a very
valuable contribution to science. After ably filling the duties of
his post, from the establishment of the Observatory till the close
of September, 1852, he resigned his appointment. The Observa-
tory remained in charge of the assistant, Mr. H. C. Bussell, B. A.,
till the beginning of 1861, when Mr. George E. Smalley, 8.A.,
formerly assistant at the Observatory of the Cape of Good Hope,
was appointed to the office. During the interval the chief work
performed consisted of transit observations for local time, and
the reduction of the meteorological observations made at the
Observatory and the country stations. A careful series of obser-
vations of Mars at its opposition in 1862 was also, I believe, made
by Mr. Bussell. Mr. Smalley’s first annual report was presented
to the Observatory Board on the 2nd June, 1865. The number
of meridian observations during the year 1864 was only 644, the
work of the Observatory having been much retarded by a course
of repairs to the building, and the unusually rainy season. A
series of observations of comet 11, 1864, comprising 249 compari-
sons, and extending from August 15th to September 20fch, was
made with the 10-feet equatorial; and an abstract of these results
appeared in the Notices of the Eoyal Astronomical Society. The
usual daily meteorological observations were carried on, and
magnetic observations instituted, at various places throughout the
Colony. Attention was also drawn in the report to the unstable
character of the ground on which the Observatory was erected, the
inconvenience of making reflexion observations with the circle being


031 that account great. The Astronomer’s second annual report
■was read to the Board on the 16th August, 1866. It gives a
detailed account of the work done at the Observatory during the
year 1865. The personal establishment remained the same as at
the date of the previous report, aud consisted of the Astronomer*
first assistant, the meteorological assistant, and the messenger.
The meridian results are thus summed up—
Transits 689
Zenith Distances IIS
E etenniaatioiis of Azimuth 121
Ditto Collimatioa 215
Ditto Level 158
Ditto Madir Point 24
The extra meridian wort performed with the 10-feet equatorial
consists of fifty comparisons of comet I, 1865, and fifteen of
Enehe’s comet. The observations of Eneke’s Comet were shortly
afterwards published in the JVbtices of the Eoyal Astronomical
Society. The usual meteorological observations were carried
through the year ; and the magnetic survey, which had been
commenced in the previous year, was prosecuted as far as time
and means would allow. Determinations of the magnetic variation,
dip, aud intensity, were made at eighteen stations. Some valu-
able additions were made to the appliances of the Observatory.
A shed, twelve feet square, was erected on the south side of the
building, for the reception of the thermometers, which was
considered to obviate the had effects due to the ordinary
Greenwich stand. A small magnetieal observatory was also in
course of erection, about 100 feet on the north side of the
Observatory. The principal instruments acquired during the
year comprised a self-registering pluviometer, a self-recording
tide-gauge, and an electrometer. The first-mentioned instrument
was constructed by Mr. Enssell, whose mechanical talents, so
necessary to every practical astronomer, have also provided the
Observatory with a self-registering anemometer, employed for
some years past with the greatest success. The tide-gauge was
erected at Fort Denison, in Sydney Harbour, and was found to
work satisfactorily. The library, at the date of the report, con-
sisted of about 1,000 volumes, and was being annually increased
by the expenditure of a small grant of money from the Govern-
ment, and by donations from other scientific institutions. The
report just referred to is, I believe, the last published during
Mr. Smalley’s superintendence. From the close of 1865 to July
12il of the present year, on which latter date the Astronomer’s
death toot place, 2,223 transits were observed and reduced. The
greater portion of the interval from the close of 1865 to the
beginning of the present year was occupied in the measurement
and determination of the base-line intended for the starting point


of the future trigonometrical survey of the Colony. Many
difficulties were encountered in the prosecution of this important
work, arising from the rugged nature of the country which had
to be traversed, and from the inadequacy of the pecuniary grant
for the purpose. To this undertaking a large portion of the
time of the Observatory staff was devoted, so that little beyond
the ordinary routine work could be expected from the establish-
ment. During this period a valuable chronograph was added to
the instrumental appliances of the Observatory. Mr. Smalley’s
last illness commenced about the beginning of the present year,
and from that time up to his decease in July last he could rarely
attend to the duties of his office; much additional labour, there-
fore, devolved on Mr. Enssell, his assistant. "With the exception
of the observations of comet 11, 1864, and Encke’s comet, already
referred to, no results of an astronomical character have been
published by the Observatory during the late Astronomer’s super-
intendence. It is hoped that the publication of the results will
take place at no distant period. Abstracts of the daily meteoro-
logical observations have, however, been published monthly and
distributed. Shortly after the death of Mr. Smalley the office of
Astronomer was conferred on Mr. Bussell. Mr. Bussell’s super-
intendence has as yet only extended over the short period of four
months, and a large portion of this time has been occupied in
meeting the difficulties consequent on a change of the director-
ship. Considerable delay was involved in handing over the base-
line to the Surveyor Q-eneral’s department. The meridian obser-
vations for time have been carried on as nsual. The 10-feet
equatorial has been well employed. Frequent examinations of
Saturn have been made with this instrument, with a view to detect
any peculiarities of the planet’s physical structure. Previously
to Mr. Bussell’s appointment some attempts had been made to
observe the double stars of Sir J. Herschel’s catalogue, but with
little success, owing to the imperfect definition of the object-glass.
Mr. Bussell’s mechanical ingenuity has, however, overcome this
difficulty, and he now informs me that he has succeeded in greatly
improving the definition. This improvement has been effected
simply by separating the lenses of the object-glass about one-
twentieth of an inch; and so satisfactory is the result that it is
now possible to measure bright stars with the full aperture of 7-J
inches. On favourable occasions a power of 400 or even 500 can
be advantageously employed. The work actually performed with
the equatorial, from September 26th to November 28th of tho
present year, is as follows: : —
Measures of position and distance of Sir J. Hersobel’s
double stars 250
Double stars found, but not contained in Sir J. Her-
sehel’s catalogue 28
Sweeps for the purpose of finding new stars 16


Some of Sir John’s stars indicate considerable change since the
epoch of his catalogue, and several stars observed by that illustrious
astronomer cannot be found. Owing to an extraordinary con-
tinuance of cloudy weather, only 22 out of the 54 working nights
since September 26th, had "been arailable for observation. From
July 12th to [November 28th, 660 observations were made with
the transit circle, and reduced; these consist of moon culmina-
tions, determinations of positions of double stars observed with
the equatorial, and the usual observations for local time. The
arrangement by which the time-ball is now dropped automatically,
was designed by Mr. [Russell, and completed in Sydney, together
with the plan for transmitting time-signals along the telegraph
lines. A barograph on the photographic principle has recently
been added to the stock of meteorological instruments, the results
to be obtained from which will be of the highest value to science.
It is matter for congratulation to astronomers that such good
use is now being made of the fine equatorial of the Sydney
Observatory, and tie present director is entitled to the cordial
sympathy and co-operation of all lovers of the science.
The time has scarcely yet arrived for the establishment in the
Colony of private observatories on a large scale.’ The history of
astronomy in [New South "Wales rests almost entirely on the
labours of the Parramatta and Sydney establishments. Occasional
observations have proceeded from the private observatory of the
writer, at Windsor. The first fruits of this small establish-
ment, which have been publishedin Europe, were the observations
of comet 11, 1862, communicated in a paper read before the [Royal
Astronomical Society, at their monthly meeting, held January 9th,
1863, together with the elements deduced therefrom. Since the
resignation of Mr. Scott all the local information, respecting the
different comets which have appeared in the Colony, has been
derived solely from the observatory at Windsor. The principal
instruments, are a transit instrument, of 2T inches aperture and
20 inches focal length, and an excellent refracting telescope,
by Jones, of 3J inches aperture, and 48 inches focal length. The
former is provided with two piers, one in the meridian and the
other in the prime vertical, so that time and latitude observations
can be made with the same instrument. The latter is mounted
roughly as an equatorial instrument, and is protected by a
revolving roof. A complete set of meteorological instruments
may he mentioned among the appliances. With these daily
observations have been conducted for the past eight years. These
observations, after complete reduction, -were forwarded monthly
to the Sydney Observatory, during the years 1863, 1864, and
1865, to he incorporated with the returns from the stations under
the superintendence of the Government Astronomer., Transit
observations of the moon and moon-culminating stars are taken


for the determination of the longitude from Greenwich. The
longitude with reference to the Sydney Observatory has beeA
pretty accurately obtained from telegraphic signals, and the
latitude has been well determined from prime vertical observations.
Occupations of stars by the moon, eclipses of Jupiter’s satellites,
observations of comets, and other occasional phenomena, form
part of the work of the Observatory. The comet observations
already made have appeared in the Notices of the Eoyal Astro-
nomical Society, and the Astrmomische Nadhrichten. Comet 11,
1864, was well observed in Europe during the earlier part of its
apparition; but the latest published observations are those made
at Athens, Santiago, Sydney, and Windsor. It was found at
Sydney and Windsor early in August, and followed till its
disappearance at the close of September. The Windsor obser-
vations appeared in due course in the Astronomische Nachricklen,
and were turned to account in a careful investigation of the orbit
by Dr. Eowalczyk, of Warsaw, the results of which appeared in
that journal for September 2nd, 1865. It is highly gratifying to
find that out of 191 determinations of position at seventeen
different Observatories, twenty-five were made at Windsor; and
that of 144 employed in the formation of the normal places for
the final correction of the orbit, ten are from the satne place.
The result is satisfactory, considering the inferior character of
the instrument with which the Windsor observations were
made. The fine southern comet of 1865 was also' carefully
observed in the Colony. It was for some time thought to he the
grand comet of 1848, which Sir J. Herschel had conjectured
might reappear about the beginning of 1865. Another interesting
event in connection with the writer’s small establishment,
is the discovery of Encke’s comet at its apparition in 1865.
The circumstances of its apparent track in- the heavens were very
similar to those attending it when it was detected by Eiimker,
at Parramatta, in 1822, it being altogether out of reach of the
European Observatories. The usual ephemeris was awaited with
impatience. Towards the close of June, 1865, the writer felt
assured the comet must he in a part of the sky visible to New
South Wales astronomers, and within reach of a moderately-
sized telescope. Its rough positions were accordingly computed, on
the assumption that it passed its perihelion on the Ist June, and
was moving in the orbit assigned to it by Enoke in 1862. A few
minutes search on the evening of the 24th June revealed the
interesting wanderer as a very faint nebulous object, without any
indication of a nucleus ,or a tail. If there could he any doubt as
to the identity of the comet with that of Bncke, it was wholly
removed by an approximate ephemeris, received from the Nautical.
Almanac Office by the mail on the 30th June. The observations
on the evening of the 24th showed the comet to be forty-two


seconds of time east, and thirty-seven minutes of arc north,
of the position assigned to it in the ephemeris. The discovery
was at once communicated to the Sydney Observatory, and
some observations were obtained of it with the large equatorial.
The comet was found again at Windsor, after the full moon, with
the aid of the ephemeris, hat it was so excessively faint in the
small refractor that the observations are hut mere guesses. The
results of the Windsor observations of the 24th and 29th June,
were soon afterwards published in the Eoyal Astronomical
Society’s Notices and the Astronomisohe Naohriehten. Among
the occasional observations at Windsor may be mentioned the
constant watch kept upon the very remarkable variable star
Eta Argus. Its magnitude was determined by careful comparisons
in July, ISSd. It was then a red star of the first magnitude, and
very conspicuous near the constellation known as the Southern
Cross. In 1860 it had declined to the 3J magnitude, and
from that time to the present a careful series of comparisons
has been made. The star is now of the 63 magnitude, and
therefore invisible without telescopic aid. The Windsor obser-
vations have recently been taken up by Professor Loomis, of
Tale College. Combining them with the earlier observations of
the present century, and those made by Halley in 1677, and
by Lacaille in 1751, he makes the period of the star’s variations
to be 67 years. It had already been pointed out by the writer
that Professor Wolf’s period of 46 years failed to satisfy the
Windsor observations. If Professor Loomis’ period he correct,
we have now arrived at the epoch of the star’s minimum, and we
may shortly expect to see it increase in lustre. Ho decided
diminution has taken place in its light during the past two years,
except a slight “ fluttering” about a mean magnitude. The fol-
lowing communications from Windsor have already appeared in
the astronomical journals of Europe :
R.A.S. Notices. Ast. Nadi.
Observations and Elements of Comet 11, 1862 No. 1402
Ditto ditto ditto Yol. XXIII, page 95 „ 1404
Observations of Comet 11, 1864 „ 1497
Observations and Elements of Comet 11, 1864 „ XXY, „ 43 „ 1503
Observations of Comet 11, 1884 „ XXY, „ 194 „ 1517
Observations of Comet I, 1865 (Great
Southern Comet) „ XXY, „ 195 „ 1526
Ditto ditto ditto „ XXY, „ 258 „ 1529
Elements of Comet I, 1865 „ XXY, „ 271 „ 1541
Discovery and Observations of Eneke’s Comet „ XXYI, „ 29 „ 1551
Observations of tie Tariations of oj Arabs,
1854-65 „ XXYI, „ 83
Elements of Comet I, 1865 „ XXYI, „ 84
Apparent Eight Ascensions and North Polar
Distances of Comet I, 1865 „ 1593
Observations of Total Eclipse of the Moon,
f3opt,S4, 1860 „ SXYH, „ 84 „ 1021


„ _ E.A.S. Notices. Ast. Nach,
Observations of Eclipses of Jupiter s Safcel-
lites, 1866 and 1867 Vol. XXVIII, page 215, STo. iffel
Observations of the Variations of tj Argus,
1866-68 „ XXVIII, „ 266
Observations of Solar Eclipse, of August 18,
1868 „ XXIX, „ 2 „ 1725
Ring-Micrometer Comparisons of ti Argus and
neighbouring stars, May, 1868 „ XXIX, „ 297
Observations of Partial Eclipse of the Moon,
July 23, 1869 „ 1776
Observations of Total Eclipse of the Moon,
Jan. 17,1870 „ 1800
Upwards of seventy transits of the moon have heen observed,
hut these being obtained with an object-glass of a diameter only
rather more than one-half of that of the Sydney transit circle,
cannot be expected to supplement the results determined with
the latter instrument. Seventy-six occultations of stars by the
moon have, however, been observed, and these are of so precise a
character that they may hereafter be employed with advantage
in determining the longitude with an accuracy unattainable by
the same number of moon-culminations. Beside the publication
in Europe of the results mentioned in the table just given, a
volume containing the "Windsor meteorological observations for
1863, 4,5, and 6, has been published in the Colony. Copies of
this work have been distributed among sixty foreign observatories
and scientific institutions. Eesults for a further period of four
years will shortly follow. A fresh impetus has been given by
the Agricultural Society to meteorological observation in the
Colony. At their recommendation several new stations have
been added to those already in existence. Each of the stations
is provided with self-registering thermometers and a rain-gauge,
and is under the supervision of the Glovernment Astronomer, so
that we may expect to have as extended information of the rain-
fall as that regularly obtained in the Colony of South Australia.
The writer has frequently drawn attention to the great importance
of establishing systematic observations of gales in New South
Wales, with a view to the ultimate adoption of weather signals.
The subject was discussed with some interest by the Colonial
Philosophical Society, at their meeting held in September, 1864,
on the occasion of a paper being read on Australian storms. It
was therein shown, from a comparison of the observations made
at Adelaide, Deniliquin, Sydney, and Brisbane, that our great
atmospheric disturbances move, as a rule, from s.w. to k.e.,
occupying about two days on the average in their transit from
the first to the last mentioned place. It is very gratifying to
find that due prominence is given to this important subject in
Mr. Smalley’s last report. The Astronomer, I believe, receives
monthly from the Superintendent of Pilots a register of gales, m


observed at the different ports of the Colony. Attemtetuia aSo
drawn, at the close of Mr. Smalley’s report, to the desirability of
the measurement of an arc of the meridian in the Colony, of
obtaining a first-class meridian circle for the Observatory, and of
removing the establishment itself to some more eligible site. The
most important wort expected from our . southern Observatories
is doubtless the formation of a catalogue of stars of the southern
hemisphere. The published catalogues of Lacaille and Brisbane,
though embracing a great number of stars down to the seventh
magnitude, are confessedly too inaccurate for the refined purposes
of modern astronomy. Their defects are almost wholly due to
the imperfections of the instruments employed. The telescope
employed by Lacaille had an aperture of only half-an-inch, and
a focal length of 26-J inches, while the large transit instrument
employed at the Parramatta, and subsequently at the Sydney,
Observatory, had defects of construction which it was impossible
to correct in observation. These defects have been pointed out,
both by Mr. Biimker and Mr. Scott. An extension southward
of Argelander’s survey of the northern hemisphere was several
times proposed in Europe, and has recently been taken up by
the Observatories at Madras, the Cape of Glood.Hope, Santiago,
and Melbourne. Sydney, owing doubtless to the want of a good
meridian-circle, does not join in this important work. The four
volumes of observations by Mr. Scott, however, are a valuable
contribution to our knowledge of the southern heavens.
It is much to be regretted that astronomy is not more extensively
cultivated in the Colony. The deficiency is probably owing in a
great measure to the fact that instruction in the elements of the
science is almost wholly neglected in our schools. Due attention
to this important branch of education would doubtless beget a
taste for, and a better appreciation of, the sublime science. With
one exception, I believe no purely Colonial publication has
appeared, designed for the instruction of young persons in astro-
nomy. The exception I refer to is, a publication in the form of
a Planisphere of the Southern Circumpolar Stars, for the latitude
of Sydney, by Mr. George Butterfield, of Homehush. It was
introduced to the public at the last Exhibition of the Agricultural
Society, and will no doubt prove a useful auxiliary for acquiring a
knowledge of the sidereal heavens.
In closing this brief sketch of the progress and present state
of astronomy in New South Wales, the writer confidently hopes
that before long, private observatories of a high class, equal to.
those in the Mother-country and on the continent of Europe,
will spring np among us, to assist the national establishment in
the promotion of the science.
J.T., JUNR.
Windsor, 10th December, 1870.
Sydney : Thomas Bichards, Government Printer.—lB7l
[«*]
