





r o i t>> Pq
Sr Vi C£.
THE DISCOVERY OF AUSTRALIA.
AN INTERVIEW WITH MR. •PETHERICK.
Who discovered Australia] When was Australia discovered ?
are questions that have been often asked, and to which no
definite answers have hitherto been given. French savants
in the last and in the present century, as well as Portuguese,
Spanish, and English geographers, have devoted years of re-
search and study to the subject of early discovery. De Brosses,
Alexander Dalrymple, hydrographer to the English Admiralty,
Admiral Burney, Malte-Brun, Baron Humboldt, the Yicomte
de Santarem, keeper of the Portuguese archives, M. D’Avezac,
the late Mr. Major, of the British Museum, and many other
writers, have all vainly endeavoured to solve the enigma of
Australian discovery. That Australia was discovered between
1511 and 1530, a belief now commonly accepted, is based upon
the evidence of certain manuscript maps existing in the British
Museum or in continental libraries. But nothing further
relating to any definite vessel or navigator of so early a date
has been produced.
Hearing that my friend Mr. E. A. Petherick had found the
record of the first voyage to the Great South Land, I called
upon him, expecting he would enlighten me upon the subject.
He very obligingly gave me some information, but could not
supply the actual details, as he is preparing an elaborate paper
on the subject to be submitted first to the Royal Geo-
graphical Society.
14 Where did you find the information —in England or abroad ?
What was the nationality of the discoverers, and what was
the date of the voyage?” were naturally my first questions.
To these Mr. Petherick replied in a general way that he
had been for many years accumulating all books and maps
bearing upon maritime discovery in various languages, being
unable to search in foreign archives. These, especially early
narratives of voyages and maps, he had carefully examined,
and, knowing a little French, a little Dutch, a little
Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian, and possessing a knowledge
of Australia as it is, and being desirous to find something relat-
ing to its discovery, he had at last succeeded. More than twelve
years ago he had a clue in a published narrative as well as in
the charts, and would then have made an announcement, but
his published statements seemed to be unacceptable, and he with-
held those which were speculative or conjectural. When he had
leisure he followed up the clue which he then found, and he
now believes that he will be able to demonstrate the fact that
Australia was discovered before the end of the fifteenth century.
He says that he can produce authentic evidence of the natural
features of the country, the aborigines, the fauna and flora,
some of its natural productions having been actually brought
home ! And further, he can furnish the names of the com-
mander of the expedition and of his companions.
These voyagers landed between King George’s Sound and
Cape Leeuwin, and at several places on the west coast of the
island continent, taking in wood and water and holding com-
munication with the natives. They also admired the big Karri
trees and were astonished at the kangaroos. They caught a
female with its young, intending to bring them alive to Europe,
but the strange creatures died during the voyage, and only the
carcase of the dam was brought home.
Before leaving, I asked, “ How long is it since you first took
an interest in these studies ? ”
1 ‘ Almost as long as I can remember,” he replied. “When
a boy at school, I was very fond of geography and of mapping.”
Mr. Petherick here produced some of his own fine work
done before he was in his teens, and certainly beautiful work
It is for any mere lad to have executed. He mentioned, too,
a very interesting incident of that same period, “ I remember,”
he said, “the day when the Burke and Wills expedition left
Melbourne—that unfortunate expedition from which they never
returned ! After morning lessons I ran two or three miles to
see the expedition, with its camels and pack horses, depart. I
was late for school in the afternoon, and was punished accord-
ingly rather severely. It didn’t occur then, however, either
to the master or to myself and one or two companions, that
we had been assisting at an historical event.” Mr. Petherick
added that it was a year or two later that he took an interest
in Australian discovery, remarking, “My attention was
drawn to it by a paragraph which appeared in a newspaper
announcing that Mr. Major, of the British Museum, had
found a rare map, showing a discovery of Australia made in
the first year of the seventeenth century.” It will be perceived
that if Mr. Petherick can prove, as I am sure he is now pre-
pared to do, that Australia was discovered in the
century, he will have established a fact of the first importance
in historical geography.
Percy Russell.
I<ar*




The Discovery of Australia.
Reprinted from THE BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN, May 6th, 1897.
. ✓ , rf ' ( ' ft] , ;
* r " < M -y
The following letter has been addressed to the Agent-General of Western Australia by Mr. E. A. Petherick : -
To the Hon. Sir Malcolm Fraseb, K.C.M.G., &o., &c.,
When I pointed out the passage in Peter Martyr to the
Agent-General for Western Australia.
late secretary of the Royal Geographical Society, Henry
Walter Bates, Esq., F.R.S., the distinguished naturalist of
I\
the Amazons, he at once remarked that there were no such
trees in Brazil, and invited me to write a paper on the
subject for the Society’s “ Proceedings but I hesitated to
come into conflict with the opinions of Herrera, Navarrete,
Humboldt, and other eminent geographers, whose lives
had been devoted to the study of the history of discovery,
JifW-
J 1 /I
IwISm
especially th it of the American continent, or until such
mm M
time as I had obtained further information.
Fifty years after the voyage was made, and the animal
described by Peter Martyr, Sebastian Munster, in his
“ Universal Cosmography,” a work full of illustrations of
■
the wonders of nature and art, towns, cities, men, women,
animals, earthquakes, battles, &c., included an illustration
of this strange monster. The artist, like the philosopher
fM
mfi A
who evolved the camel out of his inner consciousness, has
IR
set up the beast on four stout legs and four human feet,
m
jfl J
but he has abridged its ears and forgotten its tail. Here
it is, not a little creature the size of a squirrel, but a
Mmm
vulpine animal.
Jfes.
, nr^ —
“PLEASE CAN TOMMY COME OUT TO PLAY?”*
Sib,— I have the honour to inform you that I have this
day laid before the President of the Royal Geographical
Society a paper treating of early discoveries in Australasia.
Perhaps the most interesting part of my paper will be, to
you, sir, that tending to pmve the discovery of part of the
coast of Western Australia in the ’sear 1499.
When preparing a series of short papers for the Melbourne
Beview fourteen or fifteen years ago, my attention was
arrested by a passage in the “ Decades ” of Peter Martyr,
describing some enormous trees—“ trees of such bigness
that sixteen men joining hands together and s f anding in
OPOSSUM OB KANGABOO ? j
compass can scarcely embrace some of them,” and a strange
animal before that time unknown in Europe:— “Among
Navarrete, whose attention the passage did not escape
these trees is found that monstrous beast with a snout like a
fox, a tail like a marmoset, ears like a bat, hands like n
(whether from inadvertence or the desire to correct what
man, and feet like an ape, bearing her whelps about with
may have appeared to him exaggeration), modifies the
her in an outward belly, much like unto a great bag or
statement as to the girth of the trees and writes
purse. The dead carcase of this beast you saw with me,
“six” instead of sixteen men, and, seeking for an
and turned it over and over with your own hands, marvelling
animal to answer to the marsupial described bv Peter
at that new belly and wonderful provision of Nature. The
Martyr refers to Didelphys vir giniana, the largest of ail
sav it is known by experience that she never letteth her
American opossums, found only in North America !
w r helps go out of that purse except it be either to play or
those of South America, as the naturalist, Waterhouse,
suck until such time that they be able to get their living by
informs us, being rather of the size of a rat. The beast
themselves.”
described was, however, as to size, vulpine, and its carcase,
Upon reading this passage my impression was that the
was not handled as that of an animal no larger than a
animal was a kangaroo. Finding that it had hitherto been
squirrel would be, but “ turned over and over ” ; the pouch
supposed to be an opossum
brought from Brazil, the
of an opossum would not be described as a “great bag,”
country which it has been assumed the discoverers visited,
nor would its forefeet be called “ hands,” which imply
and that the most eminent historians and geographers of
arms, like those of a kangaroo. Opossums, too, being
Europe and America had endorsed these opinions, I hesi-
nocturnal in their habits, and rarely found except hidden
tated to publish any statement thereon, though I have
away in the hollow branches of trees, would not be spoken
often shown the passage to such
cf mv friends as have been
of as found “ among the trees,” as kangaroos are. But
interested in the subject.
where are such trees to-day? Not in Brazil, only in
But now that I am completing a and his-
Australia. They must have been, 400 years ago, near the
torical work treating of Portuguese, Spanish, and Dutch
sea coast ; and we find them there now, on the south-w-est
discoveries in Australasia, I must publish my views upon the
coast of Australia. The karri forests are on the Warren,
passage and the voyage described, that they may be dis-
Shannon, Donnelly, Walpole, Gardner, and Blackwood
cussed and confirmed, or, if erroneous, refuted.
rivers, between King George’s Sound and Cape Leeuwin,
* From Zig-Zags at the Zoo. By permission of George Newies & Co.
t From Munster s Cosmographia Ui iuersalit, 1550


Peter Martyr was writing hurriedly when thus treating
coast of Western Australia was sighted by the Victoria (che
of a voyage made by Yanez Pinzon, and he has included
only vessel of Magellan’s expedition which returned to
these particulars from another voyage made by a relation of
Europe) on her homeward passage across the Indian Ocean
Pinzon, Diego de Lepe, who sailed from the same port,
in 1522. A statement has been made in some works of
Palos. If Diego de Lepe had proceeded to the Court of
reference that the Western Coast of Australia was first
Ferdinand and Isabella at Granada, as his cousin did, he
discovered by Don George de Menezes in 1526. This
would doubtless have been able to speak for himself, and
should be corrected. Don George, when proceeding from
have obtained credit with Peter Martyr for discoveries
Malacca to assume the Governorship of Ternate in the
which have ever since been given to another. Fourteen
Moluccas m that year, instead of following the usual course
years after, when Diego was dead and inquiries were
south of Borneo, went round by the North, and being
made, all that could be elicited was that he had touched at
driven by adverse winds out of his course, discovered
the coast of Brazil and gone further— it being assumed that
Papua, i.e., New Guinea : Menezes was not in Australian
he then went further south. Australia and South America were
waters.
then supposed to be one continent, the one had been dis-
1 have to add that the paper submitted to the Geo-
covered on its west coast, the other on its east coast —
graphical Society wdl be fully illustrated with maps ; three
Brazil, or dyewood, had been brought from both— and no
of these refer to the alleged discovery by Diego de Lepe.
one had dreamed o' an intervening ocean between America
Tne date of his departure on this voyage is unknown, but
and Asiatic countries. Long after the discovery of the
he returned in the year 1500.
Pacific, when both southern continents were separately
I have the honour to be, Sir,
represented upon the maps, some of the names originally
Y Alii 1 nhon loihf cowonf
belonging to the western coast of Australia and to the
1UU1 UUcUlCiil btJIVcllllJj
eastern coast of South America were left upon both.
Edward A. Pethbeick.
Some years ago I pointed out the fact that the north-west
London, April 26, 1897.


HCKotlier weight whatever. To keep our army in the highest possible state of
efficiency is the sole and only business of the War Office. What that efficiency
should be is to be determined solely by the men who, if the army has to be used,
are Responsible for its handling. Yet Dr. Conan Doyle’s remarks (Conservative)
about our fifteen-pounders in South Africa have been quoted by a Minister of
the Crown as words to be weighed against what Captain Hedworth Lambton
(Liberal) said about them! The grotesqueness .ef this is probably without
parallel. It would not be less ridiculous (supposing the Liberals were in) to
take Captain Lambton’s opinion on the nature of a shattering wound, in opposi-
tion to Dr. Conan Doyle’s. But it is to this sort of absurdity that our system
at the Admiralty and War Office tends. It is high time—by singular good
luck it is not too late —to put things on a bettei footing.
that though
still remain to us the
A. M.


THE COLONISATION of AUSTRALIA.
By EDWARD A. PETHERICK, Esq.
ALOW, sandy, desolate shore, marked by sandstone rocks and chains of
everlasting breakers. No mountain ranges cheer the weary mariner,
or warn him of the dangers of the coast —a coast in sight of which vessels
had sailed two thousand miles without finding any haven or entrance into the
Opossum or Kangaroo ?
From Munster s “ Cosmographta,” 1550.
land. Beyond the sand hills are a few human creatures, timid, naked, black;
without habitations or villages; agile and vigilant, but apparently uninterested
in their strange visitors. Such was the aspect of Australia and its people, when
Europeans—the Portuguese—came unexpectedly upon the western coast, at the
beginning of the sixteenth century.
A “ Terra Australis ” of somewhat different aspect had been seen by com-
panions of Columbus. Sailing farther than any others before them, into


unknown regions, eight months out from Seville, they came to a new country,
where they landed two boats’ crews and took possession. Here they saw trees
of enormous magnitude, and upon one stupendous specimen, which sixteen men
standing around could scarcely encompass, they carved the initials of their
sovereigns, Ferdinand and Isabella. Among these trees they caught a mon-
strous vulpine beast, having the snout of a fox the tail of a monkey, and that
wonderful provision of nature, a bag in which to carry its young. This animal
died during the voyage, but the carcase was taken to the court at Granada in
the last month of the last year of the fifteenth century.* Part of this “ Terra
Australis ” possessed dyewood, and was long known as the “ Brasielie Regio; ”
the maps also show a “ Psittacorum Regio,” which owed its name to the in-
numerable birds, including “popinjays of a wonderful greatness,” seen there;
another part was named “ Regio Patalis,” after an island of antiquity lying
south of India. It was generally believed that all these countries were connected
with the continent in the South Atlantic, and that this joined the “ Terra
Piccinacoli,” the land of the bird of Paradise; for no one then knew of a great
ocean, the Pacific, lying between our Australia and South America: the west
coast of the former and the east coast of the latter believed to be parts of
one and the same continent.
The voyage of Magellan revealed the vast extent of that ocean, upsetting-
preconceived ideas of the geography of the Southern Hemisphere, yet bequeath-
ing enigmas to our own time. On its homeward voyage, one of Magellan’s
vessels had sight of the Australian coast south of Timor and further on under
the Tropic of Capricorn; the sailors noticed also that the country was peopled.
Having found their safest routes to India and the Spice Islands, Portuguese
navigators visited the South Land only when driven there by storms. Misnamed
by the French ” Java la Grand,” and lying within the Eastern, or Portuguese,
hemisphere, the flags of that nationality are laid upon it in the mappemonde
of the French cosmographer Desliens.
* * * *
Unsated by the gold and silver of Mexico and Peru, the Spanish conquerors
sought for islands abounding in gold and silver and pearls in the Pacific. They
found the “ Isla del Oro ” (our Hew Guinea) and the “ Solomon ” Islands, in
which, it was stated, that gold was more plentiful than iron was in Biscay. It
was also reported that out in that ocean, south-westward from Peru, there was a
* The only coast where similar big trees and marsupials are found to-day lies between Cape
Leeuwin and King George’s Sound. The discovery has been erroneously given to the Pinzons:
it was made by Diego de Lepe : Was he accompanied by Amerigo Vespucci?


pleasant and fertile continent, inhabited by white people who were peaceable,
kind, and hospitable. Some said it was joined to New Guinea, others that it
was separated therefrom by a narrow strait. A second expedition setting out
from Peru, early in the next century, intending to discover and to settle in it,
after two or three months’ sailing about among the islands and in unknown seas,
gave up the search : like the fabled floating islands, the “ continent ” seemed
to elude the navigators. It is believed that Torres passed through the
strait to the south of New Guinea, seeing the northernmost point of the conti-
nent, but not being able to explore it, supposed it to be islands. Quires, his
commander, believing that he had discovered the continent, returned to Peru,
and thence to Europe again to petition Philip the Third for a new expedition to
colonise the “ Tierra Australia del Espiritu Santo,” which he had named in
honour of his Majesty as head of the House of Austria, and taken possession of
on the day of the Holy Spirit, his Majesty’s birthday. Eor many years Quiros
waited at the Spanish Court, upon the King, his Ministers, their Secretaries,
Under-Secretaries, and Assistant Under-Secretaries, urging them in numerous
petitions to colonise and christianise the South Continent, which, said he (found-
ing his statement on the maps of the period) was equal in extent to Europe,. Asia,
and Africa. In the south countries, he begged to assure them, from what he
had heard and seen himself, there would be found the most varied of natural
productions, riches inexhaustible, and most important of all, millions of souls
which would be lost, if his Majesty did not send missionaries to teach them.
He drew up plans for just government, for humane treatment of the natives,
and for the encouragement of industrious settlers. Several times the Council
of State and the Council of the Indies considered these proposals, but they
advised the King that there were no funds to spare to settle the large provinces
which his Majesty already possessed.
Thirty years of war, in a vain attempt to put down Protestantism and prop
up the military empire of Charles the Fifth, had rendered Spain bankrupt. Her
industrial population having been banished as heretics, the country did not
now produce food enough for its reduced population: the public debt had been
repudiated, the coinage debased; and even-strhad grown so scarce that it was
often difficult to provide food for the royal household. Nor were there any ships.
Heemskerk, the “ Nelson ” of Holland, had destroyed the Spanish fleet—all that
remained of the great armadas —off Gibraltar, and a few farmed old\vessels
convoying the galleons from the Indies now formed the navy of the proudest
people in the world.
Worn out by years of waiting, the petitioner was at last sent away with a
The Colonisation of Australia.


new Yiceroy to Peru and the promise of a new expedition, for fear that he would
go to the King of England with his glowing accounts of the new “ continent.”
But the glory of that discovery was denied to Spain. Pedro Fernandez de
Quiros was the last of the Hispano-Lusitanian discoverers. In the face of
continual opposition, he had for more than twenty years devoted himself to
this great enterprise; he had travelled more than eighty thousand miles, exnos-
ing himself to almost incredible privations, hardships, and sufferings, hy sea
and by land. At Old Panama, where .twelve years before. Death had dogged
his footsteps, the last Enemy waited.
There, on the eastern marge of the broad Pacific, may we not in imagination
see him now, the gallant soul,
“ Silent upon a peak in Darien,”
with face half-turned towards Europe, his hand pointing to the West! No more
weary of warfare with mutinous seamen or servitors of State; no more hungry,
wretched, or distressed; for, in that West, beyond the sunset, lies the “ earthly
paradise ” which he foresaw—Australia and her sister isles ! populous and well-
built cities, fields of waving corn, watermills, sugar-mills, and other industries;
plains and valleys covered with flocks and herds —millions, a hundred millions,
of Spanish merino sheep, and cattle upon a thousand hills ! There, also, are
gold mines—no richer in the world; alas lit was the greed of gold that corrupted
and ruined Spain.
The Kingdoms of the Spanish hemisphere, so easily won hy the sword of
Cortez and his followers, have, one after another, passed from the successors
of that sixteenth century monarch, Charles the Fifth, whose boast it was, that
upon his empire “ the sun never set.” Other civilising powers have long since
outstripped the proud Castilian race. Upon the vast Pacific, once a Spanish sea,
no Spanish vessel sails to-day; of that ” Tierra Austral Noconocida,” which
Quiros yearned to colonise, not one square mile belongs to Spain. Of all the
regions in the Eastern hemisphere over which the flag of Portugal once waved,
only a few square miles remain to her; for when, after forty years of Spanish
rule, she-regained her independence, the greater part of her Eastern possessions
—Mauritius, Ceylon, J ava, Spice Islands, etc. —had fallen into the hands of the
Dutch. So jealous had Spain and Portugal become of their new domain that they
would, if they could, have shut off France, England, and the Northern States,
and have locked up the sea from Finisterre to Iceland.
When His Most Catholic Majesty Philip the Second took possession of
Portugal, and closed the port of Lisbon to the Dutch heretics and rebels who


had carried the Indian products to the northern ports, they sailed direct to the
Eastern seas and very soon secured the lion’s share of that trade for themselves.
Taking a course east of that usually followed by Portuguese vessels, the Dutch
frequently had sight of the Western Australian coasts, and once, seeking a more
easterly route in a vessel carrying the Dutch Ambassador, Pieter Nuyts, to
Japan, they sailed more than a thousand miles along the southern coast, six
hundred miles of which presents a rocky, perpendicular barrier to the ocean,
with only one landing place. While Tasman’s surveys convinced this eminently
commercial people that the “ Terra Australis ” offered them no increase to their
trade, they nevertheless thought of colonising it. \ His people)Stemmed in by an
encroaching ocean, against which they and their ancestors had fought for ages;
at war with England; invaded by the
armies of Louis the Fourteenth. and
forsaken by those whose cause he had
championed, William of Orange was
inclined to emigrate. When victory
seemed hopeless, he said he would
collect his vessels, open the dykes, let
in the ocean, and transport his people
to that “ New Holland ” and “ New
Zealand ” j&, which his merchants
were SO' proud as to engravem in
brass on the floor of the Stadt House
in Amsterdam. A private Dutch
company was also formed to colonise
“ New Holland,” but its projector
dying, the project lapsed. Later on
(in 1699), when William was King of
Dampier.
England, Dampier was despatched on a voyage to complete the exploration of
New Holland.
•* * * *
Long before English projectors and some foreigners had made proposals
to the Ministers of Elizabeth and James the First to colonise the “ Terra
Australis.” From the period of its first discovery, Englishmen had been
interested in it. Sir Thomas More, treating of the dangers threatening the>
English Commonwealth, placed his “ Utopia ” in the Indian Ocean''; Bishop Hall,
satirising the vices and follies of his countrymen, discovered his “ Mundus Alter ”
there; Bacon there also located his ideal world, the “New Atlantis.” The
92
The Colonisation of Australia.


“ Terra Australis was described in 1578 in an introduction to the account of
Frobisher’s First \ oyage to the North West, and even earlier was recommended
to Queen Elizabeth in papers laid before her Majesty, representing’ the
advantages likely to accrue to her kingdom and people from its discovery and
settlement. A project, in Secretary Walsingham’s handwriting, for establish-
ing a company to trade there—Drake to be Governor for life—is still in existence
in the Record Office. This was prepared in 1580, just after Drake’s return from
his voyage round the world. The only English colonies, however, to be settled
during the reigns of Elizabeth and her successor were those planted in North
America and Guiana. Burton, in the most learned of learned works, had urged
the full discovery of the “ Terra Australis ”: “ lying in the temperate zone, it
could not but yield in time some flourishing kingdoms to successive ages.”
In the last year of the reig*n of -lames 1., an eminent London merchant—
probably the most enterprising English merchant of his time—Sir William
Fourteen, joint owner of more than twenty ships of burden, employing four or
five thousand seamen, and carrying on an extensive trade on his own account to
Portugal, Spain, Guinea, and the West Indies, desiring to extend his trade to
the “ Terra Australis,” petitioned the King for the privilege of erecting Colonies
therein. The following is a copy of his petition :
To the Kings most Excellent Ma tie
The humble peticon of S r VKilliam Oourten Kn l
Most humbly sheweth vnto your Matte
That all the lands in y e South parts of y« world called Terra Australis incognita
extending Eastwards & Westwards from ye Straights of Le Maire together with all ye adjacente
Islands, &c., are yet undiscovered or being discovered are not yet traded unto by any of your
Med'™ subjects. And your petitioner being very willing utt his owne charges which
wilbe very greate, to indeavonr if discovery thereof & settle Collonies and a plantation there
which he hopeth will tend to ye glory of God, ye reducing of Inf dells to Christianity, ye honour
of your Matte ye inlargem t of your Mat s Territories and Dominions, ye increase of your Mattes
Customes & revenue & ye Navigation and imployment of your Mattes subjects.
Your pep therefore humbly desireth y r Matte to foe pleased to grante to him his
heires& assignee all ye said lands islands & Territories with power to discover ye same
to erecte Colonies & a plantation there & Courts of Justice officers and Ministers
for ye setting and governinge of ye said Colonies and plantations & those which are
or shall Inhabit or be there & power to administer Justice and to execute Marshall
law by land and sea and for your pet r and those whome hee shall imploy to


defend themselves and offend such others as shall oppugns or hinder the said
discovery or plantation of your pep' B shippes in going or returning. And with
such other grantes and landes and privileges as in Cases of discovery or setlinye
of Colonies or plantations is usuall or shall be fitt. And to directe your Ma ties:
Attorney generall to prepare a grants accordingly fitt for your Ma ties Royal
Signature. And your pet r (as in duty boundJ shall ever pray for your
Ma ties long and happie raigne.
Having lent large sums of money to tlie King, Sir William Courteen had
some claim upon His Majesty’s consideration. But it does not appear that
“ All ye said islands and territories ” were granted to him. He appears to have
received a grant of the island of Barbados, whither he sent (1626) fifty settlers,
who built a fort (1627) and remained there till it was taken from them (1628).
He then sent eighty men to the island and retook it in the name of the Earl
of Pembroke. Sir William died in 1636. His son’s claim to the title was
disallowed in 1660.
ED. A. PETHEEICK.
(To he continued.)


OT-tlie Indian Civil Service, of wliicli I was disposed to entertain the very highest
opinion. I was probably unlucky, hut certainly most of those I came in contact
with were very, ordinary men, and doing their work conscientiously, I daresay,
but harshly and unsympathetically. It struck me, too, as a remarkable and not
a pleasant fact, that Europeans might live for years in cantonments without
knowing anything of the country or the people, or seeing anything of them
except the servants in their employment. “ I thank God I shall leave this
miployment. “ I thank God I shall leave
file of it as when I came,” said' one Major
odd subject for thankfulness, truly, hut I si
the fact. The cantonments extend for miles. There
is a racecourse to ride on, the Mall or “ Circular
hardlySany but European carriages with European
trim bungalows which line the road are all made to look as English as maybe?
at all events inside., The ladies visit each other, play at croquet with the young
men in the evening, drive and ride, dine and dance, and hardly a thought of
the great Indian world around them enters their little circle. \ The Major I
have mentioipdads by no means singular, and the ladies especially seem to take
an absolute firide in knowing nothing. At Ahmedabad my host had asked some
young ladles to dinner and to see the Moharrem procession after it. They were
allowed to come to dinner, but only under the strictest orders not to go to see
the pzhcession, and to return home before it began. Another lady declined to
pfe, on the ground that she could not “countenance idolatry.” Aor did the
urination that it was a Mahommedan festival, and those who took part in it
Mahommedans, and consequently fanatically hostile to idolatry, serve in the least
to enlighten her. And on the part of officials, want of interest in native life,
and want of sympathy with native feeling, often pained me. “ I have never
been inside the city,” said the District Magistrate of vto me; “my
office is outside the gate,” when I questioned him about a remarkable temple in
the town. The District Judge at has a big black dog. “It’s
such fun,” said he, " to see him pounce on a squirrel in the bazaar and walk down
the street withkjt in his mouth, all the fellows he passes longing to take it away
from him, hut not daring to meddle with the Judge’s dog.” He calls it/fun;
I call it brutal want of respect for native feelings and prejudices. They are
terrible vandals, toh, are some of these officials. I was driving with a high
functionary at Ahmedabad, and complimented him on the excellence of the roads,
where there was so little road metal. “ Yes,” he said, “ there are plenty of tombs
and temples here. I don’t know what we shall do when they are used up.”
STAAMOEE.


THE COLONISATION of AUSTRALIA.
By EDWARD A. PETHERICK, Esq.
IN the preceding pages* the sixteenth and seventeenth century discoveries of
Australia hy Spanish, Portuguese, and Dutch navigators are briefly out-
lined. The country offered no inducement to either nationality; wiser,
however, than some in the nineteenth century, they located their trading depots
and “ factories ” among civilized or semi-civilized peoples. We have seen that
proposals were made to the Governments of Spain and Holland, as well as to
that of England, to form settlements in the “ Terra Australis,” without direct
results. When Holland—then the leading commercial country of Europe, and
comparatively the most populous—was invaded by the armies of Louis XIY.,
William of Orange thought of emigrating with his people to “ New Holland ”;
but, peace being restored, nothing was done in that direction until William
became King of England and the two countries were in alliance. Then Captain
Dampier, who had visited the north-west coast of “ New Holland ” during a
buccaneering voyage in 1687, was despatched to complete its discovery.
Dampier sailed from the Downs early in 1699, intending to explore the
southern and eastern coasts, but being delayed in his departure, he would not
venture on a voyage so far south in an old vessel in winter. He landed at
several points on the western and north-western coasts, and collected numerous
plants (his herbarium is still preserved at Oxford) and other objects of natural
history, besides describing the animals and the aborigines—“ black and
deformed, with frizzled hair and painted faces, the most unpleasant-looking and
the worst featured of any people he had ever seen.”
He next sailed round north of New Guinea and discovered “ New Britain,”
when he was obliged to return without accomplishing the main object of his
voyage. His vessel foundering off Ascension Island in the Atlantic, he did not
arrive in England till after the death of King William. War had again broken
out, and he was employed in expeditions of reprisal against the Spaniards on
the Pacific coast of South America.
* Pages 88 to 94.


After the Treaty of Utrecht, Captain Welbe, a Dane, who had sailed with
Dampier, once more petitioned the Government (that of Walpole) to complete
the discovery of the “ Terra Australis,” on the eastern side, known to him, as to
others long before, as “ New Guinea.” Later on, during the period of the
South Sea Bubble, Welbe issued proposals for establishing a joint-stock
company for carrying on a trade and settling colonies there. Investors were
informed that in St. George’s Islands and “New Wales ” (named by himself),
and in other islands, there were gold and silver mines which would enrich the
British nation by upwards of £60,000,000 sterling, but his petitions and proposals
had only the result of bringing him to a debtors’ prison. The following is a
copy of his “ Proposals ” :
Captain John Welbe s
PROPOSALS
Establishing a Company by the name of the London
Adventurers, for carrying on a Trade to (and settling
Colonies in) Terra Australis , and Working and Improving
the Gold and Silver Mines which there abound.
\y~ HERE AS ’tis veil known that there is no nation that do trade from the South
\\ S eas to the East Indies hut the Spaniards, whose India trade is from Aca-pulco
(on the Coast of Mexico , in the South Seas) to the Philippine Islands in the
East Indies , which ships, in going, keep always in the North East Trade Wind;
and in coming back they run to 40 or 45 Degrees North, to meet with a Westerly Wind, to
run them to the Eastward, for which Eeason those Southern parts are not yet fully discover’d,
nor any part of them settled by any European whatsoever, they lying out of the way of all
Trading Ships.
If we look back and trace the Course of those European Ships Yoyages that have
sailed round the Grlobe, it may be easily seen how far they were from making any Discoveries
in those Southern parts, the Course of their Yoyages not giving them any Opportunity for
so doing.
Magellanus, the Discoverer of the Sereights, call’d after his Name, the first that sail’d
West from the South Seas to the East Indies, sailed along the Coasts of Peru and Mexico,
till he came to California, and thence took his Departure for India, keeping in the North
East Trade Wind.
Sir Francis Drake said to be the first Commander that sail’d round the Grlobe (. Magellanus
being kill’d by the Indians at Mindano Island) kept the Coast of Peru and Mexico on board
and sail’d West for India, in the North East Trade Wind.


Sir Thomas Cavendish tlie same.
Captain Swann, one of the Buccaneers of America, with whom Captain Dumpier sail’d
the first time round the Globe, kept in the North-East Trade Wind from California to India,
and was kill’d at Mindano, as Magellanus was.
Captain Rogers in the Duke and Dutchess, with the Aca-pulco Ship, kept likewise in the
North-East Trade Wind.
It is here to be observ’d that from the Coast of Fern West, to the East Indies, is upwards
of 2,500 Leagues, which to the Southward of the Line is undiscovered to any European.
(Captain Welbe excepted) who, in the course of his Yoyage round the World with Captain
Dampier, in the Year 1703, 1701, 1705, and 1706, having many extraordinary Opportunities
of satisfying and informing himself what Discoveries had been made, by Order of the
Viceroys of Peru, for 150 Years past; Was thereby Avell assured that the islands, named (by
the said Captain Wei be) St. George’s Islands and Neiv Wales, and some other Islands there-
abouts, which abound with Mines of Gold and Silver, belong to no European Prince or State,
and are therefore free for the first Discoverer to take Possession of, which Mines the under-
taker doubts not to prove, will enrich the British Nation upwai’ds of 50,000,000 Sterling, if
taken Possession of, and Colonies settled, which is not half what the Kingdom of Peru has
produc’d to the Spaniards since their first Settlement there, under Francisco Pizaro, the
first Viceroy.
It is therefore propos’d that a Joint Stock, not exceeding 2,500,000 be raised to fit out
Ships, and settle Colonies forthwith, that the Improvement and advantages of such Valuable
Discoveries may not be lost. And in order thereto, the said Captain Welbe is uoav ready to
grant Permits to such Persons who are willing to be Proprietors and Adventurers in this said
Undertaking. On Grant of which Permits the Proprietors are to pay in Is. on every Share,
viz., 10s. for £l,OOO to enable the Undertaker to apply for, and obtain a Patent, and defray
other charges; and no more is to be paid in until at a General Meeting of, and by the
Proprietors, Directors, and Treasurers be chosen; and then no more on each Share than
Avhat the Directors, at such Meeting, shall agree on, and find necessary for carrying on
effectually so valuable and advantagious a Trade.
N.B. — The Proposer has no sinister Ends, nor Self-Interest, In View, and expects no Pay,
nor any Reward, hut such Part of the neat Produce of Profits, as the Directors
themselves shall think fit, and agree, to allow him.
About tlie same time, a Swiss Protestant preacher, John Peter Purry, for
some years resident in Batavia, offered tlie Dutch governor to found a colony
in Anyts Land, New Holland, within the 30th and 35th degrees of latitude,
where wine, corn, and other commodities could be produced, instead of import-
ing them from Europe. As his offer could not be entertained, he came to
Amsterdam and afterwards to Paris to submit his proposals for a colony either
in Nuyts Land or in Kaffraria. In Paris he lost in the Mississippi Company
the fortune he had gained in Java, and then came to London, where he obtained
The Colonisation oe Australia.


an interview witli the Duke of Newcastle and King George tlie First in
Kensington Gardens. Sir Isaac Newton, as well as some members of tire French
Academy, bad been favourable to his proposals, but the colony of Georgia being
then talked about, Furry relinquished the idea of a colony in New Holland, and
tlie idea of a colony in New Holland, and
afterwards took out a number of his own countrymen from Switzerland and
planted them upon the Savannah river, where he founded the town of Purisburg.
* *
Reasons were often propounded for ei
Australis,” both in England and in France
India, the African, or the South Sea Co]
Captain Cook,
* *
establishing colonies in the “ Terra
■e, to be under the control of the East
Companies. Expeditions for scientific
objects were also proposed by learned
societies. Invited to Berlin by
Frederick the Great, the eminent
savant, Maupertuis, recommended
an expedition to the “ Terra
Australis.” He believed that many
new species would be found there,
and, in some of the islands, men
with tails, a species between a
monkey and a man. He would
rather, said he, have an hour’s con-
versation with one of these than
with the greatest wit in Europe.
The King of Prussia was planning
the extension of his own borders
and could not afford voyages of
discovery, but the Kings of
England and France were soon engaged in glorious rivalry as patrons
of geography. Bougainville, the first French circumnavigator, voyaging among
the islands of the Pacific, came nearer to the east coast of Australia than any
preceding navigator had been since the time of Torres; indeed, his people were
of opinion that they saw land, but the commander himself saw only endless
shoals (the Great Barrier Reef), and concluding that this was the “ Yoice of
God, he was obedient unto it,” altered his course and steered away to the
Louisiades,” returning to Europe round the north side of New Guinea, thus
leaving the greater discovery to be made by the immortal Cook two years later.
Cook, accompanied by Banks and other men of science, sent out by George the
Third at the suggestion of the Royal Society, having observed the transit of
217
The Colonisation of Australia.


Yenus at Tahiti, and surveyed the coasts of Yew Zealand, then sailed westward,
discovering and surveying the whole of the eastern coast of Australia in ITTO.
* * * *
The complete discovery of Yew Zealand and of the eastern coast of the
“ Terra Australis ” —Yew South Wales—did not dispel the idea of an antarctic
continent or that “ terra vista ” described by sixteenth-century geographers and
placed on their maps, south and south-east of the Cape of Good Hope. The
hydrographer, Dalrymple, disappointed in his expectation of being allowed to
conduct a Government expedition, ottered to make one at his own expense, upon
the condition that he and his friends should be granted only such lands within
certain longitudes as they were able to examine in five years. He had already
proposed to name it “ Australia,” and in August, 1772, submitted to Lord Yorth
a scheme for its government and a code of laws, fundamental and unalterable.
All men between eighteen and sixty were to bear arms; women were to be on the
same footing as men in the exercise of political rights, and not to be debarred
from public office, though owners of mad dogs were disqualified; no one was
to exercise the profession of the law for hire or fee, on pain of forfeiture of all
his property and perpetual imprisonment; the public accounts, kept in decimals,
were to be open to inspection on Sundays in the churches; there was to be no
State religion—sects, private opinions and worship were to be free; only copper
coin was to be used; bachelors and maidens were to be taxed for the support
of orphans and public schools; prisoners were to be kept in separate chambers,
and no one was to be imprisoned for debt; murder and two other crimes only
were to be punishable by death. “ Altogether,” said one of the projector’s
friends, “ a very good model of the worst of all governments, that of a republic.”
A second voyage by Captain Cook, in the years 1774, 1775, and 177 G,
resulted in the discovery of Kerguelen Island—probably the “ terra vista ” south-
east of the Cape —the Yew Hebrides, Yew Caledonia, Yorfolk, and other small
islands in the Pacific, but no Southern Continent within temperate regions,
other than those already known.
* * * *
Emigration for the benefit of mother-countries, by relieving them of their
redundant population, was an idea which had not yet reached the masses. Their
education was at a very low standard, and they struggled on in poverty—
generally in abject poverty. Reformers and heretics had been driven out of
every country in Europe, either into England or to Yorth America. Into her


American colonies England had shipped thousands of her criminals, selling
them to the planters. There a nation, nurtured in the free and untrammelled
life of a new country, was ripening to maturity. When the “ inevitable ”
happened—in this case before due time—and the thirteen colonies became the
United States of North America, that country could no longer be the receptacle
for England’s criminals; and English statesmen had to consider and decide what
was to be done with them, as the gaols and hulks were overcrowded. A few
philanthropists would have reformed the penal laws, repaired and rebuilt the
prisons, but they were a small minority. As a last resort, a Penal Colony was
planned, and New South Wales was chosen. By the advice of Sir Joseph Banks
it was decided to send a fleet to Botany Bay.
The first fleet, carrying several
hundred convicts, a military force,
and a civil establishment, under
Governor Phillip, with stores and
supplies, sailed early in 1787, and
arrived in Botany Bay 20th January,
1788. The aspect of the country
around the Bay in midsummer was
not inviting, and six days after, 26th
January, 1788, the vessels were re-
moved a few miles further up the
coast, to Port Jackson. While the
fleet was at anchor in Botany Bay, it
may be noted, two French vessels,
under command of La Perouse, who
had left France nearly three years
before, appeared ■ —- too late for
Governor Phillip.
occupation, if that was his intention
More than the usual difficulties attending the plantation of a colony in a new
country attended Phillip and his people. At a distance of half the circum-
ference of the globe (then a voyage of eight or ten months) from the mother-
country and the source of his supplies, and hampered with the worst class with
which to found a colony, the Governor himself did not despair, nor did he doubt
that the country would prove “ the most valuable acquisition Great Britain ever
made.” A second settlement was formed by his lieutenant, King, on Norfolk
Island, and, as other transports arrived, settlements were formed inland. Owing
to ill-health, Phillip returned to England at the end of 1792, and the


Government was carried on for the next fourteen years by officers who had been
associated with him in the foundation of the colony. By the end of that time
(1806) new settlements had been formed at Hunter River (Newcastle), on the
Derwent (Hobart), and on the Tamar (Launceston).
A Trench expedition under Admiral Baudin being off the coast in Bass
Strait in 1802, the importance of a settlement on the southern shores was urged
upon the Home Government. They sent out two transports with convicts, their
wives and children, a few free settlers, and a military detachment under Colonel
Collins, who landed them in Port Phillip towards the end of 1803. “In the
course of a few weeks lanes were cut in the woods for the passage of timber
carriages, huts were erected, the busy hum of voices was heard and the sound of
the axe, denoting the exertions of social industry and the labours of civiliza-
tion.” The 1 writer in imagination beheld “ a second Rome, rising from a condition
of banditti, giving laws, and superlative in arms and arts.” One of the ladies,
writing home, said, “ My pen is not able to describe half the beauties of the
delightful spot. During the time we were there I never felt one ache or pain,
and I parted from it with more regret than I did from my native land.” Yet
the officers deemed the place ineligible for a settlement, and at the end of three
months the people were removed to the Derwent, and that part of the mainland
was evacuated and left to the kangaroo, who, according to the writer first quoted,
££ reigned undisturbed lord of the soil, a dominion he seemed likely to retain for
ages.”
Meantime, Baudin having encountered Flinders, who had just completed
the survey of the southern coast, received from that navigator copies of his
charts, which were sent to Europe, while Flinders, making his way homeward
in 1804—after completing further surveys and suffering shipwreck—was
detained for six-and-a-half years in Mauritius, then a French colony.
Continental Europe was at this time overrun by the armies of Napoleon, that
extraordinary man being at the summit of his glory. Standing on the heights of
Him while the vanquished thousands of the captive German army filed before
him, he thought not so much of that grand spectacle as of the one great ocean
Power which he desired to humble. Not intoxicated with the success of his
arms as were those around him, ££ Gentlemen,” said he, ££ this is all well, but I
want greater things : I want ships, colonies, and commerce.” Alas for the
irony of events! Within twenty-four hours of this utterance, the combined
fleets of France and Spain, from which so much was expected, were shattered
and destroyed at Trafalgar (21st October, 1805).


Tlie greatest military genius of modern times was feeble in prescience. Not
colonies, but dominion—dependencies—Napoleon most desired; but lust of
empire, like greed of gold, has its limits—bounds beyond which no conqueror,
no nation, dare trespass with impunity. France —more self-supporting and
self-contained than any other European country—needed rest. Courtiers still,
however, continued to flatter the Emperor with anticipations and hopes of a
Colonial Empire, and more than hinted that he would share in a division of the
“Terra Australis.” Altering the nomenclature of the charts of the brave and
intrepid Flinders, who was eating out his heart in the Mauritius, they renamed
“Spencer” and “St. Vincent ” Gulfs respectively Gulfs “Bonaparte” and
“ Josephine,” after the Emperor's family and his wife ; to the islands, capes, and
bays they gave the names of his Ministers of State, generals, and men of
science; and upon the whole country between Nuyts Land and New South
Wales, now known as South Australia and Victoria, they placed the name
“ Terre Napoleon.” In justice to the French people, for whom the present
writer has the greatest admiration, it is perhaps needless to remark that those
charts, engraved in 1808 and 1809, were soon afterwards cancelled and never
reproduced. On the other hand we may add that our Admiralty charts of the
Australian coasts give credit to bona-fide discoveries made by French navigators,
as also to those made by the Dutch, the original nomenclature being retained.
Would that great peoples were always as reasonable, high-minded, and mutually
just!
Rumours of intended French occupation of parts of Australia were frequent
during the first half of the nineteenth century, but settlements at Port Jackson,
Hunter River, and Moreton Bay on the east, at Port Phillip and at Adelaide
on the south, at Albany and at Swan River on the west, at Melville Island, at
Raffles Bay, and at Port Essington on the north, precluded occupation by any
rival Power; and when an ambassador of the “Second Empire” inquired
“ What part of Australia do claim ?” the British Minister was in a position
to reply, “ The Whole I”
* * * *
Thus, not by conquest, not by cession, nor by encroachment, Australia—
almost alone among British possessions—has been acquired by peaceful occupa-
tion. In Australia people of all European nationalities have discovered the
blessings and advantages of freedom and protection under the British flag. They
have, moreover, shared in the making of just laws, and their descendants enjoy
equal rights and privileges—rights and privileges such as they could never


hope to possess in the Old World. How the different settlements progressed
under most adverse circumstances; how the vast interior was explored; how
agriculture and other industries were introduced; how the people have prospered
commercially, politically, socially, must he told at another time; my allotted
space is filled.
3 1508 00549205 8




