

Jr ■
■ I;




geological character of these countries. We have ample data
from which to define their limits, except at the single point to
which I have alluded in this paper, with regard to the S.V\ . ex-
tremity of Celebes.
IV.— On the Languages of Australia, being an extract of a Dispatch
from Captain G. Grey, Governor of South Australia , to Lord
Stanley. Communicated by his Lordship.
I have the honour to transmit to your Lordship an outline map
of the continent of Australia, coloured so as to show the dis-
tricts within which different dialects are spoken on that portion
of the southern coast which lies between 115° and 141 1 E.
Five principal dialects are spoken within this range.
The first is spoken within the district comprehended between
the 115 th and 125 th meridian.*
The second dialect is spoken by the aborigines inhabiting the
district lying between 125° and 136° E. This dialect is com-
posed, in a great measure, of the languages which I have, in
this dispatch, termed the first and third dialects, and which are
spoken by the natives of Western Australia and those of the
vicinity of Adelaide respectively.
The third dialect is that spoken by the natives inhabiting the
vicinity of Adelaide and the country to the north of it, as far as
it has yet been explored. ' .
The fourth dialect is spoken by the tribes inhabiting the banks
of the river Murray, as far southward as a point about 30 miles
to the north of the junction of that river with Lake Alexandria ;
and it extends thence to the northward along the Murray until
its junction with the Darling, and from thence to the northward
alono - the latter river as far as we have any acquaintance with
its aboriginal tribes. No extensive vocabulary of this dialect
has yet been collected, but I trust that in a few months I shall
be able to forward one to your Lordship, as two gentlemen are at
present engaged on this subject. , .
The fifth dialect is spoken by the aboriginal tribes inhabiting
the shores of Lake Alexandrina, and it extends thence to the
northward for about 30 miles along the banks of the M urray,
and to the southward and eastward along the coast of Australia
in the direction of Port Philip, to as great a distance as we are
yet acquainted with the natives. I have on the present occasion
* Vocabularies of this ami the two following dialects were previously sent home by
Gov. Grey.—Ed.


the honour to transmit a vocabulary of this dialect to vour
Lordship.
brom the loregoing description and the accompanying map,
your Lordship will perceive that these dialects (which, from their
radical and grammatical resemblance, appear all to have had one
common origin) have all extended themselves in the direction of
the great natural features of the country.
I he people speaking the first dialect appear to have extended
themselves along the coast-line from the northward and westward.
Those speaking the third dialect appear to have come from the
northward along Lake Torrens and Spencer's Gulf, and to have
spread themselves to the westward until they met the people
speaking the first dialect, and from the amalgamation of the two
the second dialect appears to have sprung.
The people speaking the fourth dialect appear to have come
from the northward down the river Darling and its tributaries,
and from thence down the Murray, until they were met by those
who spoke the third and fifth dialects.
Those who speak the fifth dialect seem to have come along
the coast from the eastward as far as Lake Albert and Lake
Alexandrina, and from thence to have spread up the river Murray,
until they were met by the other tribes who were coming from
the northward.
Those tribes who have spread along the coast-line appear to
have migrated with the greatest rapidity, or at all events to have
occupied the greatest extent of country.
/I ie onl J probable means of tracing the direction from which
this continent was peopled appears to be that of studying the
ranges of the various dialects, and the directions in which they
have spiead, in the manner I have exhibited on the accompanying
map; and as the lapse of every year renders the accomplishment
of this object more difficult, I would venture to request your
Lordship to endeavour to obtain from the different authorities on
this continent, vocabularies of the dialects spoken by the aborigines
in the different districts in their vicinity. It would be especially
desirable that vocabularies of the languages on the northern coast
should be collected ; for it is evident that, if one of these dialects
should be found to coincide with one of those spoken on the
southern coast, then the line of migration from one point to the
other might be considered to be very nearly determined. The
map which I have now the honour to "transmit, and which shows
(approximately only) the range of nearly all the southern dialects,
affords very strong presumptive evidence that this continent was
peopled from the northward, and that the lines of migration were
along the coast and the great water drainages of the country.
I think it proper to add, that in all the vocabularies which


V "ftV' "V. Toitcs.
jfi.WettA i'mienvour
II ."> LonJfUudr Fa si J'j'O IVom CinTiiwirli ,'t *" *</.■;, ' JM6| l.)()
MAP 4* \ J ' C.,,. J |
. a .-v %/. 4. ff m/UJP! ’ll n
shewing the Rii/ujc X \ -M IBRpiO u I. f of # I « ’ '
ofrte f WTjk, , *, . f I ,*\o" oBay ■ J
„ C* Wh>/(’ Eu/andt % r|( - 0'*f I
SOUTHERN DIAIJ'iCTS f | •.
AUSTRALIA. ']£' „
%
I w E s T E R '^' w "
< , j
r c T R A L I A I sou T H I £ V J
I AUSTRALIA.; 0) |U~.
1 .JU*. D 1 ALE c r j \V i 4,.,,/^
h I 1 i i v \ 'ts /
4fi " *\ i ± d\ & \L #
Ik * i \ 1 / /S- -4) - t'yuc
r. , y< Mt^^ > _ . ' . .,.. ~~
**
\ SPAIN & PORTUGAL. /-
" \ English Miles .applicable to Australia 1 j -
■ \'Arf \' \ M TTlgTliTr\liV 'MM 1 1! M 1 ! : 1 P1 U<fFi T nW T T 1 T l 1 WTI
John Arrow smith
Pub i for the Journo/ of the Roval Geoarewhionl Sodetti.hu John Murrau.. Ubenuirlr S[ London it 45.
Pub for the Journal of the /toga/ Geographical Societg.bv John Murray, Albemarle S*. London JS4S.


*
■■
' " ;
/ I 1/ , II 1 i
.
.
VJ
-


Mr. Anderson on the Freezing of Streams in N. America. 367
I have transmitted from South Australia, one common system
of orthography has been adopted; and that the different writers
of the vocabularies, having previously agreed upon one common
method of representing sounds, has rendered these records much
more complete and valuable than they would otherwise have
been.
y. —Some Remarks upon the Freezing of Streams in North
America, in connexion with the supposed Congelation of their
Sources in High Latitudes. By Alexander C. Anderson,
H.H.B.C.S.
At the Newcastle meeting of the British Association, Captain
Washington, upon reading Professor Yon Baers communication
respecting the frozen ground of Siberia, made allusion to an
adventure of the Baron Wrangel’s, near Yakutsk;* and inferred
that the members of the Hudsons Bay Company must, in their
frequent journeys, have encountered similar adventures, tending
to the same conclusion—namely, the freezing of the sources even
of considerable streams, in high latitudes, during the winter
season.
Though far from seeking to invalidate Baron Wrangel s state-
ment, I cannot but think that the inference deduced from it is
incorrect. Circumstances nearly similar (though on a lar less
conspicuous scale) have occurred to myself and others who are
in the habit of travelling during winter in this country; but every
instance that I have met with or heard of may, I conceive, be
referred to the following simple explanation.
But it is first necessary that attention be directed to the pro-
cess by which the congelation (for it can scarcely be termed
freezing) of rapid streams is effected. To this end, wherever the
current runs with any considerable velocity, it is first necessary
that the stream become choked with drift ice, first formed in the
slack water near the banks, and afterwards disengaged and driven
away by the current. Dense packs are thus at length formed ;
and these, being stopped in different parts by the projecting
angles of the shore, are soon consolidated by the cold into a firm
and stationary mass; with occasional vacancies, however, owing to
the unequal obstruction of the packs. These openings, though
in process of time their dimensions become much contracted, are
kept from closing by the rapidity of the current, even when the
cold is very severe. Were it not tor the packs formed and ar-
* See ‘ Narrative of an Expedition to the Polar Sea.’ By Admiral 1. \on Wrangel.
Edited by Lieut.-Col. Sabine, R.A., F.R.S. 2nd edition, p. 36.—Ed.


rested as we have explained, the agitated waters would be main-
tained open throughout; a fact evinced by the circumstance that,
even in very high latitudes, some streams —such as the Bear’s
Lake River, instanced by Dr. Richardson—are never frozen : not,
as that gentleman supposes, on account of their rapidity solely,
but simply because their course is too short, as compared with the
breadth, to permit a sufficient accumulation of drift-ice to occa-
sion a stoppage. For this reason the upper parts of rivers (set-
ting the consideration of springs apart) are never congealed from
side to side above the spot where the accumulation of drift first
chokes the passage. Under the concurrent circumstances which
I have stated, it may be assumed as a general truth that no stream
is too rapid to admit of congelation; and the only observable
difference between the most rapid streams and those of more mo-
derate velocity, is that the former present an extremely rugged
surface, owing to the forcible protrusion of huge blocks of ice
during the first obstruction of the packs ; while that of the latter
is comparatively level, on account of the smaller degree of force
exerted against the component blocks by the current. The exist-
ence of these hourdignons, as the Canadians term the rugged
projections upon the ice, is, I may remark, a very serious im-
pedient to the traveller’s progress upon the surface of rapid
streams.
To proceed more directly to the point under consideration.
The obstruction of the packs in any particular reach of a river
necessarily causes a temporary retardation of the current; by
which the water in the superior vicinity is raised, for a short pe-
riod, perhaps 4 or 5 feet, or even more, above its previous level.
In some positions the body of ice acquires sufficient firmness be-
fore the subsidence of the waters to maintain its position under
these circumstances; but this occurs, lam inclined to believe,
only upon small streams, or upon the minor channels of large
streams. Some of the latter, being filled upon the rise of the
water, are again reduced to their previous state of partial or total
dryness as soon as the superfluity is drained off by the main
channel. Now it is easy to conceive that, in the interim, the accu-
mulation of drift might, in severe weather, be rendered so compact
as to maintain its position over a narrow surface at the greatest
height to which the water had risen. Possibly, too, under the
intense cold of extreme latitudes, a large stream might become in
like manner bridged over, and retain its elevated position under
the same circumstances. But in all cases of this description which
have come under my knowledge, the weight of an unsupported
mass of any considerable breadth occasioned it invariably to sub-
side as the waters retired : and, indeed, to judge by analogy from
the construction of artificial bridges, it seems to be evident that no


1508
01026553


