

ON THE
APPROPRIATION OF THE PROCEEDS
OF
SALES OF PUBLIC WASTE LANDS
IN THE
AUSTRALASIAN COLONIES.




It is earnestly requested that all those who feel interested in the
welfare of the Australasian Colonies, or are desirous that the further
Colonization of these countries should not be stopped or checked, will
seriously consider the effect likely to be produced by such a measure
of legislation, respecting the Appropriation of the Proceeds of the
Sales of Public Waste Lands in these Colonies, as was lately spoken of
by the Secretary of State for the Colonies, in his place in Parliament.
The accompanying “ Article,” having reference to this subject, and
extracted from the pages of the ‘Colonial Magazine’ for the present
month, is respectfully submitted for perusal.
London, April, 1842.




PUBLIC WASTE LANDS IN AUSTRALIA.
Of all questions affecting the interests of our colonies in Australasia, that
of the appropriation of the funds arising from sales of their public waste
lands, is the one of paramount importance. If not the very existence ot
these colonies, at all events their advancement in population and wealth,
primarily and principally depends upon its right, determination. With-
out a due proportion of the labouring classes in their population, they can
make no progress in economical improvement, nor offer any temptation
to capitalists to settle within their hounds, or to invest money in the
purchase of their waste lands; and, as is admitted on all hands, the only
prospect they have of being able to establish or to maintain that pro-
portion, consists in a proper application of their land-sales fund.
This being the case, we look with no small anxiety to the result ot
the deliberations about to take place in Parliament, with respect to the
measure for regulating the sales of colonial waste lands, lately announced
by the right honourable the Secretary of State for the Colonies. We
noticed with much regret that his Lordship talked of appropriating only
one-half of the proceeds of sales to the purposes of emigration ; for we
are fully convinced, that if an enactment with a provision to that effect,
were to issue, there would at once he a stop to all sales of waste lands,
and, consequently, to all emigration of poor labourers from this to the
Australasian Colonies, so long as such law remained in force.
After having fully examined the subject in all its bearings, we venture
unhesitatingly to assert, that it is utterly vain to expect that capitalists,
either here or in the colonies, will ever be induced to invest money in
purchasing the waste and desert lands of Australia, at the high prices now
demanded, unless a pledge, on which they can rely, be given, that the
whole net proceeds of the land-sales will be employed in supplying
population. # . ,
We would respectfully warn Lord Stanley against being deceived upon
this point; and would entreat his Lordship not to run the risk of tarnish-
ing his fair fame, as an able colonial minister, by proposing a measuie
based upon no sound principle, and which is sure to prove abortive.
In support of the opinions we have fonned upon this subject, we do
not purpose, on this occasion, to offer any arguments of our own, but
would earnestly solicit the attention of our readers, (especially Lord
Stanley and other members of the Government, as well as members of
either house of Parliament,) to the statements contained in the two papers
we now submit for their perusal.
The first is from the pen of a gentleman from New South Wales,
whose long residence in that colony, and the position he occupies there
as a merchant and landholder of the first class, entitle his evidence to
the utmost weight and consideration. The second contains a variety of
extracts from official or semi-official documents, exhibiting the deliberate
opinions regarding the appropriation of the land-sales fund entertained
by persons best qualified to form a correct judgment on the point, and
who have most fully investigated the subject;


Before closing our own brief remarks, we must, however, bring under
the notice of our readers one view of the question, which does not appear
to have been taken by any of the authorities we quote. It is this : that,
inasmuch as the public waste lands are a national domain and pro-
perty, and do not belong to any section of the community, it becomes
the bounden duty of the legislature to see that they be not appropriated
to other than national purposes. In this view of the case, there can be
no more justice in appropriating these lands, or the proceeds of them
when sold, to local Colonial purposes, than to local English or Irish
purposes; and we call upon Parliament not to sanction any such appro-
priation of them. The promotion of emigration to the colonies being,
however, a national object, in which the colonies and the mother-country
have a common interest, no valid objection can be made when the appro-
priation is limited to that purpose.
No. I.—Perceiving that my Lord Stanley intends to introduce into
parliament during the present session, a bill for regulating the future
disposal of the public waste lands in the Australasian colonies, and to
propose that only one-half of the proceeds of sales shall be pledged for
the purpose of promoting emigration, I am induced to submit a few brief
observations with reference to these important matters.
Having maturely considered the subject in various point of view, and
been aided in forming my opinion regarding it by an extensive practical
and local experience of the value and uses of land in the colonies of
Australia, and of the estimation in which this species of property is held
by capitalists, both here and in the colonies, I do not hesitate to declare
my conviction that if it shall be determined that only one half of the
proceeds of land-sales shall be appropriated in conveying emigrant
labourers from this country to the colonies, all hope of effecting sales of
the colonial waste-lands, to any extent, at the price of 20s. per acre, or
any higher rate, may at once be abandoned.
I feel morally certain that no such price as that named, nor any other
price worthy of consideration, will long continue to be given for waste-
lands, in a remote and desert country, unless purchasers shall be assured
that something like a commensurate population will be established in the
country, and that adequate supplies of labour for the cultivation and im-
provement of the land will be procurable in it.
Now the only source, worthy of account, from whence any land,
additionally appropriated in the Australasian colonies, can derive a supply
of labouring or other people, is that of emigration from this country.
But poor labourers cannot emigrate to Australasia, unless a free-passage
be found for them, which, all expenses being included, cannot be estimated
to cost less than £2O for each adult; and thus the half of 20s. per acre,
expended in conveying emigrants to the Australasian colonies, would,
under the most favourable circumstances, not supply more than one
labourer, he being accompanied by his wife, or a female relative, as the
regulations properly require, for every eighty acres of land sold.
And can it be supposed, that waste unimproved land in a wilderness at
the antipodes, with such an inadequate proportion of labouring people as


this, can possibly be worth 20s. the acre P Would any capitalist ever be
tempted to proceed to the colonies to buy it at that rate, under such cir-
cumstances ? What could he do with it P
But it may be said, that the price of 20s. per acre is not the one that
will be adopted—that a price will be named as a minimum, one half of
which, expended in conveying emigrants from this country, will suffice to
provide an adequate supply of labouring and other people, in proportion
to the quantity of land sold—and to realize, in fact, the principle of “main-
taining a due proportion between the extent of land which is appropriated,
and the population by which it is occupiedof the “ soundness ” of
which, the Commons’ Committee on South Australia, (of which my Lord
Stanley was a most influential member) and all other persons who have
considered the subject, are “ persuaded.”
In such a case as this, the objections I have yet made, would, of course,
not be applicable, but there are others which I think would be.
Before stating them, however, I must premise that it is admitted to be
impossible to state with certainty, a priori, what price would be “suffi-
cient ” for the realization of the principle above alluded to—as that price
can be certainly known only after a series of experiments, and of careful
observations, founded thereon, if even then.
But, waiving this difficulty for the present, and assuming that a price
may be, and will be, fixed upon, one half of which would be “sufficient,”
it becomes necessary to ascertain what will be ihe amount in money, of
such price, before any opinion can be formed of the effect likely to
result from it. Now, I think it will be conceded, that no price that did
not suffice to furnish a population of at least four couples (male and
female) of the labouring classes, for every eighty acres of land appropriated,
could have any pretensions to be called “sufficient;” and as a smaller
expenditure than £2 per acre, in conveying emigrants to the colony, would
not effect this object, it follows that a price of £4 per acre would have to
be put upon the land.
Hereupon the questions formerly put again arise—Would there be
buyers of the land at this price P Is it reasonably to be assumed that per-
sons would be disposed or could afford to invest their capital in buying the
land at the rate and under the circumstances supposed ?
This is certainly a very different case from the one already remarked
upon, and of the two, I deem it by far the preferable one. I would
much rather give £4 per acre for land in a country adequately peopled,
and in which a due supply of labourers for its cultivation and improve-
ment might be had, than 20s. per acre for land in a country almost
uninhabited.
But this is not precisely the point, the question being, whether buyers
would be found under the circumstances stated.
Two pounds the acre for land and people, might perhaps be obtained;
but then there must be considered the additional two pounds per acre
required, say as a contribution towards defraying public expenses.
The latter would form, I suspect, an insuperable impediment to the
investing of money in land, and consequently to colonization; it would,
in effect, be nothing less than a tax or fine upon the appropriation of land,


and even conceding that the amount would be wholly expended, in the
most judicious and economical way, in promoting the advantage of the
colony, which is a very large concession indeed, 1 apprehend no settler
would be found willing or who could afford to pay it out of his capital.
Only a few short years ago, it was deemed expedient, for the encourage-
ment of colonization, that portions of the public waste lands in the colo-
nies should be given, without price, to capitalists who should proceed to
settle upon them ; and now, in the supposed case under consideration, a
price or tax of not less than £2 per acre is put upon the land. Ido not
think that persons would be found willing to operate under such a system.
I leave out of consideration the £2 per acre which goes to supply labour;
for if the land were given gratuitously, it would, I think, be for the interest
of the grantees, that they should contribute to that extent for such an
object, and I believe they would voluntarily agree to do it, for the sake of
giving a value to their land, (exceeding the amount expended) which it
would not otherwise have.
But it may be asked, Is it then proposed that the land should not con-
tribute anything towards defraying the public expenses P I answer, Far
from it; let the land, by all means, be made to contribute its fair quota.
I know of no source from whence a large proportion of the amount
required for public purposes may with more propriety be drawn ; and
especially as regards local improvements, such as roads, bridges, &c. I
think almost the whole amount of them should be charged upon it.
But with respect to a measure of appropriating one-half of the proceeds
of sale, by way of making the land contribute towards the payment of
general public expenses, serious objections may I think be made, and I
beg leave to state some of them.
It has not, I believe, been explained, nor have I been able to discover,
upon what grounds it is assumed, that a proper amount, or a proper
rate of contribution on the part of the land, would in that way be
obtained. Wliy a half, rather than a third or three-fourths, or any other
specific proportion of the proceeds of sales, should be fixed upon, has not
been stated, I believe; nor have I been able to divine the reason. What
amount of revenue might result cannot possibly be foretold, nor be correctly
estimated, upon any intelligible data; the relative proportion, therefore,
which such amount might bear to the exigencies of the public service,
must consequently be still more problematical and uncertain.
But surely it never could be intended to impose a tax upon the appro-
priation of the colonial waste lands, which would be, de facto , a tax upon,
and, pro tanto, a check and hinderance to colonization, unless such a mea-
sure were absolutely necessary for the attainment of an ascertained proper
object. Either there are certain necessary expenses to be provided for,
or there are not. If there are, then the tax or levy to meet them should
be such as would be likely to produce the amount required, and no more.
But we have seen that the tax under review is one, the amount of which
cannot be foretold nor estimated. On the one hand, we have certain known
expenses to be provided for: on the other, a revenue, in its very nature
variable, uncertain in amount, and not to be depended upon.
t This, I submit, forms a serious objection to the measure. Besides,


the revenue would be derived, if any revenue were derived at all, from
capital, not income, and the source is one which must exhaust itself,
depending as it does upon the extent of saleable land.
Out of the capital of the colonist a large amount, and in all probability
a large proportionate amount, would be taken for the payment of annual
expenses. Let me put a case: a person emigrates, say to New Zealand,
with a capital of £2OOO, one half of which he invests in land, —reserving
the other half for the purpose of stocking and improving his purchase.
Such a disposition of an emigrant’s capital, may I think be fairly assumed.
Of the £IOOO paid by him for his land, one half goes to supply him
with labour, with which appropriation he is quite satisfied ; but the other
half (£500) goes into the public treasury, towards defraying the public
expenses of the year. Thus one-fourth of his whole property is taken to
pay one year’s expense of his government. Reckoning at the colonial
rale of interest, his estate is thus burdened with £SO per annum for ever t
on account of the expenses of the first year of his being in the colony, in
addition to what he may have paid as his share of the ordinary taxes of the
year, and leaving unprovided for the expenses of the future years of his
and his successors’ residence in the colony.
This case, incredible as it may seem, is not however a purely imaginary
one, but really that of any person investing money in land in New Zea-
land at this moment. A reference to Governor Hobson’s estimate of the
expenses of his government for 1842, and of the ways and means for
meeting them, will show, that the expenses for the year are taken at
£63,086 15s. 10d., whilst he proposes to provide for them as follows:
By customs’ and other duties ... 19,400 0 0
upwards of three-fifths of the proceeds
of expected land sales 31,082 6 3
I submit that a measure involving such consequences as these, would
never work nor prove practical.
A few town or suburban allotments might be forced into the
market —sold to speculators, who will calculate upon a change of system
taking place—at a price not equal to one-tenth of that which, under
a better system, they would be worth and would bring, (as at Port
Phillip, where the public waste-lands were prematurely alienated at an
immense sacrifice, and where lots were sold for £IOO, which to my
knowledge, w r ere re-sold within eighteen months for upwards of £SOOO !)
but no country lots of any extent would be sold, nor would any bona fide
settlers of capital be attracted to the colonies, and thus a measure intended
to regulate and promote emigration would be frustrated and become a
dead letter.
But I would respectfully ask why shoidd parliament wish to force upon
the colonies a system of raising a revenue which is not approved of by
them, nor believed to be efficacious ? or, I should rather say, why should
it insist upon their using, for local purposes, funds which they reject for
such uses, under the belief that a different application of the money is
essential to their welfare? The colonies feel that so long as their
capitalists can offer abundance of all the necessaries of life to surplus
unemployed poor labourers of the mother-country, in exchange for a inode-


rate quantity of labour on the part of the latter, no appropriation of the pro-
ceeds of sales of the public waste-lands, can be more advantageous both to the
colonies and to the mother-country, than that which is made when the
whole of such funds are expended in conveying such persons from this
country to the colonies; and that, moreover, no other appropriation of these
funds can be proposed, without endangering the very existence of the
funds themselves.
I can, at all events, speak with certainty, as respects the colony to which
I belong, that of New South Wales, when I say that both the people and
the legislature of that colony have repeatedly placed upon record in public
acts, their earnest desire that the land-sales’ fund should be exclusively
appropriated in the way just alluded to, and their sense of the deep injury
which would he inflicted upon the colony, were it to be diverted from
this use.
That colony is quite ready and willing to provide for all necessary
public expenses by local duties and assessments, only requiring that the
land sales’ fund should be appropriated to the only legitimate use of such
a fund, that of promoting the immigration of required labourers, as a
requisite means of enabling it to do so ", and I doubt not that the other
Australasian colonies are equally so under the same stipulation. The
possession of representative institutions, for the purposes of local self-
government, would of course be necessary to enable them to do this.
I forbear to enter at large into any statement illustrative of the importance,
nay, absolute necessity, upon general grounds, of appropriating the proceeds
of sales of the public waste-lands in the Australasian colonies to the pur-
pose of conveying population to these provinces,—a task which has been
ably performed by the Colonial Land and Emigration Commissioners in
their letter, addressed to the Under-Secretary of State, Mr. James Stephen,
dated 26th Feb. 1840. Published in Parliamentary paper No. 613, printed
by order of the House of Commons, Bth August, 1840,—and by other able
writers—limiting myself in this paper to an expression of the opinion ot
the effects which the particular measures, herein adverted to, would have on
the interests of these colonies, entertained by a colonist, deeply interested in
the result, and who has had ample opportunity of forming a judgment
on the point.
London, 16 Feb. 1842. T. W.
No. 11. Authoritative Opinions and Statements upon the subject of the
Appropriation of the Proceeds of Sales of Public Waste Lands in the
Australian Colonies, extracted from Official or Semi-Official Docu-
ments.
Lord Goderich to Governor Darling, 1831. Parliamentary Paper,
No. 328. 1831.
“ The next source from which it has been supposed a fund might be raised
‘ for the purpose of promoting emigration,’ is from an extended sale of land.
Lord Howick to the Secretary of the Treasury, 16th July, 1831.
Parliamentary Paper, No. 328. 1831.
“ And Lord Goderich would more especially call the attention of their lord-
ships 1 to the impolicy of applying to the ordinary current expenses of the colony,


‘ that portion of the territorial revenue which arises from the sale of land.’ The
funds derived from this source should be looked upon, not as forming a part of
the income of the colony, and available for the purpose of meeting the annual
expenses, but as capital which should not be permanently sunk, but invested so
as to produce a profitable return.”
Report from Committee of Council, New South Wales, 18th Sept. 1835.
Parliamentary Paper, No. 358. Ist June, 1837.
“ Your Committee are desirous to record their opinion, as well as that of the
whole community of this colony, that the funds arising from the sale of lands
should be appropriated 4 exclusively to the purpose of introducing a moral and
‘industrious population that they consider this appropriation alike indispensable
to the present interests and future prosperity and character of the colony; and
that they regard the opinion expressed by the Secretary of State for the Colonies,
and approved by the Lords of the Treasury, in the light of a pledge by His Ma-
jesty’s Government, that the crown lands of the colony shall be held sacred to the
promotion of emigration .”
Lord Glenelg to Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, 19th August
1836. Parliamentary Paper, No. 358. 1837.
“ You will, however, observe from the concluding paragraph of the inclosed
report, that the committee of the legislative council of New South Wales have
strongly urged the application of the whole of the net proceeds of the sale of crown-
lands in the colony to the promotion of emigration. 4 Such appears to have been
4 the intention of Lord Ripon, as expressed in Lord Howick’s letter to Mr. Stevv-
-4 art, of the 16th July, 1831, on the first establishment of the present system of
4 the sale of these lands; and Lord Glenelg is of opinion that the funds derived
4 from the sale of crown-lands in those colonies cannot be more properly or
4 beneficially appropriated than in the advancement of this object.’ ’’
Report from the Commons Committee, on the disposal of Colonial Waste-
Lands, August, 1836.
44 That with a view to this latter duty” (that of directing emigration), “ in the
opinion of the committee, it is most expedient that 4 the net proceeds of the land-
» sales in those colonies, the climate of which is not unfavourable to the European
4 frame, should be employed as an emigration fund, each colony being furnished
4 with emigrant-labour, in exact proportion to the amount of its own land-sales. ’’
Petition to the Commons House of Parliament from Members of Council,
Magistrates, Clergy, Landholders, and other Inhabitants of New South
Wales. 1836. Parliamentary Paper, No. 211. 1840.
44 Your Petitioners, impressed with this belief, have observed with the deepest
concern and affliction, that notwithstanding the promise of His Majesty’s Secre-
tary of State for the Colonies that these funds should be devoted solely to the
encouragement of emigration, a large proportion of them has been proposed to be
applied to other local purposes ; a measure so injurious to the best interests of
this community, that your Petitioners feel themselves bound to appeal against it
by every means in their power.”
Lord Glenelg to Governor Gipps. 9th August, 1836. Parliamentary
Paper, No. 536. 1839.
44 4 The object of the change of system introduced by Lord Ripon was to remedy
4 the want of labour, which was at that time complained of in the colony, by pro-
-4 viding the pecuniary means of assisting emigration, and at the same time pre-
-4 venting the undue dispersion of the emigrants.’ The result has been to refute
the arguments with which the change of system was originally opposed, and com-


price of land should be considerably raised.
Petition from Colonists of New South Wales to the Commons Houso^ 1
Parliament, which appears in the Monitor Sydi y W »
Nov. 1838.
colony be exclusively appropnated m • j’’ f t p e labouring classes, the
ssigHigll i=irr:
sss»fX"K»S2^sSisii"
Petitioners need not impress on your l lonouiable colonists may
with a whole continent to range 1 , lands can ever be adequate to
make and afford to invest: m the purchase of t ed irrtoy wi>‘ creale ; and
the unlimited demand for labour w Honourable House in this Petition
consequently, that the repeated prayer ■[ 0 f immigration to New South
*- once reasonable and
essential to their prosperity. juainsnovoO ? TO
Speech of Governor Sir George Gipps to the Legislative Council of New
1 South Wales, 4th June, 1840.
“ The land-fund is, by the unanimous voice of the inhabitants of the colony and
“if
‘ w fund St he was determined he would no longer be even a sharer in the
|Sa^^
immigration expenses.
Fourth Annual B,h JM "
™L° f rr l ’lhe I ‘rild lands of a new country, for the purpose of
To exact a pr towards defraying the expences of the civil
applying te mnoun impose a tax upon the introduction of capital; but,
government, is, in ettcct, to P land , f or the purpose of employing
that price is employed in importing labour, the caprtahst
. Events have ™rortu ; ..e,y colgetel^erined
sscajGssasif iiisaj ss e. *-& »«-—-«*
that Colony is now labouring—Ed.


4 obtains a more ample and constant supply of that indispensable instrument of
4 production than that which it would be possible, under any other arrangement,
4 to obtain at so cheap a rate. It is labour that gives value to land. The most
4 fertile land, without labour to cultivate it, is of no value ; while land, combined
4 with labour, acquires a greater value than the cost by which the labour is sup-
* plied. Hence, when the whole of the proceeds obtained by the sale of waste-
-4 land is employed without deduction as an emigration-fund, the payment of a
4 price sufficient to maintain a due proportion between the supply of labour and
4 the extent of appropriated land, acts as a bounty upon the introduction of
4 capital, by giving to the land a greater value than the price.’/’
Report proposed by Lord Eliot in Commons Committee on New Zea-
land, July, 1840, which w r as supported by Mr. F. Baring, Mr. Glad-
stone, and Mr. G. W. Hope. Parliamentary Paper, No. 582. 1840.
“ Your committee are also of opinion, that, according to the fundamental prin-
ciple of the South Australian Act, the whole of the funds received as the purchase-
monies of crown-lands should, without any deduction, be employed as an emi-
gration-fund, for the conveyance of labouring emigrants to the colony, and for
no other purpose whatever."
The Colonial Land and Emigration Commissioners to the Secretary of
State for the Colonies, 26th February, 1840.—Parliamentary Paper,
613. 1840.
“ Sir James Stirling concludes his despatch on the subject of this Report of the
Committee of the House of Commons upon Colonial Lands by earnestly suggest-
ing in opposition to the recommendations of that Committee 44 that the proceeds
of the land sales should be applied to the general purposes of Revenue, under
the management of the local authorities, subject as heretofore to the control of
Her Majesty’s Government.”
“ It is, as we conceive, incontrovertible that to exact a price upon the appropriation
of waste lands of new countries, for the purpose of creating a revenue applicable
to the expenses of the civil government, is to discourage the introduction of
Capital into the Colonies. The exaction of a price for such a purpose might be
expedient, or might be even necessary, but would nevertheless be essentially a
discouragement to the introduction of Capital. If a settler taking .£IOOO into a
new country is required to pay £ 100 for his land, to be expended for the general
purposes of the government, he must commence his operations with a Capital of
.£9OO instead of with a Capital of <£looo. But the effect would be altogether
different were the price demanded for land returned to the purchaser in the form
of labour wherewith to cultivate it. In this case the Capitalist obtains, at the
cheapest rate, an indispensable instrument of production, which it would other-
wise require a still greater outlay to procure. Capitalists settling in a new coun-
try must obtain labour; and except, in countries where some species of slavery
exist, labour will be obtained more certainly and more economically when imported
by a general fund than when imported by separate funds advanced by individuals.
In the absence of compulsory labour, an enterprising settler, who expends a por-
tion of his Capital in the conveyance of labour, will be in danger of losing the
service of bis labourers, because unable to give the high wages which can be
afforded by the less enterprising settler who has expended no portion of his capital
on immigration. It is therefore evident, that when the price demanded for waste
land is employed as an emigration fund, that the price ceases to operate as a
discouragement to the introduction of capital, and becomes in fact an economical
arrangement, giving to the enterprising settler a cheaper and more certain supply
of an indispensable instrument of production than that which he could otherwise
procure.
“ The general rule, in conformity with which it is expedient that the price of
waste land in new countries should be determined, is, the maintenance of a due
proportion between the supply of labour and the extent of appropriated land.
The exaction in each particular case of the price which should be found adequate


*£ fflSo'nXltiSX in"S,“e„? ""' “ *
ffsasjs r? * d ;srsl p r„ zir F P 2 *
lower price in a country in which it would he L P ? ° f a^ our : than to P a y a much
intelligent settlers mav be aftr-ierid r„ ti . S dt - t le e .?. te , nt t 0 wblcb opulent and
upon so adjusting the nriee nf omes ’ wiil de P end in great measure
portion ” “ “ lai "‘“ i » “ <"* I™'
staSiffi-SSSsSSS
savaee P stlte Spreadln ? over unreclaimed districts in an isolated and semi-
here a f frfK ect dlsco » ra gement upon the introduction of capital.’ Rut
: £«a^&4u:n l tr. t
of IL ef T° St InJUriOUS SOUrCe from which the ™eans of defraying the expense’
-SA'-isrs
ST*r “<• b tIC r ' :( ' llk "' 1 »c« tvfio pay their own passage! as wel as if
ippelrs bv the uST’ wh ° ““"W ead > ™W .Up, JS °
ppears ny the latest financial reports, that the revenue raised in tha
Cf^aTd^UfoUo 1,6 th th\ £2 hC - d Up ° n the whole Population. Taking
and o ld govemment,would < occas!on n afoss'of nopu
mount of £4,000 per annum. Now the commissioners were able, even in the first
ZdlZlfll C ,° my : S ° btain * “P™ ooio’nal securities at Zen pj! cent
and could probably, at the present time, obtain a loan upon the same securities at
five per cent. Raising a loan of £20,000 at five ,'pef cent, fo™defravinL tS
tSTJIf ° f t f e . l , ocal government, would entail an annual charge of £l,OOO mion
e revenne of the province, while withdrawing the sum of £2O 000 from the
emigratmn-fund, n order te defray the expenses of the government would
occasion an annual loss of revenue to the amount of £4,000.
dered re ,}S * n ° ther J?° int view in which the financial question may be consi-
-1 000aduh emWamOnf?!, em . l S rat l ion - fund of £20,000 conveys to the colony
m.lp. on!i T g T l u f t l he . labo,lrln g class ; and each adult of the labouring chJ
males and females both included, has obtained upon the average, in money
Sir l ?. nS ’ WagCS t 0 th J G amount of ab out £5O per annum. The wages of the
T5O OOO b npr erS C ° nVey „ ed b l an emi g ra tion-fund of £20,000, may be & taken at
fen! nnffrL f Um ' Ut ,™ te of P rofit in the »at least twenty per
cent, and therefore the capitalists who advance £50,000 per annum in wages,


must obtain in return a reproduction to the amount of .£60,000 per annum. It
follows, that withdrawing the single sum of £20,009 from the emigration-fund
for the expenses of the civil government, must occasion a diminution in the gross
produce of the labour and capital of the colony, to the amnunt of £60,000 per
annum.
There is still another point of view in which this question may be considered.
When the proceeds obtained by the sale of waste lands are employed as an emi-
gration-fund, each successive immigration leads to a further increase. Thus, then,
when the operation of an emigration-fund amounting to £20,000 has caused an
increase of population to the extent of 2,000 souls, the effect upon the progress
of the colony, through the means of emigration, does not terminate with the first
increase. The additional population creates an additional demand for food, and
causes an additional quantity of land to be purchased for supplying it. The pro-
ceeds of this purchase become a new emigration-fund; and the new emigration-
fund again increases the population, the demand for land, and the funds applicable
to emigration. To divert the proceeds of the land-sales to the general purposes
of the civil government in the manner recommended by Sir James Stirling would
be to arrest this accelerating ratio of prosperity.
Signed, J. F. Eliot.—Robert Torrens. —E. E. Villiers.
LONDON : FISHER, SON, AND CO., PRINTERS.






