

ON THE BOILER
By
W. B. YEATS
THE CUALA PRESS - DUBLIN
PRICE: THREE SHILLINGS AND SIXPENCE


ON THE BOILER


ON THE BOILER
By
W. B. YEATS
Printed by Alex. Thom & Co., Ltd., Dublin.
Published by
THE CUALA PRESS
133 Lower Baggot Street
DUBLIN


[COPYRIGHT.]


Contents
The Name ~ 9
Preliminaries - - - 9
To-morrow’s Revolution 14
Private Thoughts 21
Ireland after the Revolution ----- 27
Other Matters ...-----32
Purgatory 39
[Cover design by Jack B. Yeats, R.H.A .]




Preface
Many years ago I brought out an occasional publication
called, according to the season, “ Beltaine ” or “ Samhain ” ; it
contained my defence of the Abbey Theatre, its actors and its
plays. Though I wrote most of it, Synge’s “ Riders to the
Sea,” some of Lady Gregory’s little comedies, as well as my
“ Cathleen ni Houlihan,” appeared first in its pages. In this
new publication I shall write whatever interests me at the
moment, trying, however, to keep some kind of unity, and only
including poem or play that has something to do with my
main theme. “ Purgatory ” was first produced at the Abbey
Theatre, Dublin, on August 10, 1938, with Michael Dolan as
the Old Man and Liam Redmond as the Boy.
W. B. YEATS,
October, 1938.




The Name
When I was a child and wandering about the Sligo Quays
I saw a printed, or was it a painted notice ? On such and such
a day “ the great McCoy will speak on the old boiler.” I
knew the old boiler, very big, very high, the top far out of
reach, and all red rust. I wanted to go and hear him for the
boiler’s sake, but nobody encouraged me. I was told then or
later that he was a mad ship’s carpenter, very good at his
trade if he would stick to it, but he went to bed from autumn to
spring and during his working months broke off from time
to time to read the Scriptures and denounce his neighbours.
Then I saw him at a Rosses Point regatta alone in a boat;
sculling it in whenever he saw a crowd, then, bow to seaward,
denouncing the general wickedness, then sculling it out amid
a shower of stones.
Why should not old men be mad ?
Some have known a likely lad
That had a sound fly fisher’s wrist
Turn to a drunken journalist;
A girl that knew all Dante once
Live to bear children to a dunce ;
A Helen of social welfare dream
Climb on a wagonette to scream.
Some think it matter of course that chance
Should starve good men and bad advance,
That if their neighbours figured plain,
As though upon a lighted screen,
No single story would they find
Of an unbroken happy mind,
A finish worthy of the start.
Young men know 7 nothing of this sort,
Observant old men know it well;
And when they know what old books tell
And that no better can be had,
Know why an old man should be mad.
Preliminaries
I.
Last year the Lord Mayor sent out an intelligent Christmas
card, an eighteenth century print of some Dublin street;
but this year his card had a drawing of the Mansion House
as it is to-day. It is clear that architecture interests him.
B


Let him threaten to resign if the Corporation will not tell the
City Architect to scrape off the stucco, pull down the cast
iron porch, lift out the plate glass, and get the Mansion House
into its eighteenth century state. It would only cost a few
hundred pounds, for the side walls and their windows are as
they should be, and Dublin would have one more dignified ances-
tral building. All Catholic Ireland, as it was before the National
University and a victory in the field had swept the penal
laws out of its bones, swells out in that pretentious front.
Old historic bricks and window panes obliterated or destroyed,
its porch invented when England was elaborating the architec-
ture and interior decoration of the Gin Palace, its sole fitting
inhabitant that cringing firbolg Tom Moore cast by some
ironmonger—bronze costs money —now standing on the other
side of Trinity College near the urinal.
This has not occurred to the Lord Mayor, a good, amiable,
clever man I am told, because he thinks, like English royalty,
that his duty is to make himself popular among the common
people, and architectural taste is at present articulate only
in the few. His time is taken up opening creches, talking
everything but politics, presiding at dinners, going sober to
bed. The whole State should be so constructed that the
people should think it their duty to grow popular with King
and Lord Mayor instead of King and Lord Mayor growing
popular with them ; yet, as it is even, I have known some
two or three men and women who never, apart from the day’s
natural kindness, gave the people a thought, or who despised
them with that old Shakesperean contempt and were worshipped
after their death or even while they lived. Try to be popular
and you think another man’s thought, sink into that slow,
slothful, inanimate, semi-hypocritical thinking Dante symbolised
by hoods and cloaks of lead.
11.
I read in “ The Irish Times ” of October 20th, 1937, that the
Galway Library Committee is indignant and has written to
a firm of publishers to protest. John Eglinton said in his
memoir of AE that a mob had broken into a public library,
taken out the books of certain eminent authors and burnt
them in the street. The committee did not require, it seems,
the dictation of a mob to do its duty. They had some years
ago discussed whether " the works of Mr. Bernard Shaw were
works which should be kept in a public library, and on a


division it was decided that the books of Shaw be not kept.
It was suggested at the time that any book which was offensive
should be burned. There was no other way of getting rid
of them.” I do not mention this incident because of its
importance, there have been similar burnings elsewhere in
Ireland, but that I may stand between these men and their
critics. They are probably clever, far-seeing men when
ploughing their fields, selling porter, or, if they make their
living by teaching class, when they have shut the school doors
behind them, but show them a book and they buzz like a bee
in a bottle. I know nothing of them except those few printed
words, but it seems probable that many men in Irish public
life should not have been taught to read and write, and would
not have been in any country before the middle of the nine-
teenth century. Some of the Galway committee may have
a family tradition of some grandfather or grandfather's cousin
or nephew who set out to seek learning supported by the
contributions of relations and friends and found at the journey’s
end, if he had reasonable luck, not a government appointed
dunce, but a man who loved his book and taught something
of great people and great literature. Thackeray heard two
ragged boys leaning over the Liffey parapet discussing “ wan of
the Ptolemies.” Forcing reading and writing on those who
wanted neither was a worst part of the violence which for
two centuries has been creating that hell wherein we suffer,
unless indeed the spoilt priest in “ John Bull’s Other Island ”
was right and the world itself is hell. I once travelled up from
Limerick with an old priest and a girl of thirteen or
fourteen. He had written an essay on Gladstone and it lay
upon his knees. He began talking to the girl about it. " Who
was Gladstone ? ” “I don’t know, Father.” “ Was he at the
Siege of Limerick ? ” “ Yes, Father,” this with a sudden
brightening. When he asked about Parnell and the Land
Bill and found that she had heard of neither he turned to me
with “ Sir, if you ever meet anyone of importance please tell
them that this kind of ignorance is spreading everywhere from
the schools.”
Perhaps now they learn these names by rote, but I see
nowhere evidence that ignorance has abated. Our representa-
tive system has given Ireland to the incompetent. There are
no districts in County Galway of any size without a Catholic
curate, a young shopkeeper, a land-owner, a sawyer, with
enough general knowledge to make a good library committee.


I remember the volunteers who policed the country, dealt out
justice, and had all men’s respect.
111.
When I was first a member of the Irish Senate I discovered
to my surprise that one learned in three months more about
every senator’s character and capacity than could have been
learned from years of ordinary life. I came to know the
ministers more slowly, for each attended only when his own
department was concerned. The thirty men nominated by
President Cosgrave were plainly the most able and the most
educated. I attached myself to a small group led by an old
friend of my father’s, Andrew Jameson, for I knew that he
would leave me free to speak my mind. The few able men
among the elected senators had been nominated for election
by ministers. As the nominated element began to die out
—almost all were old men—the Senate declined in ability
and prestige. In its early days some old banker or lawyer
would dominate the House, leaning upon the back of the chair
in front, always speaking with undisturbed self-possession
as at some table in a board room. My imagination sets
up against him some typical elected man, emotional as a
youthful chimpanzee, hot and vague, always disturbed, always
hating something or other.
The ministers had not been elected. They had destroyed
a system of election and established another, made terrible
decisions, the ablest had signed the death warrant of his
dearest friend. They seemed men of skill and mother-wit,
men who had survived hatred. But their minds knew no play
that my mind could play at ; I felt that I could never know
them. One of the most notable said he had long wanted to
meet me. We met, but my conversation shocked and em-
barrassed him. No, neither Gogarty nor I, with our habit of
outrageous conversation, could get near those men. Yet
their descendants, if they grow rich enough for the travel
and leisure that make a finished man, will constitute our
ruling class, and date their origin from the Post Office as
American families date theirs from the “ Mayflower.” They
have already intermarried, able stocks have begun to appear,
and recent statistics have shown that men of talent every-
where are much linked through marriage and descent. The
Far East has dynasties of painters, dancers, politicians,
merchants, but with us the dancer may be the politician’s


mother, though I cannot think of any example, the painter his
rebellious son.
I was six years in the Irish Senate ; I am not ignorant of
politics elsewhere, and on other grounds I have some right
to speak. I say to those that shall rule here ; If ever Ireland
again seems molten wax, reverse the process of revolution.
Do not try to pour Ireland into any political system. Think
first how many able men with public minds the country has,
how many it can hope to have in the near future, and mould
your system upon those men. It does not matter how you
get them, but get them. Republics, Kingdoms, Soviets, Cor-
porate States, Parliaments, are trash, as Hugo said of some-
thing else “ not worth one blade of grass that God gives for
the nest of the linnet.” These men, whether six or six thousand,
are the core of Ireland, are Ireland itself.
IV.
As I write these words the Abbey Players are finishing a
successful American tour. These tours, and Irish songs and
novels, when they come from a deeper life than their nine-
teenth century predecessors, are taking the place of political
speakers, political organisations, in holding together the twenty
scattered millions conscious of their Irish blood. The atti-
tude towards life of Irish writers and dramatists at this
moment will have historical importance. The success of the
Abbey Theatre has grown out of a single conviction of its
founders : I was the spokesman because I was bom arrogant
and had learnt an artist’s arrogance—“ Not what you want
but what we want ” —and we were the first modem theatre
that said it. I did not speak for John Synge, Augusta
Gregory and myself alone, but for all the dramatists of the
theatre. Again and again somebody speaking for our
audience, for an influential newspaper or political organisa-
tion, has demanded more of this kind of play or less, or none,
of that. They have not understood that we cannot, and if we
could would not comply ; the moment any dramatist has some
dramatic sense and applies it to our Irish theme he is played.
We may help him with his technique or to clear his mind of
the second-hand or the second-rate in their cruder forms, but
beyond that we can do nothing. He must find himself and
mould his dramatic form to his nature after his own fashion,
and that is why we have produced some of the best plays of


modem times, and a far greater number of the worst. And
what I have said of the dramatists is tme of the actors,
though there the bad comedians do not reach our principal
company. I have seen English producers turn their players
into mimics; but all our producers do for theirs, or so it was
in my day and I suppose it is still the same, is to help them
to understand the play and their own natures.
Yet the theatre has not, apart from this one quality, gone
my way or in any way I wanted it to go, and often looking
back I have wondered if I did right in giving so much of my
life to the expression of other men’s genius. According to
the Indians a man may do much good yet lose his own soul.
Then I say to myself, I have had greater luck than any other
modem English-speaking dramatist; I have aimed at tragic
ecstasy and here and there in my own work and in the work
of my friends I have seen it greatly played. What does it
matter that it belongs to a dead art and to a time when a
man spoke out of an experience and a culture that were not
of his time alone, but held his time, as it were, at arms length,
that he might be a spectator of the ages. lam haunted by
certain moments ; Miss O’Neill in the last act of Synge’s
“ Deirdre ” “ Stand a little further off with the quarrelling of
fools ” ; Kerrigan and Miss O’Neill playing in a private house
that scene in Augusta Gregory’s “ Full Moon ” where the
young mad people in their helpless joy sing “ The boys of
Queen Anne ” ; Frank Fay’s entrance in the last act of “ The
Well of the Saints ” ; William Fay at the end of “ On Baile’s
Strand ” ; Mrs. Patrick Campbell in my “ Deirdre,” passionate
and solitary ; and in later years that great artist Ninette de
Valois in “ Fighting the Waves.” These things will, it may be,
haunt me on my deathbed; what matter if the people prefer
another art, I have had my fill.
To-morrow’s Revolution
I.
When I was in my ’teens I admired my father above all
men ; from him I learnt to admire Balzac and to set certain
passages in Shakespeare above all else in literature, but when
I was twenty-three or twenty-four I read Ruskin’s “ Unto This
Last ” of which I do not remember a word, and we began to
quarrel, for he was John Stuart Mill’s disciple. Once he


threw me against a picture with such violence that I broke
the glass with the back of my head. But it was not only with
my father that I quarreled, nor were economics the only
theme. There was no dominant opinion I could accept. Then
finding out that I (having no clear case—my opponent’s case
had been clarifying itself for centuries) had become both
boor and bore I invented a patter, allowing myself an easy
man’s insincerity, and for honesty’s sake a little malice, and
now it seems that I can talk nothing else. But I think I have
succeeded, and that none of my friends know that I am a
fanatic. My reader may say that it was all natural, that
every generation is against its predecessor, but that conflict
is superficial, an exaltation of the individual life that
had little importance before modem journalism; that
other war, where opposites die each other’s life, live each
other’s death, is a slow-moving thing. We who are the
opposites of our times should for the most part work at our
art and for good manners’ sake be silent. What matter if
our art or science lack hearty acquiescence, seem narrow and
traditional ? Horne built the smallest church in London, went
to Italy and became the foremost authority upon Botticelli.
Ricketts made pictures that suggest Delacroix by their colour
and remind us by their theatrical composition that Talma once
invoked the thunderbolt; Synge fled to the Aran Islands to escape
" the squalor of the poor and the nullity of the rich,” and
found among forgotten people a mirror for his bitterness. I
gave certain years to writing plays in Shakesperean blank verse
about Irish kings for whom nobody cared a farthing. After
all, Asiatic conquerors before battle invoked their ancestors,
and a few years ago a Japanese admiral thanked his for guiding
the torpedoes.
11.
But now I must, if I can, put away my patter, speak to
the young men before the ox treads on my tongue. Here is
my text; I take it from “ The Anatomy of Melancholy.”
" So many different ways are we pledged and punished for
our fathers’ defaults ; in so much that, as Fernelius truly
saith, 'it is the greatest part of our felicity to be well born,
and it were happy for human kind, if only such parents as
are sound of body and mind should be suffered to marry.
An husbandman will sow none but the best and choicest seed
upon his land ; he will not rear a bull or an horse except he
be right shapen in all parts, or permit him to cover a mare.


except he be well assured of his breed; we make a choice of
the best rams for our sheep, rear the neatest kine, and keep
the best dogs, quanto id diligentius in procreandis liberis
observandum! And how careful then should we be in be-
getting our children ! In former times some countries have
been so chary in this behalf, so stem, that, if a child were
crooked or deformed in mind or body, they made him away;
so did the Indians of old by the relation of Curtius, and many
other well-governed commonwealths, according to the dis-
cipline of those times. Heretofore in Scotland, saith Hect.
Boethius, if any were visited with the falling sickness, mad-
ness, gout, leprosy, or any such dangerous diseases, which
was likely to be propagated from the father to the son, he
was instantly gelded : a woman kept from all company of
men ; and if by chance, having some such disease, she were
found to be with child, she and her brood were buried alive :
and this was done for the common good, lest the whole nation
should be injured or corrupted. A severe doom, you will
say, and not to be used among Christians, yet more to be
looked into than it is. For now by our too much facility in
this kind, in giving way for all to marry that will, too much
liberty and indulgence in tolerating all sorts, there is a vast
confusion of hereditary diseases, no family secure, no man
almost free from some grievous infirmity or other. When
no choice is had, but still the eldest must marry, as so many
stallions of the race ; or if rich, be they fools or dizzards,
lame or maimed, inable, intemperate, dissolute, exhaust
through riot, as he said, jure haereditario sapere jubentur,
they must be wise and able by inheritance ; it comes to pass
that our generation is corrupt, we have many weak persons,
both in body and mind, many feral diseases raging amongst
us, crazed families, parentes peremptores ; our fathers bad, and
we are like to be worse.”*
111.
Though well-known specialists are convinced that the
principal European nations are degenerating in body and in
mind, their evidence remains almost unknown because a
politician and newspaper that gave it adequate exposition
would lose, the one his constituency, the other its circulation.
* " The Anatomy of Melancholy,” by Robert Burton, edited by the Rev. A. R.
Shilleto, M.A., published by G. Bell & Sons, London, 1912. Part I, Sect. 2, Mem. 11,
Subs. VI.


That upon which success in life in the main depends may
be called co-ordination or a capacity for sustained purpose*!
and this capacity, this innate intelligence or mother-wit, can
be measured, in children especially, with great accuracy.
The curious and elaborate tests are unlike school examina-
tions because they eliminate, or almost eliminate, the child’s
acquired knowledge. This mother-wit is not everything and
may have been the same in Bluebeard and St. Augustine ;
Gray’s “ Milton ” remained for lack of acquired knowledge
“ mute, inglorious ” ; but it outweighs everything else by, let
us say, six to one, and is hereditary like the speed of a dog
or a horse. Take a pair of twins and educate one in wealth,
the other in poverty, test from time to time ; their mother-
wit will be the same. Pick a group of slum children, examine
for mother-wit, move half the children to some other
neighbourhood where they have better food, light and air,
and after several months or years re-examine. Except for
the increase which comes with age—it increases until we are
seventeen and declines after thirty-five—there will be
little or no difference. *2 Furthermore, if you arrange an
ascending scale from the unemployed to skilled labour, from
skilled labour to shopkeepers and clerks, from shopkeepers
and clerks to professional men. *3 There is not only an in-
crease of mother-wit but of the size of the body and its freedom
from constitutional defects. *4 Intelligence and bodily vigour are
*i I have deduced this rough definition of intelligence from the general nature of the
" intelligence tests ” and from “ The Measurement of Intelligence ” by Lewis M. Terman
(pages 44-47). lam indebted to the Secretary of the Eugenics Society for a long typed
extract from this book. I am, indeed, indebted to his patience and courtesy for much
of my information.
*2 A test of this kind with three hundred Glasgow children was summarised by
Shephard Dawson in an address to The British Association in 1934. On re-examination
eighteen mouths after removal to better surroundings they did show " a just, appreciable
improvement.” Cattell considers this seeming “ improvement ” the result of tests which
did not sufficiently exclude acquired knowledge. Shephard Dawson, a cautious man,
while considering it encouraging to philanthropists, says that it was so small that those
who initiate “ social welfare schemes may have to rely on the formation of habits that
have to be learned, rather than on any improvement in intelligence." Cattell, with
later and fuller information from his own exhaustive investigations in Devonshire and in
the town of Leicester, would say not “ may " but “ must.”
*3 A well-known authority writes in answer to a question of mine : “We have no
statistics for the leisured classes, owing to the difficulty of getting them into groups for
examination.” It is a pity, for I want to know what happens to the plant when it gets
from under the stone.
*4 The physical degeneration is the most easy to measure. In England since 1873
the average stature has declined about two inches, chest measurement about two inches
and weight about twenty pounds. In almost all European countries, especially those
where Catholicism encourages large families among the poor, there has been an equal or
greater decline. Military standards have been lowered almost everywhere; Spain has
lowered hers four times in the last forty years. Holland seems the one exception, and
there, presumably because the poor have reduced the size of their families, the average
stature has risen with astonishing rapidity. I summarise from Cattell's “ Psychology
and Social Progress,” pages 102 and 112.
c


not in themselves connected, but those who in their mating
have sought intelligence have sought vigour also. As intelligence
and freedom from bodily defect increase, wealth increases in exact
measure until enough for the necessities of life is reached—fixed by
Cattell at £l4O a year—and after that, with many exceptions,
for men have other goals. There are exceptions through-
out ; clever men are bom among dunces, dunces among clever
men, and here and there a dunce earns much money, but in
every country the statistics work out the same average.
But this ascending scale has another character which may,
or must, turn all politics upside down ; the families grow
smaller as we ascend ; among the unemployed they average
between four and five, among the professional classes be-
tween two and three ; among the unemployed there are still
families of twelve and thirteen, but when we reach skilled
labour families of six have come to an end, and this is true
of all Western Europe, Catholic and Protestant alike. Since
about 1900 the better stocks have not been replacing their
numbers, while the stupider and less healthy have been more
than replacing theirs. Unless there is a change in the public
mind every rank above the lowest must degenerate, and, as
inferior men push up into its gaps, degenerate more and
more quickly. The results are already visible in the degene-
ration of literature, newspapers, amusements (there was
once a stock company playing Shakespeare in every con-
siderable town), and, I am convinced, in benefactions like
that of Lord Nuffield, a self-made man, to Oxford,
which must gradually substitute applied science for ancient
wisdom. Not that it will matter much what they teach. Mr.
Bernard Shaw, contemplating the impressive English school
system, has remarked that his old nurse was right when she
said that you couldn’t make a silk purse out of a sow’s ear*.
Then, too, think of the growing cohesiveness, the growing
frenzy, everybody thinking like everybody else, pre-occupation
of all sorts with “ the youthful chimpanzee.” Any notable
eighteenth century orator contrasts with Lloyd George, as an
orator of the great period in Greece and Rome with the Emperor
Julian among his troops in Gaul.
IV.
The United States organised their troops sent to Europe
in the Great War by tests of mother-wit, “ intelligence
* I recommend to my readers Cattell’s " Fight for the National Intelligence,” a book
recommended by Lord Horder and Leonard Darwin. I have taken most of the facts in
this section, and some of the arguments and metaphors that follow, from this book.


tests,” and yet differ little from other democratic nations in
their daily practice ; and the new-formed democratic parlia-
ments of India will doubtless destroy, if they can, the caste
system that has saved Indian intellect. The Fascist countries
know that civilisation has reached a crisis, and found their
eloquence upon that knowledge, but from dread of attack
or because they must feed their uneducatable masses, put
quantity before quality; any hale man can dig or march.
They offer bounties for the seventh, eighth or ninth baby,
and accelerate degeneration. In Russia, where the most
intelligent families restrict their numbers as elsewhere, the
stupidest man can earn a bounty by going to bed. Govern-
ment there has the necessary authority, but as it thinks the
social problem economic and not eugenic and ethnic —what
was Karl Marx but Macaulay with his heels in the air ? —■
it is the least likely to act. One nation has solved the prob-
lem in its chief city ; in Stockholm all families are small;
but the greater the intelligence the larger the family. Plato’s
Republic with machines instead of slaves may dawn there,
but like the other Scandinavian countries Sweden has spent
on education far more than the great nations can afford
with their imperial responsibilities and ambitions, their al-
ways increasing social services and public works. That in-
crease, too, can be calculated mathematically. But even if all
Europe becomes sufficiently educated to follow the Swedish
example, can it, or can Sweden itself, escape violence ? If
some financial re-organisation such as Major Douglas plans,
and that better organisation of agriculture and industry
which many economists expect, enable everybody without effort
to procure all necessities of life and so remove the last
check upon the multiplication of the uneducatable masses,
it will become the duty of the educated classes to seize and
control one or more of those necessities. The drilled and
docile masses may submit, but a prolonged civil war seems
more likely, with the victory of the skilful, riding their
machines as did the feudal knights their armoured horses.
During the Great War Germany had four hundred submarine
commanders, and sixty per cent, of the damage done was the
work of twenty-four men. The danger is that there will be
no war, that the skilled will attempt nothing, that the
European civilisation, like those older civilisations that saw
the triumph of their gangrel stocks, will accept decay. When
I was writing “ A Vision ” I had constantly the word “ terror ”
impressed upon me, and once the old Stoic prophecy of earth


quake, fire and flood at the end of an age, but this I did not
take literally. It was because of that indefinable impres-
sion that I made Michael Robartes say in “ A Vision ” : “ Dear
predatory birds, prepare for war, prepare your children and
all that you can reach . . test art, morality, custom, thought,
by Thermophylae, make rich and poor act so to one another
that they can stand together there. Love war because of its
horror, that belief may be changed, civilisation renewed.
We desire belief and lack it. Belief comes from shock and is
not desired,"
V.
The American intelligence tests put the Irish immigrant
lowest in the scale, the English, the German and the Swede
highest. Skilled men leave the industrial countries attracted
by higher wages; what Irish go there are unskilled men
driven by necessity, those that succeed are the few who, as
a successful Irish-American lawyer said to me, escape from
toil before it has killed them. These immigrants are our un-
employed, and balance those that go to posts all over the
British Empire as doctors, lawyers, soldiers, civil servants,
or drift away drawn to the lights of London. In the opinion
of most sociologists the level of mother-wit in all West-European
countries is still much the same. But we are threatened as
they are, already we have almost twice as many madmen as
England for every hundred thousand. Sooner or later we
must limit the families of the unintelligent classes, and if our
government cannot send them doctor and clinic it must, till
it get tired of it, send monk and confession box. We cannot
go back as some dreamers would have us, to the old way of
big families everywhere, even if the intelligent classes would
consent, because that old way worked through lack of science
and consequent great mortality among the children of those
least fitted for modem civilisation.
Some of the inferiority of our emigrants in the United
States and in Scotland may depend upon difference of
historical phase. The tests usually employed are appropriate
to a civilisation dominated by towns, by their objectivity
and curiosity. Some of the tests are rectilinear mazes of in-
creasing difficulty. The child marks with a pointer the way
in, the way out at the other side, avoiding if he can turnings
that lead nowhere. Probably he thinks of neighbouring
streets where every turn is a right angle; an Achill child
having no such image would probably fail through lack of


attention. Other tests consist of fitting certain objects into
pictures, but pictures are almost or wholly unknown in our
remote districts. A Canadian artist told me that she once
lodged with French-Canadian farmers and, noticing the
thought they gave in planting a tree to the composition of the
landscape, she gave the farmer's wife a picture. When
she returned a year later the farmer's wife said, " I made
this apron out of that bit of canvas, but it took hours of
scrubbing to get the dirt off.”* Then, we Irish are nearer
than the English to the Mythic Age. Once, coming up from
Cork, I got into talk with a fellow traveller and learned that
he lived in County Cork, and as there was nothing notice-
able about his accent I assumed that he was a Cork man.
Presently he said : "We have passed through three climates
since we started; first our breath congealed on the glass, and
then it ceased to do so, and now it congeals again.” I said :
“ You are English ? ” He said, “Yes, but how did you find
out ? ” I said, "No Irishman would have made that observa-
tion.” I forget what more I said, but it may have been that
we are not disinterested observers, being much taken up with
our own thoughts and emotions. The English are an
objective people ; they have no longer a sense of tragedy in
their threats; pity, which is fed by observation instead of
experience, has taken its place ; their poets are psychological,
looking at their own minds from without. Ninette de Valois,
herself a Dublin woman, protested the other day because
somebody had called the theatre the province of the Jews
and the Irish. " The Irish,” she said, " are adaptable
immigrants, the bigger and emptier a country the better it
pleases them. When England fills up, they will disappear;
they will lunch in bed instead of merely breakfasting there,
they will be scared off by the Matriculation papers.”
Private Thoughts.
(SHOULD BE SKIPPED BY POLITICIANS AND
JOURNALISTS.)
I.
I am philosophical, not scientific, which means that
observed facts do not mean much until I can make them part
* Since I wrote this passage a friend has described to me Mayo boys and girls looking
at a film or magazine page for the first time. It takes some little time before they
understood that black and white splashes or black lines can represent natural objects.
If it is a magazine page, some one will presently say “ That is a horse,” or, “ that is a man.”


of my experience. Now that lam old and live in the past
I often think of those ancestors of whom I have some detailed
information. Such and such a diner-out and a charming man
never did anything ; such and such lost the never very great
family fortune in some wild-cat scheme ; such and such, per-
haps deliberately for he was a strange, deep man, married
into a family known for harsh dominating strength of
character. Then, as my mood deepens, I discover all these
men in my single mind, think that I myself have gone through
the same vicissitudes, that I am going through them all at
this very moment, and wonder if the balance has come right ;
then I go beyond those minds and my single mind and
discover that I have been describing everybody’s struggle,
and the gyres turn in my thoughts. Vico was the first modern
philosopher to discover in his own mind, and in the
European past, all human destiny. “We can know nothing,”
he said, “ that we have not made.” Swift, too, Vico’s contem-
porary, in his first political essay saw history as a personal
experience, so too did Hegel in his “ Philosophy of History;* ”
Balzac in his letter to the Duchesse de Castris, and here and
there in “ Le Peau de Chagrin ” and “ Catherine de Medici.”
When I allow my meditation to expand until the mind of
my family merges into everybody’s mind, I discover there,
not only what Vico and Balzac found, but my own particular
amusements and interests. First, no man can do the same
thing twice if he has to put much mind into it, as every
painter knows. Just when some school of painting has become
popular, reproductions in every print-shop window, million-
aires outbidding one another, everybody’s affection stirred,
painters wear out their nerves establishing something else,
and this something else must be the other side of the penny —■
for Heraclitus was in the right. Opposites are everywhere
face to face, dying each other’s life, living each other’s death.
When a man loves a girl it should be because her face and
character offer what he lacks, the more profound his nature
the more should he realise his lack and the greater be the
difference. It is as though he wanted to take his own death
into his arms and beget a stronger life upon that death. We
* Hegel’s historical dialectic is, I am persuaded, false, and its falsehood has led to the
rancid ill-temper of the typical communist and his incitements or condonations of murder.
When the spring vegetables are over they have not been refuted, nor have they suffered
in honour or reputation. Hegel in his more popular writings seems to misrepresent his
own thought. Mind cannot be the ultimate reality seeing that in his “ Logic ” both mind
and matter have their ground in spirit. To Hegel, as to the ancient Indian Sages, spirit
is that which has value in itself.


should count men and women who pick, as it were, the dam
or sire of a Derby winner from between the shafts of a cab,
among persons of genius, for this genius makes all other kinds
possible.
Our present civilisation began about the first Crusade,
reached its mid-point in the Italian Renaissance ; just when
that point was passing Castiglione recorded in his “ Courtier ”
what was said in the court of Urbino somewhere about the
first decade of the sixteenth century. These admirable con-
versationalists knew that the old spontaneous life had gone,
and what a man must do to retain unity of being, mother-wit
expressed in its perfection ; he must know so many foreign
tongues, know how to dance and sing, talk well, walk well,
and be always in love. Elsewhere Titian was painting great
figures of the old, simple generations; a little later came
Van Dyke and his sensitive fashionable faces where the impulse
of life was fading. Somebody has written, “ There can be
no wisdom without leisure,” and those rich men of leisure
still kept war and government for perquisites, and all else
was done under their patronage. A City Father of a defeated
Spanish town said that he could not understand it because
their commander was not less well born than his opponent.
They were at times great architects, they travelled everywhere,
read the classic authorities and designed buildings that still
stir our admiration. When Bishop Berkeley was asked to
help design the facade of Speaker Connolly’s fine house at
Celbridge he refused because too many country gentlemen
were already at the task. Meanwhile a famous event happened
with much notoriety; Sir Richard Temple and certain of his
distinguished friends had affirmed the genuineness of the letters
of Phalaris and the coarse, arrogant Bentley had proved them
in the wrong; culture, unity of being, no longer sufficed,
and the specialists were already there. Swift, when little
more than a boy, satirised what ” Gulliver ” would satirise :
“ But what does our proud ignorance Learning call ?
We oddly Plato’s paradox make good,
Our knowledge is but mere remembrance all;
Remembrance is our treasure and our food ;
Nature’s fair table-book, our tender souls,
We scrawl all o’er with old and empty rules,
Stale memorandums of the schools :
For Learning’s mighty treasures look
In that deep grave a book ;


Think that she there does all her treasures hide,
And that her troubled ghost still haunts there since she dy’d.
Confine her walks to colleges and schools ;
Her priest, her train, and followers show
As if they all were spectres too !
They purchase knowledge at th’ expense
Of common breeding, common sense,
And grow at once scholars and fools ;
Affect ill-manner’d pedantry,
Rudeness, ill-nature, incivility,
And, sick with dregs of knowledge grown,
Which greedily they swallow down
Still cast it up, and nauseate company.”
The leisured men had still a characteristic work to do.
During the eighteenth century they bred cattle instead of
men, turning the fence-jumping, climbing, muscular cow and
sheep of antiquity into fat and slothful butcher’s meat. And
now, their great task done, as it seems, they live the life of
pleasure, taking what comes, marrying what’s there, but now
and again married by some reigning beauty, daughter of a
barmaid man-picker who had doubled her own mettle with
that of a man whose name she had forgotten or never known.
The specialist’s job is anybody’s job, seeing that for the
most part he is made, not bom. My best-informed relative
says : “ Because Ireland is a backward country everybody is
unique and knows that if he tumbles down somebody will
pick him up. But an Englishman must be terrified, for
there is a man exactly like him at every street comer.” A
poet in an old Irish poem, travelling from great house to
great house on his poet’s business, meets a woman poet and
asks for a child because a child of theirs would be a great
poet. Parted, they died of love. The hero Finn, wishing
for a son not less strong of body, stood on the top of a hill
and said he would marry the first woman that reached him.
According to the tale, two thousand started level; but why
should Jones of Twickenham bother ?*
We cannot do the same thing twice, and the new thing
must employ a new set of nerves or muscles. When a civilisa-
*ln a fragment from some early version of " The Courting of Emer.” Emer is chosen
for the strength and volume of her bladder. This strength and volume were certainly
considered signs of vigour. A woman of divine origin was murdered by jealous rivals
because she made the deepest hole in the snow with her urine.


tion ends, task having led to task until everybody was bored,
the whole turns bottom upwards, Nietszche’s “ transvalua-
tion of all values,” As we approach the phoenix nest the
old classes, with their power of co-ordinating events, evaporate,
the mere multitude is everywhere with its empty photo-
graphic eyes. Yet we who have hated the age are joyous
and happy. The new discipline wherever enforced or thought
will recall forgotten beautiful faces. Whenever we or our
forefathers have been most Christian—'not the Christ of
Byzantine mosaic but the soft, domesticated Christ of the
painter’s brush—perhaps even when we have felt ourselves
abounding and yielding like the too friendly man who blabs
all his secrets, we have been haunted by those faces dark with
mystery, cast up by that other power that has ever more and
more wrestled with ours, each living the other’s death, dying the
other’s life. A woman’s face, though she be lost or childless,
may foretell a transformation of the people, be a more dire
or beneficent omen than those trumpets heard by Etruscan
seers in middle air.
111.
But if I would escape from patter I must touch upon
things too deep for my intellect and my knowledge, and
besides I want to make my readers understand that explana-
tions of the world lie one inside another', each complete in
itself, like those perforated Chinese ivory balls. The mathe-
matician Poincare, according to Henry Adams, described
space as the creation of our ancestors, meaning, I conclude,
that mind split itself into mind and space. Space was to
antiquity mind’s inseparable " other,” coincident with objects,
the table not the place it occupies. During the seventeenth
century it was separated from mind and objects alike, and
thought of as a nothing yet a reality, the place not the table,
with material objects separated from taste, smell, sound,
from all the mathematician could not measure for its sole
inhabitant, and this new matter and space men were told had
preceded mind and would live after. Nature or reality as
known to poets and tramps has no moment, no impression,
no perception like another, everything is unique and nothing
unique is measurable.
A line, whether made with rule and plummet or with a
compass, must start somewhere. How convenient if men
were but those dots, all exactly alike, all pushable, arrange-
able, or, as Blake said, all intermeasurable by one another.
D


Two and two must make four, though no two things are
alike. A time had come when man must have certainty,
and man knows what he has made. Man has made mathe-
matics, but God reality. Instead of hierarchical society, where
all men are different, came democracy; instead of a science
which had re-discovered Anima Mundi, its experiments and
observations confirming the speculations of Henry More,
came materialism ; all that whiggish world Swift stared on
till he became a raging man. The ancient foundations had
scarcely dispersed when Swift’s young acquaintance Berkeley
destroyed the new, for all that would listen created modem
philosophy and established for ever the subjectivity of
space.* No educated man to-day accepts the objective mat-
ter and space of popular science, and yet deductions made
by those who believed in both dominate the world, make
possible the stimulation and condonation of revolutionary
massacre and the multiplication of murderous weapons by
substituting for the old humanity with its unique irreplace-
able individuals something that can be chopped and measured
like a piece of cheese; compel denial of the immortality of
the soul by hiding from the mass of the people that the grave
diggers have no place to bury us but in the human mind.
When I began to grow old I could no longer spend ail my
time amid masterpieces and in trying to make the like. I
gave part of every day to mere entertainment, and it seemed
when I was ill that great genius was “ mad as the mist and
snow.” Already in mid-Renaissance the world was weary
of wisdom, science began to appear in the elaborate perspec-
tives of its painters, in their sense of weight and tangibility;
man was looking for some block where he could lay his head.
But better than that, with Jacob’s dream threatening, get
rid of man himself. Civilisation slept in the masses, wisdom
in science. Is it criminal to sleep ? Ido not know ;I do not
say it.
IV.
Among those our civilisation must reject, or leave unre-
warded at some level below that co-ordination that modem
civilisation finds essential, exist precious faculties. When
I was seven or eight I used to run about with a little negro
girl, the only person at Rosses Point who could find a plover’s
nest, and I have noticed that clairvoyance, pre-vision, and
* For a modem re-statement, see Boyce Gibbons’ translation from Husserl’s ” Ideas,”
pages 128, 129 and elsewhere.


allied gifts, rare among the educated classes, are common
among peasants. Among those peasants there is much of
Asia, where Hegel has said every civilisation begins. Yet
we must hold to what we have that the next civilisation may
be born, not from a virgin’s womb, nor a tomb without a body,
not from a void, but of our own rich experience. These gifts
must return, not in the mediumistic sleep dreaming or dream-
less, but when we are wide awake. Eugenical and psychical
research are the revolutionary movements with that element
of novelty and sensation which sooner or later stir men to
action. It may be, or it must be, that the best bred from the
best shall claim again their ancient omens. And the serving
women " shrank in their rejoicing before the eyes of the child,”
and “ the hour seemed awful to them ” as they brought the
child to its mother :
“ And she said : ‘Now one of the earthly on the eyes of my
child has gazen
Nor shrunk before their glory, nor stayed her love amazed :
I behold thee as Sigmund beholdeth—and I was the home of
thine heart—
Woe’s me for the day when thou wert not, and the hour when
we shall part.’ ”
V.
In Ireland there is some talk of the counter-Renaissance
and a proposal to teach Greek in association with Gaelic was
opposed by a well-known Cork Professor on the ground that
it would strengthen the influence of the Renaissance. lam
about to repeat and amplify the proposal whether first made
by Father Patrick Browne of Maynooth or myself I do not
know, and precisely because it would strengthen the influence
of the Renaissance. I detest the Renaissance because it made
the human mind inorganic; I adore the Renaissance because
it clarified form and created freedom. I too expect the
counter-Renaissance, but if we do not hold to freedom and
form it will come, not as an inspiration in the head, but as
an obstruction in the bowels.
Ireland After The Revolution
I.
I assume that some tragic crisis shall so alter Europe and
all opinion that the Irish government will teach the great


majority of its school-children nothing but ploughing, har-
rowing, sowing, curry-combing, bicycle-cleaning, drill-driving,
parcel-making, bale-pushing, tin-can-soldering, door-knob
polishing, threshold-whitening, coat-cleaning, trouser-patching,
and playing upon the Squiffer, all things that serve human
dignity, unless indeed it decide that these things are better
taught at home, in which case it can leave the poor children at
peace.
Having settled that matter I return to more important
things. Teach nothing but Greek, Gaelic, mathematics, and
perhaps one modem language. I reject Latin because it was
a language of the Greco-Roman decadence, all imitation and
manner and other feminine tricks; the much or little Latin
necessary for a Priest, Doctor or Lawyer should be part of
professional training and come later. D’Arblay de Jubainville
worked on old Irish for thirty years because it brought him
back to the civilisation immediately behind that of Homer;
and when I prepared “ Oedipus at Colonus ” for the Abbey
stage I saw that the wood of the Furies in the opening scene
was any Irish haunted wood. No passing beggar or fiddler or
benighted countryman has ever trembled or been awe-struck
by nymph-haunted or Fury-haunted wood described in Roman
poetry. Roman poetry is founded upon documents, not upon
belief.
Translate into modern Irish all that is most beautiful in
old and middle Irish, what Frank O’Connor and Augusta
Gregory, let us say, have translated into English ; let every
schoolmaster point out where in his neighbourhood this or
that thing happened, or is said to have happened, but teach
Irish and Greek together, make the pupil translate Greek
into Irish, Irish into Greek. The old Irish poets lay in a
formless matrix; the Greek poets kept the richness of those
dreams and yet were completely awake. Sleep has no bottom
waking on top. Irish can give our children love of the
soil underfoot; but only Greek, co-ordination or intensity.
When I was a very young man, fresh from my first study
of Elizabethan drama, I began to puzzle my elders with the
question : “ Why has the audience deteriorated ? ” I would go
on to explain that the modem theatre audience was as inferior
to the Elizabethan as that was to the Greek; I spoke of
the difficult transition from topic to topic in Shakesperean
dialogue, of the still more difficult in those long speeches of
Chapman; we could not give that close attention to-day.
And then I would compare the Elizabethan plot broken up


into farce and spectacle with the elaborate unity of Greek
drama ; no Elizabethan had the Greek intensity. No one
could answer my question, nor could I myself, for I still half-
believed in progress. But I can answer it now : civilisation
rose to its high tide mark in Greece, fell, rose again in the
Renaissance but not to the same level. But we may, if we
choose, not now or soon but at the next turn of the wheel,
push ourselves up, being ourselves the tide, beyond that first
mark. But no, these things are fated ;we may be pushed up.
Mathematics should be taught, because being certainty
without reality it is the modem key to power, but not till the
child is thirteen or fourteen years old and has begun to reason.
Children before that age are the only bom mimics, and they
learn all through mimicry and should be taught languages
and nothing else, though not so many that they will lose
intensity of expression in their own, and these languages should
be taught by word of mouth. Greek and Irish they should
speak as fluently as they now speak English. If Irish is to be-
come the national tongue the change must come slowly, almost
imperceptibly; a sudden or forced change of language may
be the min of the soul. England has forced English upon
the schools and colleges of India, and now after generations
of teaching no Indian can write or speak animated English
and his mother tongue is despised and cormpted. Catholic
Ireland is but slowly recovering from its change of language
in the eighteenth century. Irishmen learn English at their
mother’s knee, English is now their mother-tongue, and a
sudden change would bring a long barren epoch.
Let schools teach what is too difficult for grown men, but
is easy to the imitation or docility of childhood ; English,
history, and geography and those pleasant easy things which
are the most important of all should be taught by father and
mother, ancestral tradition, and the child’s own reading, and
if the child lack this teaching let father, mother and child
be ashamed, as they are if it lack breeding and manners. I
would restore the responsibilities of the family.
11.
Armament comes next to education. The country must
take over the entire defence of its shores.* The formation
of military families should be encouraged. I know enough
of my countrymen to know that, once democratic plausibility
has gone, their small army will be efficient and self-reliant.
* This was written before de Valera’s London agreement.


highly trained though not highly disciplined. Armed with
modem weapons, officered by men from such schools as I
have described, it could throw back from our shores the dis-
ciplined uneducated masses of the commercial nations.
If human violence is not embodied in our institutions the
young will not give them their affection, nor the young and
old their loyalty. A government is legitimate because some
instinct has compelled us to give it the right to take life in
defence of its laws and its shores.
Desire some just war, that big house and hovel, college and
public house, civil servant —his Gaelic certificate in his pocket
—and international bridge-playing woman, may know that
they belong to one nation.
I write with two certainties in mind : first that a hundred
men, their creative power wrought to the highest pitch, their
will trained but not broken, can do more for the welfare of
a people, whether in war or peace, than a million of any lesser
sort no matter how expensive their education, and that although
the Irish masses are vague and excitable because they have
not yet been moulded and cast, we have as good blood as there
is in Europe. Berkeley, Swift, Burke, Grattan, Parnell,
Augusta Gregory, Synge, Kevin O’Higgins, are the true Irish
people, and there is nothing too hard for such as these. If the
Catholic names are few history will soon fill the gap. My
imagination goes back to those Catholic exiled gentlemen of
whom Swift said that their bravery exceeded that of all nations.
111.
The recognition of the crown should be the minimum the
law requires, there must be no royal visits ; a royal opening
of the Dail might be too great a price to pay for the Unity
of Ireland. The English royal family must always embody
an English ideal. I have been told that King George V asked
that the Russian royal family should be brought to England.
The English Prime Minister refused, fearing the effect upon
the English working classes. That story may be no more true
than other stories spoken by word of mouth, but it will serve
for an example. The average Englishman would think King
George’s submission, his abandonment of his relations to a
fate already foreseen, if proved, a necessary, even a noble sacri-
fice. It was indeed his submission, his correctness, as a con-
stitutional sovereign that made his popularity so unbounded
that he became a part of the English Educational system. Some
thousands of examination papers were distributed to school


children in a Northern industrial district with the question,
“ Who was the best man who ever lived ? ” The vast majority
answered, ” King George the Fifth.” Christ was runner-up.
We, upon the other hand, would think that he showed lack
of personality, of manhood even, because he did not abdicate.
No propaganda must be permitted which might recommend
a sovereign who cannot boast in the words of a Sophoclean
chorus :
”... I would be praised as a man,
That in my words and my deeds I have kept those laws in
mind
Olympian Zeus, and that high, clear Empyrean,
Fashioned, and not some man or people of mankind,
Even those sacred laws nor age nor sleep can blind.”
Indeed I beg our governments to exclude all alien appeal
to mass instinct. The Irish mind has still in country rapscallion
or in Bernard Shaw an ancient, cold, explosive, detonating
impartiality. The English mind, excited by its newspaper
proprietors and its schoolmasters, has turned into a bed-hot
harlot.
IV.
I am tired of cursing the Bishop
(Said Crazy Jane)
Nine books or nine hats
Would not make him a man.
I have found something worse
To meditate on.
A King had some beautiful cousins
But where are they gone ?
Battered to death in a cellar
And he stuck to his throne.
Last night I lay on the mountain
(Said Crazy Jane)
There in a two horsed carriage
That on two wheels ran
Great bladdered Emer sat,
Her violent man
Cuchulain, sat at her side,
Thereupon,
Propped upon my two knees,
I kissed a stone ;
I lay stretched out in the dirt
And I cried tears down.


V.
The old man on the boiler has been silent about religion,
but soon this occasional publication, probably in its next
number, will print his words upon that subject without tact
or discretion. He holds that the whole nation must be con-
vinced by some new argument that death is but passing from
one room into another, for lacking that there can be no great
lasting quality.
Other Matters
I.
As there is no Dublin criticism I propose to criticise plays
produced by the Abbey, books published or written by mem-
bers of my family or by my friends, Cuala embroidery, or
whatever else I have a mind to. The reader can make allow-
ances for my bias, and certainly I am a biassed man.
11.
Some years ago I voted for the production by the Abbey
Theatre of a play that I disliked because I thought the author
had won the right to decide upon the merits of his own work.
A few weeks ago I saw that play upon the stage for the first
time, and certainly if I had understood how performance
would solidify its demerits I would, despite all theory to the
contrary, have voted and spoken against it. It displayed a
series of base actions without anything to show that its author
disapproved or expected us to do so. I left before the finish,
feeling that neither I nor anyone else in that audience could
help transferring to the author himself the horror inspired
by his characters. Yet that was unreasonable, for his other
plays are charming and amusing and there all are judged as
we would have them judged. The wicked should be punished,
the innocent rewarded, marriage bells sound for no evil man,
unless an author calls his characters before a more private
tribunal and has so much intellect and culture that we respect
it as though it were our own. Shakespeare and the ballads
judge as we would have them judge. In Jonson’s " Volpone,”
one of the greatest satiric comedies, Volpone goes to his doom
but innocence is not rewarded, the young people who have gone
through so much suffering together leave in the end for their
fathers’ houses with no hint of marriage, and this excites us


because it makes us share in Jonson’s cold implacability. His
tribunal is private, that of Shakespeare public.
I have learnt much of Ireland as a reader for the Abbey
Theatre, perhaps as much as a Priest learns in the confes-
sional. During our first years we sometimes rejected plays
because they were incoherent or commonplace imitations of
Boucicault or of old Queen’s Theatre melodrama. There was
little vulgarity, tradition was still unshaken, the sixpence
had worn thin but was still silver. But of recent years a form
of jocularity incompatible with personal fastidiousness has
begun to replace or degrade characterisation, and I was glad
when infirmity permitted me to leave to others the search
for some quality that could be separated from what seemed
the comic paragraphs of some base penny newspaper or the
inscriptions on the walls of a Corporation urinal. I once
drew the attention of some member of the Executive Council
to this disappearance from great spaces of the public mind
of the old idealistic tradition, and as political revolution and
thirty years of Gaelic grammar had been in vain, I asked for
such drastic thought as that of the Abbey Theatre at its best.
111.
Two or three recent plays have gone to the other extreme.
The persons sit around in a circle and talk and, that unreality
as of a glass chandelier which lifts certain plays of Shaw
into philosophic dialogue altogether lacking, turn some ques-
tion over and over. The pit stays at home, but those who
educate themselves through the circulating libraries are de-
lighted ; they congratulate the Abbey Board upon its belated
discovery that thought is more important than action. But
thought is not more important than action ; masterpieces,
whether of the stage or study, excel in their action, their
visibility; who can forget Odysseus, Don Quixote, Hamlet,
Lear, Faust, all figures in a peep-show, and we are not coherent
to ourselves through thought but because our visible
image changes slowly. English producers slur over that
scene where Hamlet changes the letters and sends Rosen-
crantz and Gildenstem to their death, because they define
him through his thought and think that scene but old
folk material incompatible with Shakespeare's “ Hamlet.” Yet
no imaginative man has ever complained, and Shakespeare
when he made Hamlet kill the father of Fortinbras in single
combat showed that he meant it. Hamlet’s hesitations are
hesitations of thought, and are concerned with certain persons
E


on whom his attention is fixed; outside that he is a
mediaeval man of action. Take some seemingly average man
or woman, touch some psychological gadget and they turn
to angel or devil. Our bodies are nearer to our coherence
because nearer to the “ unconscious ” than our thought. Sar-
gent once said to me, " All people are exactly what they look.
I have just painted a woman who thinks herself completely
serious; here is her portrait, I show her as she looks and is,
completely frivolous.” This new art, this art of the circulating
libraries, has no interest in anything that cannot be under-
stood through opinion : unlike ancient art, it is urban, it
belongs not to the small ancient town serrated by its green
gardens but to the great modem town where meditation is
impossible, where action is a mechanical routine, where the
chest narrows and the stature sinks, where “ individuality ”
or intellectual coherence is the sole distinction left.
IV.
Our Abbey Theatre some years ago took over from the
English repertory theatre a play which failed with our
audience and is bound to fail with every audience which has
not been educated out of its instincts. Flecker’s “ Santorin ” is
almost the most moving and romantic of modern lyrics, but in
“ Hassan” I can discover nothing but the perversity and petu-
lence of the disease of which its author was already fading.
I find it even more horrible than the vulgar jocularity of cer-
tain ignorant Irish dramatists. With them tradition is dying
because neither the old folk-feeling nor the superficial ideality
of Young Ireland can resist a contagion from English and
American slums. But this play was written during those ten
years before the war when the English urban mind was
turning against culture as Arnold defined it, the knowledge
of the best that is said and thought in the world, and seeking
to substitute contemporary thought merely because contem-
porary. It began with a distaste for romantic subject mat-
ter. Presently would come a desire for a contemporary
urban style. In Flecker subject matter and style were un-
changed, but in his illness he seems to have suddenly accepted
everything else in the point of view of his critics. In “ Hassan ”
he assumed that at least one masterpiece was already for-
gotten. We know Harun al Raschid through “ The Arabian
Nights ” alone, and there he is the greatest of all traditional
images of generosity and magnanimity. In one beautiful


story he finds that a young girl of his harem loves a certain
young man, and though he himself loves that girl he sets her
free and arranges her marriage; and there are other stories
of like import. Considered as history, “ Hassan ”is a forgery,
as literature an impertinence, for it makes him put two such
lovers to death with every horror of cruelty. One feels that
its nightmare-ridden author longed to make Galahad lecherous,
Lancelot a coward and Adam impotent; to employ against
them, because they are still in some sense reigning sovereigns,
all the revolutionist’s baser tricks. But even if we could
condone its false history we must condemn it as a work of
art, for there is nothing there but wanton, morbid cruelty.
The arts are all the bridal chambers of joy. No tragedy
is legitimate unless it leads some great character to his final
joy. Polonius may go out wretchedly, but I can hear the
dance music in “ Absent thee from felicity awhile,” or in
Hamlet’s speech over the dead Ophelia, and what of Cleopatra’s
last farewells, Lear’s rage under the lightning, Oedipus sinking
down at the story’s end into an earth “ riven ” by love ?
Some Frenchman has said that farce is the struggle against a
ridiculous object, comedy against a movable object, tragedy
against an immovable ; and because the will, or energy, is
greatest in tragedy, tragedy is the more noble ; but I add
that “ will or energy is eternal delight,” and when its limit
is reached it may become a pure, aimless joy, though the man,
the shade, still mourns his lost object. It has, as it were, thrust
up its arms towards those angels who have, as Villiers de LTsle
Adam quotes from St. Thomas Aquinas, returned into themselves
in an eternal moment.
V.
The Cuala Press has published during the past few years
two series of “ Broadsides,” twelve numbers in each. The first
contained traditional Irish songs and songs by modem Irish
poets, with their music ; the second, songs by modem Irish
and English poets with their music. There were no accom-
paniments, for they were intended to be sung, as the country
people sing Gaelic words, mainly for the sake of the words.
When our modern movement began it attempted not only
dramatic literature but new popular songs. Songs by Colum,
by Campbell, and one song of mine, became so well known,
largely through Mac Cormack’s singing, that they have
almost the currency of folk songs. They had, however, been
put to tunes musicians thought suitable for the concert platform,


and were sung there more for their notes than their
words. F. R. Higgins, Dorothy Wellesley and lin editing
these new " Broadsides ” have thought mainly of the words
and not at all of the concert platform. We live in the country
or in Dublin where one can see the mountains through a gap
between two houses, and the largest audience we think of is
a dinner of the Irish Academy of Letters, some group of friends
in a public house, or else some house-party like that which
saw the first performance of Milton’s “ Comus.” Those who
listen must be few that the words may keep their natural
intonation, and those few must share a knowledge of good
literature, and sometimes, where the poem is Irish of Irish
national tradition, no churl must be present. We, like all good
poets, turn our backs on the heterogeneous, seek out our own
kindred. We expect no rapid success or development, no
John MacCormacks.
VI.
I have described in some diary pages, and later in an essay
on Berkeley, a dream or nightmare that went through my
sisters’ house. My sisters and their maid dreamt different
events complementary to one another. Another such dream
affected my wife, my daughter and her nurse. My wife
dreamt of a cat, daughter and nurse had a rat and a mouse
between them. Events in time come upon us head-on like
waves, each wave in some main character the opposite of its
predecessor. But there are other events that lie side by side
in space complements one of another. Of late I have tried to
understand in its practical details the falsehood that is in all
knowledge, science more false than philosophy, but that too
false. Yet, unless we cling to knowledge, until we have ex-
amined its main joints, it comes at us with staring eyes.
Should we drive it away at last, we must enter the Buddhist
monastery in Auden’s play and for the reason there given.
And now comes my brother’s extreme book, " The Charmed
Life.” He does not care that few will read it, still fewer
recognise its genius; it is his book, his “ Faust,” his pursuit
of all that through its unpredictable, unarrangeable reality,
least resembles knowledge. His style fits his purpose for every
sentence has its own taste, tint and smell.
VII.
I undertook to find designers for my sister’s needle, but
found nothing altogether suitable until a friend brought me


Diana Murphy, I put her to making designs from my own
poetry; four are made or in making, “ Innisfree,” “ The
Happy Townland,” “ The Land of Youth ” from my early
poetry and prose, and either " Sailing to Byzantium ” or
“ Byzantium.” My sister will have put the first three into
needlework before this paragraph is published. Sold or unsold
they will lodge somewhere to keep the name of the designer
and the Yeats name in memory,
I delight in Diana Murphy’s work with one reservation.
Of recent years artists, to clear their minds of what Rossetti
called " the soulless self-reflections of man’s skill ” depicted in
commercial posters and on the covers of magazines, have
exaggerated anatomical details. Miss Murphy’s forms are
deliberately thick and heavy, and I urge upon her the ex-
clusion of all exaggerations, a return to the elegance of
Puvis de Chavannes. There are moments when lam certain
that art must once again accept those Greek proportions
which carry into plastic art the Pythagorean numbers, those
faces which are divine because all there is empty and
measured. Europe was not bom when Greek galleys de-
feated the Persian hordes at Salamis, but when the Doric
studios sent out those broad-backed marble statues against
the multiform, vague, expressive Asiatic sea, they gave to
the sexual instinct of Europe its goal, its fixed type. In the
warm sea of the French and Italian Riviera I can still see it.
I recall a Swedish actress standing upon some boat’s edge
between Portofino and Rapallo, or riding the foam upon a
plank towed behind a speed boat, but one finds it wherever
the lucky or the well-bom uncover their sunburnt bodies.
There too are doubtless flesh tints that Greek painters loved
as have all the greatest since ; nowhere upon any beautiful
body, whether of man or woman, those red patches whereby
our democratic painters prove that they have really studied
from the life.
VIII.
In my savage youth I was accustomed to say that no man
should be permitted to open his mouth in Parliament until he
had sung or written his Utopia, for lacking that we could
not know where he was taking us, and I still think that artists
of all kinds should once again praise or represent great or
happy people. Here in Monte Carlo, where lam writing,
somebody talked of a man with a monkey and some sort of
stringed instrument, and it has pleased me to imagine him


a great politician. I will make him sing to the sort of tune
that goes well with my early sentimental poems.
I lived among great houses,
Riches drove out rank,
Base drove out the better blood,
And mind and body shrank.
No Oscar ruled the table,
But I’d a troop of friends
That knowing better talk had gone
Talked of odds and ends.
Some knew what ailed the world
But never said a thing
So I have picked a better trade
And night and morning sing ;
Tall dames go walking in grass green Avalon.
Am I a great Lord Chancellor
That slept upon the Sack ?
Commanding officer that tore
The khaki from his back ?
Or am I de Valera,
Or the King of Greece,
Or the man that made the motors ?
Ach, call me what you please !
Here’s a Montenegrin lute
And its old sole string
Makes me sweet music
And I delight to sing :
Tall dames go walking in grass green Avalon.
With boys and girls about him,
With any sort of clothes,
With a hat out of fashion,
With old patched shoes,
With a ragged bandit cloak,
With an eye like a hawk,
With a stiff straight back,
With a strutting turkey walk,
With a bag full of pennies,
With a monkey on a chain,
With a great cock’s feather,
With an old foul tune.
Tall dames go walking in grass green Avalon.


PURGATORY
{A ruined house and a hare tree in the background).
Boy : Half-door, hall door
Hither and thither day and night
Hill or hollow, shouldering this pack
Hearing you talk.
Old Man : Study that house
I think about its jokes and stories ;
I try to remember what the butler
Said to a drunken gamekeeper
In mid-October, but I cannot,
If I cannot, none living can.
Where are the jokes and stories of a house,
Its threshold gone to patch a pig-sty ?
Boy : So you have come this path before ?
Old Man : The moonlight falls upon the path,
The shadow of a cloud upon the house
And that’s symbolical; study that tree.
What is it like ?
Boy : A silly old man.
Old Man ; It’s like —no matter what it’s like.
I saw it a year ago stripped bare as now,
So I chose a better trade.
I saw it fifty years ago
Before the thunderbolt had riven it,
Green leaves, ripe leaves, leaves thick as butter,
Fat, greasy life. Stand there and look,
Because there is somebody in that house.
{The BOY puts down pack and stands in the doorway).
Boy : There’s nobody here.
Old Man ; There’s somebody there.


Boy ; The floor is gone, the windows gone,
And where there should be roof there’s sky,
And here’s a bit of an egg-shell thrown
Out of a jackdaw’s nest.
Old Man : But there are some
That do not care what’s gone, what’s left ;
The souls in Purgatory that come back
To habitations and familiar spots.
Boy : Your wits are out again.
Old Man ; Re-live
Their transgressions, and that not once
But many times ; they know at last
The consequence of those transgressions
Whether upon others or upon themselves ;
Upon others, others may bring help,
For when the consequence is at an end
The dream must end ; upon themselves,
There is no help but in themselves
And in the mercy of God.
Boy ; I have had enough !
Talk to the jackdaws, if talk you must.
Old Man : Stop ! Sit there upon that stone.
That is the house where I was born.
Boy ; The big old house that was burnt down ?
Old Man : My mother that was your grand-dam owned it,
This scenery and this countryside,
Kennel and stable, horse and hound —
She had a horse at the Curragh, and there met
My father, a groom in a training stable ;
Looked at him and married him.
Her mother never spoke to her again,
And she did right.
Boy : What’s right and wrong ?
My grand-dad got the girl and the money.


Old Man : Looked at him and married him,
And he squandered everything she had.
She never knew the worst, because
She died in giving birth to me,
But now she knows it all, being dead.
Great people lived and died in this house ;
Magistrates, colonels, members of Parliament,
Captains and Governors, and long ago
Men that had fought at Aughrim and the Boyne.
Some that had gone on government work
To London or to India came home to die,
Or came from London every spring
To look at the May-blossom in the park.
They had loved the trees that he cut down
To pay what he had lost at cards
Or spent on horses, drink and women ;
Had loved the house, had loved all
The intricate passages of the house,
But he killed the house ; to kill a house
Where great men grew up, married, died,
I here declare a capital offence.
Boy : My God, but you had luck ! Grand clothes,
And maybe a grand horse to ride.
Old Man : That he might keep me upon his level
He never sent me to school, but some
Half-loved me for my half of her :
A gamekeeper’s wife taught me to read,
A Catholic curate taught me Latin.
There were old books and books made fine
By eighteenth century French binding, books
Modem and ancient, books by the ton.
Boy : What education have you given me ?
Old Man ; I gave the education that befits
A bastard that a pedlar got
Upon a tinker’s daughter in a ditch.
When I had come to sixteen years old
My father burned down the house when drank.
F


Boy : But that is my age, sixteen years old
At the Puck Fair.
Old Man : And everything was burnt;
Books, library, all were burnt.
Boy : Is what I have heard upon the road the truth.
That you killed him in the burning house ?
Old Man ; There’s nobody here but our two selves ?
Boy ; Nobody, Father.
Old Man : I stuck him with a knife,
That knife that cuts my dinner now,
And after that I left him in the fire ;
They dragged him out, somebody saw
The knife-wound but could not be certain
Because the body was all black and charred.
Then some that were his drunken friends
Swore they would put me upon trial,
Spoke of quarrels, a threat I had made.
The gamekeeper gave me some old clothes,
I ran away, worked here and there
Till I became a pedlar on the roads,
No good trade, but good enough
Because I am my father’s son,
Because of what I did or may do.
Listen to the hoof beats ! Listen, listen !
Boy ; I cannot hear a sound.
Old Man : Beat ! Beat !
This night is the anniversary
Of my mother’s wedding night.
Or of the night wherein I was begotten.
My father is riding from the public house
A whiskey bottle under his arm.
(,A window is lit showing a young girl).
Look at the window ; she stands there
Listening, the servants are all in bed,
She is alone, he has stayed late
Bragging and drinking in the publichouse.


Boy : There’s nothing but an empty gap in the wall.
You have made it up. No, you are mad !
You are getting madder every day.
Old Man : It’s louder now because he rides
Upon a gravelled avenue
All grass to-day. The hoof beat stops,
He has gone to the other side of the house
Gone to the stable, put the horse up.
She has gone down to open the door.
This night she is no better than her man
And does not mind that he is half drunk,
She is mad about him. They mount the stairs
She brings him into her own chamber.
And that is the marriage chamber now.
The window is dimly lit again.
Do not let him touch you ! It is not true
That drunken men cannot beget
And if he touch he must beget
And you must bear his murderer.
Deaf ! Both deaf ! If I should throw
A stick or a stone they would not hear;
And that’s a proof my wits are out.
But there’s a problem : she must live
Through everything in exact detail,
Driven to it by remorse, and yet
Can she renew the sexual act
And find no pleasure in it, and if not,
If pleasure and remorse must both be there
Which is the greater ?
I lack schooling.
Go fetch Tertullian ; he and I
Will ravel all that problem out
Whilst those two lie upon the mattress
Begetting me.
Come back ! Come back !
And so you thought to slip away.
My bag of money between your fingers,
And that I could not talk and see !
You have been rummaging in the pack.
[The light in the window has faded out).
Boy: You never gave me my right share.


Old Man : And had I given it, young as you are
You would have spent it upon drink.
Boy : What if I did ? I had a right
To get it and spend it as I chose.
Old Man : Give me that bag and no more words.
Boy : I will not.
Old Man : I will break your fingers.
{They struggle for the bag. In the struggle it drops,
scattering the money. The OLD MAN staggers hut
does not fall. They stand looking at each other.
Window is lit up, a man is seen pouring whiskey into
a glass)
Boy : What if I killed you ? You killed my grand-dad.
Because you were young and he was old;
Now I am young and you are old.
Old Man : ( Staring at window)
Better looking, those sixteen years —
Boy : What are you muttering ?
Old Man : Younger—and yet
She should have known he was not her kind.
Boy ; What are you saying ? Out with it!
{OLD MAN points to window).
My God ! The window is lit up
And somebody stands there, although
The floorboards are all burnt away.
Old Man : The window is lit up because my father
Has come to find a glass for his whiskey.
He leans there like some tired beast.
Boy : A dead, living, murdered man.


Old Man ; Then the bride-sleep fell upon Adam :
Where did I read those words ?
And yet
There’s nothing leaning in the window
But the impression upon my mother’s mind.
Being dead she is alone in her remorse.
Boy : A body that was a bundle of old bones
Before I was bom. Horrible ! Horrible !
{He covers his eyes.)
Old Man : That beast there would know nothing, being
nothing,
If I should kill a man under the window,
He would not even turn his head.
{He stabs the BOY).
My father and my son on the same jack-knife !
That finishes —there —there—there—
{He stabs again and again. The window grows dark).
Old Man : “ Hush-a-bye baby, thy father’s a knight,
Thy mother a lady, lovely and bright.”
No, that is something that I read in a book.
And if I sing, it must be to my mother,
And I lack rhyme.
{The stage has grown dark except where the tree stands
in white light).
Study that tree.
It stands there like a purified soul,
All cold, sweet, glistening light.
Dear mother, the window is dark again
But you are in the light because
I finished all that consequence.
I killed that lad because he had grown up,
He would have struck a woman’s fancy,
Begot, and passed pollution on.
I am a wretched foul old man
And therefore harmless. When I have stuck
This old jack-knife into a sod
And pulled it out all bright again,
And picked up all the money that he dropped
I’ll to a distant place, and there
Tell my old jokes among new men.
{He cleans the knife and begins to pick up money).
Hoof beats ! Dear God
How quickly it returns —beat —beat —


Old Man : Her mind cannot hold up that dream.
Twice a murderer and all for nothing,
And she must animate that dead night
Not once but many times !
OGod
Release my mother’s soul from its dream !
Mankind can do no more. Appease
The misery of the living and the remorse of
the dead,
April, 1938.


THE CUALA PRESS
133 LOWER BAGGOT STREET
DUBLIN
Telephone Letters to
62435 Miss E. C. Yeats
HAND-PRINTED BOOKS
LAST POEMS W. B. YEATS .... 12 6
NEW POEMS: 10 6
THE KING OF THE GREAT CLOCK
TOWER :
Commentaries, Poems and a Play .... 12 6
NEW STORIES OF MICHAEL
ROBARTES
And a Play in Prose .... .... 12 6
PASSAGES FROM THE LETTERS
OF “AE”TO W. B. YEATS .... 12 6
ARABLE HOLDINGS :
Poems by F. R. Higgins .... .... 10 6
LORDS AND COMMONS ;
Poems translated from the Irish by
Frank O’Connor .... .... .... 10 6
PILGRIMAGE IN THE WEST;
By Mario M. Rossi: Translated from
the Italian by J. M. Hone .... .... 5 6
BROADSIDES
BOUND VOLUMES BROADSIDES 1937.
Signed by the Editors. Dorothy
Wellesley and W. B. Yeats .... 2 2 o
Postage .... 8
A FEW SETS IN BLUE LINEN
PORTFOLIOS 1 13 6
Postage .... 6
Postage on a single copy of any book, three pence.


THE
CUALA PRESS
'ZXtZS
*
133 Lower Baggot Street
DUBLIN
HAND PRINTED BOOKS
HAND COLOURED PRINTS by
Jack B. Yeats, R.H.A.; Lady
Glenavy, R.H.A.; Victor Brown
and others.
BROADSIDES in Bound Volumes
and in Portfolios.
CHRISTMAS CARDS and GREET-
ING CARDS.
LISTS SENT ON APPLICATION TO THE
SECRETARY
