

ON
THE IMPROVEMENT
OF
THE RIFLE,
AS A
WEAPON FOR GENERAL USE.
BY LIEUT.-COLONEL LANE FOX,
GRENADIER GUARDS.
Read at the UNITED SERVICE INSTITUTION, on 14th June, 1858,
COLONEL THE HON. JAMES LINDSAY in the Chair.
LONDON:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY
W. CLOWES & SONS, 14, CHARING CROSS.
1858.




THE RIFLE.
In some of the Lectures lately delivered at this Institution,
several important questions were raised respecting the theory
of the construction of rifled barrels and bullets, and the Council
of the Institution considering that advantage might accrue to
the Service, by a discussion in which all those gentlemen who
have at various times been engaged in the experiments and
trials with small arms, might be invited to take part, have
done me the honour to request I would commence the pro-
ceedings of this evening, by giving a brief account of the history
of the rifle and of the experiments and trials which have
accompanied its introduction into the English Army. This I
shall endeavour to do, to the best of my power.
The remarks which I am about to offer are extracted
principally from a private journal which I have kept during the
course of experiments in which I have been engaged at Wool-
wich, Enfield, Hythe, and Malta, during six years, commencing
in 1851 and ending in 1857.
It would he foreign to the object of this discussion, and
quite beyond the limits of the time afforded me, that I should
give an account of all the inventions which have been patented.
But out of all the numerous contrivances which in suc-
cessive ages have been put forward for the improvement of the
musket, some few may be taken to serve as links in the chain
b 2


of progress, whilst others have branched out of the main line,
and contributed nothing of permanent utility. In tracing the
history of the rifle, through its various phases, I therefore
propose to confine my remarks to what may be considered the
main chain of improvement, disregarding all those varieties
which, however ingenious in themselves, have embodied no
principle of practical benefit to our own times, nor served as
the stepping-stones to farther improvement.
My subject necessarily breaks in upon the history of missile
weapons, at a comparately recent date.
The common musket, or hand fire-arm, (Fig. 1,) which,
from its first invention in the middle of the 15th century to
the time of its discontinuance in 1854, underwent no material
change in the main principle of its construction, consisted of a
plain tube or barrel, through which the projectile was forced by
the action of exploded gunpowder.
At one time during the 15th century projectiles were
employed with these arms, and hand cannon, of the same
elongated form as the bolts or quarrels which had been pre-
viously used with the crossbow. But the great inaccuracy
which resulted from the use of this description of missile, gave
rise to the universal adoption of spherical bullets, which have
continued in use both in hand fire-arms and cannon, until
within the last few years.
The inaccuracy of these elongated projectiles, arose from
the fact, little understood at the time, of the enormous force
opposed by the atmosphere to their passage through the air, at
the great velocity communicated to them by the new weapons ;
and as it was impossible to ensure their points continuing to
the front throughout their flight, these bullets (offering a greater
surface on their sides than at their extremities) met with an
unequal pressure of the atmosphere as they turned over, and
often presented an oblique surface to the condensed air in front


of them, by which means they were deflected to a considerable
distance from the point aimed at; whereas the spherical bullets,
offering no greater surface on one side than another, it mattered
little which of their sides came foremost. Their flight was
therefore less influenced by their rotations, and for this reason
the sphere must ever continue to be the best form of bullet to
be fired out of a smooth barrel, unless some means be devised
to ensure that one side of the bullet should continue uniformly
towards the front; in which case, the elongated projectiles
would be advantageous.
But the spherical bullets were also very uncertain in their
fire, owing to the large amount of windage which was necessary
with these arms; the latest pattern employed in our service
being from this and other causes inferior to the long bow, both
in accuracy and in many other qualities. The large amount of
fouling resulting from the residuum deposited upon the sides of
the barrel by the discharged gunpowder, rendered it necessary
to make the ball much smaller than the bore, otherwise after
much firing the bullet would not enter the barrel. Lord
Orrery, who lived in the middle of the 17th century, mentions
that in his time, a large proportion of the shot in action rolled
out of the barrel before firing; this led to the men being or-
dered to bring their firelocks to the recover, before presenting;
a motion still retained in some services. They were also
ordered to ram grass or tow into their barrels. Peppercorns
and grains of coarse powder, were also used to wedge the
bullets into the barrels, and many other expedients were re-
sorted to, to obviate the inconvenience and inaccuracy resulting
from the excess of windage.
Of these expedients one is especially deserving of notice,
as affording a link between the old musket and its successor,
and leading by an intermediate step to the introduction of rifled
barrels.


About the end of the 15th century, not more than fifty years
after the invention of hand fire-arms, fowling-pieces were con-
structed in Germany with grooves running straight down the
sides of the bore. The barrels were first bored round, after
which from five to six shallow angular grooves were cut down
the sides of the bore, by means of which it became a polygon,
closely resembling the form lately proposed in this country by
Mr. Whitworth. These grooves had no other purpose than to
receive the fouling which oozed into the angles of the polygon,
as the bullet was rammed down. The ball used with these fire-
arms, was of the same size as the bore before the grooves were
cut, the circumference of the bullet, fitting tightly up to the
sides of the polygon, caused it to be retained there when
charged, and on the discharge taking place, to glide out of the
bore with an even movement; whereas bullets with which con-
siderable windage was allowed, were often deformed by striking
against the sides of the barrel during their passage out of it,
and sometimes left the barrel at some uncertain angle with the
axis of the piece. It is evident that increased accuracy must
have resulted from this system of grooving, as most of the
causes of uncertain shooting which take place in the barrel
were done away with. Still as nothing had been done to pre-
serve one side of the bullet foremost during the flight, it must
have met with considerable deflection from the unequal pressure
of the atmosphere after it left the barrel. For, although a bullet
may be round, yet it cannot be truly homogeneous, or of
uniform sphericity on every side, especially in cast bullets, in
which a vacuum usually occurs on one side, causing the centre
of gravity of the bullet to be placed on the opposite side of the
centre of its figure ; and when the centre of gravity, and the
centre of figure, do not coincide, the bullet will experience a
disturbing rotation which will influence its passage through the
air.


It has been found by experiments which have lately been
conducted in this country and abroad, that excentric shot
invariably deviate towards whichever side the centre of gravity
rests, when the shot is placed in the barrel. If it is placed to
the right, the deviation will be to the right; vice versa , if to the
left. If above, the range will be increased; and if below, it
will be diminished.
The limits of the time afforded me, deter me from entering
more fully upon the interesting subject of these rotations. The
subject has however been ably treated upon at this Institution
on a former occasion, in a lecture delivered by Colonel P. J.
Yorke, F.R.S.
It is evident that, although the deviations resulting from
this cause were of less account in the bullets used with small
arms than in the large iron cannon balls, the absence of
homogeneity, must have influenced considerably the accuracy of
rifles, in the stage of improvement to which they had been
brought in Germany, by the adoption of grooves running
straight down the barrel.
The rifle (if such it can be called) appears to have con-
tinued in this imperfect state until the year 1520, when Koster,
of Nurenburg, began to give his grooves a spiral twist; the
twist making a little more than a whole turn in the length of
the barrel; so that the bore in reality resembled a female
screw, varying from the ordinary fabric of screws only in this,
that the threads or rifles were less deflected, and approached
nearer to a right line. The ball was made a little larger than
the bore of the piece before the grooves were cut, and being
therefore too large to go down of itself, was placed on the
muzzle, and forced home by a strong rammer, Impelled by a
mallet. By this means, the zone of the bullet which was
contiguous to the piece, was made to take the shape of the
grooves, so that it became a part of a male screw, exactly


fitting the indents of the rifle. When the piece was fired, the
bullet was constrained to unscrew itself, the zone of the bullet
following the sweep of the rifles, so that it received a rotatory
motion upon the axis of the piece, and on leaving the barrel,
continued to whirl round an axis which was coincident with the
line of its flight.
The advantage of spinning projectiles was not a new
discovery; it had long been customary to place the feathers
of arrows in a spiral direction, so as to cause them to turn
round in the air; and it is probable that this circumstance
may have first given rise-to the idea of spinning the rifle
bullets; but it is certain, that very erroneous ideas prevailed
for some time as to the nature of the advantages to be derived
from this practice. Some supposed that the grooves, by increas-
ing the friction, caused greater resistance to the action of the
powder, and produced a more perfect inflamation ; others ima-
gined that the bullet, by compounding its circular and revolving
motion, bored through the air, and thereby overcame its resist-
ance with greater facility, and produced an increase of range.
They found they could hit a mark at a much greater distance
than formerly, and they not unnaturally attributed to increased
range, what was in reality owing to increased accuracy.
This was the state of knowledge on the subject until 1748,
when Robins set aside these false notions, by proving that no
increase of range could possibly result from the use of rifled
barrels, the advantages of which lay solely in regulating the
flight, and producing accuracy at distances at which bullets
fired out of an ordinary smooth bore could never be traced ;
and the manner in which this was accomplished was assumed
to be, by obviating the disturbing rotations before mentioned,
and preserving the same side foremost throughout the flight.
He first illustrated his theory by means of a top, which
he observed could never by any possibility be balanced upon


its peg in any other manner than by spinning it on its axis,
in which case it assumes the vertical position naturally, and
maintains it as long as the spinning continues. The subject,
however, will be more clearly explained, by applying Robins’s
theory to the action of a floating ball. If a wooden hall is
made excentric, by weighting it on one side with lead, so that
the centre of gravity is thrown to that side, and it is then
floated upon the water, it will be seen to turn round according
to whichever side the centre of gravity preponderates, until it
rests at the lower side.
Although the turn thus made by the ball in the water, is
not precisely similar in cause or effect, to that which produces
the disturbing rotation of a ball during its flight In the air,
(but is in fact the reverse of it,) still, there is sufficient analogy
between the two, to serve our present purpose of explaining the
effect of the spinning motion imparted to projectiles; inas-
much as both are produced by the excentric position of the
centre of gravity, and the same means which are found
effectual in preventing the one, will also serve to obviate the
other.
Now it is found, that by spinning the ball upon any axis,
whatever may be the position of the centre of gravity, it will
maintain nearly the same relative position around the axis of
rotation, as long as the spinning continues; nor will it
descend towards the lower side, until the rotation has begun
to slacken, or has entirely ceased. If we examine the cause
of this, we shall find that although the centre of gravity is not
exactly upon the axis it spins on, yet this irregularity cannot
instantly cause the ball to turn according to its natural effort,
because, during one revolution the centre of gravity prepon-
derates on every side of the hall, and thereby raises it as much
in one place as it is depressed in another; wherefore applying
this to the motion of projectiles, it is evident that the effect


of the spinning motion produced by the action of the grooves,
will be to remove the evils arising from imperfect homogeneity ;
producing a virtual equality of density on every side, and
thereby preventing any disturbing rotation from taking place,
and preserving the same side foremost throughout the flight.
But, besides this negative advantage of preventing any
disturbing rotation, Robins perceived that the motion thus
given to the bullet would be in itself a source of accuracy, by
correcting the irregularities of its flight at each revolution.
Having calculated the resistance of the air to be far greater
than had ever been contemplated before his time, he saw that
the enormous force, which within the space of a few hundred
yards could overcome by its direct action the great velocity of
the bullet, would by its oblique action easily divert it from its
proper path ; and that although the same end of a bullet
might always be presented to the front, still, as it would be
impossible to ensure perfect sphericity (it being as difficult to
construct a ball of perfect figure, as it is to make it of equal
density), one side of the half sphere which is offered to the air,
must always offer a greater surface than the other; which,
although it might be imperceptible to the eye, would never-
theless create deflection, by causing an unequal resistance of
the atmosphere. But, by a rotation which is imparted to a
bullet upon an axis coincident with the line of its flight, this
imperfect side must constantly be presented to the air in
opposite directions, and the deflection which would be caused
by its position on one side, would instantly be corrected by
its transfer to the opposite side; so that the resistance on the
foremost hemisphere of the bullet would by this means become
equally distributed round the pole of its circular motion, and
act with an equal effort on every side of the line of direction.
From these considerations it follows, that the effects of the
rotation in question are two-fold, producing a vertical equality


both of density and of form ; and by this means rectifying the
accuracy of the flight.
“ The motion of a rifled projectile may be easily understood
by considering the slow motion of an arrow through the air.
For example, if a bent arrow with its feathers not placed in
some degree in a spiral position so as to make it revolve round
its axis as it flies through the air, were shot at a mark with a
true direction, it would constantly deviate from it, in conse-
quence of its being pressed on one side by the convex part
opposing the air obliquely. Let us now suppose this deflection
in the flight of 100 yards to be ten yards. Now if the same
arrow was made to revolve round its axis once in every two
yards of its flight, its greatest deviation would take place when
it had proceeded only one yard, or made a half revolution;
since at the end of the next half revolution, it would again
return to the same direction it had at first; the convex side of
the arrow having been once in opposite positions. In this
manner it would proceed during the whole course of its flight,
constantly returning to the true path at the end of every two
yards; and when it reached the mark, the greatest deflection
that could occur to either side would be equal to what it had
made in proceeding one yard: equal to part of the former,
or 3" 6 inches ; a very small deflection when compared to the
former one. In the same manner, a cannon or musket ball
which does not turn upon its axis, deviates greatly from the
true path, on account of the irregularities of its surface, which
though small, cause great deviation by reason of the resistance
of the air.”
From this it is evident that it is the resistance of the air
alone which is capable of producing deviation; for whatever
may be the position of the centre of gravity, it cannot of itself
produce deviation, except through the action of the air. Want
of homogeneity may produce rotation, and rotation may, by


the unequal pressure of the atmosphere, cause a deflection to
one side; or the position of the centre of gravity may influence
the flight of an elongated ball, so as to make it present an
oblique resistance to the atmosphere; but, if it were possible
to fire a bullet in vacuum, it might then be of any form,
whether spherical, elongated, or of a deformed figure, it might
turn on end, fly sideways, or rotate upon any axis, without
producing the slightest effect either on the accuracy, or rapidity
of its range ; for it would then pursue its course with unabated
speed throughout, in the true curve of a parabola, and would
strike the mark with the same velocity that it had on leaving
the muzzle of the gun. Hence it follows, that it is only by
the action of the air that the theory of a rifled bullet can be
properly explained.
But besides clearing up what had previously been regarded
as the mystery of rifled pieces, Robins by his researches arrived
at two important discoveries, which I believe I may say laid
the foundation of all subsequent improvements. The first of
these was the advantage of using projectiles of an elongated
form ; and the second, that of so constructing them, that their
centre of gravity should lie near the fore part.
These two points occupy no more than ten lines of his
celebrated treatise, but I shall endeavour to shew in the
remaining portion of this paper, that through all the varieties
the rifle has undergone, (especially within the last few years,)
these two principles may be traced as affording the only guide
to the path of real progress. It will be found that all the
systems which have been proposed in various countries, and
the numerous forms of bullets which have been adopted, have
succeeded only in so far as they were in accordance with the
principles contained in the ten lines which Robins devoted to
this subject; and I may add, that I believe his principles have
not arrived at their full development even at the present time.


This subject will be considered more at length when
treating of the elongated projectiles, which did not come into
general use until long after the death of Robins. This
celebrated man, to whose extraordinary genius gunnery owes
so much, and to whose discoveries so little of comparative
value has since been added, never lived to perfect his inven-
tions ; but having bequeathed them to posterity, he concluded
his investigations with the following remarkable prediction,
which may be found in the last page of his treatise on gunnery.
“ I shall therefore,” he says, “ close this paper with predicting
that whatever nation shall thoroughly comprehend the nature
and advantages of rifled-barrelled pieces, and having facilitated
and completed their construction, shall introduce into their
armies their general use, with a dexterity in the management
of them, they will by this means acquire a superiority, which
will almost equal anything that has been done at any time, by
the particular excellence of any kind of arms; and will
perhaps fall but little short of the wonderful effects which
histories relate to have been formerly produced by the first
inventors of fire-arms.” Robins died with his pen in his hand
in the year 1751, and it is a remarkable circumstance that in
the year 1851, exactly a century afterwards, the Minie musket
was adopted in this country for the use of the army. 28,000
were ordered by the Board of Ordnance, and the Duke of
Wellington, in a letter confirming the Board’s order, concluded
by expressing his intention that every man in the service should
be armed with the rifle musket.
But before we arrive at the introduction of the rifle into
this country as a weapon for general use, it will be necessary
briefly to trace the progress of its improvement from the time
of Robins.
Like many of those who have lived before their time,
Robins appears to have produced but little effect on the
practice of his contemporaries.


For nearly a century after his death, and indeed it may be
said, from the time of the invention by Koster to the year 1828,
(a period of no less than three centuries,) little improvement
took place in the construction of the rifle; and the spherical
bullet continued to be the only form employed. The difficulty
and time required to load the piece, from the process of forcing
the ball into the grooves, rendered it inapplicable as a weapon
for the infantry generally; and although the experience of the
American war led this country (towards the close of the last
century) to institute a corps of riflemen, the French abandoned
it during the revolutionary war, considering it impracticable as
a military weapon, and suited only to what they termed the
phlegmatic constitution of an Englishman. Still however they
acknowledged that their Chasseurs were by this means placed
in an inferiority with those of other nations, and experiments
were instituted from time to time to facilitate the loading, with
a view to the re-introduction of the rifle into their service. No
success however appears to have attended their efforts, until
the war in Algeria, when the French began to experience,
from the long-range matchlocks of the Arabs, inconveniences
similar to those sustained by our troops in Afghanistan.
During the flying war kept up against them by Abdel
Kader, they found that masses of their men were struck by
Arab balls at distances where the French musket was apparently
powerless ; and this, they afterwards discovered, arose from the
matchlocks of their enemies being fired at much greater eleva-
tion than was ever thought of by European troops.
In order to place themselves on an equality with their
enemies, the French recommenced their experiments; and in
1828 M. Delvigne first shewed how a bullet might be made
to enter the piece easily, and quit it in a forced state. (Fig. 2.)
To effect this, he formed a chamber in the breech of the gun,
large enough to contain the whole charge. The ball was con-
structed to go down easily with a slight windage, and was


prevented from touching the powder by resting on the edge of
the chamber. It then received three smart blows of the ram-
rod, which was found sufficient to give it the impression of the
grooves, by compressing it in the direction of the axis of the
piece, expanding it laterally, and thereby pressing it into the
grooves.
It is unnecessary to enter into the details of this, or the
carabine a tige, (Fig. 3.) both of which were identical in the
object of their construction; that of expanding the bullet by the
blows of the ramrod. With both of these arras the spherical
bullet was at first employed ; but if any one will place a
spherical leaded bullet upon an iron bench, and strike it with a
hammer, he will readily perceive how much the ball must have
been flattened before it could receive the lateral expansion
necessary to enable it to take the grooves. It was in order to
obviate the defective figure thus produced by the blows of the
ramrod, that elongated balls of an oval form were first intro-
duced into the French service, and these were subsequently
replaced by the cylindro-conical bullets. (Fig. 6.) Considered
as an accessory to the use of elongated projectiles, the intro-
duction of cylindrical bullets must be regarded as a great step
in advance; for, by constructing a portion of the bullet of such
a shape as exactly to coincide with the sides of the bore, the
axis of the bullet is by this means made to coincide with the
axis of the piece, and to leave the muzzle in the direction of
the line of fire —a point of the utmost importance in producing
accuracy of flight; for when it is considered how much greater
surface a lengthened bullet, the long axis of which is not co-
incident with the line of its flight, must present to the oblique
action of the air, it is easy to understand why, up to the time
of the introduction of cylindro-conical bullets, all attempts to
employ the elongated form had been unsuccessful. (Figs. 5
'and 6 illustrate this.)


Great increase of range and accuracy resulted from these
improvements; but diming the experiments with these bullets
by M. Tamisier, a curious circumstance occurred, which, by
throwing light on the defects of their construction, led to
still further improvements. Round the cylindrical portion of
the bullet, an indented ring had been cut near the base, to
receive the string which tied on the cartridge. (Fig. 7.) But
an alteration in the shape of the cartridge having been made,
this ring was done away with as unnecessary, and the result
was a great diminution of the accuracy of fire.
The cause of the deviation experienced by these balls had
been already investigated by Robins when considering the
flight of spherical rifled balls; and was explained by him as
follows. (Figs. 21 and 22.) The axis of rotation on which the
ball spins by the action of the grooves, remains parallel to
itself throughout the flight; it follows, therefore, that when the
musket is fired with an angle of elevation, the axis of rotation
which at first coincides with the direction of the flight, must
depart from it more and more as the trajectory or line of flight
becomes incurvated, forming with it an angle upwards. Thus,
if the piece is fired at an angle of 25 degrees with the horizon,
at the culminating point, the axis of rotation (retaining the
same position it had at first) will form an angle of 25 degrees
with the tangent to the trajectory; during the descent, this
angle will increase more and more, and the lower side of the
ball becoming in fact the foremost side, (and rotating in a
direction which is from right to left,) will give rise to the
deviation already alluded to, under the head of disturbing
rotations.
Although it was ascertained with certainty that the deviation
of these bullets was invariably towards the right, opinions are
not unanimous as to the precise manner in which these rotations
operate in producing deflection. It would occupy more time


than I am able to devote to the subject, to give a detailed de-
scription of the various theories which have been adduced in
order to account for the effects observed in practice. All
agree that they are caused by the angle formed by the axis
of the bullet and the line of flight; but some attribute the
deviation to the friction of the air, whilst others ascribe it to
the unequal pressure engendered on one side of the bullet. A
third theory denies that the axis remains parallel to itself
throughout the flight, and attributes the deviation to other
causes ; and a fourth arrives at the conclusion that elongated
bullets deviate to the right, whilst spherical and other short
bullets deviate with the same rotation towards the left
It matters little, as regards our present purpose, which of
these theories is the correct one, for all conduct us equally to
the point of our subject, which is the improvement of the
bullet.
It was in order to obviate these defects, that Robins pro-
posed the use of bullets of an egg-like form, (Fig. 4,) which,
having their centre of gravity in the fore part, would fly more
truly in the line of trajectory, the lighter end being constantly
forced by the resistance of the air into the path of the flight.
Monsieur Tamisier also attempted, with the same object,
to increase the weight of the fore part; but as he hit upon no
other plan of doing so than by thickening and blunting the
fore side, which rendered his bullet less adapted to penetrate
the air, his endeavours were unsuccessful. He, therefore, had
recourse to the expedient of re-establishing the indented rings
which had before been found so efficacious in preventing
deviation. He increased their number to three, and sharpened
the edges which were towards the front (Fig. 8) ; considering
that the friction which they offered to the air on the hinder
part of the bullet, would retard the (light on that end, and
press it back into the line of flight.
c


Great success attended the employment of these indented
rings, which were termed cannelures; but it is evident that
their adoption was a step in the wrong direction, as they ob-
tained, by retarding the bind part of the bullet, the same
effects which ought to have been brought about by increasing
the momentum of the fore part.
The great defect of the Carabine-d-Tige, was the means
employed to effect the expansion. The English authorities
had early warning of the defects of this system. The first
weapon of this description, which was sent over to this country
as a sample, was one which was found loaded in the streets of
Rome after the attack of the French. On unloading this, it
was found to contain two bullets, one of which had been inserted
with the point downwards, shewing how little reliance could be
placed on a system of expansion, which depended upon the mani-
pulation of the soldier himself in the hurry and confusion of
action.
It was to remedy this evil that the attention of military
men on the continent was drawn towards the construction of a
bullet which should expand itself; or rather, which should be
itself expanded by the action of the exploding gunpowder.
Mr. Delvigne was, I believe, the first who attempted this,
(Fig. 9,) by boring a cavity in the base of the bullet, which
cavity being filled, as he conceived, by the gas of the exploded
gunpowder, would expand the sides into the grooves of the
barrel; and it is worthy of being remembered, in connection
with the Minie system, that in this he not only succeeded, but
over succeeded, inasmuch as the gas was found to fill the
cavity and burst the ball.
To remedy this, Monsieur Minuj introduced the iron cup,
or kernel, (Fig. 10,) into the cavity, which was made conical, so
as to diminish towards the interior, in order that the kernel,
which exactly fitted the shape of the cavity, might be forced in


by the explosion, and expand the lead in the manner of a
wedge. The shape of the fore part of the bullet was also
altered to conoidal form, which has been ascertained to be that
which offers least resistance to the elastic properties of the air.
It is stated by those who advocate the Minie system, that
the expansion of the cylindrical portion of the bullet is effected
by the action of the iron cup, which being lighter than the lead,
receives a greater velocity, and is therefore driven into the
cavity before the inertia of the bullet is overcome. Others,
amongst whom is Mr. Boucher, who, whatever may be the
result of his experiments, has rendered a great service to the
army by reviving the subject, consider this system a fallacy,
and contend that the cup is never driven into the cavity, and
that the gas, acting as much upon the base end of the cylinder
as upon the cup itself, has no power to affect one more than the
other, but drives the whole base of the bullet upon its fore part,
and that in reality the cup is often forced out of the cavity by
the compression of the lead around it.
In considering this subject, it is necessary to bear in mind
that the force of the explosion does not act after the manner of
force communicated by the blow of a mallet, or any other solid
substance, but has the faculty of seeking its exit by the line of
least resistance. The question, therefore, is, whether the ex-
plosive gas, in overcoming the force opposed by the inertia of
the bullet and the atmosphere, meets with less resistance by
forcing the cup in, or by compressing the leaden cylinder. But
supposing that the cup is forced in, and that the base end of
the cylinder is expanded into the grooves, will the cup then
have the power of acting farther towards the fore part of the
cylinder ? for experience proves that the whole of the cylin-
drical portion of the bullet takes equally the impression of the
grooves. It has also been proved by numerous bullets which
have been fired into clay with full charges, that a Minie bullet
c 2


may receive the full impression of the grooves when the cup is
not driven into the cavity at all.
In the March number of the “ Journal des Armes Speciales”
of 1842, Monsieur Tiroux, a chef d’Escadron of the French
artillery, observes that in the experiments with the Minie
bullet conducted in France, the cup was seldom forced into the
cavity, and that very often it was forced out of it, and remained
in the barrel. This he, at the time, attributed to the action of
the powder escaping by the windage compressing the sides of
the ball, and closing them upon the cup.
In the experiments conducted at Woolwich, in 1850, the
same thing occurred, the cups remaining in the barrel of the
gun. To remedy this, the cups were made deeper, and the
same effects were not perceived in 1851. In 1852, at Enfield,
the cups by some mistake were again made shallower, and as
the practice was conducted over water, it was observed that the
cups detached themselves from the bullet, and fell into the
water not far from the piece. The defect was again remedied
by lengthening the conical portion of the cup, so that it offered
greater side surface to the action of the lead, and remained in
the bullet.
Before proceeding farther, I must, with all due deference,
correct an error of date, which has appeared in Sir Howard
Douglas’s fourth edition of his “ Naval Gunnery.” It is there
represented, that the shape of the culot or cup of the original
Minis was a hemisphere, and that in 1854, an important im-
provement was made by the Commandant of the School of
Musketry, by deepening the cup, and giving both to it, and
the cavity, conoidal forms, so that the former must, by the
force of the powder, proceed directly forward into the hollow
space, and thus uniformly expand the lower part of the shot.
Having witnessed the greater part of the experiments which
took place at Woolwich and Enfield, at the time of the intro


duction of the Minie musket, I can safely say that no such
hemispherical cup as that described in the passage alluded to
was ever in use in this country since the beginning of 1851.
The cups always fitted the cavity : but having by mistake, at
one time, been made too shallow, they were immediately cor-
rected and deepened by the authorities at Enfield: and the
cups made by Mr. Lancaster, samples of which were in the
collection of specimens at the School of Musketry, were, if
anything, deeper and better formed than those since used.
Moreover, having in 1852, had the opportunity of examining
Minie bullets in France, Belgium, Piedmont, and Naples, I
can testify that in none of those countries were the cups formed
in the shape of a hemisphere ; but all had a cylindrical portion
which fitted the sides of the cavity. Reference to the diagrams
given in Monsieur Panot’s work, published in 1851, will be a
sufficient proof of the truth of my statement. The alteration
in the shape of the cavity, from a conical to a conoidal form,
could not in itself produce the effect of increasing the ex-
pansion ; but as the fore part of the cylinder was by this means
thickened, the bullet was strengthened in this part, and pre-
vented from bursting when the gas entered the cavity. It is
necessary to correct this error, in order to shew that no im-
provement has taken place in the construction of the Minie
bullet since 1852, when it was superseded by the Pritchet
bullet, under the authority of the Committee of Small Arms.
Before arriving at the more recent improvements, it will be
well to consider farther the defects of the Minie. I have
already mentioned that Monsieur Delvigne’s bullets were
found to burst. In firing with Minie bullets without the cup,
I have found that with a particular form of cavity, the same
thing will happen ; the cylinder remaining in the barrel, pressed
firmly into the grooves. The action of the gas in this case is
evident; having filled the cavity, it presses equally on all sides,


expanding the sides of the cylinder into the grooves of the bore,
and at the same time forcing the head of the ball forwards ; so
that the head is separated from the cylinder at the place where
the two join, leaving a crater-like fracture, shaped like an
inverted frustrum of a cone. In 1851, Mr. Wilkinson and
myself made experiments with Minie bullets, by filling the
cavity entirely with cork. The same thing occurred. The
cork counted for nothing against the enormous force of the ex-
plosion, the bullet bursting as before at the junction of the
head with the cylinder, and planting the latter on to the sides
of the bore. In firing with the cup bullet, it has also been
found that when the cavity is not sufficiently conical to prevent
the cup from being forced home, the gas filling the cavity will
burst the bullet; or, if the cup is shallow, it is liable to be
canted on one side, and thus admit the gas into the aperture.
The same thing will occur when the wooden plug is used ; as
many as two or three cylinders sometimes remain in the barrel.
A sufficient remedy for these evils is found to be by giving the
cavity a more conical form; or, still better, by making it
conoidal, as the cylindrical portion of the bullet is by this
means thickened and strengthened at its juncture with the head,
and the fracture at that place is prevented.
But although the evils attaching to the Minie system have
been prevented in the manner described, still when it is con-
sidered the nature of those evils, and the means by which they
have been obviated, when it is also ascertained by undeniable
proof, that a Minie bullet will rifle itself without the assistance
of the cup, the latter remaining fixed in the mouth of the
aperture; and when in addition to this, it is known, as I shall
afterwards shew, that a solid cylindrical bullet will rifle itself
as completely as the most perfect form of Minie, we are forced
to the conclusion that the action of the cup in the Minie system,
if it is not a fallacy, as stated by some, has certainly less in


fluence in the expansion of the lead than has hitherto been
supposed.
The real merit of the cup in the Minie, consisted in its
forming a frame for the cavity; by means of which the centre of
gravity is thrown towards the fore part, so as to fulfil the con-
ditions laid down by Robins, without flattening the point.
With this form of bullet the cannelures are no longer neces-
sary, and they have therefore been done away with in our
service.
The Minie system has been taken up so warmly by the
Officers of the School of Musketry, that we have been told in a
recent lecture, delivered at this Institution, that any attack on
this system will be regarded by them as an accusation of im-
posture. It is difficult, however, to conceive how those officers
can consider themselves affected by the failure of a system,
which was invented in France, and adopted in this country,
some years before their names appeared in the field of experi-
ment. When it is considered that no human eye ever has,
or ever can, witness the action of a Minie cup under the
influence of a full charge of gunpowder, and that all ideas
on the subject must be merely conjectural, it is evident that
the truth in this matter can only be arrived at by hypothesis.
And when it is also shewn that another distinct principle has
since been discovered to produce the expansion of all elongated
leaden projectiles, it is evident that even M. Minie himself,
may have been led into error, without incurring the suspicion
of any but the purest motives. The question can only be
decided by the aid of experiment, and this has been done by
Mr. Boucher, in a manner that testifies to the attention he
has devoted to the subject, and entitles his opinion to every
consideration.
Before proceeding farther, however, 1 must remark upon
one of Mr. Boucher’s experiments, which has reference to the


expansion of the bullet, and the manner it is acted upon, by
the air in the barrel.
“ In the course of experiments,” Mr. Boucher says, “ some
hundreds of rounds were fired, with different lengths of barrels,
into water, clay, and other substances, so that the bullets
might be collected afterwards for examination. The first
number of rounds were fired from a rifled barrel, 2 ft. 8 in. in
length. Then after every stage of firing, from three to four
inches were cut off the barrel, until it was shortened to one-
half of its original length. Two inches at a time were then
cut off, until the barrel was shortened to one-fourth; after
which, one inch each time was cut off, and then half an inch,
until the barrel was shortened close to the charge, a full charge
of powder being used at every round. The result showed that
after a certain length had been cut off, the appearance of rifling
on the bullet grew more aud more indistinct, until not a vestige
of it could be traced.” “ Beginning at the breach end,” he con-
tinues, “until the bullet had moved about half an inch, no
perceptible signs of expansion had taken place, nor were there
any traces of rifling upon the bullet Then, however, the
faintest trace of rifling-like scratches could be perceived, for
about an eighth of an inch next the base of the bullet. This
impression showed itself more and more distinctly, and at
greater length, as the bullet proceeded farther up the barrel,
until it appeared complete all along the cylindrical part.
From the proofs which were exhibited in the earlier stages,
the compression of the bullet and the expansion of the lead
into the grooves, must have continued for some time after,
though not discernible on the outside of the bullet.” “ This,”
he says, “ was evidently occasioned by the increasing and
accumulating pressure of the gases on the hinder end, and
the resistance of the condensed air in front of the bullet.
From this,” he says, “it may be seen that a very slight


degree of expansion, if any, takes place at the moment a bullet
is moved from its state of rest, and that it is not complete until
it has travelled up some portion of the barrel.”
This experiment of Mr. Boucher is important in proving
how great is the effect produced on the expansion by the re-
sistance of the air, but I would venture to doubt the conclusion
which he arrives at; that the expansion is gradual and not in-
stantaneous, or nearly so; for it must be observed, that whereas
in practice, his experiment was conducted with barrels of dif-
ferent lengths, in theory, he argues as though he had traced
the expansion of the bullet through its various stages in a
barrel of the same length.
Now when it is considered that that expansion is caused by
the column of condensed air in the barrel, it is evident that
the extent of that column, and its action on the bullet, must
within certain limits be affected by the length of the barrel.
In short, that within certain limits the reduction of the barrel
will reduce the pressure upon the charge. It is found that
barrels of the ordinary length, after constant firing, wear away
in the shape of a ring at about an inch in front of the resting
place of the bullet before discharge. This is supposed to
mark the point of expansion, where the foremost portions of
the gas, being arrested by the base of the bullet, are thrown
with great force upon the sides of the bore. The cause of this
may be explained as follows. The ignition of the powder
being gradual and not instantaneous, the bullet moves from
its place with a gradual though rapidly increasing movement,
and the expansion is not effected until a sufficient portion of
the column of air in front of it, is condensed to its utmost
limits. The bullet is then expanded, and the solidified portion
of the column of air acquires the same velocity as the charge,
and helps to drive the remaining portion of the air out of the
barrel. From this it would follow, that in accordance with the


effects observed in the experiment referred to, the reduction
of the barrel would produce no effect, until it began to cut
into that portion of the column by which the first expansion
is produced. Beyond this point the expansion would be
diminished by every inch that was cut away, until it had been
reduced to about half an inch from the bullet, when the expand-
ing agent having been completely destroyed, the bullet would
leave the barrel in an unforced state.
To resume the history of the bullet, it is necessary to return
to the system of expansion by the blows of the ramrod. In the
experiments of 1850, Mr. Lancaster, in order to diminish the
resistance offered by the substance of the bullet to the blows of
the ramrod, and to facilitate the lateral expansion into the
grooves, hit upon the expedient of deepening the indented can-
nelures round the cylindrical portion of the bullet. (Fig. 13.)
These deep grooves, two in number, were filled with grease,
and with the twine which tied on the cartridge ; and the blows
of the ramrod in compressing the bullet lengthways, and ex-
panding it laterally, closed up the grooves, and forced out the
grease, so as to lubricate the barrel.
Little advantage was derived from this construction, which,
nevertheless, may be regarded as a step to improvement, inas-
much as it doubtless anticipated the form, if it did not actually
give rise to Mr. Wilkinson’s bullet, which closely resembled it
in shape (Fig. 14); with this very important difference, however,
that Mr. Wilkinson, having reduced the bore of his rifle, dis-
covered that a bullet of this construction would take the
impression of the grooves by the action of the gas and atmo-
sphere alone, without the blows of the ramrod. The stem of
the bullet, enfeebled by the deep indents on the sides of the
cylindrical part, gives way to the pressure of the gas behind,
and that of the atmosphere before, added to the inertia of the
fore part of the bullet At the same time the grooves are


closed up, and the grease is forced out upon the sides of the
bore. Colonel Gordon, in his remarks on the experiments at
Enfield in 1852, speaks highly of this system, which he says
was equal to all others in accuracy, and exceeded them in the
flatness of its trajectory at long ranges. It has since been tried
in Germany, where it is stated to have been the best used,
possessing great accuracy, a low trajectory, easy loading, and
little fouling. The difficulty of constructing a cartridge which
would enable this bullet to be used naked, that is, without any
paper intervening between it and the bore, appears to have
"been the only impediment to its adoption in our service in
1852. This difficulty has since been overcome, as I shall
afterwards shew. Of all the improvements which have been
suggested in the shape of the bullet, this is perhaps the greatest
step in advance. We have here a solid self-expanding bullet,
upon an entirely new principle, without any cup, cavity, or any
of the drawbacks of the Minie system; easily constructed on
service, and adapted to any system of rifling.
An important discovery was however made during the trial
with these bullets. It was found that the head of the ball,
which is in front of the circular indented grooves, received the
rifles as well as any other part of the bullet This could in no
way be attributed to the action of the cannelures, which it
became evident, were not necessary to the expansion of the lead.
Acting upon this, Mr. Pritchett introduced a bullet, which since
its adoption has gone by his name, (Fig. 15,) consisting of a
plain cylinder of lead, with a conoidal point having a slight
cavity in the base, which is for no other purpose than to send
the centre of gravity forward, and to keep it within a reasonable
weight This bullet being adapted to be used with a cartridge,
was adopted for the service with the Enfield rifle in 1853.
Thus, after all the ingenuity which had been expended in
devising a method of self expansion, after trials in which cups of


various shapes, plugs of iron, lead, wood, horn, and other
materials, had been successively attempted, it was found that
a plain leaden bullet was that which most perfectly fulfilled the
necessary conditions, at the same time combining them with the
utmost simplicity of form and construction.
During the time I was First Instructor at the School of
Musketry, the trials between the Minie and Enfield musket
left no doubt as to the superiority of the latter as a military
weapon. Shortly after its adoption a great improvement took
place in the shooting of the men, which the commandant of the
establishment attributed in his reports entirely to the new
arms; and reference to the annual reports will shew that as
many as 150 rounds were frequently fired out of the same
barrel, without experiencing the slightest difficulty from foul-
ing, notwithstanding that the arms were frequently left un-
cleaned during the night, in order to make the test severe-
But during the latter part of the war, the Enfield rifle having
been distributed to the men in the Crimea, and being probably
in an extremely dirty or oily condition, difficulties were ex-
perienced in the loading. To remedy this, I afterwards learnt
that it had been proposed at Hythe to reduce slightly the
calibre of the bullet, and re-introduce the cup and subsequently
a wooden plug: in short to return to the Minie system.
I no sooner heard of this retrograde step, than (being then
at Malta) I immediately caused trials with the Pritchet bullet
to be made in the several battalions stationed there, in order to
ascertain if during the great heat of a Malta summer, the same
difficulty of loading would be experienced; and if so, to ascertain
if possible the cause. Out of 60 rifles fired in the several bat-
talions, 15 (or exactly one-fourth) were rendered unserviceable
before they had fired 60 rounds. The same difficulty was
experienced with the Minie, but in a less degree.
In endeavouring to account for a result so much at variance


with all previous experience, I enumerated in my report home
of August 3, 1855, a variety of points which might contribute
towards hard loading, such as bad gunpowder, bad oil, and so
forth; and then proceeded to give more in detail the cause,
which all who had been present at tbe trials, concurred in
thinking the principal defect.
The paper of the Enfield cartridge was of different texture
from the Minie; it appeared to be finer, and when saturated
with grease became like wet leather, and was very liable to
crease. The external case of the cartridge, enclosing the
bullet and charge, was not rolled tight enough upon the sides
of the bullet: so that when the cartridge was put into the
barrel, the paper, saturated with the grease in hot weather,
began to crease, in the manner which was represented in a
diagram that accompanied my report (Fig. 19): and this no
doubt increased as the bullet went down the barrel. In some
of the charges which were afterwards punched out by the
armourer, the paper was found to be rolled up into a kind of
string. This, I said, would be quite enough to account for
hard loading.
The base of the Minie bullet, I observed, is broader than
that of the Enfield, and is also better adapted to hold the paper
which is folded upon it; the ends being turned into the hollow
cup, and in a great measure retained there by the shoulders
or edges of the cup, as shown in a second diagram which I sent
with my report (Fig. 20). This is not the case with the Enfield,
and when there is much pressure on the sides of the bore,
from fouling or other causes, the paper is unfolded and drawn
off the base of the bullet, which often slips down naked upon
the charge. In proof of this, it was observed, in the several
trials conducted at different places in the garrison, that upon
returning ramrods, the paper which ought to have gone down
with the bullet frequently came out adhering to the head of


the ramrod, and was invariably creased up in the manner
before described. The use of the bag cartridge, I added,
would completely obviate these defects. I also observed, that
the grease of the cartridges appeared to be of an unusually
sticky nature; and I concluded my report by saying that I
saw no reason to suppose the bullet did not expand sufficiently
when forced by the explosion; otherwise the accuracy of fire
would certainly have been affected by it.
I had afterwards an opportunity of testing the Pritchett
with the cup ammunition, but without discovering any differ-
ence between the two systems, either in regard to fouling or
accuracy; and it remained for some time a mystery to me,
how it was that the exploded Minie system could obtain support
in this country.
All doubt on the subject, however, was cleared up on my
return to England, by finding that the cartridge of the wooden
plug ammunition had been choked , that is to say tied at the
base of the ball, so as to prevent its creasing, and entirely to
fulfil the conditions of the bag cartridge, which I had recom-
mended in my report home ; whilst that of the Pritchett am-
munition was not choked.
This confirmed most fully the truth of my premises ; but, if
any farther proof be necessary, it may be mentioned that since
then, the plug ammunition has been used at Hythe with grease
in which a proportion of wax had been mixed. In consequence
of this, the practice fell off very considerably; showing the
great effect produced by any objectionable substance intervening
between the bullet and the bore.
But a crowning proof in my opinion, that it is to the paper
alone the defects in fouling and accuracy are attributable, has
taken place within the last few weeks at Enfield, where solid
leaden bullets have been constructed and used without paper ;
and the result has been that these bullets have not only shown


themselves superior to the plug, but barrels which would have
been rejected with the latter as bad barrels, have, produced
greater accuracy than has ever been obtained with the plug
ammunition.
The employment of a naked bullet has been proved in the
experiments of 1852 to he advantageous; the only difficulty
being its adaptation to the cartridge, and this has been effected
by enclosing the grease within the paper, which latter is easily
squeezed off by the soldier in loading. The grease is retained
round the sides of the bullet by means of shallow cannelures. I
have seen both the diagrams of practice and the bullet, the
latter of which greatly resembles the Pritchett; but I will not
trespass upon the province of that department by giving any
farther description of it. Suffice it to say, that it promises to
lead to important results.
The re-adoption of the cannelures for the purpose
above mentioned, is a remarkable illustration of the rule
which has held good throughout the whole history of the
rifle ; that the path of improvement has been stumbled upon,
and followed by those who were in search of something widely
remote from it. These cannelures, at first established to act
like the feathers of an arrow, were subsequently employed
to weaken the stem of the bullet, and are now re-adopted
as a receptacle for the grease only; showing that in all
things necessity, rather than foresight, has been the mother of
invention.
But another collateral advantage deserves to be noticed in
connexion with the solid bullet I allude to the facility with
which it is constructed on service. An instance of this occurred
at Lucknow. I received a letter from Major North, of the 60th
Rifles, who had acted as Deputy Judge-Advocate to General
Havelock’s force. On the arrival of that force at Lucknow, the
ammunition of the Enfield rifles failed, and the rifle was in


consequence taken away from three of the regiments which were
armed with it, and replaced by the smooth bore. Having been
for some time employed as a musketry instructor, Major North
immediately proposed that men from every regiment should be
told off, for‘the manufacture of cartridges. The idea was at first
ridiculed, but persisting in the feasibility of his proposal, General
Havelock at last desired him to begin. There was but one bullet
mould in the force, a private one, belonging to an officer of one of
the regiments. Having enlisted this officer with his mould, others
were made after it by the regimental armourers : the natives
were taught; 2,500 cartridges per day were manufactured;
and at the end of a month, after 72,000 rounds had been
constructed, the three regiments received back their rifles.
This, it will be admitted, was an important service rendered
to the force, under the circumstances in which it was placed;
and had the three regiments been instructed in the use of their
rifles, still more important results might have attended it.
On Major North’s return to England, I wrote to him to ask,
How did you manage to construct the cups or plugs in the
necessary proportion ? He answered, It was the Pritchett bullet,
which being solid, required no such accessories; if we had
been dependent on cups or plugs, I do not know how we should
have managed.—l think a lesson might be learnt from this.
Our whole army is now taught to make cartridges. Of what
use is this instruction to them, if they are neither provided
with the means of making them, nor is their ammunition of
such a nature that it can be constructed with facility in the
field?
It must be remembered, that the position in which this
force was placed, was by no means so extraordinary, that it
might not occur again to any corps, that is detached from the
main army. The troops in India were not dependent on
Woolwich for their supply of bullets, but similar machines


were in operation in Calcutta, for making bullets by com-
pression. This force, however, was cut off from its supplies.
Under such circumstances, lead and powder are almost always
at hand, and copper caps, from their comparative lightness,
always accompany an army in larger proportions than cartridges.
It must therefore be a matter of some importance, that the
bullet should be of such a nature as to be easily cast in a
mould.
But, whatever weight may attach to this consideration, I
should be sorry to rest an argument for the employment of a
solid bullet upon such grounds, were not its advantages in
point of accuracy, and other respects, sufficiently established
both by theory and experiment.
If any farther doubts on the matter should still exist, it is
only necessary to quote the reports which have been published
of the practice of the Whitworth rifle. Nearly every one has
heard of the extraordinary, and almost incredible performances
of this arm. It is stated, that at 800 yards it exceeds the
practice of the Enfield at 500. Now what is the shape of the
bullet employed with this rifle? (Fig. 17.) Two forms have
been submitted by Mr. Whitworth, neither of them have either
cup or plug; and that which is proposed for the use of the army,
is neither more or less than the solid Pritchett bullet; differing
from it only in length and diameter. Like the Pritchett, it
receives its expansion by the opposing forces of the gas and
atmosphere, the particles being what is technically termed
upset, and the cylinder moulded to the form of the barrel.
The Whitworth rifle brings us at once to the question of
bore. The advantage of reducing the bore of a rifle has long
been known to rifle makers; and the principle on which it is
based is extremely obvious. The resistance of the atmosphere
1 s in proportion to the size of the fore end of the bullet which
is presented to it, but the momentum, or power to overcome
D


the resistance with a given velocity, is in proportion to the
weight of the bullet, which depends upon its length. No one
would think of taking off the points of an arrow, and using
them without their shafts; and by the same reasoning, the
longer a bullet is, in proportion to its diameter, provided its
point is kept to the front, and it receives a sufficient velocity, the
greater will be the range. As long as the spherical bullets con-
tinued in use an increase of bore was desirable, because in a
sphere, the weight increases in a larger ratio than its diameter;
but since the employment of elongated projectiles, all improve-
ment in the construction of the musket has been accompanied
by a reduction of bore. On the adoption of the Minie, it was
reduced from • 760 to • 702. On the introduction of the Enfield,
it was reduced to • 577, and Colonel Gordon, in his remarks
upon the experiments of 1852, which had been conducted
under his superintendence, comments upon the advantages of
this reduced bore, as more easily adapting itself to the improve-
ments which are constantly being made in the form and
composition of elongated projectiles.
At this time, Mr. Wilkinson proposed a farther reduction
of • 530, and Mr. Lancaster, either then, or shortly afterwards,
proposed ‘498. But a farther reduction at that time was not
desirable, as much difficulty had been contended with, in
overcoming the opposition to the reduction already made.
This is more particularly shewn in the evidence of Mr. Westley
Richard, before Parliament, in 1854. But since then, Mr.
Whitworth, conducting his experiments with the aid of a grant
from Parliament, and acting in concert with the School of
Musketry, has adopted a smaller bore than that originally
suggested by the gunmakers. The Whitworth bullet differs
from the Pitchett only in this; that its diameter is smaller, and
the regulation weight is made up by adding to the length, the
mass of lead which is deducted from the periphery; thereby


producing a form better calculated to meet the resistance of
the atmosphere, and which, independently of the system of
grooving, would produce greater accuracy, velocity, penetration,
and range. In the experiments at Hythe, the Whitworth
small bore has been tried against the Enfield large bore,
and current opinion has attributed to the improvement of
system, the superiority which all experienced persons had
foretold would result from the diminution of bore. Whether or
not it is entirely attributable to this cause, can only be proved
when it has been fairly tried with the Enfield.
Any invention emanating from Mr. Whitworth must carry
with it all the weight, and receive all the attention which is
due to his eminent abilities as a mechanician, but at the same
time I am bound to add, that I am informed upon good autho-
rity, that an Enfield rifle has been made of the same bore as
Mr. Whitworth’s, and has been found to equal or exceed it in
range and accuracy.
Besides the question of bore, must also be considered, the
accuracy with which these arms have been constructed, for not
only are the barrels bored out of a solid bar of steel, but even
the beds of the sights have been cut out of the same block,
instead of being soldered on to the barrel, as in ordinary rifles.
Mr. Whitworth is the well-known inventor of a most ingenious
machine, by which small distances, and especially gauges, are
measured with a degree of accuracy that has never before been
attainable. The difference between a good and a bad rifle of
the same construction, depends greatly on the accuracy with
which it is gauged ; and it remains to be proved, whether
the few samples of this arm which have hitherto been used,
may not owe much of their perfection to a degree of accuracy
and cost bestowed upon them, which can never be attainable in
arms manufactured wholesale for the army.
These remarks are in no way meant to disparage Mr.
d 2


Whitworth’s system. lam too well aware of the little value
of any merely theoretical conjecture, to give any opinion on
the merits of a system which I have not seen practically tested*
Indeed, so far as I can judge from the brief inspection Mr.
Whitworth was so kind as to afford me of his rifle, I should
say, that if ever there was a system which would bear the test
of a fair trial, it is the one now under consideration; and I
have little doubt that Mr. Whitworth himself is the last person
who would wish that the credit of his invention should rest
upon such mention as has hitherto been made of it; for until
it has been fairly tried, and placed on an equality with other
arms, all premature laudation, from whatever quarter emanat-
ing, must tend rather to damage, than promote the success of
his undertaking.
Another advantage of reducing the bore of a rifle, is the
greater facility which it affords for the expansion of the bullet.
It has already been mentioned that in Mr. Wilkinson’s system,
indented cannelures were cut to diminish the substance of the
cylinder. In the Minie, the same effect is produced by the
aperture running through the centre of it, and although it is
found that with the small bore, adopted by Mr. Wilkinson, the
cannelures are not absolutely necesary, still there can be little
doubt that the more the diameter of the cylinder is reduced,
and its substance diminished by the reduction of the bore, the
more perfect the expansion will become.
The question of rifle grooving remains to be considered.
It has been already said, that at the time of the first invention
of the rifle, the increased friction opposed by the grooves, was
considered to be its great merit. Robins was the first to
refute these misconceptions, by showing that the friction was
in fact the great defect of the rifle, and the principal difficulty
to be contended with in the improvement of it; and he laid
down the principle, never to be lost sight of in the construction


of rifles, that the grooves should be no deeper than is necessary
to give the bullet sufficient rotation.
As the grooves were made shallower, they necessarily
became broader, otherwise the portion of lead pressed into
them would not be of sufficient substance to ensure the turn of
the bullet
In order to convert the old smooth bore into a rifle musket
(and as the thinness of the metal at the muzzle of these arms
did not admit of their being grooved to the usual depth,) the
French made their grooves shallower at the muzzle than breech.
This was found to give increased accuracy, and was therefore
adopted as part of their system, and the same principle was
extended, by making them also broader at the breech than
muzzle.
In 1851, experiments conducted in Belgium, proved that
greater initial velocity was produced by the new system of
grooving, but the difficulty of cutting these grooves deeper at
the breech than muzzle induced them to construct their barrels
slightly conical, so as to produce the same effect, —that of
squeezing the ball more tightly, as it approached the muzzle.
They reported favourably of this method, but the recoil was
much increased by it. In England this system never received
a very extended trial. The difficulty of constructing these
grooves had more weight than it deserved, in a country like
this. In 1852, I found a machine in operation at Turin for
the construction of these grooves, which closely resembled one
which I had contrived and submitted to the authorities the
previous year, and by which the increased depth at the breech
was cut by means of an excentric bit, which was forced out
by the twist of the boring rod. As it is now proposed to
re-establish the unequal grooves, with the Enfield rifle, a few
words on the subject of the advantages or disadvantages of
the system, may not be out of place.


The effects must be considered under the two heads of
accuracy and velocity. The accuracy may be increased by
tightening the hold of the grooves upon the bullet, and thereby
more effectually preventing the possibility of stripping. The
velocity may be increased by more effectually destroying all
windage; but, on the other band, it might be retarded by the
increased friction which is produced by the pressure of the
bore. These are points which can only be satisfactorily deter-
mined by experiment; but in all these matters it is important
to bear in mind, that within certain limits, accuracy should give
way to velocity, or to whatever tends to flatten the trajectory,
and produce a more grazing fire. When it is considered the
circumstances under which the rifle is applied in the field, the
noise and confusion of action, the smoke, and above all, the
difficulty of judging distance, it may safely be said, that with
any rifle of the ordinary construction, the inaccuracy which will
be due to the man, however well trained, as compared with
that due to the imperfection of his rifle, will be, as twenty to
one, or a larger proportion.
If, therefore, the accuracy of the arm alone is the object to
be attained by the proposed alteration, it is barely worthy of
adoption; but in regard to velocity, the matter is widely
different, for velocity, when combined with such a form of
bullet as to maintain it with comparatively slight diminution
throughout the flight, produces a more grazing fire, and thereby
diminishes the difficulty of judging distance. With the
Enfield rifle, it is known that at the distance of 600 yards the
bullet falls the height of a man in about 60 yards. A margin
of 60 yards is therefore afforded at this range for the appre-
ciation of distance, when firing at a man: the flatter the
trajectory, the more that margin will be increased. The
imaginary perfection of the flight of a bullet, would be a
straight line, for in this case, all judging distance exercises


might be dispensed with, as the same sight would answer
equally for all distances; and although such conditions are
impossible, still, the nearer the trajectory approaches to the
straight line, the greater will be the facility with which the
rifle is employed practically in the field. An increase in the
velocity of a projectile, is therefore an object to be attained by
every means possible.
Mr. Whitworth’s system may be said to consist in an
alteration in the number and shape of the grooves. Instead of
three shallow grooves, with rounded edges, he employs six
shallow angular grooves, so shaped as to form the bore into a
hexagon.
Mr. Lancaster’s system may be said to be an extension of
the principle of broad shallow grooves, and may be described
as having two opposite grooves, so broadened and extended,
as to run into one another, and form the bore into the shape of
an ellipsis.
Mr. Lancaster’s rifle has the very great advantage over all
others, of having no angles to accumulate dirt and fouling,
and it is therefore much 'more easily kept clean. The great
superiority of his rifles in this respect has been brought to
my notice, by having under my superintendence for instruction
at Malta, two companies of the Royal Engineers, which were
armed with it. My conviction is, that throughout the entire
service, and especially at places where soldiers are encamped
near the sea, the angles of the grooves of our Enfield rifles are
in a state of rust, which will show itself before long by a great
diminution of accuracy. In the garrison of Malta, which
consisted entirely of regiments from the Crimea, the accuracy
of the arm was found to be in an inverse proportion to the time
they had been in use, and in those regiments which had had
their rifles longest, a large proportion were found to be
entirely past repair, and were exchanged for new ones.


Although it is true that the wear and tear they received in the
Crimea, is not a fair criterion of that which they would
experience under ordinary circumstances, when the men
become more careful of their arms; still, it is evident, that
the subject is worthy of serious attention, as the ordinary
examination of the head of the ramrod on parade is insufficient
to detect rust in those parts of the grooves which may escape
the sweep of the cleaning rag.
Mr. Lancaster’s musket was tried at Hythe, in 1854, and
was found to exceed all others in accuracy, but having been
tried again some time afterwards, the bullet was found to strip,
or in other words to leave the grooves and quit the barrel without
receiving the spiral twist, and on that account it was rejected.
The reason for this was never clearly ascertained, but in the
absence of any better understood cause, it was attributed to
the greater wear and tear of these arras, although as the report
stated, it was difficult to reconcile this view of the case with
the fact that only 260 rounds had been fired out of them when
the trial commenced.
Mr. Lancaster at the time attributed it to the use of wax
in the grease of the cartridge, and subsequent experience
appears to confirm the truth of this supposition. He also
supposed it to be caused by a malformation of the bullet,
which was easily rectified. The results of these trials have
been made public by Sir Howard Douglas.
The reports from the School of Musketry were explicit in
stating, that but for the defect of stripping, the Lancaster
musket was superior to the others, both as regards accuracy
and facility of loading.
It was, however, supposed to require that the cartridge
should fit the barrel tighter than in other systems of rifling,
owing to the shallowness of the grooves, or to speak more
properly, to the slight difference between the long and short


diameters of the ellipsis, and this it was considered would
render it unserviceable in the field, where ammunition is often
dirty and defective. It has been proved on the contrary, by
the practice of two companies of Royal Engineers at Malta,
where the ammunition was very inferior to that used at the
School of Musketry, and was often in an almost unserviceable
condition from the dirt adhering to the grease of the cartridge;
that even with this defective ammunition, the Lancaster
musket is superior to all others, in the facility with which it is
loaded after much firing.
Upwards of 200 rounds were fired out of some of these
rifles, without producing any deterioration, but on the contrary
an increase of accuracy was perceivable. Although the bullet
used was the Pritchett, which is supposed by some to receive
an insufficient expansion, no stripping worthy of mention
occurred during the whole practice; and the average and final
classification of both companies exceeded the highest previously
obtained with the Enfield at the School of Musketry, even
with non-commissioned officers training for the corps of Instruc-
tors of Musketry. It is therefore evident, that the defect of
stripping had by some means been remedied, and accordingly
in my report I ventured to say, that the practice proved the
Lancaster musket to be not only “ not inferior, but if anything
a superior weapon to the Enfield rifle.” This report having
been referred to the Commandant of the School of Musketry,
was commented upon by him to the following effect. The
practice at Malta, he said, was no test of the merit of the
weapon. The accuracy of a weapon could only be tested by
careful trials conducted from a rest, and by measuring the
mean absolute deviation. This had been already done at
Hyfhe in the case of the Lancaster musket, and the result was
that it had been condemned. The practice of the men at
Malta, he continued, proved only the attention bestowed upon


them by their officers, and was no criterion of the merit of the
arm. The data on which I had formed my conclusions was
totally insufficient
In answer to this, and in order to point out that improve-
ment in the practice of the men, has on previous occasions
been made use of as an argument to testify to the improvement
of an arm, I will take the liberty of quoting the following
extract from the Annual Report of the School of Musketry,
for the year ending in 1855.
It is as follows:
“ In November 1854, the Minie or rifle musket of 1851, in
use at the School of Musketry for instruction, were replaced
by the Enfield three-groove or rifle musket of 1853, which
were for the first time placed in the hands of the soldier for
instruction and practice at this establishment.
“ At the conclusion of the first course of instruction with
these arms of pattern 1853, their superiority in accuracy of
shooting from the shoulder was so marked, that a report
thereof was forwarded to the Adjutant-General, Horse
Guards. The increase from 10 to 33 in the per centage of
the first-class shots, was the result of the practice with the
rifle-pattern of 1853, while at the same time the shooting of
this class with these arms at the longer ranges, was decidedly
superior to that produced by the first class with the Minie, or
rifle pattern of 1851.
“ The results obtained by the second party of detachments
which practised with the rifles-pattem of 1853, confirmed their
superiority, and place beyond a doubt their efficiency for
military service over any arms that have yet been placed in
the hands of the infantry.”
Now I think that with this passage standing amongst the
printed records of the School of Musketry, it is somewhat
remarkable that when on a subsequent occasion the pattern of


1853 is beaten by the Lancaster, it should be asserted that the
practice made by the men is no criterion of the merit of a
rifle.
My report sufficiently testified to my sense of the zeal
shown by the officers of Engineers, who were attached to these
companies under my supervision; and lam again ready to
attribute their success principally to this cause; but, were they
(themselves being under instruction) likely to surpass as in-
structors the entire staff of the School of Musketry ? Or, if the
superior intelligence of the men composing the corps of en-
gineers is mentioned as a cause of good shooting; is it reasonable
to class them above the corps of non-commissioned officers at
Hythe, who are selected out of the whole service to become
the instructors of the army ? When, in addition to this, it is
considered that careful experiments at Hythe, in which the
deviations were ascertained by measurement, had already
decided the superiority of the five Lancaster muskets, which
then underwent experiment on every point, save that of the
tendency to strip ; and when it is borne in view, that stripping
can never take place without a whistling noise, which is as
easily detected at target practice as when firing from a rest,
and that it has not been found to prevail to any unusual degree
during the practice of two entire companies at Malta; I think
I was justified in saying that this defect had been obviated,
and that the Lancaster musket is certainly not inferior to the
Enfield; or, at least, lam justified in asking that it should be
tried with the Whitworth rifle at the same reduced bore which
Mr. Lancaster was one of the first to propose.
A few observations on elongated projectiles will conclude
my remarks. It has been found by all those who have at-
tempted to elongate the bullet beyond a certain length, that
they have been obliged to increase the spiral of the grooves ;
otherwise, after a certain distance the bullet began to turn


over, and fly with great irregularity. The cause of this is
easily understood, when it is considered that all the bullets
which have been employed of a very elongated form, were
of such a shape that the centre of gravity is in rear of
the centre of figure; or if not in rear of it, but slightly in front
of it.
The force of propulsion has its resultant in a line drawn
through the centre of gravity, whilst that of the resistance of
the air is in the centre of figure. If therefore the centre of
figure is in front of the centre of gravity, the slightest irregu-
larity will cause the bullet to turn over, or form an angle with
the line of flight; and with a given angle of inclination the
greater the length of the bullet, the greater the side surface
opposed to the oblique action of the air. This can only be
remedied by increasing the rotation, so that the error of incli-
nation may be more rapidly corrected, and the bullet more
instantaneously brought back into the line of flight.
But an increase of spiral can only be given to a rifle at a
sacrifice of velocity. In bullets such as the Minie, where the
centre of gravity is nearer the front, the air, instead of acting
as a disturbing influence, helps to correct the flight by forcing
the hind part of the bullet into the line of flight. The rapid
spiral is therefore unnecessary with these arms.
It would therefore appear advisable that some means should
be devised to lighten the base end of the new projectiles, so as to
place them on an equality with the Minie in this respect. It
has been stated in Parliament that advantage has been derived
from the use of iron hexagonal bullets with the Whitworth
rifles. If so, and the wear and tear occasioned by the use of
iron bullets is not found to be an impediment, I would suggest
that by way of experiment they should be weighted at the fore
part, with lead cast in at the point. The bullet might then be
elongated, and the spiral perhaps diminished.


With the present spiral, it is probable that the hexagonal
balls could never be used in military service, on account of the
difficulty of loading; the bullet having to be as it were,
screwed down the spiral of the bore; an operation which when
foul, would probably give rise to all the inconveniences
which formerly attached to that system of loading: but
with a diminished spiral, this difficulty might perhaps be
obviated.
The same effects might, perhaps, be produced with the
Lancaster and Enfield rifles, by hollowing the base of the ball,
and inserting a wooden picket, of an entirely different shape
from that now in use in the service, and having for its object,
merely to form a frame-work for the aperture by which the
rear end of the bullet is lightened.
Mr. Boucher’s bullet appears well adapted to the desired
purpose, the aperture being closed up by an iron disc, so as to
prevent its collapsing or bursting by the action of the gas, I
can conceive no reason why this bullet should not be con-
siderably elongated.
It is possible that bullets of the above-named construction
might prove an extension of Robins’s principle, and produce an
increase both in accuracy and range. But if no very material
advantages are derived from them, the objections to a com-
pound, and the difficulty and cost of construction, both in the
arsenal, and on service, would operate in favour of a solid
bullet of the Pritchett form; which I will conclude by pro-
nouncing the best principle of bullet ever yet introduced into
this, or any other service. Finally, I may observe, that I
believe it is the wish of all those who are interested in the
improvement of the rifle, (now that a farther reduction of bore
is contemplated,) that all the various arms which at different
times have been submitted to the authorities, should be tried


together, with a bore of the same diameter; in order that the
conditions of each being identical, it may then be possible to
compare the systems, and select the best.
London: Printed by W. Clowsi and Sol's, 14, Charing Crocs.




