

in
m
LO
£ cl
oo
ON
ro
fS
Z


|| | I


dht % ©right (Kfrifeatioit.
A LECTURE
HIS GRACE
THE ARCHBISHOP OF DUBLIN
TO THE
YOUNG MEN’S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION:


PREFATORY NOTE.
The Committee of the Young Men’s Christian Asso-
ciation gratefully avail themselves of the privilege of pub-
lishing the following Lecture, which His Grace the Archbishop
of Dublin intended to deliver in London as the Introductory
Lecture of the present Course. He was prevented carrying
out his intention by indisposition, and has most kindly
placed the Lecture at the disposal of the Committee, as an
expression of His Grace’s interest in the aims and efforts of
the Association.
December , 1854.


NEW ZEALANDER.
n my, hh|rp^hhUip
jjjf® jt m if Mtlr
FUEGIAN,


I y ., / ■{ t//s zz-z |
l&H *> 1 1 1 v^^!.
NEW HOLLANDER,


ON THE ORIGIN OF CIVILISATION.
A subject on which I have for many years bestowed consi-
derable attention, as appearing to me both very curious, and,
in many respects, highly important (much more so than many
suppose), is, the Origin of Civilisation. And I propose to
lay before you a small portion of the results of my researches,
and reflections thereupon ; which will, I trust, be found not
uninteresting or uninstructive.
Every one who is at all acquainted with works of ancient
history, or of voyages and travels, or who has conversed with
persons that have visited distant regions, must have been
greatly struck (if possessing at all a thoughtful and intelligent
mind) with the vast difference between civilised Man and
the savage. If you look to the very lowest and rudest races
that inhabit the earth, you behold beings sunk almost to the
level of the brute-creation, and, in some points, even below
the brutes. Ignorant and thoughtless, gross in their tastes,
filthy in their habits, with the passions of men, but with the
intellect of little children, they roam, half-naked and half-
starved, over districts which might be made to support in
plenty and in comfort as many thousands of civilised Euro-
peans as there are individuals in the savage tribe. And they
are sunk, for the most part, quite as low, morally, as they are


intellectually. Polygamy, in its most gross and revolting
form, and infanticide, prevail among most savage tribes ; and
cannibalism among many. And the sick or helplessly aged
are usually abandoned by their relatives, to starve, or to be
devoured by wild beasts. Even in bodily person they differ
greatly from the civilised man. They are not only, in general,
very ugly and ill-made, but, in the structure of their limbs,
and especially in the head and face, they approach consi-
derably to animals of the ape tribe;and the countenance
is usually expressive of a mixture of stupidity, ferocity, and
something of suspiciousness and low cunning.
If you compare together merely the very lowest of
savages and the most highly civilised specimens of the
European races, you will be at first inclined to doubt whether
they can all belong to the same Species. But though the
very topmost round of the ladder is at a vast distance from
the ground, there are numerous steps between them, each
but a very little removed from that next above and that next
below it. The savages whom we found in Yan Diemen’s
Land, and of whom there is now but a very small remnant,
and others of the same race, —the Papuan,—who are found
widely scattered over the South-eastern regions of the globe,
—the people of Tierra del Euego, in the Southern extremity
of America, —and again, the Bushmen-Hottentots in the
neighbourhood of the Cape Colony (some specimens of whom
were not long since exhibited in this country), seem to be the
lowest of savages. But one might find specimens of the
human race, to the number of perhaps twenty or more,
gradually ascending by successive steps, from these, up to the
most civilised nations upon the earth; each, not very far
removed from the one below and the one above it; though
the two extremes present such a prodigious contrast.
As for the alleged advantages of savage life—the freedom
enjoyed by Man in a wild state, and the pure simplicity, and


innocence, and magnanimous generosity of character that he
exhibits—l need not, I trust, detain you by offering proofs
that all this exists only in poems and romances, and in the
imagination of their readers ; or in the theories of such philo-
sophers as the well-known Rousseau, who have undertaken to
maintain a monstrous paradox because it affords the best
exercise for their ingenuity, and who perhaps have ended in
being themselves bewildered by that very ingenuity of their
own, like a spider entangled in the web spun by herself.
The liberty enjoyed by the savage consists in his being left
free to oppress and plunder any one who is weaker than him-
self, and in being exposed to the same treatment from those
who are stronger. His boasted simplicity consists merely in
grossness of taste, improvidence, and ignorance. And his
virtue merely amounts to this, that though not less covetous,
envious, and malicious than civilised Man, he wants the skill
to be as dangerous as one of equally depraved character, but
more intelligent and better informed.
I have heard it remarked, however, by persons not desti-
tute of intelligence, as a presumption in favour of savage
life, that it has sometimes been voluntarily embraced by
civilised men; while, on the other hand, it has seldom if ever
happened that a savage has consented to conform to civilised
life.
. But this is easily explained, even from the very inferiority
of the savage state. It is easier to sink than to rise. To lay
aside or lose what we have, is far easier than to acquire what
we have not. The savage has no taste for the enjoyments of
civilised life. Its pursuits and occupations are what he wants
capacity to enjoy, or understand, or sympathise with. On
the other hand, the pursuits and gratifications (such as they
are) of the savage, are what the civilised man can fully un-
derstand and partake of; and if he does but throw aside and
disregard the higher portion of his nature, he can enter


heartily into the enjoyments of a hunting tribe of wild
Indians, whose business is the same as the recreation of the
sportsman, and who alternate the labours of the chase with
torpid repose and sensual indulgence.
In short, the case is nearly the same as with the resem-
blance, and the distinction, between Man and the brute
creatures. Man is an animal as well as they. He has much
in common with them, and something more besides. Both
have the same appetites, and many of the same passions ; but
the brutes lack most of the intellectual and moral faculties ;
and hence, a brute cannot be raised into a man, though it is
possible, as we too often find, for a man to sink himself
nearly into a brute, by giving himself, up to mere animal
gratifications, and neglecting altogether the nobler and more
properly human portion of himself.
It may be worth remarking, before I quit this portion of
the subject, that persons not accustomed to accuracy of think-
ing, are often misled by the differences of form, and conse-
quently of name, under which the same evils may be found in
different states of society; and consequently are inclined to
suppose that others may be exempt from such vices and other
evils as prevail among ourselves, inasmuch as they cannot have
exactly the same under the same titles. Where there is no
property in land, for instance, there cannot be a grasping and
oppressive landlord; where there is no trade, there can be no
bankrupts ; and where money is unknown, the love of money,
which is our common designation of avarice, cannot exist.
And thence the unthinking are perhaps led to imagine that
avarice itself has no place in the savage state, and that oppression,
and cruelty, and rapacity, and ruin, must be there unknown.
But the savage is commonly found to be covetous, often
thievish, when his present inclination impels him towards any
objects he needs, or which his fancy is set on. He is not,
indeed, so steady, or so provident, in his pursuit of gain as the


civilised man; but this is from the general unsteadiness and
improvidence of his character ; not from his being engrossed
by higher pursuits. What keeps him poor, in addition to
insecurity of property and want of skill, is, not a philosophical
contempt of riches, but a love of sluggish torpor and of present
gratification. Lamentable as it is to see multitudes—as we
may among ourselves —of Beings of such high qualifica-
tions and such high destination as Man, absorbed in the
pursuit of merely external and merely temporal objects,—
occupied in schemes for attaining worldly wealth and aggran-
disement for its own sake, and without reference to any
higher object,—we should remember that the savage is not
above such a life, but below it. It is not from preferring
virtue to wealth, —the goods of the mind to those of fortune,
—the next world to the present,—that he takes so little
thought for the morrow ; but from want of forethought, and
of habitual self-control. The civilised man too often directs
these qualities to unworthy objects; the savage, universally,
is deficient in the qualities themselves. The one is a stream
flowing too often in a wrong channel, and which needs to
have its course altered ; the other is a stagnant pool.
Such is Man in what is commonly called a “ state of
nature.” But it can hardly be called with propriety Man’s
“ natural state since in it a large proportion of his faculties
remain dormant and undeveloped. A plant would not be
said to be in its most natural state when growing in a soil or
climate that would not allow it to put forth the flowers and
the fruit for which its organisation was destined. Any one
who saw the pine-trees high up on the Alps, when growing
near the boundary of perpetual snow, stunted to the height of
two or three feet, and struggling to exist amidst rock and ice,
'would hardly describe that as the natural state of a tree which,
m a more genial soil and climate a little lower down, was
found towering to the height of fifty or sixty yards. In like


manner, the natural state of Man must, according to all fair
analogy, be reckoned, not that in which his intellectual and
moral growth are as it were stunted and permanently repressed,
but one in which his original endowments are—l do not say
brought to perfection, but—enabled to exercise themselves, and
to expand like the foliage and flowers of a plant; and especially
in which that characteristic of our species, the tendency towards
progressive improvement, is permitted to come into play.
If, however, Man is not to be reckoned in a perfectly
natural state when he has acquired anything from others,
then, even the savage would not answer to the definition;
since language, we all know, is a thing learnt; and a child
brought up (as it is supposed some have been, who were lost,
or purposely exposed in infancy) by a wild goat, or some
other brute, and without any intercourse with human creatures,
would grow up speechless; as we know those do who, being
deaf-born, are precluded from learning to speak. Now hardly
any one would call dumbness the natural state of Man.
The savage, then, is only so far in (comparatively) a state
of nature, that the arts which he learns and transmits to his
children are very few, and very rude. And yet it is remark-
able that in many respects savage life is decidedly more
artificial—more anti-natural—than the civilised. The most
elaborately dressed fine lady or gentleman has departed far
less from nature than a savage of most of the rudest tribes we
know of. Most of these not only paint their skins with a
variety of fantastic colours, but tattoo them, or decorate their
bodies (which is the New Hollander’s practice) with rows of
large artificial scars. The marriage ceremony among some of
these tribes is marked, not by putting a ring on the woman’s
finger, but by cutting off one of the joints of it. And in
those same tribes, every male, when approaching man’s estate,
is formally admitted as coming of age, by the ceremony of
having one of his front teeth knocked out. Some of them


wear a long ornament of bone thrust through the middle
cartilage of the nose, so as to make the speech indistinct.
Other tribes cut a slit in the under lip, so as to make a sort
of artificial second mouth, in which they fix some kind of fan-
tastic ornament. And some tribes, again, artificially flatten,
by pressure, the forehead of their infants, so as to bring the
head even nearer than nature has formed it, to a resemblance
to that of a brute.
And their customs are not less artificial than their ex-
ternal decorations. To take only one instance out of many:
marriage, among the most civilised nations of Europe, usually
takes place between persons who, living in the same society,
and becoming well-acquainted, contract a mutual liking for
each other ; and surely this is the most natural course; but
among the Australian savages, such a marriage is unheard of,
and would be counted an abomination; a wife must always
be taken, and taken by force, from another, —generally a
hostile tribe; and the intended bride must be dragged away
with brutal violence and most unmerciful blows.
Such is Man in what is called a state of nature!
I have given a very brief and slight sketch of the differ-
ences between the savage and the civilised condition; but
sufficient, I trust, for the present purpose. Those who may
wish to investigate the subject more fully, may find much
interesting and curious information on it, in a little book
(written at my suggestion) by the late Dr. Cooke Taylor,
entitled “ The Natural History of Society.” What I have
now been saying was designed merely as a necessary intro-
duction to the great and interesting inquiry, How was civilisa-
tion originally introduced ? Were the earliest generations of
mankind savages ? And if so, how came any of our race
ever to rise above that condition ?
It has been very commonly taken for granted, not only
by writers among the ancient heathen, but by modern


authors, that the savage state was the original one, and that
mankind, or some portion of mankind, gradually raised them-
selves from it by the unaided exercise of their own faculties.
I say “ taken for granted,” because one does not usually meet
with any attempt to establish this by proof, or even any dis-
tinct statement of it; but it is assumed, as something about
which there can be no manner of doubt. You may hear
plausible descriptions given of a supposed race of savages
subsisting on wild fruits, herbs, and roots, and on the pre-
carious supplies of hunting and fishing ; and then, of the sup-
posed process by which they emerged from this state, and
gradually invented the various arts of life, till they became a
decidedly civilised people. One man, it has been supposed,
wishing to save himself the trouble of roaming through the
■woods in search of wild fruits and roots, would bethink him-
self of collecting the seeds of these, and cultivating them in a
plot of ground cleared and broken up for the purpose. And
finding that he could thus raise more than enough for him-
self, he might agree with some of his neighbours to exchange
a part of his produce for some of the game or fish taken by
them. Another man again, it has been supposed, would con-
trive to save himself the labour and uncertainty of hunting,
by catching some kinds of wild animals alive, and keeping
them in an enclosure to breed, that he might have a supply
always at hand. And again others, it is supposed, might
devote themselves to the occupation of dressing skins for
clothing, or of building huts or canoes, or of making bows
and arrows, or various kinds of tools; each exchanging his
productions with his neighbours for food. And each, by
devoting his attention to some one kind of manufacture,
would acquire increased skill in that, and would strike out
new inventions.
And thus these supposed savages, having in this way
become divided into husbandmen, shepherds, and artisans of


several kinds, would begin to enjoy the various advantages of
a “ division of labour,” and would advance, step by step, in
all the arts of civilised life.
Such descriptions as the above, of what it is supposed has
actually taken place, or of what possibly might take place,
are likely to appear plausible, at the first glance, to those who
do not inquire carefully and reflect attentively. But, on ex-
amination, all these suppositions will be found to be com-
pletely at variance with all history, and inconsistent with the
character of such Beings as real savages actually are. Such a
process of inventions and improvements as that just described
is what we may safely say never did, and never possibly can,
take place in any tribe of savages left wholly to themselves.
As for the ancient Germans, and the Britons and Gauls, all
of whom we have pretty full accounts of in the works of Caesar
and of Tacitus, they did indeed fall considerably short, in
civilisation, of the Greeks and Romans, who were accustomed
to comprehend under the one sweeping term of “barbarians”
all nations except themselves. But it would be absurd to
reckon as savages, nations which, according to the authors just
mentioned, cultivated their land, kept cattle, employed horses
in their wars, and made use of metals for their weapons and
other instruments. A people so far advanced as that, would
not be unlikely, under favourable circumstances, to advance
further still, and to attain, step by step, to a high degree of
civilisation.
But as for savages properly so styled—that is, people
sunk as low, or anything near as low, as many tribes that our
voyagers have made us acquainted with—there is no one
instance recorded of any of them rising into a civilised con-
dition, or, indeed, rising at all, without instruction and assist-
ance from people already civilised. We have numerous
accounts of various savage tribes, in different parts of the
globe—in hot countries and in cold, in fertile and in barren,


in maritime and in inland situations—who have been visited
from time to time, at considerable intervals, by navigators, but
have had no settled intercourse with civilised people; and all
of them appear to have continued, from age to age, in the
same rude condition. Of the savages of Tierra del Fuego,
for instance, it is remarked by Mr. Darwin, the naturalist
(who was in the “ Beagle ” on its second voyage of dis-
covery), that they, “in one respect, resemble the brute
animals, inasmuch as they make no improvements.” As birds,
for instance, which have an instinct for building nests, build
them, each species, just as at first, after countless generations;
so it is, says he, with these people. “ Their canoe, which is
their most skilful work of art—and a wretched canoe it is—is
exactly the same as 250 years ago.” The New Zealanders,
again, whom Tasman first discovered in 1642, and who were
visited for the second time by Cook, 127 years after, were
found by him exactly in the same condition. And yet these
last were very far from being in as low a state as the New
Hollanders, for they cultivated the ground, raising crops of
the cumera (or sweet potato), and clothed themselves, not
with skins, but with mats woven by themselves. Subse-
quently, the country has, as you are aware, been made a
British colony; and though their first intercourse with
European settlers w T as under the most unfavourable circum-
stances —many of those who first came among them being
most worthless characters, who were often engaged in bloody
contests them—still the result has been that they have
renounced cannibalism, and the greater part of them have
become Christians, reading the Bible in their own lan-
guage, and fast adopting European habits. Their own lan-
guage, the Maori (that is their own name of their nation),
most of them can read and write. And besides the
Bible, several little popular tracts of mine have been
translated into it, under the superintendence of the late


Governor, Sir George Grey, and are, he tells me, eagerly
read by them.
Then again, if we look to ancient historical records and
traditions concerning nations that are reported to have risen
from a savage to a civilised state, we find that in every instance
they appear to have had the advantage of the instruction and
example of civilised men living among them. They always
have some tradition of some foreigner, or some Being from
heaven, as having first taught them the arts of life. Thus,
the ancient Greeks attributed to Prometheus, a supposed
superhuman Being, the introduction of the use of fire; and
they represented Triptolemus, and Cadmus, and others,
strangers from a distant country, as introducing agriculture
and other arts. The Peruvians, again, have a like tradition
respecting a person they call Mancocapac, whom they represent
as the offspring of the sun, and as having taught useful arts
to their ancestors. If it be true, as I have heard, that the
name signifies in the Peruvian language “ white,” it is not
unlikely that he was a European, and that the fable of his
descent from the sun may have arisen from his pointing to the
sun-rising—the east —to indicate the country he came from.
But there Is no need to inquire, even if we could do so
with any hope of success, what mixture there may be of truth
and fable in any of these traditions. For our present purpose
it is enough to have pointed out that they all agree in one
thing, in representing civilisation as having been introduced
(whenever it has been introduced) not from within, but from
without.
We have, therefore, in this case all the proof that a nega-
tive admits of. In all the few instances in which there is any
record or tradition of a savage people becoming civilised, we
have a corresponding record or tradition of their having been
aided by instructors; and in all the (very numerous) cases we
know of in which savages have been left to themselves, they


appear never to have advanced one step. The experiment, as
it may be called, has been going on in various regions for
many ages ; and it appears to have never once succeeded.
Perhaps the fanciful and pleasing picture of savages raising
themselves into civilisation, which I just now put before you,
may appear so natural, that you may be disposed to wonder
why it should apparently have never been realised. When
you try to fancy yourself in the situation of a savage, it may
perhaps occur to you that you would set your mind to work
to contrive means for bettering your condition, and that you
might hit upon such and such useful and very obvious contri-
vances ; and hence you may be led to think it natural that
savages should do so, and that some tribes of them may have
advanced themselves in the way above described, without any
external help. But what leads some persons to fancy this
possible (though it appears to have never really occurred) is,
that they themselves are not savages, but have some degree of
mental cultivation, and some of the habits of thought of
civilised men. And they imagine themselves merely destitute
of the knowledge of some things which they actually know;
but they cannot succeed in divesting themselves, in imagina-
tion, of the civilised character. And hence they form to
themselves an incorrect notion of what a savage really is ;
just as a person possessed of eyesight finds it difficult to
understand correctly the condition of one born blind.
Any one can easily judge, by simply shutting his eyes, or
going into a dark room, what it is to be blind; and thence he
may be led to suppose that he understands—which is a far
different thing—what it is to have been always blind.
When Bishop Berkeley demonstrated by mathematical
reasoning that a person born blind and acquiring sight (of
which, at that time, there was no actual instance), would not
be able at first to distinguish by the eye the most dissimilar
objects—such as a cube and a globe—which he had been


accustomed to handle, he was considered as maintaining a
great paradox. Afterwards, when the operation of couching
for cataract had been successfully performed on a youth born
blind, the Bishop’s demonstration was confirmed by the trial.
It was a considerable time before the lad could learn to dis-
tinguish, without handling, the dog and the cat, with which
he had long been familiar.
Now, the difficulty we have in fully understanding the
condition of one born blind, is similar to that of a civilised
man in representing to himself correctly the character of those
wholly uncivilised. Persons, however, who have actually
seen much of real savages, have observed that they are not
only feeble in mental powers, but also sluggish in the use of
such powers as they have, except when urged by pressing
want. When not thus urged, they pass their time in torpid
inactivity, or else in dancing, and various childish sports, or
in decorating their bodies with paint and with feathers, flowers,
and shells. They are not only brutishly stupid, but still more
characterised by childish thoughtlessness and improvidence;
so that it never occurs to them to reflect how they may put
themselves in a better condition a year or two hence. The New
Hollanders, for instance, roam about the woods and plains in
search of some few eatable roots which their country produces,
and which they laboriously dig up with sharpened sticks.
But though they are often half-starved, and though they have
to expend as much toil for three or four scanty meals of these
roots as would suffice for breaking up and planting a piece
of ground that would supply them for a year, it has never
occurred to them to attempt cultivating these roots ; no, not
even when they have been near enough to the settlers to see
the operations of agriculture going on.
For, savages not only seem never to devise anything spon-
taneously, but moreover, the very lowest of them are so
indocile, that even when they do come within reach of the


influence of civilised men, it requires much skill, and very
great patience, and a considerable length of time, to bring
them to avail themselves of the examples and instruction put
before them. Defoe, in his Eobinson Crusoe, though he does
represent the Brazilian savages as just such ignorant and
ferocious Beings as they really are, attributes to them a do-
cility and an intelligence far beyond the reality. He commits
the mistake I was just now adverting to, of representing the
savage as wanting merely the knowledge that is possessed by
civilised men, and as not deficient in the civilised character.
And, accordingly, Crusoe’s man Friday, and the other savages
who are brought among the Europeans, are represented as
receiving civilisation far more speedily and far more completely
than the actual Brazilian savages, or any others like them,
ever have done, in the first generation.
The original condition of those savages was lower than
that of the New Zealanders; and yet he has allotted hardly
so many months for their civilisation as it took years to bring
the New Zealanders, under the most careful and laborious
training, up to the same point. If Defoe had represented his
savages with the stupidity, indocility, and inattention, which
really characterise such races, and had, accordingly, made their
advancement far slower, and more imperfect, than he has, he
would have been more true to nature, but would probably
have appeared to most readers less natural than he does;
because most readers have formed precisely the same erroneous
conception of the savage character, as himself.*
* A few years ago, some tales acquired considerable popularity,
of which the scenes were laid in Ireland and in the West Indies.
The descriptions were vivid and striking, and the stories well got up.
And though the representations given were perceived, by those really
acquainted with those countries respectively, to be as wide of the reality
as the figures of lions and elephants on Chinese porcelain, this formed
no objection to ninety-nine hundredths of the readers, who were as
ignorant of the true state of things as the writer, and had probably


Since it appears, then, a complete moral certainty that men
left unassisted in what is called a state of nature, —that is,
with the faculties Man is horn with not at all unfolded or
exercised by education, —never did, and never can, raise
themselves from that condition : the question next arising is,
When and how did civilisation first originate ? How comes it
that the whole world is not peopled exclusively with savages ?
Such would evidently have been the case if the human
race had always from the first been left without any instruc-
tion from some superior Being, and yet had been able to
subsist at all. But there is strong reason to doubt whether
even this bare subsistence would have been possible. It is
most likely that the first generation would all have perished for
want of that scanty knowledge, and those few rude arts which
even savages possess, and which probably did not originate
with them (for savages seem never to discover or invent any-
thing), but are remnants which they have retained from a
more civilised state. The knowledge, for instance, of whole-
some and of poisonous roots and fruits, the arts of making fish-
hooks and nets, bows and arrows, or darts, and snares
for wild animals, and of constructing rude huts and canoes,
with tools made of sharp stones, and some other such
simple arts, are possessed more or less by all savages ; and
are necessary to enable them to support life. And men
left wholly untaught would probably all perish before they
could acquire for themselves this absolutely indispensable
knowledge.
For, Man, we should remember, is, when left wholly un-
taught, far less fitted for supporting and taking care of himself
than the brutes. These are far better provided both with
formed similar misconceptions. And a really correct representation
would probably have been less approved than the one given. The
“live pig”—according to the well-known Table—would have been
judged by the audience to squeak less naturally than the imitator.


instincts and with bodily organs, for supplying their own wants;
for instance, those animals that have occasion to dig either
for food, or to make burrows for shelter, such as the swine, the
mole, the hedgehog, and the rabbit, have both an instinct for
digging, and also snouts or paws far better adapted for that
purpose than Man’s hands. Yet Man is enabled to turn up the
ground much better than any brute ; but then, this is by the
use of spades and other tools, which Man can learn to make
and use, while brutes cannot.
Again, birds and bees have an instinct for building such
nests and cells as answer their purpose as well as the most
commodious houses and beds made by men ; but Man has no
instinct that teaches him how to construct these.
Brutes, again, know by instinct their proper food, and
avoid what is unwholesome ; but Man has no instinct for dis-
tinguishing from wholesome fruits the berry of the deadly-
nightshade, with which children have often been poisoned,
as it has no ill smell, and tastes sweet. And, again, almost all
quadrupeds swim by nature, because their swimming is the
same motion by which they walk on land ; but a man falling
into deep water is drowned, unless he has learnt to swim, by
an action quite different from that of his walking.
It is very doubtful, therefore (to say the least), whether
men left wholly untaught would be able to subsist at all, even
in the condition of the very lowest savages. But at any rate
it is plain they could never have risen above that state. If it be
supposed—and this is one of the many bold conjectures that
have been thrown out—-that Man was formerly endowed with
many instincts such as those of the brute creation, which
instincts were afterwards obliterated and lost through civilisa-
tion, then the human race might have subsisted in the savage
state ; but we should all have been savages to this day. How
comes it, then, that all mankind are not at this day as wild as
the Pupuans and Hottentot-Bushmen ? According to the


present course of things, the first introducer of civilisation
among savages, is, and must be, Man in a more improved
state; in the beginning, therefore, of the human race, this,
since there was no man to effect it, must have been the work of
another Being. There must have been, in short, something of
a revelation made, to the first, or to some subsequent
generation, of our species. And this miracle (for such it clearly
is, being out of the present course of nature) is attested inde-
pendently of Scripture, and consequently in confirmation of
the Scripture accounts, by the fact that civilised Man exists at
the present day. Each one of us Europeans, whether Christian,
Deist, or Atheist, is actually a portion of a standing monument
of a former communication to mankind from some superhuman
Being. That Man could not have made himself, is often
appealed to as a proof of the agency of a divine Creator; and
that mankind could not, in the first instance, have civilised
themselves, is a proof of the same kind, and of precisely equal
strength, of the agency of a divine Instructor.
It will have occurred to you, no doubt, that the conclu-
sions we have arrived at, agree precisely with what is recorded
in the oldest book extant. The Book of Genesis represents
mankind as originally existing in a condition which, though
far from being highly civilised, was very far removed from that
of savages. It describes Man as not having been, like the brutes,
left to provide for himself by his innate bodily and mental facul-
ties, but as having received at first some immediate divine com-
munications and instructions. And so early, according to this
record, was the division of labour, that, of the first two men
who were born of woman, one is described as a tiller of the
ground, and the other as a keeper of cattle. But I have
been careful, as you must have observed, to avoid appealing,
in the outset, to the Bible as an authority, because I have
thought it important to show, independently of that authority,
and from a monument actually before our eyes, the existence


of civilised Man—that there is no escaping such conclusions as
agree with the Bible narrative. There are at the present day,
philosophers, so-called, some of whom make boastful pre-
tensions to science, and undertake to trace the Vestiges of
Creation; and some w r ho assume that no miracle can ever have
taken place, and that the idea of what they call a “ book-
revelation” is an absurdity ; and these you cannot meet by an
appeal to our Scriptures. But if you call upon them to show
how the existing state of things can have come about without
a miracle and without a revelation, you will find them (as I
can assert from experience) greatly at a loss.
It is alleged by one of these philosophers, that “ some
writers have represented the earliest generations of mankind
as in a high state of civilisation; ” and he adds that, “ this
doctrine has been maintained from a desire to confirm Scrip-
ture history.” He does not, however, cite, or refer to any
such writers ; and there is reason to think that none such
ever existed, and that the whole is a complete mis-statement,
either from error of memory, or from some other cause ; for
this at least is certain, that no one could possibly have been
led, by a desire of confirming Scripture history, to attribute
high civilisation to the first generations of men; since this
would go to contradict Scripture history. The author in
question, if he is at all acquainted with Scripture history,
must know, that, according to that, mankind were originally
in so very humble a degree of civilisation, that even the use of
metals appears to have been introduced only in the seventh
generation.
But though the earliest generations of mankind were, as
has been said, in a condition far short of what can be called
“high civilisation,” and had received only very limited, and what
may be called elementary instruction, enough merely to en-
able them to make further advances afterwards, by the exercise
of their natural powers— some such instruction (we have seen)


they must have received, because without it, either the whole
race would have perished—which is far the most probable, —or
at best, the world would have been peopled at this day with none
but the wildest savages. For, all experience proves that men
left in the lowest, or even anything approaching to the lowest,
degree of barbarism in which they can possibly subsist at all,
never did and never can raise themselves, unaided, into a higher
condition. But when men have once reached a certain stage in
the advance towards civilisation, it is then possible for them
(under favourable circumstances, and if wars or other calamities
do not occur to keep them back) to advance further and further
in the same direction. Human society, in short, may be com-
pared to some combustible substances which will never take
fire spontaneously, but when once set on fire, will burn with
continually increasing strength. A community of men requires,
as it were, to be kindled, and requires no more.
In this, as in many other matters, it is th e first step that is
the difficulty. Though it may be in itself but a small step,
and one which would be easy if it were the second and not
the first, its being the first makes it both the most important
and the most difficult.
Although I wish to rest my conclusions, not on the authority
of other writers, but on well-established facts and conclusive
arguments, I think it will not be out of place to advert to the
opinions of some authors of high repute, whose views on the
subject I had no knowledge of when mine were first formed.
“ The important question,” says the celebrated Hum-
boldt, “ has not yet been resolved, whether that savage state,
which even in America is found in various gradations, is to
be looked upon as the dawning of a society about to rise, or
whether it is not rather the fading remains of one sinking
amidst storms, overthrown and shattered by overwhelming
catastrophes. To me the latter seems to be nearer the truth
than the former.”


The famous historian Niebhur also is recorded (not in any
publication of his own, but in published reminiscences of his
conversation with a friend) to have strongly expressed his
full conviction that all savages are the degenerated remnants
of more civilised races, which had been overpowered by
enemies, and driven to take refuge in woods (whence the
name “ silvaggio,” savage), and there to wander, seeking a
precarious subsistence, till they had forgotten most of the
arts of settled life, and sunk into a wild state.
It is remarkable, however, that neither of these eminent
men seem to have thought of the inference, though they were
within one step of it, that the first beginnings of civilisation
must have come from a superhuman instructor.
Not so, "however, President Smith, of the College of New
Jersey, United States. In an Essay on the Diversity of the
Human Species, after saying that the savage state cannot
have been that of the earliest generations, and that such a
supposition is contrary to sound reason and to all history, he
expresses his conviction not only that savage tribes have
degenerated from more civilised, but that life, even in the
savage state, could not have been preserved, if the first
generation had been wholly untaught. “ Hardly is it pos-
sible,” says he, “ that Man placed on the surface of the world,
in the midst of its forests and marshes, capable of reason
indeed, but without having formed principles to direct its
exercise, should have been able to preserve his existence,
unless he had received from his Creator, along with his being,
some instructions concerning the employment of his faculties,
for procuring his subsistence and inventing the most neces-
sary arts of life. . . . Nature has furnished the inferior
animals with many and powerful instincts to direct them in
the choice of their food, &c. But Man must have been the
most forlorn of all creatures ; . . . cast out, as an orphan
of nature, naked and helpless, he must have perished before


he could have learned to supply his most immediate and
urgent wants.”
The views of President Smith coincide, you will perceive,
very closely with those put forth by me; though I never
heard of his work till long after.
But these views are, as you may suppose, very unaccept-
able to certain classes of writers. And they have accordingly
made vehement but fruitless efforts to evade the force of the
arguments adduced. They contend against what they call the
theory maintained, and set themselves to meet the arguments
which prove it unlikely that savages should civilise themselves ;
but they cannot get over the fact, that savages never have
done so. Now, that they never can, is a theory ; and some-
thing may always be said-—well or ill—against any theory,
whether sound or unsound; but facts are stubborn things:
and that no authenticated instance can be produced of savages
that ever did emerge, unaided, from that state, is no theory;
but a statement, hitherto never disproved, of a matter of fact.
It has been urged, among other things, that no art can be
pointed out which Man may not by his natural powers have
invented. Now, no one, as far as I know, ever maintained
that there is any such art. I myself believe there is none
that Man may not have invented, supposing him to have a
certain degree of mental cultivation to start from. But as for
any art—much less all the arts—being invented by savages,
none of whom can be proved to have ever invented anything,
that is quite a different question. The fallacy here employed,
which is called in logical language the “ Fallacy of Composi-
tion,” consists in taking a term first in the divided sense, and
then in the collective sense. This art, and that, and the other,
&c.—each taken separately—is not beyond the power of Man
to invent: all the arts are this, that, and the other, &c.
taken collectively: therefore, all may have been originally
invented by unaided Man. In like manner, there is no one


angle and no one side of a triangle that may not be discovered
if we have certain data to start from. Given, two sides and
the contained angle, we can ascertain the remaining side arid
the other angles. Or again, if we know one side and two
angles, we can discover the rest. But it would be a new sort
of trigonometry that could discover all the three angles and
three sides without any data at all.
One other of the arguments—so called—in disproof of
the possibility of Man’s having ever received any commu-
nications from a Superior Being, I will notice, merely to
show what desperate straits our opponents are reduced to.
A writer in the “ Westminster Review” assumes, on very in-
sufficient grounds, from a passage in the book of Chronicles,
that the Jews in Solomon’s time supposed the diameter of
a circle to be exactly one-third of the circumference, instead
of being, as it is, rather less than seven twenty-firsts,
though more than seven twenty-seconds. I say on “ in-
sufficient grounds ” does he infer this ignorance, because
it might just as well be inferred that every one who speaks of
the sun’s setting, supposes that the sun actually moves round
the earth ; and that when we speak of a road laid down
in a straight line from one town to another, we must be igno-
rant that the earth is a sphere, and that consequently there
cannot be a perfectly straight line on its surface. But let
this pass. The inference drawn is, that, since the Jews
had so imperfect a knowledge of mathematics, therefore,
mankind could never have received from above, any instruction
whatever, even in the simplest arts of life; and that, conse-
quently, all civilised nations must have risen to that condition
unaided, from the state of the lowest savages; though all
history, and all our experience of what takes place at the
present day, attests the contrary! Now when a writer,
evidently not destitute of intelligence, is driven to argue in this
manner, you may judge how hard pressed he must feel himself.


I was conversing once on the present subject with an
intelligent person, a great student of phrenology, who was
inclined to attribute the stationary condition of savages to
their defective cerebral development, and to conjecture that a
number of people with well-formed brain, might, without any
instruction, acquire the arts of life, and civilise themselves.
Now there is, indeed, no doubt that the very lowest savage
tribes—such as the Pupuans and Fuegians—have a very
defective formation of head; but this I was disposed to
regard as the effect, not the cause, of their having lived in a
wild state for a vast many generations. For, the cerebral
organs,—as my friend himself fully admitted, —are, like other
parts of the body, developed and strengthened by being
exercised, and impaired and shrunk by inactivity. But some
tribes, I remarked to him, who are considerably above the
very rudest of all (as for instance the New Zealanders), have
a conformation of head little if at all inferior to the European ;
and yet the New Zealanders, though they accordingly have
proved incomparably more docile, and capable of advance-
ment, than the more degraded races, were, nevertheless (as we
have seen), incapable, when left to themselves, of advancing
a single step. And this instance he was compelled to admit
as decisive.
Among the many random guesses that have been thrown
out on this subject, one that I have heard is, that perhaps
there may have been two races, —two distinct Varieties, or
rather two widely different Species, of Man; the one capable
of self-civilisation, the other, not, though capable of being
taught. This is a sufficiently bold conjecture, being not sup-
ported by any particle of evidence ; and yet, after all, it
answers no purpose. For, this wonderful endowment,
the self-civilising power, if ever it were bestowed on any
portion of mankind, seems to have been bestowed in vain,
and never to have been called into play ; since, as far as we


can learn, no savage tribe does appear, in point of fact, to
have ever civilised themselves.
Of late years, however, an attempt has been made to
revive Lamarck’s theory of development. He was a French
naturalist who maintained the spontaneous transition of one
Species into another of a higher character; the lowest animal-
cules having, it seems, in many generations ripened into fish,
thence into reptiles, beasts, and men. And it is truly wonderful
what a degree of popularity has been attained by this theory,
considering that it is supported altogether by groundless conjec-
tures, mis-statements of facts, and inconclusive reasoning. But
its advocates found it necessary to assail somehow or other the
position I have been maintaining, which is fatal to their whole
scheme. The view we have taken of the condition of savages
“ breaks the water-pitcher” (as the Greek proverb expresses
it) “at the very threshold.” Supposing the animalcule safely
conducted, by a series of bold conjectures, through the several
transmutations, till from an ape it became a man, there is, as
we have seen, a failure at the last stage of all; —an insur-
mountable difficulty in the final step from the savage to the
civilised man.
It became necessary, therefore, to accept the challenge
proposed, and to find a race of savages who had, unassisted,
civilised themselves ; and the case produced was that of a tribe
of North Americans called theMandans. These are described
in a work by Mr. Catlin, who visited them, as living in a
walled town, instead of the open defenceless hamlets of the
other tribes, and as exercising some arts unknown to their
more barbarian neighbours. These latter, not long ago, fell
upon them when greatly thinned by the ravages of the small-
pox, and totally extirpated the small remnant of the tribe.
Now, when this case was brought forward, one naturally
expected that some proof would be attempted—(l), that these
Mandans had been in as savage a condition as the neighbouring


tribes; and (2), that they had, unaided, raised themselves
from it. But all this, which is the only point at issue, instead
of being proved, is coolly taken for granted. Not the least
attempt is made to prove that the Mandans are originally of the
same race with their neighbouring tribes. It is simply taken
for granted; though Mr. Catlin himself, who was intimately
acquainted with both, gives strong reasons for the contrary
opinion. No proof, again, is offered that they ever were in as
rude a condition as those other tribes; it is coolly assumed.
No proof is offered that their ancestors never received any
instruction, at a remote period, from European or other
strangers ;it is merely taken for granted. And this pro-
cedure is boastfully put forward as “ Science !” The science
which consists in simply begging the question, is certainly
neither Aristotelian nor Baconian Science.
But in an article in the “ Edinburgh Review,” on Mr.
Gatlin’s book, we are told that the more advanced con-
dition of these Mandans is to be attributed to their living
in a fortified town, by which means they enjoyed leisure
and security for cultivating the arts of peace. Now, if
they had chanced to light on a spot fortified naturally, by
steep precipices, or the like, the cause assigned would at least
have been something intelligible. But the wall which fortified
the city of these Mandans was built (which the critic seems
to have forgotten) by themselves. And when we are gravely
told that it is a very easy thing for the wildest savages to
civilise themselves and learn the arts of life, for, that they
have only to begin by building themselves a well-fortified town,
it is impossible to avoid being reminded of the trick by which
little children are deluded, who are told that they can easily
catch a bird if they do but put salt on its tail.
But reviewers, being for the most part secure from being
themselves reviewed, sometimes put forward such statements
and such arguments as they would unmercifully criticise if


appearing in the work of any other author. Suppose, for in-
stance, some author maintaining that the intellectual culture of
the Europeans is to be traced entirely to their having access to
Libraries and Museums; you may imagine with what unsparing
ridicule he would be visited by the reviewers, who would
remind him, that though Libraries and Museums do certainly
contribute greatly to a nation’s enlightenment, yet, as they
do not fall from the sky, but are the work of the very people
themselves, such a people must have something of intellectual
culture to begin with, and cannot owe every thing to what they
have themselves produced. Or again, suppose a people of
remarkably cleanly habits to be living in the midst of tribes
that were abominably filthy, what would be thought of a
person who should say, “ their superior cleanliness may be
accounted for by their use of soap?” Soap is, no doubt, a
great purifier; but if they had been originally quite careless of
cleanliness, how came they to think of making and using soap ?
These Mandans, however, says the reviewer, were driven
by “ necessity ” to fortify themselves, in order to protect them-
selves from the neighbouring hostile tribes. But necessity is
not “ the mother of invention” except to those who have some
degree of thoughtfulness and intelligence. To the mere savage
she rarely if ever teaches anything. And of this there cannot
be a stronger proof than that which the reviewer had, as it
were, just before his eyes, and yet overlooked. He forgot
that those other tribes, generally at war with each other, and
therefore pressed by the very same necessity, yet continued to
dwell in open villages, where they are accordingly from time
to time surprised or overpowered' by their enemies, and have
never thought of fortifying themselves; no, not when they
had before their eyes the example of the Mandans, which
they had not the sense to copy!
It appears, then, that all the attempts made to assail our
position have served only to furnish fresh and fresh proofs


that it is perfectly impregnable. That some communication
to man from a Superior Being—in other words, some kind of
Revelation—must at some time or other have taken place, is
established, independently of all historical documents, in the
Bible or elsewhere, by a standing monument which is before
our eyes, the existence of civilised man at this day.
And the establishing of this is the most complete discom-
fiture of the adversaries of our religion, because it cuts away
the ground from under their feet. For, you will hardly meet
with any one who admits that there has been some distinct
Revelation, properly so called, given to Man, and yet denies
that that revelation is to be found in our Bible. On the con-
trary, all who deny the divine authority of the Bible, almost
always set out with assuming, or attempting to prove, the
abstract impossibility of any revelation whatever, or any
miracle, in the ordinary sense of these words ; and then it is
that they proceed to muster their objections against Christi-
anity in particular. But I trust you have seen that we may ad-
vance and meet them at once in the open field, and overthrow
them at the first step, before they approach our citadel; by
proving that what they set out with denying is what must
have taken place, and that they are, in their own persons, a
portion of the monument of its occurrence. And the esta-
blishing of this, as it takes away the very ground first occu-
pied by the opponents of our Faith, so it is an important pre-
liminary step for our proceeding, in the next place, to the
particular evidence for that faith. Once fully convinced that
God must at some time or other have made some direct com-
munication to Man, and that even those who dislike this
conclusion strive in vain to escape it, we are thus the better
prepared for duly estimating the proofs that the Gospel is in
truth a divine message.
It is not, however, solely, or even chiefly, for the sake of
furnishing a refutation of objectors, in case you should ever


chance to meet with any, or even of satisfying doubters, that
I have put these views before you ; though no one can think
this an unimportant matter who remembers that we are
solemnly charged to be “ always ready to give to every one
that asketh us a reason for the hope that is in us; ” but beyond
this, it must be both highly useful and highly gratifying to a
rightly-minded Christian to contemplate and dwell upon all
the many marks of truth stamped on a Revelation which he not
only acknowledges, but deeply venerates and heartily loves.
It may, therefore, seem, to some persons, strange that any
kind of apology should be offered for calling attention to an
important evidence of Christianity. But certain it is that
there are not a few Christians who consider that there is the
more virtue in their faith the less rational ground they have
for it, and the less they inquire for any. They acknowledge,
indeed, the necessity, for the conversion of pagans and the
refutation of infidels, of being prepared to offer some proofs
of the truth of our religion. But while they acknowledge this
necessity, they lament it; because it appears to them that to
offer proof of anything is to admit it to be doubtful; and to
produce answers to objections, implies listening to objections ;
which is painful to their feelings. They wish, therefore,
that all those who actually are believers in what they have
been told, simply because they have been told it, should
be left in that state of tranquil acquiescence, without hav-
ing their minds “ unsettled ” (that is the phrase employed)
by any attempt to give them reasons for being convinced
of that which they are already convinced of, or at least have
carelessly assented to. And with respect to Ireland in par-
ticular, I have known both Roman Catholics and Protestants
allege, that though in England there may be need to take
some precautions against infidelity, in this country no such
thing exists, nor is there any danger of its appearing. Those
who spoke so must have either been very ignorant of the


real state of things, or must have calculated on their hearers
being so. But even supposing such were the fact, it surely is
doing no great honour to our religion, to prefer that it should
be believed exactly on the same grounds that the Hindu and
Chinese Pagans believe in the abominable absurdities of their
mythology, which they embrace without inquiry and without
hesitation, simply as being the religion of their fathers. It is
not thus that men proceed in other matters. If, for instance,
there is some illustrious Statesman or General whom they
greatly admire, they are never weary of inquiring for, and
listening to, fresh and fresh details of his exploits, of the
difficulties he has surmounted, and the enterprises in which
he has succeeded; which are all so many proofs of his superior
wisdom and energy ; proofs not needed to satisfy any doubts
in their minds, but which yet they delight to bring forward and
contemplate, on account of the very admiration they feel. So,
also, they delight to mark and dwell on the constantly re-
curring proofs of the excellent and amiable qualities of some
highly valued friend ; to observe the contrast his character
presents to that of vain pretenders; and how every attempt
of enemies to blemish his reputation serves only to make his
virtues the more conspicuous.
Should it not then be also delightful to a sincere Christian
to mark, in like manner, the numberless proofs which present
themselves, that the religion he professes is not from Man but
from God, —to note the contrast it presents to all false re-
ligions devised by human folly or cunning,—and to observe
how all attempts to shake the evidence of it, tend, sooner or
later, to confirm it ?
But there are some who go a great deal further than those
I have just been alluding to. There are persons professing to
believe in Christianity, and to be anxious for its support, who
deprecate altogether any appeal to evidence for it, as likely to
lead not to conviction, but to doubt or disbelief. A writer, for


instance, in a Periodical now dropped, but which had a great
circulation among a certain party, and seems to have exercised
no small influence, maintains distinctly, and with great vehe-
mence, that our “belief ought to rest not on argument, hut
on faith; ” that is, on itself: and that an ignorant clown who
believes what he is told, simply because he is told it, (which
is precisely the foundation of the belief of the ancient hea-
thens who worshipped the great goddess Diana, and of the
Hindu idolaters of the present day,) has a “ far better ground
for his faith than anything that has ever been produced by such
authors as Grotius, and Paley, and Sumner, and Chalmers; ”
that is, that the reasons which have convinced the most intel-
ligent minds, are inferior to that which is confessedly and
notoriously good for nothing !
A writer, again, in another Periodical, deprecates and
derides all appeal to evidence in support of our faith, and
censures Baxter (whose life he was reviewing) for having
written on the subject, because the result, he assures us, will
be “ either our yielding a credulous and therefore infirm
assent, or reposing in a self-sufficient and far more hazardous
incredulity.” And he remarks, that the sacred writers
“ have none of the timidity of their modern apologists, but
authoritatively denounce unbelief as guilt, and insist on
faith as a virtue of the highest order.” The faith, according
to him, which the Apostles insisted on, was belief without
any grounds for it being set forth. Had it been so, we
should never have heard of Christianity at this day; for men
could not have been bullied by mere authoritative denuncia-
tions of guilt—coming from a few Jewish fishermen and
peasants, and resting on their bare word—into renouncing
the religion of their ancestors, in defiance of all the persecu-
tions of all their rulers and neighbours.
Timid, however, and credulous, according to the peculiar
language of this writer, the apostles and their converts cer-


tainly were, since he uses these words to denote exactly the
opposite of what every one else understands by them. A
person is usually called “ credulous,” not for believing some-
thing for good reasons, but, on the contrary, for believing
without evidence, or against evidence. And those are
generally considered as “ timorous ” who shrink from inquiry,
and deprecate as “ hazardous” all appeal to evidence; not
those who boldly court inquiry and bring forward strong
reasons, which they challenge every one either to admit or to
answer, or else to stand convicted of perversity.
And this is what our Lord and his Apostles did. They
do, indeed, inculcate faith as a virtue, and denounce unbelief
as sin ; but on what grounds do they so ? Because, says our
Lord, “if I had not done among them the works which
none other man did, they had not had sin;” because the
Apostles appealed to the resurrection of Jesus, of which they
were eye witnesses, and to the “ many infallible proofs ”
the “ signs of an Apostle,” as they called them —consisting
of the miracles wrought by themselves; and because they
made unanswerable appeals to the ancient prophecies,
“ proving by the Scriptures that Jesus is the Christ.”
To maintain, in the face of the whole New Testament
history, which is in most people’s hands, and which many
know almost by heart, that the Apostles demanded faith
without offering any reason for it, is an instance of audacity
quite astonishing. And not less wonderful is it that any
rational Being should be found, who can imagine that men’s
minds can best be satisfied by proclaiming that inquiry is
hazardous. If there were any college, hospital, workhouse,
asylum, or other institution, whose managers and patrons
assured us that it was well conducted, but that inspection
was much to be deprecated, because it would probably lead to
the conviction that the institution was full of abuses, I need
not say what inference would be drawn.


And when we are told that it shows “ timidity ” (of all
things !) to court investigation and to defy disproof, we may
be reminded of an anecdote told of some British troops, who
were acting along with some North American Indians as their
allies. When attacked by a hostile force, the Indians, accord-
ing to custom, ran off and sheltered themselves behind trees,
while the British stood firm under a heavy fire, and repulsed
the enemy. It was expected that their Indian friends would
have admired their superior valour. But their interpretation
of the matter was—that the British were too much frightened
to run away! They thought them such bad warriors as to
have been utterly paralysed by terror, and to have not had
sufficient presence of mind to provide for their safety !
More recently, a writer in another Periodical attributes
the infidelity of Gibbon (a life of whom he is reviewing)
to his having studied the Evidences of Christianity! And
he derides with the utmost scorn the extreme folly of those
who teach young persons to “ give a reason of the hope that
is in them,” or who even tell them that it is true, or allow
them to know that its truth has ever been doubted; which
is a sure way, he maintains, to make them disbelieve it!
Such writers as these must either be themselves marvel-
lously ignorant, or must trust to their readers being so, not
only of Scripture, but of all history, ancient and modern.
For, no one can read the New Testament (attending at all to
the sense of what he reads) without learning that “some
believed the things that were spoken by Paul, and some be-
lieved not; ” and that this was what took place everywhere,
among both Jews and Gentiles. And the like takes place
still, and must be known ; since people cannot, in these days,
be so completely debarred from all knowledge of history as
not to hear of the French at the Kevolution abjuring Christi-
anity, and of multitudes of their priests professing unbelief.
The passages I have referred to are, I am sorry to say, only


a few out of many, and have been noticed merely as specimens.
Many more might have been produced, in the same tone, some
of them from authors of considerable repute.
It is to be wished that such writers, if they really have
that regard for Christianity which they profess, and if they have
written as they have, not from insidious designs, but from
mere ignorance and error of judgment, should, in the first
place, read attentively the New Testament, that they may see
how utterly contrary to the fact are all the statements they
have made. And, in the next place, I would wish one of
these writers to consider what he would think of some pro-
fessed friend coming forward as his advocate, and saying,
“My friend here is a veracious and worthy man, and there
is no foundation for any of the charges brought against him;
and his integrity is fully believed in by persons who thoroughly
trust him, and who have never thought of examining his
character at all, or inquiring into his transactions ; but, of all
things, do not make any investigation into his character; for
be assured that the more you examine and inquire, the less
likely you will be to be satisfied of his integrity.”
No one can doubt what would be thought of such a pre-
tended friend. And no reasonable man can fail, on reflection,
to perceive that such professed friends of our religion as those
I have been speaking of, do more to shake men’s faith in it
than all the attacks of all the avowed infidels in the world
put together.
And next, I would have them look to the deplorable fruits,
of various kinds, which their system, of deprecating the use of
reason, and thus hiding under a bushel the lamp which Provi-
dence has kindly bestowed on Man, has produced, in its unfor-
tunate victims. Some, not a few, have listened to the idle tales of
crazy enthusiasts, or crafty impostors, who gabbled unmeaning
sounds, which they profanely called the “ gift of tongues; ”
or who pretended to have discovered in a cave a new book of


Scripture, called the “ Book of Mormon,” and which they
assure their deluded followers contains a divine revelation.
And they are believed (why not ?) by those who have not
only never heard of any reason why our Scripture should
be received, but have been taught that it is wrong to seek for
any, and that they ought to believe whatever they are told.
Others, again, have been strongly assured that Traditions
are of equal authority with Scripture ; and this they believe
because they are earnestly assured of it; which is the only
ground they ever had, or conceive themselves permitted to
have, for believing anything.
Others again, when falling in with some infidel, find that
he does urge something which at least pretends to be an
argument, and that they have nothing to urge on the opposite
side ; and having, moreover, been taught that inquiry is fatal
to belief in their religion, they conclude at once that the
whole of it is a fable, which even its advocates seem to ac-
knowledge will not bear the test of examination.
Finally, then, I would entreat any one of those mistaken
advocates I have been speaking of, to imagine himself con-
fronted at the Day of Judgment with some of those misled
people, and to consider what answer he would make if these
should reproach him with the errors into which they have
fallen. Let him conceive them saying, “ You have, through
false and self-devised views of expediency—in professed imi-
tation of the sacred writers, but in real contradiction to their
practice,—sent forth us, your weak brethren —made weaker
by yourself —as 1 sheep among wolves/ provided with the
‘ harmlessness of the dove/ but not with the ‘ wisdom of the
serpent/—unfurnished with the arms which God’s gifts of
Scripture and of Season would have supplied to us, and
purposely left naked to the assaults of various enemies. Our
blood is on your head. You must be accountable for out-
fall.”


31508023237292


V ! >
-v *T • ‘ '’*'*/(• . v.V ‘ i i, T>. y*, ■'; ''' 4 ‘ * ‘ ’ ' * A
;.; v'-;-' :; .. yp pW- ' V;f : :M
pp '■■.^^yv;;U:' : 3r T 5'^■■
• '. ' ' * r "’f' '. ’-" V'» - .• • . ,: f \> * -*'• -5b.'- * /** ► .. I''" ‘ -
v» y *. . *■ $ * * , '$ a £ * Jr * ,
ii< * *’ •'*■, ’ <4 } - t "■« * ' . ;--*r o .'/;.
*“ -2 *■' f 5 & I ft I ./ t/ M p ‘ 1
- 1 ■ .■ ' . ,s * A' 1 : ' ■ - :
Is ■ r ' ' - ' - ' I , (I : : ■ « ' v , ■■- A , ' ■ ■ ’ /
£ - „ '< W t ■"'.: ' - : '■ y -. J , : 'a> -= : - ~y.
' A; j y *i >* ■*“' ■' , v '>'.■ ,’ ••’ •• -' > <*• ' -•: ■ . ,» Jl i
: Jif ,, ■: - , . t y ,> S ' * ■ ; ’. 'wA. I “ -, .. : . A '■.'■Sv 1 .>Jr -", V- kj. < v -'
V-; v -. .:..■ • ,„ ■■-^'f•^,■ :,
I
i
