





ON THE
TREATMENT OF CONVICTS
IN THE
HULKS AT WOOLWICH.
[From the LONDON MEDICAL GAZETTE, August 27, and Sept. 3, 1847.]




REMARKS ON THE
REPORT ON THE TREATMENT OF CONVICTS
IN THE
HULKS AT WOOLWICH.
[From the London Medical Gazette, August 27, 1847.]
Our readers will probably remember,
that in January last, Mr. Buncombe,
as a member of the House of Commons,
brought forward certain charges of
cruelty and neglect against the medi-
cal officer of the Hulks at Woolwich.*
Eight cases were specially enumerated ;
and after entering into the most re-
volting details respecting them, the
honourable gentleman said that “con-
duct more brutal (than that of Mr.
Bossey) could not possibly be de-
scribed or conceived.” Before pro-
ceeding to lay before our readers the
result of the recent investigation in-
stituted by Government, we are desirous
of putting on record some other state-
ments made at this period by Mr.
Buncombe. It is not a question which
affects Mr. Bossey merely, but it in-
volves all those members of the pro-
fession who have the misfortune to
hold Government appointments. They
will perceive, as we stated in our
former article, how easily the reputa-
tion of a medical officer may he da-
maged,—nay, irretrievably ruined, by
privileged ex parte statements ; —and
* See our last volume, p. 239.
how little he can hope for redress in
the event of his innocence being
proved,—either from the “honourable”
member who acts as accuser, or from
the .Government, to whom he has a
right to look for protection.
During the discussion which took
place in the House of Commons on the
29ih of January last, Sir George Grey
expressed his disbelief that a gentle-
man, holding the office of surgeon,
could be guilty of the conduct which
had been alleged against him; and
another honourable member, probably
having some misgivings from the re-
sult of former popular accusations
made by Mr. Buncombe, said that
the “ honourable member for Finsbury
was occasionally in the habit of making
adcaptandum statements, which, upon
investigation, did not appear to he so
well founded as they ought to he.” This,
as we shall see hereafter, was a very
mild parliamentary way of suggesting
a doubt respecting the truth of Mr.
Buncombe’s charges; and the neces-
sity for this caution in receiving ex-
parte statements, has been, we think,
most fully justified by the evidence
given at the recent investigation


was intimated to Mr. Buncombe that
there should have been a private com-
munication with Government in the
first instance, in order that the matter
might be inquired into, before grave
charges, involving ruin to the repu-
tation of a medical officer, were publicly
made in a privileged place, and circu-
lated in a privileged form by what
are called “ the ordinary channels of
information”: —but this does not appear
to have suited the purpose of the hon.
member. He said, “ all that the house
had a right to require from a member
was, that he should make out a prima
facie case for inquiry : if the inquiry
failed to substantiate his statement, the
disgrace must rest with him.” * *
An hon. member {Sir W. James) had
alleged that his statements were not
borne out by facts, when they were
submitted to investigation. “ Now no
one could take more pains than he did,
to ascertain the truth of the cases which
were brought before the house.” On
a subsequent occasion we find the
honourable gentleman using the fol-
lowing language : “ he could say, with
regard to the statements he felt it his
duty to make to the house, that he had
understated his case (hear, hear) —that
a complaint was made against him that
he had only half-stated the cruelty
with which those persons were treated.”
* * * He repeated, “ he was
prepared to prove all he had stated as
to the treatment of those convicts, if
the house would give him a committee,
or put him on a commission of inquiry
fairly, honestly, and impartially con-
stituted, to investigate the case.”
Waiving, for the present, the question
whether a commission can ever be fair,
honest, or impartial, at which an ac-
cuser, who has already prejudged a
case, is allowed to be present as one of
the judges, we shall proceed to try Mr.
Buncombe’s allegations by his own
standard. Medical men who hold
government appointments will thereby
have a good opportunity of learning
what is the Parliamentary prima facies
of a case for inquiry into the profes-
sional treatment of their patients. The
physicians and surgeons of our nu-
merous prisons and Poor Law Unions
may hereby learn to appreciate the
true nature of one branch of Parlia-
mentary privilege,— i. e. of circulating,
by means of the daily press, charges
which, if published by members in
their private capacity, would infal-
libly expose them to an action for
libel with the certainty of heavy
damages,—and of escaping scot-free
from all responsibility in the event of
these charges turning out to be false
and unfounded. An hon. member has
only to volunteer to take upon himself
“ the disgrace” that would result from
a failure in substantiating his state-
ment ; he has only to declare that he
had understated his case—that he had
but half-stated the cruelty, &c.: the
daily press, privileged in this respect,
has then merely to circulate the libel-
lous charges; and when the Parlia-
mentary report is published, the ho-
nourable accuser and the daily press
have only coolly to pass the matter
over without apology, retractation, or
explanation, and the matter is at an
end ! The public think much more of
the charges originally made, than of
the disgrace which ought to fall on
the person who fails to prove them, or
of the unfair dealing of the conduc-
tors of those journals who circulate
the libels, but refuse to do common
justice by publishing the results of a
Government inquiry.
In entering upon this question, we
wish to state at once, that the Govern-
ment report shews the necessity for
great improvements in the medical and
moral management of the convicts at
the Hulks. It would be altogether
foreign to our purpose to examine the


copious details which are here spread
over 509 folio pages, and are comprised
in the answers made by the various
witnesses to 13,326 questions ! This
is not the question before us. We have
at present merely to deal with Mr. Dun-
combe’s charges against the medical
officer, Mr. Bossey. On a former occa-
sion*, before this inquiry was com-
menced, we stated our firm conviction,
from the prima facies of the case upon
which Mr. Duncombe relied for a con-
trary result, that the medical officer
would be able to prove that these
charges were false, scandalous, and
unfounded ; and that his secret accuser
(a discontented convict) was not a
person upon whose testimony any
Court of Justice, or Committee of
Inquiry, would rely. We shall leave
our readers to judge how far our pre-
dictions have been borne out by the
official report.
We may premise that Captain Wil-
liams, the Inspector of Prisons, who
was appointed to conduct this inquiry,
was evidently, from the report, much
more favourably disposed to Mr. Dun-
combe than to Mr. Bossey. While he
admits that the charges are unfounded,
and therefore that Mr. Bossey has been
most unjustly accused, he, as it appears
to us, goes out of his way as a judge, to
compliment Mr. Duncombe, “ for the
courtesy and deference personally
evinced to him !” Mr. Duncombe was
allowed to watch the case for the prose-
cution, and to examine and cross-exa-
mine witnesses as he pleased. The medi-
cal officer was no match for his accuser
in this respect; and Captain Williams
sternly refused an application made by
Mr. Bossey to be permitted to employ
counsel; although the whole case rested
upon the credibility of witnesses and
the consistency or inconsistency of their
statements ! It must be obvious that
an astute man, by no means unac-
* Vol. iv. N. S. p. 237.
quainted with the technicalities of the
law, and possessing the power of se-
lecting his witnesses and arranging
the evidence in the best light, would
have an immense advantage over a
professional man wholly unskilled in
these matters. Sir George Grey and
Captain Williams conceded every pos-
sible advantage to Mr. Duncombe, by
allowing him, not only a full power of
examining any witnesses he pleased in
his own way, but of calling for books,
papers, records, returns, and even of
suggesting any matter of inquiry !
If, with all these advantages, he was
obliged to abandon his statements one
after the other, and his principal wit-
ness and convict correspondent, Wil-
liam Mawman Brown, was, in the end,
proved guilty of falsehood and ma-
licious misrepresentation, we think it
must be pretty clear that the prima
fades of a case for a parliamentary
charge tending to ruin the reputation
of a medical officer may be very
slight indeed 1
The first part of the case which we
propose to examine, is that in which
Mr. Bossey was accused by Mr. Dun-
combe with falsifying the medical
returns of mortality. In his place in
Parliament, on the 28th January last,
the hon. member said—
“ Prom all the reports which he (Mr.
Duncombe) had received, it appeared
that the cruelty exercised was so ex-
cessive, the medical treatment was so
brutal, the manner in which the pri-
soners were treated when alive, as well
as when dead, was such, that it was
utterly disgraceful to a civilised and
Christian country. Credit was taken
in the returns for a mortality in 1845
of only 11 prisoners from Milbank
Prison, which was contrasted with the
mortality in the Penitentiary of Phila-
delphia and in Milbank Prison. But,
from a return which had been laid
upon the table of the House that
morning, it appeared that instead of 11
prisoners dying in 1845 on board the
Warrior, which was a convict ship as


well as the Justitia, there were 28 who
died in that year from Milbank Prison
alone. Yet Mr. Bossey took credit for
the smaller number. How did it hap-
pen that such a case as this had not
been discovered before?”
We need hardly say, that to publicly
charge a medical officer, employed
under Government, with misstating in
his official returns, the mortality among
those who were placed under his care,
is about as grave an accusation as could
well be made. This matter was fully
inquired into, and Captain Williams
reports upon it in the following
terms: —
11 This allegation, attributing a wilful
misstatement of the mortality to Mr.
Bossey, is unfounded ; it has its origin
in a misapprehension on the part of Mr.
Buncombe, of the Reports made by
Mr. Bossey to the Superintendent,
dated January 24, 1846, the particulars
of which will be found at page 373.”*
On turning to page 3/3, we find the
facts clearly enough detailed, easily
intelligible to one who has only an
ordinary acquaintance with decimals
and statistics ; and it is stated by Mr.
Bossey in his evidence, —“ Mr. Bun-
combe has since accepted my explana-
tion of its correctness.”
We have here a specimen of the pains
takenby Mr. Buncombe to ascertain the
truth, before making and causing to be
circulated through the public press,
such a serious accusation. A previous
communication with Mr. Bossey,or even
with Sir George Grey, would j ust as easily
have removed Mr. Buncombe’s mis-
apprehension, as the inquiry instituted
by Captain Williams! It is also a fair
representation of the mode in which a
case may be understated in the House
* Report, p. xiv.
of Commons ! Some men may, it is
true, easily mistake the results of statis-
tical inquiries, and, in consequence,
bring charges against others which
may prove to have no other foundation
than in their own misapprehension of
the facts. When, how r ever, they pos-
sess the power of working such infinite
mischief, by leading to the privileged
circulation through the daily press of
the most injurious statements, it be-
hoves them to use especial caution in
making them; and if perchance they
have been led into error, and have
thus inflicted injury on a professional
man, it appears to us that they are
bound in honour to make an ample
retractation in as public a manner as the
charge was made. Has Mr. Bossey’s
accuser done this with regard to the
alleged falsified returns which were
thus proved and admitted by himself,
some months since, to be true ? The
answer is, that in this, as in the other
cases which we have yet to bring before
our readers, he allowed the session of
Parliament to close without acknow-
ledging his mistake, or offering any
apology whatever to the medical officer,
whom he had thus publicly wronged !
The daily press has been silent on the
subject, as the popular side of the ques-
tion appears to be that which supposes
that these horrors are really perpetrated
by medical men in convict-prisons and
poor-law unions ! Under these circum-
stances, it appears to us to be the duty
of the medical press to place the facts
in their true light. When a gross
injury has been inflicted even upon
the most humble member of the pro-
fession, he has a right to expect that
support against injustice, which it is in
the power of the medical press to afford.
We shall return to this subject in the
following number.


REMARKS ON THE EVIDENCE
ON THE
MEDICAL TREATMENT OE CONVICTS
AT WOOLWICH.
[From the London Medical Gazette, September 3, 1847.]
In resuming our examination of Cap-
tain Williams’s Report, in so far as it
relates to the charges against the me-
dical officer of the hulks at Woolwich,
we propose to consider seriatim the
various cases of savage cruelty and
barbarous neglect which Mr. Dun-
combe described as “ utterly disgrace-
ful to a civilized and Christian coun-
try.”
Mr. Duncombe’s Charge.
1. “George Monk, or Taylor, belong-
ing to the ‘Warrior,’ a lunatic ; he was
admitted on board with a broken leg;
he was allowed to lie in bed in his own
water and filth until such time as a
large piece fell out, putrid with his
urine, from the bottom of his back-
bone; he was sometimes handcuffed
to each side of the iron bed which he
lay on, at other times with a strait
jacket on; he, if he were living, bore
the mark on his back. This man was
afterwards removed to Bethlehem.”
Captain Williams's Report.
1. “Case of George Monk. The
evidence on this case does not in any
may support the charge of neglect or
cruelty. George Monk was a lunatic,
and was in the hospital in consequence
of having broken his leg by accident.
His violence and restlessness under
treatment were so great that he on one
occasion displaced the fractured bone,
and the surgeon was obliged to place
him under restraint; handcuffs and
other means being resorted to, to secure
him from impeding his own cure. He
was for a time unable to attend to his
personal wants, and appears to have
had a bed-sore on the bach; but there
is no evidence to prove this arose from
neglect. The witness, George Rush-
worth, page 72, question 2625, who
was over him as nurse for three
months, and gives a somewhat exag-
gerated description of the case, says,
‘ I took to him, and every time he
dirtied himself I used to clean him
and get him a clean bed.’ The con-
vict recovered from the effects of the
accident, and was sent to Bethlehem,
where he undoubtedly ought to have
been removed before the accident
occurred.”
We predicted in February last* al-
most in terminis what would be the
result of an inquiry into this case, and
then said, “ Let those surgeons who
have henceforth to deal with intracta-
ble bed-sores in lunatic patients, where
the case may be complicated with in-
continence of urine, or great difficulty
in enforcing cleanliness, —tremble for
the result!”
* Vol. iv. N. S. p. 240.


Mr. Buncombe's Charge.
2. “ An old man of the name of
Peter Bailey. When Mr. Perry called,
he told Mr. Bossey that the poor man
ought to be sent home, and they passed
on to other prisoners. This poor man
got daily worse; he asked Mr. Bossey
if he could see a religious person be-
longing to his own persuasion. He
asked him what that was. He told
him he belonged to the Wesleyan
Methodists, and Mr. Bossey said,
laying great stress on his words, ‘ What
brought you here ?’ He then began to
relate a life of the most simple nature,
at which Bossey began to laugh.
‘ Sir,’ said he, ‘ you have more occasion
to pity me than to laugh at me.’
Bossey turned round to him and said
to him, ‘ It is of no use your imagining
that you will ever go home, for home
you will never see; you will die on
that bed you are lying on; for, were
your friends at the gates of the Arsenal,
they might come to see you; that
would be all the consolation you should
derive.’ He died a few days after-
wards. I called to see him the Friday
before he died; he told me that he had
a pain at his heart ever since Mr.
Bosaey’s conversation with him, and
said, ‘ He has broke my heart.’ ”
Captain Williams’s Report.
2. “ Case of Peter Bailey. — Much
evidence has been adduced on this
allegation, but I come to the conclusion
that Peter Bailey was heated with
kindness, and received every attention
from Mr. Bossey. The circumstances
which gave rise to this case are to be
regretted, but they w r ere accidental,
and peculiarly liable to misconstruc-
tion. Mr. Perry, the Inspector of
Prisons, on an occasion of his visiting
the hospital ship, the ‘ Unite,’ observed
the declining appearance of Peter
Bailey, and, in his hearing, said to Mr.
Bossey, ‘ This poor man ought to be
sent home.’ These words appear to
have made a very strong impression
upon this man’s mind, no doubt more
than ordinarily susceptible and irrita-
ble from disease; and, on his finding
that no result followed this observation
of Mr. Perry, he seems to have taken
it greatly to heart, and to have made
it the frequent subject of conversation
with his fellow-prisoners, attributing
his not receiving a pardon to Mr.
Bossey, saying that he had broken his
heart. The surgeon, in not recom-
mending Peter Bailey for discharge,
appears to have acted in this case upon
the same general principle which
governed him in others, that it was not
the custom of the establishment to
apply for the liberation of aged, in-
firm, or sick prisoners, until they had
served one half of their terms of trans-
portation. With respect to the charge
of Mr. Bossey having intended to
mock, or of his having used derisive
language to this prisoner, I consider it
quite groundless. The surgeon, well
aware that the convict’s hopes of liberty
were not likely to be realised, appears
to have endeavoured to convince him
of their futility, and to reconcile him
to his situation, and, being of the same
religious persuasion, a Wesleyan me-
thodist, he interested himself more than
ordinarily, by procuring for him the
attendance of a minister of that sect.”
Mr. Buncombe’s Charge,
3. “ The next man that came under
my notice was William Theobald,
belonging to the ‘ Justitia.’ This man
was subject to epileptic fits, besides
great weakness of body. Mr. Bossey
called one day when he was in a fir,
and said, ‘He should soon cure him.’
He ordered a bucket of water to be
brought to him ; he got upon his bed,
he ordered a tin to be given him, and
he commenced pouring the water on
his head, which had no effect. The
next day he saw him, and told him he
should have him well flogged if he
found him in any such fits as those
again. He died on the 31st of July,
1844. The diet that he was receiving
at the time of his death was three pints
of skim milk, and three-quarters of a
pound of bread.”
Captain Williams’s Report.
3. “ Case of William Theobald. —
The evidence given in this case appears
to me to establish that the medical
treatment of William Theobald by the
surgeon was judicious and proper, and
the allegation of his threatening to have
the prisoner flogged if he saw him in
such fits again, is unsupported, and
appears, under the circumstances,
improbable.
Mr. Buncombe’s Charge.
4. “ The next was James Brandish,


a maniac. This man was admitted
while in a fit, roaring out very lustily.
This was his second time of admission
into the hospital. When 1 saw him,
he was shouting out on each occasion.
The first time when Mr. Bossey saw
him he began to laugh at him, and
told him ‘ Those fits would not do
there.’ Brandish had a fit after this,
which appeared to deprive him of the
power of opening his jaws. Bossey
placed his thumb on his cheek and
pressed against his teeth; he then
opened his mouth. Bossey began to
laugh, and said, ‘ It’s all gammon, Mr.
Brandish. I will have you well flogged
if you don’t alter your course of con-
duct. I will have you sent to the
Justitia, and well flogged.’ After the
doctor went away I examined his
mouth, and I found that his cheek w'as
cut opposite where he pressed it with
his thumb. They frequently hand-
cuffed his hands to each side of the
bed, and kept him lying in this posi-
tion in his dirt and water until a large
piece mortified out of the bottom part
of his back, about the same place as
that of George Monk. He became
completely childish. The doctor fre-
quently threatened to have him flogged.
He allowed him wine before he died,
a part of which he took off a few days
before his death, with his usual threat
of having him flogged. He died Octo-
ber 6, 1844.”
Captain Williams’s Report.
4. “ Case of James Brandish. —This
case has occupied a considerable por-
tion of time and attention, and from
the period which has elapsed, it being
nearly three years since the man died,
and the contradictory character of the
testimony, it is somewhat difficult to
arrive at a just conclusion.
“James Brandish was admitted into
hospital with epileptic fits, first in
April, 1844, and several times subse-
quently until his death, which hap-
pened in the October of the same
year. He appears, on his first recep-
tion at the hulks from Millbank, to
have been of weak intellect, bordering
upon insanity; which gradually in-
creased with the frequency of his fits.
Mr. Bossey seems to have doubted
whether the indications of insanity
were not assumed. Whether in form-
ing such an opinion he acted with dis-
crimination and judgment, is a ques-
tion which could only be answered by
a professional view of the case at the
time. The patient, however, continued,
with the exception of short intervals, to
sink under the influence of his attacks,
becoming gradually more imbecile and
helpless, and was at last reduced to a
state of insensibility, being wholly de-
pendent upon the attention of the
nurses and officers for the commonest
offices. During his paroxysms it
seems that his mouth was frequently
closed, and that it became necessary to
employ means to open it, and I cannot
find that the surgeon in so doing used
the slightest unnecessary violence, but,
on the contrary, rather evinced pro-
fessional dexterity. With respect to
the allegation of James Brandish
having been neglected, it is esta-
blished that Mr. Bossey, when visit-
ing the patient on one occasion,
found him in a very neglected condi-
tion as to personal cleanliness; and
Mr. Blyth, the assistant-surgeon, in
his examination relative to Brandish’s
case, is asked the following ques-
tions :
“ ‘ 3854. Have you any recollection
of there being any disputes between
Mr. Phillips and Mr. Bossey upon the
subject of this man ?—I have a recol-
lection of Mr. Bossey being very angry
with everybody about him, but his
anger was specially directed to the
master of the hospital.
“‘ 3855. As tohisneglectingßrandish ?
—Yes; but that he had been neglected
for a week I can safely say is impos-
sible. I believe so.
“ ‘ 3856. You do not know ?—No, I
do not know.
“ ‘ 3857. You perfectly recollect the
circumstance of Mr. Bossey being very
angry with Mr. Phillips and the master
of the vessel for neglecting this pri-
soner ?—Yes, I do.’
“ The fact of James Brandish having
been neglected when in the hospital
admits of no doubt; and that the
neglect was not of a trifling nature
may also be assumed from the evi-
dence of the convicts, making allow,
ance for some exaggeration, and the
degree of anger it seems to have
elicited at the time from Mr. Bossey.
The responsibility for the proper treat-
ment of all the patients in the hospital
devolving upon the principal medical


officer, he is no doubt answerable for
this neglect.’ ”
Mr. Duncomhe’s Charge.
5. “The next was William Cooper;
he was nurse in the hospital. I wall
here state how the office of nurse is
fulfilled. On a man being admitted to
the hospital, he is put on what is termed
low diet, which consists of eight
ounces of bread, two pints of tea, and
one pint of mutton soup. This is his
diet for the day. The medicine which
is prescribed for all diseases when they
enter is a purging draught and a
calomel pill. The patient is then
confined to his bed for three or four
days perhaps, when Bossey pro-
nounces him to be recovering. He
then orders him to get up, and make
himself useful as a nurse in waiting
on the other patients, and keeping
watch at night. Those watches sit up
all night, three of them taking it in
turns, and dividing the watch into
two hours and a half each. At this
time the poor man perhaps is not
able to walk, which I have frequently
seen the case, the nurse often worse
than the patient whom he is attending.
This Cooper was one of these nurses.
When he arrived at the hulks he was
bad with a liver complaint, which
was swollen to an enormous size. It
projected two inches. I heard Bossey
tell some young men, who, I believe,
were his and his brother’s apprentices,
that there was a bag of matter lying
in the pit of his stomach, and he
then ordered him to lie down on a
bed, and to strip his breast; when he
commenced knocking and squeezing
it, his sides and breast, but in par-
ticular that part where he said the bag
of matter was. The next day this
poor man was unable to get up. He
complained bitterly to me of the treat-
ment that Bossey gave him in bruising
and pinching him in the way that he
did, and he ever after complained
of the pain that he endured from that
pinching. He said he believed that
Bossey wanted to break that bag of
matter which he had described to his
apprentices. He died shortly after.”
Captain Williams’s Report.
5. “Case of William Cooper. —No
evidence has been adduced in support
of this allegation, Mr. Duncombe
having stated that his informant had
been discharged from the hulks, and
his attendance not procurable. The
statement of the surgeon, p. 369,
which appears reasonable, must be
admitted as a full and exculpatory
explanation of the circumstances of the
case.”
This case, upon which Mr. Dun-
combe was unable to adduce any evi-
dence in support of the charge of
manslaughter which it involves, is of
some interest to those professional
attendants of hospitals, and persons
who are foolish enough to aid their
diagnosis of disease by percussion or
palpation. In the House of Com-
mons, where medical men are not
admitted, this mode of examination
will easily pass for knocking and
squeezing, pinching and bruising, &c.,
—the surgeon, of course, selecting for
these operations the “ bags of matter,”
and other parts of the body, where
the patient happens to be most sensi-
tive ! The result of this case, there-
fore, is, that Mr. Duncombe is unable
to prove one iota of his allegation, and
Mr. Bossey, in his evidence, declares
emphatically that the whole charge is
false.* The statement implies, primd,
facie, gross ignorance, and a malicious
desire to exaggerate facts, on the part
of the pretended witness of these
alleged barbarous proceedings.
Mr. Dnncnmbe’s Charge.
6. “ Henry Heighten. —Treated for
six months for consumption, and kept
from the hospital to the last moment.
When on his death-bed, he was ordered
out to work, which he declared he
was unable to do. Mr. Bossey threat-
ened him wdth punishment. He got
up, and in a few hours death eased
him of his troubles. In his last mo-
ments he declared he was a 1 murdered
man.’ He entered the hospital on the
25th of May, and died the 9th of June,
1846—15 days.”
Captain Williams’s Report.
6. “ Case of Henry Heighten. —The
* Report, p. 370.


case of Henry Heighten has been
satisfactorily traced from its com-
mencement on the 12th of March,
1846, when he was admitted into
hospital as a case of fever, discharged
on the 22d of April, re-admitted May
25th, to its final termination in his
decease on the 9th J une in the same
year.”
The statement that Henry Heighten
was treated for six months for con-
sumption is incorrect, nor has the alle-
gation that he was kept from the hos-
pital to the last moment, been supported,
by evidence. The assertion, that when
on his death-bed he was ordered out
to work, which he was unable to do,
is unfounded, as also of the surgeon
threatening him with punishment, or
his getting up and declaring in his
last moments he was a murdered man.
The charge of his being ordered out to
work, appears to have arisen from the
improper practice of employing patients
in the hospital as watches and nurses
over the sick. Robert Ellis, a convict,
states, that the clerk or the doctor’s
mate, both convicts, ordered Heighten
out of bed as a watch, when he was
unable to perform his duty. It does
not, however, appear, even if this was
the case, that he attempted the duty,
and it is quite clear he was neither
punished nor threatened with punish-
ment for his non-compliance. Th s
man’s case appears to have received
every attention jrom the hands of the
medical officers.
Mr. Buncombe's Charge.
7. “ Henry Driver (Milbank pri-
soner.)—Bied through similar treat-
ment ; said to be a schemer by Bossey-
Entered the hospital the 21st of May>
died the 26th of May, 1846—four days.
This unhappy wretch had no soonet
departed this life, than the body, still
warm, was carried over to the dead-
house, and the knife at work, operating
and dissecting. Entrails taken from
the body, and thrown into the river,
where dozens had gone before. When
the dissection was over, the vacuum
was filled up with flannel, and then
sewn up for the jury to sit on.”
Captain Williams’s Report.
7. “ Case of Henry Driver. —The
allegation that the post-mortem exami-
nation of Henry B'river took place the
day he died, is disproved by direct
evidence of its having been performed
in the morning of the day succeeding
his decease. The statement that his
entrails were taken from the body and
thrown into the river, where dozens had
gone before, is greatly exaggerated,
and the surgeon’s explanation may be
received as nearer the truth.
From this we learn, that the “ en-
trails ” referred to by Mr. W. M.
Brown, Mr. Buncombe’s convict-
witness, consisted of the washings
of blood, and some portions of fibri-
nous effusion, removed during the
inspection (1252-5.) It appears that in
this case there were extensive layers
of lymph. Our readers will perceive
that this is no more than would have
been thrown away at the inspection of
a private patient. The case strongly
proves the impropriety of allowing
convicts to be present at a post-mortem
examination : if evil-disposed, a fine
ad captandum case may, as in this in-
stance, be got up for the House of
Commons 1 Captain Williams’s report
proves that Brown’s statement is false
from beginning to end. (p. xi.)
We pass over the two remaining
charges, as they refer to cases of im-
proper punishment, for the infliction*
of which Mr. Bossey is not responsible.
The charges being thus proved to
be unfounded, by the report of a gen-
tleman, who received from Mr. Bun-
combe, during the enquiry, “the
greatest courtesy and deference,’’ the
only inference which it appears to us
can be fairly drawn is, that a gross
libel has been extensively circulated
to the prejudice of Mr. Bussey’s cha-
racter as medical officer, and that the
law affords him no redress, and the
Government, as it appears, no pro-
tection.
Let us put the case that Mr. Bun-
combe had published these statements
respecting Mr. Bossey in a daily news-
paper, upon his own responsibility,


and unprotected by his parliamentary
privilege. Mr. Bossey would then have
been able to meet him fairly in an arena
where justice would be done, i. e. in
a Court of Law. The want of power
to produce evidence in support of an
allegation of manslaughter, and the
misapprehension of decimals and sta-
tistical facts, would, we believe, avail
nothing before the Court of Queen’s
Bench. The judge would tell the jury
that a man’s character was not to be
damaged, and his professional pros-
pects were not to he ruined, because
the defendant chose to rely upon the
hear-say statements of convicted fe-
lons ; and we have no doubt that the
verdict of a jury would show, by
heavy damages, that greater caution
should be used before such injurious
imputations were cast upon professional
men!
There is no probability, however,
that the matter will be thus settled, —
still it may be as well to look to
some parts of the evidence of Mr.
Duncombe’s principal witness W.
Mawman Brown. There is an old
legal adage, “ in re lupanari testes
lupanares and the quotation, which
we are about to give from his evi-
dence, will, we think, show that it is
justly applicable to this witness. Mr.
Brown, the inventor of the atrocities
regarding which we have already
quoted Captain Williams’s report, was
convicted of forgery in 1843, and sen-
tenced for twelve years. It appears,
that this man was in the habit of se-
cretly taking notes, in pencil, of the
treatment and medicines prescribed,
from the hospital-book, and of com-
municating these, with his own com-
ments, to honourable men. He in-
forms us that “ he had marked the
dates, and honourable men would
take his word.” (question 41.) Mr. R.
Capper states in his evidence that
“ Brown acknowledges that Dr. Bossey
treated him kindly, and that he had
been deceived by other prisoners. He
said that Dr. Bossey had accused a
prisoner, of the name of Driver, of
scheming (see case 7); that the man
was taken into the hospital, and died
five or six days afterwards ; that while
in the hospital himself, he never saw
any harsh treatment, and never heard
a fellow-prisoner complain of Dr.
Bossey.” (question 54.) We will now
compare this with Brown’s own state-
ment to Captain Williams. [The italics
are our own.]
“320. Make your statement. For
some considerable time, for some
months, I should say, since last May,
I have noticed Mr. Bossey’s ill-treat-
ment to the general body of the pri-
soners, and I made notes and memo-
randums. Those notes and memoran-
dums are to be had, but they are not
in the ship.
321. 111-treatment of the convicts ?
General neglect and ill-treatment to
the convicts.
322. Where are your notes ? I have
sent them away.
323. To whom? To a party outside.
324. What is his name P I could
not tell you till I saw the prisoner; he
had them in the ironing-house: when
we found there was a search going to
he made for all the memorandum-books.
I sent them out.
325. What is the prisoner’s name ?
Butler, one of the washing-men, George
Butler.
326. He has the notes now ? I told
him to send them away, but I have not
seen him since.
327. You have given information to
Mr. Buncombe relative to the case of
Henry Heighten (Case 6), a prisoner,
who died in the hospital on the 9th
of June, 1846, have you not ? Yes.
328. Are you yourself cognizant of
the truth of those statements or not,
or do you derive them from , other
prisoners P I have taken them from
that book ( pointing to a hook on the
table).
329. Are the facts which you have
stated to Mr. Buncombe relative to the
treatment of Heighten, facts which
you have ascertained yourself, or from
any other prisoner ? The statement I


have given relative to Henry Heighten,
with reference to what occurred while
he was at this ship, comes from my
own personal knowledge; what trans-
pired at the hospital, is from what was
reported to me.
334. Relate what took place in this
ship with respect to Henry Heighton.
That as far back as January he was
ailing then, and that Mr. Bossey
attended to him, and sent him once or
twice to the hospital; he was there a
short time, and he came back worse
than when he went.
331. Had you any conversation with
him ? Yes.
332. What did he state to you. He
told me always he was a dying man ;
he never said he was a murdered man :
he said he knew the doctor would be
the death of him.”
We shall next pass to the evidence
of this worthy witness respecting Mr.
Bossey’s alleged non-attendance on the
convict-patients.
“ 370. Is there any other case you
wish to give evidence upon ? I do not
know anything of Davis’s treatment;
he was taken suddenly ill; he was not
in the list at all; he died suddenly.
There are many cases that are not
down there at all. I gave you the
names of those that can state them to
you. 1 have mentioned that Doctor
Bossey was in the habit of stopping
away for some days. It was several
days in December : six days running.
371. Who were they attended by
then ? By no one; there was no one
at the hospital.
372. (Mr, Duncombe.) Not Mr.
Blyth ? Mr. Blyth was in town.
373. (Captain Williams.) How do
you know that he did not attend ?
Because I took notes, and made memo-
randums from the Medical Officer’s
Rough Entry Book.
374. Did you affix a mark to this book
every day that Mr. Bossey did not
attend P Yes.
475. Give the dates on which you say
Mr. Bossey did not attend the ‘ Justitia.’
November 24th, 25th, 26th, 27th, 28th,
and 30th ; December Ist, 4th, 6th, 7th,
14th, 20th, and 24th; January 15th
and 19th. I have every reason to be-
lieve that the first six days he did not
attend here, and he did not attend at
the hospital. It was remarked that
the men might die, or be taken ill in
the middle of the day, and no doctor
to attend to them.”
We may now compare this statement
with the evidence of other witnesses.
Mr. Jones, Mr. Bossey’s assistant, is
asked—
“4s9l. Have they (the convicts)
ever been left without a properly
qualified medical person to attend
them ? No ; whenever I have been
left on board Mr. Bossey has always
visited them.
4593. Do you recollect any occasion
of Mr. Bossey not visiting the ship ?
There was one day, when he was
very ill.
4594. In November last do you re-
member more than one day ? No, only
one day, and then Mr. Blyth was on
board. Mr. Bossey was very ill.
4595. Can you positively state that
Mr. Bossey attended the 27th, 28th,
29th, and 30th of November last at
the hospital ? I can positively state
that there was only one day he omitted
in November. I cannot state the day,
but only one day that he omitted to
attend, and then I took him up the
state of the prisoners from Mr. Blyth.”
Mr. Blyth, who occupies, indepen-
dently of Mr. Bossey, the post of Assist-
ant-Surgeon, says, when cross-ex-
amined by that gentleman,
“ 5599. Have you ever known me in
the habit of stopping away three days
from this vessel ? Consecutive days ?
5600. Yes. No, never since I joined
here.
5601. (Captain Williams.) Do you
mean the ‘ Justitia,’ or the hospital ?
(Mr. Bossey.) From either. (To
the witness.) Do you remember my
absence on the 24th of November last
year ? You were absent two days in
November, from illness, I think.
5602. Have you any recollection that
I visited the hospital in the month of
November last year, about the 25th,
26th, 27th, and 28th, in a state of great
weakness from illness ? Yes, perfectly.
I remember on one occasion your going
down the ladder at the ‘ Wye,’ and
you would have fallen from weakness
if Mr. Strickland had not caught you
in his arm.
5603. At that time P Some time iu
that month.


5604. Do you remember whether I
was present or absent from the ‘ Justitia’
on the 19th of January, 1847 ? I do
not recollect; the books will show.
5605. Will you refer to the book.
(The witness referred to the booh.)
Turn to December the 7th, 1846. Do
you find any entry on that day in my
handwriting? Yes, here is one.
5606. What is it? There are two:
there is one.
5607. The prescription for whom ?
The name is Mawman Brown : two
leeches to the tongue, and tonic mixture
twice a-doy.”
On comparing these statements, it
will be perceived, that Mr. Dun-
combe’s witness, who was so correct
in taking his memorandums from the
entry-book, was himself actually seen
and prescribed for on one of the days,
December 7th, 1846, on which he de-
clared the medical officer did not
attend ! This fact, however, does not
rest upon the testimony of witnesses,
who, as belonging to the medical staff,
might be supposed to be favourable to
Mr. Bossey. Here is the evidence of
the Chief Officer of the Hospital Ship,
Mr. Strickland :—■
“ It has been stated that Mr. Bossey
did not attend on certain days. Just
look at December Ist, 1846 ; did Mr.
Bossey attend that day ?—I will refer to
it. (The Witness referred to the Oc-
currence Booh.) Mr. Bossey attended,
also the assistant-surgeon.
“ Did he attend on the 4th ?—Mr.
Bossey attended, also the assistant-
surgeon.
“ On the 6th ?—The surgeon, Mr.
Bossey, attended, also the assistant-
surgeon.
“The 7th? —Mr. Bossey attended,
and also the assistant-surgeon.
“ The 14th ?—Mr. Bossey attended,
also the assistant-surgeon.
“Are you prepared to declare the
truth of those entries ?—Yes.
“To verify them?—Yes; to verify
them on oath.
“ Upon oath ?—Yes.”
It is clear, from this evidence, that
on five out of the “ six days running”
during which this witness deposed
that Mr. Bossey was absent from
his duties, he was actually present and
performing them! There was not only
the Occurrence-book to prove this, but,
if necessary, the oath of the Chief
Officer, Mr. Strickland. We cannot,
by any stretch of charity, refer this
false statement on the part of Brown
to a mistake, his feeling against
“ Bossey,” as indicated by the result
of the inquiry into his special cases
of cruelty, &c. is too apparent. Besides
he plainly declares that he “took
notes and made memorandums,” —“ he
affixed a mark to the book every day
Mr. Bossey did not attend !” and as a
conclusive fact in support of the truth
of his statement he says in his evi-
dence :—“ It was remarked that the
men might die or be taken ill in the
middle of the day, and no doctor to
attend to them.” What can be more
circumstantial than this ? How can
falsehood more strongly assume the
guise of truth? and what other in-
ference can be drawn from the facts,
than that Brown has shown himself
as expert in the invention of mali-
cious falsehoods to injure a medical
officer, as he probably was in his old
vocation of forgery ! If these state-
ments had been made on oath, it is
clear that this man might have been
indicted for perjury : yet we find him
thus boasting of his qualifications as
a witness in answer to Quest. 401, put
by Mr. Buncombe. “ I told him (Mr.
Capper) I had been twice up to London
as a witness in the highest Courts ; —in
the Court of Queen’s Bench, and Court
of Common Pleas, —and that by my
evidence alone verdicts had been ob-
tained. for the parties.” If there be
any truth in this statement, it is perhaps
just as well for the parties who gained
the verdicts, that their names were not
revealed: but we think that had the
witness given such testimony as he
gave in this case, it would have been


beyond the power of any member of
the House of Commons to have
rescued him from a conviction for
perjury.
We might proceed to point out other
parts of the evidence which show that
no reliance whatever can be placed on
this witness, but it is surely unneces-
sary. It is, we think, clear that
Mr.Bossey, in so far as these charges
are concerned, is quite exonerated by
Captain Williams’ Report. Thus we
find it explicitly stated by this gentle-
man, in his summary of the medical
treatment of the convicts;—
“ Independently of the allegations
made by Mr. Buncombe, which im-
puted cruelty to Mr. Bossey in his
medical treatment of the convicts,
other cases of a similar tendency were
brought before me and investigated ;
but in no instance do I consider that
either cruelty or harshness, in his
medical treatment of the convicts,
have been proved against him. His
general conduct appears to have been
kind, although in some instances, from
anxiety to escape imposition, he may
have imposed upon himself, in suspect-
ing imposture where real disease ex-
isted, but the numerous simulations of
disease to which medical men in charge
of penal hospital establishments are
subjected, may well palliate solitary
instances of errors in judgment, to
which men in every condition of life
are liable.”
For the defects in (be present system
of managing the Hulks, Mr. Bossey is
not fairly responsible, nor is it our
duty to enter upon this part of the
case. A medical officer has been
publicly attacked, most unjustly as it
appears to us, in his medical capacity.
The honourable gentleman who be-
came his accuser said, “ if the inquiry
failed to substantiate his statements,
the disgrace must rest with him.” He
told his incredulous hearers in the
House of Commons, that he had
“ understated the case,” —that in fact
he had “only half-stated the cruelty”
with which convicts were treated, —
that “ he was prepared to prove all he
had stated,” with respect to them, &c.
We have here brought the facts before
our readers; and we will now leave
them to judge, whether Sir Walter
James, in saying “ that the hon. mem-
ber for Finsbury was occasionally in
the habit of making ad captandum
statements, which, upon investigation,
did not turn out to be so well-founded
as they ought to be,” —was overstating
the case in favour of the medical
officer who has been made the subject
of these most unjust and calumnious
charges ! The whole of the proceed-
ings throw a curious light upon the
very unsafe position in which all
medical men, holding public appoint-
ments, are placed.
Wilson and Ogilvt, 57, Skinner Street, Snowhill, London,
