

TRANSACTIONS
OF THE
NEW ZEALAND INSTITUTE
18 9 8
[Extract from ]
I
I


-
f.
*


TEANSACTIONS
OF THE
NEW ZEALAND INSTITUTE
18 9 8
[.Extract from]


4
*


TRANSACTIONS
OF THE
NEW ZEALAND INSTITUTE,
1898
L —ZOOLOGY.
Art. I.— On the Ornithology of Neiv Zealand.
By Sir Walter L. Buller, E.C.M.G., D.Sc., F.R.S.
[Read before the Wellington Philosophical Society , 22nd November, 1898.]
Plate I.
Undoubtedly the most important ornithological event of the
year in New Zealand has been the capture of another speci-
men —only the fourth during more than half a century—of
the Takahe ( Notornis hochstetteri) . On hearing that this
valuable bird had been sent in the flesh to the Otago Museum,
I telegraphed to that institution for further information, and
immediately received the following reply from Professor
Benham: “Every particle of Notornis preserved; young
female in perfect condition, but coracoids injured.” A few
days later I received a letter from Mr. George Fenwick, the
editor of the Otago Daily Times, containing further particulars.
He says:—
“I have been very much interested in the recent capture
of a Takahe by young Ross —brother of the Te Anau-Milford
guide—and had an opportunity this morning of inspecting it.
It is a fine specimen, and realises the impression of the bird
gathered from the striking illustration in your book. The two
specimens in the South Kensington Museum are disappointing
—one of them particularly so. The better one of the two
•cannot compare with the specimen just captured, the plumage


of the latter being bright and glossy, whereas that in the
South Kensington Museum is dull. Jennings has done his
work well, the new Takahe presenting the firm, well-set-up,
striking look with which we have been made familiar by your
illustration. I hope it may be secured for the colony. I have
written to Eoss on this point, and if I make any progress will
let you know. I am posting you a copy of to-day’s Times t
with some notes on the bird and the species by Professor
Benham.”
The article referred to —in the issue of the 23rd August—
gives an interesting, popular account of Notornis and its
discovery, from which I quote the following:—
“ In size the bird is like a goose, but in colouration it re-
sembles the Pukeko; its breast is a beautiful rich dark-blue,,
becoming duller on the neck, head, abdomen, and legs. These
last are clothed with feathers for a greater distance than in
the native turkey, but they are relatively shorter and much
thicker than in the latter bird. The legs in both birds
have the scaly part, technically termed 4 tarso-metatarsus/
as well as the toes, coloured salmon-red. The feathers of the
back, wings, and tail are olive-green, with an almost metallic
lustre in certain lights ; below the short tail the feathers are
pure white. When the bird is seen from in front these colours
are at their brightest and best; seen from behind—as when
the bird is running away from the hunter—the brightness is
lost: the blue becomes dull and nearly black, the green be-
comes greenish-grey, so that if it were not for the white tail
the bird, when retreating, would be very inconspicuous in
the feeble light of the bush. This white tail-piece occurs in
the Pukeko, as well as in some mammals, such as the rabbit
and deer, but its meaning is not always obvious ; although
the general inconspicuousness to foes is diminished, yet its
recognition by friends appears to be attained thereby. The-
eyes are red-brown. But perhaps one of the most notice-
able features of the bird is its beak a great equilateral
triangle of hard pink horn, with one angle directed forwards.
At the upper side of the base of the beak is a bright-red band
of soft tissue like an attempt at a 4 comb,’ such as we get in
cocks, only transversely placed. The whole is a handsome
bird of heavy gait, absolutely unable to use its wings for their
natural purpose of flying. Indeed, one of the interests, zoo-
logically, is that, like several of our native birds, it is flight-
less, while its congeners in other countries are endued with
powers of flight. The Takahe is closely allied to the Pukeko
(, Porphyrio ), and not far removed from the Brown Woodhen
( Ocydromus ), all these belonging to the family of Rails, which
usually frequent more or less marshy ground, and in other
countries are able to fly as well as other birds. On the other


hand, the Takahe can run very actively, and gave a good chase
to those who captured the earlier specimens, while its power-
ful beak must be a formidable weapon, one would think, which
it could use with effect on enemies when at close quarters.
The nature of its food is practically unknown. The previous
specimens did not reach Scientific hands till after the removal
of the viscera; the present specimen, however, reached me in
such excellent condition that I have been able to examine all
the internal organs, and I find the stomach and intestines
filled with a kind of grass with cylindrical leaves, all cut up
into lengths of Jin. to Jin. But whether this is its normal
food or not is uncertain. Like its predecessors, it was caught
in winter on low-lying grounds near the water; but there is no
doubt but that it lives usually in the higher and rougher bush,
and it was probably driven down to the water’s edge by stress
of weather and the consequent difficulty of getting enough to
eat. Certain it is that, though thoroughly healthy in every
way, there was no fat in the body such as one finds in a
normally well-fed bird; moreover, its beak seems needlessly
powerful for cutting up grass.
“The present specimen is a young female, possibly not quite
fully grown. The measurements of the various external parts
of the body agree almost exactly with those given by Sir W.
Buller for the bird examined by him nearly twenty years ago.
Yes ; it is nineteen years since the previous specimen was
captured, and —pace Mr. Park—it is uncertain whether any
have even been seen since 1879; at any rate, I believe there
is no record of such a fact. Even a greater length of time
separates the capture of the third from the first specimen—to
wit, thirty years—for it was in 1819 that the first specimen
ever seen by scientific folk was chased and captured by a
party of sealers in Duck Cove, Dusky Sound. Of this the
skin alone remains, stuffed and set up in the British Museum;
the rest of the bird was eaten by the captors. The second
specimen, which was caught in 1851 by Maoris on Secretary
Island, Thompson’s Sound, also found its way to the British
Museum. The third specimen was caught by a rabbiter’s dog
(1879) on the eastern shore of Lake Te Anau, and its remains
were purchased for the Dresden Museum for one hundred
guineas. The three spots at which the captures were made
are at the corners of a triangle, each side of which measures
about a hundred miles. It is scarcely surprising, then, that
this, the fourth specimen of the bird, now temporarily deposited
in the Otago University Museum, should be the cause of
some excitement amongst all those —and these are happily
many—who take an interest in the birds of New Zealand,
especially in those which, like the Takahe and the Kakapo,
are on the way to extermination—a result of the interference


with the ‘ equilibrium of nature ’ brought about by the ferrets
so thoughtlessly introduced by a too impulsive Government
some years ago.
“ The specimen now in the Museum belongs to Mr. Ross,
brother of the guide of that name. It appears that Ross was
walking along the shore of Lake Te Anau, accompanied by
his dog, which suddenly disappeared into the bush, and
reappeared carrying the Takahe. Mr. Ross, fortunately for
science, despatched the bird to Dr. Young, of Invercargill,
who wired to me to inquire whether I could recommend a
taxidermist who could be trusted to preserve the bird with all
the tender care merited by its rarity and interest. The
Museum luckily possesses, in the person of Mr. E. Jennings,
not only a skilful taxidermist, but an ornithologist who can
value a bird for its own sake. So I replied to Dr. Young to
send it along ; and I announced the receipt of his telegram
to the meeting of the Otago Institute on the 9th August,
where the news was received with very great interest. Mr.
Hamilton took the trouble to travel to Invercargill next
day in order to bring back the bird, and to learn the facts
of the capture ; but in the meantime it had been despatched
to Dunedin, and reached me in capital condition. It was at
once handed over to Mr. Jennings. The skin was properly
and skilfully cured, so much of the skeleton as was possible
was removed and dried, and the viscera are preserved in spirit.
Mr. Jennings, it may be mentioned, preserved the Dresden
skin, so far as it was possible to do so after its unskilful treat-
ment by the captor. . . .
“ But, although the skin of the Takahe is very rare, its
bones are less rare and less expensive. The Otago Museum is
fortunate enough to possess a nearly complete skeleton, in-
cluding the only skull on public exhibition in the colony, or
anywhere else indeed, except London and Dresden. Other
bones exist in private collections, but they are by no means
numerous. Another feature of interest lies in the fact that the
Takahe ( Notornis) exists nowhere else in the world except in
the South Island of New Zealand. The name Notornis mantelli
was bestowed by the late naturalist, Sir Richard Owen, on a
few bones discovered in a fossilised condition in the North
Island—viz., a part of a skull, a jaw, and a leg-bone. The
examination of the skeleton of the second bird, subsequently
captured in the South Island, led ornithologists to conclude
that both the living and the extinct bird belong to the same
species. But later on careful measurements of the bones
in the Dresden Museum by Dr. A. B. Meyer, and of the
bones in the Otago Museum by the late Professor Parker,
as well as of bones obtained by Mr. Hamilton, render this
identity very doubtful. Dr. Meyer has, as a result of his


measurements, given the name Notornis hochstetteri to the
living bird, and we shall probably be right in accepting this
revision of the name. It may be that the fossil bones,
imperfect as they were, belonged to a male bird, whilst the
remaining specimens are females, but this is extremely im-
probable. At present we do not know for certain whether
there is any difference in the colouration or in the size of
the two sexes; one in the British Museum, according to
Sir W. Buller, is more brightly coloured than the Dresden
specimen, which he believes to be a female. But no ana-
tomical examination of any of the previously obtained birds
was possible for the purpose of deciding the sex, and the
only definite fact is that this fourth specimen is a female,
and that it agrees in size and colouration with the Dresden
specimen. From analogy with our other native birds it is
quite probable that a different species of Notornis inhabited
each of the two Islands that of the North Island is
extinct, that of the South Island will become so shortly.”
As an indication of the interest which this fresh capture of
Notornis has excited, I may mention that numerous offers
have been made to the owner for its purchase, for various sums
up to £3OO. I understand that the Government is now nego-
tiating for it, at a lower figure; but whether successful or not
we must all join in the hope expressed by Mr. Fenwick that it
will be kept in the colony, either in one of our public museums
or in some private collection where it will always be access-
ible to those of our rising colonists who take an interest in the
natural history of New Zealand. Mr. Hamilton, the Regis-
trar of the Otago University, has kindly forwarded me an ex-
cellent photograph of the bird, as mounted, which I have much
pleasure in exhibiting this evening. (See Plate I.)
This reference to the rare Notornis naturally leads me to
say a few words about our other vanishing forms of bird-life.
And here, parenthetically, I may observe that perhaps I owe
some sort of apology to the Society for so often dilating on this
subject. But to me it is one of absorbing interest, and I have
always in my mind Professor Newton’s prophetic words. In
the “Encyclopedia Britannica” (p. 742) he says: “As a
whole, the avifauna of New Zealand must be regarded as one
of the most interesting and instructive in the world, and the
inevitable doom which is awaiting its surviving members can-
not but excite a lively interest in the minds of all ornitholo-
gists.” In another place he urges “the importance of the
closest study, because the avifauna is now being fast obliter-
ated by colonisation and other agencies, and with it will pass
into oblivion, unless faithfully recorded by the present genera-
tion, a page of the world’s history full of scientific interest.”
In his last publication, the “ Dictionary of Birds ” —a book


which should be on the shelf of every ornithologist —he returns
to the subject (p. 316) with the following pregnant remarks:
“Mention has already been made of the unhappy fate which
awaits the surviving members of the New Zealand fauna, and
its inevitable end cannot but excite a lively regret in the minds
of all ornithologists who care to know how things have grown.
This regret is quite apart from all questions of sentiment; but,
just as we lament our ignorance of the species which, in
various lands, have been extirpated by our predecessors, so
our posterity will want to know much more of the present avi-
fauna of New Zealand than we can possibly record, for no one
can pretend to predict the scope of investigation which will be
required, and required in vain, by naturalists in that future
when New Zealand may be one of the great nations of the
earth.”
For my own part, I am most anxious that we should escape
the reproach of posterity by doing everything in our power to
preserve, if not a few living representatives, at any rate a full
life-history of these expiring forms ; so I try to make my voice
heard, in season and out of season, hoping thereby to stimu-
late others to do the same. lam induced to believe that, in
the interests of science, lam pursuing the right course. For
example, a returned colonist writes me : “ At Cambridge I
met the genial old Professor Newton, who told me that your
sketches of vanishing native birds were the most charming he
had ever read.” I naturally argue thus : that, if the subject
possesses so much attraction for readers at a distance, I shall
not weary you by reverting, on every opportunity, to this
favourite theme. The great thing is to awaken public interest.
And, if I may venture to say so, the subject is yours as much
as mine, for it must be borne in mind that an implied duty
rests on all the members of such a Society as this to con-
tribute their quota to the general stock of human knowledge,
and to aid—each one according to his opportunity and ability—
in the promotion of such objects as the one I am discussing.
It is refreshing to find, in these more enlightened days, that
even from the pulpit this moral obligation is enforced, and
with no uncertain voice. As an illustration of this, I may
remind you of the eloquent sermon preached by the Bishop of
Salisbury in St. Paul’s Cathedral on the occasion of his visit
to Wellington some time ago. Passing out of the beaten
track, his Lordship referred to the interesting problems in
science that awaited their solution in New Zealand, mention-
ing specially the abnormal features in the fauna and flora.
He said he hoped that in the City of Wellington—the centre
of activity for the colony—there would be found men of leisure
w r ho would “ consecrate their lives ” to the elucidation of these
problems in natural science. He put in, too, a pathetic appeal


for the beautiful virgin forest, and expressed an earnest hope
that the hand of the destroyer would spare some portions of
this magnificent bush, with its unique forms, and pass them
down for the delight and study of future generations. _
The beautiful Huia, famous alike in Maori tradition and
song, is becoming every year more scarce, notwithstanding
its close protection by a statute which, I am glad to say, is
very rigidly enforced by the police in the bush districts.
This is, no doubt, owing mainly to the inevitable destruction of
its favourite forest haunts in the steady march of European
settlement, large areas of bush land being annually cleared
and burnt off in the Forty-mile Bush as elsewhere. Apart
from this, the periodical recurrence of devastating bush-fires,
originating nobody knows how, is altering the whole aspect of
the country. However much this may be deplored, it is one
of the necessary accompaniments of colonisation in a country
like this. Owing to such causes, the range of the Huia, always
very limited in extent, is becoming more and more restricted
every year, and its ultimate fate is not a matter of mere specu-
lation. I was never more impressed with this than when I
made an ascent of the Ruahine Range in July last. A wide-
spread conflagration had swept through and killed many
thousands of acres of virgin forest on the side of the range
towards Woodville; but, on getting beyond and above this
scene of desolation, we found the mountain-side clad with
thick vegetation. This consists on the lower ranges of the
usual mixture of native trees, but at a higher elevation it
changes almost entirely to tawhero, or mountain-cedar, which
becomes more and more stunted the further you ascend, till
at length it is as gnarled and twisted in its growth as the
olives of Gethsemane, to which, indeed, the trees in this
condition present a remarkable likeness. At an altitude of
1,800 ft. the lovely Todea superha made its first appearance,
but this fern soon became the dominant plant, and we at
length found ourselves in patches of it many acres in extent,
looking very beautiful in its symmetrical fronds of vivid green.
We reached the summit of Whariti (3,500 ft.) in good time,
and then stood on the dividing-line between the Provincial
Districts of Wellington and Hawke’s Bay. The sky being
clear, we had a magnificent panoramic view of the surround-
ing country, both east and west coasts being visible, and the
cone of Mount Egmont in the far north, whilst a distant veil
of cloud alone prevented our seeing Ruapehu and the burning
mountain. We descended by the same route, crossing several
densely wooded spurs, and arriving at the foot of the range
before nightfall.
Although the season was favourable, and the weather per-
fect, there was an almost total absence of bird-life. During


the whole excursion we never saw or even heard the note of
the Tui; we shot a Kaka, heard a Parrakeet, and saw a single
Huia (a fine female bird), which, on our near approach, went
bounding through the mountain vegetation with the swiftness
of a greyhound. Formerly this was a favourite haunt of this
elegant mountain starling, which could always be attracted by
an imitation of its peculiar whistling cry; now it has all but
vanished. Seeing that excellent insular preserves have been
acquired by the Government, it seems to me a great pity that
an effort is not made, before it is too late, to capture a few
live Huias and turn them out on the Little Barrier, on Kapiti,
and on Eesolution Island. Unless this be done, the final
extinction of this species can only be a matter of a few years.
Its powers of flight are so limited—its progression being
generally effected by a bounding movement through the
branches—that, once safely introduced, there would be no
danger of its quitting its island home for the mainland; and
the difference of climate at the three points I have indicated
would give the experiment every chance of success. The cost
would be very small, as this bird is easily snared; and, if the
Government would not defray the trifling expenditure neces-
sary, the task might be properly undertaken by our Acclima-
tisation Society. From a zoological point of view, it is even
of more importance to preserve the Huia for the student of
the future than the little Stitch-bird, about which so much has
of late been said and written. The Huia is more tamable
than perhaps any other New Zealand bird, and will accept
suitable food almost immediately after being caught; so there
would be no practical difficulty in effecting its transportation
to any part of the colony. It should be remembered, also,
that this was part of the original scheme proposed by Lord
Onslow, whose celebrated memorandum to his Ministers gave
the first impulse to this island-conservation which has so
taken hold of the popular fancy.
During a recent discussion in the House of Representa-
tives as to the propriety of protecting the Woodhen in the
South Island it was stated by a Minister of the Crown that
he possessed authentic information that this bird was increas-
ing on the Canterbury Plains, and might therefore be left to
take care of itself. As to certain favourable localities, this
statement is no doubt quite true; but to those who remem-
ber how abundant the Woodhen was on the plains in the early
“ sixties ” it will seem now that the bird is practically a thing
of the past. I recollect when travelling on horseback towards
Waimate South in 1859, accompanied by a single Maori, we
were overtaken by darkness, and had to camp in the open,
using our saddles as pillows. It was a fine night, although
somewhat dark, and my companion’s little dog spent the


night in catching Woodhens. The ground was pretty thickly
covered with stunted Coriaria, and the birds were, no doubt,
feeding on the berries of that plant; at any rate, the dog had
no difficulty in running them down. The speedy and very
general destruction of the Woodhens on the Canterbury
Plains was occasioned chiefly, I think, by the tussock-fires
which about that period, and later on, were so universal for
the purpose of improving the grazing capabilities of the
newly occupied sheep-runs. That this bird will increase
rapidly enough when under careful protection is beyond
doubt. I remember seeing at Government House, in Welling-
ton, about the year 1863, a cage of them which Sir George
Grey had brought from the South Island, and was taking up
to his island in the Hauraki Gulf. When, many years later,
I visited the “great proconsul” at Kawau he told me that
the Woodhens had so increased and multiplied that he was
practically unable to keep any other ground-birds on the
island. The Maori member, Mr. Parata, urged as a reason
for preserving the Woodhen that the oil produced from its fat
was useful medicinally. To the zoologist other more cogent
reasons will suggest themselves. As every student knows,
as a flightless bird it is one of the most interesting of our
endemic forms; however, I will not enlarge upon that sub-
ject now. To show how completely the Woodhen has dis-
appeared from some districts, I may mention that Mr.
Morgan Carkeek, during several months’ surveying last year
in the mountainous district of Marlborough, met with only a
single example. This, in a district where a few years ago it
was extremely abundant, is very significant.
The same remarks apply, in a modified degree, to Ocy-
dromus greyi in the North Island. In certain restricted
localities it appears to be increasing. A few years ago it had
quite disappeared from the Ohau district, and its pleasing
cry—so like the plaintive call of the European Curlew —was a
thing of the past. But during the last two seasons it has re-
appeared at Papaitonga, breeding in a wooded gully near the
homestead, and on the approach of evening announcing its
presence by its shrill cry. On any quiet evening now at the
lake you may hear the Weka’s cry, in which both sexes join,
and mingling with it the call of the Pukeko in the sedges, the
loud boom of the Bittern in the swamp below, and the pleasant
chattering of numberless Wild-duck and Teal, of which there
are sometimes five hundred or more on the bosom of the
lake.*
♦ Oq this subject I have received the following very interesting letter
from the Hon. L. Walker, M.L.C. (of “ Pour Peaks,” Geraldine): “ I read
with much pleasure the signed article contributed by you to the Press as
to the disappearance of certain of the New Zealand birds. Among these


The only species of Woodhen that remains with us in
undiminished numbers is Ocydromus earli, an inhabitant of
the wooded country on the west coast of the South Island.
As I have remarked before, the advantage to our native
birds of compulsory protection has been amply demonstrated
by results. Take,* for example, the Tui. In the early days
of settlement this was the commonest of our birds, whilst
certainly not the least interesting. But some twenty years
ago it was becoming so scarce in all the settled districts that
lovers of birds became alarmed, and in the end the strong arm
of the law had to be invoked for its protection. As a con-
sequence, this species is now as plentiful as ever; indeed, in
some places, it is visibly increasing. It would, of course, be
absurd to expect birds whose subsistence depends on bush
products to survive in districts where there is a wholesale
destruction of the forest. In the miserable little fringes of
native bush that are allowed to remain in such districts the
indigenous birds, as might have been expected, are silenced for
ever, and, instead of the sweet notes of the Tui, one hears the
twitter of the Sparrow or the call of the Californian Quail.
But the case is wholly different where ample bush reserves
have been made. I consider it one of the principal charms of
my country home at Papailonga that the Tui is most plentiful
there, enjoying the freedom of its native woods unmolested,
and nesting freely wherever the local conditions are favour-
able. To add to the inducements to stay, I have planted the
edges of the native bush with Australian Acacia, Eucalyptus,
and bottle-brush, the flowers of which trees are a “ perpetual
joy ” to the Tui.
Those who have observed this bird at all closely will be
aware that it is in the nesting season from September to
you mention the Woodhen. All about my place I have a lot of scrub and
(sub-alpine) bush, and the number of Woodhens that I used to have was
something wonderful. I think it was somewhere about five years ago
that they suddenly disappeared, and for three or four years their note
was never heard in the evenings, nor at any other times. The bush was
still there for them, for I never allow a stick to be cut out of it. How-
ever, last year I began occasionally, but rarely, to hear them tuning up in
the evenings, and this year there are hundreds of them. But they seem
to stick about the gardens and under the Lawsonias, cedars, &c., rather
than go into the bush. This, I fancy, they do so as to be handy to the
bens’ nests, for my women say they take most of the eggs. I used to
have thousands of Tuis, Bell-birds, and Pigeons: the last, of course, are
clean gone. But I have still a good lot of the other two, although they
come and go at different seasons. Jusd opposite my house I have got a
lot of kowhai-trees, which in the beginning of October are a mass of
yellow blossom. Then comes the holiday time for the Tuis, Bell-birds,
and Kakas. They are there in hundreds ; but most of them go away as
soon as the blossom is over, which, as you know, is but a short time.
However, there is never a sunshiny day in winter’that I have not a few
native birds singing in my garden.”


December —that the Tui poses as a songster, and shows off
to the greatest perfection. Whilst the hen-bird is sitting the
male is accustomed to perch himself on the high limb of a tree
not far distant from his mate, using this as a post of outlook ;
and then, throughout the whole day, he pours out his soul in
song. Puffing out his body-feathers and gesticulating freely,
so as to give greater emphasis to his song, he produces quite a
medley of musical notes, interspersed at intervals with that
peculiar cough, and a sound not unlike the breaking of a pane
of glass, followed by a series of gentle sobs. Then,- quick as
thought, he dashes upwards and makes a wide circuit in the
air, or silently dives into the bush to exchange courtesies with
his mate, snaps at a fly on the way, and then returns to
his post of observation and song. After sunset, and as the
shadows of evening begin to darken the forest, he alters his
song, and utters a succession of notes like the tolling of a
distant bell. Many of the passages in the Tui’s ordinary song
are of surpassing sweetness, and so rapid is the change from
one set of notes to another that one never tires of listening to
the wild melody. Both sexes sing, but in the breeding season
the female confines her efforts to a produced note like the low
chirping of a turkey-hen. As already mentioned, the xnale
has an evening song quite distinct from that of the bright
morning. To many ears it has a resemblance to the tolling
of a highly pitched silver bell, but to me it is more suggestive
of the distant tapping on a metal anvil. Of course, these
resemblances are merely fanciful, but the musical cadence of
the note is exquisite, as all who are familiar with it will
readily admit.*
In one of my former papers I referred to the beautiful
collection of New Zealand rarities, as well as birds from all
other parts of the world, brought together by the Eev. Canon
Tristram, F.R.S., at Durham, and I expressed the hope that
so valuable a collection might ultimately find a resting-place
in some public museum. lam glad to say that this hope has
been realised, and that it is now safely lodged in the Liver-
pool Museum, under the charge of Dr. H. 0. Forbes,- formerly
Curator of the Canterbury Museum, who, at any rate, can
fully estimate the value of New Zealand rarities. And I may
here mention an interesting piece of information conveyed in
Canon Tristram’s last letter. He says, “I do not know if you
have heard of the ‘ find ’at Liverpool. Forbes came across
two cases in some corner of the Museum. They had been
received from the then Lord Derby, probably soon after 1845.
* On a quiet summer evening the Tui may sometimes be heard long
after dusk. On the wooded shores of the Papaitooga Lake I have heard
them tolling up to 9 o’clock at night, the notes having a very sweet effect
on the water.


At any rate, they were a collection of New Zealand birds
made about 1845 by a Captain Stanley, R.N. Though bedded
in the dust of fifty years, neither damp nor moth had reached
them, and they are all good sound skins in perfect order.
There are some half-dozen Sceloglaux albifacies, plenty of
Morepork, the three Falconidce, no Nestor notabilis, no Quail,
no Turnagra hectori, plenty of the other Turnagra, several
Stitch-birds (male and female), both Miros, several Saddle-
backs, but only one species of Glaucopis, Orthonyx albicilla,
0. ochrocephala, Certhiparus, plenty of Wekas, Black Stilt,
no Thinornis or Anarhynchus. He had evidently not visited
the Chathams. But the collection shows how plentiful many
of the perishing or perished species were fifty years ago. Did
I tell you I saw living, in good health, in a conservatory in
Norfolk, a specimen of Sceloglaux, brought Home by a son of
Sir Thomas Fellows, at whose place I saw it ? ”
Glaucopis wilsoni, Bonap. (Blue-wattled Crow.)
A perfect albino of this species, obtained in the Wairarapa
Valley, has the whole of the plumage pure white, with a tinge
of cream-colour on the under-parts of the body ; bill and feet
horn-coloured; wattles flesh-colour.
Creadion carunculatus, Gmelin. (The Saddle-back.)
It is indeed singular how this species, so abundant in our
woods thirty or forty years ago, has, without any apparent
cause, so completely disappeared from the North Island. It
still exists, but in sadly diminished numbers, in the South
Island; so also does Creadion cinereus. During two visits to
the West Coast Sounds I was only able to obtain one specimen
of each species. I sought in vain for skins at the various
dealers’ shops I visited. I believe the current price now is a
guinea, and in a few years’ time it will be impossible to obtain
specimens at any price.
Speaking on the subject to old Ihaka, of Ngatiwehiwehi, he
said, “Oh, yes; when I was a young man the woods about
here [Manukau] were swarming with these birds; also with
Kotihe, the Whiowhio, the Pitoitoi, and the Popokatea. Now
they are all gone—as completely as the moa! Soon also will
my race vanish from the land, and the white man, with his
sheep and his cattle and his birds, will occupy the country ! ”
This was Ihaka’s simple way of formulating the doctrine of
the survival of the fittest.
Myiomoira macrocephala, Gmelin. (South Island Tomtit.)
In a thick clump of Olearia rotundifolia, at Stewart Island,
I saw a lovely albino of this species. I brought it down with
a small charge of dust-shot, but unfortunately lost it in the


close vegetation, although I spent a considerable time hunting
for it.
Sphenoeacus punctatus, Quoy and Gaim. (Fern-bird.)
I have lately noticed, at Papaitonga, that this species has
a habit of hopping over the ground to feed under the thick
marsh vegetation. This may probably account for the usually
abraded condition of the tail-feathers at the close of the
season.
As mentioned on a previous occasion, I have received from
Stewart Island two skins (male and female) that seem to
represent a larger race—possibly a distinct species—but I am
anxious to procure more specimens before forming any definite
conclusion. This bird is darker than the common Fern-bird
of the mainland, the whole of the foreneck and throat being
thickly studded with black spots. These black markings
become more conspicuous on the breast and sides, occupying
the whole centre of the feather.
Sphenoeacus rufescens, Buller. (Chatham Island Fern-
bird.)
I have in my possession a partial albino of this now very
rare species from the Chatham Islands.
Anthus novae-zealandise, Gmelin. (New Zealand Pipit.)
Mr. Langley, of Foxton, has forwarded to me for examina-
tion the skin of a pure albino of this species, very skilfully
prepared by himself. There is also another perfect albino in
the Colonial Museum collection, obtained, I believe, in the
Hawke’s Bay District.
I notice that Captain Hutton, when exhibiting to the
Philosophical Society of Canterbury an albino Skylark,
referred to it as the first example of the kind obtained in New
Zealand. This is not exactly the case, however, for in 1886 I
received two specimens from Mr. W. W. Smith, of Ashburton.
One of these I presented to the British Museum and the other
to the Cambridge Zoological Museum. The fact is interesting
in itself, as showing the strong tendency to albinism in this
country even among introduced birds.
Rhipidura fuliginosa, Sparrm. (Black Fantail.)
At Half-moon Bay (Stewart Island) I saw a Black Fantail
paired with a Pied Fantail, the former looking, as it moved
about among the twigs on the roadside, half as large again as
its mate. Bhipidura Jiabellifera is the common species on
the island, there being only stray individuals of the black
form.


Rhipidura flabellifera, Gmelin. (Pied Fantail.)
One has to speak of so many of our species as decreasing,
or as having reached the border-land of extinction, that it is
quite refreshing to be able to record that the Fantailed Fly-
catcher—that pretty little denizen of our woods—is perhaps
more plentiful than ever; at any rate, it shows no sign of
diminution. Mr. Robert Mair, writing to me from Whangarei
on the 11th September, says, “I saw a pleasing sight a few
weeks since. There are generally five or six Fantails flitting
about our shrubbery in the evening, catching gnats in the
air and diverting one by their fantastic aerial evolutions. But
on this particular evening I counted no less than twenty-five
of them at one time.”
I never see this little bird, or hear its “ laugh,” without
being reminded of the romantic Maori myth of Maui’s
disaster, which brought death into the world, when Hine-
nuitepo, awakened by the merriment of the Tiwaiwaka, closed
her mouth and put an end to Maui’s ambitious dream of
conquering man’s last enemy. The story has been well told
by Sir George Grey in his “ Polynesian Mythology.”
Graucalus melanops, Latham. (Australian Shrike.)
To the already recorded instances of the occurrence of
this Australian species in New Zealand I have now to add
another. Mr. William Townson writes to me that one of
these birds was shot near Bradshaw’s Creek, at Westport,
some years ago, and came into Dr. Gaze’s possession. Un-
fortunately, it was ultimately destroyed by moths.
Prosthemadera novse-zealandise, Gmelin. (The Tui.)
A remarkable specimen which has come into my possession
has the head, neck all round, the whole of the breast, and
sides of the body umber-brown, the feathers of the breast
having pale shafts; neck-frill very indistinct, being often
reduced to mere shaft-lines of white ; upper surface of body,
wings, and tail creamy white, with a broad alar bar of pure
white; thighs, abdomen, and upper and lower tail-coverts
pale yellownsh-brown ; quills and tail-feathers umber-brown
on their inner webs; neck-bands pure white; bill and feet
horn-coloured.
A nest of this species (now in the Otago Museum) was
found by our party fixed in the branches of a makomako
{Aristotelia racemosa ), about 12 ft. from the ground, at the
head of Milford Sound. It is of symmetrical shape, and
firmly put together, the outworks consisting of twigs and soft
tree-moss, then a layer of fern-hair, and inside of this a lining
of white feathers. Curiously enough, these are sea-birds’


feathers, the builder of the nest having evidently repaired to
the shores of the Sound to collect them.
Anthornis melamira, Sparrm. (The Bell-bird.)
Mr. Robert Mair, writing to me from Whangarei, under
date the 11th September, says, “ I was out last week in a
6-ton yacht hapuku- fishing at the Poor Knights [in the
Hauraki Gulf]. On the largest of the Poor Knight Islands
there are numbers of Korimako. It was delightful to see
them flying from bush to bush overhead, and to hear them
singing their sweet notes.”
From Mrs. Halcombe, a daughter of the celebrated orni-
thologist, the late William Swainson, F.R.S.,* I have received
the following interesting note ; “ Bell-birds are very plentiful
on the Island of Kapiti. I stayed there for nearly three
weeks in 1894, and every morning, about 4 o’clock, I was
charmed to hear a perfect concert from the Bell-bird. The
house was quite close to a beautiful piece of bush, which was
full of native birds, and, to judge from the noise they made,
the Bell-birds must have been very numerous. ... I
have all the tastes of my dear father, but I have not had
the chance to develope them. I cannot help loving all the
beautiful world of nature, and I wish I had the time and
opportunity to study all her wonderful secrets. The longest
lifetime, it seems to me, is all too short for the full enjoyment
of her treasures.”
Anthornis melanocephala, Gray. (The Chatham Island
Bell-bird.)
I have been fortunate enough to receive lately two beauti-
ful pairs of this species from the Chatham Islands; but,
according to all accounts, the bird is very nearly extinct
there.
Zosterops coerulescens, Latham. (The Blight-bird.)
The history of the arrival from the South Island and
subsequent stay of this little migrant is familiar to all who
know anything of our local natural history. Its services to
the agriculturist and to the gardener are also pretty generally
recognised. But one is alw T ays glad to record fresh evidence
in favour of any deserving bird—especially, too, when there
is a widespread prejudice abroad against little birds in general,
* It was from Mr. Swainson that I received my earliest lessons in
zoological drawing. He had long before published a beautiful series of
“Zoological Illustrations” (1820-21). “All the figures were drawn by
the author, who, as an ornithological artist, had no rival in his time.
Every plate is not beyond criticism, but his worst drawings show more
knowledge of bird-life than do the best of his English or French con-
temporaries.” (“ Dictionary of Birds,” p. 28.)


and an organized crusade for their destruction. As an in-
stance of this, I may refer to a newspaper paragraph to the
effect that during a period of three months the Knapdale Road
Board (Otago) purchased the large number of 56,612 birds’-
eggs, for the purpose of destroying them. lam glad, therefore,
to give the following from my excellent local correspondent,
Mr. Robert Wilson : “The Blight-bird is undoubtedly on the
increase in the Rangitikei district. They seem to have found
a winter food in the introduced insects, and may now always
be seen flying about the run in flocks. The food they are
now chiefly subsisting on is a little caterpillar—a striped-
green species, which does great harm to the crops in summer.
These are now—September—to be found all over grass-lands
—under logs, sticks, &c.—and the Blight-bird pursues them
indefatigably. When lam working at a fence they will
sometimes be within a couple of yards of me, searching every
cranny for insects. They are particularly fond of diving out
of sight into a common tussock {Garex), the plant which
grows so freely on the hills, and they crawl about under any
fallen scrub, looking for insects, and keeping up a pleasant
cheeping all the time. I have sometimes seen them with a
caterpillar nearly as big as themselves battering it against
a wire on a fence till it was reduced enough to swallow.
They must do immense service to farmers at this time of the
year, as one caterpillar now means thousands in summer.
As every one knows, it is very fond of the American blight,
which is so destructive to the apple-trees. There is an
orchard close to a patch of native bush on the farm, and the
Blight-birds keep it entirely free from this pest. Though the
blight sometimes, in hot weather, makes a start on the trees,
in winter these birds always keep it under.”
At Fiji I saw small flocks exactly resembling our Blight-
bird in their flight and habits, but on shooting one I found
that it was quite a distinct species. It has a more con-
spicuous eye-ring, with a beautiful lemon-yellow throat, and
only the slightest indication of brown on the sides of the
body.
Clitonyx alTbicapilla, Lesson. (The White-head.)
1 am glad to be able to announce the recent appearance of
a pair of this now rare species in the bush on the northern
shore of the Papaitonga Lake.*
* Professor Newton accepts my suggestion that the disappearance of
the White-head and some other New Zealand perchers is, in a large
measure, a displacement due to the introduction of exotic birds, which,
being morphologically higher and constitutionally stronger, speedily
establish themselves at the expense of the lower, weaker, and earlier
forms. ( “ Dictionary of Birds,” p. 1037.)


Xenicus longipes, Gmelin. (Bush-wren.)
At Milford Sound I met with Xenicus longipes —a single
one, which I managed to secure with a charge of dust-shot.
The bird has a rapid, furtive way of moving about, keeping,
as a rule, near the ground, and hunting for its food among the
mosses and fungi covering the roots of the trees. When I first
saw it, and excited its attention by an imitation of its feeble
cry, it hopped about on a branch quite close to me, and
several times opened its mouth, after the manner of a young
bird, but without making any sound. It was very active, not
remaining for one moment in the same position. It soon
became indifferent to my simulated call, retired to some dis-
tance, then descended to the ground and hopped about,
apparently looking for food, and moving so swiftly that I
found it very difficult to get a shot. The specimen proved to
be a young bird, but it has exactly the same colours as the
adult, although somewhat duller. In this respect it differs
from the allied genus, Acanthidositta.
Mr. Brough, to whom I was indebted for some beautiful
specimens of the Bush-wren some years ago, writes giving
me an account of a subsequent visit to the locality whence he
obtained these birds—the low woods under the Tasman Range.
He says: “ When I went back this year I pushed on to a spot
a few miles further on than where I camped before. I am
sorry to say that the Bush-wren and the Wood-robin had
almost entirely disappeared. lam certain I did not see more
than a dozen during the several months I was out. The heavy
falls of snow last winter may have been the means of killing
off a number of these birds, or the wet summer may have
induced them to migrate to some drier woods at a lower alti-
tude ; but, whatever the cause may be, they are gone. Whilst
I was there we had an immense and continuous fall of rain,
and the bush was never dry. We had twenty-six wet days in
January, and during the whole time of my stay it was mostly
wet, with very little sunshine. The Wood-robin, which was
formerly so plentiful there, has almost entirely gone. This is
a great pity, because there is no bird more respected by the
backwoodsman than this one. There is nothing else to re-
lieve the monotony of these gloomy red-birch forests. Their
raillery, if I may so term their string of noisy notes, brings
the explorer suddenly up when he is rambling alone in these
mountain solitudes, and produces a feeling of companionship.
The absence of this sprightly bird was, I may say, the saddest
feature of my four months in the wet and lifeless forest.”
Eudynamis taitensis, Sparrm. (Long-tailed Cuckoo.)
On the Bth June I received from Mr. H. H. Travers a note
saying that he had just obtained from New Plymouth, in the


flesh, a Koheperoa in very fat condition. Very late in the
season for such a bird ! Mr. Travers suggests that some
may remain with us all the year round. It may be so, but
the occurrence is a very unusual one. It is clear, however,
that there is no lack of winter food for this species. And if it
is able to endure our seasonable cold, why should it have
inherited its wonderful migratory instinct? This is one of
the problems of natural history which will probably never find
a solution. Why should the Godwit make its annual weary
pilgrimage from New Zealand to Siberia, when, as we know,
the few individuals that remain with us through the winter
are always fat and in good condition ?
Nestor meridionalis, Gmelin. (Yar. Kakakura.)
A specimen in Mr. Whaley’s collection obtained at Rotorua
differs from all examples I have seen in having the hindneck
greenish-orange with black centres to the feathers; the crown
of the head, cheeks, and throat dusky-brown, the ear-coverts
being dull orpiment-orange ; breast dusky-brown, mixed with
yellow ; shoulders bright-scarlet, mixed with orpiment-orange,
the centres of the feathers brown; croup and upper tail-
coverts brilliant scarlet, with clouded markings of brown
abdomen, flanks, and under tail-coverts duller scarlet, largely
mixed with brown ; upper surface of wings beautifully varied
with olive-brown, scarlet, and orpiment-orange; lining of
wings golden-yellow towards the bend, pale-scarlet below;
quills golden-yellow and scarlet for half their extent, then
dusky to the tips ; tail-feathers pale-scarlet for two-thirds of
their length, then dark-brown, with naked shaft-lines pro-
duced -|in. beyond the webs.
On the table this evening there is another very similar
specimen exhibited by Mr. Donne, who is making a collection
of New Zealand rarities.
On the occasion of a visit to Stewart Island I obtained
from a settler named Jensen a beautiful albino (or, rather,
buff-grey) example of this species. On inquiring how he got
it, he explained that, being out in the woods Kaka-shooting,
he wounded a bird, and, without looking closely at it, he held
it down with his foot as a decoy. Its screams attracted a
flock of them, and, in quick succession, he shot fifteen. Then
he took up his wounded bird and found that it was something
out of the common. The specimen was successfully skinned
by Marklund, and I rewarded Jensen liberally for saving it.
Stringops habroptilus, Gray. (The Kakapo.)
It is gratifying to learn that the Kakapo is still plentiful in
the wooded country on the west coast of the South Island, in
spite of the steady spread of stoats and ferrets; but in former
times they were, of course, far more abundant.


Canon Stack, in his very interesting account of the original
occupation of certain districts by the Ngaitahu, refers thus
incidentally to the home of the Kakapo ;* “ These young
chiefs (known as the Whanaunga-purahonui), having ascer-
tained from persons familiar with the physical features of the
country the names of the various localities, proceeded to
divide the unallotted parts of the country amongst them-
selves ; and their procedure on this occasion is of particular
interest, as it serves to illustrate one method by which the
Maoris acquired title to land. Kakapo-skins were at that
time highly prized, and every one of the party was desirous
to secure a parrot preserve to himself. As they approached
the mountain known as Whata-arama they each claimed a
peak of the range. ‘ That is mine,’ cried Moki, ‘ that my
daughter Te Aotukia may possess a kilt of Kakapo-skins to
make her fragrant and beautiful.’ ‘ Mine,’ cried Tanetiki,
‘ that the Kakapo-skins may form a kilt for my daughter
Hinemihi.’ ‘Mine,’ cried Hikatutae, ‘that the Kakapo-
skins may form a girdle for my daughter Kaiata.’ Moki, one
of the party, had his servant with him, who whispered in his
ear, ‘ Wait; do not claim anything yet ’; and then the man
climbed up into a tree. ‘ What are you doing? ’ said the rest
of the party. ‘ Only breaking off the dry branches to light
our fire with.’ But he was in reality looking out for the
mountain which Tura-kautahi had told his master was the
place where the Kakapo were most abundant. Presently he
espied the far-off peak. ‘My mountain, Kura-tawhiti! ’ he
cried. ‘ Ours!’ said Moki. The claim was at once recognised
by the other members of the exploring expedition, and Moki’s
descendants have ever since enjoyed the exclusive right to
catch Kakapo on Kura-tawhiti.”
Professor Newton, in his “ Dictionary of Birds,” writing of
this species, corrects a current statement that in this form of
Parrot the furcula has been “ lost,” whilst the sternum lacks
a keel, and he explains that whereas the clavicles, which
in most birds unite to form the first-mentioned bone, are
present, though they do not meet, on the other hand the
keel on the sternum is undoubtedly present, and, though much
reduced in size, is nearly as much developed as in the Dodo
and the Weka. He adds (p. 474): “ Yet, though much
has been written about the Kakapo, there is no detailed
description of its internal structure, a fact the more to be
regretted since the bird is obviously doomed to early extinc-
tion, and the opportunity of solving several problems of
interest, which a minute examination of its anatomy might
afford, will be lost if the matter be not speedily taken in
* “ South Island Maoris,” by Canon Stack.


hand. Few existing birds offer a. better subject for a mono-
grapher, and it is to be hoped that, if perish the genus
and species must, posterity will not have to lament the
want of an exhaustive treatise on the many and wonderful
characteristics of what Professor Fiirbringer considers * to
be one of the primitive forms of Psittaci.” I would venture
to remark that the absence of so desirable a monograph can
hardly be due to the want of material. Years ago I pre-
sented to the British Museum a perfect skeleton of the
Kakapo, and another to the Cambridge University Museum.
I also forwarded to London a specimen, in spirits, for the
express purpose of having its anatomy investigated.
Spiloglaux novse-zealandise, Graelin. (The Morepork.)
I have recorded in my “ Birds of New Zealand ” a partial
albino of this little Owl. An intelligent young half-caste
informs me that he saw a snow-white one at the Bay of
Islands. It was in the day-time, and he followed it a con-
siderable distance through the woods, hoping to secure it,
but without success.
Circus gouldi, Bonap. (Gould’s Harrier.)
I have to record a beautiful albino of this species that was
taken alive —shot in the wing—in the Canterbury District last
summer. In this bird the entire plumage is snow-white, ex-
cept that on the upper surface there are a few scattered brown
feathers on the shoulders, two among the small coverts of the
right wing, and one or two partially brown feathers among
the scapulars; also, on the under-surface, one of the axillary
plumes, one of the under-coverts of the left wing, and a single
feather on the left thigh are brown, and there is a wash of
fulvous on the abdomen. The tail, however, is of the normal
colour, but one of the feathers is white on its inner vane.
With these trifling exceptions, the entire plumage is snow-
white, presenting a very striking appearance. On dissection
it proved to be a female, and its golden irides showed that it
was an adult bird.
It must have been such a bird as this which the old
tohunga had in his mind when he narrated to Sir George Grey,
'‘on the rocky edge of a hot spring shaded by pohutukawa-
trees,” on the Island of Mokoia, the story of Hinemoa, the
maiden of Rotorua :
She rose up in the water
As beautiful as the wild white hawk,
And stepped on the edge of the bath
As graceful as the shy white crane.
• Journ. fur Orn., 1889, pp. 239-241.


As I have remarked before, this species appears to be
steadily increasing, notwithstanding the numbers that are
annually, and, as I think, very unwisely, destroyed by sheep-
farmers. One reason for this, no doubt, is that they are not
preyed upon by the introduced pests. On the contrary, they
do not hesitate to attack stoats and ferrets when they have
the chance. Judge Gill told me of a combat which he wit-
nessed between a Harrier and a stoat, in which the latter was
eventually killed, although the Hawk found it too heavy to
carry away with him.
In its progress towards maturity the Harrier passes through
several phases of plumage, and is sometimes very beautifully
marked. At Papaitonga I shot an adult male which was
molesting my Teneriffe Quail. It was in excellent plumage,
with a very distinct white frill on the lower part of the throat,
and having the under-parts of the body tawny-white, stained
with fulvous, and marked with broad longitudinal streaks of
dark-brown, presenting the appearance of a buzzard on the
under-surface; lining of the wings white, with narrow longi-
tudinal streaks of brown ; the axillary plumes pure white,
with broad transverse bars of rich umber-brown; and the
superior under wing-coverts crossed by numerous arrow-head
patches of the same ; the inner webs of the quills pale cream-
colour; and the upper wing-coverts marked with a spot of
rufous, more or less distinct, near the tip. Irides pale-yellow,
and of sparkling brilliancy; legs rich lemon-yellow, brightest
on the toes; claws black.
I have noticed that this species hovers and hunts in the
rain, without any inconvenience, occasionally shaking its wet
plumage.
Carpophaga novse-zealandise, Gmelin. (New Zealand
Pigeon.)
To the numerous varieties of this species already described
I have now to add another, recently procured through Mr.
Jacobs, of this city. General plumage delicate cream-colour;
under-surface pure white, the line of demarcation on the
breast being quite distinct; nape, shoulders, interscapulars,
and small wing-coverts rich chocolate-brown, forming a very
conspicuous mantle ; bill and feet carmine.
A Maori at Otaki had a tame bird of this species in his
possession for many months. It had the freedom of a large
hut, where I saw it, and would perch on the hand or shoulder
in the most confiding manner. In the end it was killed by
one of those mongrel curs that infest every native village. 1
also had one confined in an aviary for some months, intending
to forward it to the Zoological Society of London; but, unfor-
tunately, some children, taking compassion on the bird’s soli-


tary appearance, deliberately opened the door and turned it
loose. This Pigeon had been brought in by a party of bush-
fellers, who reported that it was stunned by becoming
entangled in the branches of a falling tree. It seemed quite
unhurt, and adapted itself readily to captivity, feeding freely
on wheat, cooked potato, and almost anything offered to it.
It consorted with a tame Silver-runt, confined with it. The
latter laid two eggs, but they proved to be infertile.
The protection extended to this bird by the Legislature,
in having every sixth year made a close season, is a great
boon, and will save this fine Wood-pigeon from the extermi-
nation which lately threatened it. The fact of a species
being very plentiful is no guarantee against its speedy ex-
tinction when once the tide of destruction has set in. Of
this it would be easy to adduce numberless proofs from all
parts of the world. But protection at the right moment may
achieve a good deal in the way of arresting the evil. An in-
telligent old man of the Ngati-wehiwehi Tribe said to me in
February, “The Pigeons are coming back to us. Soon they
will be as plentiful as ever. [As we spoke five of them passed
in sight, each winging its solitary flight.] Now they are good
eating. In January they have the early miro. This lasts
through February. Then they get very fat and sweet. In
March the food is scarce. In April the second crop comes on,
and then the birds get fat again.” Tamihana Whareakaka,
who was present, chimed in, “Oh, yes; how fat the Pigeons
were in the old days, when we used to go out and trap
hundreds of them ! Kakas, too, were plentiful. These are
disappearing, because the introduced bees have taken pos-
session of the hollow trees. That can’t be helped,” added he;
“ but what is the use of the Government protecting the other
birds and imposing fines and punishments if they allow all the
woods to be destroyed, for how is the Pigeon to find sub-
sistence when the berries are gone ? ” There is some phi-
losophy in Tamihana’s words, but I fear it is a poor argument
against the requirements of advancing settlement. The only
thing to be done is to insist on ample bush reserves being set
apart.
Himantopus leucocephalus, Gould. (White-headed Stilt-
plover.)
Mr. Robert A. Wilson, of Bull’s, writes me, “ Both the
Pied Stilt and the Red-breasted Dottrel nest freely on the
river-bank here [Rangitikei]. They build very low, and their
nests are often, on that account, destroyed by floods. One
pair of Stilts had their nest destroyed three times in suc-
cession in one year, but they formed a fourth, and reared a
brood.”


Glareola grallaria, Temminck. (Australian Pratincole.)
Regarding the occurrence of this widely spread species, I
have received the following particulars from Mr. William
Townson, to whom the specimen belongs: “ The bird was
first seen by Mr. J. B. McKenzie, an agent for the National
Mutual Life", and he came back from the beach for a gun, and
on his return shot the bird and brought it to me. I remem-
bered seeing either the bird or a plate of it, and on turning up
the ‘Royal Natural History’ I found an illustration of it, and
a pretty full description. The hind-toe, forked tail, and the
black line bordering the buff-coloured throat are sufficiently
distinctive, the only point omitted in the description being the
scarlet margin to the gape. The bird was seen hawking after
flies on the-beach. It proved to be a male, and the stomach
contained the remains of insects and beetles. It seemed quite
at home with its surroundings, and I found it in perfect
plumage, without any stains of travel or any marks of having
been in confinement —so different from an Australian Curlew
in my possession, which was shot on the same beach, and
which was ragged and frayed out as though it had been beat-
ing up against head weather for a week. Two years ago I
was at Mokihinui, and saw a couple of Australian Tree-
swallows hunting flies about the head of an old rata in a
bush-clearing. I watched them for some time, but did not
manage to get a specimen.”
Writing of this species, in his “Birds of Australia,” Mr.
Gould says it “ possesses several remarkable specific distinc-
tions, the great length of the tarsi and primaries, which, com-
bined with the graceful contour of its body and the small size
of its head, render it the most elegant species of the genus
that has yet been discovered.”
Stercorarius crepidatus, Vieill. (Richardson’s Skua.)
Mr. A. T. Pycroft sends me the following interesting note
from the Bay of Islands: “Skua-gulls are sometimes seen
here in the summer. Only a fortnight ago, when I was out
fishing at the Rawhiti, I saw three of these birds., As a rule,
I have found them following flocks of the Antarctic Tern,
when the latter are fishing. The Skua singles out a Tern
which has a fish, and frightens it so that the Tern cries out,
and, as a rule, drops the fish ; then the Skua, with great
quickness, secures the prize before it reaches the water.
While this is going on some of the other Terns fly round the
assailant screeching, but they do not venture to attack it.
Shortly after I came here, when pulling up the Waikare
River, I saw a Tern trying to evade the attack of a larger bird
of dark plumage ; however, the poor Tern had no chance
against its powerful enemy, who struck it, causing it to fall


into the water. I was surprised to see the assailant settle
down in the water and lift up the Tern, flying off with it
about 200 yards, when it was dropped. I pulled up, and on
my approach the large bird flew away. The Tern was quite
helpless when I picked it up, but came to later on; however,
it died next morning. I think the bird that struck it was a
Skua-gull, but of this lam not certain.” Probably the larger
form, Stercorarius antarcticus.
I have recorded several instances of the occurrence of this
species in Wellington Harbour. The last specimen that came
under my notice (an adult bird) was taken on the Wairarapa
Lake.
Sterna nereis, Gould. (Little White Tern.)
A pair of this somewhat rare species frequents the Papai-
tonga Lake, but only in rough weather. In January I saw a
pair at the Wairoa Heads. They were fishing in roughish
water, and very near the surface. This bird does not appear
to be gregarious like the other members of the genus. I have
never seen more than a pair together.
Notornis hochstetteri, Meyer. (The Moho, or Takahe.)
I have already dwelt upon the recent capture of Notornis
as an event of exceptional interest. It is curious to find the
following reference to its haunts in Canon Stack’s history of
the now extinct Ngatirnamoe Tribe of Maoris ; “ A party
[of Ngaitahu] had been sent from Pukekura to Eauone to
collect fern-root. One of them, Tane-toro-tika, the son of
Taoka and grandson of Manawa, a young chief of very high
rank, was surprised and taken prisoner. On being carried
to the presence of Te Maui, that chief, seeing him, said, ‘ This
comb-fastening is equal to that comb-fastening,’ meaning that
the captive’s rank corresponded to that of the chief whose
remains had been desecrated, and thereupon killed him.
Taikawa, a Ngaitahu warrior, immediately after the deed, came
upon the band of Ngatirnamoe, and asked them what had
become of their prisoner. When told that they had killed
him, he said, ‘You have done foolishly, for not a soul of you
will now be spared. You will be banished to the haunts of
the Moho (Notornis), and in the depths of the forest will be
your only place of safety.’” Taikawa’s words were prophetic,
for, notwithstanding the persistent rumours of wild men in
the woods of the West Coast, the capture of a Ngatirnamoe
would be a greater event even than the killing of a Notornis.
Rallus philippensis, Linn. (Banded Rail.)
During my last visit to Fiji, when out shooting on the
Island of Wakaya, I heard the unmistakable note of this


species. I also received two skins from one of the other
islands of the group. They differ from the typical form in
the more spotted character of the wings and in the total
absence of the chestnut-coloured pectoral band.
Ocydromus earli, Gray. (Brown Woodhen.)
Having sent Professor Newton a specimen of the Woodhen
from the west coast of the south Island, which I had identified
as the true Ocydromus earli* he wrote me as follows: “ I
have been much struck with the Weka, named on the ticket
0. earli. Last summer I made a pretty elaborate examina-
tion of the fairly good series of specimens of the genus we
have now here (thanks to yourself, Hector, and Yon Hiigel),
and I feel that we (or, at least, I) have not got to the bottom
of the business yet, though I believe that what I have said in
the ‘ Dictionary of Birds ’ (p. 1032) is pretty correct so far as
it goes. I find it hard to bring myself to think that there
were three distinct species in the South Island ; but sooner or
later this dark point will be.made clear, and it would be well
that it should be so. What a fine opportunity there is for
some one to write a monograph of Ballida. In regard to
Ocydromus only, my investigation last summer had produced
on me the impression that I had been able to see daylight,
but this last specimen of yours has almost shattered that
hope.”
Ocydromus greyi, Buller. (The North Island Woodhen.)
Mr. Robert A. Wilson, to whom I am indebted for some
beautiful specimens of this bird, writes to me: “Unlike the
stupid Stilt-plover, the Woodhen, which also lives in the
bottoms of creeks, nearly always nests in a single raised flax-
bush some distance above the flood-mark. When looking for
eggs, if you walk along a creek and examine the bushes stand-
ing by themselves, higher than the rest, you will sometimes
find nearly every suitable one occupied. On our run about
one pair of Woodhens occupy about 300 to 400 yards of
creek-bed, and you never find more than one pair in a section.
Our creeks are all covered at the bottom with thick flax, and
the Maoris have specially trained dogs to catch them in these
localities. The man rides along the creek, while the dog trots
along unconcernedly in the midst of the flax. When he arrives
opposite a Woodhen’s home he stops and dashes in, then 1m as
suddenly rushes out and runs ahead of the Woodhen, which
has, of course, started up the creek; then he turns and meets
the bird, of which he makes a short business. A dog that did
not understand his work would lose much time —first in search-
* “ Birds of New Zealand,” 2nd ed., vol. ii., p. 115.


ing the ground, and then in chasing the bird along the creek-
bottom, where it could travel faster than its pursuer.’
This note is interesting in itself, and, moreover, shows that
this species is still plentiful, in the Rangitikei district at any
rate. I have always known the male birds fight vigorously
for their rights; but in Mr. Wilson’s district they appear to
have a recognised territorial partition. Birds that are de-
veloping so much intelligence surely deserve a better fate
than to be collected by a naturalist or consigned to the Maori
pot.
But the Woodhen fights on very unequal terms with its new
enemies—stoats and weasels. That the introduced carnivora
continue to do untold mischief is beyond question. In the
New Zealand Herald I find the following paragraph on this
subject: “Scarcely a day passes but what we hear some
news of the depredations by weasels in one part or other of
the district. Several deaths among sheep have been reported
in the Hautapu district lately, and on Thursday last Mr. Ward
lost three fine ewes. The deaths in all cases were attributed
to weasels.”*
* My own views as to the absolute wickedness of introducing these
predatory animals into this fair land of ours are too well known to need
repetition. But I should like to quote here what Professor Newton has
to say on the subject: “In respect of extermination leading immediately
to extinction, the present condition of the New Zealand fauna is one
that must grieve to the utmost every ornithologist who cares for more
than the stuffed skin of a bird on a shelf. In the fauna of that region
the class Aves holds the highest rank, and, though its mightiest members
had passed away before the settlement of white men, what was left of
its avifauna had features of interest unsurpassed by any others. It was,
indeed, long before these features were appreciated, and then by but few
ornithologists, yet no sooner was their value recognised than it was
found that nearly all of their possessors were rapidly expiring, and the
destruction of the original avifauna of this important colony, so thriving
and so intellectual, is being attended by circumstances of extraordinary
atrocity. . . . Allowing for a considerable amount of exaggeration
on the part of the sheep-owners, no one can doubt that the rabbit plague
has inflicted a serious loss on the colony. Yet a remedy may be worse
than a disease, and the so-called remedy applied in this case has been
of a kind that every true naturalist knew to be most foolish —namely,
the importation from England and elsewhere and liberation of divers
carnivorous mammals —polecats or ferrets, stoats, and weasels. Two
wrongs do not make a right, even at the Antipodes, and from the most
authentic reports it seems, as any zoologist of common-sense would have
expected, that the bloodthirsty beasts make no greater impression upon
the stock of rabbits in New Zealand than they do in the Mother-country,
while they find an easy prey in the heedless and harmless members of
the aboriginal fauna, many of whom are incapable of flight, so that their
days are assuredly numbered. Were these indigenous forms of an
ordinary kind their extirpation might be regarded with some degree of
indifference ; but, unfortunately, many of them are extraordinary forms
—the relics of perhaps the oldest fauna now living. Opportunities for
learning the lesson they teach have been but scant, and they are vanish-


Bullbr. —On the Ornithology of New Zealand. 27
Ardea egretta. (White Heron.)
On my visit to Paterson’s Inlet (Stewart Island) I saw a
beautiful White Crane, which, it was said, had been frequent-
ing that locality for ten or twelve years. We found him
perched among, or very near to, a colony of Pied Shags,
which were nesting in a tree “rookery,” but the vigilant bird
took alarm and sailed away long before our boat had reached
the spot, or the Shags, ever on the alert, had shown any sign
of uneasiness. We saw him later on in the day, on the other
side of the cove, perched high up on a rimu-tree, and looking
very conspicuous among the surrounding vegetation , but, al-
though it was fully a quarter of a mile off that our boat landed,
the bird took alarm and was off again. I was amused and
pleased at the objection of the lad who rowed me to any
attempt being made to shoot the Crane, because, as he put
it, “We’ve seen him here ever so long.”
About six months later an ardent collector, after much
careful stalking, shot this beautiful Crane, and sent me the
skin. I purchased the specimen, but wrote to my correspondent
expressing my regret that he had interfered with this par-
ticular bird. In his reply he said, “If I had known so much
of the history of this Crane as I know now I never would
have shot it.” It proved to be a female, and at the time it
was killed —the month of August —it had no dorsal plumes.
It is an interesting sight to watch this stately bird fishing.
It wades into shallow water, as far as its long legs will
enable it, and then it remains perfectly motionless till its prey
comes within reach, when it will strike forward with the
rapidity of an arrow, seize it with its powerful yellow man-
dibles, and instantly swallow it. It is quite possible, as
suggested by the Duke of Argyll in the case of an allied
European species, that the small fish are attracted by the
gleaming reflection in the water of the bird’s snowy plumage.
The mention of this solitary Kotuku in Stewart Island
reminds one of a passage in Canon Stack s interesting
brochure, already referred to: “In his island home at Eakiura
(Stewart Island) Kana te Pu dreamt that he caught a White
Crane, which kicked him in the chest while vainly struggling
to get free. Interpreting, this dream to mean that he was
ing before our eyes ere that lesson can be learnt. Assuredly the scientific
naturalist of another generation, especially if ho be of New Zealand
birth, will brand with infamy the short-sighted folly, begotten of greed,
which will have deprived him of interpreting some of the great secrets
of nature, while utterly failing to put an end to the nuisance admit-
tedly a great one. The provoking part of the thing is that, as shown by
Mr. Sclater (“Nature,” xxxix., p. 493), there exists a way, the discovery
of Mr. Rodier, at once simple, natural, and efficacious, of reducing the
rabbit-pest.” (“ Dictionary of Birds,” pp. 224-225.)


destined to overcome some famous Ngaitahu warrior, he went
to a neighbouring stream to bind the omen, and then, eager to
distinguish himself, summoned his followers, and took his
departure for the seat of war. In the crisis of the battle,
when Rakautauwheke was slaying those to the right and left
of him with his taiaha, Kana te Pu, watching his opportunity,
sprang upon his shoulders, and held him so firmly that he
could not draw his arms back again. He tried in vain to
shake him off, but by a sudden movement of his hands he
jerked the point of his weapon against the head of his oppo-
nent, and then, by a violent contortion of the body, succeeded
in inflicting a mortal wound, and the ‘ White Crane ’ fell dead
at his feet.”
Ardea cinerea, Linn. (The Common Heron.)
This cosmopolitan species has been met with in all suitable
localities throughout the whole of Europe, Africa, and Asia,
reaching Japan, many of the islands of the Indian Archipelago,
and even Australia. In the latter country it is evidently very
rare, for Mr. Gould only saw it once in the course of his
explorations. He says, “ During my journey into the interior
of South Australia, in 1839, I saw a fine example of this bird,
but, although I resorted to every possible stratagem in my
power to get within shot of it, I regret to say I was unsuccess-
ful. I have since, however, received a skin direct from New
South Wales. Mr. Blyth considers that this Heron is not
specifically distinct from the Ardea cinerea of India and
Europe; and, if this be really the case, the species enjoys a
very extensive range over the whole world.”
We have now to include New Zealand in the range of this
noble bird, Mr. A. Waley having obtained in Auckland the
skin of one which was caught on board a schooner off the
east coast, about the authenticity of which there can be no
doubt.
Phalacrocorax onslowi, Forbes. (Chatham Island Shag.)
I have now before me two specimens of the Chatham
Island Shag, which Dr. Forbes distinguished from P. imperialis
under the above name. I find that, although the plumage is
similar to that of the Stewart Island bird, it differs in having
a cushion (if I may so term it) of red caruncles on each side
of the forehead. In P. carunculatus, from Queen Charlotte
Sound, these caruncles are orange-coloured. The male bird
has a much broader and more conspicuous white alar bar than
the female, and it exhibits a broad white dorsal spot, which is
entirely absent in the other specimen. I may add that the
latter has some beautiful white filaments at the back of each
eye.


Phalacrocorax punctatus, Sparrm. (Spotted Shag.)
Mr. H. H. Travers states, in one of his published notes,
that the female of Phalacrocorax ■punctatus is never crested;
but this is a mistake. Both sexes are crested during the
breeding season, although I think it is probable that the
female does not assume the crest till the second year. Mr.
W. Smyth has several female birds in full crest, and he
assures me that he “sexed” them very carefully. In the
female the colours are duller than in the male, the crests
appear to be smaller, and the white-necked stripes are not
so broad or conspicuous as in the male ; otherwise the sexes
are alike.
Phalacrocorax melanoleucus, Vieill. (The Frilled Shag.)
In October last I received from my son—who had shot it
in the Papaitonga Lake—a small Shag which is undoubtedly
referable to the above species. It possesses a conspicuous
frontal crest, composed of very narrow feathers of a maximum
length of 1 in. There is also an elongation of the feathers of
the occiput, standing erect like a short mane, and the white
feathers of the face and throat are produced so as to form a
sort of irregular frill. The whole of the under-parts with the
exception of the under tail-coverts, which, like the upper
surface, are black, are of the purest white with a glossy
surface; but on one side of the body there is an indistinct
patch of black, showing that this was the earlier plumage.
The bill is brownish-black on the ridge, the cutting-edges of
both mandibles and the unguis being bright-yellow ; sides of
lower mandible and angles of the mouth yellowish-green,
changing to dull-yellow on the eyelids ; palate and throat pale
bluish-green; inside of both mandibles bright-yellow. The
feet have a rough surface, having the appearance of dull-black
velvet. It proved on dissection to be a female, and it gave the
following measurements: Approximate length, 24 in.; wing
from flexure, 9 - 25 in.; tail, 6'sin.; bill, along the ridge, 2 in.,
along the edge of lower mandible, 2-sin.; tarsus, 1-sin.;
longest toe and claw, 2-5 in. The bird had been frequenting
the lake for two or three years, disappearing at intervals, but
it was so extremely shy that it was almost impossible to get a
shot at it, except by stratagem.
This form is extremely rare in the North Island. I re-
member, when crossing the Otaki Eiver on horseback, some
thirty years ago, seeing one perched on a rock in the shallow
water. At a distance of some 40 yards I could plainly dis-
tinguish the frontal crest, which the bird erected the moment
it became alarmed by my presence.


Phalacrocorax novse-hollandiae, Stephens. (Sea-shag.)
When I was at Papaitonga last Christmas the mill-hands
were felling some lofty rirau-trees on .the northern side of the
lake—ls or 20 chains from the water —on which the Sea-
shags have for many years past had their “rookery.” I
regretted very much to see these trees come down, but they
were beyond my boundary, and I could not interfere. The
young birds had not yet quitted their nests, although they
were well advanced —covered with thick black down, and with
quills and tail-feathers several inches long.
Phalacrocorax varius, Gmelin. (Pied Shag.)
On my last visit to the Bay of Islands—in September —I
was struck with the scantiness of bird-life. Here and there a
solitary Sea-gull was to be seen floating on the surface of the
water, and as we steamed up to Bussell in the tender we saw
a few Pied Shags; that was all. Of. the latter there was a
young one near the landing-wharf which continued to fish
within a few yards of the boat during the whole of our visit,
lasting a couple of hours. Timing it with a stop-watch, I
found that each dive occupied, as a rule, thirty seconds.
Dysporus serrator, Gray. (Gannet.)
Captain Waller, of the “ Anglian,” tells me that in muggy
weather he always finds the Gannet on the wing an infallible
sign that he is nearing the Three Kings. On one occasion,
however, he saw three of them when upwards of two hundred
miles from land, and the occurrence was so unusual that he
made an entry of it in his log.
Tachypetes minor, Gmelin. (Small Frigate-bird.)
Among the collection of New Zealand birds in the Colonial
Museum is a locally mounted specimen of this bird, but I
have been unable to ascertain its history. The only other
New-Zealand-killed one, so far as we know, is in the Nelson
Museum, where it has been for nearly forty years.
Tachypetes aquila, Linn. (Great Frigate-bird.)
Of this closely allied species the Colonial Museum contains
the specimen captured at Castle Point and mentioned in my
“Birds of New Zealand” (vol. ii., p. 185). I have recorded
another which killed itself against one of the southern light-
houses, and was brought to me by Captain Fairchild.
This “vulture of the sea” has a tropical range, and is
comparatively abundant in the Fiji Islands. Whilst staying
with my friend Captain Langdale, at Wakaya, I had frequent
opportunities of observing it soaring overhead, singly or in
pairs, its beautiful white throat gleaming in the sunlight, and


its long forked tail being alternately opened and closed like a
pair of shears. It has marvellous powers of flight, and when
soaring there is scarcely any visible movement of the wings,
but there is a rapid movement of the head, first to one side,
then to the other. When in pursuit of its victims, to compel
them to disgorge, the whole character of the bird is changed ;
but I had no opportunity of witnessing this, the sea being too
calm for fishing. Captain Langdale informed me that a few
days before my visit he shot one with his rifle at a consider-
able altitude, and it came down with a crash on the roof of
his house.
Diomedea regia, Buller. (The Royal Albatros.)
As we left the New Zealand coast (on the 11th September)
for Fiji several birds followed our steamer all day, although
it was perfectly calm. One fine Diomedea regia —readily dis-
tinguishable on the wing from Diomedea exulans by the splash
of white on the humeral flexure—several of the latter, and
also of Diomedea melanophrys, were in our wake till nightfall.
There were two or three of the Giant Petrel and a few Cape
Pigeons. It was a pleasant diversion to watch their aerial
movements from the deck of the steamer, and it seemed to
me that Diomedea melanophrys was decidedly the smartest
and handsomest of the whole group, its movements on the
wing being peculiarly light and graceful. On the following
morning, with a gentle trade-wind blowing, a single Albatros
appeared for a short time, and another swept over our stern
at noon, and then winged its way off into the watery expanse.
And we had not another glimpse of bird-life till we approached
the coral reefs of Fiji. Of course, this in no way surprised us,
because it is notorious that as we approach the tropics sea-
birds disappear. Captain Beaumont (of the s.s. “Flora”)
tells me that in winter he has sometimes carried the Albatros
with him as far as the Tonga reefs, but never in the summer
months.
Prion turtur, Kuhl. (The Dove Petrel.)
Mr. Lyall writes me from Stephens Island: “ The Dove
Petrels are here in thousands ; the ground is covered with
them as thick as they can find sitting-room. They begin to
assemble as soon as darkness sets in, and the noise they make
is something astonishing.”
CBstrelata axillaris, Salvin.
A specimen of this rare Petrel, hitherto recorded only as
from the Chatham Islands, was picked up, not long since, on
the Wairarapa Plains, where also stray individuals of Prion
turtur are often found, driven inland by stress of weather.


The plumage of this Petrel is so singularly like that of Prion
that we may, 1 think, regard it as a case of mimicry for pro-
tective purposes. The two genera are perfectly distinct,
but, as we get better acquainted with the species, we shall
probably find that this Petrel hunts with the communities
of Prion that are so common in our seas. What protection
is gained in the struggle for existence by this curious re-
semblance of plumage can only be a matter of speculation till
we know more about the habits and general economy of these
birds.
Ossifraga gigantea, Gmelin. (Giant Petrel.)
Mr. Napier Bell, the Well-known Civil Engineer, in a
letter from Perth, Western Australia, says: “Two islands
here are the home of the Giant Petrel. This bird is as large
as a Goose, and of a dark slate-colour. I saw one which flew
on board one of the dredges at Fremantle and dropped into
the hopper, which is a great compartment where the dredge
deposits its dredging ; but, as this dredge is worked by suction
from pipes laid to the shore, the hopper is unused, and full of
water. The bird has lived there quite contentedly for a
month, and refuses to leave the hopper. It is fed every day,
swims about in the water, and roosts in the iron girders.”
Puffinus tenuirostris, Temm. (Bonaparte’s Shearwater.)
Mr. David Lyall, writing from Stephens Island, in Sep-
tember, says: “ There is one Petrel here that I cannot find
anything about in your ‘Manual.’ It is not so large as the
Mutton-bird, and lays a pure-white egg, of the size of a
common fowl’s. The colour of the bird is dark-black, and
white on the under-side. It has a call almost the same as
that of the Laughing Jackass, of Australia. I will send you a
pair of them.” He kindly did so, and it proved to be the
above species.
Puffinus griseus, Gmelin. (Sombre Shearwater.)
The late Dr. Shortland, nearly fifty years ago, published a
graphic account of the “ mutton-birding ” operations of the
Maoris in the South Island, These operations have been con-
tinued annually ever since, and it is a perfect marvel that the
species continues to exist, in undiminished numbers, notwith-
standing this wholesale slaughter. The last information I
have on the subject is contained in the following newspaper
paragraph; “ The Western Star reports the arrival of a craft
from the mutton-bird islands with the Eiverton and Colac Bay
contingent, which comprised seventeen families, numbering
fifty individuals. The natives report that the birds were ex-
ceedingly numerous this season, and in splendid condition.


The catch of each individual, young and old, may be taken at
the fair average of fifteen hundred birds, or a total of seventy-
five thousand for the whole of the families. The average price
is about 3d. a bird, so that the season’s operations, when the
birds are all sold, represents a total of £937 10s. Two River-
ton girls are said to have made a record catch, taking four
thousand two hundred birds between them.”
Anas superciliosa, Gmelin. (Grey Duck.)
Mr. William Marriner informs me that on the Wairoa
River, at the commencement of the shooting season, the Grey
Duck is very fat and of excellent flavour, from feeding on the
spawn of eels —tiny little crawling things that infest the mud-
banks of the river in countless millions. On opening the birds
at this season he has found their crops distended with this
food alone, and there is every evidence that it is very nutri-
tious.
The Grey Duck commences breeding on the Papaitonga
Lake about the end of September, and the breeding season
lasts till after Christmas. My son believes that this species
brings out two broods in the season : he counted one clutch on
the lake of eleven young ones.
Anas chlorotis, Gray. (Brown Duck.)
On the occasion of a recent visit to the Manawatu Gorge,
I saw, in broad sunshine, a pair of these Ducks disporting
themselves in a cool pool overhung with tree-ferns and other
vegetation. But as a rule they remain in retirement during
the day and come out at dusk. A Rangitikei correspondent
informs me that this Teal has almost disappeared from that
district. He adds, “As soon as they come out from their
haunts, under the raupo in the swamps, they get shot. They
are too simple for the changed times, and are fast succumbing
to the inevitable.” The last pair I obtained were shot by my
son at Ohau. These were forwarded in spirits to Professor
Newton, and enabled him to make an interesting discovery as
to the affinities of this form with Nesonetta aticklandica, an
account of which has already been communicated to the
Society.
Casarca variegata, Gmelin. (The Paradise Duck.)
Professor MacGillivray said that Casarca may be termed
with equal propriety a Duck or a Goose, and he demonstrated
this by the anatomy of the bird. I may mention another
point of similarity : the male of the above species hisses, when
provoked, after the manner of the domestic gander.
Mr. Morgan Carkeek, who sent me some fine young
Paradise Ducks from the Marlborough District in January,


states that, in his opinion, this species breeds twice in the
year. He found it quite numerous in the mountain streams
or river-beds, and met with many broods of young ones. He
counted generally seven or eight, and on one occasion
thirteen, in a clutch.
Formerly, however, it was far more abundant. Mr. Mc-
Donald, of Blenheim, informs me that in the old days he has
known as many as five thousand taken in a single season.
The numbers have been greatly diminished of late years by
the laying of poisoned wheat for wild rabbits.
Rhynchaspis variegata, Gould. (Spoonbill Duck.)
A pair of these beautifully marked Ducks have nested for
three successive seasons in the sedge near my boat-house on
the Papaitonga Lake. This year the brood came out in the
last week of November.
Podiceps ruflpectus, Gray. (New Zealand Dabchick.)
This is one of the most interesting birds on the Papaitonga
Lake, where it is extremely plentiful, as the result of close
protection. A pair brought out their brood of five about the
15th December. It was very pretty to observe one of the old
birds swimming over the smooth water followed by her little
crowd of young ones, and then detaching herself for a time to
gambol with her mate, and to skim the surface of the water,
apparently in the height of playful enjoyment.
This bird is called “ Taihoropi ” by the Ngapuhi Tribe,
“Weweia” by the Eotorua natives, and “ Taratitomoho ” in
the Waikato.
Eudyptes chrysolophus, Brandt. (The Eoyal Penguin.)
I have lately had an opportunity of examining four curious
specimens of this bird from the Macquarie Islands. Three of
them are partial albinoes. No. 1 has the entire surface of
the flippers and the whole of the body below their insertion
white, tinged with cream-colour on the upper parts. There is
no distinct line of demarcation against the dark plumage above
the wings, but each feather has a brown centre, and this in-
creases in extent till the darker plumage is reached; above
the tail there are also a few touches of brown ; and the tail-
feathers, which are white, have brown margins; rest of the
plumage normal, the golden-yellow on the forehead being
extensive and very vivid. Nos. 2 and 3 have less white on
the upper surface, the plumage of the back being pale yellow-
ish-brown. The fourth specimen has a strong tendency to-
wards melanism. On the right-hand side of the body there
are large irregular patches of slaty-black feathers covering


about one-third of its extent. There is also a cloudy patch on
the throat.
In two other examples submitted to me there are scattered
feathers of the same colour on the under-surface of the body.
Apteryx mantelli, Bartlett. (The North Island Kiwi.)
I find in my diary a note which is worth recording, as
showing the wonderful vitality of this species. I purchased a
half-grown Kiwi, in vigorous health, which I decided to kill as
a specimen. I adopted the usual means —compression of the
breast-bone against the back. The Kiwi fought hard for life,
but at length succumbed, and I laid it in a specimen-box, limp
and lifeless, being to all appearance absolutely dead. In the
evening I went to fetch ray bird, intending to skin it, when, to
my surprise, I found it alive and active, showing no sign of the
tragic experience of the morning. I had not the heart to re-
peat the experiment, so I had a comfortable cage made for it,
kept it for a month to accustom it to confinement, and then
shipped it to England as a present to the Zoological Society,
rewarding in this manner its heroic struggle for existence.
Apteryx occidentalis, Rothschild. (The West Coast Kiwi.)
I lately had an opportunity of examining some good ex-
amples of this species procured by an English tourist from a
bird-dealer at Nelson. I remarked that the bill is very similar
to that of Apteryx oweni, although the plumage, as already
recorded, bears a general resemblance to that of Apteryx
haasti, but is paler. Legs dark-coloured, in which respect it
agrees with the latter; claws horn-coloured.
Apteryx haasti, Potts. (The Great Spotted Kiwi.)
I had six live specimens of Apteryx haasti in my posses-
sion for some time, and was much impressed with their gentle
character as compared with Apteryx mantelli and Apteryx
lawryi. Whilst they were in my enclosure—a period of a
month or more—they never, so far as I am aware, uttered a
single cry, in which respect they differed entirely from the
other noisy species. They were very tame from the first,
allowing themselves to be handled without much resistance.
They had been caught in the wooded country near the Buller
River, and were put straight away on meat-food in lieu of
earthworms. Three of them pined away and died, having
wasted to mere skeletons, being unable apparently to adapt
themselves to the new and artificial conditions of life. The
other three took readily to their new diet —raw minced beef
and ox-heart—and became at the end of the month quite fat
and heavy. I then shipped them to a friend in London, who
received them in excellent health and condition.


Apteryx lawryi, Eothschild. (The Stewart Island Kiwi.)
Of this fine species the Colonial Museum contains a
skeleton, but as yet no skin. I fortunately possess several
skins, which were collected for me by a resident on Stewart
Island prior to the issue of the Order in Council protecting
this bird. Several skins arid skeletons have been forwarded to
Europe, but, so far as I am aware, no living example. Know-
ing that the Zoological Society of London was most anxious
to procure this species, I instructed my agent to bring a pair
in alive, which he succeeded in doing. The Kiwi having in
the meantime become a “ protected bird, ’ I applied to the
Government for the necessary permission under the Act,
explaining at the same time that I had procured the birds
at my own expense as a gift to a society of high scientific
status, and one which has always been ready to do anything
in its power to benefit New Zealand. I assumed, as a matter
of course, that a permit would be granted; but, to my surprise
and regret, our present Minister of Education considered it
his duty to refuse my request, and I accordingly ordered the
birds to be turned loose again. The inconsistency of the mat-
ter is that a brisk trade is going on in these birds under the
very nose of the authorities —live ones from Nelson having
lately been hawked about in Wellington —without any attempt
to stop it.
My Stewart Island collector, Mr. 0. Marklund, who is a
very observant man, sends me the following notes: “At the
end of July I came down from the hills ; and on this trip I
found that the Kiwis were moving down to the lower country
—probably for nesting purposes. I should also mention —
although it may be already known to you—that I have deter-
mined which of the cries are used by either sex. After some
practice with a leaf of wild flax held in a certain position
between my two thumbs I can fairly well imitate their cry.
I have discovered that the best time for these birds is a moon-
light night, with the sky somewhat overcast. If it is too light
the birds will not leave the scrub. They also object to rainy
weather. Though apparently insensible to pain when attacked
by a dog, they are naturally very timid. If the moon is
bright their own shadow will sometimes cause them un-
easiness; indeed, I have seen one make a kick at its own
shadow on the ground, accompanied by that peculiar hissing
sound they make when confined in a pen. I have noticed also
that a smaller bird will always run as hard as his legs will
carry him at the least show of anger from a larger and stronger
one. By imitating their cry—the deep rasping one being
the more successful —I have always had the clear shrill one in
response. If in the close neighbourhood, I would then send


the dog in, and it would always turn out to be a male. The
male is generally ready to answer, especially if it does not
happen to know where its mate is, but the female is more
independent, and often takes no notice whatever of the call.
With this bird the ordinary relationship between the sexes
appears to be reversed ; for instance, it is the female that
undertakes the defence of the house and home, for the male
gives in after a very slight struggle; but the male is the faster
runner of the two. After the young is big enough to follow
its parents the male (not the female) seems to take special
charge of it. The male has a high shrill cry; the female
utters a low hoarse note —between a cry and a hiss. In one
case I heard the male uttering the cackling noise—like a hen
with chicks—but that may be common to both sexes.
Although a nocturnal bird, its sight is weak even at night, for
I have seen them running against objects that could easily be
avoided ; but their hearing and sense of smell are very acute.
By going against the wind I have got to within 10 ft. of them
and seen them feeding. They do not confine themselves to
worms, but will also take any kind of vegetable matter avail-
able—for example, the young shoots of a very common alpine
orchid. I have found three different kinds of seed and a
small white berry (of which I have not yet seen the plant)
in the stomachs of those I have opened. Enclosed you will
find some of the seeds on which the Kiwis subsist. Ido not
understand how they can find any nourishment without crack-
ing the seeds, but the fact remains that they do, for I have
found these seeds in the stomachs of several that I have
opened. The grass producing this seed grows in great
abundance up to a level of 2,000 ft. above the sea.” The seeds
sent are those of Gahnia procera; they are red-coloured, and
of the size of small wheat.*
Apteryx oweni, Gould. (The Grey Kiwi.)
The cry of this species is very much weaker than that of
Apteryx laivryi, described above. As with that species, how-
ever, the sexes cry together —the cry of the male resembling
the shrill cry of the Woodhen, although not so loud, and that
of the female being a husky screech.
* Since the above was written I have received another egg of this
species from Stewart Island. It is of large size, measuring 525 in. in
length by 3'2m. in breadth. It is of a regular ovoido-elliptical shape,
and the shell is of a clear greenish-white. It is similar to those described
by me on a former occasion, and is readily distinguishable from the egg of
Apteryx mantelli.


n
‘
*
i.
, •
.• ■
! - - *
I
. ' . .. ' ‘
' • ' • . - • I
■1 ■
.. 1 1 .1
■ ■ ■ ■ ■ .' i . ... i ■
j


transactions scto Eralantj Institute, Voi. xxxi. pi. i.
NOTORNIS.
(To illustrate Papers by Puller and Penh am, from photo hy A. Hamilton.)


■
■




»
i
i
t
i
