

ON THE ORIGIN AND MIGRATIONS OF THE
POLYNESIAN NATION.
The Key. De. LANG.
Read , 5 ./«///, IS7G.
U-J j/p
f




ON THE ORIGIN AND MIGRATIONS OF THE
POLYNESIAN NATION ;
DEMONSTRATING THEIR ORIGINAL DISCOVERY AND PROGRESSIVE
SETTLEMENT OF THE CONTINENT OF AMERICA.
By the Eey. Dr. Lang.
[Head before the Royal Society ofN.S.W., 5 July , 1876.]
In the outset of a series of lectures delivered before this Society
seven or eight years since, I observed that the singular phenome-
non which the South Sea Islands present to the eye of a philo-
sophical observer is perhaps one of the most difficult to account
for that has ever engaged the efforts or the ingenuity of man.
From the Sandwich Islands in the Northern, to New Zealand in
the Southern, Hemisphere; from the Indian Archipelago to
Easter Island, adjoining the continent of America —an extent of
ocean comprising sixty degrees of latitude and a hundred and
twenty of longitude, that is exactly twice the extent of the
Eoman Empire in its greatest glory —the same primitive language
is spoken, the same singular customs prevail, the same semi-
barbarous nation inhabits the multitude of the isles.
In using this language, however, I would not be understood to
include the numerous islands and groups of islands of the West-
ern Pacific ; the inhabitants of which are all remarkably different
from the other South Sea Islanders, and would seem to be derived
from the same primitive stock as the aborigines of Australia and
the Papuans of New Gruinea. These islanders of the Western
Pacific are all of a much darker hue than those of Polynesia
Proper, or the Eastern Islanders, many of them being jet black ;
and there is this remarkable distinction between the two races,
that while the languages of Eastern Polynesia are all mere
dialects of the same primitive tongue, there is an infinity of lan-
guages in the islands of Western Polynesia, and all remarkably
different from each other, every island of any size having one
of its own, and the larger islands three or four.
My attention was strongly directed to this very interesting sub-
ject at an early period after my arrival in this Colony for the first
time in the year 1823 ; and as there was a more frequent inter-
course at that period than in later years, between New South


Wales and certain groups of islands in the Pacific, I employed
myself as I could from time to time in investigating the
manners and customs of the islanders generally and the modes and
causes of their migrations from island to island, and in endeavour-
ing, if possible, to ascertain from what part of the surrounding
world they originally came.
The Polynesians, like all other islanders, are a maritime people,
very frequently if not constantly at sea, and ever and anon making
short voyages from island to island in their respective groups. Now
although the trade winds in the Pacific are remarkably regular, they
are not so uniformly. Sudden and violent westerly gales arise from
time to time, and when these are contrary to the course of the
unfortunate islander, passing perhaps from one well-known island
to another, he may be driven out to sea, notwithstanding all his
efforts to the contrary, and may never regain his native isle. In
such cases, unless he happens to be cast on some previously un-
known island, he will at length be engulphed in the waves. This
then is the first of the ways in which the numberless islands of
the Pacific Ocean have been successively peopled, in the course
of ages past, at a cost of human life and suffering absolutely
appalling to think of. The second of the modes in which the
numberless groups of the Pacific Ocean have been successively
peopled in past ages is from the event of war. In all past time
the islands of the Pacific have been the scene of almost
perpetual and savage warfare ; and it has often happened that the
vanquished party have been obliged to trust themselves in their
canoes to the mercy of the winds and waves, and the chance of
being cast upon some unknown island, rather than remain in their
native island to be butchered wholesale by their victors. This
has in all likelihood been the origin of cannibalism in the South
Sea Islands, the wretched survivors in these uncertain and peril-
ous voyages being compelled from sheer necessity to kill and prey
upon one another ere they could reach, if they ever did, any land.
The state of things I have thus pourtrayed accounts for another
and remarkable fact in Polynesian history, viz., the absence of any
distinction of caste among the natives of the New Zealand group
of islands, while in the Tonga or Priendly Islands, which the
vicinity and the resemblance of language in these groups would
indicate as the original home of the New Zealand race, there is a
full development of caste. For in whatever manner the original
forefathers of New Zealand had left Tonga, their supposed native
isle, all of the lower castes would be mercilessly butchered one by
one for the subsistence of the rest, and the whole of the original
inhabitants of their new found land would thus be Eangatiras or
gentlemen. The spirit of adventure, which in many cases has been
remarkably developed among the South Sea Islanders, must also
have tended strongly to the spread of mankind over the number-


less isles of the Pacific. At all events, since the islands of the
Pacific were first known to civilized men, there have been numer-
ous instances of all these modes—by accident, by the event of
war, and by the spirit of adventure —of carrying population to
the most distant islands. The captain of the vessel in which I
made my first voyage from Sydney to England, in the year
1824, having previously been the master of a whaler in the
Pacific, told me that on one occasion he happened to fall in with
a canoe with a number of natives on hoard who had accidentally
been driven to sea by a sudden gale, and having nearly expended
all their provisions, were utterly unable to find their way back to
their native isle. The benevolent shipmaster took them all on board
his vessel and supplied them with the necessary food for their
subsistence. But as it would have taken him about three hun-
dred miles out of his proper course to carry them to their native
island, he merely gave them a compass, and showing them how to
use it he left them to pursue their homeward voyage themselves.
In due time the summits of the mountains of Tahiti, their native
isle, hove in sight, and the natives leaped and danced for joy at
sight of them in their canoe. Then looking first at the land and then
at the compass, their mysterious guide, which they supposed alive,
they exclaimed, “ The cunning little thing —it saw it all the time!”
The next question before us is from what portion of the habit-
able globe has the Polynesian race been derived, and with what
other family or tribe of the earth’s inhabitants does it exhibit any
affinity p
Before attempting to answer this question, I would observe
that there are certain writers who maintain that the Polynesians
could not possibly have come from the westward or the continent
of Asia, from the prevalence of the easterly or trade winds of
both hemispheres. He Zuniga, a Spanish writer of some celebrity,
and the author of a history of the Philippine Islands, in which he
held office under the Spanish Government, maintains that the
Polynesians could never have made their way across the Pacific
from the westward, in consequence of the uniform prevalence of
the easterly trade winds in that ocean. He therefore advances
the singular hypothesis that the South Sea Islands were originally
peopled from America, and alleges in proof of it the remarkable
resemblance of the language of the American Indians of Chili, of
which certain specimens were contained in the history ot that
country by the Spanish historian to that of Tagala in
the Philippine Islands; forgetting that the natives of continents are
never maritime people like those of islands, and not taking into
consideration the obvious fact that even if the American Indians
had been disposed to maritime adventure, they might have made thou-
sands of voyages from the west coast of America ere ever they could
hit upon any one of the Islands of the Pacific, the nearest of


which is at least 2,000 miles from the American land. But this
testimony of that eminent navigator La Perouse is decisive
against the hypothesis of He Zuniga. “ Westerly winds,” says
that distinguished navigator, “ are at least as prevalent as those
from the eastward in the vicinity of the equator, in a zone of
7or 8 degrees north and south; and they” (that is the winds
in the equatorial regions) “ are so variable that it is very little
more difficult to make a voyage to the eastward than to the west-
ward.” To the same effect Captain (afterwards Admiral) Hunter,
R.N., the second Governor of New South Wales, observes in the
narrative of his voyage from Port Jackson to Batavia, in the year
1791, Vlt was very clear to me, from the winds we had experi-
enced since we came to the northward of the line, that at this
time of the year (the end of July), and generally during the
height of the north-west monsoon in the China seas, these
(westerly) winds do sometimes extend far to the eastward of the
Philippine Islands, and frequently blow in very heavy gales.”
Having thus disposed of the preliminary objection as to the
alleged impossibility of getting to the eastward in the Pacific
Ocean, I observe that the Polynesian race exhibits the clearest
evidence of an Asiatic origin.
First, —In the distinction of caste, which, as I have already
observed, although not existing in New Zealand, for the reason I
have mentioned, was as clearly developed in the Friendly Islands
as it ever was in India.
Secondly,—ln the singular institution of Taboo, which obtains
universally in the South Sea Islands, and is evidently also of
Asiatic origin. The word Taboo corresponds pretty nearly with
the Latin sacer or the Greek avaOe/xa, the person, place, or thing
under taboo, being what the Latins would call sacer diis coelestibus,
holy or sacred to the celestial gods, or sacer diis infernis, accursed
or devoted to the infernal gods. It may be difficult indeed to
account for so singular an institution as the Polynesian taboo;
but its Asiatic origin is evident and unquestionable. Its influence
and operation may be traced from the Straits of Malacca, across
the whole Continent of Asia, to the Sea of Tiberias and the Isles
of Greece. In lonia, in Hindostan, and in Tahiti, the person, the
place, or the thing that was subjected to the influence of the
mysterious taboo was, in the words of the Latin historian, augurus
patrum, et prisca formidine sacrum , abstracted from the common
usages of life, by a superstitious dread, the result of ancient
religious observances.
Thirdly,—Numerous Asiatic customs and observances are
practised in the South Sea Islands, as well as in the Indian
Archipelago, which closely adjoins the Continent of Asia, and
must therefore have been originally peopled from that continent.
Of these, however, our time will only allow me to mention one,


but a very remarkable one —I mean the filthy practice of chew-
ing the areca nut or piper hetel, so prevalent in the East Indies —
a practice which makes th© mouth unnaturally red and the teeth
black. This Asiatic practice was observed by Captain Hunter
among the natives of the Duke of York’s Island to the eastward
of New Ireland; and by Captain Hovell, of the “ Young Austra-
lian,” among the inhabitants of Banks’ Island, still further east,
or in 170° west longitude.
Fourthly, —The evidence of language in regard to the origin of
the South Sea Islands is still stronger and less open to objection.
“ Language,” says the celebrated Horne Tooke, “ cannot lie, and
from the language of every nation we may with certainty collect
its origin.”
“ One original language,” observes Sir Stamford Raffles, “seems
in a very remote period to have pervaded the whole Indian Archi-
pelago, and to have spread (perhaps with the population)
towards Madagascar on one side and the islands in the South
Seas on the other.” And in confirmation of this idea, Mr.
Marsden, the author of a history of Sumatra, and an eminent
authority in all matters connected with the Indian Archipelago,
informs us that “ upon analysing a list of thirty-five Malayan
words, of the simplest and most genuine character, twenty will be
found to correspond with the Polynesian generally, seven with a
small portion of the dialects of the South Seas, and seven, as far
as our present knowledge extends with the Malayan itself.”
There is another very remarkable fact, under the head of
language, which I shall merely mention for the present, as I
shall have to refer to it more particularly in the sequel, and
which proves incontestibly the original identity of the Polynesian
race with the Indo-Chinese nations of South-eastern Asia and
the inhabitants of the Indian Archipelago ; for in common with
these nations the Polynesians, in the islands in which their social
system was more fully developed, as in the Tonga or Friendly
Islands, as compared with New Zealand, there was a language of
ceremony or deference distinct altogether from the language of
common life. My idea therefore is, that the forefathers of the
Polynesian race were somehow struck off from the other or
Malayan tribes of the Indian Archipelago at so early a period in
the history of mankind as within five hundred years after the
deluge, according to the Hebrew chronology, and that in the
course of many successive generations, and under the influence of
those occasional westerly gales that prevail in the Pacific, they
had crossed that ocean to the eastward, within the Equatorial belt
of La Perouse if not rather considerably to the northward,
according to our very able Member, Mr. Edward Hill, from their
supposed starting point in the Philippine Islands, to Pasquas or
Easter Island, in latitude 27° in the Southern Pacific, within


2,000 miles of the American land. There, at all events,
our own great navigator, Captain Cook, actually found not only
a people of the real Polynesian type but the colossal remains of
their long extinct civilization.
And this extreme antiquity which I assign to the Polynesian
race is not merely a matter of conjecture. . There are two
remarkable notes of time in the case that throw us back irre-
sistibly to the very cunabula gentis, the actual cradle of the
Polynesian race. The distinguished scholars of the Indian
Archipelago—Sir Thomas Eaffles, Dr. Leyden, Mr. Crawford,
Mr. Marsden, and others —inform us that there have been two
distinct foreign infusions into the ancient Malayan tongue, viz.,
an Arabic infusion co-eval with the era of Mahomet and the
Mahometan invasion of the East. Now, of this copious Arabic
infusion in the Malayan language, which may be dated as high as
the seventh century of our era, there is no trace in the Polynesian
tongue—a circumstance which proves incontestibly that the
Polynesian race had been struck off from the Malayan tribes of
the Indian Archipelago before the era of Mahomet. But there
is another and much more ancient foreign infusion in the Malayan
language, of which also there is no trace in the Polynesian dialect,
I mean the Sanscrit infusion. This, therefore, throws back into
the very highest antiquity the origin of the Polynesian race as a
distinct family of mankind.
To retrace our steps for a moment, we have now established the
important fact, that under the influence of causes that are still in
operation throughout the South Sea Islands, the Polynesian race
has spread itself in the course of long ages past over the whole
extent of the Pacific Ocean—from the Sandwich Islands in
the northern to New Zealand in the southern hemisphere, and
from the western shores of the Pacific, to Easter Island, within
1,800 or at the utmost 2,000 miles of the American land.
At the time when I was earnestly pursuing my investigations
into the origin and migrations of the Polynesian race, .1 was
myself crossing the Pacific, on my second voyage from Sydney to
London, in the year 1830, having carried with me to sea for the
express purpose, such works bearing on the subject as I could
then procure in the Colony. We had encountered on that
occasion a strong southerly gale of seven days continuance
after rounding the North Cape of New Zealand; and for
part of that time we had the mountains of that island
clearly in sight. We then got a strong westerly gale that
carried us the whole way right across the Pacific to Cape Horn,
with close-reefed topsails, at the rate of ten or eleven knots an
hour. In these circumstances, when reading De Zuniga’s work, in
which he tells us that the aboriginal languages of Tagala, in the
Philippines, and of Araucania, in Chili, were remarkably similar


(bastanfe conformed) , and alleges the fact as a reason for his strange
hypothesis,' that the South Sea Islands were peopled from
America ; it struck me all at once and with prodigious force, when
glancing, as I could not help doing at the moment, at the possible
results to which the suggestion might lead, that the converse of
the Spaniard’s hypothesis might perhaps be the true idea in the
case, and that instead of Easter Island having been colonized and
settled from America, some unfortunate canoe suddenly blown off
from that island by some such violent westerly gale as the one
before which we were then careering over the great waters of the
Pacific, might have landed the first cargo of human beings on the
continent of America.
It would seem indeed as if Easter Island had been placed in
its actual position by the all wise and beneficent Creator for the
express purpose which in all likelihpod no other island in the
Pacific could have served—of ensuring the discovery and settle-
ment of that great continent by the Polynesian race —of proving,
so to speak, a stepping stone between Polynesia and America.
Situated, as that island is, in 27 degrees south latitude, that is,
well up in the south temperate zone, and very nearly in the
latitude of the city of Brisbane, on this coast, it is equally
beyond the influence of the south-easterly trade winds of the
intertropical regions, and within the full sweep of the strong
westerly gales of the southern Pacific. Such gales as the one I
experienced in the year 1830 —and I have experienced various
others of the same kind in subsequent voyages across the Pacific —
such a gale as I have referred to would certainly extend as far
north as Easter Island ; and, once caught within its resistless
sweep, the hapless Polynesian craft would be driven before it, in
all likelihood in less than ten days, to the American land. And
where is it supposable that a Polynesian vessel would in such
circumstances reach the American continent ? Why, the westerly
gale I have supposed would admit of no deviation from a due
easterly course, either northward or southward, in the case of any
hapless vessel accidentally brought within its power. Such a
vessel would therefore reach the unknown land to the eastward,
as nearly as possible in the latitude of Easter Island —that is,
somewhere near the present seaport town of Copiapo, in the
Republic of Chili. That, lam confident, was the place where the
American continent was first trodden by the foot of man.
I am happy to be able to state in this stage of our inquiry that
an able and scientific member of this Society, Mr. Edward Hill—
who is eminently qualified for offering a reliable opinion on the
subject of our present investigations, from having himself spent
not less than four years in traversing the Pacific Ocean in all
directions, and especially from having made the origin and
migrations of the Polynesian nation his particular study for


many years past —has assured me that he coincides entirely with
me in the views I have stated both in regard to the origin ox
the Polynesian nation in the Indian Archipelago and to the courses
which the individuals of that nation must have taken in crossing
the Pacific in the regions of its greatest breadth from their start-
ing point in the Philippine Islands to Pasquas or Paster Island,
which he reckons is situated 2,200 miles from the American land.
There he leaves me, however, not from any doubt as to my being
then on the right track for ascertaining how both North and
South America were originally peopled, but because he had
never entertained the thought of following the Polynesians across
the intervening tract of ocean that separates Easter Island from
the mainland of America.
Taking it for granted, therefore, for the sake of argument, that
that continent was originally reached by a canoe full of Poly-
nesians, who had been accidentally blown oft' the laud from Easter
Island by one of those sudden, violent, and protracted westerly
gales that prevail at certain seasons in the southern Pacific, and
had crossed the intervening breadth of ocean to the American
land, somewhere near Copiapo, in the Republic of Chili, what
would be the result of these unfortunates finding themselves in
their new-found-laud? Why, like'all emigrants from the old
world to some colonial field beyond seas, they would just repro-
duce in their new settlement the whole framework of society on
the model on which it was constructed in their native isle.
They would practice the same manners and customs as had
obtained in their fatherland, and they would construct both their
private habitations and their public buildings on the same plan
or model to which they had been accustomed in the land of their
nativity. . .
Now, this is precisely what we find to have been the result ox
the supposed original discovery of America by a handful of
famished Polynesians at a very early period in the history of
mankind. We find the whole framework of society among the
aborigines of America constructed on precisely the same model
as in ; we find the same singular manners and customs
prevalent in both cases ; and we find those wonderful remains of
an extinct civilization in America that excite the astonishment of
modern civilization, of precisely the same character and aspect
as if they had been erected by a Polynesian architect.
Reserving the proof of this for the present, I would now
present the Society with a brief statement of the theories put
forth by a great variety of authorities in regard to the origin of
the Indians of America, in the recent work of an eminent
American historian, Mr. Bancroft, entitled “ The Native Races
of the Pacific States of North America.” Before doing so, how-
ever, I would Jay dowm as a test for judging and deciding on all


such theories the principle established by the great philosopher
and traveller, Humboldt, and confirmed and strengthened by
other two very eminent authorities on this subject —Dr. Morton,
of Philadelphia, and Dr. Yon Martius, of Bavaria.
What then is the testimony of that eminent philosopher and
keen observer, Baron Humboldt, on the subject of the aborigines
of America ? W"hy, it is as follows : — u The nations of America,
except those which border on the Polar circle, form a single race ,
characterised by the form of the skull, the colour of the skin, the
extreme thinness of the beard, and straight, glossy hair.’ *
And again, “ I think I discover, in the mythology of the
Americans, in the style of their paintings, in their languages,
and especially in their external conformation, the descendants of
a race of men, which, early separated from the rest of mankind,
has followed for a lengthened series -of ages a peculiar road in
the unfolding of its intellectual faculties, and in its tendency
towards civilization.”f ,
Dr. Morton, of Philadelphia, with whom 1 spent an evening in
his own house in that city, in the year 1840, was the author of a
scientific work of the highest character,!]; entitled “ Crania Ameri-
cana,” containing accurate drawings of the crania of all the
aboriginal races of that continent, from the Esquimaux region
in the far north to Cape Horn. Having heard very shortly
before of a Professor in the German University of Ereiburg
maintaining very dogmatically that the Azteck conquerors
and the comparatively civilized builders of the pyramids and the
other wonderful ruins in America were a totally different race
from the wild Indians of the forest of the present day, Dr. Mor-
ton assured me that there was no difference in the skulls of the
aborigines, that they were all one people, the descendants of one
common stock, one nation, and on asking him to what section of
the human family the Indo-Americans bore the greatest resem-
blance in their craniological development, he replied at once the
Polynesian.
I shall be reminded, however, that the Indo-Amencan nations
of Peru and Mexico were in a comparatively high state of civiliza-
tion at the period of the Spanish conquest. When A merica was
first discovered and colonized by Europeans, the western equa-
torial regions of that continent were the seat of extensive, flour-
ishing, and powerful empires, the inhabitants of which were
well acquainted with the science of government, and had made
no inconsiderable progress in the arts of civilization. At the
time when the institution of posts was unknown in Europe it
* Humboldt’s Researches, vol. i, p. 15.
f Ibid. , p. 200. ,
+ Dr. Morton had quoted in his great work a work of mine published in
London in 1834, on the subject of this paper.


was in full operation in the Empire of Mexico ; at a time when a
public highway was either a relic ot' Eoman greatness or a sort
of nonentity in England, there were roads of 1,500 miles
in length in the Empire of Peru. The feudal system was
as firmly established in these transatlantic kingdoms as in France,
and the system of etiquette that regulated the intercourse of the
different ranks of society, was as complete and as much respected
as in the Court of Philip the Second. The Peruvians were
ignorant of the art of forming an arch, but they had constructed
suspension bridges across frightful ravines ; they had no imple-
ments of iron ; but their forefathers could move blocks of stone as
huge as the Sphinxes and the Memnons of Egypt. The Mexicans
were unacquainted with the art of forming cast metal pipes, but
they had constructed dykes or causeways as compact as those of
Holland ; and their capital, which was situated in the centre of a
salt water lake, was supplied with a copious stream of fresh water,
brought from beyond the lake in an aqueduct of baked clay.
They had had no Cadmus to give them an alphabet, but their pic-
ture writing enabled them to preserve the memory of past events
and to transmit it to posterity.
“ The Indigenous race of the New World,” observes Dr. Von
Martius, an eminent Bavarian philosopher, who travelled in the
Brazils during the earlier portion of the present century, “ is
distinguished from all the other nations of the earth, externally
by peculiarities of make, but still more internally by their state
of mind and intellect. The aboriginal American is at once in
the incapacity of infancy and unpliancy of old age ; he unites the
opposite poles of intellectual life.” And again, “ The first
germs of development of the human race in America can be
sought nowhere except in that quarter of the globe.* In short,
Humboldt, Dr. Morton, of Philadelphia, and Dr. Von Martius,
all give it as their deliberate opinion that the aborigines of
America are all, with the exception of the Esquimaux of the
Polar circle, one people, and unlike every other people on the
face of .the earth. But while both Humboldt and Dr. Morton
modestly decline pronouncing any judgment as to their origin,
Dr. Yon Martius, in the true spirit of modern scepticism, tells
us at once that they had sprung into existence on the spot.
To return now to Mr. Bancroft, although that writer lays
down no theory of his own as to the original peopling of
America, he evidently inclines to the opinion of those who derive
the Indo-Americans from Eastern Asia by Behring’s Straits.
“ The theory that America was peopled,” says Mr. Bancroft, “ or
at least, partly peopled, from Eastern Asia, is certainly more
widely advocated than any other, and in my opinion is moreover
* Yon dem Rechtzustande unter der Preinwohnern Brazilians. A paper
by Dr. Yon Martius, in the Royal Geographical Society’s Journal, vol. ii.


based upon a more reasonable and logical foundation than any
other.”* But in so far as the emigration from Eastern Asia is
supposed to have taken place by Behring’s Straits or the Alieutian
Islands, the objection taken to such a theory by the Quarterly
Review (vol. xxi., pp. 334-5), is unanswerable : “We can hardly
suppose that any of the pastoral hordes of Tartars would emi-
grate across the strait of Behring or the Alieutian Islands with-
out carrying with them a supply of those cattle on which their
whole subsistence depended.” To suppose indeed that a people
like the Tartars of North-eastern Asia, who live, so to speak, on
horseback, and subsist almost entirely on the flesh and milk of
their flocks and herds, would cross that narrow strait, either by
water or on the ice when frozen, without carrying with them a
single horse, a single sheep, or a single head of cattle, is quite
incredible. And to talk of an extensive emigration of the Tar-
tar nations of North-eastern Asia flying to America from before
the warlike hosts of Zenghis Khan, how could a non-maritime
people have crossed the intervening tract of ocean between Asia
and America ? or if they did, how did they come to leave all their
sheep, cattle, and horses behind ? But if America was first peo-
pled, as I have supposed, by a handful of famished Polynesians,
who had been suddenly driven to sea from Easter Island, and
carried across the intervening ocean to America, somewhere near
Copiapo in the State of Chili, in South America, the entire
absence of all our domestic animals at the era of the Spanish
conquest was the necessary consequence of the manner in which
they had originally reached their new-found-land.
“ Analogies,” says Mr. Bancroft, “ have been found, or thought
to exist between the languages of several of the American tribes
and that of the Chinese ; but it is to Mexico, Central America,
and Peru, and not to the north-western coast, where we should
naturally expect to find them most evident.”f Besides, in the im-
portant item of architecture, in which we should have expected
some proofs of identity between the Chinese and the Polynesians,
if there had been any original affinity between these nations,
there is none whatever. Speaking of the ruins of Central
America, Stephens says ; “If their (the Chinese) ancient archi-
tecture is the same with their modern, it bears no resemblance
whatever to these unknown ruins.” Central America, vol. ii.
p. 438.
It would be a mere waste of time to take into serious consider-
ation thejelaims which Mr. Bancroft shows us have been put forth
by various writers to the discovery and settlement of America on
behalf of the Egyptians, the Phoenicians or Tyrians, and the Car-
thaginians. It would be inexcusable, however, to omit all men-
* The native races of the Pacific States of North America, vol. i, p. 30.
t Bancroft. Ibid.


tion of those that have been preferred for the Jews in general or
the Ten Lost Tribes in particular. There are four principal writers
on this subject, viz., Garcia, a Spaniard ; Lord Kingsborough, an
enthusiastic Englishman ; and a Dr. Boudinot, an American divine,
of Huguenot descent; but none of these writers give us any
rational idea as to how the Jews could ever have crossed the
Pacific, or any proof of the identity of the Indo-Americans with
the Jewish people, while the far-fetched and strained analogies
on which they base their theory are evidently the mere offspring
of a warm imagination. If my theory as to the origin of the
Polynesian nation is well founded (as I am confident it is), that
nation must in all likelihood have taken its departure from the
Indian Archipelago as early as the age of Abraham himself, and
long before the Jews became a nation at all, and in this opinion
I am not singular.
“ Much,” says Mr. Bancroft, “ has been written to prove that
the north-western parts of America were discovered and peopled
by Scandinavians long before the time of Columbus. Although a
great part of the evidence upon which this belief rests is unsatisfac-
tory, and mixed up with much that is vague and undoubtedly fabu-
lous, yet it seems to be not entirely destitute of historical proof.”
Again, “ We come now,” says Mr. Bancroft, “to the theory
that the Americans, or at least part of them, are of Celtic
origin,” and then he gives us the legend of Madoc, a prince of
Wales, having crossed over to America, as also the opinion of Lord
Monboddo that America was colonized and settled by Scotch High-
landers who had left their language in the country in proof of it.
Mr. Bancroft then alludes to the story of Atlantis, “as old as
Plato,” that is, of a submerged lost land that once lay “ to the west
of Europe,” by which it has been alleged emigrants from the old
world had originally crossed over by dry land to America. But
there are two things fatal to all these theories. Ist. That there
is no reliable evidence whatever of either a Scandinavian, or a
Welsh, or of any other emigration westward from the old world
to America. The emigrants of all these countries died and left
no sign, no progeny. But even if there had been any consider-
able emigration from Europe to America, the three eminent
authorities I have quoted —Humboldt, Dr. Morton, and Dr. Yon
Martius —assure us that the Indo-Americans could never have
descended from any people of the old world, there being no other
nation upon earth with which they have the slightest affinity.
“ Hence it is,” says Mr. Bancroft, “ many not unreasonably
assume that the Americans are autochthones (or created on the
spot) until there is some good ground given for believing them
to be of exotic origin.”* Now this is the very desideratum I
* Ibid, 131.


propose to supply, by giving tbe best possible grounds for believ-
ing that the Indo-Americans are not autochthones or indigenous,
but are intimately related, in the way of natural descent, to one
of the most ancient sections of the family of man. I shall
reserve the proof of this, however, for another paper.
Part 11.
The points I have established in the previous part of my paper
are: —
1. That the Polynesian nation, scattered as it is oyer the num-
berless islands of the vast Pacific Ocean, is of Asiatic origin and
of Malayan race, and was separated from the rest of mankind at
a period of the earliest antiquity in the history of man.
2. That under the operation of causes that are still in active
operation in the Pacific Ocean, the forefathers of the Polynesian
nation proceeded to the eastward from their original point of
departure in the Indian Archipelago, and that their descendants
in many successive ages and generations crossed the Pacific
Ocean —discovering and occupying the numerous islands and
groups of islands in their course, as well as others at great dis-
tances both north and south, till they reached their farthest east
in Pasquaa or Easter Island, within 2,000 miles of the American
land.
3. That the same causes that had operated in carrying them to
the eastward as far as Easter Island —a distance of not less than
7,000 or 8,000 miles—must have operated in carrying them
still farther east, across the remaining tract of ocean from that
island to somewhere near Copiapo, in the same latitude, in
the Republic of Chili, in South America, where our own great
navigator, Captain Cook, found them a hundred years since.
And my theory is—
4. That from that landing-place they gradually proceeded
northwards and eastwards during the numberless ages that have
since elapsed ; occupying and forming settlements in all eligible
localities in their course, first in the southern and afterwards
in the northern continent of America, as far as the Lakes of
Canada and the coast of Labrador.
’With this view I shall show you in the first place that the
civilization of the more civilized Indo-American nations was
exclusively Polynesian, and cast entirely in a Polynesian mould.


I shall then, show that the phenomena of language in America
point directly to a Polynesian origin; and I shall conclude by-
showing that the same singular manners and customs prevail
among the wild and uncivilized tribes of both nations.
I, The peculiar type of the civilization of the Indo-American
nations is exhibited in some measure at least in the very remark-
able architectural remains that are scattered in great profusion
over both the American continents. These consist of pyramidal
erections, of temples, of tumuli, and of fortifications. I have
already observed that the pyramidal and colossal style of the
architecture of the earlier postdiluvian nations was in all likelihood
a relic of the civilization of the antediluvian world. There can be
no doubt, however, of its universal prevalence in that early period
of the history of our race ; and wherever we can trace its exist-
ence we may rest assured that the civilization of which it is the
sign was derived from the ages immediately succeeding the deluge.
Now there is nothing more remarkable than the prevalence of
this peculiar type of civilization, this pyramidal and colossal
style of architecture, in the ruined cities of America. Humboldt,
as I have already shown, compares those of Mexico with the
pyramids of Egypt; and in all the recently-discovered ruins of
Indo-American cities in Gruatimala and Yucatan —in Copan, in
Quirigua, in Palenque, and in IJxmal—pyramidal buildings are
uniformly found, sometimes in great numbers, together with
monolith statues, in some instances upwards of 20 feet high.
“ The pyramid of Papantla,” says Humboldt, “is built entirely
with hewn stones of an extraordinary size, and very beautifully
and regularly shaped; three staircases lead to the top.”* Stephens
also, in his “ Incidents of Travel in Central America,” thus
describes a ruin he had seen in the ancient Indo-American city
of Copan in Gruatimala : “ This temple is an oblong enclosure.
The front or river wall extends on a right line north and south
624 feet, and is from 60 to 90 feet in height. It is made of cut
stones, from 3 to 6 feet in length; and a foot and a half in
breadth. * * * The other three sides consist of ranges of
steps and pyramidal structures, rising from 30 to 140 feet in
height on the slope.”t Now each of these remarkable buildings,
to which there is nothing at all similar either in ancient or modern
Europe, or even in Asia, consists of a pyramid with steps up to
its top on three of its sides, while the fourth forms the wall for
a temple enclosure. But the structure described, on the
authority of Mr. Ellis—the temple and pyramid of Atehuru in
Tahiti —is precisely of the same character, and might have been
erected by the same architect from the same plan • while in
Easter Island, the supposed point of departure from Polynesia to
* Humboldt’s Eesearches, i., 89.
f Stephens’ Incidents of Travel in Central America, page 87.


America, there are monolith statues quite as large as those of
Copan or Quirigua. Can we doubt then that the Polynesians
and Indo-Americans are the same people, and that their fore-
fathers carried with them across the vast Pacific and to both of
the American continents, the peculiar type of civilization, photo-
graphed as it had been upon their minds, that characterised the
ages immediately after the deluge ?
There were, properly speaking, no such buildings as temples
either in Polynesia or Indo-America —what we should call their
temples being merely square or rather oblong spaces, enclosed
with massive walls, but without roofs. It is observed by Mitford,
in his History of Greece, that the antiquity of the writings of
Homer may be inferred from his silence on the subject of temples
and image-worship. They were botlj, it would seem, equally
unknown to the ancient South Sea Islanders and Indo-Americans ;
although in later times, and in particular localities, idolatry
obtained a footing and became prevalent among them. “The
Indians of the forest,” says Humboldt, “when they visit
occasionally the missions, conceive with difficulty the idea of a
temple or an image. ‘ These good people,’ said the missionary,
‘ like only processions in the open air. When I last celebrated
the patron festival of my village, that of San Antonio, the
Indians of Inirida were present at mass. ‘ Your God,’ said they
to me, ‘ keeps himself shut up in a house as if he were old and
infirm ; ours is in the forest, in the fields, and on the mountains
of Sipapu, whence the rains come.’ ”* The same magnificent
idea of a great Spirit pervading the world is, as is well known,
prevalent among the wild Indians of North America, who have
neither temples nor images—a fact that would seem to indicate
that the forefathers of their race in the Indian Archipelago had
been separated from the rest of mankind, before the monstrous
idolatries of the East had been devised, and when the purer
theology of the age immediately succeeding the deluge still
prevailed among men.
There is another indication of the hoary antiquity, as well as
of the identity, of the Polynesian and Indo-American races in
the want of mortar or cement of any kind in their more ancient
buildings. This, it seems, was one of the characteristics of that
pyramidal and colossal style of architecture that obtained in the
ages immediately succeeding the deluge. The Rev. Dr. Porter,
for some time a missionary in the East, and now a professor in the
General Assembly’s College in Belfast, Ireland, who, when
stationed in Syria and Damascus, had visited and described the
colossal remains of the giant cities of Bashan, to which he assigns
an antiquity of not less than four thousand years, thus describes
* Humboldt’s Narrative, vol. v., page 273.


one of the houses which he entered in one of these cities.
“ The house seemed to have undergone little change from the
time its old master had left it; and yet the thick nitrous crust
on the floor showed that it had been deserted for long ages.
The walls were perfect, nearly 5 feet thick, built of large
blocks of hewn stones, without lime or cement of any hind. The
roof was formed of large slabs of the same black basalt, lying as
regularly, and jointed as closely, as if the workmen had only
just completed them. They measured 12 feet in length,
18 inches in breadth, and 6 inches in thickness.”* Pre-
cisely similar is the account which the American, Herman
Melville, gives of the colossal remains in the Marquesas Islands.
“ A series of vast terraces of stone rises step by step for a con-
siderable distance up the hill side. These terraces cannot be less
than 100 yards in length and 20 in width. Their magni-
tude, however, is less striking than the immense size of the
blocks composing them. Some of the stones, of an oblong
shape, are from 10 to 15 feet in length, and 5 or 6 feet thick.
Their sides are quite smooth ; but though square, and of pretty
regular formation, they bear no mark of the chisel. They are
laid together without cement." \ And in the account of the
remarkable colossal remains in' Easter Island, the same very
singular circumstance is observable. “ These monuments consist
in a number of terraces or platforms built with stone, cut and
fixed with great exactness and skill, forming, though destitute of
cement, a strong durable pile. On these terraces are fixed colossal
figures or busts. They appear to be monuments erected in
memory of ancient kings or chiefs.”* Although many of the
South Sea Islands consist of vast masses of coral, and are sur-
rounded with coral reefs, the natives never had in any instance
learned the art of burning the coral into lime ; and when taught
the process by the missionaries, they testified alike their astonish-
ment and delight. The colossal terraces, I may add, are exactly
similar to those described and figured by Stephens in his account
of the ruined Indo-Americau cities of Copan, Palenque, and
Uxmal. I quite agree, however, with Mr. Stephens in regarding
these cities as of a comparatively modern date, and as having
been inhabited in all likelihood down to the era of the Spanish
conquest; first, because there are wooden lintels still remaining
in some of the ruinous buildings ; and, secondly, because the
walls are cemented with mortar, and covered with stucco. Eor
in the more ancient buildings of that continent, as on the shores
of the Lake Titicaca, in Peru, there is no cement used. Spanish
writers describe the remains of an ancient Peruvian temple, con-
* The Giant Cities of Bashan; London, 1867, page 26.
f Typee, page 173.
j Ellis’s Polynesian Researches, iii., 326.


sisting of an enclosed space, open at the top, of which the walls
are about 12 feet in height, and consist of stones of an
immense size, some of them being 30 feet long, 18 broad,
and 6 feet thick. These stones are not cemented ivith
mortar; neither have they been squared to join closely to each
other, like hewn stones in a European building, although the
stones of ancient Peruvian buildings are sometimes found hewn
into regular forms; but cavities have been wrought with the
utmost exactness, and with incredible labour, in one stone to
receive the natural or accidental protuberances of another.
Tumuli, constructed, in some instances, of immense stones,
and in others, as on the banks of the Ohio, of mounds of earth,
are also found among the remains of ancient civilisation, both in
the South Sea Islands and in America.' I have already mentioned
the tomb of Toobo Tooi, in the island of Tonga, constructed of
immense stones that must have been rafted across the sea Irom
some other island, as Tonga is a mere mass of coral, and per-
fectly flat.
Remains of ancient and regular fortifications have also been
discovered in both continents of America; and the circumstance
has repeatedly awakened much curiosity respecting the origin,
the history, and the fate of the nation that has left behind it
these memorials of its ancient civilisation. But regular fortifica-
tions of a similar kind are still met with in all parts of the South
Sea Islands. In some islands they are constructed of walls of
loose stones piled on each other on the tops of hills, as in New
Zealand; in others, as in Ascension Island, in the Northern
Pacific, of a wall of 80 feet high, enclosing a harbour, and
formed of large blocks of dressed stone, built up with great
architectural skill, but without cement of any kind; in others
they are formed of strong palisades, like the Burman Stockades,
as in the level island of Tonga; and in others still they consist
of some artificial addition to a place of great natural strength,
as in the district of Atehuru, in Tahiti. In short, the South Sea
Islanders have evidently been in a sufficiently advanced state of
civilisation to enable them to construct fortifications, and to
adapt these fortifications, in regard to the materials employed in
their construction, to the nature of the country in which they
were required. This part of our subject is so very interesting
that I shall willingly avail myself of the following passage from
Mr. Ellis:—
“ The fortress at Maeva, in ITuahine,” one of the Society
Islands, “ bordering on a lake of the same name, is probably the
best artificial fortification in the islands. Being a square of
about half a mile on each side, it encloses many acres of ground
well stocked with breadfruit, containing several springs, and
having within its precincts the principal temple of their tutelar


deity. The walls are of solid stonework, in height 12 feet.
They are even and regularly paved at the top. On the top of
the walls (which in some places were 10 or 12 feet thick)
the warriors kept watch and slept. Their houses were built
within, and it was considered sufficiently large to contain the
whole of the population. There were four principal openings
in the wall, at regular distances from each other, that in the west
being called the King’s road. They were designed for ingress
and egress ; but during a siege were built up with loose stones,
when it was considered a pari haabuca, an impregnable fortress.”*
Considering that the normal state of the South Sea Islands
has from time immemorial been that of civil or rather inter-
necine war, there is no point of comparison between the
Polynesians generally and the Indo-Americans more interesting
than that of their fortifications. Those of the Indo-Americans
appear to have been generally formed of mounds of earth—a
mode of formation well adapted for such localities as the alluvial
banks of the Ohio, the dead levels near the lakes of Canada, or
the elevated plains of Central America, but not at all adapted
for the South Sea Islands. My talented townsman, the late
John Oalt, Esq., of Greenock, Scotland, the author of a whole
series of popular works of fiction about half a century ago, and
father of the late Premier in Canada, has told me that he
had seen the remains of an Indian fort on the summit of a preci-
pitous ridge near Lake Simcoe, in Upper Canada. It consisted
of a mound of earth, enclosing a considerable extent of ground;
but on the banks of the Miamis Eiver, much farther to the
southward, the Indian forts had been constructed of stone.
Nay, the march of ancient civilisation among the Indo-
Americans may even be traced, in some measure, by those most
interesting remains. In South America I have not heard of their
being found to the eastward of the Andes. The gloomy forests
of Guiana and the Brazils were evidently unfavorable for the pres-
ervation of Indo-A merican civilisation; and the portion of the
race that wandered into these vast solitudes was necessarily
broken up, at an early period, into an infinity of insignificant
tribes that could hold little or no communication with each other,
and that, consequently, very soon sunk irrecoverably beneath the
level of the rest of their nation. But the regions of Central
America, the elevated plains of Bogota and Cundinamarca, the
open valleys of Peru, and the lofty and secluded but highly fertile
tracts of Chili, were much more favorable for the formation of
powerful states and empires ; and it is, accordingly in these por-
tions of the continent of South America that the ruins of ancient
cities and of extensive fortifications are found. In the North
American continent, the course of the Mississippi and its tribu-
* Ellis : Polynesian Researches iv, 459.


tary streams would, doubtless, guide the Indian in his progress to
the northward ; and it is, accordingly, on the banks of the Ohio,
in the Western prairies, and along the lakes of Canada, that we
find the monuments of his ancient power.
There is therefore a remarkable similarity in the developments
of civilisation in the article of national defences or fortifications,
on the part of the Indo-American nations and the Polynesians
respectively. One is constrained to regard them as the same
people, exhibiting, as they do, in circumstances remarkably
different, the same amount of intellectual power and mechanical
ability. There are certainly no such palatial residences to be
found in the South Sea Islands as those of which we find the
ruins in the Indo-American cities of Central America and Yucatan.
But the reason is obvious —the South Sea Islands afforded no
such fields for the establishment of mighty empires, the exercise
of kingly power, and the other developments of luxury, as there
were in Mexico and Peru and Central America. But I maintain,
without fear of contradiction, that there is nothing in the civilisa-
tion of these Indo-American empires of the past that is not fairly
traceable to a Polynesian source.
11. I now proceed to the second branch of our subject —to show
that the phenomena of language, and of what may be called
literature among the aborigines of America, point directly to a
Polynesian origin.
Taking it for granted, therefore, that the theory I have been
endeavoring to establish, is well founded, and that America had
been originally discovered by a handful of Polynesians from Easter
Island, who had been caught suddenly, when perhaps fishing oft’
the coast of that island in one of those violent westerly gales that
are so prevalent in the Southern Pacific, and had been driven
before the wind to the American land, what are the phenomena
in regard to language which this theory would lead us to antici-
pate —supposing as I have done that the forefathers of the Indo-
American race in both continents had landed on the west coast
of South America, somewhere near Copiapo, in the Republic of
Chili, and that the future migrations of their descendants, north,
east, and south, had commenced from that point ? Why, we
should expect, as a matter of course, that the Polynesian character
of the language or languages spoken by the Indo-American
people would be retained the most strongly in the region in which
the forefathers of the race had first landed. Now this is precisely
what we find to be the actual fact. De Zuniga, the historian of
the Philippine Islands, a most unexceptionable witness in such
a case, informs us that the words of the language of the Arauca-
nian Indians of Chili, contained in the work of the his-
torian of that people, are strikingly conformable, bastante covformes,
to those of the language of Tagala, one of the districts of the


Philippines, I may add, in passing, that one of our own respected
members, Mr. Edward Hill, who spent four years of his life in
sailing among the South Sea Islands, and who knows, perhaps,
more about their inhabitants than any other person in this Colony,
while he coincides with me entirely in regarding these islanders
as Malays from the Indian Archipelago, conceives that the Philip-
pine Islands were their starting point from that Archipelago,
and that, to use the nautical language, they made their easting in
the Northern hemisphere, but in that Equatorial belt, in which
La Perouse and Admiral Hunter inform us that at certain
seasons of the year westerly winds are as prevalent as easterly.
We should also expect if my theory is well founded, that the
Indian languages of South America generally, down to the Equa-
tor, would exhibit much more of the Polynesian and vocalic
character than those of the northern continent, the latter being
so much farther from the original point of departure. And this
is precisely what we find in fact. Whole strings of words in the
language of the Indians of the British province of Guiana, whole
strings of words in the language of the Cuna Indians of the Isth-
mus of Darien, are in their form and character precisely like so
many words in the Polynesian -dialects of New Zealand and
Tahiti.
A scholar, accustomed to trace the affinities, or to detect the
radical dissimilarity of different languages, would at once unhesi-
tatingly assert that the following words of the dialect of the
Warows, of British Guiana, were just so many words of the
Polynesian tongue: —
Head Magaah Water Ho
Eyes Maamu Earth Hotah
Mouth Maroho Sun Yah
Hair Maaheo Moon Waanehah
Ears Mahohoko Stars Keorah
Arms Mahaara Thunder Nahaa
Skin Mahoro Rain Naahaa
Blood Hotuh Paddle Haahah
The following words are from the dialect of New Zealand: —
Mahana Day Madino Smooth
Marama The moon Maha Much
Maripi A sword Matapo Blind
N.B. —The syllable Ma, in both lists, is in all likelihood a
prefix.
The following Indian names of localities on the Demerara
River, supplied me by a friend returned to England from Deme-
rara, have also quite a Polynesian aspect: —Arigaraboe, Hiagua,
Haboe, Boera-boera-wa, Warawarau, Maraka, Mamaa, Moenetari,
Mari Mari, Winipio, Mamikoeroa, Toeraatamatia, Motolca, Aky-
ma, Kaiwalia, Kamakaiaha, Dalawila, Wai, or Yai, is the Polyne-


sian word for water; and Waridu, Waratili, Walaba, are the
names of three creeks that empty themselves into the Demerara
River,
The following specimens of the language of the Cunas, one of
the tribes of Indians inhabiting the Isthmus of Darien, have also
very much of a Polynesian aspect. I extract it from “The
Journal of the Royal Geographical Society for the year 1868,”
page 100.
Father
Tata
Nana
Mother
Nusatileli Nana, Nusatileli’s mother
Urpa
Brother
Sister
Orne
Hilu
Tule
Ti
Man, or men
Water
Canoe
Paddle
Ulu. Look to the canoes —Ulutaque
Canie. Take care of the paddles—-Came
pehue taki.
Rati
Black
Red
Kiniti
Tumati
Chuli
High
111, evil
I, me
Anu
Pe
You, thou
Day
Evening
Rice
Yppa
Sueto
Aro
Flesh
Sana
Needle
Ico, yco
Cana
Naala
Bench, seat
Dish, plate
Calabash
Yes
Noga
Ee (nasal)
Chule
No, nothing
Who
Where, when
To take
I R i
Pia mai
Kae
To see
Take
Nica
To have
What have you ?
To tell
Ipi pe nica
Shogue. Tell him —Pe ehogue.
Huishi
Nae. Go (imper.), Pe nae.
To know
To go
Pain
One
Two
Nun make
Kuasak
Pagua


Three Pa
Four Pake
Five Atal
Six Nerkua
Seven Kugule
Eight Pavaga
Nine Pake wake
De Zuniga also observes, in the passage of his work which I
have already quoted, that “ the proper names of places, about the
middle of the continent of South America, are very similar to
those of the Philippines.”
The following are a few of these names of places in South
America having a Polynesian aspect: —Peru, Quito (Kito),
Guatimala (Katimala), Arica, Loa, Titicaca, Panama, Huayna,
Chili, Caicara, (Kaikara), Alahualpa, Tiahuanacu, Arequipa
(Arekipa), Guarohiri (Karohiri), Huanuco, Lima, Tarapaca,
Guana Xato (Kanahato), &c. The same Polynesian character
of the language also holds in regard to persons even in Mexico.
For example, the Mexican reverential affix tzin or azin, which
was always added to the names of princes, is in all likelihood
the Indo-Chinese affix, asyane, signifying lord, if not rather the
Chinese word tsin. In the list of Mexican kings who reigned
previous to the era of the Spanish conquest we find the names of
Nopal-tzin, Ho-tzin, Quina-tzin (Kina-tzin), Cacoma-tzin,
Cuicuitzca-tzin, Coanaco-tzin, Montezuma-tzin, Guatimozin (Ka-
Tima-tzin). Several of these proper names have a remarkable
resemblance to modern Polynesian names; the last especially—the
name of the unfortunate prince whom the Spaniards extended
over a fire of coals to compel him to inform them where he had
hidden his treasures —that name is, when stripped of its Spanish
doublet and its reverential affix, a pure New Zealand name.
When we reach the northern continent, however, in which
the movement of nations, wars, and conquests would seem to have
been much more frequent than in the South, the Polynesian or
vocalic character of the language disappears, and we meet with
combinations of consonants of a really formidable character,
altogether unlike the speech of Polynesia. The Aztecks, or
modern Mexicans, who had overrun the Mexican territory from
the northward, and whose tenth king, Montezuma, was the
reigning monarch at the era of the Spanish invasion, ascribed the
erection of the famous pyramid of Teotihuacan to the Toltecks,
a tribe of kindred origin and language, who had also overrun
Mexico, five hundred years before the Azteck conquest; but
they did so simply because their chronology, which, like that of
many other conquering tribes, overlooked the records and tradi-
tions of the vanquished people, did not extend any higher than
the era of the migration and conquests of the northern tribes.


But the probability is that the pyramid of Teotihuacan was
erected long before the Toltecks had emerged from the forests of
the North, and that that warlike but less polished race retained
the ancient Polynesian name of the stupendous edifice, while they
worshipped their owu national divinities within its sacred
precincts, under their own northern appellations. At all events
there is a wonderful difference in character and aspect between
the Polynesian name Teotihuacan and those of the Azteck and
Tolteck divinities Huitzilopochtli, the god of war, and Miction-
cihuatl, the goddess of hell. . .
I have already quoted the strongly expressed opinion both of
Humboldt and of Dr. A”on MArtius, that the Xndo-Americans are
all one and the same people, from north to south, with no inter-
mixture with any other portion the family ol man. Baron
Humboldt also apprises us of the very interesting fact that not-
withstanding the wonderful diversity of language among the
aborigines of America there is a common principle of mechanism
exhibited in the structure of all the aboriginal languages of that
great continent which entitles us to refer them all to one common
origin. “ Languages,” says that illustrious writer, are much
more strongly characterized by their structure and grammatical
forms than by the analogy of their sounds and of their roots ; and
this analogy of sounds is sometimes so disfigured in the dif-
ferent dialects of the same tongue as not to be distinguishable ;
for the tribes into which a nation is divided often designate the
same object by words altogether heterogeneous. Hence it follows
that we are easily mistaken, if, neglecting the study of the inflec-
tions, and consulting only the roots—for instance, the words
which designate the moon, sky, water, and earth—we decide on
the absolute difference of two idioms from the simple want of
resemblance in sounds.” * “ From the country of the Esquimaux
to the banks of the Oroonoko, and again from these torrid banks
to the frozen climate of the Straits of Magellan, mother-tongues,
entirely different with regard to their roots, have, if we may use
the expression, the same physiognomy. Striking analogies ot
grammatical construction are acknowledged, not only in the more
perfect languages, as that of the Incas, the Tymara, the Guarani,
the Mexican, and the Cora, but also in languages extremely rude.
Idioms, the roots of which do not resemble each other more than
the roots of the Sclavonian and the Biscayan, have those resem-
blances of internal mechanism which are found in the Sanscrit,
the Persian, the Greek, and the German languages. It is on
account of this general analogy of structure it is because Amer-
ican languages, which have no word in common (the Mexican,
for instance, and the Quichua), resemble each other by ieir
organization, and form complete contrasts with the languages ot
* Humboldt, übi supra.


Latin Europe, that the Indians of the missions familiarise them-
selves more easily with an American idiom than with that of the
metropolis. In the forests of the Oroonoko I have heard the
wildest Indians speak two or three tongues. Savages of different
nations often communicate their ideas to each other by an idiom
which is not their own.”*
Another extraordinary coincidence in the civilisation of the
Indo-Americans with that of Polynesia presents itself in the fact
of there having been in both a language of ceremony, distinct
from the language of common life. I have shown in my first
lecture that there Avas such a language, not only among the
Indo-Chinese nations of Eastern Asia, but in Polynesia also,
especially in the larger islands and among the more advanced
tribes, as in Samoa and Tahiti; as, for instance, when inferiors
addressed their superiors, when a plebeian addressed a chief, or
Avhen the latter addressed his prince. This language of ceremony
did not consist in the use of a few phrases of deference and
respect, such as those in use in European languages, in addressing
royalty or nobility. It constituted, so to speak, a separate
language, and pervaded the whole economy of speech. “The
Mexicans,” says Dr. Robertson, Avhen alluding to the singular
circumstance, Avhich he had no Idea of its having ever obtained
or been observed among any other people, —“ The Mexicans had
not only reverential nouns, but reverential verbsand the use
of any other than this reverential language in conversing with a
king or higher chief would, both in Mexico and in Tahiti, have been
held tantamount to high treason. This feature of resemblance
between such widely dissevered portions of the human family
is surely of such a character as not to be mistaken for a mere
accidental coincidence ; it constitutes rather an evidence of the
absolute identity of the Indo-American and Polynesian nations
that cannot be gainsaid.
The right of property was recognised and established among
the Indo-American nations; but the lower orders generally
cultivated a considerable extent of ground in common, the
produce of which was laid up in storehouses, called tambos, and
distributed at certain periods, agreeably to some established
custom. Now it is A r ery remarkable that the practice of the New
Zealanders was precisely similar. The kumaras, or sweet
potatoes of that island, are always cultivated pro bono publico by
persons set apart for the purpose ; the produce being afterwards
distributed according to rule. The storehouses in Noav Zealand
are always taboo , the violation of which by any person is death.
I suspect the Spaniards have either reported the word inac-
curately, or disguised it a little with their peculiar pronunciation ;
for the Mexican tambo is unquestionably the same word as the
Polynesian taboo, as they both signify the same thing.


Perhaps, however, the most remarkable feature in the civilisation
of the Indo-American nations was their picture writing and
their hieroglyphics; by which they were enabled to transmit to
posterity a knowledge of the memorable events of successive
ages. The progress made by the Mexicans in these arts of a
higher civilisation was truly wonderful, and the long columns of
hieroglyphics carved in stone on their colossal monuments, and
resembling in some measure the hieroglyphics of ancient Egypt,
carry us back, as almost everything else does in Indo-American
civilisation, to the remotest period in the history of man. Unfor-
tunately there has as yet been no Champollion, as in Egypt—no
Rawlinson, as in Assyria —to interpret these wonderful remains of
an extinct civilisation ; but although there are no such remains
as the picture writing of the ancient Mexicans in the South Sea
Islands, it is quite evident that the Polynesians were on the right
track towards the much higher level of the chroniclers and the
picture writers of Mexico, aud that all that was wanting for the
development of their idea was a suitable field, which the com-
paratively narrow limits of the South Sea Islands and their
small population did not present. “ Along the southern coast of
the Island of Hawaii,” says Mr. Ellis in his Polynesian Researches,
“ both on the east and west sides, we frequently saw a number
of straight lines, semi-circles, or concentric rings, with some rude
imitations of the human figure, cut or carved in the compact
rocks of lava. They did not appear to have been cut with an
iron instrument, but with a stone hatchet, ora stone less frangible
than the rock on which they were pourtrayed. On inquiry, we
found that they had been made by former travellers, from a motive
similar to that which induces a person to carve his initials on a
stone or tree, or a traveller to record his name in an album —to
inform his successors that he has been there. When there were
a number of concentric circles with a dot or mark in the centre,
the dot signified a man, and the number of rings the number of
the party who had circumambulated the island. When there
was a ring, and a number of marks it denoted the same, the
number of marks showing of how many the party consisted, and
the ring, that they had travelled completely round the island ;
but when there was only a semicircle it denoted that they had
returned after reaching the place where it was made.”
I am inclined to differ from Mr. Ellis when he regards these
rude specimens of picture writing as the first efforts of an
uncivilised people towards the construction of a language of
symbols. I am inclined to regard them, in common with those
colossal remains of the architecture of the earlier Polynesians,
which their degenerate offspring of the present day can only
behold with amazement, rather as the scanty but interesting
relics of an ancient and primitive civilisation, of which both the


memory and the evidences have almost passed away. In short, it
appears to me incontestible that the practice of picture writing
was in general use among the earliest inhabitants of the South
Sea Islands ; but that in the course of exterminating wars, or
rather in consequence of that rust which gathers over the human
mind when it is cooped up within a narrow sphere, and thereby
loses the edge and the polish which it acquires by being
frequently rubbed upon the whetstone of society, this and various
other Asiatic arts -were gradually lost.
It is natural, however, to suppose that the impression which
had once been made upon the Polynesian mind, but which had
thus been well nigh effaced, from the causes I have enumerated,
in the South Sea Islands would again be revived and deepened on
the plains of Quito, and around the Lake of Mexico ; just as a
writing in sympathetic ink becomes darker and more distinct
when held close to the fire.
The Indian nations of North America had carried this, as well
as the other arts, and the general civilisation of its central
regions, as high as the lakes of Canada. When that province
was colonised by the French the most powerful Indian nation in
North America was the Iroquois —a nation which it afterwards
required many a fierce battle to exterminate. That warlike
nation was sufficiently civilised at the period I refer to, to practise
the Mexican art of picture-writing ; for an Indian village, situated
somewhere near the site of the present city of Montreal, having
about that period been surprised and destroyed by the French, a
painting or picture-writing, which afterwards fell into the hands
of the French, containing a hieroglyphical representation of the
event, was executed by some Indian artist, to transmit an account
of it either to the distant tribes of the nation or to posterity.
The village was indicated by a series of wigwams, and the state in
which its inhabitants were surprised, by an Indian asleep. The
rising sun indicated that the attack had taken place at the break
of day ; and the moon in her first quarter on the back of a stag,
afforded the additional information that it had taken place in the
early part of that month in the Indian year of which the stag
was the emblem. #
In a letter to the Secretary of the Antiquarian Society,
published in the sixth volume of the Archaeologia, W. Bray, Esq.,
gives an account of an Indian picture-writing which had been
intended to commemorate the exploits of Wingenund, an Indian
warrior of the Delaware nation, about the middle of last century.
It consisted of a series of marks or characters inscribed within a
square figure on a sugar-maple tree on the Muskingham River,
in the State of Delaware. The first line consisted of the figure
of a turtle —the emblem of the tribe to which the warrior belonged
.—an arbitrary mark designating the particular chief who had


executed the writing, and a representation of the sun. Ten hori-
zontal lines on the right side of the figure denoted the number of
expeditions in which the warrior had been engaged ; and opposite
to each of these lines on the left there was a series of marks
resembling the letter X, with a bar across the top of it, repre-
senting the number of scalps or of prisoners he had taken; the
sex of the victim being designated by a slight variation of the
character, and the central part of the figure being occupied with
a rude drawing of three different British forts whicli he had
attacked on these occasions. At the bottom of the figure there
were twenty-three vertical lines inclining a little to the left (the
figure of the sun in the first line of the writing being at the right
side of the painting) to denote that at the time the record was
left the writer was marching on another expedition to the north-
ward.
So far north, even, as the Hudson’s Bay Territory, this method
of communication by picture-writing prevails among the wild
Indians of that inhospitable region. The Bev. John West, one
of the Hudson’s Bay Company’s chaplains, on travelling in the
Bed Biver colony in the year 1820, came up with an Indian
family who proposed accompanying him to the factory. “The
Indian had two sons, who, he said, were gone in the pursuit of a
deer; and on quitting the encampment to travel with us he
would leave some signs for them to follow us on their return.
They were drawn upon a broad piece of wood which he prepared
with an axe. They were —Ist. A tent struck to intimate that
the party had gone forward in a particular direction ; 2nd. Tour
rude figures indicating the number of the party, and exhibiting
by their dress and accoutrements the rank or condition of each
individual, viz., a European chief, a European servant, and Indian
attendant, and the two Indians from the encampment. 3rd. A
curvilinear figure with the two extremities of the curve pointing
towards the hindermost of the figures, to intimate to the Indian’s
two sons that they were to follow the party.” *
The development of this rude method of communication into
the famous picture-writing of Mexico was a natural process to be
expected in the progress of society in the large wealthy capital of
a great empire like that of Montezuma.
The same remark holds good also in regard to the astronomical
knowledge exhibited in the remains of the ancient Mexicans. The
germs of that knowledge existed in Polynesia, and only required
a suitable field for its development; for my friend Mr. Edward
Hill informs me that the South Sea Islanders have, in certain
islands, at least sufficient astronomical knowledge to steer their
course by the stars.
* The substance of a journal during a residence at the Red River Colony;
by John West, M.A., London, 1824.


Part 111.
I now proceed to the third and last department of our inquiry,
viz., to show that the same singular manners and customs,
altogether unlike those of the rest of mankind, are observable
alike among the wilder tribes, both of the Indo-Americans and
the Polynesians.
Before mentioning any of these, I would remark upon the great
resemblance in bodily form that has been observed by intelligent
travellers, in comparing one of these tribes of mankind with
the other. Speaking of the Indians of Acapulco in Mexico, on
the Pacific coast, Captain Basil Hall, R.N., thus writes : —“ Their
features and colour partake somewhat of the Malay character;
their foreheads are broad and square ; their eyes small, and not
deep-seated; their cheek-bones prominent, and their heads covered
with black straight hair; their stature about the medium standard,
their frame compact and well made.”*
One of the most remarkable peculiarities in the manners and
customs of nations is their different modes of disposing of the
dead. On one of my voyages to England, in the year 1839, our
good ship having sprung a leak a few days after leaving this port,
we had to run for repairs to the Bay of Islands, in New Zealand,
where we lay about ten days, shortly before the colonization of
the New Zealand group had commenced. During my stay I
visited the cemetery of the Bay of Islands tribe, situated close to
the native village of Kororarika. There were no graves, however,
to be seen in the cemetery; the dead bodies having each been
wrapped up in mats, and laid upon trestles raised a few feet from
the ground, and left to putrefy in the open air. During the fol-
lowing year, before my return to the Colony, I happened to visit
the exhibition of American Indian curiosities of a Mr, Catlin, an
American gentleman, of a very enthusiastic and adventurous
character, who had been travelling for many years among the wild
Indians of that country, and with whose family I had in the mean-
time become acquainted in New York ; his wife, whom he had
left behind him in the United States, having been entrusted to
my care on her passage across the Atlantic to rejoin her husband
in London. On one of my visits to Mr. Gatlin’s exhibition in the
Egyptian Hall, London, I happened to see an interesting drawing,
or rather painting, which he had made on the spot, of the native
village of the Mandan tribe of Indians in Missouri, and I was greatly
struck at observing that the cemetery of the village had precisely
the same singular appearance as that of the New Zealand native
cemetery I had seen a few months before at Kororarika, in the
* Captain Basil Hall’s Voyage to South America, vol. ii., page 175.


Bay of Islands; the dead bodies in both cases having been wrapped
up in mats and laid on trestles raised a few feet above ground.
I afterwards found, however, that this was the usual mode of
disposing of the dead among the wild Indians of America, so far
north even as the Bed Biver Colony in the Hudson’s Bay Ter-
ritory, as witness the following quotation from the journal of the
Bev. Mr. West, already quoted above :
“ On the following morning I saw an Indian corpse staged, or
put upon a few cross sticks, about 10 feet from the ground, at a
short distance from the fort. The property of the dead, which
may consist of a kettle, axe, and a few additional articles, is gen-
erally put into the case, or wrapped in the buffalo-skin with the
body, under the idea that the deceased will want them, or that
the spirit of these articles will accompany the departed spirit in
travelling to another world.”*
On the occasion of my visit to the cemetery at Kororarika I
observed two other customs or practices of the South Sea Islanders,
indicating, together with that of keeping the dead above ground,
an Egyptian or contemporary origin, as ancient at least as that of
the sojourn of the children of Israel in Egypt. There happened
during my visit to be one of those periodical mournings for the
dead in progress which are symptomatic of a similar origin. A
number of native men and women were assembled in the cemetery
—the former for the most part strongly tattooed, while the latter
were ever and anon cutting themselves with mussel-shells till the
blood streamed down from their cheeks as they gazed intently at
the remains of the deceased; for one of the mummy-cases having
in the meantime been taken down from the trestle and opened,
the bones of the deceased —in all likelihood those of a superior
chief, long deceased —w r ere spread upon a mat on the ground;
the ceremony being occasionally relieved with sudden bursts of
dismal and unearthly wailings and bowlings in honor of the dead.
Now, it is worthy of remark, as a confirmation of my theory as to
the extreme antiquity of the Polynesian and Indo-American races,
that both of these savage practices —tattooing and cutting for the
dead—which were doubtless common in ancient Egypt and among
the earlier post-diluvian nations, were expressly forbidden in the
laws of Moses to the children of Israel, as we find in the Book of
Leviticus, chap. xix. 28 : “Ye shall not make any cuttings in
your flesh for the dead, nor print ant marks upon you ; I am
the Lord.” The practice of tattooing has all along been a national
practice among the South Sea Islanders, although long disused
in some of the islands ; and the Bev. Mr. West informs us that
it is still occasionally observed among the Indians of Hudson’s
Bay.
* “Journal of a Residence at the Red River Colony, British North
America”; by John West, M.A.


There are various other practices or observances common to the
Polynesians and Indo-Americans which I shall merely enumerate
without dwelling upon them at any length. The necessity for
utu, or satisfaction for any injury received, and the cherishing of
feuds arising in this way for generations, is equally distinctive of
the New Zealanders and the Indo-Americans, especially those of
the northern continent. The manufacture of an intoxicating
beverage from a root, called in the South Sea Islands cava, and in
the equatorial regions of America cassava, evidently the same
word, is equally common to both, as well as the very singular and
disgusting mode of its manufacture; the root being chewed in
some instances by boys, in others by young women, and in others
again, as among the Cunas at the Isthmus of Darien, by old
women ; the residuum being collected in a large vessel and water
poured over it, thereby inducing fermentation. The mode of
catching fish also by throwing an intoxicating herb or root into
the water ; the separation of women, and prohibiting them from
touching their food with their own hands for a certain time after
childbirth, and the caste of blood being transmissible through the
female and not through the male, are also equally common to
both of these very ancient ra>ces of the family of man.
I have thus shown, I trust to the satisfaction of the Society,
that the forefathers of the Polynesian race were separated from
the rest of mankind, in the very infancy of the post-diluvial
world, in the remotest ages in the history of man. I have also
shown that at the period at which this separation took place, the
world must have been in a comparatively advanced state of civili-
zation, implying at least very considerable skill in the arts ot
life, and great ability in the use and management of the mechani-
cal powers. I have shown, moreover, that the impression of this
primitive civilization must have been photographed, so to speak,
on the Polynesian mind, to be reproduced wherever they went, in
every suitable field. I have likewise shown that after having
crossed over almost the whole extent of the broadest part of the
Pacific, the amphibious islanders reached at length the farthest
east of the inhabited islands of that ocean, viz. Easter Island,
in latitude 27'6 S., and that from that island, which is only about
2,000 miles from the west coast of America, a mere handful of
unfortunates must have been caught suddenly in one of those
violent westerly gales that are so frequent in the Southern
Pacific, and been blown across the intervening tract of ocean to
the American land—landing somewhere in the State of Chili
near Copiapo, in the latitude of Easter Island. And I have
expressed my own opinion very strongly that this arrival of a few
famished Polynesians on the west coast of America must have
taken place some time between twelve and fifteen hundred years
before the birth of Christ; that is some time between the death


of the patriarch Jacob and the exodus of the children of Israel
from the land of Egypt. A later date than this would scarcely
suffice to account for the dispersion of the Indo-American nations
over both continents, originating as they all did, agreeably to the
testimony of Baron Humboldt, in one common source, as well as
for the multitude of languages that have sprung in the course of
long ages from that one source.
I maintain, further, that the original inhabitants of America,
and their more immediate descendants, had brought along with
them, from beyond the Pacific, a comparatively advanced form
of civilization, which they reproduced in those colossal works
of which the wonderful remains in Peru and Mexico have aston-
ished the whole civilized world ; but that this higher civilization
had, from causes unknown to us, died out long before the era of
the Spanish conquest. Dr. Yon Martins, who maintains that the
Indo-Americans are indigenous, created on the spot as an inferior
edition of the genus man, and having no connection or relation-
ship with any other portion of the human family, nevertheless
admits the fact of this higher civilization having characterized
the earlier ages of Indo-American history. “ Colossal works of
architecture,” he tells us, “ comparable in extent to the monu-
ments of ancient Egypt (as those of Tiahuanaca on the Lake
Titicaca, which the Peruvians, as far back as the time of the
Spanish conquest, beheld with wonder as the remains of a much
more ancient people), bear witness that their inhabitants had in
remote ages developed a moral power and mental cultivation
which have now entirely vanished. A mere semblance of them—
an attempt to bring back a period which had long passed by—
seems perceptible in the kingdom and institutions of the Incas.”
It would appear, therefore, that long ages, perhaps, before the
era of the Spanish conquest, a blight had fallen on the earlier and
higher civilization of the Indo-Americans, and that it had, in a
great measure, died out, as it would seem to have done com-
pletely all over the Pacific. But if we only take into consider-
tion the remarkably peculiar circumstances in which the Indo-
American nations were placed, as compared with the nations of the
West, we shall not be surprised at this seemingly mysterious
consummation. What other division of the human race would, in
similar circumstances have attained a higher level than the Indo-
Americans appear to have reached? Had Europe, for instance,
been inhabited exclusively either by the Celtic or the Teutonic
race for the last three thousand years —had that race been shut
out from all communication with the rest of mankind —had they
been equally ignorant of letters and of the use of iron—and had
their only domestic animals been the dog, the turkey, the llama,
and the duck, with no sheep or cattle or horses, or swine, and had
their only species of grain been maize or Indian corn —I question


Sydney : Charles Potter, Acting Government Printer.—lB76.
pimo
J\lK Off
whether Europe itself would have vied at this moment with
ancient Mexico or Peru. The nations of the West have in all
past ages been jumbled together in the great political dice-boxes
of Europe and Western Asia, each perpetually changing its rela-
tive position to the rest, and entering from absolute necessity
into new combinations. Now, just as quartz pebbles lose their
angles and acquire a sort of polish by being subjected to the rush-
ing of waters in the bed of a rapid river, while they would doubt-
less have retained their original conformation and their less
pleasing exterior if they had been lying all the while at the bot-
tom of a lake —and as malt liquor, when it has become stale,
revives and becomes brisk again when emptied from vessel to
vegse l—it appears to me that the changes of circumstances that
have been experienced in all past ages by the Western nations,
have been highly favourable to the general progress of civili-
zation in the West, and to the general development of the
mental energies of man. In short, when we consider the very
unfavourable circumstances in which the Indo-American nations
had been placed for countless ages, and contrast them with the
stately ruins of their palatial and other noble buildings that
indicate their past glory, fhe wonder is not that the Indo-
Americans achieved so little, but that they achieved so much.
At all events, there is evidently a very wide field still open to
the Australian literati of the future in tracing the developments
of human society in such extraordinary circumstances as present
themselves to the contemplative mind in the South Sea Islands,
and among the Indo-American nations.
NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA




