

\y ?erm
i
i
si
5 *
i
ON THE IMPORTANCE AND NATURE OP THE
OCEANIC LANGUAGES.
By Sidney H. Ray, Memb. Anthrop. Inst. Gt. Brit. & Ireland.
[Read before the Royal Society of N.S. Wales, June 1 , 1892. ]
f
*


\


ON THE IMPORTANCE AND NATURE OF THE
OCEANIC LANGUAGES.
By Sidney H. Ray, Memb. Anthrop. Inst. Gt. Brit. & Ireland.
[Bead before the Royal Society of N.S. Wales, June 1, 1892.~\
I. —The linguistic value of the Oceanic Languages.
The languages of Oceania afford material of much value to the
Ethnologist in the discussion of some of the most interesting and
intricate problems of comparative Philology. Whether we regard
the number and variety of dialects, their mutual relationship,
origin, or influence upon each other, we find in the island region
an assemblage of facts to which no other family (or families) of
speech can show an exact parallel.
In America or Africa, for example, the number of languages
and dialects is perhaps fully as great as in Oceania, but the
phenomena presented are of a different nature. We there find
languages spoken in extensive regions by large communities.


Unlimited facilities for intercourse in war and peace exist, with
consequent mingling of speech and customs. In Oceania, cn the
other hand, the languages are those of insular populations,
separated, it is true, in many cases by narrow channels, but yet
so separated as to be prevented from enjoying the close intercourse
to which a stream or a range of hills would be no barrier. In the
continental and insular regions the languages affect one another
in different ways. “ Languages of a continent touch each other
at their circumferences and may or may not graduate into each
other. Languages of au archipelago are definitely bounded. We
always know where their circumference is limited. The limit is
the sea and the sea is mute.”* In America or Africa the contact
of languages would thus affect only the outlying portions of a
large territory. The inhabitants of the central region, surrounded
on all sides by people akin to themselves in speech, race and
religion, may be supposed to have retained in its purest form the
characteristics of the original language and race. In Oceania the
tendency is in a different direction. Except on the larger islands
the territory occupied by kindred tribes is small, and we may
conceive the original tongue broken up into distinct portions. If
another race or language varying in any degree, nay, even another
dialect of the same language be introduced, it affects the whole of
the language spoken in a particular district and not merely a
portion of it. This process being repeated ad infinitum, the
result is a mixed language differing in many respects from its
neighbours and often resembling that of distant islands. Hence
arises the peculiar difficulty in ascertaining the origin of any par-
ticular language of Oceania. The continuous introduction of
dialects from all parts renders it well-nigh impossible to discover
the original speech, or even to determine whether the languages,
as now found, are superposed upon older or more primitive forms
of speech.
In another respect the languages of Oceania are of importance.
They afford material by which the psychologist may study the
* E. G. Latham—Comparative Philogy, p. 4.


working of the human mind in its early condition. In the eloquent
words of Farrar*—“lt is these (uncultivated) languages more
than any others which are likely to throw a faint glimmer of light
over what may be called ‘ that Eocene period of the human mind
which precedes the dawn of all history ’ —for which, therefore,
indispensable as it is for our ethnic and zoological, nay, even for
our political and humanitarian speculations, all other lights are
wanting. In fact, the more bizarre the method of the language,
the more impoverished are its resources, the more miserable the
contrivances it adopts, the more nakedly it displays the crude
infantile expedients of a primitive speech, the more forcible the
contrast it presents to all the languages with which we are familar,
the more entirely is it worthy of our philological examination. For
after all it is, and must necessarily be, an instrument, and an
adequate instrument, for the expression of human needs, even if
those needs are at their lowest; and a dim reflex of human intel-
ligence, even if that intelligence be of the meanest and least
developed type.”
ll, — The stageof developmentinwhich the Oceanic tongues are found.
A question of some interest in the discussion of the Oceanic
languages relates to the stage of development in which they are
now found. In most works on general philology, they are placed
among languages of the agglutinating type. But if we accept the
common definition of agglutination, as the placing of unaltered
roots side by side, the term will only partially apply. Many words
are no doubt formed in this way, but the method is not the most
prevalent one in the island languages, and therefore cannot be
regarded as determining the type. It would be better to adopt
the classification of Steinthal and describe them as uncultivated
languages of the inflectional type, expressing the modifications of
meaning by prefixed particles and suffixes.* In the Australian
tongues these are plainly apparent, but the practice of writing
the modifying particles apart from the root in many of the other
languages tends to obscure the fact of inflection, and makes the
* Farrar —Language and Languages, p. 391.


particle appear as a separate word. But when, as in Tanna and
Eromanga, the formative particle is represented by a single letter
and cannot be written otherwise than in combination with the
root, the inflectional character of the language is apparent.
We may even compare the structure of a verbal form in Tanna
with that found in the classical languages. Thus the singular
imperfect indicative of the verb 1 to say ’ is in Tanna :
1. yak-am-ani 2. nuk-am-ani 3. t-am-ani
and in Greek and Latin :
I. e-fa-y 2. e-fa- S 3. f -fa-
1. dic-eba-m 2. dic-eba-s 3. dic-eba-t
Here the Tanna personal prefixes yak, nuk , t correspond to the
Greek suffixes y, s, e and the Latin m, s, t. The Tanna tense sign
am corresponds in meaning to the Greek augment <r and the Latin
eba. The only difference in the three languages is in the position
of the roots ani, fa and die. The Tanna yak-am-ani, nuk-am-ani,
t-am-ani are equivalent to ‘ I, thou or he said,’ without the per-
sonal pronouns iau, ik, te (demonstrative) being expressed, just as
in the classical tongues. In all three languages however the
pronouns may be used to emphasize the person.
As also the Gaelic ba , ‘he was’ shows the Latin eba used as a
separate word, so we find the Tanna am, represented by m (with
varying vowel) used in more than one language of the New
Hebrides as the sign of an action combined with a pronominal
idea. In Malekula mi rij, and Espiritu Santo (Malo) mo viti are
equivalent to “ he speaks.”
The descriptions of the highly inflected languages of the Aryan
family given by Schlegel and Bopp are equally true of the Oceanic.
Schlegel’s words are : —“ Le merveilleux artifice de ces langues
(ci inflexions) est, de former une immense variete de mots, et de
marquer la liaison des idees que ces mots designent, moyennant,
un assez petit nombre de syllabes qui, considers separement,
n’ont point de signification, mais qui determinent aveo precision
le sens du mot auquel elles sont jointes.”*
* Schlegel, quoted in Bopp—Comparative Grammar, p. 101.


Bopp writes : —“ There are in Sanslkrit and the languages which
are akin to it, two classes of roots : ffrom the one, which is by far
the more numerous, spring verbs, and nouns (substantive and
adjective) which stand in fraternal connection with the verbs, nob
in the relation of descent from therm, not begotten by them, but
sprung from the same shoot with tlhem. From the second class
spring pronouns, all original prepositions, conjunctions and
particles,”*
It will be noted that the characteristics of the Aryan languages
as here stated may be collected as follows
1. Roots which may be either noiams or verbs.
2. Modifying particles or syllables which have no meaning apart
from the principal word.
3. One class of roots signifying things (nouns), conditions
(adjectives), or actions (verbs).
4. A second class of roots expressing relations of place (demon-
strative pronouns and adverbs) and position (prepositions).
In summing up the characteristics of the Melanesian languages
Dr. Oodrington uses expressions almost identical with those of
Schlegel and Bopp quoted above, and his remarks may be applied
to all the Oceanic languages without exception.
“ There is an absence of those variations in the form of words
which may distinguish the parts of speech. . . . The use of
the word not its form, commonly declares its character.
It is evidently wrong to speak of a noun as derived from a verb,
while the form is unchanged.”f
“ it is highly probable that words generally are in the native
mind names or nouns. The thing, the action or the state, receives
its name. Words thus are nouns or verbs and they receive dis-
criminating marks, articles or verbal particles in these languages
according to their use ; but there is no such distinction in the
native mind between the visible object and the visible act, as to
* Bopp—Comparative Grammar, p. 96.
+ Melanesian Languages, p. 102.


force them to think the name of an action a different sort of word
from the name of a thing.”*
“ There is a class of vocables in the Melanesian languages which
certainly are not now the names either of objects or actions. These
are the particles which point in one direction or another, the
demonstrative directive particles with which language itself gesti-
culates. These may be found separate as demonstrative particles,
and probably as the simplest prepositions; but they are found
combined in pronouns, in adverbs of place, and therefore of time,
and in articles. If they are fragments of old nouns, they are now
nothing but fragments of that which has been lost; they name
nothing, they only point. These cannot like ordinary words,
become, as the speaker is pleased to use them, nouns or verbs;
they never can have an article or a verbal particle prefixed.”!
In some of the Island languages, the tendency is towards
analysis. This still further separates them from the agglutinate
type, and confirms the analogy to the inflectional. It is mainly
owing to the want of prepositions, for example, that such languages
as the Fin or Turkish are denied a place with those of the inflec-
tional type,! but in Oceania prepositions are commonly found.
Yet, where the inflections are fullest as in Tanna and Eromanga,
the prepositions are fewest. Like the Aryan prepositions, too,
the Oceanic may be often shown to consist of a nominal or verbal
combined with a pronominal or adverbial root. The Banks Island
(Mota) ‘ apena ’ is analogous to the English ‘ about it ’ both in
structure and signification, and literally means ‘at its side.’ § A
is the locative particle, ‘at,’ pe is a noun, 1 side,’ na is a pronoun
‘ its.’ The English ‘about it’ may be resolved into: —a ‘at
or on,’ he ‘by’; ‘out,’ an adverb, and the pronoun it. By is
explained as a noun meaning (a place) ‘ around,’ the Greek t,
§ Melanesian Languages, p. 103.
* Melanesian Languages, p. 104.
f Farrar—Language and Languages, p. 391.
X Melanesian Languages, p. 209.


Latin amh* Many similar examples off Oceanic prepositions may
be found in Dr. Codrington’s work.
The proof of the nominal origin of jpe is to be found in its use
as an independent noun in other languages, e.g., in Leper’s Island,
Arag.f In the same way the Sanskriit preposition ava ‘from,’ is
in the Zend a perfect and declinable pronoun, while the Zend
preposition hacha ‘ out of ’ is in Santskrit found as a pronoun,
‘ isquo.’|
It appears from the foregoing, that we may regard the Oceanic
languages as being in the inflectional stage with traces of analytic
forms, the evidence being of similar character to that found for
the European languages. Hence it is reasonable to suppose that
we may apply to them the same methods of argument and analysis
which have been applied to the elucidation of other inflectional
tongues. The difficulty in so doing is no doubt great, owing to
the want of a literature preserving ancient forms, but the peculiar
dispersion of the original population may to some extent supply
the want of a literature. Here and there among the islands, we
may find a few isolated remnants of an ancient people, whose
dialects, from some cause or other, have retained forms which
other dialects have lost. From these we may gather the true
meaning of many an obscure word or particle, and perhaps in
time attain some knowledge of the primitive Oceanic speech.
A word of caution is necessary, lest what has been here written
should be taken to imply that the writer finds any connection
between the Aryan and Oceanic tongues. There is no evidence
of any such connection. To affirm it, with our present imperfect
knowledge of the Oceanic would be absurd and unsafe. The
analogy is to be found in structure only. A similar argument
may be, and has been applied to some of the American languages.^
* Morris—Historical English Grammar, pp. 195, 196.
f Melanesian Languages, p. 153.
X Bopp—Comparative Grammar, pp. 530. 1441.
§ Hale —The development of Language, Toronto, 1888, p. 29.


111. A suggested Grouping of the Oceanic Languages.
In comparing the Oceanic languages, it has been the fashion to
bring forward for comparison words from all parts of the region,
without any very definite result being arrived at, except that they
apparently belong to one family* Their place in that family is
not very definitely pointed out. It seems desirable that some
attempt should be made to condense the multiplicity of languages
into certain smaller groups, and to investigate each of these
separately. An enquiry into the relationship of the members of
each group to one another, and also as to the evidence which each
may, or may not afford as to the existence of earlier languages
occupying the same regions, is more likely to prove of value to the
ethnologist than a discussion of the resemblances between the
words of the whole region or of their supposed affinities with some
other linguistic stock.f
The following table is put forward as suggestive of a convenient
nomenclature and grouping of the whole of the languages of
Oceania. It does not necessarily imply that all the languages
therein mentioned are of the same stock. The Australian and
Papuan, for instance, may, with fuller materials for study be shown
to be quite distinct from the Indonesian or Melanesian. In fact
the evidence possessed for the Papuan seems at present to indicate
that it forms a group of several distinct languages.
The connection of the Andaman with the Australian is argued
by Von Carolsfeld. The arrangement of the other groups is that
of the writer based upon a careful comparison of the grammatical
forms and vocabularies.
* This is denied, however, by many, who hold that the Australian
languages are distinct from those of the Malay Archipelago, Melanesia
and Polynesia. The same denial is also extended to the Andaman and
Nicobar languages which are here called Oceanic.
f The Oceanic tongues have been connected with all the chief linguistic
families of the Old World. Bopp sought to connect the Polynesian and
Indo European. Macdonald has written to prove them Semitic. Others
have connected them with Indo-Chinese. The discussion of all such
questions must be regarded as premature until we are in a position to.
declare what are the roots of the primitive Oceanic speech.


I.— Principal 'Groups :
A. Australian...l. Languages of Australia
2. Tasmanian
B. Papuan 1. Languages of thee Black Frizzly-haired natives
of New Gumma.
C. Melanesian... 1. Southern —Soutlh New Hebrides, Loyalty
Islands ; New Caledonia.
2. Central —Northiern New Hebrides, Banks
Islands, and BFiji.
3. Northern—Laniguages of the Southern Solo-
mon Islands,, Bismarck Archipelago, and
South Easterm New Guinea (Port Moresby,
South Capeettc.)
D. Indonesian...!. Madagascar.
2. Languages of Siumatra, Java, and Malay.
3. Languages of Biorneo and Celebes, and islands
to the south.
4. The languages of the Philippine Islands and
Formosa.
E. Polynesian... The languages of the Eastern Pacific—Samoan,
Maori, Tonga, Hawaii, etc.
Resulting from the contact of these principal groups are found
mixed languages. These may be arranged thus —•
ll.— Sub-Groups.
Indo-Australian (1)— The languages of the Andaman and
Nicobar Islands.
h. Indo-Papuan—The languages of Ternate, Tidor, and islands
and shores of Western New Guinea.
c. Papuo-Australian —The languages of Torres Straits.
d. Melano-Papuan—Languages of the Louisiade Archipelago, and
portions of Eastern New Guinea.
e. Indo-Polynesian (or Micronesian) —Languages of the Caroline
Islands, Marshall and Gilbert Islands.
f. Melano-Polynesian —Languages of Aniwa and Futuna, New
Hebrides, and Rotuma.


