

INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION ESSAYS, 1872-3.
No. 6.
ON WINES.
BY REV. JOHN I. BLEASDALE, D.D.
[6]




ON WINES.
INTRODUCTORY.
In the following pages will, be found an account of such studies
and analyses of colonial wines as I have, been able to make during
the last five or six years, which., are now thrown out as a very
small contribution to our, common fund of information concerning
this interesting and valuable new industry. I venture to call it,
still, a “ new industry,” for the colony.has hardly yet been pro-
spected fully as.to its whole capabilities for .yielding wines; while
the vines best suited to each locality are by, no means clearly
ascertained, and while the systems of making and,maturing wine
.must for, some time longer be experimental.rather; than fixed; as
will be readily understood when it is remembered that between
the Barrabool Hills and the valley of the Murray, Victoria
possesses every variety of climate, exposure,, and soil that are to
be met with between Neufchatel and Lisbon.
And as the industry itself is, in, my belief, but in an infantile
state, though making fair progress, and as the products of vine-
yards of the same district are known to. vary so markedly, I con-
clude that very much remains to be,,learned by those who are
about ,to establish vineyards, and by makers and treaters of wine ax
well as by the student of oenology. Of course, I hold myself alone
responsible for any opinions, statements, or deductions here laid
down. I would premise, however, that the matter, of this essay
has been collected, and the remarks recorded from time to time,
as opportunity offered, so of course I have made no attempt at
literary composition.
.. .Circumstances, to which I shall have to refer.hereafter, induced
■me, many years ago, to make the study of vines and wines an
occupation for, my leisure hours; the results of which I have, now
and then, laid before the public of the Australian colonies. J
would.refer briefly to some of these. ..As chairman .and reporter
of the wine experts of the Intercolonial Exhibition, 186fc' : 7, ,1
drew a somewhat lengthy account of the introduction of the.vine
into Australia; and the fortunes of colonial wine •to the end of
1866. - Subsequently I had opportunities ofmaking more-lengthy
and detailed- inquiries into several matters-affecting the making,
keeping, and maturing of our wines—to say nothing of efforts to
remove prejudices against them. Though those investigation*
were by no means as thorough and complete as I could have


wished, yet they appeared to me then, and do so still, useful in
clearing the path of the vignerons.
The wine industry differs in multifarious ways from nearly all
others, because the subject matter of it is so various, and the
methods of treating the same materials so different in different
places.
WINE IN RELATION TO CLIMATE, &c.
Climate, soil, aspect, any one or more of the .hundreds of vari-
eties of grapes entering into the formation of a wine—the duration
of fermentation, the temperature of the cellar, racking, fining,
&c.—all have to do with modifying the ultimate product, the wine.
Then, again, the properties of nearly all the European vines
change very much in Victoria. No one can doubt for a moment
that the excellent judges, to whom were submitted recently some
hundreds of samples of Australian wines in Germany and France
(the remainder of the samples sent for competition at the last
Wine Exhibition, held by the late Board of Agriculture), expressed
their conscientious convictions of their merits or defects. But
this is remarkable, especially as regarded the white kinds, that in
nearly every instance where they ventured to name the grape or
grapes a wine was made from, they were wrong.
It must be borne in mind that wine is a very compound fluid ;
among its principal constituents, such as are always present in it,
are water, spirit of wine, tannic acid, tartaric acid, phosphoric
acid, racemic acid, malic acid, sugar, and oxide of iron, and potash,
with generally a small quantity of lime. These are the principal,
hut by no means the only, ingredients of pure wine. The bouquet,
as it is called, is a true fether, and is formed by the action of the
acids on the alcohol in a nascent state, and the flavouring princi-
ple of the grape, from which each distinctive bouquet is derived.
The iron, potash, phosphoric acid, afad the lime are taken up from
the earth; the elements of the other acids, sugar, alcohol, &c.,
from the air and water. A glass of genuine wine contains a varying
quantity, generally about one-fifth or a little more of its bulk, of
proof spirit and four-fifths water, when not fortified.
WINE IN RELATION TO THE HUMAN SYSTEM.
Wine, not must*, fortified to any considerable extent, say 5 per
eent. or upwards, produces in its action on the human system an
effect somewhere between that of pure wine, and brandy, or some
less pure spirit, and water. Hence the headiness of fortified wines.
The Portuguese, and probably the general Spanish, practice of
* Must, the unfermented, or only partially fermented, and new juice of
the grape.


■adding 2 or 3 per cent, of proof spirit to the fermenting musts, in
•order to arrest a too great production of spirit'and waste of
body, is a totally different affair; because the added spirit merely
destroys the albumen and other nitrogenous matters, and along
with them is itself deposited as an insoluble compound, the murk;
thus leaving the wine with a material to feed upon—a little of the
•natural sugar of the grape—and less spirit than it would otherwise
have formed for itself at the expense of the gummy and other
■quasi-saccharine matters contained in the must. Wines so made,
seldom become “ropy,” and hardly ever take “ the flour.”
The proof spirit, however, in the case of wine, differs widely in
its action on the human system from so much distilled spirit and
water, for in wine it is not a mere mixture, hut a combination,
•and it stands in chemical relations with the tannic and tartaric
acids and iron. Tannic acid is a powerful astringent and tonic,
while tartaric acid, combined with potash and iron, has its own
peculiar action on the human economy. It is evident, then, that
wine must be slowly digested before it can get into the general
circulation; and it is also plain that it more nearly resembles
the nicely-adjusted prescription of a physician than aught else.
And it is a prescription prepared by the greatest of all physicians,
not alone as a restorative or alterative for the deranged functions
of the body, but one, meant primarily to strengthen and promote
the well-being of the healthy frame, and at the same time
intensify the sense of enjoyment of life. It is both an element of
food and a luxury. Had I time, nothing would he more pleasing
to myself than to illustrate by examples the wonderful and
merciful providence of God in maintaining His creatures in
existence, health, and comfort through every zone, from the
equator to the poles, supplying them with whatever is needful
under the very altered conditions, in which their existence has to
he carried on. What animal fat, and oil, clothing of skins dr
feathers, are to the Laplander; what his starch, no matter whence
derived, and his almost naked skin are to the equatorial African;
what his bitter beer is to the inhabitant of Northern Europe; that
his wine, and a moderate quantity of animal and vegetable food, are
to the inhabitants of sub-tropical climites all over the world.
Again, if time allowed, it would be delightful to take up the line
of illustration, so exquisitely drawn by Mr. Babinet, of the Insti-
tute of France, and trace the action of Providence in the wool,
hair, feather, skin, and other integuments of animated nature in
the several zones. But we can do no more now than allude to - it.
And so, if we reason consecutively, we shall find that every
climate has its own appointed conditions, under which alone the
human economy will be healthy and vigorous. You cannot here
subsist on the starch food which .maintains in health and strength


fhe inhabitants of equatorial regions, nor can you think of sus-
taining'life for any length of time on the .fish oil, tallow, and
dried flesh of the Laplander, or man of Kamschatka. The beers
and, ardent spirits, so much a necessary in moderation in cold and
damp,regions,,and the,strong,tea of China, when taken constantly
and in excess, produce diseases here, on which learned physio-
logists .become eloquent, and from,which are derived in no small
'degree the need of the physician, and the waste of .health and the
expense of sickness, to say. nothing ot the miseries of declining
life. Health, depends much , upon the- vigorous tone of the
nervous system; the enjoyment of life wholly on that great instru-
ment in The human laboratory, the liver. /Tea, and such like, act
strongly on 'the nervous system, but are comparatively harmless.
Malf liquors and ardent spirits load the system with carbon ; well
enough for the production of animal ,heat>. but not needed here,,
since the atmosphere supplies it abundantly.
/’ When the temperature is not low , enough to require a large
supply of carbon to maintain animal heat, then, as the,carbon
must go somewhere, and be got rid of somehow, the liver and
kidneys have to do the work, when they are, perhaps, already
overworked. •
.1 trust I, am neither a theorist nor a quack. I hate quackery
of , all kinds, and my education has taught me that theories are
worth,little more, than, that they serve to arrange and harmonise
a, certain number of facts. The fact in this case is that liver and
kidney diseases, nearly unknown in,wine-drinking, countries, are
almost universal in these colonies, and either.form the basis of
prevailing, complicated diseases, or are complicated with. them.
Beer and spirits have their work to do in cold and damp climates,
not such as ours—intensely hot and dry. Wine has its beneficial
work to do in Victoria, and it is gratifying to watch the steady
progress hitherto made, mainly during the last five or six years.
EARLY STUDY OF AUSTRALIAN WINES, FROM 1859
TO 1866.
..., I think,, then, that any.contribution .to the; further knowledge
of this important branch of colonial industries will be of some
use; and that 1 need no. further apology for ..placing before the
readers an.,outline or resume of my investigations, chiefly since
1866-7, in the plainest-mannerT know how.'.
In the month of . May, 1867, I read , an essay on Colonial Wine
before the members of the Royal Society of /Victoria, which was
afterwards published in the Transactions of that body, circulated
in .pamphlet form by the late Board of Agriculture, and subse-
quently, found worthy to be translated into German,, which was
done by Mr. Methe, and circulated among his countrymen. That


essay, or paper, referred, in the first part, to certain studies of,
and chemical investigations into, most of the leading character-
istics of Australian Wines that came to my hand between the
latter months of 1859, and December, 1866. Many of the samples
tested were the produce of well-known vineyards in New South
Wales, the first and by far the largest number and variety being
either “ Camden Park” or “ Irrewang and Kaluda” brands, intro-
duced into Victoria by Mr. Blake, to whose enterprise in 1860,
when colonial wine was another synonym for anything detestable,,
the Victorian vignerons owe no small debt of gratitude.
These investigations comprised the specific gravity of each
sample, its amount of absolute alcohol, unchanged sugar (if any),,
percentage of residue after evaporation, power of keeping and
resisting acidity, and change of colour, and especially its total
amount of free acids, which was determined by alkalimetry, the
standards of reference being port, sherry, hock, and tokay, supplied
by the agent of the Messrs. Macarthur, of Camden, the late Mr.
Ralph Hutchinson, an educated and able judge of wine.
I recoid the above outline of the points I inquired into, that
others may follow.the same, and, I trust, record their results.
With reference to the: experiments to determine the power a
wine had of keeping,, after exposure to the air, and of resisting
acidity, I would mention in this place that, next.after determining
the quantity of alcohol, I sought for.the amount of tannic acid that
it contained. In the case of white wines, this was an easy matter;,
but difficult in the red. The following was the plan I adopted
with.the whites:—l took.samples of good sound sherry, as nearly
as possible of the same shade of colour as that of the colonial
wine I was going to test; and after putting about equal quanti-
ties of each in wine glasses of the same size, I added to each an
excess of carbonate of soda. —say, admail teaspoonful ; a little too
much makes no difference. After standing a few minutes, it will
be easy to observe.the depth of dark. colour;shown by the sherry..
Now, compare this with the samples to be tried, and. the greater or
lesser depth,of colour in the samples will show how this important
point in the keeping of wine stands. If the wine be paler than
the standard of sherry, eggs or isinglass must on no account be
used for .fining. If .the. sample is perceptibly darker after adding
the carbonate of soda, even then much caution is needed in using
eggs,ior any other albuminous substance; for these abstract the
tannic acid by the chemical action they exert upon it.
Not.,living-in a wine-producing country, the English people
have no proper terms to express accurately, many operations on
wine, and thus such terms as “ fining ” have a. more or less
confused meaning. We say when wine ds. rough, austere on the
palate, bitter— -“fine” it. ; .White of egg, isinglass, bullock’s.


blood, and milk, &c., will do the fining such wine requires. They
will remove the tannic acid, and probably some others. Again, a
wine, smooth and sweet to the palate, is muddy, off colour, &c.: we
say, “fine ” it—and that means, clear it; but in this case albumen,
isinglass, &c., would ruin it, and sand or Spanish clay is alone
admissible. All fining is a sort of filtration; and as you cannot
put the wine through an ordinary filter, you put a filter through
the wine. The insoluble compounds formed by albuminous
matters and tannic acid on one hand, and the sand or Spanish clay
on the other, constitute such a filter.
SOME PERSONAL MATTERS.
I have been twitted at times by teetotallers with devoting too
■much attention to these matters; and certainly I can say with
Cicero, “ Licuit otioso esse mihij” but I preferred to fill up my
time in a way that was pleasant and instructive to myself, and not
without showing a prospect of future utility to the country of my
adoption. Mingled with the above was, very likely, a little
harmless vanity; for in a new country, and in a limited popula-
tion, a little man is apt to delude himself by thinking that he is a
big one; and I honestly admit that, while there might have been
more experienced judges of wine and abler analyists than myself, I
•could hear, in 1860, of hardly one who knew anything of the
young, unmatured wines of Europe, and not one, who at the same
time could bring a chemist’s knowledge to bear upon our produce.
And, furthermore, I thought the vignerons would trust my
statements, seeing that I had a character and public position to
maintain, and, also, that I had not a pennyworth of personal
interest in any vineyard, or its produce. But I had another
motive for taking up this subject—one not unworthy of a clergy-
man. Many years’ experience had impressed on my mind that
wine-producing countries, where wine is plentiful and cheap, are
invariably remarkable for sober, healthy, and cheerful populations;
■that drunkenness is all but unknown, and many distressing
diseases common among drinkers of beer and spirits in warm
climates utterly unheard of.
It must also be conceded that there is a freshness and charm
about the first investigations of objects, such as wines, which are
liable to indefinite and almost innumerable varieties. In the
circumstances under which the vine has been introduced into
Australia, on one hand from old vineyards in the south of Spain
and south of France, and on the other by Swiss and Germans from
their own countries, mainly the Rheingau and the Tyrol, changes
in the produce must of necessity occur. Change of climate,
•perhaps, more than anything else, affects the vine and its produce.
■Vines introduced by the Messrs. Macarthur, of Camden, into


• New South Wales, and Mr. Gilbert, of Pewseyvale, into South
Australia, originally from near Jeres de la Frontera, and a few
varieties common about Roussillon, found themselves in climates
not very different from those they had been taken out of. But
when these same kinds made their way into Victoria, circum-
stances were materially altered. As a rule, the vine, brought from
a warmer into a colder climate, deteriorates for some years, both
in its growth and produce; and, on the other hand, those
removed from a colder to warmer, improve. One remarkable
instance of this is the Chasselas. It was brought to us, I think,
originally from the northern, or at most central, parts of France,
on account of its being a good table grape and a prolific bearer.
But in France it yields a wine generally poor in quality, bad in
colour, weak, and with a mousey odour. And, indeed, for a
length of time it retained most of these peculiar properties in the
colder regions of Victoria. At a time when it was considered the
correct thing to run down our native wines, I remember reading
in Melbourne Punch a 'receipt for making colonial wine, much
like the following: —“ No. 1 Chasselas.—Take one gallon of cold
water (Yan Yean will do), one pint vinegar, 2 lbs. sugar, mix, and
add two dirty, well-seasoned mousetraps. Product equal to the
ordinary run of this variety.”
ANTICIPATION OF FUTURE SUCCESS IN VICTORIAN
WINES.
Yet this same Chasselas vine produces in our warmer climates
—such as from Sunbury to Sandhurst—and with careful making,
one of our very best wines; while in the medium and cooler ones
I note its improvement in all the best vinous properties from year
to year. This is due, no doubt, to the vines having become accli-
matised, and to more extensive experience in the making and
maturing of the wine. If this colony ever produces novel wines
that will distinguish it in the markets of the old world, Chasselas
will be prominent among them. Another instance of a vine that
we have received from France is the Aucardt. This pre-eminently
requires a warm climate—such as from Sandhurst all along the
valley of the Murray—and produces a wine that will most likely
be the first to attract attention as a peculiar product of our country.
Properly made, it yields a medium sweet wine, of good body, of a
dark, golden yellow, and having a bouquet that resembles that of
a handful of new sweet hay. It is, moreover, one of the few kinds
that can be safely used in moderate quantity for blending with
either white or red wines. But all the samples I have seen of it
from our colder climates have been poor and hard, as have also
been some from about the Murray, where the attempt had been


made to render it prematurely a dry wine. The awards of the
late wine jury of the Board of Agriculture, 1870, bear out my
observations on this head, and those samples still in my possession
are sweety-sour, one of the worst of bad properties. This is due
to bad making. Many other varieties of imported vines from dif-
ferent parts of Europe will, no doubt, show, if they have not
already.shown, marked changes; and let us hope for the better.
I-extract the following from the jurors’ report, 1870: —
“As prize-takers for Victoria, the wines at the Great Agricultural Wine
Show, 1870, rank as follows: . ' ,
Hermitage (pure or mixed), 6 prizes, 7 honourable mention
Mataro - 2 ~ 1 ~
Gamai - . - 1 ~ 1 ~
Reislinga - 4 ~ 1 ~
Chasselas - 2 ~ 1 ~
Verdeilho (pure or mixed) 2 ~ 1 ~
Pineau (or mixed) - ) , . , ~ ~
Rousette and Tokay - [ each 1 honourable mention.
: '“lt will thus be seen that the Hermitage, Mataro, Reisling, and Chasselas
stand most prominent; but it is evident that the wines of the same name had
changed their character in each district, thus producing many varieties.
This is the most important point in the Exhibition to the vignerons ; and
although it cannot be denied that many of the wines are very fine, this
variety is a great drawback, which it is for the vignerons to remedy. To
make their wines marketable for foreign countries, the first condition is
uniformity ; and to attain this, the vignerons should set to wprk without
delay. We would suggest that in each district an association be formed,
whose sole object should be to ascertain, by careful examination over two or
three years of the wines produced, the most suitable grape for their particu-
lar; district. Having ascertained this, they should lose no time in reorganis-
ing, their .vineyards, according to their means, by planting, no other than the
grape selected for their district, and 1 by grafting it, a certain proportion in
each year, on to their old vines. By this means, in ten, twelve, or even fifteen
years, each district would excel in its particular kind of wine, as the Rhine
produces hock; Bordeaux, claret; Burgundy, burgundy ; the Douro, port,
&c.; and our wines would then, through the agency of our wine merchants,
be introduced into the home markets, which will never be done to advantage
unless what we have recommended is carried out.”
The peculiarity of our red wines, and the same may be said of
Australian red wines generally, is a slightly earthy taste. Now
this I believe to be due to.the faulty.manner of making, and the
Want of knowledge in maturing ,the wine, .more than to anything
derivable either from the air or the soil, or the variety of grape
used. I have noted, however, that Mataro is generally the least
affected by it, and Malbec the most.: "Red wines made by Mr. C..
Maplestone,,at Ivanhoe, from grapes well matured in a small, well-
sheltered /vineyard, and carefully, chosen, on a plan substantially
the same, as that recommended for a like i class of wines by M.
C.asalia AHut, were as. nearly free from, this objectionable taste as
any ! have,met with. , It, may, .however, ,be said that much might


be done in making fine wine in a sinall vineyard/ and under all
the most favourable conditions, and to a certain extent this is true'/
But by adopting a plan in many of itspoints the same as that of
Casalis Allut, and on the large scale; S. Baldini, the able feitor of
the Hon. J. G. Francis, at Sunbury, has produced red wines'that
commanded the admiration of the judges who examined the Vic-
torian wines at Sydney in 1870. . I know not the plans adopted by
Weber Brothers, August Heine, Heine and Greiffenhagen, whose
red wines were nearly free from this gout de terrain, but think it
cannot be very dissimilar. As the red wines have to be fermented
on the skins to give them colour and tannin, there is reason to fear
they mostly receive more or less injury from the thick “cap,” as it is :
called, whichis formed by the husks and stalks on thetop of thevat.
To obviate this, the best French makers keep this “ cap ” pressed'
down below the surface of the fluid so as to prevent any air from'
touching it, by means of- a false lid, a little smaller than the dia-
meter of the vat. This lid should be forced down a few inches
below the surface of the must, and‘the vat finally covered 1 with'
some thick cloth, such as a horse rug or two. I state this, because/ 1
as a precautionary measure, it is of value, and the cost of it is
trifling. I have for several years been trying to ascertain if this*
earthy taste is due to any change in the tannic acid, such as oxi-
dation of a portion of it into some higher form, such as gallic'
acid. But I am not yet prepared to say with certainty that it is.'
My opinion, based on some results obtained within this year;
inclines to this change. ‘ It must be remembered that ferinenta-'
tion frequently becomes very violent in Victoria, and when matters-
are in their transition state, it is hard to tell what may*happen!'
Moreover we are not yet 1 certain as to the part played in* the*
tumultuous fermentation by gummy matters and* others in " a
transition state from acid to sugar. Mr. Baldini * acts,“in my :
judgment, wisely, by gathering his red grapes only when Warmed
by the sun and perfectly dry, breaking the bunches as little as
possible, packing them in the vats, covering the vats when full with
thick woollen rugs, and leaving them so for a few days “to sweat.”'' 1
In this interval much of this transition matter; and many* not 1
perfectly ripe grapes, *wiHbe brought into*a perfect condition, ow-ici
There is now no doubt * on my mind that the rfid* wines of
Victoria may be vastly improved by' the' careful study by intelli- 1
gent vine-growers of i the conditions of ripeness of grapes," methods ’
of crushing, vatting; and storing of their ’ produce; in * relation
mainly to climate. The French methods of making* red’ Winei‘in!
most places south- of the ’dividing' range *seeffl’‘the : best. “ The
German methods; as in* use on the’ 'Rheingau;' thfn 'but thd l best*
white wines south of the*'dividing range; and- the ‘Spanish‘land'
Portuguese ones “for the north.' Of course there Will' be spots;'


north of the dividing range, that will yield some varieties of dry
wines; but, as a rule, it is merely torturing the musts of high
saccharine strength, in a necessarily hot climate, to attempt to
make of them wines of the hock and sauterne character. The
Spanish grapes, which produce the manzanilla, would probably
yield a dry wine there.
WINES LEFT AFTER THE EXHIBITION OF 1866-7
FOR FUTURE STUDY AND REPORT.
There were sent to the Intercolonial Exhibition of 1866-7 not a
few samples of red wine from the north of the dividing range—
Hopwood’s, of Echuca; Guppy’s, of Benalla; one or two of
Piper’s, and some others—that obtained no distinction whatever
at the time. These were pure and simple wines—well made, but,
being young and full-bodied, they needed care and keeping. But
after lying quiet for five years, they proved to be quite equal to
the very best sent to the Exhibition—wines quite ripe at, say, six
or seven years old, that would be a credit to the colony in any
country in the world.
It is frequently remarked that the produce of young vineyards
becomes drinkable, and matures sooner, than that of old ones;
and all my observations go towards confirming it. There are no
old vineyards in Victoria, and very few in Australia. There can
be but three or four in all, that date back twenty-five years; but
there are a good many of ten or twelve years. Now I understand
by the produce of young vineyards those not older than their
third year of bearing. The produce of such as these does soon
ripen, and it also soon passes its best, deposits colouring matter,
and becomes thin and poor, though it may retain its distinctive
bouquet. It is, perhaps, providentially so arranged, that the cul-
tivator may not lay long out of a return.
One important object which I proposed to myself in studying
the samples left with me at the close of the Intercolonial Exhibi-
tion, 1866-7, was to watch from time to time, and ask the opinion
of good judges when they considered a sample was at its best.
The declared ages of all were marked on the labels. This has
been done. Not one of them, whether red or white, improved
after its eighth year, and but very few showed decided signs of
decay at that age. In every instance those which held their own
were from rather sweet to sweet kinds; and were, with two or
three exceptions, from South Australia. The whites kept their
properties longer, and in higher perfection, than the reds.
Prominent among the old white wines were those of Messrs.
Patrick Auld (Auldana); Gilbert’s Yerdeilho and Reisling;
Peake’s Reisling, Yerheilho, Palomino Blanco, and Pedro
Ximenes, and one. sample of strong sweet Gouais; Greig’s, of


Dirleton; Smith and Son’s Sherry; one Highercombe white, and
two, known only at the time as AB and AZ, afterwards found
to be the produce of Morialta, the vineyard of the late Hon. John
Baker; and last of the South Australians, Messrs. Winckel’s and
Charlesworth’s samples of pure Tokay. With the two excep-
tions of the Highercombe and Morialta, the rest all partook of the
character of sweetish wines, and two only contained less than 20
per cent, of proof spirit.
The commissioners for New South Wales and for Western Aus-
tralia removed their samples remaining at the close of the Exhibi-
tion of the wines from those colonies, and I had to do the best L
could with a bottle or two of Bukkulla, a few of Carmichael’s, and
one or two of Doyle’s Kaludah. No doubt all these were fine
wines, and I regretted then and since that I had no chance of
thoroughly studying the king of New South Wales wines—the
Bukkulla white. ...
The Victorian wines, up to six years of age, held their own very
fairly, hut hardly more than three could he said to be on the im-
proving side at the end of another year, that is, when about eight
years old. Of these three, one is a white wine of the late Mr.
Hopwood’s, of Echuca, a notoriously bad sample originally, and
not good even now ; one or two of Weber Brothers’; Depury and
Langdon’s white Hermitage; and one of August Heine’s. These
seemed to improve to the last. Of the rest, one or two of Mr.
Trouett’s, of St. Peter’s Vineyard, Great Western; one of
Dunoyer’s, a few of Mr. Kitz’s, one of Heine and Greiffenhagen’s,
and one of Galland and Junod’s, of Pollocksford, Geelong; two
of Meredith’s, of Chewton; two of Dr. Hope’s, of Batesford; and
Billing’s Shepherd’s Beisling, held their own up to about six
years, but, for the most part, were then quite up to, if not past,
their best.
Owners of vineyards and traders in colonial wines who are look-
ing for foreign markets may, I think, not unprofitably make them-
selves acquainted with the above results obtained in wines sent for
exhibition; and, naturally, the best only in each owner’s estima-
tion would be sent. Nay, more, all these were bottled, and have
been carefully put aside in a cellar of equable temperature, in the
foundations of the Exhibition Building. It is not unfair to con-
clude that the circumstances I have just mentioned place these
samples in a far more favourable condition than they would have
been had they been shipped to Europe in wood, tumbled about
after arrival, and finally bottled and put aside. :
The details of distillation of a few bottoms of bottles below show
the power of several of these samples to resist acescence. ; That is
a great matter truly. But what I wish to state here that few
showed any striking likelihood of improving after six years of age.


OPENED
1866. DISTILLED
IN 1869-70.
Name of Grower.
Nam© of
Locality.
Name of Wine
Spirit- •
Strngth
Retained
Colour Fairly.
Lost Colour.
Age of
Vintage
Jtabdallo
Glen Para, SA
Hermitage-
19-3
very fairly...
lost a good
deal
1865'
?1 i,
«,
H.& Garbinet
■ 18-9
1863*
. »
Keisling V..
20-3
colour good
EandallsenV.
Mataro ' ■...
18-2'
: good'red ...
' ...
186A
Auld
M'Gill
Auldauer ...
22-3
white ■ wine
... ■
1863
20-6.
,,,
1863
Mixture . B.
' 18-1
lost colour
1862,
Portugal ■
to B.
f ;
Carbinet,:
Sherry
; ! :
Peake 1
Clarendon...
Palomino
Blanco ""
;20-3
white : ...
1862;
.. „h .■ ; ...
. Verdeilho
23
white . ...
1863
Jf ;
Pedro Xi-
20-2:
.white: ...
...
1863"
menes’ ■
.Nbltenius 11 '...
Adelaide 1;:
Red ’" ...
I7’2
kept colour
1863
„
White
...
...
1863
Sangar, N.S.W.
Wahgunyah
Aucardt
15-3 ■
kept colour,
yellow
; ‘ •«’.
1863
« •**
Eeisling ...
18-7
white
1864
- »- 1- -
■ ' » .
. {Termitnge;.
19-3
: kept colour
. fairly ;
1863
SPECIAL REMARKS ON WINES FROM CLARENDON
VINEYARD, S.A.
: The interest I took-in the produce of a vineyard, belonging to a fellow-
collegian, made "me ’ subject his wines to an especial study on his own
account." ' But after L had made personal inspection of nearly all the
vineyards, lying, within a radius of fifty miles Adelaide', 1 1 arrived
•at the conclusion that Clarendon was a fair Representativedistrict fob
that portion of South Australia.' Situate in the gentle hills looking* Over
the pretty hamlet of Clarendon, and bounded on one side by the Orika-
paringa River, the- vineyard* rises’ somewhat:'steeply to at least 150’feet
from* the’cellar,- which' is'placed atthe lowest part!" It is about 50 acres
in and, with Its ’ Surrounding of olive trees, realises fully what
■one* Writer'called it, “a'gigantic pyramid of-luxuriant verdure.” Ear
•COolCr than’ the' ’ plains surrounding> the, capital,, and. by; no means so
cool as many vineyards on the Barossa Range,:it is, to my mind; a'fair
exponent of the average wine districts of South'-Australia. Henfce'if
have: studied Clarendon* wines- because -of* that characteristic, also. <! !|
j -1, trust I shall rnotv.be - misunderstood by' Wine 1 men, either in' South
Australia or Victoria, because-I have selected the winOs'Of‘a'pCrSohal
frieiid for especial studyf Ji lt ihuSt bC borrife ‘in min'd that the examinay
tibn of-wine (though but partial) involves much time and some expense,
both'of 'Which fall on me • personally, and-that-in such, cases extreme


Name of Wine Distilled.
Hydrometer Used.
Percentage o:
Proof Spirit.
Mean.
Age of
Wine.
1. Temprana
Gay-Lussac
• ••
27-1 )
Sykes’ scale
27-5 }
26-86
1867
Long’s balance
26-0 )
1. Temprana, No. 11
1 Gay-Lussac
23-6 1 '
hhd. for England |
( Sykes’ scale
( Long’s balam
1 slide ruler
...
25-7 1
24-66
No. 2 hhd.
:e and |
24-7]
3. Do. No. 3 hhd.
Gay-Lussac
...
25-3 1
Sykes’ scale
25-8 [
25-46
Long’s balance
25-3)
Verdeilho, No. 1
Gay-Lussac
23-6 i
Sykes’ scale
226^
22-9
Long’s balance
22-7)
Do., No. 2
Gay-Lussac
...
23-6
Sykes’ scale
...
23 0 >
23-3
Long’s balance
23-4)
Do., No. 3
Gay-Lussac f ,
23-6
Sykes’ scale
Long’s balance
230^
23-3
23-4 )
Temprana, No. 4
Gay-Lussac
25-3
Sykes’ scale
Long’s balance
25-7 >
25-9)
25-3
1867
Ded Wine, No. 1
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
21-91
21-2)
21-5
1867
Do., No. 2
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
21-91
21-2)
21-6
1867
'■Grenache, No. 1
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
...
23-6 1
23-2)
2S-4
1867. :
Do., No. 2 ... , ...
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
21-91
21-8 1
21-8
1867
Reisling
Gay-Lussac
...
2'H
22-9
1869
Sykes’ scale ,
22-2 (
Verdeilho
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’ scale
28.8 |
27.8 f
28-3
1869
Palomino Blanco
Sykes’ scale
21-0 i
21-4
1869
Long’s balance
...
21-8 J
[6] 6
and exceptional defetcs, or excellences, must give way in the main to a
fair average.
In the tabulated statements next following those of the Clarendon
wines, will be found the detailed record of the spirit strength of a con-
siderable number of samples of South Australian and Victorian, and also
a few from New South Wales and Western Australia.
The following are the Clarendon wines, distilled by E. J. Peake, Esq.,
in 1869, and nearly all by me in 1870-1; the instruments used being
•Saleron’s smaller and larger still; spirit strength estimated, in some
instances, as will be observed, according to tables calculated by Gay-
Lussac ; in others, according to Sykes’ (the English standard),.and in a
few according to Long’s balance, and mostly the mean of the three given.
Those results, obtained by me, are recorded according to Sykes’ strength
only, and where a mean is given, it is the mean of two or three
distillations of the same samples with the same instruments.


Name of Wine Distilled.
Hydrometer Used.
Percentage of
Proof Spirit
Mean.
■ Age of
Wine.
Temprana ... ' ...
‘Gay-Lussac
27-0)
25-9
1869
Long’s balance
21-8 f
Temprana, soon after its
Gay-Lussac
23-6)
23-3
1869
: first fermentation
Sykes’scale .... ...
23-1)
Bed Wines, Nos. 1 and 2
Long’s balance ... . ...
Sykes’ scale
23-3 1
22-7 (
23-0
1869
Grenficbe ... ...
Gay-Lussac
Sykes’scale
25-3 1
24-6 f
24-9
1869
• Taking the total as obtained by all:, the several-instruments used; it is
24'265; but if we pick out those reported at Sykes’ strength, it is
foundto bo 23'625. Now, this is just‘9ss; or substantially one per
cent.'.higher than the general average of South Australian wines
hitherto studied.
ELEMENTS AFFECTING THE KEEPING OF WINE.
Now, as the spirit and tannic acid have so much to do with the
keeping of wine, upon which depends, in no small degree, its power
of travelling, and therefore its fitness to be sent into any foreign
market; I thought it most desirable that these two points should be
well attended to. And to them.l have directed my attention, as the
following tables will show. I premise, however, that in the instance of
white wines, the standard of tannic acid was that of good old sherry and
Madeira for the sweeter kinds, and Deinhard’s hock for the harder
Rieslings, Chasselases, and Pineau Blancs. I treated only such as were
free from any taint of acetic change. Now, I found hardly one that
fell below the above-named standards.
For the.red varieties I had to adopt other and more complicated
methods of forming a fair rough,.estimate of that element—white of
egg, in some instances; filtration through animal charcoal, and subse-
quent treatment; the examination of. the residue after distilling off the
spirit, &c. In fine, -1 am satisfied that nearly all of them contained
tannic acid enough for home purposes, but hardly enough for exporta-
tion, to distant countries. , Red wines to be sent abroad in bulk should
be rough to the taste.
In considering the excellent effects of tannic acid on wine meant for
long voyages, I ain bold to advise that all such should on no account be
“fined?' with white of egg, pr any. albuminous matter, but well separated
from the natural deposits Of dregs by racking at proper seasons; nay,
more, I fee! certain that if | ordinarily-prepared tannic acid, that may be
procured from any druggist, were dissolved in wine brandy, and a pro-
portion (say, a bottle) to a hogshead of wine added, instead of the two or


Name of Maker.
Name of Wine.
By Sykes’
Hydrometer.
Spirit Strength.
Mean.
New South Wales.
Wyndham, Messrs.
Bukkullah Eed... —
19-6 20:4
20-
„ „ ...
Bukkullah White
23' 22-4
22-7
Doyle, J
Marie, Louis
Kaludah
19-5
Muscatel
24-3
Carmichaels, — ...
White
235
Fallon, J.
Riesling
22-3 24-
236
Lindeman, H. J....
Cawarra
20'4
Macarthur, Sir W.
Eiesling, 1856 ...
24-5 24-2
24-3
Western Australia.
Hardy, Joseph
General mean
of samples treated
22-16
Eed Wine
24-1
Clifton, — ... , ...
Verdeilho
23-5
Wayler, Dr.
Muscatel
24-35
General mean
- 23-983
South Australia.
,
Peak#, B. J.
Red and White
15 samples, /
„ 22-13
Auld, Pck.
Auldana, 1864
17-4
„ White ' ...
23- 23-6 24-8
23-8
„ Eed ...
,2Q-3 22>4; 22-7
21-46 ,
Baker,:John , ; ...
A.B. Morialta ... ....
23- 23-6 ;
;:23-3 ,
A.Z. White ... ...
23-5 , 22-8 .
23-15 ,
Fisher, D.
Roussillon ... ...
26-3 21-3
26-3 ,
Scott, E. and J. ... . ...
Hermitage, 1864
25- 24-8
, 24-9 ■
Eandall, David ...
Glenpara,, White
18-8 19-
; 18-9
„ Eed
17-3
Marked F. Eed ...
25-7 26-3
26-2 , ;
„ G. Eed ,
26-1
Eiesling ... .,.
20- 19-2
19-6.
Callender and Co.
Auldana, 1863
22-6
three per cent. of spirit, the consumers at home would find a more
agreeable article. Of course the quantity per hogshead of tannic acid
added should be made known to the-agent, that, he might have it
removed to suit his customers, in the ordinary way, by “fining” it with
a proper proportion of white of eggs.' Nothing is more certain than
that the quantity of superadded tannic acid can be completely removed
from the roughest or the most delicate of wines. The above observa-
tions apply to wines sent in bulk, not in bottle.
Were the above directions made the subject of an experiment or ,two
on pipes or' hogsheads to be sent to Europe, I feel all -but. certain the
result would show how needless it is to fortify wine for exportation, and
what a saving in the cost of spirit alone it would prove to the exporter.
.These tables relate to wines sent in to the Intercolonial Exhibition
1866-7, and were operated on from time to time since, as opportunity
proved favourable, not a few having been distilled several times over,
and different bottles used. The end in view was to test -how great
were, the differences observable in the produce of all the colonies.


Name of Maker.
Name of Wine.
By Sykes’s
Hydrometer.
Spirit Strength.
Mean.
South Australia.—
( Con
tinned.) -
Smith and Son ...
Sherry ... ... ...
233
23-
23-15
Hermitage ... ...
24-
Eoss, R. D.
Highercombe, White ...
22-8
22-5
22-56
„ Eed
21-6
21-7
21-65
Martin, W.
Dulcetta. Red, 1864
21-2
23-7
23-9
Stead, J. ...
Hermitage
24-
23-9
23-93
Greig, A
Verdeilho & Frontignao
25-
24-3
24-6
Greig, W
Eiesling, 1862
24'
24-1
24-05
Hunt, F. E.
Madeira
23-
Charlesworth, T. W.
Tokay (a fine Wine) ...
22-1
22-6
22-35
...
Eiesling
23-4
23-5
23-45
Gillard, J.
Hermitage, 1863
25-2
24-9
25-05
}] V ...
Mataro, 1861
24-6
24-
24-3
Winokel, F.
Old Tokay (a splendid Wine)
23-9
23-3
23-6
Newer Tokay
24-
22-9
23-45
Gilbert, J.
Eiesling, 1860 ...
20-
20-3
20-1
Verdeilho, 1860
21-5
21-
21-25
Riesling, 1861
216
Carbinet
. 22-4
Scyras .-.
, 23-
23-3
23-15
Green, W.
Eiesling, 1862 ...
23-8
22-9
23-35
General
average
22-67
Victorian.
Guppy, —
Hermitage, 1865
23-
23-3
23-15
Hopwood,—
...
Bchuca, Eed
25-2
24-8
25-
Galland and Jarrard
Hermitage ...
22-1
22-6
22-35
Weber Brothers ...
Hermitage, 1865
21-3
Hope, Dr.
White Wine
22-6
22-1'
22-3 '
Dardell, J. H.
Schiraz, 1865
20-7
202
20-4
Adams, E.
Hermitage
21-6
Bear, T. H.
Mataro
20T
Knight, G. W.
Hermitage
23-3
22-9
23-1
J) ,,
Pineau Blanc
’ 21-5
Piper, W.
“ Perseverance,” White
19-
19-5
19-25
JJ JJ
White Muscat
20-4
Eichmond, J.
Chasselas
18-8
18-2
18-5
Eeid, Curtis
Muscat
231
23-
23 05
Heine, A.
Riesling, 1866
21-8
j. jj
...
Chasselas, 1865
203
20-6
20-4
Klemm, —
...
Riesling
19-9
20-2
20-05
Heine and Greiffenhagen
Hermitage
24-1
23-4
23-75
Burgundy
23-
22-4
22-7
Panton, J. A.
...
Hermitage
24-1
24-
24-05
...
Mataro, 1866
21-4
Burgundy
22-7
22-3
22-5
Vlaeminick Brothers
Eed Wine
24-6
Meredith,!.
Tokay
23-8
24-1
23-95
Bepury and Langdon
Verdeilho
20-3
Boss, J., and Co.
Hermitage
• 18’9
19-4
191
Pin, J. B
Chasselas
• 19-3
Elliott, S.
S.E. in diamond
20-4
Everest, T. J. ... '
Mataro
19-6
193
19-4
Maplestone, C. ...
Hermitage
21-8
Murray, A.
Mataro ;
21-4
Moody, Fred. A, ...
Burgundy
22-5
22-
22-25
General average
21-77


It will be remarked, from the above tables of spirit strength, that the
highest average strength is found in the produce of Western Australia,
it attaining nearly 24 per cent., actually 23-983. Next comes South
Australia with 22 - 67. Third in order is New South Wales, 22T6.
Lastly, Victoria shows only 21-77.
Western Australia.— Probably the average for Western Australia
would have stood somewhat lower, had a larger variety of samples been
available. Still, it is not much matter for wonder that the produce of
that colony stands so high for pure wine, if we remember its geo-
graphical situation, and the fact of the great radiation of heat from
the sands near Perth, in which vicinity the vineyards above mentioned
are situated.
New South Wales. —The eight samples of New South Wales wines
distilled, though but few for so old and so large a wine country, repre-
sent fairly the best-known varieties; and from the different districts
whence they were obtained, may not unfairly be said to be representa-
tives of the produce generally. They were, without exception, first-
class wines in their several kinds. Average strength, 22-16.
South Australia. —By far the largest and most interesting collec-
tion of wines sent to the Intercolonial Exhibition 1866-7, came from
South Australia. Their variety was striking, their range of spirit
strength surprising, and their general character very good indeed.
It was to these wines that I looked for information for our Victorian
vignerons; for though no inconsiderable number of the South Aus-
tralian vineyards have been formed in situations, whose annual average
heat is, perhaps, higher than any Victorian, yet those situate on the
high and exposed hills are as cool as the districts about Geelong or
Yering ; so that there is not so very great difference, on the whole, as
regards the vineyards now in existence in the two colonies. The
Auldana, Morialta, Highercombe, and Pewsey Vale growths find ana-
logues, if not their counterparts, in the Barrabool Hills and Yering,
and their equals at Ivanhoe, near Melbourne. The difference in spirit
strength, as obtained from the general average, is 0-39 in favour of
South Australia.
As to the keeping power of South Australian wines, it was excellent
wherever the tannic acid was present in its normal quantity. But with
the exception of very sweet, luscious wines, like those of Mr. Stead, I
cannot say that any of them continued to improve after the sixth or
seventh year. I have no means of knowing how they would improve
in bulk. I can only speak about bottled samples.
Speaking of the white wines very generally, I found in the prevail


ing character of'the bouquet something to' remind me of the faint odour
of apples. Could;this be malic sether, formed by a portion of the malic
acid on the spirit in a nascent state? And if it be disliked, could it not
be removed by the use of small quantities of ‘ partially calcined gypsum
during the pressing ?
Not a few of the reds either had already, or soon after the bottle was
opened, acquired a very distinctive smell and taste, which were not
pleasing to every palate. Some persons, not professed judges, called it
smoky, othere leathery. But the acquiring of this in no way affected
the keeping of the wine. Both in the instance of South Australian and
Victorian produce I conducted a long series of chemical experiments,
with a view of determining whether this peculiarity was due to some
alteration in the tannic acid or not; for instance, the oxidation of it
into some higher form, as gallic acid. It very generally occurs in
Victorian red wines, but at first has more of an earthy quality. But
my results hitherto are not conclusive. I have also consulted all the
best and most recent works of the Portuguese cenologues, and find
Senhor Lapa, Professor of Chemistry, and Royal Commissioner for
Vineyards and Wines, attributes it in Portugal to the conversion of a
portion of the tannic acid into alcohol! To whatever cause it is due,
the vineyard proprietor should never rest till he has found means of
getting rid of it. The French methods of fermenting red musts
advocated by Mr. Casalis Allut, and to be found fra extenso in the last
useful volume which Dr. Kelly has contributed to our scanty libraries
of works on “ Vines and Wines,’’ seem, from points of reason, to be by
far the best, and if needed in any one colony more than another, I
should consider that one to be South Australia.
Last in the relation of average spirit strength, come the products of
Victoria with an average of 2P77. Though not quite so numerous as
the South Australian, it represents not inadequately the produce of this
colony. Stated in general terms, the Victorian wines are wonderfully
good in their several kinds. But it must be observed in limine, that
whether light or full-bodied, they are the produce of French or German
vines. Hardly any other, except the Verdeilho (Madeira Vine), is to be
found as a standard sort. Not a few vineyards in South Australia,
such as that of Sir George Kingston, Mr. White, &c., contain nothing
but Spanish kinds; and Clarendon, Pewsey Vale, Morialta, and Higher-
eombe have mixtures of these with French; so it is impossible to institute
exact comparisons. Yet from the circumstance of the Spanish vines
being grown for the most part in hot situations, with plenty of lime in
the soil, and the' mode of treating the musts being more German than


Spanish, these- vineyards turn out white wines as fine and delicatc as
any that have been produced at Vering or- the Barrabool Hills; but
of course of a different bouquet, and slightly;higher alcoholic strength.
No matter how remote Victorian wines may yet be from the glorious
bouquet of Deinhard’s or the Johannisberg Hock, the produce oft the
.south side of our dividing range comes the nearest to .them of anything
south of the equator. But if the treaters of the Spanish produce in
South Australia only understood the requisites for managing their musts
as such are treated in the instances of manzanilla (the bitter, fine, hard
wine, so called from the hitter partaking of the character of camomile) ;
the montilla, another dry wine; and the paxarete, a medium 1 sort, it is
hard to understand why these light, firm sorts might not be supplied
abundantly. ,
In the valley of the Murray all the Spanish vines would have a fine,
chance; for there a deep gravelly, soil, heat and: shelter, and no hot
winds, would indicate their natural home. And if ever the produce of
this colony is to rapidly supersede the hot brandied sherries, and retain
the pure sherry flavour without the adventitious impure, alcohol, it is
clear that from, Sandhurst and Benalla to the Murray the requisite con-
ditions must be looked: for.
SPECIAL REMARKS ON CERTAIN MATTERS AFFECTING
VICTORIAN WINES.
Among the kinds to which I have devoted time for a more than
ordinary study in this colony are as white wines the Ghasselas; the
Aucarot, the Shepherd’s Riesling; and in feds the Mataro; the Grenache
and the Donzellinho (black Portugal). The Ghasselas is in this colony one
of our most useful grapes; it is a first-rate table grape, and will await the
convenience of the wine-maker without complaining for a week or two,
and the produce is frequently excellent; ' 1 ' 1
If ever Victoria gains l a name in the'world’s markets for' any distinc-
tive growths; the two first I prophecy will be Ghasselas and Aucarot; and
the third, Shepherd’s Riesling; or some blend of it.' As yet nothing has
come to my knowledge sufficient to mark a distinctive character upon any
of the red kinds, exceptperhaps Grenache; It yields enormously;' and in
rich soil and warm localities appears to have improved in the quality of
the wine. I have met 'with a'few samples from Echuca- and South
Australia, that possessed a well-marked character; and-in 1866-7 a medal
was awarded to a sample grown at Glarendon, ! South Australia.
Concerning the blending of wines for the production of better results


and greater varieties, and also for supplying a uniform article when one
has been found to suit a particular market, much remains to be said,
which cannot, however, be attempted in a short essay like the present.
Thus much, however, may be placed on record—that until this branch
of the art of wine-making and preparing is carried out, the present uni-
versal complaint will continue to be as universal as ever, both among
our own and foreign consumers. “We can never rely on getting the
same colonial wine twice together.” “We have no sooner become ac-
customed to a particular kind that suits us than we are informed there
is no more of it.” Now, on the other hand, when a Portuguese or Spanish
house finds that an article has “ taken,” the very same can be supplied
for ever if it continue to be popular in the market. Duff Gordon’s
sherry, Hunt’s and Ofiley’s ports, &c., come to us year after year the
same. To do more than hint at this point would inevitably lead me
beyond my limits. Hitherto I have found by experiments only two
white wines that I consider perfect for blending with red kinds—
Ancarot and Shepherd’s Riesling.
One cause of the want of uniformity in the produce of many of our
vineyards is the great variety of kinds of vines to be found in not a few
of them. It is a mistake to allow this practice to continue one season
longer than is necessary to ascertain two things—lst, which of two,
three, or four kinds yield the best wine in the particular locality i 2nd,
which, bearing the above in mind, resist disease best 1 Graft all the-
rest with these kinds. Were something of this nature done, and a dis-
tinctive character stamped on the produce, and consequently an almost
regular demand created for it by customers at home or abroad, there-
would remain no reason why the banks should not advance upon the-
stock in cellar as they do in Spain and Portugal, and as they do here
on wool and other merchandise.
I would now direct the attention of the reader back to the “ tables of
spirit strength” and to the general averages which I have recorded. I
hardly need say that I took all care when distilling that lay in my
power. From time to time one or two were subjected to actual balance-
weighing, to satisfy my own mind that the hydrometer was correct, and
that I was not led into error by such a thing as air-bubbles, produced
when diluting the spirit with water or by plunging in the hydrometer—
the two fruitful sources of error. In either case the spirit strength
would be altered. In thus directing attention to this important
element in wine, I would add that I know I am open to much
criticism—still, facts are facts. Exceptional samples, made rather from
raisins, than naturally ripe grapes when their elements were all nicely


balanced, I have found yield over 26 per cent. I take the following
from Dr. Druit’s fine little work on wines :—“ When we look through
Mr. Keen's report on the wines which were sent to the International
Exhibition, London, from almost every country except Spain and Por-
tugal (from which no samples were analysed ), we shall see that, although
from southern countries, as Italy and Algiers, the average is a little'
higher, and on the Rhine and Moselle a little lower, still the fact re-
mains, that of the 569 samples of liquid sent to the International Ex-
hition as Wine from France, Italy, Germany, Austria, and our own
colonies of Australia—all, in fact, but a few exceptional specimens—
yielded 18 to 22 per cent, of proof spirit.” (Druit, pp. 9-10.) Now, in
order to fully appreciate any question about cheap wine, we must fully
realise the distinction that exists in composition, properties, uses, and
doses, between what I will venture to call pure virgin wine, the refresh-
ing beverage that a man drinks at a draught, with its 18 to 22 per cent, of
proof spirit, and strong or fortified wine, the stimulating dram, which he,
sips, pregnant as it is with its 35 to 45 per cent, of spirit. The two
things differ toto ccelo.
I could have wished to insert a complete list of vines which yield the
wine best known to Englishmen, but have been able to verify only a few
kinds, either here or in South Australia.
SPANISH VARIETIES OF VINES KNOWN IN THE
COLONIES.
The grapes which enter into the Spanish wines we call sherries are, as--
the basis of sherry—
1. Palomino Blanco.
2. Pedro Ximenes.
3. Temprana (meaning early); it differs apparently from Palomino’
Blanco only in ripening earlier.
4. Doradillo, a capital bearer.
5. Jaen.
"With the solitary exception of Pedro Ximenes, I am not aware if any:
of the above kinds of vines have been successfully planted in Victoria.
But there are plenty of places north of the Dividing Range where they
would succeed—the old diggers’ spoil-heaps about Huntly, for example
—and probably yield a fine light wine in character not unlike Manzan-
illa. In South Australia they produce light wine somewhat of the above.'
character and strength; and, to my mind, are among the most agreeable
and distinctive in character, as white wines, that I remember to have
seen from that colony.


FRENCH VARIETIES OF VINES.
There is hardly a popular variety of vine in Prance that has not been
introduced into Victoria, 'all'of-which succeed south of the Dividing
Range. Hermitage (often called Seyran), Miller’s Burgundy, Carbinet,
and Carbinet Sauvignon, with now and then Malbec, are common and-
yield well. The Pineaus grow well, and some day will be the founda-
tion of Champagne and other effervescent sorts.
PORTUGUESE VARIETIES OF VINES.
The district whence come the finest Port wines is that of Traz os
Montes, and they are made from the following kinds of grapes. I trans-
late from the report of the Yiscount Yilla Maior, Professor of Chemistry
in the Polytechnic School, to whom was deputed the examination of the
processes of wine-making of the above-named district, called also the
District of the North. In passing, I would submit that the Portuguese
Government Departments might help us, in these colonies, to a bit of
common sense in the selection of members for appointment as Royal
Commissioners, in the matter of agriculture at any rate :
“ His Majesty the King of Portugal has vouchsafed to appoint,
through the Minister of Public Works, Commerce, and Industry, a Com-
mission, composed of the Yiscount Yilla Maior, Professor of Chemistry
in the Polytechnic School; John Ignatius Ferreira Lapa, Professor of
Agricultural Chemistry in • the ■ General Institute of Agriculture; and
Antonio Augusto de Aguiar, Professor of Chemistry in the Polytechnic
School and Industrial Institute, in order to visit, during the time of the
vintage, and of the wine-making, the principal wine districts of the
kingdom. The department allotted to Yiscount Yilla Maior is that of
the districts north of the Douro ; Antonio Augusto de Aguiar, the dis-
trict comprised between' the Douro and the Tagus, except that of Lisbon;
and John Ferreira Lapa, the district of Lisbon and the other districts
lying south of the Tagus. The Commission will draw up a report em-
bodying its labours and studies, and forward it to the Government not
later than 15th November. Commission dated 10th August, 1866.”
I consider the above a model of a working- Royal Commission !
Work tJ report,: and all; finished in three months. Returning to the
“ studies and labours ”of Yiscount) Yilla Maior, he says :—“ The predomi-
nating kinds of grapes in this region are;: among, the reds, one called
Alvarelhao, the Bastardo. and some deep-red kind they call Molle (soft).
And among the white varieties the Arinto, which they call Dual (our
Riesling), the Terrantez, :and D. Branca. : The red kinds are far more
-abundant than the white; and the wine they make is red.” The lagares


(places in which the grapes are trodden and pressed) are rectangular
tanks of ordinary masonry (and such are in common use in the province))
mostly small, affording little accommodation, and seldom clean, not to
say that they are often deplorably dirty. Formerly the vintage took
place not before the 29th of September; there being usually made a
proclamation of the time by authority. At the present time the vintage
takes place earlier, and, as a consequence, the wine is, as they say; in-
ferior to that made in former times. The better class of cultivators)
even still, hold their vintage later, and succeed in making excellent wines.”
The method followed in the making of wine by the greater part of
the cultivators is the following ;
“ As soon as the lagar is full of the mixed grapes, without any attempt
at separating the dry, rotten, or green berries, all together is trodden
out for wine, and plenty of men put on at once, so that the first part of
the treading may be done in the shortest space of time ; afterwards the
work is carried on with fewer men during two days and the halves of two
nights.
“ When the fermentation has been well set up, they wait to ascertain
how the wine offers to turn out. The fermentation is allowed to' go on
from two to eight days. The proof which is required is its having’ a
vinous taste and smell, and a certain roughness of flavour on the palate.
When it arrives at this point it is put into large casks, without any ad-
dition of brandy, until it is racked previous to being sold, and eveii
then only a small portion is added. The Senhor Campilho, one of the
best vignerons in these parts, and whose wines are made with more than
customary care, gives two almudes of brandy to every 700 gallons.”
PERSONAL EXPLANATION.
Certain remarks in a leading article in the Argus (6th November)
some months ago seemed at the time to demand a reply, because, without
mentioning any name, they pointed towards myself, and I took them to
have been aimed at me:—“But there was one point in connection
with which we certainly consider that the exhibitors had a good
right to consider themselves aggrieved. Their wines were adjudicated
on here, and then disappeared altogether from mortal view. It was
understood they would be sent home, and submitted to judges in
the mother country; but, beyond the decision of the colonial jurors,
nothing has been heard of them since the day the exhibition cellar
opened and swallowed them, up. . This is a great grievance. Had
faith been kept with the growers, they would not only have had
the advantage of hearing an opinion expressed by a different: set of


experts, but they would probably have succeeded in exciting interest
amongst the wine-trading community in England, which would have
brought them fresh customers, and perhaps opened up a large trade.
It is to be hoped that such mistakes will not be made on the present
occasion, and that a strict account will be exacted of the Commissioners
of what becomes of the wine sent for exhibition.”
Now, if this vague and general language means anything at all, it
refers either to the samples of wine sent in to the Intercolonial Exhibi-
tion 1866-7, or to the late Board of Agriculture’s last Exhibition, 1870.
If it refer to the samples given to me for study, then I must inform
the editor that I published an essay on them in 1867, to be found in the
Transactions of the Royal Society, circulated privately, but extensively,
by myself, reprinted by the Board of Agriculture, and finally translated
into German for circulation among the wine people of that nation. As
occasion offered, these samples were studied, and the present essay gives
some account of what was done with them, and through them for the
wine interest generally. If the remarks fall upon the samples sent for
competition to the Agricultural Society (1870), then the reply is simple
indeed. The judges recommended that certain suggestions of mine
should be acted upon, mainly to the effect that the untouched bottles
should remain in the Exhibition cellars for a year—be again tasted—
and the best of them sent to the Agent-General in London, for the
opinion of some competent European experts. This advice and recom-
mendation were thrown aside, and the wines ordered off to London
forthwith. Then were handed over to me, “to do what I liked with,”
the bottoms of bottles opened for the experts, and a few bottles of one-
year-old stuff, too poor I suppose to be sent home. I blended, as well
as I could, these parts of bottles, and have a lot of them lying here now;
but, of course, after having been left open, some with bits of cork in
their necks, and very many without any at all, for three or four weeks,
they were useless for any kind of careful study. The writer declares
that a very rigorous account of those sent in on the present occasion
shall be taken. He is at liberty now to take it. I can tell him that
nearly all the vignerons who got medals have left with me the balance
of their exhibits, while those, who got nothing, have taken them away—
just what I wished.
REMARKS ON WINES SENT TO THE EXHIBITION,
MELBOURNE, 1872.
It would be out of place now to trespass on the report of the wine
experts, further than to add that during the period that has elapsed
since I had an opportunity of personally judging of any large collection


of Victorian wines (1867), there is the most unmistakable evidence of
vast improvement in nearly all their vinous properties. Most of our red
wines then had, when young, a well-pronounced disagreeable earthy taste ;
but with more care, and improved methods of fermenting, and after-atten-
tion, that has in many instances disappeared. And while our Victorian
wines will have a character of their own, it is now certain that it will be
& pleasant one. Young wines from new vineyards on the valley of the
Murray were quite clean on the palate—in one instance remarkably so.
Prom a vineyard near Echuca there came, in 1866, two lots of white
and red wine, so offensive from this earthy taste, that the experts could
find no terms strong enough to characterise it. In the instance of the
reds, after four years they became good, but the whites, some of which
remain, are still simply execrable. Yet a German vigneron, Mr. Vettler,
has shown that by care and attention all these bad qualities can be
avoided. None of his wines were more than two years old, yet the
number of medals awarded him by experts, who had not the remotest
knowledge whose wines they were judging, shows his complete success,
in wine-making.
I often hear persons interested in wine talking about foreign markets
for their produce; but it has always seemed to me that our own people
form the best consumers of our produce. One thing is certain, that
we are gradually and steadily becoming a wine-drinking people. The
city is well spotted over with shops that deal in little else than colonial
wine, which they retail at 2d. a large glass and 6d. a bottle! Now, I
have had many years experience of wine, as taken by the Portuguese,
and I am bold to say that such wine as is retailed in Melbourne at 6d.
per bottle cannot be had for twice the money in either Lisbon or Paris
■at this day.
In the absence of any official information, I take the following from
the Argus of 15th February, 1873 :■—“ The decrease in the import of
wines from £213,852 in 1862, to £64,766 in 1871, is clearly to be
traced to the manufacture of wines forced upon us by the extension of
■our vineyards, and to a change in the ■ drinking habits and tastes of our
people. Our import of wines of all kinds in 1871 was 188,150 gallons,
against 629,219 gallons of colonial manufacture, which increased to
713,589 gallons in 1872.” The italics are mine, and lam delighted at
seeing these statistics. They are all in favour of health and sobriety.
What is now to be desiderated is the utter expulsion of bad brandy and
worse “ square gin,” and one or two other “ evil spirits”-—which, let us
hope, time will soon effect, and substitute in their place both a taste for,
and the needful supply of, wine brandy. Wine brandy does not ordi-
narily create any craving for it, but all this raw manufactured stuff does.


Government Statistics op Acreage under Vines, and its gradual
INCREASE'PROM 1863 TO MARCH, 1872.
i t
' .year ending 31st March.
• Vines.
. Acres.
2,006|
:! 3AI76 ‘
3,594:
4^078
Alll
, 4,340
4.046
4,950
, 5,466
5,523 ■
In .an essay read before,the Royal Society of, Victoria in"1867,‘1 saidt
-r-“i Experience hag long ago convinced me that pledges and resolutions
to . abstain from ardent spirits are but ‘ poor, safeguards of unstable
virtue;’ and,that, to effect a ~lasting cure, the natural instincts must be
not violently .assaulted with,.resolves, but steadily aud' gently turned
towards sources,of reasonable and healthy gratification, while the danger
of excess is effectually removed.” ■
.Am I wrong in thinking no w that our pure native wines are doing their
share,in effecting a change irx the.drinking habits and tastes of our people 1
.; The following, is a list of a portion of the Victorian wines, sent to the
Exhibition just;closed in Melbourne, and left with me for further study
andireport,..which have been already distilled, and their spirit strength,
according, to Sykes’s tables, determined by me. They have been.drawn
from : the representative, wine districts of .Victoria, viz. ;—North* of the
dividing range,is represented by August Heine, Bruhn Brothers;. Castle-
maine, by Mellon ; the , Loddon * River, William BotterL; Sunbury, by
Hon. ,J. G. Francis; Yering, by Hubert de Castella ;■ Melbourne district,
by Charles Maplestone and John Davis ; Geelong wine districts, by the
Hon. ; Dr. (Hope and Mr. Jacob Weber; and the high* country about.
Daylesford, by M; Jean Merle.
, j The necessity of* having this essay printed in . time i for the Official
Report, of, the Exhibition. Commission prevents me from carrying on my
ifiquiry: further * intoi the character of; the wines sent to the Exhibition;
but I trust to .be able, to continue it, .and publish my results , in a paper
fpr the , next, volumei .of the Acclimatisation ■ Society’s * Transactions.
Meanwhile,'l will just add that they*show, as a.whole, great progress in
the arts of making and treating wine.
If the Victorian vignerons will make their wines carefully, and* sell
them cheap, they will clear out all but. the very best from year to year,
and have;no need to look for. exorbitant prices- in foreign .markets.


Return of, Vines Grown and Wine and Brandy Manufactured in the
, : Colony op Victoria, for the year ending 31st March, 1872.
Number of
Vines.
Grapes Gathered.
Wine
Produced. ,
Brandy
County.
Not Made
into Wine.
, Made
into Wine.
Manu-
factured.
Anglesey
10,450
cwt.
150
cwt.
galls.
galls, ■ :
Benambra
8,700
68
106
460
— ■
Bendigo
821,095
. 7,083
9,508
, 58,234
— ,
Bogong
1,504,286
898
26,786
172,198
— ,
Boruck
317,933
1,787
2,813
17,410
65,784
— ‘
Bourke
1,560,570
9,293
9,923
—
Buln Buln
12,330
17
99
675
—
Croajingolong
—
—
—
-
— '
247
385
: 2,206
.
Dargo
—. ,
Delatite
127,215
259
2,911
19,448
— ■
Dundas
12,435
777,000
326
47
• 230
—■./>
Evelyn
125
10,741
78,515
1,500 ,
Follett
—
—
—
•
—
226,307
1,756
2,464
3,076
15,461
17,271
108,233
— i
Grant
, 2,423,811
79
Grenville
40,167
202
. 722
4,323
— : ■
Gunbower ....
•4,000
—
35
200
Hampden
1,208
6
—
—
■ r .
Heytesbury
—
—
—
—
— ■*
413
251
1,829
Karkarook
— ,,
Lowan
—
—
—
—
—
Millewa ......
—
—
—
—
. .—..v
Moira
572,650
312
, ,8,872
66,980 ,
Mornington
•73,530
243
673
5,260 1
—
Normanby ...
19,875
33,000
239
90
430
'•
Polwarth
460
650
3,000
— . ,,
Eipon
57,410
222,746
319
547
3,780
Rodney
• 205
2,508
17,420 !
■■ ■•r
Talbot
688,376 .
4,458
,10,242 ,
68,383 ,
Tambo
«•
—
—
—
—
Tangil
2,588
17
—
—
— ■
Tatchera'
6,000
.. 60
—
.
Villiers
44,550
89
345
1,340
—
Weeah
'
.
•
—
' --
Wonnangatta
.3,000
■■
■
:
— ■
•30,896
106,791
713,609
1,579 .
According to the above tables the number of acres under vines has.
been substantially trebled in nine years—from 1863 to 1872. Yet this
is hardly in keeping with the history of most of our new or -localised
industries. The rule 1 is that we l 100k 1 on and say nothing until an
industry has got well into the experimental scale, and then we rush
madly into it. For many a year prior to 1866, a few colonial breweries
struggled on, and their beer .was tolerated by a small portion of-the


Name of Maker.
Name of Wine.
Vintage.
Colour.
Proof
Spirit.
Average,
August Heine
Riesling
1869
20-0 )
Sand-
Hermitage
1869
22-7)-
hurst,
91 )>
Mataro
1868
...
18-1 I
20-26
people ; by some because it was cheap, by the patriotic because it was
native produce; but it was generally decried and detested. But in 1866-7,
at the Intercolonial Exhibition, it was brought into really public notice;
-and the dissertation upon it by Mr. Eoord, and the medals awarded by
the jurors to Carlton and Castlemaine ale, and one or two others, awoke
in no small degree the attention of the public ; and forthwith came the
“rush” of brewers, and, as a result, the practical expulsion of the
European article. It is so with woollen cloth making, and generally
with other industries' in Victoria: they struggle hard and finally
flourish.
But there have been, and still exist, heavy obstacles in the way of the
wine interest. Firstly, we are not, as a people, wine-drinkers as yet;
else we should consume the produce of the colony in less than a month.
Secondly, every vigneron has - a pet idea of his own, that his little patch
of vines is the real Australian “Cote d’Orj” and his wine must soon
■bring a guinea a bottle. Thirdly, we want two or three merchants of
large means, or two or three companies of not more than four or five
partners, with ready cash, to the amount of (say) £50,000, and suitable
■cellars not far from the city, and if possible on the river, who would buy
anything, even the worst at its brandy value, and the better sorts at
higher prices. Thus every grower of a hogshead or a pipe of wine
could bring it in, have it tested, and obtain at once, in cash, its fair
value, as he could for a load of wheat or oats. Such companies would
soon supply the whole of the retail shops, and from the quantities in
their cellars something like a uniform article might be supplied.
Fourthly, in the instance of the more wealthy owners of vineyards,
while their stocks of middling wines would be kept down by selling to the
■companies, their experiments on their better growths would be carried
on with more care and less anxiety aboutm oney matters. And lastly,
the banks would be brought to the ordinary common sense of banks in
Portugal, and make advances on wine in the cellar, on. the.report of
■competent judges, just as they now do on gold or station produce.
I have caused the following samples of Victorian wines, to be dis-
tilled, and have determined their spirit strength according to Sykes’
(British proof) strength.
VICTORIAN DISTILLED WINES.


Name of Maker.
Name of Wine.
Vintage.
Colour.
Proof
Spirit.
Average
Bruhn Brothers
Carbinet Sauvignon ...
1869
23-3)
Carbinet
1869
21-8
Sand-
" "
Riesling
1869
23-0 >.
hurst,
Verdeilho
1870
25-3
23-92
„ ...
1869
26-2)
F. Mellon
’ Muscat
1870
20-2 ]
J» ; jj ••• •••
Pineau
Esparte (Mataro)
1870
1870
23-10 (
17-4 ’
20-2
Pineau
1871
201 1
H. de Castella
Chasselas
■ 1869
22-10 )
Yering
Hermitage
1871
21-2 \
22-1
Charles Maplestone ,..
Large & small Riesling
1868
20 6 I
Iv’nhoe
5J »J
Hon. J. G. Francis ...
JJ JJ JJ
Chasselas
1870
1869
20-4 \
20-8 (
20-5
S'nb’ry
Gouais
1869
23-8 1
22-3
Franz Schmidt
Riesling
1868
220)
Ber-
1869
23-8
wick
Ngarveno (White) ...
1866
26-3 j
24.03
John Davis
18-6 j
Ngar-
JJ ,j
„ (Red) ...
' 22-2 f
yeno
Jacob Weber
Hermitage
1871
20-0|
20-4
Chasselas
1871
25’5 \
22-75
The Hon. R. C. Hope,
Hermitage
1870
24-4)
Geelong
1870
22-6 C
Second sample
23-98
Gouais and Riesling...
1871
25-1 f
Riesling
1871
24-4 \
JJ J» JJ
Jean Merle, Daylesford
Hermitage
1871
23-4 J
Gamais
1871
19-8 )
J» JJ >1
JJ ,M ** *
Another bottle do. ..
1870
1870
16-21
19-1 f
18-7
JJ JJ »>
William Botten, Loddon
Another sample
1870
19-7)
Shiraz
1868
24-4
23-0
White Hermitage
1871
22 6 y
Shiraz
1869
220)
August Mueller
Muscatel
...
23-2
23-4
Shiraz
22 0 >
” ))
Verdeilho
25-0)
J. G. Francis ..-
Mataro
1869
16-2
Hermitage
1866
220 1
22-3
„
1867
22-0 f
i, il
Verdeilho
1868
24-4)
Otto Jung
Rousette
1871
White
21-81
23-05
Hermitage
1871
Red
24-3)
Carl Pohl (857)
Mataro, Hermitage &
1871
Red
21-8)
Pineau
„ „ (855)
Verdeilho
1872
White
24-9 V
23-7
„ „ (861)
Carbinet & Hermitage
1869
Red
22-6
Verdeilho
1871
White
25-5 )
J. S. Johnstone, Sunbury
Riesling
1869
White
200
20-9
» jj
Verdeilho, a little
1869
White
21-8 !•
mixed
I
Messrs. Docker, Bon-
Riesling
1869
White
19-8
22‘1
tharambo
Red
Hermitage
1869
22-4)
21-8
Fred. Egli
Hermitage
1872
Red
21-8
WINES.
Victorian Distilled Wines— (continued).


Name of Maker.
Name of Wine.
Vintage.
Colour.
Proof
Spirit.
Average
John Vettler, Bchuca..
Gouais
1871
White
23-21
5? ., „
Sherry
1871
White
20-0
» a »
» J> 55
W. Morillion
Gloria Australia;
Mataro
1871.
1871
1871
"White
Red
Red
22-4 y
24-9 (
21-8)
22-46
Joseph Best ...
Burgundy and Black
Pineau •
1871
Red
, 22-4
23-0
„
Muscatel, Chasselas,
and Tokay
1871
White
23-6 7
Jacob Deppeler
Hermitage
1870
Red
23-6 |
23-0
Riesling
1870
White
22;4)
Wm. McDonald
B. Muscat
1867
Brown
32-2
Trouetti
Riesling
1870
White
20-4)
18-95
B. Custer
1871
Red
17-5 f
Cowan Baton
Riesling
1870
White
21-6 i
20-55
11 ) 1
Shiraz
1870
Red
19-5 (
Eobinson
Burgundy
1871
Red
21-6
Creppa, T.
» ...
1871
Red
16-21
17-35
Hermitage
1871
Red
18-5}
Sei’dd
Muscat
1871
21-0
Pedro Ximenus
1871
White
22-6 V
22-48
» ••• •”
Verdeilho
1871
White
23-8)
I conclude, then, as I began, saying that hopeful as our colonial wine
industry is, it is pot as yet quite out of its nonage.
NOTE.
Foe the guidance of persons testing the spirit strength of liquids, the following will
he useful, as there were until within the last two years hardly any other than Gay-
Lussac’s tables to be had, with Saleron’s small stills. Lately hydrometers and
tables calculated on what is known as “ Sykes,” or English proof spirit, have been
procurable :
Comparative Value of French and English Degrees op
Alcoholic Strength.
The different modes of expressing the strength of liquors adopted in England
and France, is the source of much inconvenience and confusion. In both countries
the operation of testing or trying the strength is by distillation of a determinate
quantity, and then taking the temperature and density of the distillate by thermo-
meters and hydrometer; but here the similarity ends. The instruments, as used in
idle two countries, differ essentially, and therefore the results are shown in different
terms. In England, Fahrenheit's thermometer and Sykes’hydrometer are used’;
in France, the Centigrade thermometer and Gay-Lussac’s hydrometer. These
thermometers differ in the fact, that the range between the temperature of frozen
and boiling water is divided in the latter (Centigrade) into 100 parts or degrees,
and in the former into 180. Gay-Lussac’s hydrometer is graduated to show 100
divisions or degrees between absolute alcohol of - 796 specific gravity, at 15-5 Ceri-
WINES.
Victorian Distilled Wines— (continued).


Sykes.
Gay-Lussac.
Sykes.
Gay-Lussac.
Sykes.
Gay-Lussac.
i
0-5
9-5
6-5
21-5
13
2,
1
11
7
23
14
3
2
13
8
24
15
4
3
15
9
25
16
4 •5
3-5
16'5
9-75
26-5
17
5
4
18
10-5
28
18
6-5
5
19
11-5
30
19
8
6
20
12
32
20
tigrade or 60° Fahrenheit, and pure water ; while the scale of Sykes’ hydrometer
starts from a definite mixture of water and pure alcohol, nearly in equal volumes,
having a specific gravity of ‘920 at 60° Fahrenheit, and called proof spirit, and the
instrument shows whether the spirit under test is of greater or less strength
than such proof. In various scientific works tables are given of the equivalent
degrees of these two scales, but none of them exactly correspond. The following
figures are very nearly exact:—
Under the excise laws of France, wine generally is not allowed to be fortified
for home consumption j but, under certain limitations, spirit to the extent of 5
per cent, may be added to the produce of the eastern Pyrenees, the Aude, the Tam,
the Hdrault, the Gard, and the EhSne. All wines for exportation may be fortified
without restriction, and most vintages are so strengthened before being shipped—
Roussillon wines for Brazil to the extent of 10 per cent., and for England from 5
to 8 per cent
