

I - r i. - J f jy r/y/^^«y//>v^pj< r & SC^r-».
&


e& v
,
(Lvubra RY^J






“Once Upon a Time”








( ° 0 ° c p /f' j!
\|| AL1CEG RI NWADt^i^
“Once Upon a Time”
ILLUSTRATIONS BY
UNA LE SOUEF FALKINER and VIOLET TEAGUE
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND COMPANY
Propy. Ltd.
MELBOURNE SYDNEY ADELAIDE BRISBANE


fa)%mduh


29729
CONTENTS
THE LITTLE SPRITE IN THE FOREST ... 1
THE LITTLE CHINA PEOPLE 11
WHAT THE WEST WIND DID 20
THE FOUR SISTERS 27
ESSAY ON THE HOLIDAYS 37
EAVESDROPPING UNDER THE TREES ... 40
THE PASSING OF THE DOLL 49
THE LAND OF EVERLASTINGS 57




Hmce a lonely, gay,
who lived all by
a big eucalyptus
i will wonder how
; lonely and gay at
dll tell you how it
ight and happy by
i surroundings, the
ring gum-trees that
the birds and the
1 that made life so
iut the very beauty
id, because he was
)ig forest there was
* him to play with,
(i)
The Little Sprite in tlie Forest


no little companions with whom to pass
his days.
There were hundreds and hundreds
of trees, and he could hear them
whispering and laughing together, no
doubt telling each other the most glorious
secrets about all that happened away
up in the blue above their tip-top
branches, but he had no share in their
secrets and could not understand what
they said.
Then there were the birds who
never went far without a mate and who
often gathered in large parties. Bright
coloured parrots who sought refuge in
the forest after robbing the neighbour-
ing fruit gardens, and talked shrilly
together about the lovely food they
found now-a-days which had been un-
known to their great-grand-parents;
grey cockatoos, and white ones with
their yellow crests agitated, screeched
aloud.
By day the lyre birds danced, and
in the twilight the kookaburras laughed
in their mirthful yet mournful way;
there were opossums without number,
little and big ones, and all kinds of


mysterious creatures that ran and crawled
upon the ground did our little sprite
find, but never anywhere did he discover
another little sprite like himself, even
though he was very adventurous, and
peeped into snakes’ holes and turned
over big stones that had myriads of
creepy things underneath. Ah! living
all alone is but dreary work, when really
life should have been such fun! Alone
to hunt for dewdrops in the early
morning so as to breakfast on them
and manna that fell from the trees, or
lovely sticky pieces of wattle-gum, was
very dull compared to what it would
have been with a cheery little friend.
One day he had wandered farther
afield than usual, tempted by some wild
bees, honey-laden, apparently making
for home, until he came quite to the
edge of the forest, to a little clearing
where was a wood-cutter’s cottage of
two tiny rooms. It was the middle of
the day, and hours before the wood-
cutter had taken his axe and set off to
his work in the forest; his wife had
been busy washing, and was going
backwards and forwards from the little




wash-house to the line with first, a blue shirt, then a small
pink frock which fluttered gaily and made bright spots of
colour in the sunshine.
Near her on the rough grass romped a white puppy,
yelping and trying to tear from her hands the garment she
was going to hang on the line, and near by was another
animal, the like of which our little sprite had never seen
before. It was much larger than the puppy, oh! yes, four times
as large, but it could not run as well, for it often grabbed at
things and then fell plump down; that was, when it tried to
run on two legs, when it fell down and then stayed on all
fours for a while it managed much better.
It squealed something like the way the puppy did, but
it could not be a puppy for it had hair, pretty, fair, curly hair,
only on its head, and its body was covered by a little pink
frock just like the one hanging on the line.
Our little sprite was very puzzled, and wondered what-
ever it could be, for he had never seen a baby before in
all his short life, and this was a real jolly laughing baby,
just learning to talk and to walk. Men and women he had
seen sometimes, for they would walk and drive through the
forest occasionally, and talk loudly and shout to each other
and their horses, and he was always frightened, and would
peep at them from behind the leaves of a sheltering bush as
they passed; but how lovely this baby was, and how he
wished he could have it, could steal it and take it away
with him into the forest.
He watched it for a long while, until the mother, having


\ ~b*’
V 45 c^T
'^r
w/p
V 1 / l/jy I / JjltT ,4Kb t£j / K
’
\
I dr
finished hanging out the clothes, picked her baby up and
playing and laughing with it ran into the house and he did not
see it again. Then he turned sadly and went away, but he
could think of nothing but the baby, how sweet it was when
it w r as running about and tumbling down and holding out
its tiny fat arms to catch the sunbeams!
That night when he crept into his favourite hollow tree
and tried to go to sleep he could not do so for thinking of
the baby. Now in this very tree lived a mopoke, and the little
sprite was so lonely that he thought he would tell the mopoke
all about the little creature he had seen that day, and ask
his advice about getting one like it. The mopoke would be
sure to be able to help him
you see, for he is a very wise 0*
bird, being closely related to
the owl, who is the wisest c n
1 • t • .-a iiit \
bird, being closely related to
the owl, who is the wisest
bird in the world, and knows
everything.
The mopoke listened very
quietly to the little sprite’s
story, and then he answered
very gravely, “Mo-poke. Be
good. Do a kind deed for
someone, and you will be
rewarded. Mo-poke.” And not
another word would he say I
That advice was not at
all useful, thought the little


sprite, and he felt more miserable than ever, for how could he
do kind deeds, or unkind ones either, when he had no one to
whom he could do them i
The next day he crept back to the clearing and waited for
a long time, hiding behind a tall toad-stool, before he saw a
a sign of anybody outside the little cottage except the puppy.
At last the mother came out, bring-
ing a saucer of bread and milk for
it, and the baby toddled after and
sat down on the doorstep to watch
his play-fellow have his dinner.
Presently a lovely, gay, yellow butter-
fly hovered by, rested for a moment
on a flowering hawthorn bush and
then floated away in the clear blue
air, and the baby saw it and clapped
his wee hands and crawled to the
edge of the small garden, trying to
catch the pretty thing.
Then the naughty little sprite
crept forward and called to it, and
played softly on a little musical
instrument he had made of hollow
reeds. And the baby saw him and
forgot about the butterfly, but laugh-
ing and cooing tried to catch him
instead, and sometimes toddling,
sometimes crawling, followed him


°n on right into the big forest, while the puppy, uncon-
cernedly, lapped up his milk, and the mother continued her
work m the house, never dreaming what a dreadful thing had
happened out of doors.
Further and further away from his home that wicked
little sprite coaxed the baby, all the time feeling very pleased
with himself, and thinking how clever he had been in getting
what he wanted. He found gum for the baby, and some wild
cherries, and then he led him into his hollow tree and gave him
a httle pillow of soft, green moss, and covered him over with
strips of bark that had fallen from the trees, and the poor
baby, tired and worn-out, was soon fast asleep.
Soon the little sprite heard calls and shoutings as men
and women passed near, scouring the forest in all directions to
find the little wanderer, but he stood just inside the opening of
the tree, where he could not be seen, and chuckled to himself
with delight at having, at last, got a little play-fellow. Night
soon crept on, and during the long dark hours he saw men
with lanterns hurrying by and hunting in all directions, but the
weary baby slept peacefully on and woke bright and fresh in
the morning, and oh! so hungry.
That thief of a sprite gave him drinks of clear water out
of eucalyptus cups, wild honey he had found in a nest near by,
but all the baby said was, “ More, more,” so at last, quite in
despair, he decided that he would have to run back to the
cottage to try and find some of the food that humans live on.
He gave the baby all his treasures that he had collected in the
forest to play with, so as to keep him happy while he was


a curious sound
coming from the open window.
Very cautiously he crept to the
window and clambered up on some
pot-plants and gardening tools that
were lying underneath it, so as to
be able to peep in. There in the
room, with her arms spread out on
the table and her head buried in
them, sat the baby’s mother, sobbing,
away, and set off
for the clearing as
fast as his very
small legs would
carry him.
When he reached
the wood-cutter’s
cottage there was
no sign of anyone
about, but he heard
sobbing, as though her heart must break. On hearing a slight
noise she looked up, and tears streamed down her cheeks as
she cried, “My baby! oh! my babykin, where are you? ’’
Suddenly something underneath the little sprite’s green
jumper went crack, and he knew all at once that he had done
an awful and a wicked thing, and he felt very miserable, and
very much ashamed of himself. Without waiting to find the
bread, for which he had come to look, he quietly and carefully


climbed down to the ground again, for now his one idea was to
return as quickly as possible and fetch the baby back to his
mother. He ran and ran till he was quite out of breath, and
came to where the baby was playing very happily and talking to
two lizards that were basking in the warm morning sunshine.
He picked up his little instrument and coaxed the baby
home again in the same way as he had only the day before
coaxed it into the forest. When he came to the clearing he saw
the puppy running races by itself round the little grass plot, and
the baby saw it too, and darted forward to join in the fun,
gurgling with delight. The wood-cutter’s wife heard it, and came
rushing out to pick it up and clasp it to her, and the tears that
filled her eyes now, and overflowed down her face, were tears
of joy and happiness.
In all the country-side the story is told of how the baby
wandered away and was lost in the forest for a whole day and
night, and how then it came merrily home again none the worse
for its adventure, and nobody ever knew that the little sprite
had anything whatever to do with it. The baby, knew, of course,
but then he could not properly talk, and by the time he had
learned to do so, he had forgotten all he might have said.
The poor little sprite turned and walked slowly back to his
favourite tree again, feeling lonely, but oh! so happy, and there
at the entrance of his home, what do you think he saw ?
Nothing less than a dear little girl sprite! And he knew she
was waiting there for him, and that he should never be lonely
or miserable any more, and that the wise old mopoke had been
right all the time.


' '' ' ''
The Little China People
a pretty, rather out-of-the-way suburb of
Sydney there lived, not many years ago, a
little old gentleman and lady. They were both
well known. in the part, for they had lived
there a very long time, and he was always
spoken of—even sometimes addressed —as the Professor,
though I never quite knew why, unless it was because he took
a great interest in flowers, insects and birds, and because
his gold-rimmed spectacles, through which beamed his blue
far-away looking eyes, gave him a scientific appearance.




In his younger days he had been in the Civil Service,
but he had long ago retired, so as to have time to enjoy
the really enjoyable things of life, those things which are
apt to be overlooked, which require a great deal of time,
though, fortunately, not so very much money.
First of all, of course, he loved his dear little old wife,
then his home with the garden running down to the beautiful
harbour; such a wife and such a garden I She was so lovable,
so dainty; the look, the scent of her and the sweet words
she always spoke suggested pot-poum, told of things still
fresh, though things gone by. Neither the little old lad> nor
the little old gentleman seemed to have any connection with
this modem world, with this big bustling commercial city,
but they seemed to have come from somewhere apart, to be
of a time and of a kind that was and is no longer.
The garden was quite different too from other gardens.
It was the Professor’s great delight and he alone tended it,
but it did not have in it such flowers as chrysanthemums as
big as dinner plates, or the latest fancy in daffodils or tulips
-no, not even, I am afraid, many of the new roses. It was
full of the dear old-fashioned flowers, lavender and holly-
hocks, and fox-gloves, and canterbury bells; wallflower and
mignonette were first favourites, and there were always violets,
heaps of violets white and blue, during the winter months.
Honeysuckle and Virginia creeper climbed recklessly, every-
where, and made a bower of the pretty house.
Two other inmates quite in keeping with their surround-
ings were Gordon, the collie dog, and Blue-blue, the Persian


cat; they were both sedate and elderly. Gordon was almost
the only cause of the old couple ever going beyond the garden
gate (except for painful, but occasionally necessary shopping
expeditions into Sydney), but they felt that he needed exercise,
and would sometimes take him for a walk. It was really he
who took them, for he marched in front and they followed
demurely, but, as he had left behind him all desire to chase
birds and imaginary rabbits, or to scurry off into the bracken,
as a younger, more frivolous-minded dog would have done,
it really did not matter at all who took the lead.
The old lady was my godmother, and when I was a girl
at boarding-school in Sydney I used to spend my short holi-
days with her. Perhaps had I been there for longer, I might
have missed the good gallops over the paddocks, the ferret-
ing expeditions with my brothers, and all that goes to make
up the jolly family life on a station, but such holidays as
Michaelmas and Easter I enjoyed immensely and always
looked forward to.
Of all the many pretty things in her house and her
garden that my godmother loved, the chief of all were the
precious China figures in the old cabinet in the drawing-room;
they had always been her greatest treasures, and had come
with her from the home of her girlhood on the other side of
of the world. No one was allowed to turn the key in the
cabinet except herself, and her face would be flushed with
tenderness and love as she handled each dainty piece and
told me its story.
Great were my joy and pride when first she let me help


her dust them and give them their annual bath. The Pro-
fessor drew near too and would willingly have helped, but I
saw my godmother tremble with fear, and then tell him
hesitatingly of something that wanted doing in the garden. I
think he, too, saw her look of anxiety, but he did not say
anything, but went away to the garden and did it, whatever
it was, and after he had gone God-
mother said gently, “You see, dear,
though he is so kind, Peter is a
man, and a man’s touch is not light
like a woman’s.
The twenty-fourth of May was
always celebrated as a holiday in
honour of Queen Victoria’s birthday,
and one year, when it came on a
Monday, I spent the long week-end
at my Godmother’s. It had been
very wet and we were kept indoors
most of the time and had given, in
consequence, more attention than
usual to the dear little figures in
the cabinet, taking them out and
arranging them on the big, polished
oval table, such as our mother’s
had in their drawing-rooms thirty
years ago, which stood near to the
home of the small people. It re-
minded me of the way Gulliver used


to put the Lilliputians on his table when he wanted to have
a talk with them, he would then sit down on a chair beside
the table, and they could thus hear one another.
There were Dr. Syntax, dapper and debonair ; Britannia,
fair and splendid with the lion at her feet; Falstaff, ridiculous
fellow, with his boastful air and his quite inadequate shield;
and all the dear and dainty shepherds and shepherdesses, and
many, many others. Back they
must all go to their shelves when
twilight set in, though I laugh-
ingly told Godmother that I was
sure she left the doors open so
that they might come out again
when flesh and blood mortals
were fast asleep.
That night I woke up very
suddenly, feeling at once wide-
awake and quite sure that some-
thing had disturbed me. A curi-
ous squeaky sound came from the
other end of the house. I jumped
out of bed, and hurriedly putting
on my warm gown and fluffy slip-
pers, for the night was chilly,
crept to the door and following
the faint, almost unearthly noise,
came to the drawing room, where
a wonderful scene met my sight.


There were the china cabinet doors wide open, and
there were all the little figures come to life and enjoying
themselves to the strains of the two violins and two flutes of
their own four musicians, as they danced and paraded about
on the top of the large table, which made a lovely ballroom,
lighted as it was by candles in the old candelabra on the
mantelpiece, and the moonbeams that shone through the
chinks in the lace of the blinds. There were all my dear
friends looking so gay and bright.
Apollo was just offer-
ing his arm to Britannia,
who deserted the lion and
walked off with him. Mars
and Venus made another
stately pair and in contrast
to them was the Stafford-
shire parson vulgarly offer-
ing his bottle to his clerk,
who had had the fore-
thought to bring a lantern
with him. Some of the
visitors from the continent
looked charming, especially
the ladies from Saxony and
Luxembourg, but I noticed
the all-white ones who came
from Naples, stayed well in
the background, no doubt


feeling conscious of their scanty draperies among so many
fascinating, be-flowered skirts.
The shepherds and the shepherdesses were still the most
winning of all the little people, though there were many cele-
brated ones present. Shakespeare, for instance, who passed
me pulling at his beard and murmuring something about
having already said that the world was a stage, while Milton,
with his sightless eyes, bore a look of solemn disapproval.
Three jolly little Neapolitans called all and sundry to come
and look at their peepshow, which was much appreciated by


two very comical, but very ugly dwarfs from Derby, and a
Plymouth harlequin.
Through all the throng moved Dr. Syntax, in and out
among the ladies, bent always on his matrimonial quest;
surely the difficulty will be to choose, and not to find one fair
partner where all are so fair? I was very busy match-making
on his account and had just definitely settled on a sweet
little Chelsea lady who lived in a bower of apple blossom
when a warning signal came from the next door neighbour’s
poultry yard, an alarming cock crow, then the grandfather’s
clock in the hall chimed six times, and, in the twinkling of
an eye, all the little figures were back again in their proper
places looking as demure and well-behaved as ever.
Regretfully I rubbed my eyes, shivered, and crept back
to my own room and to bed again, where lat once fell sound
asleep and was terribly late for breakfast.
* * * * *
A dream, you say? Well perhaps . . . that is what
Godmother said when I told her all about it, but I do not
feel so sure—at any rate, if it was a dream it was a very
pleasant one.


tke West Did
NCE upon a time, before the
white man found Australia,
away in the north of that big
land there lived an aborigine
and his gin. They were very
happy, for they loved one another dearly,
and they spent their days basking in the
glorious sunshine, and, when that was too
hot even for their brown skins, they bathed
and paddled in the lovely streams, keeping
ever one eye on the watch for that sly fellow,
the alligator.
They lived on the luscious fruits that
grew in abundance all around, and on fish
that they caught with their hands, with
sometimes a wild bustard or some other bird
that came screaming to earth, felled by the
blackfellow’s boomerang. And they did not
need to worry about their clothes, for they
did not wear many, in fact, they did not


worry about anything at all, except one little sorrow, that they
had no little piccaninny to play with.
One day when Nani, that was the blackwoman’s name,
was sitting under a Banyan tree, crying and wringing her hands
because she wanted a little black baby so badly, she looked up,
and there stood the Old Man of the Banyan tree, looking down
at her very perplexed at seeing her so unhappy. He asked her
what made her weep, and she told him her trouble, when he
smiled as if that were a very little matter, quite easily over-
come, and said, “So it’s just a little baby that you want?”
Nani, little heeding, answered, “Yes, just a little girl baby.
So the Old Man of the Banyan Tree said he would send
her a little baby, and that she could
keep it for four years, but then she
must give it back to him, as it would be
a baby no longer. Now Nani thought
only of the present, four years was a
long way off, so she said quite eagerly
that she would have the baby on those
conditions. The very next day she found
it in some bushes when she was looking
for yam-yams ; it was a very nice baby,
and Nani and her blackfellow loved it
very much.
As time went by and it grew big
and began to walk, they taught it all
they knew themselves —which spiders
pricked, which snakes would hurt and


which it could play with, and how to try and catch fish with
its little black hands, but then it always laughed and tumbled
into the water, and they would have to pull it out, so that was
the best game of all.
Now the foolish aborigines never thought of time, and
knew nothing of the years that pass so quickly, so Nani never
heeded the condition that had been made by the Old Man of
the Banyan Tree. One day she went to throw a stick at a
prowling dingo who would come wandering round their mia-
mia, and just when her back was turned came that cruel Old
Man, picked up the baby, and ran away with her into the
forest. Nani remembered everything then, and ran too as hard
as she could, but he was too quick for her, and she could not
catch him up, but had to return to her home and wait for her
blackfellow to come back from the river where he was making
a new canoe.
When he came home and was told everything, he knew
there was nothing to be done but that he and Nani must just
be unhappy, for the sun had lost all its gold, and the sky had
lost all its blue, and nothing was bright and joyous any more.
For poor Nani the days were very long now. Blackfellow
missed the baby too, but he was busy all day helping all the
other blackfellows build the big war canoe in which they were
soon going to make a raid on another tribe further up the
river.
One day when Nani was very lonely she sat under the
big Banyan Tree, and she cried aloud, and dug her nails into
the earth and tore at the roots of the tender little ferns,


because she was so unhappy she did not know what she was
doing. A crackling in the branches above her made her oo
up, and there, perched straddlewise on a great bough sat the
Old Man of the Banyan Tree. He asked Nani why she cne
wicked old man, of course
he knew quite well —and
she told him, and implored
him to give her back her
baby; but he only shook
his head and said that was
impossible, but he would
give her another instead, a
boy this time, on the same
condition.
Now Nani naturally
wanted the same baby, but
she thought that any baby
was better than no baby,
so she agreed to the con-
dition, for after all, what
else could she do? She
could hardly sleep all night,
and crept out of the mia-
mia as soon as the sun first
peeped over the hills and ran to the bushes, and there was a
dear little boy piccaninny all sleek and jolly and black.
Things went brightly in the mia-mia again, and the little
boy grew and learnt all the secrets of the bush just as the


; n mi mm
**$jJ|is‘iib' SZ&jsM laSiM 6
<s * t %tfCT ' l


little girl had done; but Nani got anxious, and when the
third rainy season since they received him had come and
gone, she thought it was time to make some plans of escape.
So she went and talked to an Emu, a great friend of hers,
and he undertook to carry the baby on his back and show
them the way right across the Great Desert to a part of the
land where the Banyan tree did not grow.
It did not take Nani and her blackfellow very long to
get ready; they just got some yams and some grenadillas and
packed them up in big leaves, then one evening they tied
the baby on to the Emu’s back with a thick cord made of
thongs from creeping plants, and set out, for they wanted
to get as far as they could before the morning, before the
Old Man of the Banyan Tree should find that they had gone.
And ever as they ran, Nani murmured and prayed, “ Blow
hard, oh! West Wind, dear West Wind, blow hard and stop
him.”
When the Old Man of the Banyan Tree woke up in
the morning and saw the mia-mia all deserted, he guessed
what had happened and he was very angry, and set off to
run after the fugitives, for he saw their tracks quite plainly.
Most probably he would have caught them up, for being
a Spirit Man he could run all night and all day and never
get tired, but the kind West Wind had heard Nani’s prayer
and he blew hard, very hard, driving the sand into the eyes
of the Old Man of the Banyan Tree, so that he could not
see where he was going, and ran right into a big heap of
sand blown up on purpose by the West Wind, and the more


he struggled to get out the further he got in, until at last
he was smothered quite dead. Now Nani and her black-
fellow and the baby got safely over to the other side, to
the Land of the Black Swan, where they joined another
tribe and had never any more sorrows or troubles, but lived
happily all the rest of their lives.


TKe F our Sisters
N a little town in the middle of Austria, named
Salzburg, there once lived a worthy merchant,
who, by dint of hard work and thrift amassed
a comfortable, though not a great fortune, and
at the age of forty thought he would like to
retire from business, marry a wife and settle down to enjoy
the fruits of his labours. His choice fell upon the young
daughter of the mayor of the town, who was a bright and
fresh girl, but not very sensible. The year’s prominence
that her father had just enjoyed and in which she had also
had her share, had somewhat turned her head and had made
her vain and ambitious. Thinking that her desires would be
all gratified by a wealthy marriage, she and her father
readily accepted Johann Schultz as a suitor for her hand and
in a very short time all the bells in the little mountain
town rang merrily to wish a long life and happiness to the
mayor’s daughter and the man of her choice.
About a year after they were married a little baby girl
was born to them which gave great joy to Johann and his
wife, Elsa, who could not think what name was good enough


to give to her wonderful child and pondered and pondered
about it, quite unable to make up her mind on the matter.
One night she had a dream and in her dream a beautiful
figure in white flowing robes stood by her bedside and said
to her “Elsa, name your child as you would wish her to be.”
When Elsa thought about it in the morning, she said to herself
“I wish her to be beautiful, for that is the greatest thing
that a woman can be. Nothing on earth is more lovely than
a beautiful rose and the rose of the world must be more
beautiful than any other, therefore I will call her Rosamund.”
She did so and the little girl grew up very fair to see.
When Rosamund was a year old a tiny sister came to
her, and again the mother was puzzled as to what name to
give her, but she thought of the dream she had had twelve
months before and the words the apparition had used, and now
she argued thus:—“lt must certainly be glorious to be beautiful
and to have people worship and admire you wherever you go,
but how splendid to be noble, to be superior to everybody
else! I shall call my second little girl Patricia for that will
show that she is an aristocrat.” And Patricia grew up to be
very dignified and haughty and, perhaps, a little disdainful.
Again a year passed and still another little girl came,
and this one the mother called Fortunata for she said,
“Beauty and position, after all are not of much use without
money; I want my third daughter to be rich.” Fortunata
grew up to be a fine, healthy girl, like her elder sisters, but
she was always rather cold and inclined to be selfish.
Some years went by before a fourth little girl baby was


■! '• • \ - 'tf; , I I (\ K.
r V ' J; • M \f ">
V 'i’<i:'ii \j/
■\ V.*. \ (I \
iV: : \
>. r. i-... | I \ \


born to Johann and Elsa, who by this time had grown
wiser and thought differently about many things, from what
she had done in the days of her youth. There was no need
for her to be perplexed about a name now, without any
hesitation she called the new baby Joyce.
As time went on and Joyce grew up, she was so bright
and sunny she made happiness for herself wherever she
went, and for everyone who came into contact with her.
When the elder girls were grown up they had a merry
time and all went to many parties and dances. Just when the
beautiful Rosamund was twenty-one years of age, the young
prince of the reigning house of Austria brought home a lovely
young bride, and in honor of their marriage there was to be
great festival and rejoicing at their capital city, Vienna.
People could talk and think of nothing else but how wonderful
and delightful all the balls and gaieties would be, and the girls
prevailed upon their parents to take them all to Vienna so that
they, too, might have a share in all that was going on.
Whilst there a wealthy and noble Turk fell a victim to
Rosamund’s dazzling beauty, a Russian of high birth and
position asked for Patricia’s hand, and an English millionaire
wished to marry Fortunata. All three girls became engaged
and married without delay, at one time; they kissed “good-
bye” to their father, mother, and Joyce, and went gaily off,
Rosamund to Constantinople, Patricia to St. Petersburg, and
Fortunata to London.
When Joyce grew to womanhood she met a young Italian
doctor who was wandering through the country before settling


down to practise his profession. They fell in love with each
other, were married, and went south to Naples to live their
quiet life together.
Johann was now an old man, and he did not long survive
the desolation caused by the wedding and departure from the
old home of the youngest and favourite daughter.
Elsa mourned him long and truly in great loneliness, and
then bethought her that she would go a-travelling to the four
corners of Europe, visit her daughters in their widely separated
homes, and perhaps settle down and live the rest of her life
with one or the other of them. To Rosamund, as the eldest,
she must first go, so she sent her word of her intentions, made
her preparations, set out, with a faithful maid and man-servant,
upon the journey, and after many adventures by land and
water at length arrived at Constantinople.
It was evening time when she reached her destination
and was met by her son-in-law, with carriages and numerous
attendants. The poor lady was disappointed not to see her
beautiful Rosamund waiting to receive her, but upon reaching
the house it was soon explained how it was she had not
been present with her husband. Rosamund had married a
Turk and must conform to the habits and customs of his
country, where women are very differently treated from the
way they are with us. They are never allowed to be out of
their homes after sunset, and never, at any time of the day,
may they be out without wearing the yashmak or soft muslin
kerchief which hides their features from the public gaze.
Elsa found her eldest and fairest daughter living in the


most beautiful surroundings and in every imaginable luxury,
with clothes and jewels, the richest that the heart of woman
could desire. Her husband adored her and her splendid
beauty, but as a consequence of his adoration, was all the
more inclined to be jealous and
strict. She passed her days almost
exclusively in her own handsome
apartments where no man, saving
her husband, was ever admitted,
and she wearied and pined for a
change from the society of the
other gentlewomen of the house-
hold and their maid servants. The
older ladies accepted their
secluded life as being the right
and proper one for women, but
the younger ones felt as Rosa-
mund did and chafed at the dull
life they were condemned to lead,
when she told them tales of what
young and lovely women did in
other parts of the world, and how
gay and much admired she herself
had been in her girlhood’s days
in bright and jolly Salzburg.
Elsa 1 saw it all with her mother’s eyes and grieved at the
fate of her fair daughter; she stayed with her for a year and
then made her plans to travel far away north to the city of


St. Petersburg to visit her noble Patricia, whose life, she felt
sure was far different and much happier. It was a long,
long journey from Constantinople to the north of Europe, and
it was a weary and travel-stained mother that at last reached
St. Petersburg and was driven in a closed carriage to her
daughter’s gorgeous palace, where, alas! she found all in a
great state of turmoil and distress.
Patricia’s husband was the eldest son of a nobleman
prominent at the court and in diplomatic circles; only a week
before Elsa’s arrival, father and son had been driving together
to the opening of Parliament, when a bomb thrown by a
Nihilist in the crowd claimed the elder man’s life. Not only
did all the family sincerely grieve for his loss, but all felt
frightened with a haunting fear that the son’s turn might
come at any time.
Poor, proud Patricia! she suffered terribly from a nervous
foreboding and an agony of suspense that never left her
whenever her dearly-loved husband and two young sons
were out of her sight. Elsa stayed with her for a year and
did much to comfort and re-assure her, though she knew that at
any time, had it been possible, Patricia would joyfully have
exchanged the exalted position she and her family filled
for that of the humble peasants who worked on her
husband’s estates.
To London, next, must Elsa go to visit her third daughter
Fortunata —and she thought to herself as she travelled thither,
“ Now surely shall I find a happy home, for I become weary
and would fain journey no further in search of peace.


England is a beautiful land, a land of freedom and brightness.”
But again she met with disappointment.
In his early days Fortunata’s husband had amassed
great wealth, and his keen desire had been to buy a lovely
home and bestow it and his fortune on a son and heir. He
loved his wife truly, but as time went by and she bore him
neither son nor daughter he felt foiled of his chief desires
in life and turned from her and his childless home, to the
pursuits and habits of his youth. Then he had wished to
make money, now he strove to make more and more money.
He had no joy in life, no leisure to spend with his wife and
make her happy, all his energies and cares went to the
increasing of a fortune that there was no one to inherit.
In those days Elsa thought often of the early years of
her own married life, and was sad as she remembered her
vain desires and ambitions. As the year of her visit drew
to a close she felt frightened at the thought of what she
might find did she travel to the south to see her fourth
daughter, as she had intended doing. She would have
liked to creep quietly back to her old home at Salzburg and
live out the rest of her life in loneliness and obscurity, but
courage came to her and gave her strength to accomplish the
last stage of her pilgrimage.
Oh ! the glory and beauty of Naples. To leave England in
gloom and depression, to spend a rough and tumultuous time
at sea, and then to arrive at that gay city of the south with
its gorgeous colouring and bright and cheery throng of people-
to discover that the sea is not made of cold and pitiless water


but bright and sparkling diamonds, that the sky above is all
a glorious blue, and that the grey and heavy storm-clouds
have completely disappeared. What wonder that Elsa felt
her heart grow light at once? And then on a small boat


coming out to welcome her on the big ship, stood Joyce,
her face irradiated by happiness, at her side her husband,
and with them a group of laughing children, all chattering
and claiming their attention and interest in all the excitement
going on around them, at one and the same moment.
And Elsa knew that she had come to the end of her
journey at last; that here she could remain and find comfort
and joy in the happiness and love of her youngest and most
blest child, for whom, though seeming least greedy, she had,
in reality asked and obtained the most.


m
1 * 7
V \ I '
Essay on the Holidays
Written ly JACK BROWN,
aged 13, for the Master of the Ist Form of the “"Big School
HE Easter Holidays were ripping, we had a
boshter time. (Please sir, I forgot, you said
we should not use slang in essays, and per-
haps “boshter” is slang). My father has just
bought a house at Dromana and we were
there, and had no end of bathing and fishing
and jolly things.
But the best of all that I must tell you
about was a find we made of treasure. Mr.
Johnson, father’s partner, told us that there
used to be pirates in the bay, and that, after
a long while, when they had been a great
trial to the nation and stolen from many
ships, they were captured by a Government
sloop or something, and it was near Dromana,
narle off. some of them that weren’t captured,
and the pirates made off, some of them that weren i capture,
the Pirate King, I suppose, with the booty, lovely jewellery and
things, and hid it in the ti-tree.


141
Wasn’t it splendid, and Mr. Johnson said we could hunt
for the treasures, and he was coming down for the holidays and
he would help us, and he would bring down a divining rod,
which is what they use to find gold or water,
and he brought two rods to make extra
sure and a little green thing, which he said
was a most precious and lucky Egyptian
beetle, but it only looked like a shabby little
old stone, and mother carried that, and he
gave Marjorie, that’s my sister, one rod and
the other one to Polly, that’s her friend,
and told them to carry them, that is the
rods, very carefully and lightly so as to see
where they led them. I got the gardener’s
iron spade, and Billy, my small brother,
had his beach spade and bucket.
Well, he came.
After a time we got to a place on a
cliff, right over the bay, where mother said
she felt the beetle struggling and the girls
said the rods were ready to fall, so we
started digging, and after a time we saw
something bright and there were a lot of
lovely things, gold bracelets, rings with
stones, a brooch with a huge diamond,
heaps larger than any of mother’s, and a few silver things too.
Wasn’t it exciting? Think of all the ages they had been
hidden there, and that then we should find them at last! We
couldn’t talk of anything else all the holidays, but what luck it


was and how boshting-splendid. Oh! then the last day a lot of
scouts came to see us because they were camping near, and Major
Richmond who had been at the Camp at the Schanck came too,
and after tea he said something to us all about being soldiers
and learning to fight for our King and our country, and we all
gave three cheers and, well, I know it made me feel jolly glad
I was a cadet at school.
I hope this essay will do and that it is not too long and
too in trill intricate. JACK BROWN.
P.S.J just went along to look up how to spell intricate
in father’s dictionary and, as I passed the drawing-room I heard
mother say to Aunt Edith and Uncle George, who have been
here to dinner, “And of course it wasn’t real jewellery, at all.
Mr. Johnson had bought it all at a shop in Melbourne, and
buried it there.” I thought it only fair to tell you sir, though I
think it was a silly thing to do. Of course boys aren’t supposed
to know the difference between good jewellery and bad as only
women and girls wear it, and it pleased the girls all right. But
I do wonder at a man like Mr. Johnson, quite an old man too
(I know because I heard him tell mother he was thirty-three
last birthday), playing such a rotten game, don’t you ?-J.B.


Eavesdropping J||l
Under tke Trees
eUSTLE . . . rustle . . . swish
. . . swish . . . rustle. ’ ?
A pleasant breeze of early "
spring is passing over the
tops of the trees, at the
edge of the forest, and they are being
blown together and are laughing and
chatting with one another in the best of
spirits. There have been good rains lately
and now the sun is out, the sky is blue,
and the sap is tearing through their veins,
and most of them feel full of happiness
and brightness, as do all the other living
things about them on this lovely September morning.


Shall we creep up gently, and sit on that low branch
and listen to what they are saying ?
There is silence for a time as the trees had heard and
seen us, and they are very shy and retiring about talking
before human strangers, but if we keep very quiet they will
soon forget us and begin to speak again.
“Ah! me, I have seen great changes in my time,” a
veteran mountain ash remarks presently, “very great changes.
“You are lucky to have had a long life, and to have
been allowed to wait for death to overtake you at your
allotted time,” says a much younger eucalypt sadly; he is a
blackbutt who has been marked down by the clearers and
has an ominous ring cut in the bark round his trunk.
“Look at me! Fine, upright and healthy I have been
from the very first day I began to sprout. Indeed that has
been the trouble, too healthy I w'as, and so I must die. I
got alarmed a month 'ago when two men came in a bugg>
from the township and walked in among us. They stood
under me and one said ‘He’s a fine fellow, he uses up a
lot of goodness, he’d better go’; and the other man marked
me with a cross of white paint. I trembled in every leaf I
can tell you, but the real pain was when, some days later,
they brought an axe and cut into my tender wood. Ah! the
sap that I lost from their gashes! It still goes on oozing
out, my life sap.” He shook as he spoke and a number of
his leaves rustled softly down to earth, like tear-drops shed
at the memory of the pain he had suffered.
“There are some advantages in being a poor feeder


after all, I suppose,” sighed a melancholy sheoak, “when
they looked at me they said,” “She lives on nothing, she
may as well stop.”
All the trees rustled in chorus and shed a few leaves
as a token of sympathy to
those that were doomed or
unhappy, but none of the
others were marked yet.
They knew nothing of the
pangs of death, but felt
conscious of Spring and
renewed life which made
them long to talk on cheer-
ier subjects.
“ Won’t you tell us
about some of the changes
of which you spoke, and
whether you think they
have been for the good of
this forest and treehood in general?” asks
a wild cherry tree as he brushes his top-
most branches affectionately against the
white gleaming trunk of the mountain ash
who had first spoken. The cherrv tree is
not so tall as the other forest fellows and
holds himself very straight in consequence,
so as to make the most of his inches. He
is very spruce and tidy too, and is often


laughed at by some of his straggly neighbours and called the
dandy of the trees, but he loves the forest and the wild surround-
ings dearly, and when he is carried off by men to beautify their
gardens he cannot bear the separation, but mopes and dies.
“Some have been bad and some good, I should think,”
answered the old gum tree, “but it is very difficult to
understand white humans and the funny things they do.
They never seem satisfied with what they have but always want a
change. Ages ago Father Time planted our ancestors here and
they have done all they could to keep on growing and increasing
ever since.” (A matronly sugar gum rustled her skirts and
glanced with pride at the crowd of fine young saplings
clustered round her lower branches). “Then the white man
came along and cleared us all away for miles around, not
judiciously by trimming out to give some a good chance of
becoming fine trees and making use of others, but just
chopping and ringing and grubbing out.”
At the word “ringing” a heavy sigh came from the
poor rung blackbutt; he had at that moment lost some sap
and was feeling very faint. Hearing the sigh the veteran
hurried on so as not to give him the opportunity to brood
over his troubles. “The strange part of it all is that white
people in other parts of the world are learning to appreciate
us and know our good points. While we, in our own country,
are being mercilessly destroyed, gum trees are being planted
and cherished in many of the oldest cities of the old world,
and in some of the vigorous ones of the new world too.”
“True, quite true,” said a wattle who was a mass of


gold and silver glory. Through having been chosen as the
national flower she had had her head a little turned lately,
but her vanity was so simple and her beauty so sweet that
all were ready to forgive the spoilt child of the forest. She
continued whilst waving in the breeze and preening all her
bobbles of yellow fluffiness —“ There are such varying degrees
of beauty, of course, and we cannot all lay the same claim
to distinction. I have nothing to complain of;
Australians themselves are always very nice
to me, while on the first of September the
attentions I receive are quite overwhelming.
Down on the other side of the earth,
at a place called the Riviera, some of
my family have a great fuss made
over them by the fashionable people
there, who call them, my relations I
mean, Mimosa. It is a pretty name, I
feel sometimes inclined to adopt it
only I have so many names already.”
“Dear me! what a
lot some people think of
themselves and talk about
themselves to be sure!
Other trees besides the
wattle have yellow flow-
ers,” muttered a gloomy-
looking honey-suckle. She
and the sheoak always


felt very conscious of being the plain daughters of the forest,
and the knowledge of their own unattractiveness piqued
them sometimes and made them short-tempered. The fact
that they needed little nourishment and grew in poor soil
where other trees could not flourish, and so often formed a
welcome shade to wanderers, whether sheep or men, was
but a sorry consolation.
The trees all rustled merrily in a general snigger at the
bare idea of the homely honey-suckle alluding to her yellow
flowers in the same breath as those of the wattle.
Seeing there was likely to be a little ill-feeling among
his fair neighbours, the veteran mountain ash thought it well
to continue the story of his reminiscences without delay.
“I am very tall,” he said, “far taller than an> of >ou,
and I can see for miles around over your heads, and I am
also very old and can remember things that happened long ago,
when your ancestors surrounded me, but not you. In all
directions I saw nothing but treetops, myriads upon myriads
of gleaming, glinting leaves, shining all colours in the sun-
light or darkly glistening in the rain. There used to be a lot
of animals in the forest in those days, kangaroos and walla-
bies, and blackfellows who came stalking them, and a great
many more birds than there are now, bright, cheery fellows,
not sombre-coated like those little foreigners that come out
from the township to visit us sometimes.”
“Cheeky little fellows, I call them,” chipped in the cherry
tree, “last year two of them while having a very good feast on
my fruit, said it was not nearly as good as what they got in the


orchards near the town. Funny stuff I thought it must be,
I remember, for they said the stones were inside the cherries
there.”
“And quite the right place for them to be too, in my opinion.”
said a quandong gently, almost hoping the remark would not
be heard, for he had wandered rather far south and felt a
stranger’s bashfulness in this cold part of the country.
“Then one day,” went on the mountain ash, “came
such creatures as I had never seen before; two of them
were the same shape as the blackfeliows, only with bark-
coloured hands and faces, and the rest of their bodies were
covered in loose skins.”
“ Clothes, they call them,” said the cherry
“ Thank you, clothes. The other two animals went on
all fours with their heads down, and nibbled at the grass
and young green shoots in their path. Horses, now I know
they were, and we are all accustomed to them and other
animals like them, but in those days they were quite a
novelty. The white men tied logs to their horses, so that
they should not wander too far, and camped under me.
They lit a fire, and had a meal, and then they lit some
things just like those that grow on the fisifolia, and put
them in their mouths and smoked them.”
“Pi. ..” began the cherry.
“Yes, pipes, I know now, thank you, but I didn’t know
then, I could not understand what the men said, but they
seemed very tired and weary. They went away next day,
and before going they cut a small gash in my trunk, so that


they should know me again. They came from the sea and
they went inland, but I never saw them return though I
looked in all directions for the smoke of their fires.
“ Long, long afterwards, others like them came, and
axemen to ring some of the poor trees, and chop down
others, and carry them away on lazy-going bullock teams,
till, gradually as time went on, the forest on most sides of
me became cleared, and now instead of tree-tops I see work-
ing men and women, and merry boys and girls trudging
forth and back from school, and waving cornfields and
grazing cattle.
“ But when you ask me which is best, how can I say ?
Who am I that I should know?”
“Ah! dear friend, I think you will agree with me, and
that we shall all find that we are of one mind in the matter.”
It was a beautiful blackwood tree who spoke; he never
talked but anything he said was always sure to be
well worth listening to. “We are here for a time, to grow
and mature, and enjoy life on this bountiful earth. But men
are greater than we are, to them the earth was given that
they should make the most of it. We are willing to suffer
death, willing to give our lives to make way for others and
to serve our turn of usefulness and beauty. If we know
that we are being slain in order that we may, with our dead
bodies, decorate men’s houses, make fine pavements for the
streets of men’s cities, or solid piles for the building of their
piers, then we are ready for the axe and the saw-mill and
will not murmur, but it is when we are rung, when we are


- ' > f/z- . r
::.r / '- J-f(MM
i !>' , i iT ‘ /'
treated as cumberers of the ground to be got rid of as
quickly and easily as possible, that we feel the cruel stab,
and know that we have not been appreciated, and that our
lives have been lived in vain.”
He said the last words very softly so that they should
not be heard by the poor dying gum tree. A breeze rustled
gently through the forest as the blackwood finished speaking,
and all the trees waved their topmost branches in a harmony
of concord.


The Passing of the Doll
T is entirely due to the Teddy bear,” said Queen
Elizabeth, in very decided tones. There was
silence in the nursery play-cupboard after she
had spoken, for, though several of those present
did not quite share her opinion, nobody,
naturally, liked to disagree openly with her majesty.
It was very hot in the play cupboard and their part
of it had been close shut all day. Queen Elizabeth, of course,
felt it more than any of the others, for she suffered in her
dignity, and nothing makes one so hot as ruffled feelings;
if, added to them is the trial of always being attired in
crimson velvet with a real proper ruff, and a wig of red-
gold curls, I am sure you will understand that the heat in
the stuffy cupboard on this mid-December evening must have
been far from pleasant.
It was that hour of the evening when even the biggest
of the children, those that kept the latest hours, had gone to
