

Up'lWI
''
ifeawaafttreaiiaBBaao^^^^
Sg^gg§S;?[§ •; v:;: Srfjvp•’[|i^i;; t cS1i-*1:S^o'♦ J§
" iofflWcyyrjffirliiuttWMpWMattlfeSMBfiSBMbififlflTffi
■ - ‘ -?gS8}S8frS8s&i8gS§S§§£i8i^
.V - ?. r! i < t r. y u r 5%~T3craPf5*}*7ppij5£^^
> : . ; ur*fgjgSggS8g§g^
I ; ; 'M §:£:£t\
-Hin? || ||i| I; |f~|§ |i ||Hi |||
.. m|gg gg |j 11 j W |^pjS
BcggaS >ii i gft88B wiriririft B5! S3H8SS8liHi88&8fcii SgBn IBSS S! S S! H mh ScnRiB 8HBBSBS BBS
■-X' ■ riy-j! (^£c^-iHlli'- I'rl^g*rS5S£ ;Xr*f
:« <■ co t; ; • ••'!• :/;c : ZS'S ' .H ;••% ■■;;■' <.*'* MiiV. i f'T K f r ‘ l 5i^
i j B111111 i > S | hi |S I \\ 3 11 S §s I! *H s' si SB ESSS B Bi Me SB a
wqgagjffi. '.^•'g££J*',j^i;VS'cgS S| £k,S I!®
P
) *
i y/\rsr. .-rxr v.iifijcSo :]6 ?",c?-'■•^§To - ft?.$1:<US25 i U f !§^^A <; r 5 t ,v .;;£v '
943
IE
' zsz pi- X' ; ;: gcg] Si^^S! fe !£ %&?)&*&*'ft S & 8®*S8SS o* *s -i^5:ijj
isi


Wff Collect ionSv\?
|| ]N(ational Library" 111


ONE HUNDRED YEARS
OF THE
LUTHERAN CHURCH
IN
QUEENSLAND
BY
F. OTTO THEILE
Lutheran Pastor
Registered at the G.P.0., Brisbane, for transmission
through the post as a book.
Published
by the
Publication Committee of the Queensland District
UNITED EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
IN AUSTRALIA
1938
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
Watson, Ferguson & Co. Ltd.,
Stanley Street, South Brisbane.




TO THE MEMORY OF THE PIONEERS
OF
THE EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH OF QUEENSLAND
PASTORS AND MEMBERS, MEN AND WOMEN
THIS
BOOK IS DEDICATED.




FOREWORD
The reading of the pages of this book has afforded
me great pleasure and deep satisfaction. Pastor O.
Theile’s “One Hundred Years of the Lutheran Church in
Queensland” is the result of a careful study of documents
in archives, both in Australia and in Germany, and oi
much painstaking work. It faithfully describes the first
hundred years of Lutheranism in Queensland. Dealing,
as it does, with the history of the Queensland District of
the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia it
offers a valuable contribution to the understanding of the
history of the whole. It is a monument, better than one
of stone or bronze, to the undaunted faith and strenuous
labours of the pioneers and subsequent generations, to
the vitality and the vision of the present leaders of the
Church, and, aboVe all, to the Grace of the Living Christ,
who, “creating out of nothing, bringing order into
chaos”, in spite of human sins and weaknesses, has
established a living Lutheran Church in Queensland.
The study of this book will materially assist, not
only in enabling a God'pleasing celebration of the forth-
coming Centenary to be held, but also in fostering that
Gratitude to the Lord and to the instruments of His
grace and that consciousness of the inheritance of the
Fathers which is essential for the continued vitality and
progress of a branch of Christ s Church.
That the perusal of this book may bring forth such
fruits an hundredfold is my fervent prayer.
JOHS. J. STOLZ,
President General
U.E.L.C.A




PREFACE
At the Pastors’ Conference of the Queensland District of
the United Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australia in the year
1932 Pastors E. Hiller, E. Wiencke and O. Theile were instructed
to prepare a pamphlet for the fiftieth anniversary of the organisation
of the Lutheran Church of Queensland, which would fall due in
the year 1935. Later Pastor E. Gutekunst was substituted for Pastor
E. Hiller, who had resigned. This committee decided that the
compilation of the pamphlet should be left in the hands of one man,
the other members helping to collect the material. Thus, in the
year 1933, I was assigned the task of compiling the history of the
Lutheran Church of Queensland.
The task was much greater than I realised. Material was cob
lected, the mind occupied itself with it, but many other duties left
me no opportunity to write anything worth speaking of, by the time
the jubilee was celebrated in the year 1935.
The seven weeks I spent on the ship “Bitterfeld”, when
travelling to Europe in the year 1936, at last afforded me an oppor*
tunity to attend to the task which had been entrusted to me. I
returned with a manuscript of many pages, and imagined it required
but a few touches to render it ready for the printer.
Meantime the Centenary of German Settlement in Queensland
(1838'1938) drew nearer. My booklet had to take notice of that
fact, and quite automatically it received a wider scope. That led
me to further research, and compelled me to recast my manuscript
As a consequence, the booklet has become a book. Its writing has
caused me an immense amount of work, but it has given me many
hours of purest joy. Of its many imperfections I am fully aware,
and I hope the kind readers will deal leniently with them.
I would take this opportunity to acknowledge the courtesies
extended to me at the Mitchell Library at Sydney, the
mentary Library, the Oxley Memorial Library, and the Public
Library at Brisbane. I wish to thank Mr. K. Reber for giving me
access to the files of the “Nord Australische Zeitung”. From all


these sources I gathered valuable particulars which are embodied in
this book. I am also indebted to Mr. H. J. J. Sparks, the President
of the Bibliographical Society, for the use of various blocks, and
to Mr. Arthur Spann for the drawing of the maps.
At the Annual Convention of the Queensland District of the
United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia, at Goombungee,
in April, 1937, Synod resolved that its Publication Committee take
in hand the publication of this book. I wish to thank my two
fellow-members on that Committee, Pastors G. Dohler and M.
Lohe, for the very loyal and able way in which they supported me.
Without their kind help I would have been unable to bring the
undertaking to a satisfactory conclusion.
May this book, as it goes forth, recall to the memory of the
present generation the trials and the labours of the pioneers and
their faith which carried them through. May it convey to the
readers a sense of the fact that it is God Himself, Who leadeth His
flock and Who, despite the weakness and the sin of His followers,
upholds His Kingdom and builds His Church of which He has said:
“And the gates of hell shall not prevail against it”. Matth. 16, 18.
Brisbane, January, 1938
F. OTTO THEILE-


ONE HUNDRED YEARS OF LUTHERAN
CHURCH IN QUEENSLAND
Page
Part I. The History of our Lutheran Church in Queensland.
Chapter I. A Missionary Beginning . . . . 1
~ 11. The Pioneer Settlers and their Church 9
„ HI. Striving after Organisation . . . . 13
~ IV. Organisation Achieved 21
~ V. Discord Again 28
~ VI. Difficulty of Obtaining Pastors . . 34
~ VII. Striving after Unity 36
„ VIII. The War Period . . . . •. . • • 43
„ IX. Unity Accomplished 46
~ X. United Efforts - 51
1. The Problem of Organisation . . 51
2. The Redistribution of Work . . 54
3. The Problem of Consolidation 56
4. The Supply of Lutheran Litera-
ture 6.3
5. The Relations with the Evan-
gelical Lutheran Synod of
Australia (Missouri) . . . . 66
6. The General Synod Conventions
in Queensland 69
7. The Jubilee Celebrations and
Statistics (1936) 72
Part 11. The Life and Customs of Our Lutheran Church in
Queensland.
Chapter I. The Pioneer Fathers 75
~ 11. The Transition Period 86
~ 111. The Present Generation 92
Part 111. The Activities of our Lutheran Church in Queensland.
Chapter I. Foreign Mission . . . . . • 101
Mari Yamba . . . . . • 103
Bloomfield . . . . ..106
New Guinea . . . . , . 108
Hope Valley . . . . • • 115


Page
Part 111. —Continued.
Chapter 11. Home Mission . . . . . . 122
~ 111. Benevolence . . . . . . 130
1. The Period of separate existence
of the Two Synods . . . . 130
2. The Period since the Amalga-
mation of the Two Synods . . 136
Part IV. The Pastors of our Lutheran Church in Queensland.
1. The Pastors of the United German and Scam
dinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland,
from 1885 to 1921 . . . . . . . . 142
2. The Pastors of the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Queensland from 1885 to 1921 . . 154
3. The Pastors of the Respective Synods in
Queensland prior to the Amalgamation in
1921 160
4. The Pastors who have entered the Ministry of
the Queensland District of the U.E.L.C.A.
since the Amalgamation in 1921 . . . . 161
Part V. The Parishes and Congregations of our Lutheran Church
in Queensland.
Alberton Parish . . . . . . . . . . 166
Beenleigh Parish . . . . . . . . . . 172
Bethania Parish .. .. .. .. ..175
Brisbane (North) Parish . . . . . . . . 185
Brisbane (South) Parish . . . . . . . . 188
Bundaberg Parish . . . . . . . . . . 194
Douglas Parish . . . . ... . . . . 198
Dugandan Parish . . . . . . , . . . 202
Engelsburg (Kalbar) Parish . . . . . . 207
Goombungee Parish . . . . . . . . 213
Hatton Vale Parish . . . . . . . . 218
Highfields Parish . . . , . . . . . . 224
Ipswich Parish . . . . . . . . . . 230
Kingaroy Parish . . . . . . . . . . 236


Page
Part V. —Continued.
Lowood Parish . . . . . • . • • • 240
Mackay Parish . . . . . . • . • • 246
Maryborough Parish . . . . . . . . 248
Murgon Parish .. .. .. • . ..252
Nundah Parish .. .. .. .. ..256
Toowoomba (Hume Street) Parish . . . . 261
Toowoomba (Phillip Street) Parish . . . . 267
Home Mission Centres . . . . . . . . 273
(Comprising the congregations of the North
Coast, South and Upper Burnett, etc., in
alphabetical order.)
Conclusion —The Mission of the Lutheran Church . . . . 283
Maps —
1. Hope Valley . . . . . . . . . . 119
2. Queensland . . . . . . • • • • 287
3. Darling Downs . . . . . . . . . . 287
4. Brisbane, Logan, West Moreton and North
Coast Districts . . . . . . . . . . 288
5. North Coast and Burnett Districts . . . . 289
ERRATA.
Page 48. Line 46, read symbolical—not symbolise.
Page 164. Line 30, read secretary—-not treasurer.




ONE HUNDRED YEARS OF THE
LUTHERAN CHURCH IN QUEENSLAND.
—O —-
PART I. THE HISTORY OF OUR LUTHERAN CHURCH IN
QUEENSLAND.
CHAPTER I.
A MISSIONARY BEGINNING.
Every historical event is the product and consequence of the
development that led up to it; and the foundation and organisa-
tion of the Lutheran Church in Queensland, which took place in
the year 1885, is no exception to that general rule. It is always
necessary to know that previous development and to study it, other-
wise the event itself can not be correctly understood and interpreted.
It is therefore necessary that we should begin the story of our
Lutheran Church in Queensland, not with the event of its organisa-
Dr. J. D. Lang.
tion in 1885, but we should lead up to that event by following
the threads of previous developments from the very beginning.
Church establishment and development in Australia, as in
other parts of the new world, is in every case very closely connected
with immigration and settlement. The Lutheran Church has its
home in Germany and Scandinavia, and its establishment in other
countries depends on the settlement of German or Scandinavian
immigrants. The first settlement of German people in what is now
Queensland was quite unique in character. The first German settlers


• '/'z'ch*'’* !" /" ' T < . : ‘? ,> ’•'■ ’ ',»*.••• -' v ,, ? u Jfe>v. .• %*• -‘rfe ■/ i !' 7 iT 4 ' i ; - /< »%-' '
.-;■ - ' ■ ■ ■ . •'>■ '■’»•-»;
■ ' , ' V ' ; % r ' ....■"■ .■ ,/-
came to Queensland for the one purpose of winning for Christ the
many aborigines who lived in this country. They were missionaries.
That admirable Scotchman, and leader of the Presbyterian
Church in Australia, Dr. John Dunmore Lang, of Sydney, who for
more than fifty years, from 1822 to 1878, made his influence felt
in all phases of development that took place in the new Colony,
which he had chosen for his home, showed much interest also in
the temporal and spiritual welfare of the aborigines of this Colony,
On one of his voyages to Europe, in the years 1836 to 1837, Dr.
Pastor J. Gossner.
Lang decided to approach the authorities at home, in England, with
the request that his Church should receive a subsidy, when it under"
took to missionise the native population of New South Wales. He
claimed that the established Church of Scotland was entitled to such
subsidy, as well as the established Church of England. The English
Government consented to grant the support asked for. It promised
£l5O for the equipment and transport for each of three fully trained
missionaries, who were to proceed to Australia; and it further
undertook to subsidise, pound for pound, any freewill offerings for


the purposes of the proposed Mission received from and through
the Scottish Church, led by Dr. John Dunmore Lang.
Dr. Lang had his mind set on the Christianising of the
aborigines of that part of New South Wales, which was at that
time called Moreton Bay Settlement. From 1824 until 1841 this was
a penal settlement, which, most of the time, was peopled by more
than one thousand convicts, male and female. Dr. Lang knew from
previous experience that he would be unable to procure the neces-
sary missionaries from England or Scotland; therefore he appealed
to the Protestant Christians on the Continent of Europe to furnish
the staff for the undertaking.
At this time Pastor Johannes Gossner of the Bethlehem Church
at Berlin contemplated sending missionaries among heathen people.
His ideas about missionary practice differed somewhat from the
course that was usually adopted. He held, that if he could send a
colony of earnest Christians, farmers and artisans, and settle it
among heathen people, the latter would be led to follow the example
set them by the members of the colony.
When the appeal of Dr. John Dunmore Lang reached Pastor
Gossner he gathered a party: Peter Niquet, mason; August Rode,
cabinetmaker; Leopold Zillmann, blacksmith; Gottfried Haussmann,
farmer; Wilhelm Hartenstein, weaver; Carl Theodor Frans, tailor;
Gottfried Wagner, shoemaker; August Olbrecht, shoemaker; and
Ludwig Doege, gardener, of whom the last three were unmarried.
To them was added Moritz Schneider, who had studied medicine,
as one of the three trained missionaries for whom the English
Government had agreed to pay the fare to Australia. The leader of
the party was Rev. Carl Wilhelm Schmidt, who hailed from Star'
gard in Pommerania, and who was an ordained minister of the
State Church of Prussia. He was joined by Rev. Christoph Eipper,
who hailed from Esslingen in Wuerttemberg. Rev. Eipper had
received his training at the Seminary for Missionaries at Basle in
Switzerland, and was ordained on the 27th June, 1837, in London
by German and French Protestant clergy.
The missionary party, the first which Pastor J. Gossner sent
forth, was very solemnly farewelled at Berlin on the 9th July, 1837,
and embarked at Greenock in Scotland in September, 1837, on the
sailing vessel “Minerva”. The ship arrived at Sydney on the 23rd
of January, 1838, where, at the quarantine station, Moritz Schneider,
one of the missionary party, died of typhoid fever.
Some members of the party, 14 in number, under the
ship of Rev. C. Eipper, proceeded to the Moreton Bay Settlement
at the end of March, 1838, and the remainder, with Rev. W.
Schmidt, followed in June of the same year. They established
themselves about seven miles north of Brisbane, near present-day
Nundah, on a Mission Reserve of 650 acres, which the Govern-
ment of New South W r ales set aside for them on both sides of a
creek, to which they gave the name Kedron Brook. The rise on
which the members of the party erected their huts was given


the name of Zion’s Hill. This was the first German settlement (and
also the first free settlement) in what was later called Queensland: a
party of Evangelical missionaries, 19 adults and 11 children.
There was even at that time a missionary stationed in Brisbane
and he, too, was a German, Rev. Johann Christian Simon Handt.
Hailing from the province of Saxony, in Germany, he had received
his training at Basle, in Switzerland, and after three years of mis-
sionary service in Liberia, in West Africa, the Church Missionary
Society of London had sent him to New South Wales in the year
1831. Here he had been stationed as missionary to the aborigines
in Wellington Valley, near Mudgee. In 1837 the Church Missionary
Society sent him to Brisbane as chaplain to the convicts, and as
missionary to the aborigines. He received a salary of £IOO per
annum from the Government, and as a Government officer he was
the official protector of the aborigines of the district and reported
on their condition and on all mission work among them to the
authorities at Sydney. Rev. Handt left Brisbane for Sydney in the
year 1843. Linally he was stationed at Geelong, in Victoria, where
he died in July, 1863.
The undertaking of the Gossner missionaries near Brisbane was
controlled from Sydney by a “Committee for managing the German
Mission at Moreton Bay”. It was but poorly supported by the
general public. In fact, Dr. Lang, who was one of the secretaries
and evidently the most prominent member of the committee and
who had been absent in England and America from 1839 to 1841,
says: “It was sadly neglected by those whose bounden duty it was
to have exerted themselves for its maintenance and support. The
missionaries were consequently subjected to great privations, and
their missionary labours were in some measure suspended because
of the manual labour in which they were compelled to engage for
the supply of the necessities of life.” As the support of the Mission
through the committee was so small, the support from the Govern-
ment was also very small. But until the year 1841 the Government
adhered to the arrangement of subsidising the undertaking pound
for pound. Its contributions were as follows: In the year 1838,
£3lO/19/2; in 1839, £159/7/6; in the year 1840, £228/5/8; in
the year 1841, £93/0/2.
In the year 1842, after Moreton Bay had ceased to be a convict
settlement, Sir George Gipps, the Governor of New South Wales,
visited Brisbane and also inspected the German Mission on Zion's
Hill. He expressed the opinion that the settlement was too near
to Brisbane, especially as it had been decided to open the Moreton
Bay District to settlement by free immigrants. This decision had a
most unfortunate effect on the relations previously existing between
the missionaries and the aborigines, and it materially interfered with
the prospects of the Mission. Sir George Gipps promised that the
Government would bear the expense, therefore Rev. W. Schmidt
and his co-workers were at once agreeable to transfer their activities
to the north-west, into the region of the Bunya Bunya Mountains.


As an earnest of their intentions J. G. Haussmann and W. Harter
stem set out and established an intermediate centre near present -day
Caboolture. Shortly after the aborigines attacked them and their
very lives were endangered. J. G. Haussmann was severely wounded
and reached Zion’s Hill with great difficulty.
Dr Leichhardt, the noted German explorer, also visited the
German Mission in the year 1843, and during his stay was the guest
of Rev. W. Schmidt. He was deeply impressed with all he saw.
It was evident that the missionaries had not succeeded in converting
any blackTellow to Christianity; but the moral influence of their
little colony on the white settlers in the vicinity was of the utmos
value. Their friendly intercourse with the savage and primitive
children of the bush had, moreover, shown to the aborigines the
whiteTellow in his best colour.
At that time there was on the way from London the despatch
which gave the Colonial Government at Sydney the authority to
annul all subsidies to missionary undertakings in New South Wales.
These subsidies, though granted by the Government in London,
were debited against the Department of Lands in Sydney. And the
officials here had repeatedly raised objections, because in this mam
ner the income from the sale of Crown lands was sadly depleted.
We can almost hear the tone of satisfaction when the authorities
at Sydney reported home in March, 1844: “There are no longer
any Missions to the aborigines receiving aid from the Government.
One of the leaders of the German Mission, Rev. C. Eipper,
hereupon left Zion’s Hill and accepted a position in the Scottish
Church in New South Wales. He was minister at Braidwood and
then at Paterson, near Maitland, in the Newcastle District. In the
year 1851 he retired from the ministry and lived privately at
Braidwood, where he died in the year 1893.
In June of the year 1844 another party of missionary colonists
arrived, which Pastor Johannes Gossner had sent from Berlin.
August Richter, Wilhelm Gehricke, Carl Gerler, and Johann
Hermann. The committee in Sydney and the authorities of the
Mission in Berlin promised to support the undertaking more
liberally. But it became ever more evident that it was most difficult
to get into real touch with the nomadic native tribes and to influence
them; and the proximity of the white settlement, which was com
tinually increasing and spreading out, was the greatest hindrance to
the work of the Mission. In the year 1845 the other leader of the
German Mission, Rev. W. Schmidt, left Zion s Hill. He joined the
London Missionary Society and went to Samoa, where he died in
the year 1864.
The laymen who remained at the original settlement established
their own farms. The Government surveyed the Mission Reserve
and sold the blocks to them, some being but small in area, five acres
and even three acres. Several of the laymen, however, persevered
with their work among the aborigines, notably J. G. Haussmann
and P. Niquet. We read in the Government despatches sent to


London, that in the year 1848 the mission work among the-
aborigines had been abandoned.
G. Wagner went to Sydney, where he entered the Australian
College which Dr. John Dunmore Lang had established, and re'
ceived training as a clergyman. Dr. J. D. Lang ordained him in
October, 1850, according to the rules and rites of the Evangelical
Protestant Church of Scotland. The Rev. G. Wagner was stationed
as Presbyterian clergyman at Tumut in New South Wales, but in
January, 1852, we find him at Zion’s Hill, where he seems to have
acted as minister of his fellow-countrymen, at the same time also
attending to his farm. J, G. Haussmann followed in his footsteps
and was ordained at Sydney in the year 1853, and, returning to
Zion’s Hill, he again followed up the aborigines, undertaking much
travelling in order to bring to them the message of the Gospel. It
is quite touching to read in Pastor J. G. Haussmann’s letters to
Dr. J. D. Lang, at Sydney, how he continued his endeavours to
bring the Word of God to the nomadic tribes.
In the year 1855 Pastor M. Goethe, who was then the German
Lutheran pastor at Melbourne, prevailed upon Pastor J. G. Hauss'
mann to join him in the Colony of Victoria and to work among the
many German immigrants settling there. Thus we soon find Pastor
J. G. Haussmann ministering to a German Lutheran congregation
at Germantown, near Geelong in Victoria.
On Zion’s Hill, near Brisbane, the missionary settlers had
erected a small church, where they gathered for worship. It seems
to have been open to all who desired to conduct service, no matter
what denomination they represented. It was in this church that, in
the year 1847, Rev. W. Moore conducted the first Methodist
services in this district. A minister of the Church of England also
conducted services here and later the Baptists did likewise, and— if
the writings of a son of one of those early settlers, Rev. J. H. L.
Zillman, are based on facts and not on fancies—there were still
other denominations and sects that made use of this little church.
All were ministering to and trying to win the same few families
settled there. There certainly was no organised Lutheran congre-
gation in existence until the year 1856. In that year Pastor Mathias
Goethe, of Melbourne, came to visit the settlement. After Pastor
J. G. Haussmann had acceded to the wish of Pastor M. Goethe and
proceeded south, the latter had repeatedly appealed to others of
the missionary settlers to come and help in the work of ministering
to the German immigrants in the newly founded State of Victoria.
His letters remained without result. Therefore he came personally,
and persuaded two —Peter Niquet and Wilhelm Gehricke—to join
him in Victoria. At the same time he was instrumental in organising
the settlers on Zion’s Hill as a German Lutheran congregation, and
induced it to join the newly-constituted Evangelical Lutheran Synod
of Victoria. The meeting at which this was resolved took place on
the 28th of October, 1856. On this occasion the lay-missionary,
Carl Gerler, was ordained by Pastor Goethe, and at the same time


$*» flk
- jut .dP-/^
' -K‘
jsl^^ s ** Jk - - c •■■.•> *. • - -*?'
jL
m
it was arranged that Pastor C. Gerler should minister to the local
congregation, whilst Pastor G. Wagner should visit the German
immigrants who were scattered about the country. It was also
decided that the “General Prayer-book for the Evangelical Church 11 ,
edited by Bunsen, should be used for the Church services and for
family worship. In the minutes of the second Annual Convention
of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Victoria, of the year 1857,
we find that the statistics enumerate one congregation in Queens-
land, Zion’s Hill, and one preaching place. There is no evidence
to be found in Queensland that the congregation founded in 1856
remained in existence for any length of time.
Prior to the year 1856 there were in Queensland no regu-
lations dealing with the registration of births, marriages and deaths.
The particulars were recorded in the Church Register, where such
was in existence. The Registrar-General of Queensland has among
his records “The Register of Baptisms solemnised by the German
Pastor J. G. Haussmann.
Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister.
Missionaries at Zion’s Hill, Moreton, New South Wales’ 1 from the
years 1837-1843. Early in 1856,- however, the Registration Act
which is in force to-day was introduced and applied. According to it
only those ministers of religion were permitted to perform marriage
ceremonies whose names, addresses and denominations were re-
corded with the Registrar-General. It is interesting to note that until
the year 1861, of all the missionaries and pastors mentioned on the
previous pages, not one was registered as a Lutheran clergyman.
Pastor C. Gerler was registered as a German Evangelical clergyman
and Pastor G. Wagner was, until 1860, listed as a Presbyterian
clergyman, and, with the exception of Pastors J. G. Haussmann and
J. P. Niquet, not one of the members of those missionary parties
sent to Queensland by Pastor Johannes Gossner in the years 1837
and 1844 ever again appears in connection with the history of the
Lutheran Church in Queensland. They nearly all lived to an ad-
vanced age. Pastor Wagner, for instance, passing away at 84 years


of age in September, 1893, and Pastor Gerler died 73 years of age-
shortly before Christmas, 1894.
In the year 1857 Pastor Carl Frans Alexander Schirmeister
arrived at Zion’s Hill, which then formed part of a slowly increasing
settlement and which was known as German Station. Pastor
Schirmeister, who was born on the 22nd July, 1814, at Neustadri
Eberswalde, in Germany, was an ordained minister of the State
Church of Prussia. Pastor J. Gossner, of Berlin, had placed him in
charge of the missionary colony, which, in the year 1847, pro-
ceeded to the Chatham Islands, east of New Zealand. For nearly
ten years Pastor Schirmeister had laboured there under great diffi-
culties, caused by the climatic conditions and by the antagonism of
the natives; and early in 1857 he saw himself forced to leave the
field of his activity and to proceed to Sydney, where Dr. John
Dunmore Lang took care of him. When his health had been
restored, Dr. J. D. Lang sent Pastor and Mrs. Schirmeister to
Moreton Bay Settlement. Pastor Schirmeister was to join his
brother-indaw, Pastor W. Gehricke. The latter had returned from
Victoria, having found the work, to which Pastor Goethe had sent
him, beyond his ability.
Meanwhile, disunity had developed in the settlement at Zion’s
Hill or German Station, and the newly-formed congregation had
become disintegrated. The missionary colonists had never been
Lutherans in the stricter sense of the term, and now the one or
the other insisted on being a member of the Church of Scotland
under whose auspices they had been working, whilst others discarded
even the general principles of their “Father Gossner”, and of the
Presbyterian Church, and joined the Baptist Church, and other sects
which had established themselves in the district. Pastor Schirmeister,
though willing to yield in all temporal matters, could not agree with
the position taken up by most of the leaders of the congregation at
Zion’s Hill. He found it impossible at the time to again gather a
Lutheran congregation at that place and, although he and his.
family continued to reside there, he turned his efforts to the German
settlers in Brisbane. In the year 1858 he organised a German
Lutheran congregation in that town, which, under the name of
St. Andreas Congregation, is in existence to this day. Through the
efforts of Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister, the Government of New
South Wales granted an area of land—l-g- acres—in the town of
Brisbane for the purposes of the Church and the congregation.
On this land Pastor Schirmeister erected a small weather-board
church, which was dedicated in the year 1861. The young con-
gregation had to face many difficulties in its early history, and its
development was greatly retarded by strife in its midst, caused
partly by internal dissension and partly by the influence from Zion’s
Hill; but Pastor Schirmeister was able, with the help of God, to
surmount these difficulties and to help his congregation to enjoy a
period of quiet and peaceful development.


Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister was the first pastor in Queensland
listed as a Lutheran clergyman by the Registrar-General, and from
1858 to 1861 he was the only one.
From the outset Pastor Schirmeister extended his ministrations
to South Brisbane, to Ipswich and to Toowoomba, and, with com'
mendable foresight, he secured from the Government at Sydney as
early as December, 1857, grants of fine blocks of land at each of
these places for the Church purposes of “people called Lutherans”.
Not everywhere did the organisation of a congregation eventuate
immediately, but the land was secured. The Ipswich Congregation
was organised in the year 1860, as the first one after that on
Wickham Terrace in Brisbane.
In the year 1861, Pastor J. G. Haussmann, who had during the
previous 6 years laboured in Victoria, returned to Brisbane. From
Pastor Schirmeister he took over the work on the south side of the
Brisbane River, and in the following year, in November, 1862, his
efforts were successful: a congregation was organised and a church
erected on the land granted for that purpose in Cordelia and
Glenelg Streets.
CHAPTER 11.
THE PIONEER SETTLERS AND THEIR CHURCH.
The German population in this country was at that time very
sparse indeed. Those who had come to this part of New South
Wales had, in most cases, come under contract to the owners of
large cattle stations and sheep runs which had been established by
individuals and companies coming north from Sydney. When the
contracts of these herdsmen expired, they migrated to the more
closely settled districts around Brisbane, Ipswich, and later
Toowoomba. They found countrymen there who had established
homes for themselves. But after Moreton Bay Settlement had been
separated from New South Wales and had been constituted as the
new Colony of Queensland, in the year 1859, its Government
earnestly looked for new and more settlers. The population of
Queensland, 30,000 at that time, embraced approximately 2,000
who had come from Germany. The Government deputed Mr. J. C.
Heussler, a Brisbane business man, to use the opportunity of a trip
to his home country for the purpose of stimulating the emigration
of German settlers to Queensland. Mr. Heussler established agencies
and offices in various parts of Germany and recruited emigrants.
(Mr. C. Heussler was consular representative of Hamburg; later
he represented Denmark in like capacity. For many years he was
a member of the Legislative Council. He passed away in October,
1907, having been in Queensland for 55 years. Pastor E. Becker,
-of South Brisbane, conducted the service at his burial.)


In consequence of Mr. Heussler’s activities, many German
settlers arrived here during the years 1862 to 1873. Most of them
were brought out by the shipping company of Godeffroy, of Harm
burg, in its emigrant ships: Susannah Godeffroy, Cesar Godeffroy,
Alster, Wandram, La Rochelle, and others. In later years the
Sloman Line brought out many Germans who desired to settle in
Queensland. The journey was a long and tedious one and com
ditions on the ships were, in many cases, deplorable indeed.
Pastor Schirmeister of Brisbane tried to keep in touch with all
these new settlers and followed them into the bush, and for that
purpose he extended his travels, which were mostly undertaken on
foot or horseback, even as far as Toowoomba. Pastor J. G. Hauss"
mann, too, was untiring in his efforts to bring the ministrations of
the Church to the German settlers and for that purpose he travelled
repeatedly to Rockhampton and Maryborough. Such journeys were
at that time quite an undertaking. The two pastors soon recognised
that the field of work was too great and that their strength could not
cover it. For some reason or other they were unable to get assistance
from the remaining Gossner men at Zion’s Hill and Pastor C. F. A.
Schirmeister turned to Germany for help.
Pastor J. Gossner, his friend in Berlin, had passed away in the
year 1858, but an organisation had been formed to carry on the
work of the sainted man, and to this organisation Pastor Schir"
meister addressed an appeal for help. This appeal found a ready
response in the year 1863, when the Gossner Society sent Mr. C. A.
Anger to Queensland. Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister organised the
Lutheran St. Paul’s Congregation of Phillip Street, Toowoomba,
and on the 10th of May, 1863, he ordained and inducted Pastor
Carl August Anger as its pastor and placed him in charge of the
work at Toowoomba.
But a year later, both Pastor Schirmeister and the newly"
formed St. Paul’s Congregation at Toowoomba were sorely dis"
appointed in the new pastor, who had to relinquish his post. This
led to a sad division in Toowoomba. A number of adherents
remained faithful to Pastor C. A. Anger. They passed strongly"
worded strictures on Pastor Schirmeister, constituted the “Indepen"
dent German Church”, and erected a house of worship in Perth
Street, where Pastor C. A. Anger ministered to them until 1872.
(Pastor C. A. Anger then passes out of the records; but nearly
thirty years later, in the year 1897, he reappears in the history of
the Lutheran Church of Queensland. He had gathered a number
of adherents in the Crows Nest and Haden Districts, who sub"
scribed their names to a petition that Pastor C. A. Anger be
registered as a minister of religion. The Registrar"General, how"
ever, did not grant the petition.)
In consequence of this defection in 1864, the St. Paul’s Con"
gregation was in a very awkward position indeed, and in order to
meet the emergency Pastor Schirmeister sent a young man, August
Ludwig Heyde whom he had taken care of in his home for some


months and whom he had learned to trust —to look after the com
gregation at Toowoomba. But the new pastor remained only two
years. In March, 1866, Pastor A. L. Heyde went to Sydney, where
he helped to organise the German Lutheran congregation of that
-city and became its first pastor.
In December, 1863, Pastor J. P. Niquet, one of the original
Gossner men who had proceeded to Victoria in the year 1856 and
who was there stationed at Ballarat, visited Queensland and for a
time assisted Pastors C. F. A. Schirmeister and J. G. Haussmann,
serving the congregations South Brisbane, Ipswich, and St. PauFs,
Toowoomba. He was astonished at the changes which had taken
place since he had left the Colony. He also saw how great were
the demands made on the two pastors then in the service of the
Lutheran Church in Queensland and decided to bring his family
from Victoria and settle in Queensland permanently. But when
preparing for his departure from Ballarat he received a very pressing
call to Lights Pass, in South Australia, which he finally accepted,
serving in the ministry there until the year 1893. After his retire"
ment he lived with his somindaw, Pastor Matschoss, at Mt. Gambier.
Here he passed away in March, 1903, 92 years of age.
In consequence of the rapid increase of the German population
of Queensland during those years there was such a scarcity of
pastors willing and able to serve the new settlers with the Word of
God and with the ministrations of their Church that it developed
into a real calamity. The newcomers were but poor, as far as
worldly possessions were concerned, and they had to struggle very
hard indeed before they were able to establish themselves in the
strange country which they had adopted as their home. But they
desired the spiritual comforts of their Church. The great majority
were Godfearing, Churchdoving people. Their poverty was not the
greatest difficulty which hindered them in their efforts to obtain
the ministrations of their Church. There was no organisation,
neither here nor in the old country, which could have taken the
necessary steps to help them. Individual pastors and individual
congregations took matters into their own hands to procure the
help they required. One result was that the formation of a unified
organisation was much delayed.
After much inquiry and a long time of waiting, the congrega"
tion at Ipswich, through the agency of one of its members, Dr. von
Lossberg, secured Pastor E. Heiner, an ordained minister of the
State Church of Prussia. He arrived at Ipswich in the year 1866.
Early in the year 1864 a German settlement was formed on
the Logan River. It had as its nucleus eleven families that in Ger"
many had been members of the Lutheran Free Church of Prussia.
They came from Greiffenberg in the Uckermark, and belonged to
the parish of Angermuende, where Rev. Witte had been their
pastor. They were fully conscious of their Lutheran faith. This
group has had perhaps a quiet, but a very decided and far"reaching
influence on the development of the Church among the German


mil itrnt
— UlifUf iii MrMMfmrriMM '
immigrants toward a more clearly defined Lutheran confessionalism.
Their leader was J. G. Schneider, a man of wide reading, especially
well versed in his Bible and in the confessional literature of his
Church, a man of firm conviction and a faithful Christian who
throughout his long life always had the interests of his Lutheran
Church at heart. He was readily supported by other members of
the group, as, for instance, by F. Kleinschmidt, who moved to
Pimpama Island, by F. Stolknow, who settled at Eagleby, by C.
Rehfeldt, who lived at Alberton, and by others who had arrived
some years earlier as H. Oppermann of Eagleby, G. Weise of Ips-
wich, or who arrived somewhat later, as Johann Westphal of
German Station, G. Gross of Pimpama Island, E. Iker of the
Lutheran Pioneers at J. G. Schneider’s Golden Wedding, 1910.
Front Row: Mr. and Mrs. Radke, Mr. and Mrs. Schneider, Mr. and
Mrs. Muchow.
Back Row: Mr. and Mrs. Rehfeldt and Mr. and Mrs. Hinz.
Fassifern District. This group, having settled on the Logan, decided
to make an effort to obtain a pastor who was really a member of
the Lutheran Church. They appealed to Pastor Auricht, of
Tanunda in South Australia, whom they had learned to know and
to trust through reading the Church paper which he edited and
published. After a considerable time he was able to recommend
to them Pastor C. G. Hellmuth, who had received his training in
Hermannsburg in Hanover, Germany, in the Seminary for Mis-
sionaries, established and conducted by the well-known Pastor
Louis Harms. In the year 1868 Pastor C. G. Hellmuth arrived in
the Logan and lived at Bethania as pastor of the congregations at
Bethania, Philadelphia (Eagleby), and Elkana (Alberton).


Pastor J. G. Haussmann, who had never forgotten the original
purpose which had led him to Queensland, then pastor of the
South Brisbane German Lutheran Church, began to establish a
mission station near Beenleigh on the Albert River. At his request
the Gossner Mission Society of Berlin sent a number of missionary
colonists for the purpose of his undertaking. They landed at Bris-
bane on the 18th September, 1866: Gottfried Hampe, Friedrich
Copas, Theodor Langebecker, Wilhelm Burghardt, Wilhelm Guhr,
August Fahr, David Pfrunder, and Hermann Mix. After a very
short time we find them all —with the exception of the two last
mentioned, Pfrunder and Mix, about whom records are silent —in
charge of German congregations: Langebecker at the St. Paul’s
Church in Toowoomba; Copas, after serving German Station for
ten months, went to Maryborough; Burghardt at first supported
Pastor Haussmann at Bethesda, Beenleigh, and then went to German
Station as successor to Pastor Copas; Hampe was pastor at South
Brisbane from 1866 to 1868, and then transferred to Toowoomba
where he assisted Pastor T. Langebecker in his extensive district
until the year 1872, when he took charge of the Independent
German Church in Perth Street, Toowoomba, which Pastor Anger
had founded; W. Guhr, after labouring with Pastor J. G. Hauss-
mann on the mission station near Beenleigh for some time was, in
the year 1870, placed in charge of the parish school in connection
with the St. Paul’s Congregation at Toowoomba.
Together with this party, John Haussmann, the oldest son of
Pastor J. G. Haussmann, returned to Queensland. He had acquired
an academic training in Germany and was stationed for a time as
pastor at Rockhampton and at Mackay. His father had entertained
the hope that the son would be of great help in the ministry of the
Church of his native land, but in the course of time he experienced
much sorrow and heartache. The roving disposition of the young
Pastor John Haussmann did not permit him to settle anywhere nor
to apply himself to any definite calling. Records show that in the
year 1872 he was registered as a pastor of the Lutheran Church, but
later, in 1876, he appears as a Presbyterian clergyman and since the
year 1880 his name disappears from that list. He died at Brisbane
in the early part of this century.
CHAPTER 111.
STRIVING AFTER ORGANISATION.
The pastors, who were at that time labouring among the new
settlers in Queensland, felt very strongly that a closer unity among
themselves and a proper organisation of the Church was necessary,
and they met again and again in order to bring about the end they
desired. There were great difficulties in the way. The Pastors
Schirmeister, Heiner and Hellmuth were conscious Lutherans, but
the other pastors would not submit to an organisation that was


bound confessionally. In the hope of winning them over and thus
bringing about the formation of one united Church, embracing all
the pastors and congregations in Queensland, the final step of
organising was postponed ever and ever again. Pastor J. G. Hauss-
mann at that time described the conditions in Queensland in a
letter to Pastor M. Goethe, of Melbourne, who published it in his
monthly Church paper “Christenbote”. There we read: “Our Pro-
testant Church is now beginning to spread in Queensland and to
become organised into several bodies. The “Old Lutherans
'(Altlutheraner) are beginning to make themselves heard and their
overbearing manner is influencing the ignorant masses. Where
they have not yet established themselves, we find German
Christians trying to found congregations along independent lines,
and men are being installed as pastors as long as they are able to
prate well and loud. I am afraid we shall end in chaos”.
The same periodical published the opinion of Pastor E. Heiner
of Ipswich, who tells the readers that many congregations in
Queensland were without a pastor. They were in the initial
stages and very imperfect as far as Church matters were concerned,
and with regard to the confessional attitude the position was very
unsatisfactory. They were surrounded on all sides by sects and in
their own midst Pastor Anger, of Toowoomba, was demanding that
all denominations should join in united worship and form one
united Church.
At a meeting at Ipswich in May, 1869, earnest and serious
efforts were made to bring about the desired unity and to organise
the pastors and congregations as a Lutheran Synod. The records
are very incomplete; but it appears that the Pastors Heiner, Helh
muth, Haussmann, Hampe, Langebecker and Gaustad were present.
(The last-named had been sent to India as a missionary by the
Gossner Mission Society of Berlin, but for health reasons he had
come to Queensland and had arrived in time for this meeting.)
There were also present representatives of the German Lutheran
congregations: Ipswich, Logan River, German Station, Toowoomba,
Warwick, and Rosewood. Everything seemed set for the founding
of a Synod.
It was unfortunate that Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister was not
present. It appears he was afraid that one or the other of his
fellow pastors, especially Pastor J. G. Haussmann, would not stand
resolutely with him against the un-Lutheran practice of laymen
preaching in the Churches. The Lutheran Church holds that the
preaching of the Word is the duty of the ordained pastor and,
only as an exception to the general rule, does it permit a layman
to preach to its congregations. But under the influence which
emanated from Zion's Hill quite a number of the German laymen
in Queensland claimed for themselves the right, in the Lutheran
Churches, publicly to give testimony of their religious and spiritual
life and experience. They were led astray by what they saw and
heard when coming into contact with sectarian bodies around them.


And they began to imitate the emotional religiosity and loquacity
of the various sects which they had learned to know. Unfor-
tunately, one or two pastors favoured this un-Lutheran and dis-
orderly practice. These laymen found it easy to continue on their
way because it was so difficult at this time to obtain properly trained
and ordained pastors.
Furthermore, they were encouraged by the fact that some of
the men who were installed as pastors and who were officiating as
pastors —Hampe, Copas, Burghardt—were themselves not ordained.
These pastors held that the solemn farewell at Berlin, when they
were commissioned to go to Queensland as missionaries, con-
stituted their ordination. However, some time later they were
ordained—Pastor W. Burghardt by Pastors J. G. Haussmann and
C. Gaustad before taking charge of the St. Paul’s Congregation at
Toowoomba in the year 1874; Pastor G. Hampe by Pastors C. F.
A. Schirmeister and C. G. Hellmuth in the year 1875; Pastor F.
Copas by Pastor J. G. Haussmann in conjunction with the Baptist
preacher L. Zillmann, one of the original Gossner men. This latter
ordination also was not in accordance with Lutheran usage and
contrary to proper law and order of the Lutheran Church. To read
of the controveries over these matters, as they appear in the local
German press of the time, is most interesting and reveals how the
religious freedom these new settlers enjoyed in this country had
confused some of them and had within their minds degenerated
into a state of spiritual disorderliness.
It is no wonder that these experiences filled those pastors, who
were conscious Lutherans and who were bent on upholding the law
and order of their Church—Schirmeister, Heiner and Hellmuth—
with ever renewed misgiving and doubt. It rendered them very
chary indeed of entering into closer union with men who followed
such irregular practices, as were contrary to the teaching and
order of the Church which they professed to represent. There was
much argument and dissension with regard to these questions,
especially within the congregation at Ipswich, where Pastor Heiner
had some difficulty in upholding the order of his Church. Under
such circumstances the efforts to bring about unity among the con-
gregations and pastors and to establish a Lutheran organisation or
Synod was a difficult task, which had to be postponed ever again.
Among the immigrants from Germany that arrived in those
years there were quite a number of Baptists. Some joined up with
those settlers around German Station that had somewhat earlier
begun to follow Baptist tendencies and to which L. Zillmann minis-
tered as preacher at Hendra and at Zillmann’s Waterholes, for
instance. Quite a number of them were for a time settled in the
Logan District at Beenleigh and Eagleby. Soon they went further
inland and German Baptist congregations were formed near Harris-
viHe, at Engelsburg (Kalbar), Marburg, Minden, Blenheim. At
first they had no pastors, and laymen conducted the services; but,
later on, pastors came to them from Germany and from America,


as Revs. Windolf, Krueger, Bernoth, Blum, Heinrich, Orthner, G.
Ehmke. WBereas in the other Australian States the Germans of
that belief joined the established English Baptist Church, here in
Queensland they had their own organisation and retained it, until
in 1931 they joined the Baptist Union of Queensland. Because it
was so difficult for the German settlers to obtain the ministrations
of their Lutheran Church, the German Baptist congregations
attracted to themselves quite a number of German immigrants that
had left the old country as members of the Evangelical Lutheran
Church.
The German settlers in Queensland needed pastors, spiritual
leaders, and there was no organisation that could supply them. It
is, therefore, little wonder that various ways were used to meet the
needs: some quite irregular. When in 1873 the congregations
German Station and Zillmere were vacant and all appeals for a
pastor were in vain, Pastors Haussmann, Burghardt and Gaustad
selected from among the laymen A. Hartwig (whom they had
learned to know as a pious and suitable man), for the position as
a pastor and placed him in charge of the congregations. They
arranged for him a course of theological studies and, after two
years, they ordained him.
In the year 1879 Pastor J. G. Haussmann seems to have acted
with less circumspection when he ordained a layman, Chr. Berndt,
registered him as authorised to celebrate marriages in the State of
Queensland, and installed him as pastor of the St. John’s Congrega-
tion at Minden. This congregation had been organised by Pastor
C. Gaustad and he had hitherto served it. A number of members
who were not satisfied with the new order of things seceded and
established the Zion Lutheran Congregation which was served by
Pastor J. F. Goessling. Pastor C. Berndt now and again helped
Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister by taking the services in South Bris'
bane. But when it appeared about the year 1881 that Pastor C.
Berndt was gaining a following in South Brisbane, of which Pastor
Haussmann was one of the trustees, he was no longer permitted to
enter the church. In the year 1889 a fresh controversy arose
between the Pastors Haussmann and Berndt and the former caused
the latter to be struck off the roll of registered ministers of religion.
Thereupon Pastor Berndt was registered as a minister of the Com
gregational Church of Queensland. The consequence was that the
greater part of the Lutheran St. John’s Congregation at Minden
severed its connection with him. A party, which remained faithful
to Pastor Berndt, erected a new church at Hillside (Coolana),
representing the third Lutheran church within a few miles. (It is
interesting to note that Pastor E. Becker, of the United German and
Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, assisted at the opening
of this “Congregational Lutheran Church” on the 10th December,
1891.)
Pastor G. Hampe, who was ministering to the congregation in
Perth Street, Toowoomba, seems to have been in close touch with


the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Victoria, though he was not
actually a member of it. When, in 1877, he left Toowoomba in
order to settle at Grafton in New South Wales, Pastor H. Herlitz,
the President of the Synod in Victoria, provided a new pastor for
Toowoomba, Pastor Johann Anton Gie2iendanner. The latter had
received training in the Roman Catholic College at Seven Hills in
South Australia, but because of doctrinal scruples he was refused
ordination. He came to Melbourne, where Pastor H. Herlitz
examined and ordained him.' In the year 1878 he was sent to
Perth Street, Toowoomba, as pastor of the congregation which was
known as the “Independent German Church 11 .
When the parish German Station and Zillmere again became
vacant in the year 1877, it applied direct to the Mission Society at
Basle, Switzerland, and Pastor E. O. Maier was sent out to serve it.
The vacant parish of Bethania-Philadelphia-Elkana (Alberton) in
the same year appealed for a pastor to the Lutheran Free Church
of Prussia. The negotiations which took place revealed more than
ever the difficulties in the way of securing pastors. Though the
parish was quite willing to supply the necessary, not inconsiderable
means for the passage of a pastor and his family and for a fur-
nished residence here in Queensland, it could not guarantee a
pension in case of disablement or infirmity and old age, and for that
reason the appeals to pastors in Germany were in vain. Finally,
through the good services of the Lutheran Free Church of Prussia,
a pastor was found in America, Pastor M. Eberhard. Born in
Germany, he had studied for the ministry at the Theological
Seminary of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of lowa at Mendota,
Illinois. After a short term of service with that Synod he had
joined the Evangelical Lutheran Buffalo Synod, and in the year
1879 he came to Queensland, bringing his family with him. He
was a man of much ability and was highly gifted, but very domineer-
ing and overbearing. The Lutheran Church upholds but does not
enforce private, or individual, confession. It is left to the mem-
bers of the Lutheran Church whether they make use of it or not.
Pastor Eberhard endeavoured to compel his parishioners to adopt
the private confession as the only form of confession, thus intro-
ducing into his parish a form which was very closely related to the
auricular confession of the Roman Catholic Church. He revealed
other romanising tendencies and soon found himself in opposition
to the majority of his parishioners. The dissension which arose led
to the establishment of the congregation “To the Cross 11 at Been-
leigh, under the leadership of F. Stollznow, E. Lohrisch, J. Noeth-
ling and others. They sought the ministrations of their Church
through Pastor Hellmuth, who was at that time stationed at Mary-
borough. Shortly afterwards the congregations at Bethania and
Pimpama Island asked Pastor Eberhard to resign. But he retained
the congregations at Eagleby (Philadelphia) and at Alberton
(Elkana) until the year 1888, when he went to Charters Towers as
pastor of the German Lutheran congregation in that town. He


remained there but two years, when his romanising tendencies again
forced him to relinquish his position. Having returned to Brisbane
he seceded from the Lutheran Church and joined the Roman
Catholic Church. Curiously enough, he continued, even after that
change, to endeavour, both here and after he had left Queensland
in the year 1892 in Germany and America, to enter the ministry
of the Lutheran Church. In America, where he settled finally, he
published a book in the German language in which he related his
life's story. The tendency of the book is to glorify the Roman
Catholic Church and it is quite unreliable as far as his opinions are
concerned.
About that time, when the parish of Bethania was appealing
to the Church in Germany for a pastor, the parish of Kirchheim,
near Walloon, also became vacant because Pastor C. Gaustad was
leaving. The parish had its attention drawn to Pastor J. F.
Goessling and called him. Pastor J. F. Goessling had received his
training in Hermannsburg in Germany and had come to Australia
together with Pastor C. G. Hellmuth. At the time of receiving the
call from Kirchheim he was in New Zealand.
The fact that the pastors then stationed in Queensland had all
come from different schools and colleges, and had studied in a
different intellectual and religious and confessional atmosphere, and
had carried on their ministry in different surroundings and under
different conditions was not helpful with regard to the great need
existing in Queensland at the time: of uniting, within one organi-
sation, pastors and congregations established here.
At the time of the opening of the new church at Philadelphia
in the year 1876, the pastors present discussed anew the pressing
need of the day. Unfortunately, they were side-tracked by the
proposals which a layman, a solicitor of Toowoomba, placed before
them, dealing with the incorporation of the body they were about
to form. Even now, 50 years later, that question (the question of
incorporation) is still unsolved. At that time it seriously hindered
the development desired so much. At the end of 1879, on the
occasion of the induction of Pastor J. F. Goessling at Kirchheim,
another conference took place, and those present (Pastors Schir-
meister, Heiner, Maier, Goessling and Eberhard) resolved that,
abiding by the confessions of the Lutheran Church, they would
stand and labour together and support one another. At a further
conference, in March, 1880, the previous resolution was confirmed,
but that did not lead any further.
Pastor J. G. Haussmann and his congregation at Bethesda (Beem
leigh), feeling the need of the support coming from organisation,
from union, and from communion with other congregations and
Churches and finding that all efforts to organise a Synod in Queens-
land were proving futile, in 1883 joined the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Victoria. Pastor Haussmann travelled to Melbourne and
personally presented his application to the Synod at its Annual Con-
vention. Though he had been a foundation member of that Synod


in 1856, and had been its Acting President during the absence of
Pastor Goethe in Germany, 1857 and 1858, he had to submit to a
colloquium orthodoxiae —an examination of his views on orthodox
confession —and had to sign the agreement recording the federation
between the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Victoria and the
Evangelical Lutheran Immanuel Synod of South Australia, which
two bodies at that time constituted the Evangelical Lutheran General
Synod of Australia.
Meanwhile, further pastors were urgently needed, and—as there
was still no organisation in existence which could take the matter
in hand —Pastor Goessling, of Kirchheim, on his part, asked the
Mission Society of Hermannsburg in Germany to send to Queens'
land some of its graduates, who could enter the ministry here. The
result was that on the 12th March, 1883, four young men landed
in Brisbane: Pastors G. Heuer, C. Prenrier, Joachim Koehnke and
Johann Koehnke. On the following Sunday nearly all the German
pastors then in Queensland were present at a mission festival cele*
brated in the church at North Brisbane, and in a conference the
four new pastors were allotted their fields of activity. Pastor Heuer
was appointed to Mackay, Pastor C. Prenzler to the Fassifern Dis'
trict, Pastor Johann Koehnke to Bundaberg, whilst Pastor Joachim
Koehnke was to act as itinerant pastor. At this conference the
necessity of a proper organisation of the whole German Lutheran
Church in Queensland was discussed anew and strongly urged by
those who were present.
Toward the end of the same year, the senior of the Queensland
pastors, Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister, invited all fellow ministers to
meet in conference in his church at North Brisbane in order to
further the project which had been discussed so many times: the
organisation of a Lutheran Synod in Queensland. The conference
met on the 28th of November, 1883, and there were present
Pastors Schirmeister, Hellmuth, Heiner, Goessling, Maier, Pedersen,
Prender, Heuer and the two brothers Koehnke. There were present
also a few lay members from various congregations. Pastor Schir'
meister was in the chair and Pastor Heiner acted as secretary. At
this meeting concrete proposals of a constitution for the organisa"
tion of a Synod were discussed, and as a result of such discussion
the minutes containing the constitution were adopted and signed
by all present.
The first steps towards the organisation of a Synod had thus
been taken, but the whole year of 1884 passed and yet the actual
organisation of such a Synod did not take place.
Meanwhile the congregations of Bethania and Pimpama
Island, in the Logan District, had become vacant and had extended
a call to Pastor A. Sueltmann, who was then pastor of a Lutheran
congregation in the city of Hanover in Germany. He was an older
and more experienced man, who had for a time been one of the
lecturers at the Seminary for Missionaries at Hermannsburg in


Germany. We are told that the desire to wait for him and his
advice caused the delay in the developments here in Queensland.
But even when Pastor A. Sueltmann had arrived the dilatori-
ness with regard to the important issue of constituting a Synod or
Church was not ended. We are forced to recognise that there were
other factors at work. Between the men that were at the time
pastors in Queensland there were acute and fundamental dif-
ferences which prevented the much-needed organisation being
brought into being. Otherwise it would be hard to understand
why, after the arrival of Pastor A. Sueltmann, not all the pastors
attended the conference which took place during Epiphany season
on the 29th of January, 1885, at Bethania. The draft constitution
of the Lutheran Synod of Queensland was reviewed and revised,
and it was left to the Pastors Schirmeister and Sueltmann, who were
both present, to fix time and place for the meeting at which the
Synod was to be organised and constituted.
The old world traditions which the pastors had brought with
them to Australia influenced them here, of course. The men —
those who were sent to Queensland by Father Gossner and who
did not recognise the necessity of a confessional conviction—the
academic men who came from the State Church of Prussia, which
united under its government the Calvinistic and Lutheran con-
fessions—and the men who came from Hermannsburg, who felt
themselves bound by a strict confessionalism—distrusted one
another. All of them tried to transfer old world traditions to this
new country and to impose old world ordinances on to the
immigrants who, on their part, came from all corners of Germany,
which, at that time, was not a united country, neither with regard
to Church nor with regard to politics. There were here many
Wuerttembergers whose mother Church was Lutheran, but of a
broader character than the Lutheran Church of Hanover for in-
stance, and especially that of Hermannsburg. There were here
also many Pommeranians and people from the Uckermark who had
been members of the State Church of Prussia and who had learned,
only after their arrival in Queensland, that they were not really
Lutherans. There were members of the Lutheran Free Church in
Prussia who were conscious of their Lutheran faith. They were
Lutherans, all of them, and in Germany they had not known, and
certainly not felt, the differences among them, which were disclosed
to them here. The political divisions, too, out of which they came,
and which had set the inhabitants of the one German State against
those of the other, helped to foster the distrust which was evident
among the pastors and people alike. If we add to this the experi-
ences in the Southern States of Australia, where Synods had been
organised 30 to 40 years earlier, and where it became evident that
the old world traditions of the schools, from which the various
pastors came, were the stumbling block in the way of a real united
Church, we will more readily understand the developments which
took place in Queensland. In South Australia and Victoria the


pastors also came from different schools or colleges: from Her-
mannsburg, from Basle, from Neuendettelsau; and, though at various
times they combined and united, we find that Hermannsburg and
Neuendettelsau men parted again—that Hermannsburg and Basle
men parted Neuendettelsau and Basle men parted
again—and that each party accused the other of failing in Lutheran
confessionalism. Such experiences in the Southern States, without
a doubt, influenced some of the pastors in Queensland.
The reasons for the dissensions were not unessential, certainly
not! The Church is not a society striving but for the common good
of its members, demanding but compliance with a certain set of
rules that have been set up as a constitution. Based on common
faith and confession, the Church is an institution in which the
Word of God governs all things and everything else is of secondary
importance. But personal antipathy and personal misunderstanding,
much narrowmindedness and imputation of motives was inter-
mingled with the fight for principles.
CHAPTER IV.
ORGANISATION ACHIEVED.
It is evident that Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister greatly desired
that all pastors in Queensland should join the Synod which was to
be formed. But several of these, notably Haussmann, Copas and
Langebecker, were standing aloof. These men were continuously
being reproached, especially by the men from Hermannsburg, on
account of their un-Lutheran practice and were, therefore, not will-
ing to join a body in which they felt they would at best be
members on sufferance.
At that time Pastor Herlits, the President of the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Victoria, paid a visit to Queensland, and he
persuaded Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister to proceed with the forma-
tion of the Synod. From the record it is not clear why not all
pastors were invited for the purpose of the final discussion of the
constitution. Seven of those who had signed the first draft were
left in ignorance when, on the 9th June, 1885, Pastors C. F. A.
Schirmeister (North Brisbane), E. Reiner (Ipswich), E. O. Maier
(German Station), T. Langebecker (Toowoomba), J. G. Hauss-
mann (Beenleigh), and F. Copas (Maryborough) formed the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland and arranged that this
new Church-body be recognised by the Registrar-General of
Queensland. Pastor Schirmeister was the President and Pastor
Reiner the Secretary of the organisation. If Pastor C. F. A.
Schirmeister had cherished the hope that the other pastors in
Queensland would subsequently join the organisation and that thus
one Lutheran Synod would come into existence he was soon dis-
illusioned. Those pastors who had been ignored so absolutely were


•»>v <»>• v- s?
tipfcr. -- v *>
i wSBkSL ' : - i2|||
jjjjL ~ : JjHp&pgip y^|.. H • ®' * *T..
-■ '• ' ' i ' '**“’ .j&»
■*jt jKf m
■ I • < X gy ij
m /*< ..'WllJUWWwiKfe:-. x-y. w? - . v . 4 rfr ifromaP^s 8^
deeply hurt by this slight, which appeared to them as faithless
duplicity. They at once called a meeting of pastors and delegates
of their congregations, which took place in the Danish Lutheran
church in South Brisbane on the sth August, 1885. There were
present eight pastors: A. Sueltmann, C. G. Hellmuth, J. F. Goess'
ling, C. Prender, G. Heuer, J. Koehnke, J. C. Pedersen and H. D.
Hansen. The latter two were Danish pastors. The six German
pastors were all from the Seminary for Missionaries at Hermanns'
burg in Germany. The congregations were represented by 26 dele'
gates, three of them being Danes. Those present constituted them'
.selves as the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
PASTORS’ CONFERENCE, 1898.
Sitting: J. G. Haussmann, J. Frank, O. Maier, E. Heiner, A. D. Hartwig
Standing; M. Millatt, H. Wallatt, T. Langebecker, I. Egen, W. Guhr.
Queensland. Pastor A. Sueltmann was elected President' General
(or as his title was then stated to be, Superintendent' General),
whilst Pastor J. C. Pedersen was the Superintendent for the Danish
section of the Synod, Pastor J. Koehnke was the Secretary and Mr.
J. Westphal, of German Station, was the Treasurer.
On the 16th September of the same year the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Queensland met for the first time in the church
of Pastor Schirmeister at North Brisbane, when pastors and dele'
gates confirmed the resolutions adopted by the pastors in June and
July-


Both Synods were organised along the same lines according to
the constitution which all the pastors during the years previously
had conjointly drafted. The control of each of the two organisa-
tions was placed into the hands of a Church Council consisting
of the President or Superintendent, who was assisted by two pastors
and two laymen.
The first Church Council of the United German and Scan-
dinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland comprised Pastors A.
Sueltmann (Superintendent), C. Hellmuth, and Pedersen, and the
laymen J. G. Schneider of Bethania and C. Mittelstaedt of
Toowoomba. The Church Council of the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Queensland comprised Pastors Schirmeister (President),
Heiner, and E. O. Maier, and the laymen E. Busch and R. Fabian.
The United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland consisted of nine pastors and 16 congregations which
possessed 12 churches. The Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queens-
land numbered six pastors serving 12 congregation which possessed
12 churches.
Pastor M. Eberhard, of Philadelphia (Eagleby) and Elkana
(Alberton) stood aloof and joined neither of the two Synods, but
he was especially friendly with Pastor Schirmeister of Brisbane.
When the latter passed away in 1887, Pastor M. Eberhard had
great hopes of becoming his successor. He was, however, dis-
appointed.
Pastor A. who was then stationed in Bundaberg,
was present at the foundation meeting of the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Queensland, but he was not accepted as a member, x
probationary period of one year being imposed in his case.
All efforts to bring about one united Lutheran Church in
Queensland had been frustrated and, by the end of 1885, there
were in existence two Lutheran Synods organised on the basis of
almost identically worded constitutions. Quite a deal of bitterness
was engendered, and accusations and recriminations were raised
which served to widen the gulf between the two parties. The
consequences were that, whilst the difficulty of obtaining pastors
remained as great as before, the duplication of work, especially with
regard to the care of the diaspora—which we now call the Home
Mission—could not be avoided. Here and there altar was erected
against altar—that is, both Synods established themselves in the
same place. Congregations passed from one Synod to the other
Synod, not because of questions of faith or confession, but mostly
because of personal reasons which were sometimes of a petty nature.
The congregation of Ipswich would not join the Synod which
its pastor, Pastor E. Heiner, had helped to found and would no
longer be served by him. It applied to the United German and
Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland for a pastor.
Pastors Schirmeister and Heiner tried to organise an opposition
congregation at Kirchheim, near Marburg, making the disused
church on Scheu’s farm the rallying point. Pastor A. Sueltmann


'’’ ' : •-> ■ .... .... ■ V, V ;• •
>■ *■***-***■*- ‘
«y- ,«*■ m ■ 11 * . f «• ■> * , ;
!ippr% . m wmmmmmrn,. : mmm
'^v v Ikoll \ V'
- **> - »»
* **’ ’Jf -~. | ‘
HSBMRMfe . *“ 1 - *• 'IHwl'
* '** M$m ._ * « .. - ■ . «/' -
endeavoured to gather a congregation in Brisbane for his Synod,
asking Pastor J. C. Pedersen for the use of the Danish Lutheran
church for that purpose. Later the congregations Kirchheim and
Minden, members of the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland, dissatisfied with their pastor, J. F.
Goessling, joined the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland.
The congregation at South Brisbane, member of the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Queensland, dissatisfied with its pastor, I. Egen,
joined the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland. In the Fassifern District dissensions led to the erection
of churches of both Synods in close proximity to one another, and
when one of these two congregations again experienced a division
three different Lutheran congregations, each opposed to the other,
worshipped in the two churches. In the Logan District, too, at
PASTORS’ CONFERENCE, 1898.
Sitting: C. Pedersen, J. G. Goessling, E. Becker, A. Sultmann.
Standing: G. Heuer, J. F. Holtermann, J. Koehnke, C. Prenzler.
Pimpama Island we find two Lutheran churches, the result of some
local dissension. The Independent German Congregation at
Toowoomba had, in 1883, called Pastor Joachim Koehnke to be its
pastor; it appears to have flourished considerably as a result of
the young pastor's energetic work. On Whit Monday of 1884, for
instance, at a school picnic, a band of eleven instruments led the
procession to Mr. Horner’s paddock, and the teacher, Mr. Janke,
marched with 150 children in that procession. In August, 1885, the


congregation was one of the foundation members of the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, and was
represented by Mr. Mittelstaedt at the first Convention at South
Brisbane. On the Ist November of the same year its new church,,
which had been erected in the place of the old small building in
Perth Street, was dedicated. Pastors A. Sueltmann (President of
Synod), C. G. Hellmuth, J. F. Goessling, W. Burghardt and J.
Koehnke were present. The church was dedicated as the “Lutheran
Holy Trinity Church ’. This name displaced the former one, the
Independent German Church I '. The trustees took violent objection
to this change and thus the cause of strife and dissension was given
which ended twelve months later with the withdrawal of Pastor J.
Koehnke from the charge, and with him went the majority of the
members. As pastor the trustees called an adventurer, a Mr.
Axthelm. Mr. Axthelm had appeared on the scene from some"
where in America. He was at Toowoomba for one year, and after
his departure in 1888 the congregation ceased to exist and its
church was sold for removal.
All these sad facts and experiences bring to mind what difficuh
ties and what labour the Lutheran Church had to pass through
before it developed into the comparatively well organised body it is-
to-day. They reveal that flaw in the character of the German race
which is expressed in the old saying: Meet three Germans and you
will hear four different opinions. These experiences also show that
a firm and sound confessional basis is an absolute necessity if a
Church is to have an abiding existence, and if it is to have any
influence for good in the community to which it belongs.
There is no doubt that during the years when the Lutheran
Church was seeking after unity, when men and factions were con"
tending against one another, and when the lack of firm leadership l
was so sadly evident, it suffered serious losses and missed many
opportunities.
Many Lutherans had settled at Rockhampton and in its vicinity,
for instance. As early as 1864 Pastor J. G. Haussmann visited them
and succeeded in organising a Lutheran congregation. Within a
month the members raised £l2O and with this money erected a
church. After his return to Queensland from Germany in the year
1866 Pastor John Haussmann, the oldest son of the Gossner
missionary, ministered to the congregation at Rockhampton. Later
Pastor A. Giezendanner and then Pastor M. Doblies were in charge,
the latter in the year 1885.
At Bowen a number of Lutheran settlers desired to find con-
nection with their Church. Their letters remained unanswered and,
after waiting in vain for a considerable time, they made application
to the Anglican Bishop at Rockhampton and received through him
the spiritual help they required.
All the work which Pastor G. Hampe had done when stationed
at Toowoomba searching for and gathering Lutherans at Warwick,
Tenterfield and Grafton in New South Wales and which was par-


tially followed up in later years by Pastor J. Koehnke, when he
lived at Toowoomba, has been lost. The advertisement in the
Brisbane German weekly “Die Nordaustralische Zeitung”, which
appeared in November, 1885, according to which the Lutheran
congregation at Grafton, New South Wales, invited applications for
the position of pastor in its midst, makes sad reading, all the more
so when it is realised that the congregation never found a pastor.
It gradually dwindled away and finally ceased to exist. It is
deplorable that so many opportunities were not made use of, that
so much good work has been in vain.
To some extent the duty which lay upon the Church and the
congregations was not recognised, but the real reason was that these
congregations had their own great difficulties whilst organising and
maintaining the life of their Church.
The pioneer settlers had to work exceedingly hard in order to
establish themselves. It was an arduous undertaking indeed to build
Learth and home for their families, carving them out of the wild
scrubs and out of the undeveloped country, where they had acquired
their holdings. It required considerable sacrifice on their part to
establish also the Church and its organisation in their midst. To their
great credit be it said, that they did not mind these sacrifices.
Together with their stout hearts and strong arms, their courage,
their diligence and their thrift, they brought with them also their
faith in God and their love for their Church; and as they urn
dauntedly faced the difficulties of the pioneering days they turned
their hearts to their God, Whom they worshipped together as they
were wont to do in their old Fatherland. And with them the pastors
submitted to the poverty of those early days. They were satisfied
with a small salary, which in the majority of cases did not amount
to <£loo per annum, and lived in small and primitive residences.
Roads were bad at that time, and means of transport were
primitive. The present-day generation can hardly realise the diffi-
culties and hardships which both congregations and their pastors
were subject to. Just one example: There was no railway connec-
tion between Maryborough and Bundaberg when Pastor C. G.
Hellmuth, of the latter town, travelled with his horse-drawn vehicle
to minister to the spiritual needs of the new settlers at Bundaberg.
An axe and a shovel always accompanied him, for he knew not
what obstacles he would meet on the way. They were heroes all —
men and women, too ! And we, who stand on their shoulders and
who are to a great extent enjoying the fruits of their labours, should
think of them with much gratitude, because in the midst of those
Lard times they built up the Church which now shelters us.
The cleavage of the Lutheran Church into two Synods was
deeply felt, not only by the pastors, but also and perhaps more so
by the lay-people. They certainly found it very difficult to under-
stand why they—coming from the same region, having been mem-
bers of the same Church, often of the same congregation in
Germany—should here belong to two different Synods, one impeach-


ing the other of un-Lutheran faith and practice. It was their
viction that if only the pastors would bury the hatchet the breach:
could be healed and there would be peace, one Synod, and one
Church.
But on the other hand the laymen themselves sometimes,
showed a spirit that was a hindrance to unity and to peaceful
development, which were so necessary. Evidence thereof is found
in the previous pages of this chapter. Further proof is easily
found: the congregation at Westbrook was one of the foundation
members of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod
of Queensland. Its St. John’s Church was the first one that the
President of the newly-formed Synod, Pastor A. Sueltmann, opened',
for public worship on the 9th of May, 1886. Pastors C. G. Hell-
muth, J. F. Goessling, J. C. Pedersen and the local Pastor J.
Koehnke were also present. Three months later, in July, 1886, the
congregation, after much strife, severed its connection with the
Synod and was henceforth ministered to by Pastor Theo. F.
Langebecker and his assistant, Pastor G. W. Guhr. It appears that
for 20 years it did not belong to either Synod. Since the year 1909’
the congregation, now called St. John’s of Aubigny, sought the
ministrations of the home missionaries of the Evangelical Lutherani
Synod of Australia (so-called Missouri) stationed in Queensland,,
and is now a member of the Queensland District of that Synod.
Much factional strife arose at Deep Gully in the year 1889. The
new church which had been erected could not be opened because-
one party kept it locked against the other party. Pastor J. F.
Goessling from Plainland, Pastor G. Heuer from Toowoomba, and
Pastor J. F. Holtermann from Ipswich, took charge one after the
other until finally Pastor J. F. Goessling served the congregation
which retained the church. At Mackay the Germans and the Danes,
had conjointly erected a church in which both congregations were
to worship, each in its own language. Over the question as to who*
should have the use of the church in the forenoon a strife arose
which led to some deplorable happenings.
And ever again the difficulty of obtaining pastors led to great
dissatisfaction with the leaders of the Synods and to much defection,
from the Lutheran Church. When Pastor Johann Koehnke, who
had been stationed at Bundaberg in March, 1883, passed away after
less than eighteen months, the congregation, towards the end of
the same year 1884, accepted Pastor A. who had
previously been stationed at Perth Street, Toowoomba. His
ministry was of short duration. Then the congregation searched,
for a pastor, even addressing a call to Pastor Jacobsen in California,
America. For years its efforts were in vain until finally in 1889’
arrangements could be made with Pastor C. Schmidt of Mary-
borough.
When Ipswich was vacant in 1885, that congregation, too,,
sent its calls to various pastors who seemed likely to come to
Queensland, among them to Pastor E. Darsow of Germantown, in.


Victoria. These calls were in vain and many members were lost
during the time the pastorate was vacant. And when pastors offered
to come to Queensland and enter the ministry here, then usually
there were no means available to defray the cost of transfer. In
the year 1888 Missionary Dierks, who had received his training at
Hermannsburg in Germany and who was then stationed in New
Zealand, was willing to accept a call to Queensland; again, in the
year 1891, the two Missionaries Kempe and Schuk, who also had
been trained at Hermannsburg in Germany and who were then
.stationed on the Finke River in Central Australia, offered them'
.selves as pastors for any available vacancy. In neither case did a
call eventuate, the expense connected with the transfer being one
great obstacle.
Altogether the times were difficult for the Lutheran Church
.and its congregations and its members, and it is of the mercies of
God that the Lutheran Church was preserved and not consumed.
In the year 1887, the man who had done more for the estab-
lishment of the Lutheran Church in Queensland than any other
passed away: Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister, of North Brisbane.
Broadminded and farseeing he had never forgotten the limits of the
basis on which he stood. In never-ceasing, labour, he
had tried to bring the ministrations of the Lutheran Church to all
who were in need of it. No bodily exertion was too much for him,
no discomfort of travel deterred him. Never afraid to stand up for
his convictions, yet ever ready to bear with the weak, he laboured
to build up and to organise the Lutheran Zion with that material
that came into his hand. Thirty years he was pastor of the St.
Andreas Congregation on Wickham Terrace, and during those
thirty years he had been at the service of every German settler
that came to Queensland and sought his aid in spiritual or in
temporal matters. The Lutheran Church of Queensland must ever
keep in grateful memory the name and the life’s work of Pastor
C. F. A. Schirmeister.
CHAPTER V.
DISCORD AGAIN.
Despite the longing for unity and the desire for peace, disunion
and discord were again experienced. In the year 1889 the Danish
portion of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod
■of Queensland, the pastors and the congregations, seceded from
it and declared their independence. The difference in nationality
has always proved an obstacle to united efforts in the case of German
and Danish people, and in this instance the difference in language
often prevented a proper understanding of one another, especially
at Synod meetings. But the immediate reason for the dissension
at the time lay in the differences which arose regarding the Danish


lay-helpers on the mission station Mari Yamba. The letter, inform-
ing the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland that the Danish congregations were seceding from the
Synod, which was dated the 21st September, 1889, states as reason:
“As we cannot work together in the Mission’ 1 .
Four Danish pastors were members of the United German
and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland: Pastors J. C.
Pedersen, D. Hansen, Chr. Christensen and J. C. Larsen. Danish
congregations existed at Brisbane, Bundaberg, Maryborough, Tiaro,
Pialba, Nikenbah, Swan Creek, Laidley, Mackay and Edenvale.
Most of these were members of the Synod.
Between the years 1870 and 1890 about 5000 Scandinavians
migrated to Queensland. They were scattered throughout the
State. Two Norwegians were the first pastors who made an effort
to bring to them the ministrations of their Church: Pastors Gaustad
and I. H. Hansen. Pastor Gaustad, who had arrived in Queensland
in the year 1869, visited German and Danish settlements as far
north as Mackay and ministered to Lutherans where he found them.
After he had taken charge of Kirchheim, near Walloon, in March,
1873, he continued to serve the Scandinavians in Brisbane and
around Laidley and other places. Pastor Hansen, living at Mary-
borough, conducted services in many different places in the vicinity
of that town. The first Danish Lutheran churches were built at
Brisbane (1873), Nikenbah (1876), and Mackay (1879). Besides
the Pastors Gaustad and Hansen, another by the name of Sass
served his countrymen for a time before he went to New Zealand,
whither Pastor Gaustad also went about the year 1880. In that
year Pastor J. C. Pedersen arrived in Brisbane. He proved to be
a leader of men. Travelling a great deal, he gathered and organised
the Scandinavians, and it was largely due to his influence that they
helped to found the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran
Synod of Queensland in the year 1885. For the first years the
Annual Meetings of the Synod took place in the Danish Lutheran
church at South Brisbane. It was situated at Kangaroo Point. On
the 12tn of December, 1886, a new Danish Lutheran church was
dedicated at Maryborough by Pastor C. G. Hellmuth. The local
Pastor D. Hansen and the Pastors C. F. Schmidt of Maryborough
and J. C. Pedersen of Brisbane assisted. Unfortunately, Pastor J.
C. Pedersen had to suffer much with ill-health, and on account of
this he had to leave Queensland in the year 1886.
With the departure of Pastor Pedersen, Church life among the
Scandinavians began to decline and it never fully recovered. As
stated above, in the year 1889 the Danish congregations severed
their connection with the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland. They did not form an organisa-
tion or a Synod; they continued as separate and independent con-
gregations. In Brisbane, Pastor C. Christensen succeeded Pastor
Pedersen; but in the year 1889 he moved to Maryborough and
Pastor J. C. Larsen followed hir%. The latter presented himself


at the Pastors’ Conference at Ipswich on the 3rd July, 1889, for
the prescribed examination (colloquium orthodoxiae) and was pro'
visionally received into the membership of the Synod. By the
year 1896 both Pastors C. Christensen and J. C. Larsen had returned
to Denmark. Shortly afterwards Pastor Ries, President of the
Scandinavian Lutherans in New Zealand, came across to Queens'
land and tried to stimulate his countrymen into new activity. The
congregation at Brisbane at that time decided to affiliate with the
organisation in New Zealand and called Pastor Bjelke Petersen from
New Zealand to take up the pastorate in Brisbane. He remained
here for six years. After the departure of Pastor Bjelke Petersen,
who returned to New Zealand, there was no Danish pastor in
Queensland until the year 1910. In this year Pastor Sass, who had
left Queensland thirty'seven years previously, returned to Brisbane
and tried to build up again the Danish congregation. Two years
later, in the year 1912, he installed as his successor Pastor Mensing,
who was a member of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia
(Missouri), and was one of its home missionaries stationed in
Queensland. But in 1914 he, too, relinquished the work and left
for America.
A year later, 1915, Pastor P. C. Ligaard came to Brisbane. He
had graduated from the Theological Seminary of the Danish
Lutheran Church at Blair, Nebraska, U.S.A. Since October, 1915,
he has served the congregation at Brisbane and visited Scandinavian
settlers in Queensland and in other States. The Church work in
Brisbane received an impetus —Sunday School, Young People’s
Society, and Mission to Seamen were organised. The old church
at Kangaroo Point was sold in the year 1918 and a new one was
erected in Dock Street, South Brisbane.
It became more and more evident, though, that the Scandinavian
Church in Queensland required some outside organisation to sup'
port it. In order to make the necessary arrangements, Pastor P. C.
Ligaard visited America and the Danish Evangelical Lutheran
Church of North America adopted the "Queensland Mission’' as
one of the branches of its work in the Kingdom of God. A financial
support of 800 dollars per annum was granted and a second pastor
in the person of Pastor C. B. Larsen was sent to Queensland in
1920 to take charge of the work in the Kingaroy and Maryborough
Districts. But as early as 1923 he returned to America, and a short
time later, still in the same year, the Danish Church in America
decided no longer to support the cause in Brisbane and Queensland.
Pastor Ligaard and his congregation appealed to the National
Church of Denmark and they were taken under the wing of that
branch of the State Church known as “The Church of Denmark
Abroad”. Pastor P. C. Ligaard, appointed as emissary of the
Church of Denmark Abroad, again took up the work in Brisbane,
where, expecting that the congregation would have to dissolve,
the Church property had already been sold. In rented rooms in
George Street in the City, Church services, Sunday School, work


among the young people and among the seamen was taken up
with renewed vigour; but it appears that it is only with utmost
difficulty that the organisation can be upheld.
Here and there the Scandinavians have joined the Lutheran
congregations which now use the English language, but the greater
number have lost their connection with the Lutheran Church from
which they have sprung. Some have been absorbed by other de-
nominations, but many of them have joined the throng of the
unchurched and the indifferent in this State.
Shortly after the organisation of the two Synods in Queens-
land, a sect made its appearance among the German settlers. This
experience showed more clearly than any other how necessary was
unity, unity on a firm confessional basis. A member of the self"
styled Apostolic Church in Germany, Mr. F. Niemeyer, came to
Queensland and, settling on a farm in the Hatton Vale District,
began to seek proselytes willing to accept the special teachings of
the sect he represented. The basis of his teaching was distinctly
Irvingian, though he resolutely disclaimed any connection with
that sect. The early coming of Christ to take with Him into the
millenium the 144,000 sealed —which number is made up of those
whom the representatives of Christ on earth, the “apostles' 1 , seal
in a special rite or sacrament and who are, of course, the members
of the Apostolic Church —stands in the forefront of his teaching.
The often extreme denunciation of all members of the ministry—
who, according to the opinion of this Apostolic Church, are living
on the fat of the land and are enriching themselves —was much in
evidence. This sect declares that the Holy Spirit of God leads into
all Truth without the need of any preparation or study, and reveals
to one and all divine secrets regarding past and present and future.
Prophesying and speaking in tongues are practised. Mr. Niemeyer
was later appointed an “apostle 11 and wielded much personal in-
fluence over his followers. In the year 1899 the Apostolic congre-
gations of Queensland published their own hymn book in the
German language, and the “Apostle 11 Niemeyer issued a brochure
at the time of the 25th anniversary of his congregations in 1908.
A successor, “Apostle 11 Zielke, of Bundaberg, did likewise on the
occasion of the 50th anniversary in 1933. The latter publication
appeared in both German and English languages.
The number of those who left the Lutheran Church at that
time and joined the Apostolic Church was not inconsiderable, and
this sect was able to establish congregations in the Lockyer and
Tarampa Districts, at Mt. Beppo, in the Logan District, at Bunda-
berg, and at Mackay. These congregations were very closely
organised and strictly disciplined, the “priests 11 , “prophets 11 , and
“angels 11 were under strict supervision of the “apostle 11 . The
German language was vigorously upheld, and the tithe was regu-
larly collected.
If the Lutherans had nurtured the fond hope that the majority
of these misled members of their congregations would soon recognise


the error of their way and return to the Lutheran Church from
which they came, they were mistaken. Though dissension within
the sect has led to division, and there now are “Apostolic”,
“Neo-apostolic”, and “True-apostolic” congregations in Queensland,
very few have returned to their former faith. It is computed that
this sect has, in the course of time, caused a loss of more than 2000
souls to the Lutheran Church.
In the year 1895 an earnest effort was made to bring about a
reapproachment between the Lutheran Synods. The members of
the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queens-
land offered to meet the members of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod
of Queensland to discuss the possibilities of a union of the two
bodies. But during the ten years since the Synods had been
organised much personal bitterness had been engendered. It pre-
vented even a discussion of the question of amalgamation of the
Synods. And the result of the effort was, unfortunately, more and
greater bitterness, especially after the whole matter had, in the
year 1897, been placed before the public by means of pamphlets
written for the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod
by Pastor E. Becker, and for the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Queensland by Pastor J. Frank. The former appeared under the
title of “Contributions to the History of the Lutheran Church in
Queensland” (Beitraege Zur Geschichte der Lutherischen Kirche
in Queensland) and the latter under the title of “The Lutheran
Church of Queensland before the tribunal of Pastor E. Becker,
F.8.U.” (Die Lutherische Kirche von Queensland vor dem
Richterstuhl des Pastors E. Becker, F.8.U.).
One great difficulty in the way of a closer union lay in the
relationship of both parties to Synods in the Southern States,
which were there directly opposed to one another. The Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Queensland had in the year 1889 decided to
join the Evangelical Lutheran General Synod of Australia and was,
in the year 1890, accepted into membership by that body. The
Evangelical Lutheran General Synod of Australia comprised at that
time the Evangelical Lutheran Immanuel Synod a.a.G. (auf alter
Grundlage—on original basis) in South Australia, the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Victoria and the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Queensland. Pastor Herlitz;, of Melbourne, was its President. The
connection between the three bodies was, perhaps, but a loose one at
that time. On account of the great distances and the high cost of
travel personal exchange of opinions was difficult, thus rendering
the organisation of little real and effective value. But the member-
ship in this body certainly came into consideration when the ques-
tion of union with another body was discussed. On the other hand,
there was close sympathy between the pastors of the United German
and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland and of the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri), the pastors of
the latter being at that time, in the majority, also men from
Hermannsburg in Germany. At the Annual Meeting of the United


German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod at South Brisbane, in
the year 1889, a resolution was passed that steps be taken to bring
about a union with the Victorian District of the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri). The firm opposition of
the President of the Synod, Pastor A. Sueltmann, who objected to
the so-called Missourian tendencies of the Synod in Victoria, pre-
vented the resolution from being carried out. But still the desire not
to appear discredited as un-Lutheran in the eyes of the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri) in South Australia and
Victoria carried much weight with the pastors °f the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland.
It was in consequence of this sympathy with the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri) that in the year 1897 the
congregation at Highfields, a member of the United German an
Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, extended a ca 1 to
Pastor Backen, a member of the Victorian District of the Evange i-
cal Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri). He accepted the call
on the condition that Highfields secede from the United German
and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland. It appears it
was expected that the latter Synod would, in course of time, join
the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri), when the
Highfields Congregation would rejoin its Synod. This expectation
was never fulfilled. But thus the Evangelical Lutheran Synod ot
Australia (Missouri) gained a footing in Queensland and estab-
lished itself ever more firmly as the years went on.
At first the work of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
tralia (Missouri) in Queensland was Home Mission activity, directed
by a committee of its Victorian District. After Pastor Backen had
left Queensland, Pastor O. Nichterlein took over the work.
Stationed at Headmgton Hill and travelling long distances, he tried
to get into contact with former members of his Synod who had
migrated to Queensland from the Southern States. Quite a num-
her of years went by until he was joined and then relieved by
further pastors that his Synod sent to this State. They found no.
only members of their own Synod, and gathered in not only the
unchurched, but they also gained quite a number of individuals
and whole congregations that were members of the two Synods
established in Queensland. As shown in other parts ot this
chapter, the newcomers did not in their practice show any respect
for the comity of Synods or Churches. Queensland was their
mission field and every one was an object of their missionary
activity, even where the Lutheran Synods in Queensland had been
at work for many years.
In the year 1911 the Pastors E. Darsow, A. Bode, E. Starick,
V. Appelt, and A. Muller, together with the congregations they
had won, decided to constitute the Queensland District of the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri). The new
District Synod was supported by a Church which was able to
render much financial aid and to furnish from its Seminary at


Adelaide in South Australia as many bilingual pastors as were
required, young men who put all their enthusiasm and energy into
the work. It is therefore little wonder that it has made much
progress and has now 17 pastors at work who serve about 2,600
confirmed members of their Church. Thus the Germans in Queens-
land were divided into three Lutheran Synods, the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Queensland, the Llnited German and Scandi-
navian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, and the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Australia, Queensland District (Missouri), besides con-
gregations of German Baptists and Apostles.
CHAPTER VI.
DIFFICULTY OF OBTAINING PASTORS.
For the two Synods which here interest us most (the Evangelh
cal Lutheran Synod of Queensland and the United German and
Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland), the question of
obtaining pastors was always a difficult problem, especially for the
latter of the two.
Within the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland the
necessity of securing a new pastor arose only four times during the
first fifteen years of its history to the year 1900. On only two
occasions was a pastor called from overseas and one of them, Pastor
T. Lrank, was the son of a pastor stationed in Queensland and a
member of the Synod. Pastor T. Prank had received his training
at the Seminary for Missionaries at Basle in Switzerland. All
pastors who entered the service of this Synod in the following years
until 1921 had been trained at the same institution, though they
did not all come direct from Basle to take up work in Queensland.
TLe fact that the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland, as
member of the Evangelical Lutheran General Synod of Australia,
was in fellowship with Synods in South Australia and Victoria’
was of definite help in the question of obtaining of pastors. Quite
a number of pastors who were stationed in Queensland during
those years were transferred from the Synods in the Southern
States, or were secured through their good offices and with their
support.
The United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland stood alone, and within its bounds the need for more
pastors was an almost continuous one. During the first 15 years
of its existence to the year 1900, six pastors were obtained from
overseas. With one exception these all received their training at
the Seminary for Missionaries at Hermannsburg in Hanover.
many. But about the year 1900 that institution required all its
graduates for its extensive mission fields in South Africa and India.
And when, at that time, Pastor A. Sueltmann relinquished his


charge in the parish of Bethania, the position seemed almost
hopeless.
Some years earlier, 1898, the proposal had been seriously put
forward that pastors should be trained in Queensland. The students
were to live with the pastors of the Synod in rotation. Each pastor
was to deal with a separate subject of the rheological course, and
the students were thus to acquire the necessary training. However,
a practical test of the scheme was never made because no students
ever offered to undertake the course.
In November, 1899, the Church Council of the Synod resolved
to appeal to the Director of the Seminary of the Lutheran Free
Church of Prussia, Pastor Greve of Breslau (not to be confounded
with Pastor Greve, Chairman of the Lutheran Treasury of God in
Hanover), to the Director of the Seminary for Missionaries at
Bleckmar in Hanover, Pastor F. Wolf, and to Pastor Drewes at
Hermannsburg in Hanover. The appeal did not meet with any
practical response.
Meantime the vacant parish of Bethania took matters into its
own hands and, as almost forty years earlier, it appealed to Pastor
J. C. Auricht of Tanunda, South Australia, for a pastor. Negotia'
tions took place between the two Synods involved, the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland and the
Evangelical Lutheran Immanuel Synod in Australia, and, as Pastor
L. Kaibel, a member of the latter Synod, was at the time on a
visit to the Bloomfield mission station in North Queensland, a
personal discussion was arranged with the pastors in Queensland.
This took place in June of the year 1900. The outcome of it all
was that, through the good offices of the Evangelical Lutheran
Immanuel Synod in Australia, Pastor O. Theile came to Queensland
and was inducted at Bethania in September, 1901.
A year later contact was made with the Lutheran Treasury of
God (Lutherischer Gottes Kasten) of Hanover, which promised its
help and support in connection with the building up of the
Lutheran Church in Queensland. It appeared then as though
henceforth the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod
of Queensland would find no difficulty in supplying its congrega"
tions with the pastors they required.
In the course of the past three centuries Lutherans had
emigrated into all the world, but the mother Church had never
followed them and there was, until about 80 years ago, no organised
effort to bring to them the ministrations of their Church In
Germany itself there was not one united Church there were
many Lutheran Churches. The country was politically divided into
several kingdoms and electorates and dukedoms, and each territory
had its own Church. There were altogether about jO different
regional or territorial Protestant Churches, each with its separate
organisation. Whatever was done to help the Lutherans in foreign
lands was due to the efforts of individuals or of societies here and
there. It appears that in the old kingdom of Hanover, more than


in any other part of Germany, we find appreciation of the needs
of the Lutherans beyond the seas. The connection with England
through its Royal House quite naturally turned the eyes of the
people further afield. Two hundred years ago the Hanoverians lent
their assistance to the Lutherans in North America and in South
Africa. But these efforts remained spasmodic and irregular, and
ceased altogether, until in the first half of the past century a new
start was made to organise the work of aiding the fellow-believers
in dispersion. The new organisation was given the name: Lutheran
Treasury of God (Lutherischer Gottes Kasten), and the first one
of these was established in Hanover. Even now each regional
Church had its own organisation of this kind. Only very slowly
did the movement develop, and to this day it is not an official
undertaking of the Church as such, but it has remained the effort
of societies within the Church or Churches. There was a certain
amount of co-operation between the various societies, but only
within recent years have they joined into a nation-wide society
under the name and title of Martin Luther Federation (Martin
Luther Bund). This Federation has, under the energetic leadership
o Professor Dr. Ulmer, of Erlangen, stretched its hand beyond the
boundaries of Germany. Lutheran Churches established in many
countries have become affiliated with the Martin Luther Federation
and a wonderful strengthening of the bonds of faith and hope is
taking place. The United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Aus-
tralia is also affiliated with this Martin Luther Federation. The
Lutheran Church in Queensland was an object of its help and aid
already 30 to 40 years ago.
CHAPTER VII.
STRIVING AFTER UNITY.
From the beginning of the century to the Great War continued
efforts were made to bring together the various Lutheran Churches
and Synods in Australia and to heal the breaches that separated the
various bodies from one another. The Secretary of the Lutheran
Treasury of God (Lutherischer Gottes Kasten) of Hanover, at that
time Pastor Funke, remarked in one of his letters that his organisa-
tion found it difficult to understand why these breaches should be
in existence. He advised strongly to strive after unity. As Pastor
J. C. Auricht, the President of the Evangelical Lutheran Immanuel
Synod in Australia, had done in the year 1902, his successor,
Pastor F. Leidig, in the year 1907 approached the United German
and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland with the request
that the two bodies should draw closer together. At the same time
Pastor J. H. S. Heidenreich, President of the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Australia, a.a.G. (auf alter Grundlage—on original basis)
—a small body of Lutherans in South Australia affiliated with the


Joint Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Ohio and other States of
(J.S.A, —approached the same Synod with a like request. The
great distances separating the Queensland and these South Aus-
tralian bodies, and the large financial means necessary in order
that a closer union be rendered effective and fruitful, and above all
the desire that the two bodies in South Australia should first arrive
at an understanding, led to a negative result of the negotiations.
At the Annual Convention of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod
of Queensland at Maryborough in the year 1908, it was resolved
to approach the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod
of Queensland on the question of uniting the cwo bodies; and the
last named Synod replied a year later that it would gladly meet
the former on the understanding that the proposed union should
not extend beyond the borders of Queensland. The question to be
discussed should be: Whether the two Queensland bodies con-
cerned could be united into one body; the question should not be:
Whether the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland could join up with the General Synod of Australia.
The members of the Church Councils of both Synods met in
the school hall of the St. Andreas Church at North Brisbane on
the 26th of October, 1909, and the discussion showed that there
was full unity with regard to those questions of doctrine which
were thought to be controversial. With regard to the Word of
God and its inspiration, with regard to Baptism and the Sacrament
of the Altar, with regard to the justification of the sinner by faith
alone, both parties stood by and on the confessions of the Lutheran
Church as the correct interpretation of the Word of God. Regard-
ing the future new ministers, it was agreed to call them through
the Lutheran Treasury of God (Lutherischer Gottes Kasten) in
Germany, it being understood that that body would give con-
sideration to an express wish that a candidate could be obtained
from a certain seminary or other sources. The difficulty was the
question of the membership of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Queensland with bodies outside of Queensland —with the General
Synod. The Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland could see
no reason why it should sever such connection, and the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland could not
see its way clear to join that General Synod. But further negotia-
tions were carried on, in the course of which members of the Church
Council of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod
of Queensland attended the Annual Meeting of the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Queensland on the 22nd of November, 1909,
at North Brisbane. Shortly afterwards, however, these negotiations
were broken off, mainly because of the very decided stand the
President of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod
of Queensland, Pastor J. Koehnke, took in the public press against
the introduction of the Bible into the State Schools.
At the same time discussions aiming at a closer union were
carried on between the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran


Synod of Queensland and the pastors of the Evangelical Lutheraa
Synod of Australia (Missouri) who were then stationed in Queens-
land. The pastors of both parties met repeatedly and there appeared
to be hopes of closer co-operation, when an experience —that even
now, 25 years later, seems inexplicable—cut off all further
tions. At the Pastors’ Conference preceding the 25th anniversary
of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland, which took place at Bethania in October, 1909, Pastor
E. Darsow, of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia
(Missouri), (who, because of absence from the State, had not been
able, with his fellow-pastors, to attend the earlier meetings which
had taken place) was present and friendly discussions on important
questions of doctrine and practice took place. On the previous
Sunday, the 11th October, 1909, Pastor E. Darsow, invited by
Pastor J. F. Goessling, had attended a meeting of the congregations
beyond Gatton: Deep Gully and Mt, Sylvia. Together with Pastor
Goessling, these congregations were at that time affiliated with the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland.
In the presence of Pastors Goessling and Darsow certain resolutions
were passed. No member of the Synod had an inkling of what had
taken place. All the time Pastor Goessling, being present at the
Pastors’ Conference and at the Meeting of Synod, had in his pocket
a letter declaring his resignation from the Synod, which he had
helped to found 25 years earlier —the 25th anniversary of which he
was at the moment helping to celebrate. He had with him, also,
two letters from the respective secretaries of the congregations at
Deep Gully and Mt. Sylvia, in which they announced that their
congregations had resolved to secede from the Synod. On his way
home from the jubilee celebrations Pastor Goessling posted these
letters in Brisbane and the mail delivered them a day later to the
Secretary of the Synod, which had been treated in so faithless a
manner. The congregations in question united with two
tions at Ropeley and Wongo Creek in the same district. These
latter had up to that time been served by Pastor M. Millatt, of
Hatton Vale, a member of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Queensland. On the Sunday mentioned before, these congregations
decided to combine as one parish and to call Pastor E. Darsow, of
the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri), as their
pastor.
Both the original Lutheran Synods in Queensland, the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland and the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland, at their Annual Con-
ventions in the year 1909, celebrated the 25th anniversay of their
foundation, their semi-jubilee—the former at Bethania, as men-
tioned before, the latter at North Brisbane. Each published a
small booklet in commemoration of the fact, showing the history
and development of their respective organisations. Both appeared
in the German language. For the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland, the President, Pastor J. Koehnke


iJlik J|pV
- 1 *
JNMnMHH| r^m*‘ mH "" ** mStBSSK^^
of Beenleigh, was the author of the publication, whilst the booklet
published by the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland was
compiled by Pastor C. E. Treus of Brisbane.
The United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod at that
time again experienced great difficulty in obtaining the necessary
pastors. The Lutheran Treasury of God (Lutherischer Gottes
Kasten) was not able to render the help that was needed, especially
as the appeals became ever more insistent that new pastors must be
conversant with the English language. It was decided to negotiate
with the Evangelical Lutheran Immanuel Synod in South Australia
PASTORS’ CONFERENCE.
Sitting: Pastors Chr. Seybold, J. Frank, T. Langebecker, M. Millatt.
Standing: T. Frank, C. E. Treuz, E. Hiller.
for a pastor for the vacant congregation at Mackay, in North
land. The reply was that the required help could only be rendered
if the relationship of the two Synods to each other was properly
regulated. In order to bring about an understanding, the President
of the Evangelical Lutheran Immanuel Synod of South Australia,
Pastor F. Leidig, who was accompanied by Pastor J. P. Lohe, of
Victoria, came to Queensland and met the pastors of the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland in con'
ference at Bethania on the 12th and 13th of April, 1910. The
discussions on questions of doctrine and practice led to the resohn
tion recommending to the respective two Synods that they, together,
constitute the “Evangelical Lutheran Church Federation of Aus'


tralia” (Evangelisch'Lutherischer Kirchenbund). Subsequent meet-
ings of the two Synods passed the necessary resolutions: the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland at
Gowrie Road in October, 1910, and the Evangelical Lutheran
Immanuel Synod of South Australia at Gruenberg in February,
1911. A constitution was adopted which laid down Name, Con'
fession of Faith, Object, Power, Activity and Representation of
the new Federation. Despite the great distance, reciprocal visits in
connection with Annual Conventions took place and the benefits
of the union were soon clearly apparent. From the outset the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland
reaped the greater benefit. The great problem, which had caused
no end of worry during the whole period of the 26 years of its-
existence and which had been a continued hindrance to its progress,
was solved: a source of supply of pastors was opened, and this-
fact proved of great and lasting influence for good. Pastor W.
SchmeUer was the first pastor who came to Queensland in conse'
quence of this new arrangement. He had received his theological
training at Neuendettelsau in Germany. Early in 1911 he was
stationed at Mackay, in North Queensland.
In the course of the following years four Australiambom
pastors, sons of pastors in South Australia, were sent here through
the same agency. They were the Pastors Arthur Reuther, Martin
Reuther, Ludwig Doehler, and Albert Reuther. They had received
their secondary education at the Immanuel College at Point Pass,
South Australia, of which Pastor F. Leidig was the founder and its
headmaster, and had pursued their theological studies at Neuem
dettelsau in Germany. During those years the Synod also had the
great joy of welcoming into the ranks of its ministry two sons of
the Church in Queensland, Pastor Theo Fuhlbohm, the son of a
former pastor, and Pastor H. Proeve, the son of a farmer at
Toowoomba. Both had begun their theological course at Hermanns'
burg in Germany, and completed it at the Luther Seminary at
St. Paul, in Minnesota, in the United States of America.
Pastor Leidig, the President of the Evangelical Lutheran
Immanuel Synod in South Australia, was one of the outstanding
men in the Lutheran Churches of Australia. One of the great aims
that was ever before him and towards which much of his life’s
effort was directed was the union of the several Lutheran Church
bodies in Australia. He was a Lutheran, and stood firmly on the
Lutheran confessions and principles; but he dared to believe that
the other Church bodies which designated themselves as “Lutheran”
were what their name implied, and thus he negotiated with them.
After establishing the Evangelical Lutheran Church Federation, he
invited the Evangelical Lutheran General Synod of Australia and
its three component Synods in South Australia, Victoria and
Queensland to join it. His unremitting labour towards that end
found a ready response, especially in South Australia, where the
Evangelical Lutheran Immanuel Synod a.a.G. (auf alter Grundlage—•


on original basis) showed a sincere desire for peace and union. A
meeting took place in the St. Stephen s Church at Adelaide on the
22nd and 23rd of February, 1912, at which nearly all the pastors
of the two Immanuel Synods in South Australia were present.
The Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Victoria was represented by
the Pastors Herlit* and Hiller, the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Queensland by Pastors J. Frank and M. Millatt, and the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland by
Pastors G. Heuer and O. Theile. This meeting, though it did not
bring about the desired union, certainly cleared away many mis
understandings and showed that union was not impossible. A
further conference at Murtoa, Victoria, in May, 1913, was another
step nearer the great aim, which was well worth the efforts put into
the work and the sacrifices which were necessary. At this meeting
Pastor E. Hiller, of Beenleigh, represented the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Queensland. After his return he reported very favourably
■on the discussions and resolutions. The two Synods concerned, the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland and the United German
;and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, tried to do their
part towards the desired end at a joint conference of the pastors
at Ipswich on the 29th of May, 1913. A practical consequence of
these discussions was the help which the Evangelical Lutheran
Church Federation of Australia (Evangelisch Lutherischer Kircherv
bund) afforded the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland,
when at that time its parish of Kirchheim-Marburg-Minden was
vacant and there was no immediate prospect of filling the
position. The Evangelical Lutheran Church Federation of Australia
made Pastor L. Doehler available until such time as the pastor who
had been called from Germany, Pastor Koch, arrived.
In the year 1912 the Queensland District of the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri) again approached the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland
with the request that the question of closer union and .co-operation
be discussed. Despite the earlier discouraging experience, such
discussions were entered upon; but they did not lead to any prac'
tical result and later ones, in the years 1920 and 1921, had the
same negative result. Both the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland and the Evangelical Lutheran Synod
■of Queensland were again and again subjected to a treatment by
the Queensland District of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Australia (Missouri) which certainly was not in harmony with the
■desire for a closer union it professed. In the Kingaroy District the
congregations of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran
Synod of Queensland were treated as mission areas of the Evan-
gelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland (Missouri) and their mem-
bers were welcome material for its missionaries. And the Evangeli-
cal Lutheran Synod of Queensland had to experience in the year
1920 that the parish Marburg-Minden-Fairney View was taken from
it as though the ten commandments did not exist. The respect


*
jfc... ? ■ •• ?'■? f ' f JJ
gf ; are > ->»- j : $ Jjlf
’■ Wms&£J* WJ *ff mm.} « , * •;. «r Jm-
• ffiyjr ’ '.ffiljMg-. . /|§ , -v MHE. I j|u
'«fc Jjf CI$ ~ “ jLj * ■ :^. i ' I • •' *'T
wpAsm? '-r * §||||S *!!L*
" : ' V4 -i *i'~ ' ; ■ j£i - t M ■-<*& ~ ;• *, A.
mmlh? diHr
• ■ i A-
mBrH* m fxM
and consideration due to another Church organisation were de'
plorably conspicuous by their absence.
Meanwhile the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland had
become burdened with serious strife within its own ranks. Early
in the year 1912 Pastor C. E. Treuz and his congregation at North
Brisbane affiliated with the State Church of Prussia. The moral and
financial support gained through such a step was certainly tempt"
ing, even though foreign entanglements were always dangerous.
The congregation of North Brisbane and its pastor, Pastor C. E.
Treus, now requested that the Synod approve of the step they
PASTORS’ CONFERENCE, MAY, 1914.
Sitting: P. Hoetfner, J. Koehnke, G. Heuer, C. Prenzler.
Standing: O. Theile, L. Krause, W. Poland, M. Rcuther, G. Fischer, A R.
Routher, W. Schmetzer, M. Wittig, C. Schmidt.
had taken and grant permission to any other member of its organh
sation to do likewise. The Meeting of the Synod at Hatton Vale on
the 27th October, 1912, declined to grant such permission, and the
consequence was the defection of five pastors and their parishes
from the Synod. Under the Presidency of Pastor C. E. Treu*, of
North Brisbane, these, viz.: Pastors J. Frank of Marburg, T. Frank
of Maryborough, E. Gutekunst of Phillip Street, Toowoomba, and
IVL Millatt of Hatton Vale, constituted themselves a new body: the
“Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia". This was thus the
fourth separate German Church organisation in Queensland with


the designation Lutheran. It is well to remember that this new
organisation as such was not affiliated with the State Church of
Prussia. Such was the case only with regard to the St. Andreas
Congregation of North Brisbane and with regard to the St. John’s
Congregation of Charters Towers, which latter also joined the
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia. The new body left it
•entirely to the individual pastors and congregations to apply for
the affiliation with the State Church of Prussia.
The pastors who remained loyal to the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Queensland and to the Evangelical Lutheran General
Synod of Australia protested very strongly against the step taken
by their publishing their protest in the Church paper
of their General Synod, the “Christenbote”. Their words, however,
remained without effect.
The new organisation, the Evangelical Lutheran Church of
Australasia, met for its first Convention at North Brisbane from
the 24th to the 26th of May, 1913. Pastor C. E. Treuz of North
Brisbane was appointed President, Pastor E. Gutekunst of
Toowoomba, Secretary, and Bro. O. Peters of Hatton Vale,
Treasurer. Pastor G. Schafhirt of Charters Towers was not
sent, though he attended the second Convention which met at
St. Paul’s Church, Phillip Street, Toowoomba, on the 10th and
11th of May, 1914.
CHAPTER VIII.
THE WAR PERIOD.
And then came the Great War, 1914 to 1918 ! It is within
the living memory of many how deeply and seriously the Lutheran
Church of Queensland was affected by this calamity, and how far ;
reaching was its baneful influence ! In normal times it would
seem utterly impossible that such intense hatred of inoffensive
people, of fellow-countrymen, could be shown as was the case
during those four years and after ! Lutheran was generally taken
as synonymous with German, and the members of the Lutheran
Church were treated as though they were German nationals and
therefore the natural enemies of the British and of the Australians.
Quite a large number of young men of German extraction volun-
teered for military service and fought in the trenches side by side
with their fellow-countrymen, and not a few paid the supreme
sacrifice—whilst here in Australia the members of their families
were under suspicion of disloyalty. The Lutheran Church suffered
most severely. It was treated with utmost contempt and, what hurt
most, was that so much of that contempt found its loudest expression
from the lips of ministers of the Gospel, even in the houses of
divine worship. The members of the Lutheran Church were sub-
jected to much enmity and direct opposition and persecution. In


many cases, membership with a Lutheran congregation meant
boycott and ostracism, and many, afraid of economic loss and ruin*
dissociated themselves from their Church.
The worship in Lutheran Churches, though it was carried on
in the German language, was nowhere interfered with; but the
religious instruction of the children, even when carried on in the
English language, was greatly hindered. Early in the year 1916
all Lutheran Church work received the most serious set-back. Quite
a number of Lutheran pastors were taken into custody and placed
behind the barbed wire of the internment camp. Thus the Pastors
C. E. Treuz, T. Frank, E. Gutekunst and M. Millatt (of the newly
established Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia) were im-
prisoned, also Pastor C. Seybold (of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod
of Queensland) and Pastors W. Poland, G. Fischer and T. FuhL
bohm (of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod
of Queensland), and for a short while also the aged Pastor G.
Heuer, the President of the latter Synod.
Three of those pastors were Australian-born, and not one of
them was ever informed of the reason of such treatment. Those
pastors who retained their freedom took upon themselves the extra
burden to serve the congregations that were left without their
spiritual advisers. All congregations were affected and suffered
inconvenience and loss, but all were willing to help one another
wherever possible.
The Lutherans, as such, were as loyal as all their fellow citizens
and with their prayers and their sacrifices they stood behind their
Government, even though they felt with the people whose blood
coursed through their veins, whose language was their father’s
and their mother’s tongue. Over against the slanders and scurri-
lous attacks of a hysterical press and over against the several
vandalistic attacks of the rabble on their churches —as they occurred
in Maryborough, Toowoomba and Mackay, for instance—they
remained quiet and submitted rather to injustice than to offer even
the shadow of a doubt against themselves. Altogether it was a time
of great anxiety and of much worry, and, when at last this time
had come to an end and the result could be seen, much disorganisa-
tion and many deplorable losses had to be recorded.
There was a Lutheran congregation at Charters Towers in
North Queensland which dated back to the year 1885. Some of
the German settlers had made rich finds of gold and used the newly-
acquired wealth to erect a church and a parsonage. Especially the
generosity of the members Paradies and Riedrich made it possible
that a very fine substantial church costing about £2,500 was built.
Pastor G. Heuer, of Mackay, laid the foundation stone of this St.
John’s Church on the sth of December, 1885, and in March, 1886,
the congregation secured the services of Pastor E. O. Maier, of
German Station, who, transferred to Charters Towers, opened the
new church on the 13th June, 1886, and ministered to the con-
gregation.


Pastor Maier remained with the congregation but two years,
when he followed a call to North Brisbane. Pastor M. Eberhard of
Eagleby became his successor in the year 1888. Pastor Eberhard
also left again after a comparatively short time and his successor
was Pastor who had formerly been in charge of
Perth Street, Toowoomba, and of Bundaberg. The failing which
led to the closing of his ministry at the former places also brought
about his retirement from the Charters Towers Congregation. The
congregation applied to the State Church of Prussia for a pastor
and Pastor Siegfried Krieg was sent to Charters Towers in 1894
and took charge. Unfortunately, he was taken away by an early
death in April, 1896. His successor was Pastor W. Iwan. During
his pastorate the congregation became affiliated with the State
Church of Prussia, the necessary documents being filed in the year
1897. According to regulations, every pastor remained six years
with the congregation and the authorities in Berlin appointed a
successor. In 1900 Pastor Iwan was followed by Pastor R. de Haas,
and the latter by Pastor Spmdler. When the War broke out
Pastor G. Schafhirt was in charge. Quite early during the course
of the War the congregation ceased to exist. Pastor Schafhirt was
repatriated to Germany via America. But even before he left the
trustees, afraid that their connection with a German Church might
be detrimental to them in the community in which they lived, sold
the very valuable property of the congregation for a mere trifle.
The Church of Christ is now in possession of the church, of which
it is said that it has a most beautiful peal of bells.
At Caboolture a Lutheran congregation had been in existence
since the early days of German settlement. When ministering to
the congregations at German Station and Zillmere from 1873 to
1877, Pastor A. D. Hartwig conducted services at Caboolture
regularly, and it appears that he visited the small congregation on
the occasions when he came to the coast in later years. In the
year 1879 the congregation rallied around a Mr. W. Schroeder,
who conducted reading services regularly. The records are very
meagre, but a small church was built and Pastor I. Egen, during
his pastorate at German Station and at Nundah, ministered to the
Lutherans at Caboolture for many years. In the last years before the
War Pastor C. E. Treuz of North Brisbane served the congregation.
The church was renovated and new interest was taken in its
services. The War, 1914 to 1918, put an end to it all.
In the year 1925 the home missionaries of the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri) discovered the remnants
of the former congregation and reorganised it successfully.
In no other instance was the loss so absolute and so sweeping.
But the defection of many men and women from membership in
the Lutheran Church, in which they had hitherto worshipped all
their lives, was a very serious injury indeed and caused much
heartache. Some of these Lutherans joined English Churches with
the idea that thereby they would prove their loyalty. They were at


first received with open arms. But not a few had later to make
the sad experience, that on account of their German names they
were expelled and were finally left without any Church connection
whatsoever. What a cruel experience is war, when it destroys even
that brotherhood which has its foundation in the love of the one
Father of all Which is in heaven.
During the War the Synods could not meet in Convention,
and after April, 1916, Pastors 1 Conferences were also out of the
question. These facts show how much Church work and Church
government were impeded and how difficult it was to cultivate
the fellowship in the faith. There was great joy when pastors and
members could meet again in the latter months of 1919 and in
1920, though the joy was somewhat dampened when it was realised
how great were the losses and how difficult was the position.
As a consequence of the War, the Evangelical Lutheran
Church of Australasia ceased to exist. Its President, Pastor C. E.
Treus, of North Brisbane, was among those who after the War
were deported from Australia. And the reason for its separate
existence, the affiliation with the State Church of Prussia, had passed
into the region of the impossible. It is an unfortunate
stance, that in connection with the affairs of this Church the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland lost its minute book
and its records. They were still in the hands of Pastor C. E. Treuz,
who had formerly been its Secretary. The military authorities took
possession during the War and have never returned the documents.
Pastor E. Gutekunst, of Toowoomba, and Pastor M. Millatt, ol
Ha tton Vale, rejoined the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
land.
CHAPTER IX.
UNITY ACCOMPLISHED.
The times of distress had, according to the good will of God,
a beneficial effect also. It showed to the Lutherans of Australia
that closer union was essential if they desired to retain what they
had and were, and if they wished to preserve for their children
and future generations the heritage of their fathers. As soon as
possible after the War, negotiations were reopened with the aim
of a closer union of the Lutheran Churches and the members of
of the Immanuel Synod a.a.G. (auf alter Grundlage—on original
basis) in South Australia and the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Victoria decided at Tanunda in June, 1920, that they were willing
to join the Evangelical Lutheran Church Federation of Australia.
In October of the same year a General Pastors 1 Conference took
place in Adelaide, at which the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland was represented by Pastor O. Theile.
The projected union was brought much nearer to its final fruition.
But the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland stood aloof
until May, 1921.


In February, 1921, the President General of the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of lowa and other States in America, Dr. F.
Richter, had come across to Australia. In conjunction with Pastor
O. Theile he sought to arrive at a final arrangement with the Aus'
tralian Government regarding the German Missions in New Guinea.
The arrangements projected involved, to a large degree, the Aus'
tralian Lutherans as represented by the Evangelical Lutheran Church
Federation of Australia (Evangelisch'Lutherischer Kirchenbund).
The discussions which took place showed plainly that, in order to
take over the responsibility for the Missions in New Guinea, as
well as to meet the demands of the hour within the Church in
Australia, as close a union as ever possible was necessary. There'
fore the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Victoria at its Annual
Meeting in February, 1921, proposed to the other members of the
Evangelical Lutheran Church Federation of Australia that they
should not only federate, but that they should amalgamate and form
one Lutheran Church. The South Australian members of the
Evangelical Lutheran Church Federation of Australia agreed, and
on the Bth of March, 1921, at in South Australia, the
amalgamated Synods constituted themselves as the United Evan'
gelical Lutheran Church in Australia.
At its Annual Convention at Pimpama Island on the 12th of
April of the same year the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland agreed to the steps taken at Ebenezer
in South Australia, and thus became an integral part of the newly'
formed Lutheran Church of Australia.
Further conferences had meanwhile taken place between the
pastors of the two Synods in Queensland —the United German and
Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland and the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Queensland —and there was every prospect that
they would amalgamate and would together form the Queensland
District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia.
A Meeting of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland
convened on the 21st of May, 1921, at Engelsburg, Kalbar, and the
delegates of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod
of Queensland were asked also to attend. The first united Meeting
took place on Monday the 23rd of May, 1921, in the old church
at Engelsburg, Kalbar. There were 92 pastors and delegates present,
52 from the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland and 40 from the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Queensland. At that meeting it was reported:—
(a) The Annual Convention of the United German and Scan'
dinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland which met at Pimpama
Island on the 12th April has sanctioned what was done by Pastor
O. Theile in connection with the negotiations in the Southern
States, leading to the amalgamation of the different Synods.
(b) The Convention of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Queensland, which met at Engelsburg, Kalbar, on the 21st of May,
1921, has declared itself willing to accept the proposal of the


Pastors’ Conference to unite with the United German and Scan-
dinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland.
Hereupon it was resolved “That the two Synods here repre-
sented do amalgamate and constitute together the Queensland Dis-
trict of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia”.
Pastor O. Theile was elected President; Pastor E. Hiller, Vice-
President; Pastor E. Gutekunst, Secretary; and Brother M. T.
Schneider, Treasurer. To complete the Church Council, Pastor A.
R. Reuther and the brethren F. Hofmann, W. Behrendorff and W.
Lubach were elected by the Meeting.
The amalgamation has been of utmost benefit to the Lutheran
Church in Australia, and it was of great and far-reaching influence
in Queensland, especially after years of longing for unity. After
much labour towards that goal it was as though God Himself had
removed all obstacles and had prepared the hearts and minds for
the union. This union was more a gift from His hands than a
result of human effort. To God alone be the praise.
The United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia represents
the merger of the following Church bodies which had formerly
existed separately beside one another: The Evangelical Lutheran
Immanuel Synod in Australia; the Evangelical Lutheran Immanuel
Synod a.a.G. (auf alter Grundlage—on the original basis) of South
Australia; the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Victoria; the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland;
and the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland. In the year
1926 the last separate Church body in existence in Australia (except
the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri)), the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia a.a.G. (auf alter Grund-
lage —on original basis) in South Australia the Australian
District of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Ohio in America —also
amalgamated with the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in
Australia. Since that time there are only two Lutheran Church
bodies in Australia: The United Evangelical Lutheran Church in
Australia (U.E.L.C.A.) and the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Australia (E.L.S.A.). Because of its affiliation with the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Missouri and other States of America, the latter
is generally known as the Missouri Synod.
With the whole of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in
Australia, the Queensland District of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia holds firmly to the Holy Scriptures
of the Old and New Testament as the inspired Word of God and
as the only rule and regulation for her doctrine and practice.
With the whole Evangelical Lutheran Church the Queensland
District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia
recognises and accepts as the correct and unadulterated exposition
of the Word of God and His divine Will all symbolise books of
that Church, viz., the three Ecumenical Creeds, the Unaltered
Augsburg Confession, the Apology of the Augsburg Confession,


MaW
the Smalcald Articles, the Small and Large Catechism of Luther and
the Formula of Concord.
The Queensland District of the United Evangelical Lutheran
Church in Australia rejects all attempts to introduce syncretism
and other unsound doctrinal practices, as uniting at the Lord’s
Table with such as hold false doctrines. It also declares itself
opposed to all secret societies which are anti-Christian in principle,
and only makes use of such Church and school books, manuals,
catechisms and hymn books as are in conformity with the doctrines
of the Evangelical Lutheran Church.
At the time of the amalgamation the United German and
Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland comprised 14 pastors
in active parish work, viz.: Pastors G. Heuer, J. Koehnke, P. B.
Hoefner, L. Krause, H. Wallatt, W. Poland, O. Theile, G. Fischer,
Last Presidents of their respective Synods.
Pastor G. Heuer.
Pastor E. Hiller.
A. R. Reuther, M. G. Reuther, T. Fuhlbohm, L. Doehler, A. E.
Reuther, H. Proeve; and C. Premier, an emeritus. These pastors
at that time were serving 35 congregations, three of which did not
then possess their own church buildings. The Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Queensland numbered nine pastors in active parish work,
viz.: Pastors E. Hiller, M. Millatt, I. Egen, D. Hartwig, R. Mons,
E. Gutekunst, A. Hiller, and F. Finger, and they served 22 con'
gregations, all of which had their own churches.
The officials in office at the time of the amalgamation were:
in the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland: President, Pastor G. Heuer; Secretary, Pastor O.
Theile; and Treasurer, Brother M, T. Schneider; in the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Queensland: President, Pastor E. Hiller; Secre-
tary, Pastor R. Mons; and Treasurer, Brother Bulling.


Year
1885
The United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod.
Danish Church, South Brisbane
The Evangelical
Lutheran Synod.
North Brisbane
1886
Danish Church, South Brisbane
North Brisbane
1887
Danish Church, South Brisbane
Toowoomba
1888
Danish Church, South Brisbane
Kirchheim
1889
Danish Church, South Brisbane
German Station
1890
Toowoomba, Hume Street
North Brisbane
1891
Highfields
Milbong
1892
Ipswich
Toowoomba
1893
Alberton
Marburg
1894
South Brisbane
Dugandan
1895
Bethania
Hatton Vale
1896
Highfields
Kirchheim
1897
Philadelphia
Beenleigh
1898
Rosevale
Minden
1899
Plainland
Deep Gully
1900
Pimpama Island
North Brisbane
1901
Toowoomba, Hume Street
Beenleigh
1902
Ipswich
Lapsed because of
1903
Bethania
Drought
Milbong
1904
Alberton
Toowoomba
1905
Bergen
Kirchheim
1906
German Station
Engelsburg
1907
Highfields
Dugandan
1908
Pimpama Island
Maryborough
1909
Bethania
North Brisbane
1910
Wilsonton
Milbong
1911
Plainland
Beenleigh
1912
Bethania
Hatton Vale
1913
Beenleigh “To the Cross”
Dugandan
1914
Bundaberg
1914 to 1919—lapsed
1915 to
1919
1920 ..
Lapsed on account of the War
Bethania
on account of the War
Milbong
1921
• .
Pimpama Island
• .
Engelsburg
Pastors T. Frank of Maryborough and J. Frank of Sherwood,
an emeritus, joined the Queensland District of the United Evaiv
gelical Lutheran Church in Australia at its second Convention at
Toowoomba in May, 1922.
The two Synods had existed as separate bodies for
years. The Presidents of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Queensland were successively Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister, from
1885 to 1887; Pastor E. Heiner, from 1887 to 1889; Pastor E. O.
Maier, from 1889 to 1905; Pastor T. Langebeckcr, from 1905 to
1909; Pastor J. Frank, from 1909 to 1912; and Pastor E. Hiller,
from 1912 to 1921. The successive Presidents of the United
man and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland were: Pastor
A. Sueltmann, from 1885 to 1899; Pastor E. Becker, from 1899 to
1900; Pastor G. Heuer, from 1900 to 1907; Pastor J. Koehnke,
from 1907 to 1911; and Pastor G. Heuer, again from 1911 to 1921.
During the period of their separate existence the two Synods,
the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queens"
land and the Evangelical Lutheran Synod, had convened for their
Annual Conventions as follows:


CHAPTER X.
UNITED EFFORTS.
With renewed hope and with much energy, the task of building
up the Lutheran Church in Queensland was taken in hand after the
amalgamation had been successfully accomplished and the
land District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Aus-
tralia had been founded in the year 1921. There was much intense
activity; pastors and laymen worked on many boards and committees
and commissions in order to organise the whole Church-establish'
ment and its many branches.
1. The Problem of Organisation.
The United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia and the
Queensland District required a constitution and a set of by daws; it
caused a great deal of labour on the part of the committee, of which
Pastors E. Hiller, J. Koehnke, L. Krause, R. Mons, and L. Doehler
were the members, in order to place before the next Convention of
the Synod at Toowoomba in 1922 a draft which could be discussed.
The Pastors’ Conference was asked to review this draft constitution
and place it before each congregation previous to the next Convem
tion. But the next Convention at Murgon, 1923, could not adopt
it; it appointed Pastors E. Gutekunst, R. Mons, A. R. Reuther, and
L. Krause as a committee to again revise it and to furnish an
English translation of the constitution, which hitherto had been
presented only in a German version. All congregations examined
the draft and at the Convention at Bethania, 1924, the constitution
was adopted. It was a difficult undertakingindeed to properly formm
late clauses governing the various rights and competences, duties
and obligations.
Even then the constitution of the United Evangelical Lutheran
Church in Australia (General Synod) was still before the com
gregations and before the District Synods and caused many long
and serious discussions.
It was realised in later years that the constitutions of the four
Districts should be uniform. A uniform constitution was finally
adopted at the Convention of the Synod at Dugandan in the year
1935; but the questions and motions regarding the constitution and
its interpretation come before every meeting of Synod and its bydaws
are constantly being revised and improved.
At the same time that the constitution of the United EvangelL
cal Lutheran Church in Australia and of the Queensland District
were under discussion the various boards and committees, too, were
furnished with statutes and rules governing their work.
Model rules for congregations and model trust schedules were
also prepared and the Annual Convention at Bethania, in the year
1924, resolved that the draft be distributed among the congregations.
Rules of debate also were drafted and mimeographed for the
delegates.


As the years went by the organisation was improved and the
congregations and their members learned to appreciate the fact that
good order prevailed in all matters pertaining to their Lutheran
Church.
The question of the incorporation of the Synod or the Church
had been debated ever since the plan of organising a Lutheran
Synod in Queensland was discussed in the sixties and seventies
of the past century. And after the two Lutheran Synods were
organised in the year 1885 the proposal to be registered as a body
corporate was seriously debated, at least by the United German and
Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland. The Church Council,
the Pastors 1 Conference and the congregations deliberated on the
question, but on account of a very decided opposition within the
congregations the matter was abandoned.
Since the organisation of the United Evangelical Lutheran
Church in Australia in 1921 the need for the incorporation of the
Church has become apparent with increasing force. The Finke
River Mission had been incorporated many years earlier in order
to preserve the property rights for the Lutheran Church in South
Australia, which controlled that Mission. And when the Immanuel
College and Seminary at North Adelaide were acquired and steps
were taken to put the title in order, it became evident that it would
be necessary to incorporate the institution in order to preserve the
rights of the District Synods which had furnished the purchase
price. At the Annual Convention of the Synod at Murgon in the
year 1923, the Queensland District passed the necessary resolution,
and thus helped to place the property rights in connection with
Immanuel College and Seminary on a sound basis.
But the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia as
such is not incorporated. It has no legal standing and as a body is
not recognised before law; it cannot hold property, etc. At the
Convention of General Synod at Tanunda, South Australia, in the
year 1931, the District Synods were invited to discuss proposals for
the incorporation of the Church and to pass the statutes of im
corporation. The Queensland District examined the matter
thoroughly, but after very serious consideration the congregations
could not see their way clear to support the movement. At the
Annual Convention at Pimpama Island in the year 1933 the proposal
was definitely rejected, and the desire was expressed that the matter
should not be brought forward again. The leaders of the Church,
however, are convinced that its welfare demands that it be regis-
tered as a body corporate. Such incorporation would, in a simple
and expedient manner, safeguard the property rights of the Church
and mean a great saving in connection with the preservation of such
property rights. Therefore the General Church Council placed
its proposals before the congregations and District Synods
again. Though at the Annual Convention of Goombungee
in the year 1937 the District Synod of Queensland decided
in favour of the incorporation, the opposition was so definite


***** ■ '" ‘ / ” ; ' til
wily . f|» ***♦ |||| . , || t? *%. % %*
“ -%<*«w>*s *'*^ w «- 1 ' • Pi» , ® sr.. : -; l &:r?* —
*«* . Ul - n ,.......... , i , || iif^.^^ .. - slBylr Ldl ' ST 5 IKIP 1 : Jl w : ;*> — WlMip^v'^,: . 1 ii:8
v ; " |; Jg' 4 W ■’ ”' : . 1 " M.. Irilli jfelii _
A*™f r Ilf EjSfch v -*»HPpft
• *** - x\J& . * * -* s * X^i
. * 4 v •» *l;-i.-“ : sr v • ■"* :' ' JK m k. #. '-i
l jB9fe^^^ r JBMbhkMB&i jtL JIBSHSm ■ • MBI *-.- ■>3K i|i **
...... _ >. — fm&Bk -.- * Jmr .*. JUSmm> ■■ . '• •
'* WmSsmSM K **’,\ : a-‘!
|M|| spy -.'. | ■■ * 1 JHHH| ' ., ;«T y
R £ w: P “‘“ rs A ,' Hiller > w -. Poland, O. Theile, E. Hiller, A. R. Reuther, M. Doblies, G. Heuer.
Middle Row: £. Wiencfce, T. Fuhlbohm, G. Fischer, H. Prenzler, S. Lehncr, O. Adler, F. Finger, L. Doehlcr,
3ack Row; A? E. Reuther, R. Rohde, H, Proeve, R. B. Reuther, E. Proeve, L. Krause, M. Reuther,
PASTORS’ CONFERENCE, BUNDABERG, 1925.


and the protests against the proposals so insistent, not only in
Queensland but also in the other States, that the Convention of
General Synod in the year 1937, at South Brisbane, left it in
abeyance. The individual congregations are very conservative! As
the organisation has been carried on for such a length of time
without incorporation, they argue, that such incorporation is urn
necessary. But they are also somewhat afraid that this incorporation
might interfere with their own property rights and place unsus"
pected obligations upon them.
2. The Redistribution of Work.
After the amalgamation of Synods the Queensland District of
the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia took up the
important duty of organising all work in such a manner that over"
lapping and duplication would be eliminated. As far as the Home
Mission field was concerned the aim was achieved quickly and with"
out any trouble, and the preaching centres, as well as the Synod,
•■experienced the benefit.
It was much more difficult to effect a reorganisation when long
■established congregations and parishes were concerned. Here often
the memory of past strife and antagonism and personal bonds and
connections were the deciding factor. In one instance a signal success
was achieved: when in the year, 1925, Nundah joined with Nudgee
Road (German Station) and Zillmere to form a parish. That union
bridged a gulf that had opened 30 years earlier, and to this day the
congregations concerned are happy over the result.
In the Logan District much satisfaction was felt, when, in the
year 1924, the congregations Alberton-Norwell-Pimpama Island be"
camp reunited as one parish, and called Pastor E. Wiencke. Further
efforts to effect a re-arrangement of the congregations have so far
not led to any appreciable results. The attempt to consolidate
Ipswich into a self-supporting parish by linking up with it the
congregation at Mutdapilly Reserve also did not meet with success.
And on the Darling Downs the Church Council and the Home
Mission Committee have repeatedly endeavoured to distribute the
work more evenly, but the endeavours have been in vain. The last
and | best attended conference dealing with the question took
place at Oakey in the year 1934. The problems, how to relieve the
pastor of the Hume Street parish at Toowoomba, who was over'
burdened with much and long distance travel, and how adequately
to serve the Pittsworth District, were discussed at length. Several of
these problems have remained unsolved, others, however, have
partially solved themselves.
Ever since 1890 the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran
Synod of Queensland had, through its itinerant Pastor, M. Doblies,
begun to establish congregations in the Pittsworth area, where quite
a number of German settlers had taken up land. Pastor M. Doblies
conducted services at two centres, Springside and Back Plains. In
the year 1895 a church was erected at the former place and was


dedicated by the President of the Synod, Pastor A. Sueltmann,
assisted by Pastors Mi. Doblies and Gr. Heuer. The records are very
meagre, but it appears that at Back Plains also a church was
erected.
About the year 1898 Pastor I. Egen, the itinerant pastor of the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland, came to the same dis-
trict, organised a congregation and erected a church in Pittsworth.
Pastor I. Egen served this congregation regularly every four weeks.
At the beginning of the year 1900 Pastor M. Doblies resigned
as pastor of Springside and Back Plains, and in April of that year
Pastor J. F. Eioltermann took charge. Two years later dissension
arose in the Springside Congregation and the dissatisfied group
joined the congregation at Pittsworth, served by Pasor I. Egen
A year later in September, 1903, Pastor J. F. Holtermann relin-
quished his position at Springside, but continued to serve the con-
gregation at Back Plains, where he had established himself on a
farm. Pastors of Synod then served the congregation at Springside.
During the year 1904 the congregation at Springside offered
to raise £6O stipend and approached Synod again and again for a
resident pastor. But it was impossible to obtain a pastor. Early in
the year 1905 Pastor W. Fuhlbohm, relinquishing his position at
Ipswich, moved to Springside, where he had purchased a farm for
his family. Pastor W. Fuhlbohm began to serve the congregations
at Springside and Back Plains, but after a year his failing health
forced him to desist from active work in the ministry. The congre-
gation arranged with Pastor G. Fischer, the home missionary of the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland,
who was stationed at Doctors Creek, near Haden, to come
across to Pittsworth. Though Pastor G. Fischer took charge for a
time, the long distance, and the state of the roads at a time when
pastors did not possess motor cars, proved that it was impossible to
attend to the work in the Pittsworth area from Doctors Creek,
In the year 1909 Pastor I. Egen was serving both the Pitts-
worth and the Springside Congregations. The Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Queensland shortly afterwards entrusted the work to-
Pastor M. Doblies, who, living at Rosewood and Rosevale, served
the congregations at Rosevale and Pittsworth until the year 1926.
Meanwhile the home missionaries of the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Australia (Missouri) came into this district and it was but.
natural that they should find acceptance.
For too long a time did the district around Pittsworth have to-
suffer, because the lack of men and means made it impossible to>
work it as intensively and effectually as was necessary. At the
Annual Convention at Elatton Vale in the year 1927 the President
of Synod reported that the work in the Pittsworth District had come
to an end.
Three years later the congregation at Pittsworth again applied
to Synod that it be received into membership and that services be
arranged for it. Pastor E. Gutekunst, of Toowoomba, did all he


could to help the small congregation, which was embodied in the
Hume Street parish, Pastor H. Rogge serving it for several years.
But finally, at the Annual Convention of the Synod at Dugandan,
1935, the President had to report that the congregation at Pitts-
worth had seceded from the Synod.
It is sad to reflect that, after 45 years, the Queensland District
of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia has lost
contact with the Pittsworth District. Even though there was much
local strife to contend with, and even though circumstances were
exceptionally unfavourable, the Synods which controlled the work
cannot quite evade responsibility for the development which took
place.
3. The Problem of Consolidation.
In the first years after the amalgamation of the two Synods, the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland
and the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland, the President
of the Queensland District of the United Evangelical Lutheran
Church in Australia, Pastor E. Hiller, of Beenleigh, often found his
task very difficult —the task of sailing the ship of the Church
through the troubled waters of that time. Within the District Synod
there were still many misunderstandings that had to be cleared up,
prejudices that had to be surmounted, antipathies that had to be
overcome. Every little while mutual reproach of non-Lutheran
opinions and practices was given voice to and persons and actions
were criticised and judged. Especially was that the case in the year
1924, when questions concerning Confession and Absolution led to
very sharp disputes, which were a real danger to the newly-won
unity. But under the guidance of the President, and above all, with
the gracious help of the Lord of the Church, mutual understanding
and doctrinal unity were achieved.
The relationship of the Queensland District to the sister-
Distncts, to the General Synod, to its officials and boards, also caused
much difficulty. The whole large organisation, with its many
branches and divisions, did not at once operate smoothly and evenly.
It required time until every unit was settled and fitted into its set
of duties and regulations, and until all friction could be overcome.
The Queensland District of the United Evangelical Lutheran
Church in Australia will always gratefully remember that its Presi-
dent during those years, Pastor E. Hiller, showed so much forbear-
ance and patience, often surrendering his own opinions and desires
in order to serve the Church at large. He willingly sacrificed his
time and labour, his comfort and leisure to the tasks set him by the
Synod that had appointed him as its leader. He was often sub-
jected to criticism —it could hardly be otherwise under the circum-
stances —but such burden of leadership he endured without
complaint. He would not permit himself to deviate from the aim
which had been set: to preserve the newly-won unity. The Church
Council supported him loyally, and from year to year mutual trust
and confidence gained the ascendancy, and the pastors and congre-


gations were ever more closely bound and knitted together into a
uniform and homogeneous organisation.
A great impediment in the way of progress and healthy
development during the first years after the merger was the difficulty
of obtaining the necessary bilingual pastors —pastors able to use both
the German and the English language with equal facility.
The United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia had
transferred its Immanuel College—which had been situated at Point
Pass, South Australia, for 25 years—to North Adelaide. It had also
transferred to North Adelaide the Theological Seminary, which had
been established as the Wartburg Seminary at Tanunda, South
Australia. Both were established in the block of buildings formerly
known as the Angas College. In this Immanuel College and
Seminary the young men of the Lutheran Church were given the
opportunity to acquire a secondary education and a theological
training.
The Lutheran Church of Australia had—and still has—a large
number of faithful, devoted pastors, who came from Germany. They
left their Fatherland and their home Church with very little hope
of ever seeing them again, and sacrificed their all for the welfare
of the Lutheran Church of Australia. Most of them have thoroughly
accommodated themselves to their surroundings and the Lutheran
Church in Australia owes them a debt of gratitude. They have laid
a foundation on which a new generation may safely erect an ever-
growing organisation.
It had become quite evident, however, even before the War,
that the Lutheran Church of Australia could only then continue to
prosper, if her own sons came forward willing to take upon them-
selves the duties and the burdens of the ministry. Immediately after
the War the hearts and minds of the Australian-born members of
the Lutheran Church were still trembling from the experiences of
the past years; they were still resenting the unjust suspicion which
was attached to their German names. The spirit of an Australian
nationalism was beginning to make itself felt, and it appeared as if
only Australians could be pastors for the Australians. Since then,
however, better conditions prevailed. German-born and Australian-
born pastors work side by side seeking with great single-mindedness
but one object: the welfare of the Lutheran Church in Australia;
and the members have rallied around their pastors and with wonder-
ful zeal have joined in the work.
Still, the Lutheran Church in Australia now required bilingual
pastors, fully conversant with the German and the English lan-
guages. In Queensland that need was especially urgent, and the
first graduates from the Immanuel Seminary at North Adelaide
could not be expected before the year 1925. Fortunately there were
available young men, Australians, who had proceeded to Germany
prior to the outbreak of the War, for the purpose of acquiring their
theological training. Six ot them returned to Australia after the
War had ended. Two of these, Pastors F. Finger (1920) and FL


Prender (1923), came to Queensland. Other young men, graduates
of the Immanuel College at Point Pass, South Australia, went to
America immediately after the War and sought their theological
training at the Wartburg Seminary at Dubuque, lowa. Three of
these took charge of parishes in Queensland: Pastors R. B. Reuther
(1923), E. Wiencke (1924), and O. Adler (1925). At that time
the travelling expenses of pastors from overseas were exceptionally
high. But as these were the last Australians who were trained over'
seas, this burden soon was eased, and as pastors graduated from the
Immanuel Seminary at North Adelaide the need was gradually
overcome. Both the individual congregations and the Lutheran
Church at large have experienced the great benefit of training in
Australia the young men offering for the ministry.
Some pastors transferred to Queensland from the Southern
Districts of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia.
All of them were Australiamborn. Pastors R. Rohde (1923); G.
Dohler (1929); F. Lienert (1936). But the greatest addition to the
number of pastors since the time of the merger came from the
Immanuel Seminary in North Adelaide. Its graduates were appoim
ted to Queensland: M. Lohe (1925); H. Mmke (1928); H. Schmidt
(1928); H. Rogge (1930); A. Simpfendoerfer (1932); G. Vent;
<1934); A. Schubert (1936); J. StoU (1936). Besides these, Pastor
J. M. Larsen, a Danish pastor, accepted a charge in the year 1935.
Whatever measure of English was introduced during the years
after the merger concerned in the first instance the growing genera'
tion. A great proportion of the adults of that time were German
and preferred the German language in their churches. Thus every'
where German and English services had to be conducted side by
side. At the Annual Conventions of Synod German was the official
language. The delegates were in the majority older members of
the congregations and German was their mother tongue.
As time went on and the younger generation grew up more
English services had to be introduced in the congregations, and
gradually younger men appeared as delegates at the Annual Con'
ventions. Though they understood the German language they could
not express themselves fluently, except in English. It became neces'
sary that all reports of committees and officials had to be presented
in the two languages, German and English. The minutes also, and
the extracts from these minutes which were printed and distributed
among the congregations, appeared in both languages. At the
Annual Convention in the year 1929 this practice was officially
confirmed. Not long afterwards, however, another change took
place. Throughout the District the congregations one after another
abandoned the German services. It happened almost imperceptibly,
and almost unnoticed English became the only language used at
the Annual Conventions of the Synod. All reports are presented in
the English language only and at Conventions seldom a word of
German is heard.
The members of the ministry of the United Evangelical


I I I I I I I J
* , s ''*i.
rr\
0\
rH
CJ
<u
M
C
3
Sj
£
o
o
a
<
u
J
w
D
"d
o
c
x
c/ 3
4-»
# u
# C
</>
s
"0
c
-2
"c/ 5
c
0)
a>
3
a
M-h
o
V)
a»
*->
TO
bJ3
Q
T3
3
TO
03
U
O
+->
to
TO
a.


Lutheran Church in Australia have come from different countries;
they have received their theological training at different seminaries
.and thus different schools of theological thought are in existence
side by side. They are able to supplement one another in really
fruitful manner. Now and again however during past years, the
differences also led to argument and even to friction, especially when
the personal factor was permitted to dominate the discussion. In the
year 1928 discussions arose regarding the value of the confessions
and their relationship to the Word of God. The question was
debated whether uniform forms of service were necessary and how
much importance should be placed on ceremonies and formalities.
The fear was expressed that the United Evangelical Lutheran
Church in Australia might deny the Spirit and lose itself in rigid
formalism.
Such were the conditions when Dr. Carl Schneider —who was
;sent to Australia by the Gustave Adolph Society in Germany, an
organisation which has for its object the care of German Protestants
in the dispersion—came to Australia. Dr. Carl Schneider came here
with the intention of bringing the Lutheran Church in Australia
into closer fellowship with the Church in Germany. The learned
professor found favour with some of the pastors of the United
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia and his lectures and
addresses were really very helpful. He found little encouragement,
however, regarding the real object of his visit. After his return to
Germany he published his observations in Australia in a booklet
entitled “With the German Lutherans in Australia 1 ’ (“Bei den
deutschen Lutheranern in Australien”). The booklet gives the
impression, that Dr. Carl Schneider was giving utterance to his
disappointment at having failed in the object of his visit to Aus'
tralia. He disclosed what he had heard in confidence, and generalised
the trivial observations he had made. He gave a distorted picture of
Church conditions in Australia, especially in the circles of the
United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia. Dr. C. Schneider
asserted that a large number of the pastors were cultivating a pedan-
tic, fossilised theology, and were trying to dominate the few of the
fellow pastors who were fostering a progressive theology, a theology
which, though fully positive, at the same time kept pace with the
modern development of thought. These latter pastors, Dr. C.
Schneider held, were more truly German, whilst the former were
drifting away from present-day German theology and German trend
of thinking. He told his readers that he had observed a distinct
American influence, and as a result he feared the Lutheran Church
in Australia was becoming Americanised. It did not appear quite
clearly wherein the danger of this Americanisation really consisted;
hut his greatest concern was that the process of becoming anglicised
would rob the Lutheran Church in Australia of the opportunity of
partaking of the progress made in German theology. In this last
observation there is certainly some truth and the Lutheran Church
in Australia would do well to keep it in mind.


The biassed and one-sided attitude, however, which Dr. C.
Schneider had adopted here in Australia, engendered a certain
amount of distrust among the pastors and members of the United
hvangelical Lutheran Church in Australia. And when the above'
mentioned booklet reached Australia the controversy which had
arisen prior to the professor’s visit to Australia broke out again. But
meanwhile men had become much more reasonable and the emphasis
w ch Dr. C. Schneider placed upon the German language over
against the English opened the eyes of all: the author was concerned
not so much with the Lutheran Church as with the German cultural
heritage.
The whole controversy, which for the time being caused some
concern, has led the Lutheran Church of Australia to realise anew
t e value of the wisdom laid down in her confessional writings:
Unto the true unity of the Church, it is sufficient to agree con'
cerning the doctrine of the Gospel and the administration of the
Sacraments. Nor is it necessary that human traditions, rites, or
ceremonies instituted by men should be alike everywhere” (AugS'
burg Confession, Art VIII) “We believe that the true unity of the
Church is not injured by dissimilar rites, instituted by men.
Although it is pleasing to us that, for the sake of unity and good
order, universal rites be observed”. (Apology Chap. IV 33 ) “We
believe, teach and confess, that the Church of God of every place
and every time has the power, according to its circumstances, to
change such ceremonies, in such manner as may be most useful and
edifying to the Church of God”. (Formula of Concord I Chap
X. 4.) r
Especially in Queensland had the Lutheran Church learned
that the English language was an adequate medium for expressing the
Lutheran teaching and for the continuation of her work. Not in'
frequently has it been stated that the introduction of the English
language would lead to a shallow'minded and superficial Christian
life. The danger of becoming superficial certainly does exist at the
present time; but it is not caused by the use of the English language,
it lurks in the alLpermeating materialism of the age. Only a
restricted vision seeing the busy, bustling organisations of the
Lutheran Church at work could brand such £eal as Americanism.
The Lutheran Church has great tasks before her and she has set her
hands to many and varied activities. It is necessary that she bestir
herself and make every effort to hold that which is hers tO'day and
to gain her objectives. The Lutheran Church is not an empty'
minded busybody, she is the Master’s handmaiden, intent on fulfil'
ling His wishes. The Lutheran Church is always confronted with
dangers which she must guard against. But the Lutheran Church
knows herself to be in the hands of her Lord and trusts that He
will grant her the unity of the Spirit, the unity of purpose and the
unity of hope. In firm faith the Lutheran Church clings to the
Word of God and teaches this Word alone according to the con'
fessions of the fathers and seeks ever new strength in the Sacra'
ments, which Christ has left to her.


One other fact has become clear to the Lutheran Church of
Australia, and the aforementioned controversy emphasised that:
it cannot remain in isolation! The Lutheran Church is not an
indigenous plant of Australia, she has been transplanted to tins
country from Germany. In Germany is her fountain-head, there
lie the roots of her strength. During the past one hundred years
streams of blessing have passed from that fountain-head into tlu,
Lutheran Church in Australia. The channels which carried these
blessings were partially destroyed during the War. They must be
opened up again. These channels may take new shapes, the mode ot
conveyance of the blessings may be altered, but the connection there
must be, and it must be cultivated.
The Lutheran Church in Australia attempts to cultivate this
connection by her affiliation with the Martin Luther Federation
(Martin Luther Bund), an organisation in Germany with a world-
wide membership, having as its object the of the bonds
of unity amongst the Lutherans throughout the world. Constant
inter-communion of thought and mutual help, where such is neces
sary, are the means used to strengthen those bonds of unity.
A like objective actuates the Lutheran World Convention with
which the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia is also
affiliated. Its held is wider. It embraces all Lutheran Churches
and organisations throughout the world. Only the Synodical Con-
ference, which comprises the Missouri Synod of America and all its
branches —one of which is the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Australia —unfortunately stands aloof. An American Lutheran, Dr.
Morehead, was instrumental in the foundation of the Lutheran
World Convention, and he was its first President. His successor,
the second President, is a German, Dr. A. Marahrens, Bishop of
Hanover. This organisation watches over the interests of the
Lutheran Church wherever she may be and directs help and support
to every corner of the globe where necessary; it strengthens the
bonds of unity wherever possible and it certainly has raised the
influence and credit of the Lutheran Church in the world.
At the Triennial Convention of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia at Horsham in Victoria in the year
1934, the affiliation with the two afore-mentioned organisations was
tentatively decided upon; and the following District Conventions in
the year 1935 confirmed the decision. The question of the proposed
affiliations created some misgiving in the minds of many. They
were doubtful about the wisdom of any overseas connections; but
at the Annual Convention of the Queensland District at Dugandan
in the year 1935 a great majority voted for it.
At the General Synod at South Brisbane in the year 1937
cabled greetings were received from the Executive Committee of
the Lutheran World Convention, which was just then in session at
Amsterdam, in Holland. Its report makes it clear how rapidly, in
recent years, the idea of world-wide Lutheranism has spread around
the globe. And the Lutheran Church in Australia will certainly


experience the benefit of the membership in the Lutheran World
Convention.
4. The Supply of Lutheran Literature.
Ever since Lutheran congregations were organised in Queens-
land the question of a regular supply of literature was a burning one.
German Bibles were required, hymn books, books of devotion and
of sermons, catechisms, books of Bible stories, primers, and readers
were necessary. As soon as the two Synods had been founded in
1885 efforts were made to organise the importation of such litera-
ture. Pastor J. Koehnke, of the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland, formed a syndicate as the beginning
of a Synodical Book Concern; and he took upon himself the duties
of book-steward. When Missionary Claussen, on account of his
impaired health, was forced to leave the mission service, he took
charge of the Book Concern and, after his early demise, the busi-
ness was handed to his widow for the purpose of helping her in
the struggle to keep herself and her children. In later years this
business passed into the hands of Mr. K. Zinn, at Ipswich. The
office of the German newspaper in Brisbane also imported books
and shortly before the War a German commission agent in Brisbane,
Mr. Nieth, who was at the same time secretary at the German Con-
sulate, imported larger stocks of German books.
During the War-period and immediately after, the difficulty of
obtaining Lutheran literature in either the German or the English
language was very great indeed. The importation of German books
was altogether prohibited, even Bibles were not permitted to be
brought into the country if they were German, and English books
which showed evidence that any part of them was translated from
the German fell under the same ban. Pastor A. R. Reuther, of
Highfields, was appointed book-steward for the United German and
Scandinavian Synod of Queensland, and Pastor R. Mons, of Mil-
bong, acted in like manner for the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Queensland.
The first Convention of the Queensland District of the United
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia, in May, 1921, at Kalbar,
appointed Pastors A. Hiller, R. Monz, A. R. Reuther, T. Fuhlbohm,
and F. Finger as a Book Committee. Its duty was to procure, by
purchase or by importation or by publication, the literature which
was so urgently required. The Book Depot, as a business, was con-
ducted by the Pastors 1 Conference and Pastor A Hiller was the book-
steward. The Book Committee did not find it easy to meet the
demands made on it for books; but slowly conditions improved and
at the Annual Convention of Synod in the year 1926, the Book
Committee was reduced to three members: Pastors A. Hiller. F.
Finger, and O. Adler, Pastor F. Finger being the book-steward.
In the year 1923 Pastors G. Heuer, E. Gutekunst, and T. Fuhl-
bohm, of Toowoomba, were appointed as a committee to publish
a Christian Book Almanac” along the -lines of the German


almanacs that had regularly been issued prior to the War. The
almanac was very favourably received in the congregations when
it appeared. After two years it was combined with the almanac
published by the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia,
at Tanunda, in South Australia, a special edition for Queensland
being prepared annually.
The General Convention of the Lutheran Church at Walla
Walla, 1928. resolved that the Book Depots in the various Districts
be acquired and conducted as General Synod undertakings, with
the head office at Adelaide. The Book Depot in Queensland was to
be a branch of the General Synod Book Depot at Adelaide. This
was effected in the year 1932, when the Pastors 1 Conference of the
Queensland District handed its interests over to the General Book
Depot Board. Pastor F. Finger was retained as book-steward, and
Pastors O. Adler and O. Theile were appointed as auditors.
For the purpose of providing the literature which had to be
published in Australia, General Synod had, at its first Convention at
in South Australia, in the year 1921, appointed a Board
of Publications; and at its second Convention at Melbourne in the
year 1922 it named Pastor A. Hiller, of Boonah, as the representa-
tive of the Queensland District on that Board.
For many years prior to the War there was in use throughout
Australia a Bible History (book of Bible stories), which was issued
by a publishing house at Calw in Wuerttemberg, Germany. The
importation of this book was prohibited by the Government. Re'
printing it in Australia was permitted only on the condition that
an English version of the book was published simultaneously.
Pastors of the Queensland District, especially Pastor R. Mons,
furnished the English translation of the book. An exposition of
Luther's Small Catechism, also, was prepared for publication and
the pastors of the Queensland District reviewed the manuscript and
had the book printed at Brisbane.
The Board of Publications worked very earnestly to solve the
problem of providing a uniform Church Book and Liturgy, both in
the German and in the English languages. After much deliberation it
authorised the various books in use at that time, but recommended
that the Church adopt the German Church Book and Liturgy
published by the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of lowa, in America,
and the English “Liturgy and Agenda 11 , published by the Evan'
gelical Lutheran Missouri Synod, in America, as the official Church
Books of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia.
When the General Convention in the year 1928, which met at
Walla Walla, New South Wales, adopted that recommendation,
the General Synod had advanced an appreciable step forward on
the road to greater uniformity and order.
At that time a School Hymnal was published. Pastors E.
Wiencke, A. E. Reuther, and L. Doehler, of Queensland, assisted
in the preparation of the manuscript.
The General Synod, at its Convention at Walla Walla, New
South Wales, in the year 1928, re-organised the Board of Publica-


tions and the Queensland District was now represented on the
Board by its President, at that time Pastor A. R. Reuther, of High-
fields.
Another re-organisation took place at the Convention of the
General Synod at Tanunda, South Australia, in the year 1931, when
Pastors A. E. Reuther and E. Wiencke were appointed to represent
the Queensland District on the Board of Publications. They ren-
dered much service in connection with a thorough revision of the
exposition of Luther’s Small Catechism, when it was recast for the
second edition. Pastors A. R. Reuther and L. Doehler collaborated
in this work.
Apparently the arrangement decided upon at Tanunda proved
rather cumbersome, therefore no members living beyond South
Australia were elected to the Board of Publications when General
Synod convened at Horsham, Victoria, in the year 1934. The
Queensland District was encouraged to appoint its own committee
and to instruct it to safeguard the interests of the District in con-
nection with publication matters. Acting upon this advice the Annual
Convention of the Queensland District in the year 1935 appointed
Pastors E. Wiencke, G. Dohler, and O. Theile as Publication
Committee. Since then it has rendered valuable service, especially
in connection with the preparation of the manuscript for the new
Bible History, which was published in 1937. Pastor G. Dohler also :
prepared the first manuscript for the Funeral Hymns, which were
published in 1936. In the same year the committee assisted in
preparing the third edition of the exposition of Luther s Small
Catechism. When Pastor E. Wiencke left the Queensland District,
Pastor M. Lohe was appointed to the committee. At the last
Convention of the General Synod at South Brisbane in August,
1937, the Publication Committee of the Queensland District was
officially recognised as an Auxiliary of the Board of Publications of
the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia.
Previous to the Great War the Lutheran Church in Australia
published periodicals which appeared in the German language only.
Towards the end of the year 1917 the military authorities of the
Commonwealth of Australia prohibited the further publication of
such German Church papers. Thus the "Kirchen —und Missions-
Seitung”, which had been published regularly for 54 years, and the
“Christenbote”, which was about 5 years older, ceased to exist.
But in January, 1918, they re-appeared in the English language, the
former as ‘'Church and Mission News”, the latter as ‘The Pilgrim”.
With the amalgamation of the Synods and the founding of the
United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia the two Church
papers were combined into one, which appeared as the "Lutheran
Herald”. Various negotiations were necessary before the first issue
could be distributed. The "Church and Mission News” was the
private property of the Auricht family at Tanunda, South Australia,
and its claims had to be adjusted, whilst the registration of the new
paper was effected only after lengthy negotiations with the Federal
Government. On the Ist of July, 1921, the new paper Lutheran


Herald” was issued, and it has appeared regularly ever since. For
seven years Pastor W. Basedow, of Adelaide, was its editor, and
since the year 1928 Pastor J. J. StoU, the General President of the
Church, has filled that position.
Pastor A. E. Reuther, of Murgon, was appointed representative
of the “Lutheran Herald” in Queensland, and was at the same time
the business agent for the paper. In 1923 he reported to the Ajinual
Convention of the Queensland District that the paper had 262
subscribers in Queensland.
At the end of the year 1924 the Federal Government at last
gave permission to again publish German periodicals in Australia,
and the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia, in 1925,
began to issue a German Church-paper “Kirchenblatt”. Since 1926
this paper has had about 70 subscribers in Queensland.
Repeatedly efforts were made to gain more subscribers for the
“Lutheran Herald” and the number was considerably increased. It
was, however, still not satisfactory when the number of the members
of the Church in Queensland was taken into consideration. The
proposal was therefore put forward that the Queensland District
publish its own Church-paper. The question was thoroughly in-
vestigated during the year 1927, but in deference to the express wish
of the General Synod at Walla Walla, in New South Wales, in the
year 1928, the matter was allowed to drop.
A paper like the “Lutheran Herald” is almost indispensable for
the Lutheran. It keeps him in close touch with his Church, with
her history and development, with her teaching and her activities.
It tells him of the joys and of the sorrows, of the successes and of the
failures of his fellow-Lutherans throughout Australia and beyond
the seas. If read regularly and attentively the Church-paper will be
a source of continued blessing to the heart and to the home.
5. The Relations with the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia,
(Missouri).
In Queensland, as well as in the other States of the Common-
wealth, there are still two Lutheran Church bodies. Beside the
United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia there is the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia. Because of its close
relationship to the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Missouri and
other States in America, the latter is generally known as the
“Missouri Synod”. Both these bodies claim to be Lutheran, and,
according to their constitutions, they are Lutheran.
Again and again the lay-people of both these Churches raise
the question : Why the separation, why not unity? In Queensland
such questions are very pertinent, especially when raised by the
members of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia. The
great majority of these members were formerly, either individually
or with their congregations, members of the one or the other
of the Synods in Queensland, which now are amalgamated in
the Queensland District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church
in Australia They were baptised and confirmed in these Synods and


had for twenty-five, thirty and thirty-five years continued in mem-
bership of these Synods. Their relatives and their friends are still
members of the Church, with which they themselves were formerly
affiliated. What has separated them? It is not difference in faith
which divides them now! In no case did a congregation sever its
connection, either with the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queens-
land or with the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod
of Queensland, because of errors in doctrine or because of dis-
satisfaction with the practice! When the personal factor did not
decide the issue, the reason for the change of allegiance was simply
the desire for a pastor who could also use the English language.
This desire the Synods mentioned above were not able to fulfil so
readily, because they had not previously trained pastors in Australia,
as the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia had done.
When such congregations, which desired bi-lingual pastors,
applied to the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri),
they were received as Lutheran congregations. But when they
raised the question ; Why the difference? Why not unity?—they
learned that they had left an errant Church and had now joined the
inerrant one! In the Synod they had recently joined, these
Lutherans found the same Bible, the same Catechism, the same Hymn
Book: furthermore, every Sunday they confessed the same Creed;
Holy Communion was distributed in just the same form —with just
the same words and faith; they listened to sermons which invariably
did not differ from those they heard previously for twenty-five years
and longer. Yet, when they inquire : Why the difference? —they
learn that the pastors of their former Synods do not accept the
Bible as the inspired Word of God, that those pastors are preaching
erroneous doctrine!
Because of the strong desire of the lay-people for unity, the
Secretary of the Queensland District of the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod (Missouri), Pastor J. F. Noack, in the year 1924 approached
the President of the Queensland District of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia, Pastor E. Hiller, with the request that
discussions be opened to bring about a union of the two bodies.
Although the experiences of the past did not raise much hope of
success, the past was overlooked and was not permitted to obstruct
a good work. Several meetings took place, but they led no further.
And with sincere regret did the Annual Convention of the Queens-
land District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Aus-
tralia at Pimpama Island, in the year 1926, learn that the negotiations
had not led to any appreciable result.
Then followed an experience of which the Lutherans of
Queensland feel ashamed whenever it is mentioned. A pure l y
domestic dissension in the St. Andreas Congregation at North Bris-
bane, in the latter months of 1927, was used by the dissenting
party to approach the pastor of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Australia (Missouri), who was serving a small congregation at
Brisbane, with a request also to minister to the members of this
party. The dissenting party forcibly took possession of the church


and the pastor of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia
(Missouri) followed and conducted services, without having
previously approached the officials of the congregation or of the
Synod, Besides mentioning the fact that a large and very valuable
property was involved, it is not necessary to relate here all the
particulars of the dispute, in which even the General Presidents of
both Church organisations intervened, and which finally ended in
the Supreme Court of Queensland. The St. Andreas Congregation
of North Brisbane retained its property!
The experience threw a new and glaring light on the attitude
which the pastors of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia
(Missouri) take up over against the United Evangelical Lutheran
Church in Australia. The latter is non-existent when the interests of
the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia come into question!
This Synod will not recognise any comity of Churches.
Despite this bitter experience the Church Council of the
Queensland District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in
Australia once more entered into negotiations, in the year 1933.
The lay-members of the Queensland District of the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri) brought much pressure to
bear on their pastors, and demanded that representatives of the laity
be present at the discussions. The request for a meeting was acceded
to, and it took place in January, 1934. The discussions led to no
practical result and were not continued.
As long as the ministry of tbe Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Australia (Missouri) is actuated by the spirit, which it has shown
when dealing with the members mid the congregations of the United
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia and which it has revealed
in the course of the discussions mentioned above, it is quite evident
that these negotiations will not lead anywhere. The very fact, that
the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri) declines to
begin such discussions with united prayer, is, in itself, a judgment
passed on the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia.
The latter is not recognised as an equal, not as a Lutheran Church,
but as a Church given to false and erroneous doctrine. The discus-
sions, therefore, are not between two bodies seeking a common basis
of union. Rather the one body (the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Australia, Missouri) desires to convince the other body (the United
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia) of its errant ways, and
to lead the wayward child back to the father’s home. Actually the
aim is not union of two bodies on a common basis. The aim of the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri) is to absorb the
opposing body, the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Aus-
tralia, into its own organisation, which, for itself, will not admit
even the possibility of any aberration in doctrine or in practice.
The experience which the United Evangelical Lutheran Church
in Australia is passing through in its relationship to the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri), is not singular or unique.
All branches of the Missouri Synod mete out like treatment to any
Church organisation with which they come into contact. In the


United States, in Canada, in Brazil, in Germany, even in London the
same intolerance is being complained of. And the International Mis-
sionary Council knows from bitter experience, that there is, beside
the Evangelical Lutheran Missouri Synod, no other Protestant
Church body on the mission-fields of the world, that so resolutely
refuses to recognise the comity of Missions which is customary.
Missions in China, in India and on the West Coast of Africa have to
suffer thereby.
6. The General Synod Conventions in Queensland.
Since the amalgamation of the Synods and since the foundation
of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia in the year
1921, Lutherans of Queensland have seen much evidence of the
beneficial effects of the wider organisation of which they form a
part. But in the year 1925, they" were for the first time brought
into personal contact with the fellow-Lutherans of the other Dis-
tricts of the Church. In May of that year the General Synod
convened at Beenleigh and pastors and delegates from all the States
were present. It was a unique experience, which brought home to
the Lutherans in Queensland the fact that they were part of a great
body of brethren in the faith.
At this Convention in Queensland, the first President-General
of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia, Pastor
J. P. Lohe —who was at the same time the Director of the Im-
manuel College and Seminary at North Adelaide-pointed out that
it was almost impossible to combine the office of the President-
General with the duties of the Director of the College and
Seminary. Reluctantly the General Synod relieved Pastor J. P. Lohe
of the former duties and elected as President-General Pastor J. J.
StoU ; who was pastor at Light Pass and District President in
South Australia. He has held the position ever since. It soon
became evident, however, that the duties of President-General
demanded more time and strength than a man in charge of a parish
could afford. The President-General was, therefore, in the year
1929, relieved of his parish duties, and his whole time is now
devoted to his office as President' General, which includes the edit-
ing of the Church papers. He resides at North Adelaide, South
Australia. Periodically he visits the Queensland District of the
United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia, and such visits
do much to strengthen the bonds of unity and to keep alive before
the eyes of the members of the Church the vision of the greater
Synodical undertakings. The activities of the Church at large and
the responsibility for them are brought closer and a wider field
is opened up —far beyond the boundaries of the District or the
State, even beyond Australia —for the President-General does not
fail to keep the Church in touch with world-wide Lutheranism.
In August, 1937, the General Synod again convened in Queens-
land, this time in the Nazareth Church at South Brisbane.
Great changes had taken place since the previous Convention in
the year 1925. The United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Aus-


*, / JPBliiiX \ mW ■0'~- %
JB BT «- «? ML : *•«• w
1 *wi-ii .i , fflmJTSm *®Pfc mmm M&*:WmSm H- fe ' S Jt . • :1 - Mi • JM^fl- :
i>Aal S's„:> .m&m*: mm ABLjJSBMt- Vn flHl |Kb| JK . . * %w* JSSt f*w• \
’ ll*:iliiil**t *• JMMr * «■ UMI .* * «& iMm,'' 1&S& "" JM9-'-1&BB ”flK?iflH
mmm mm '~JHi IBiL isSP*. IH**JP1
-. lilyr s3BLjt^^:.%). JMR Mi JpKmK-~ ’’ .^: ; i
' «&'' Mbe IHPA ; : ▼ - &*& '. .* ? ; :^»wr ! W--
&y sMBy '‘BSpp- EtM " Tjayi! fx- S§| r ->;sS^|
r *t v - p%x|y*w , .
''iHPm ' : vjgi-- •' ' >' • jg a ” ~ -■■'$ ’* '».■ ° ' '■>
v ' — ■-- f- ■■ mwanimnnniinii ,.^....-~*sa& .- .- ---MtYtywMrn.rii.ru... '"nr)j|)fii^Trr~tT-fnoooooon]Durnti-rmi-~ 11 ■ ■ ■ i,tfff»Wi»uMit)
,. ■ .•■/••' , «!***■/■ ■-■'•■•'
<$>■ - X - -< ; - , .. ■ .>x. ■ , ■ - x -
•■ •• * ., ■>:.. ■• '■' •:< -
Pastors’ Conference, General Synod, U.E.L.C.A., South Brisbane, 1937,


tralia had become consolidated. Firmly based on the Word of God
and on the Lutheran confessional writings, it had extended its
boundaries, had gained in numbers, and had won the confidence,
esteem and love of its members. It had from 1930 to 1934 passed
through the anxious time of economic depression in common with
all Churches, not only in Australia, but also throughout the world.
In comparison the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia
had suffered less than others, and in Queensland the effects of the
depression were not quite so great as in the other States Perhaps
some of the members complained more loudly than was justified,
but on the whole they were willing and ready to support the
activities of their Church. In August, 1937, however, conditions
were greatly improved and the Convention was a time of much re-
joicing.
One other aspect of Lutheran Church life had experienced a
great change. The Lutheran Church was no longer an object of
suspicion in the eyes of the fellow-citizens! Twelve years earlier the
disturbance of the relations between the Lutherans—citizens of
German parentage —and the remainder of the inhabitants of Aus-
tralia caused by the War had not been wholly cleared away. The
fellow-citizens still regarded the Lutherans with a certain amount of
suspicion and distrust, and the Lutherans were still smarting under
the unjust accusations raised against them and under the calumny
heaped upon them. Only a few months prior to the General Synod
in the year 1925 the Federal Government had at last granted per-
mission that a German periodical “KirchenblatC could be published.
And the Lutheran Mission of New Guinea—which was then one of
the major undertakings of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church
in Australia —was still under the edict that its German missionaries
would be deported, and was still prohibited from placing new Ger-
man missionaries into the field. These facts seemed to indicate vhat
the Government of Australia still adjudged the Lutherans of Aus-
tralia as citizens of minor value, who, at a given moment, would
prove disloyal.
Now the suspicion of one another had given way to mutual
respect and understanding. In the year 1932, the citizens of Murgon
tendered a welcome to the pastors and delegates of the Queensland
District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia.
With great warmth the speakers referred to the value of the Ger-
man settlers and of the members of the Lutheran Church. Two
years later, at a public reception at Toowoomba, the Mayor,
Alderman J. D. Annand, and other public men of that town
testified to the good influence of the Lutheran citizens in their town
and district. And in 1937, at a civic reception tendered to the
President-General, officials and delegates of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia by the Lord Mayor of the City of
Brisbane, Alderman A. J. Jones, the utmost goodwill was expressed.
During the past few years public men have repeatedly stressed the
fact that the German pioneer settlers have proved themselves to be
among the best, and that their sons and daughters were following in


the footsteps of their parents. The antagonistic feeling of 20 years
ago has passed away and the Lutherans of Queensland are grateful
for it. Their only hope is that such an experience as they have
passed through during the years from 1915 to 1925 may never
again befall any body of citizens in Australia.
7. The Jubilee Celebrations and Statistics, 1936.
The Annual Convention of the Synod at Dugandan, Boonah,,
during the days from the 28th to the 30th April, 1935, was a
Jubilee Synod. The Convention celebrated the fiftieth anniversary
of the establishment of organised Lutheran Synods in Queensland.
The two Synods, the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland
and the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland, established respectively in July and August of the year
1885, were since May, 1921, merged in the Queensland District of
the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia.
There was present the only remaining pastor who had helped
to found the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod
of Queensland in August, 1885: Pastor G. Heuer, of Toowoomba.
He had for many years been its President until the time of the
merger in the year 1921. He addressed the large assemblage in the
German language on Rev. 2, 4-7. With youthful vigour he praised
the Lord of the Church for all the benefits He had bestowed on the
Synod and sounded a note of warning against falling away from the
Word of God and from the confessions of the fathers. He reminded
his hearers of the days gone by and of the fellow-believers who had
gone before and now belonged to the host of the saints in heaven
above.
Pastor E. Hiller, of Beenleigh, had been the last President of
the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland before the amalga-
mation in the year 1921, and as President of the new body, the
Queensland District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in
Australia, had guided its policy and had watched over its develop-
ment during the most difficult years of its history. At the Annual
Convention at Maryborough in the year 1928 he was succeeded by
Pastor A. R. Reuther, of Highfields. At the Jubilee-gathering at
Dugandan, Pastor E. Hiller preached in the English language, using
as his text Hebr. 10, 23-25. He called to mind the divisions of the
early days from which God’s grace had led the Lutheran Church
to the unity over which there was now so much rejoicing. He
admonished his hearers to stand faithfully by the confessions of the
fathers and to increase in brotherly love.
The general conditions within the Lutheran Church in Queens-
land had become more settled and were considerably easier, when
Pastor A. R. Reuther took over the presidential duties in the year
1928 and there followed a period of steady and quiet development.
The more important phases of this development are dealt with in
other parts of this book.
The following pastors have been Presidents of the Queensland
District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church: Pastor O.


• ; f ' |
Theile, of Bethama, 192M922; Pastor E. Hiller, of Beenleigh, 1922'
1928; Pastor A. R. Reuther, of Bethania, since 1928.
Since the amalgamation of the two Synods in the year 1921 the
following pastors have acted as Secretaries of the District : E.
Gutekunst, of Toowoomba, 192L1923; A. R. Reuther, of Highfields,
1923T928; E. Wiencke, of Alberton, 1928T931; F. of
Engelsburg, Kalbar, 1931T933; M. Lohe, of South Brisbane, since
1933. Treasurers were the following Brethren: M. T. Schneider, of
Bethania, 192M930; P. O. Peters, of Hatton Vale, 19301937; F.
Schilling, of South Brisbane, since 1937.
Reviewing the whole development of the Lutheran Church in
Queensland from a statistical point of view it becomes evident that
CHURCH COUNCIL, 1937.
Sitting: Pastors M, Lohe (Secretary), A. R. Reuther (President), G. Heuer,
H. Prenzler (Vice-President).
Standing; F. Schilling (Treasurer), F. Hofmann, W. Gierke, Pastor A. E.
Reuther.
Inset: C. Behrendorff.
very real progress has been made. The records are very incomplete
and unreliable for the first decades, but in later years proper records
have been kept which reveal the true position.
In the year 1860 there was only one man in Queensland regis'
tered as a Lutheran pastor, Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister. The total
number of German born immigrants, that had by that time arrived
in Queensland is stated to have been 2,115.


1
2
3
Pastors Con'
Preach'
Total
Souls
Communi'
Children
grega*
ing
2& 3
cants
i. S.S.
tions
Centres
U.E.L.C.A. . .
30
73
34
107
11101
7501
1837
E.L.S.A.
17
37
26
63
4671
2678
698
Lutheran Total
47
110
60
170
15772
10179
2535
In the year 1885, when the two Lutheran Synods were founded
there were 23 Lutheran pastors at work in Queensland. It may be
surmised that they ministered to about 3,000 communicants.
In the year 1921, when the two Lutheran Synods became
amalgamated they numbered together 23 pastors, who served 57
congregations with 4,000 communicants.
In the year 1936 the Queensland District of the United
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia numbered 30 pastors,
who served 72 congregations and 32 preaching centres with 7,500-
communicants.
During the past 16 years 18 new churches were erected and
many have been rebuilt, enlarged and beautified, 5 new residences
for pastors and several Sunday School halls were built.
The Queensland District of the United Evangelical Lutheran
Church in Australia has met for its Annual Conventions as
follows :
1. Engelsburg, Kalbar 23rd May, 1921
2. Toowoomba, St. Paul’s . . . . 1st and 2nd May, 1922
3. Murgon 23rd and 24th April, 1923
4. Bethania 5th and 6th May, 1924
5. Bundaberg 9th and 10th March, 1925
6. Pimpama Island 26th and 27th April, 1926
7. Hatton Vale 16th and 17th May, 1927
8. Maryborough 13th and 14th February, 1928-
9. Bethania 22nd and 23rd April, 1929
10. Engelsburg l 0t h and 12th May, 1930
11. Beenleigh, “To the Cross” .. .. 27th and 28th April, 1931
12. Murgon 18th an( j 19th April, 1932
13. Pimpama Island 8th and 9th May, 1933
14. Toowoomba, St. Paul’s . . . . 9th and 10th April, 1934
15. Dugandan 29th and 30th April, 1935
16. Beenleigh “To the Cross” .. .. 27th and 28th April, 1936
17. Goombungee .. .. 19th and 20th April, 1937


PART lI.—THE LIFE AND CUSTOMS OF OUR LUTHERAN
CHURCH IN QUEENSLAND.
CHAPTER I.
THE PIONEER FATHERS.
During the years 1860 to 1880 about 12-1 5,000 German settlers
came to Queensland. By far the greater number of these came from
the northern part of Germany, though we find also a goodly number
from the southern districts —especially Wuerttemberg. All of them
emigrated overseas, because of the desire to better their economic
conditions. A great many of the immigrants from North Germany
were of the poorer class of people, who were labourers on the
large estates there. They had lived under a form of feudal system,
which would prevent them from ever becoming independent owners
of land. Others, especially those who emigrated after the Franco'
Prussian War, left the Fatherland, when it was in the throes of
great economic depression. It was the transition period, when in'
dustries were being established in Germany, and when industrialism
was beginning to supersede agriculture. These people hoped to find
remunerative work overseas and an opportunity to establish them'
selves.
The conditions in Queensland were not rosy either! No one
found gold and silver along the streets and roads! No one got rich
quickly! Hard work was the portion of the new settlers and the
pioneering they did spelled much strenuous labour. But they were
able to establish themselves and to become property owners, and,
though but slowly, yet surely they secured for themselves and their
children better conditions of life.
These people, especially those that arrived in the sixties and
■early seventies, left Germany at a time when a general religious
awakening had taken place. Rationalism, which had held sway and
had held captive theology and Church for more than a hundred
years, had been overcome! Theologians and people had returned to
the faith of their fathers! Where previously human reason had been
enthroned as the last arbiter in all questions, the Bible had come
into its own again and the Word of God was the final authority.
Churches, which had been empty, were well attended; hymn books,
filled with vapid rhymings, were replaced by the old hymns full of
strength and comfort; and the people again learned to love the
Word of God, their hymns, and their Christian folk songs.
Out of such conditions and surroundings, the immigrants came
to Queensland. Though they did not leave Germany because of
any religious persecution —as did the Silesians that came to South
Australia 30 and 40 years earlier —they brought with them a firm
faith in their God and a deep love of their Church and its mes'
sage. As soon as they were settled in any district they gathered for
worship, they built churches, they sought to train their children in
the language and faith of their fathers, they tried to procure the
ministrations of their Church.


*mfm- ate# - x v %8&
. y.y ■•••:.•’ ■ y . ''<’<■ > ■•<•' -. ■■•■ •■••:•••
■‘X- ; ■jV." V% y ~ y >0- y. * <-|
The buildings, in which the early German congregations in
Queensland met and worshipped, were in accordance with the
general conditions of the time, when the new settlers had to struggle
hard to keep themselves above water. It testifies of their love for
their Church and of their faith in God, that everywhere they
erected churches and places of worship for themselves. Perhaps
they came closer to their God in those simple, unpretentious
churches —built of slabs hewn out of the scrub, and with shingle
roof—than we do in our more elaborate church buildings of the
present day. But those churches built of slabs in the Logan and
Rosewood Districts soon gave way to better buildings.
Ipswich was the first among the German congregations which
erected a substantial brick building as its church in the year 1864
In the year 1867 the congregation of Pastor Haussmann erected a
church of timber and brick at the mission station Bethesda, on the
Albert River, near Beenleigh; and the congregation at Mt. Cotton
St. Paul’s, Mt. Cotton.
worships, to this day, in a church of like construction. Bethania
replaced its building of slabs with a brick building in the year 1872,
and Philadelphia (Eagleby) did the same in the year 1876, whilst
the congregation of Phillip Street, Toowoomba, erected its large
substantial brick church building in the year 1877. The St. Andreas
Church at North Brisbane was erected 1882, and the Nazareth
Church, of South Brisbane, was built in 1896. All other Lutheran
churches in Queensland are built of timber.
The style used in early buildings was in every case the same
•—an oblong, barnlike structure, with the pulpit over the altar, and
often with a gallery for the organ and the choir. A vestry at one
end and a porch for the entrance completed the simple building,
which served its purpose. When, in the year 1884, the congregation
of Pastor J. G. Haussmann lost its church building at Bethesda and
moved into the township of Beenleigh, it purchased the Good
Templars 1 hall for its church; and the construction of that building
provided it with an apse (a separate place for the altar) whilst the


pulpit was placed on one side. It was the first of the Lutheran
churches in Queensland with this churchly arrangement. In 1891
the Bundaberg Congregation erected its church along the lines of
correct church architecture, providing it with a chancel in proper
proportion and placing the pulpit to one side. The Nazareth Church
at South Brisbane was also built true to style, with a chancel and a
pleasing spire, and to this day it is, both as to its exterior and to its
interior, one of the prettiest among the Lutheran churches in
Queensland.
The first pipe organ in a Lutheran Church in Queensland was
dedicated on the 15th October, 1884, in the Zion’s Church at
Minden. Pastor J. F. Goessling, of Kirchheim. and E. Heiner, of
Ipswich, officiated. It may be mentioned that the report in the
German press of the time speaks of it as a “fluteorgan” (Floeten-
or gel). The Lutheran Church at Bundaberg was the next to instal
a pipe organ, which it had imported from Germany. Many years
went by until in 1912 the St. Andreas Church, at North Brisbane,
had the fine German pipe organ installed, which, to this day,
delights the congregations hearing it. More recently, in the year
1927, St. Paul’s, Toowoomba, had a German organ built into its
church by a Brisbane firm. It is a fine acquisition to its Church
equipment.
Bells, too, were acquired by quite a number of congregations,
and were hung in different manner in the various localities : some-
times on a large tree near the church, in belfries of very simple or
of more elaborate design—standing apart from the church, or
erected on top of the church. Only in very few instances do we
find a tower erected with the church, as at Highfields, Engelsburg,
and South Brisbane. The churches at Bundaberg, Highfields,
Engelsburg, Ipswich and both the churches at Toowoomba have
large bells, with an acceptable tone.
In the early days quite a number of the congregations possessed
brass bands and old and young delighted in playing the instruments.
These bands accompanied the singing of the hymns in the churches,
and on festive occasions they provided programmes of music in the
open air. In the Logan, the Fassifern, the Lockyer, and the Downs
Districts these bands caused much joy to the players and to the
congregations. The Boah Peak Band was heard a few years ago at
several mission festivals in the district, and earned much praise for
its fine music.
Church Attendance : The early German settlers erected
churches for themselves and for their children! They sacrificed of
the little they had for the needs of their Church, in order that
they might worship their God and preserve, for themselves and for
their children, the heritage they had brought from the old country —
the faith of their fathers! And they attended their services.
Every Sunday they were present at the service. Though the means
of transport were but primitive, and though the roads and tracks
were of the worst, they attended their Church services! Often they
walked for miles and miles, and spent hours on the way, in order


to be present with the congregation at the Sunday’s service. From
the depths of their hearts they sang their hymns! If no pastor was
available, then one of the elders conducted the service and read a
sermon. And reverently they listened to the reading of the sermon
taken from one or the other of the welbknown books of sermons,
written by Ludwig Harms, Muenkel, Fengler, Ahlfeld, and others.
After the service they would ask about one another’s welfare, talk
about the crops and the weather, and then they would take the
sunshine of the Sunday home into the labour of the week-day.
Sunday was lacking its real purpose, if they had not been to the
service.
As a help for the elders who conducted these reading services,
Pastor O. Theile, of Bethania, in the year 1911, compiled and pub"
lished a small pamphlet containing the order of service and the
necessary prayers, and many congregations were indeed grateful
for it.
Quite an army of men would arise, if we were to call up those
who served as elders and readers in the various congregations of
the Lutheran Church in Queensland. What wealth of service they
have rendered! Yet how little notice has been taken thereof! Sun"
day after Sunday, for more than fifty years, Father J. G. Schneider,
of Waterford, conducted the service for the Bethania Congregation,
and those who heard him read will never forget it. With equal
faithfulness Father J. Althaus, of Mutdapilly Reserve, conducted
services there for forty years and more. H. Mueller and H
at Kirchheim; W. Harch, at Alberton; Chr. Berndt, at
Eagleby; F. Stolknow and N. Mewing, at Beenleigh; G. R. Weise,
at Ipswich, will also never be forgotten. It would lead too far were
we to name them all. Let us hope that God will fill their sons with
a like seal, that they may serve their Church and congregations in
all humility and in all faithfulness!
Not only on Sundays did the Germans attend their service, it
was their custom to have divine service also on the second and even
■on the third day of the great festivals of the Christian Church during
the year : Christmas, Easter, and Pentecost. Ascension Day was for
them a festival day on which they rested from labour and wor"
shipped God. Some congregations upheld an annual day for general
repentance, either the Wednesday before Jubilate Sunday or that
before or after the last Sunday of the Church-year. In many places
the old German settlers gathered for a regular devotional meeting
on an evening during the week. During Passiontide they would
come to their church on a Friday or on a Wednesday forenoon to
meditate upon the sufferings and death of their Lord and Saviour
The Word of God dwelt richly among the German settlers in those
days!
Hymn Books: The Lutherans had come from various parts of
Germany, they had been members of different regional Churches!
Thus they had brought with them different forms of service, different
books of worship, different customs. The congregations in the Logan
District used the Porst Hymn Book and this was also found in many


other congregations throughout Southern Queensland. Other con-
gregations used the Berlin Hymn Book, and others again used the
Wuerttemberg Hymn Book. And there were several other hymn
books at the first Lutheran service in the Mt. Larcom District in
January, 1912, for the new settlers there brought to light three or
four different ones. Consequently it took some time to select hymns
which were contained in all of them. In some parishes one congre-
gation used the one, the other a different hymn book. German
Station (Nudgee Road), for instance, used the Wuerttemberg Hymn
Book, the sister congregation at Zillmere the Porst Hymn Book.
When the hymns in both books are compared, the same hymns
show much difference in the words and in the verses.
Tunes : Great variety also characterised the singing. Various
tune books were in use, but the Kulke Tune Book was more widely
used than any other. In some churches the Wuerttemberg Tune
Book was on the organ, and it was at times rather bewildering
when neighbouring congregations sang the same hymns to totally
different tunes. As a general rule the congregations sang well,
though in some cases the number of tunes with which they were
familiar was very limited. It appears that in neither of the two
Synods in Queensland, neither in the Evangelical Lutheran Synod
of Queensland nor in the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran
Synod of Queensland, was ever an attempt made to adopt one and
the same German Tune or Hymn Book for all the congregations
Order of Service : The order and form of service was deter-
mined or influenced not only by the home Churches and their
orders, but also very often by the pleasure of the individual pastors
And the latter often took great liberties, which led to liturgical
errors, as for instance, that the Lord’s Prayer followed the Bene-
diction. The United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland adopted the Lueneburg Church Book and all services
were to be conducted according to it. Complying with the instruc-
tions of the Synod, Pastor Goessling, of Kirchheim, insisted that
the order of service thus prescribed was the essential and only
Lutheran form. The members of his congregations, quite unaccus-
tomed to such a form, objected and an upheaval ensued, which
caused the pastor to relinquish his position. In quite a number of
congregations and parishes the Lueneburg form of service had to be
modified in order to conform to the wishes of the members. When,
later, pastors, who had not received their training at Hermannsburg,
joined the Synod, they brought different forms of service with them
and introduced them into their congregations, as for instance,
Pastor E. Becker, at South Brisbane; Pastor O. Theile, at Bethania;
Pastor J. Thun, at Douglas. Thus it soon came to pass, that almost
every parish had a form of service differing more or less from that
in other parishes. In the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queens-
land, in which the Wuerttemberg Church Book was used by those
pastors, who had received their training at Basle in Switzerland, a
similar condition had arisen. Almost at the same time, about the
year 1900, in both these Synods the demand arose that unfform


orders of service be adopted. In the course of time, after much dis'
cussion and examination, both Synods found such an order of
service. The Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland adopted
the order, which Pastor Treus, of North Brisbane, had compiled
and had it printed in the year 1912. Pastors L. Doehler and O.
Theile compiled the order for the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland, and it was printed during the
years of the War. The members of the congregations were cer'
tainly very pleased and grateful to have these printed orders of the
service.
The Lord’s Supper : In some congregations confessional service
in preparation for Holy Communion took place on the Saturday
afternoon before Communion Sunday. In most congregations, how'
ever —because of the custom brought from the old country —this
service was held in connection with the Sunday morning service,
and later this became customary in all congregations of both Synods.
The attendance at the Lord’s Table was, generally speaking,
quite good and regular. There were, of course, then as now, those
who neglected to make use of the opportunity to commune with the
Lord. There were others for whom it had become a custom that
Holy Week was the one time of the year that they should partake
of Holy Communion. But there were many who knew that the
Holy Sacrament was a source of great blessing and who sought this
blessing ever anew. In consequence there were quite a number of
congregations in which Holy Communion, whenever celebrated,
was part of the regular Sunday’s service. Holy Communion was
then the culmination of such service, the whole congregation being
present during the celebration. In other congregations the Holy
Sacrament was celebrated apart from the Sunday’s service; it was
treated as an addendum to such service, and then only the conv
municants were present.
It was customary to be dressed in dark clothing for Holy Com'
munion. Most women and girls had a special Communion dress of
black material. It provided quite a sensation when a few of the
more modern girls appeared on Communion Sunday in bright blue
or pink dresses. But in the atmosphere of this country which is
filled with a deal of indifference towards the Sacraments of the
Church, the reverence for the Lord’s Supper declined. And the
customs, which had been brought here from the mother Church and
which gave expression to that reverence, fell away.
The old German men and women were not ashamed to bow
their knees in their church, and many knelt in silent prayer when
they entered the church. Nearly everywhere the whole congrega"
tion knelt for the Confession and Absolution during the Sunday’s
service; many of the women practised a form of curtsey, whenever
the name of Jesus was used. At prayer the hands were folded, as
is the Lutheran custom throughout the world. These customs
signify the human submission to the Father, Which is in heaven.
They are the outward expression of the humbleness of spirit, which
permeates the soul in the presence of God. And this reverence to


flli:’ . :BK||ip £ : ||S*
God the Lutheran further shows, when he rises and, standing, listens
to the reading of the Word of God. By many, such customs are
despised, as though they would reduce the practice of the Christian
religion to a pure matter of form! But there is deep truth in the
words of D. Martin Luther when he says : “Fasting and bodily
preparation (i.e. forms) is indeed a fine outward training 11 . As the
soul draws nigh unto God, the body is under discipline and gives
expression to the reverence inwardly felt.
The Christmas festival brings to light, more than any other
period of the year, the depth of feeling that is within the German
heart and mind. German Lutherans are at home for that festival,
they gather around the Christmas tree. They have one in every
St. John’s, Ipswich.
church, even if they cannot have one in their homes. And the lights
on the tree speak of the light of the Love of God, as it is revealed
in the Child in the manger at Bethlehem. And children’s voices
sing to the glory of that Child, praising it with the same old songs
and tunes that their parents and grandparents sang years and years
ago. To the Germans and to the Lutherans, Christmas seems so
bare without that tree, and, without that singing. Though the tree
is not the centre of rejoicings at Christmas —it is the Child in
the manger —it would be a pity if the tree were done away with,
and a ereater pity if the old Christmas songs and carols were no
longer heard. The German Lutheran Christmas customs are treasures
that are well worth preserving.
Various Customs : Many and varied were the customs which
the Germans brought with them from the old country and which
they practised in connection with Baptism, Confirmation and Mar-
riage. Some of them were quite unusual and quaint and thus
excited general curiosity.
Babies were usually brought to church to be baptised on the
first Sunday after their birth when the pastor conducted the service
in the particular congregation. Baptism took its place as part of the
Sunday service in the presence of the whole congregation. The


baby was clothed in a long white baptismal gown, neatly trimmed
with light blue or pink bows, and its head was covered with a white
bonnet. The sponsors, usually three or four, stood around the font.
One of the female sponsors, usually the younger unmarried one,
held the baby. Before the actual Baptism took place the older female
sponsor would remove the bonnet, hold it, and replace it im-
mediately after the Baptism had taken place. A spirit of solemn
reverence surrounded all actions of the sponsors as they attended
to their duties. Finally they placed their offering on the edge of the
font —in some congregations they placed it into the baptismal water
-—and returned to the nave of the church. In some congregations
custom demanded that the baby, if it were a boy, be held over the
font by the unmarried male sponsor at the Baptism; in others, again,
the parents of the child also would be in the party around the font.
After the service in the church the Baptism was usually celebrated in
the home with a festival party. The sponsors and other friends were
invited and happy hours were spent together.
The mother of the child would not appear in public until, with
her child, she had attended service. In song the whole congregation
would join in her praise and prayer, and, whilst she knelt at the
altar, the pastor would give voice to the emotions of her heart and
bestow upon her the blessing of the Lord.
Some of the customs connected with Baptism and Confirmation
have fallen away and all of them seem to have lost much of their
solemnity and of their influence on the homedife. This is greatly to
be deplored. At the weddings the groomsmen, on horses or on
bicycles, with flowing sashes and many coloured ribbons, pre-
ceded to the church the buggy which conveyed the bridal couple.
The return journey to the residence of the bride’s parents, where
the wedding feast was waiting, usually took the form of a race be'
tween the horse-drawn vehicles which conveyed the guests. How
merrily they dashed along, all trying to overtake the bridal couple
in the buggy in the lead! What lively crowds were found in and
around the large marquees erected for such occasions! Such a
wedding feast was nearly always a large and a protracted affair, one
of its highlights occurring at midnight when the bridal wreath was
removed to the accompaniment of prayer and song.
These old customs have disappeared. The German Lutherans
have adopted the customs of the country they live in, they have
become modernised. This development is but natural and certainly
not harmful, as long as with the passing of the old customs is not
lost that which was the most valuable possession of the fathers—
their faith!
The customs connected with the burial of the dead were very
varied. Nearly all of the older congregations have their own ceme-
teries in close proximity to the church. In fact, many churches
were erected on “God’s acre”, for instance, at Bethania, Dugandan,
Engelsburg, Kirchheim, Plainland, Lowood, Logan Reserve, and
others. In some instances, the second church building was placed
in a new location, away from the cemetery, as at Eagleby and


Alberton. Where the church was nearby, the corpse was taken
there and the burial service was begun in the church, or, after the
burial had taken place, the mourners repaired to the church and
there listened to the funeral sermon. At all Lutheran burials there
was much singing. Great comfort was derived, especially from the
two hymns that were sung at almost every burial —“Jesus, my
Redeemer, lives” and the other during which the grave was closed —
“Now calmly in the grave we lay,
This mortal frame, till that great day,
When God Himself will bid it rise,
And mount triumphant to the skies.”
It certainly is pleasing to notice that of late years the Lutherans
have begun to revive the custom of singing at the burials. With
the advent of the English language it had somewhat fallen into dis'
use. The old Germans were very particular about their mourning
attire and about the period of mourning. The men would wear a
crepe band around the upper coat sleeve and around the hat for six
to twelve months in memory of close relatives, and the womenfolk
would also be seen only in dark clothes for a long time. It is a pity
that this reverence for the dead is not generally practised to'day.
Family devotion was conducted fairly generally. The Bible was
read and a free prayer was offered up; in many homes the whole
family knelt during this prayer. Here and there books of devotion
were used; but usually the Bible itself was read. There were not
many homes during the early years of pioneering in which grace at
table was omitted; and in many homes it was customary, especially
on Sundays, to sing certain hymn verses at the close of the meal. It
was very impressive when, on Sunday evening, as the sun was set"
ting, or in the pale light of the moon, before the guests and visitors
drove from the yard all gathered around and joined in the stanza :
“Gathered here we join our hands, O Saviour”, or “Now we part
from one another”.
It is singular that the German settlers, who so reverently con'
.served the old customs of the Fatherland, did not transplant to this
country the one festival, which is almost universally celebrated in
Germany : The anniversary of the dedication of the local church'
building (Kirchweih). But mission festivals were celebrated, by
some more or less. regularly, by others only now and again. Of
course the opening of a new church, or the induction of a new
pastor, was always a festive occasion, which was duly celebrated and
which caused many from far and near to join in such celebrations.
All such festivals were arranged for week'days and the congregation,
which had issued the invitation, provided a free table for all who
attended. The joy of coming together, of joining in the hymns and
prayers, of listening to the choir and the band was great. And how
they enjoyed hearing the Word of God! The old Germans would,
on such occasions, not grow weary in lending their ear to many and
long sermons. Such festivals were real people’s days with a deep
religious significance! The influence of the surroundings soon be-
came evident though, and the festivals were used to raise means


for the purposes of the congregations by making a charge for the
meals supplied, whilst in some instances they were just ordinary
picnics. In later years all festivals —and they grew much more
numerous —were arranged for Sundays and the provisioning for the
day was left to those who attended. They brought their hampers
and baskets and looked after themselves. This has proved a very
acceptable system for all festive gatherings of Churches and con-
gregations.
For catechetical instruction quite a number of different catechisms
were in use, though in the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland most pastors used the Lueneburg
Catechism. It certainly was not the most suitable book for the
conditions obtaining in Queensland among the Germans. On the
other hand the Wuerttemberger Spruchbuch (Text Book), largely
used in the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland, did not
prove any more suitable for Queensland conditions. Some pastors
Bethania Church, 50th Jubilee.
introduced other books and catechisms, mostly with the same result.
The books introduced from Germany had their disadvantages for a
youth that was, slowly but surely, beginning to think in the lan-
guage of the country.
There was great divergence regarding the preparation for Con-
firmation. Though the age was generally between the 13th and 14th
year the length of time used for preparation varied. In some con-
gregations only a few weeks were deemed sufficient; in others three
or six months were considered necessary, whilst there were a num-
ber of congregations and parishes which demanded 12 months’ or
two years’ preparation.
The preparation for the Confirmation has always been an out-
standing feature of the Lutheran Church. It is very thorough. It
aims at imparting to the young candidates for Confirmation a com-
plete knowledge of Christian Lutheran teaching; it tries to lead them
to recognise their responsibility for a Christian walk in life and to
awaken in them a deep love for their Church.


In some congregations a form of Church discipline was in use
and the members at first submitted to it. Every member, who
offended against public and Church morals, was subjected to this
discipline. A few examples will show how the fathers of the
Lutheran Church dealt with one another : Parents who would not
send their children to the parish school were excluded from the
Sacrament of the Altar; a young man who watched a dance had to>
apologise before going to Communion; young people who had fallen
into disgrace had to appear before the altar in the church and
publicly to apologise for the offence given to the congregation. The
underlying principle, no doubt, was correct; but its application
degenerated into a public punishment which finally was purely
formal. It lost its force and caused no end of trouble and dissension,,
usually ending with the affected parties seceding from the con'
gregation and living without the Church.
The congregations were alone responsible for their Churcb
establishment. For most of the German settlers this was a new
experience, to which they had to become accustomed. They came from
State Churches, where the responsibility for the Church establish'
ment lay with the Government, and the financial obligations were
a charge on the treasury" of the respective State. In Queensland
under the conditions prevailing here the settlers themselves had to
find the necessary means for their Churches. They did so by means
of a levy, or a form of self'taxation. Every member promised a
certain yearly contribution to the funds. In the course of time most
congregations set a minimum for such contributions. Besides this,
the congregations took up collections at every Sunday service for
the purpose of meeting the expenses connected with their local
needs. Here, again, interesting variations are met with. Some con'
gregations objected to regular collections for their own domestic
purposes, they raised all they needed in that connection by means
of a levy; others refused to take the offering with a plate and
placed a collection box near the door of the church. In the early
days this collection for local purposes was known as the “pence” cob
lection; and it was amusing to notice how deeply ingrained the custom
had become that for this collection pennies were the correct thing. In a
certain congregation the offering at the German morning service
would contain scarcely any other coins but pennies. At the evening
service, which was English, only silver would appear on the plate.
Only very few congregations have taken recourse to other means of
raising funds for their church than the one of “straight'out” giving.
Fairs, Bazaars, Sales of Work, etc., have found little favour; and rais'
ing money for Church purposes by questionable means such as-
dances, raffles and other amusements, which are in use throughout
the country, has rarely been mentioned in connection with the
Lutheran Church.
The congregations elected trustees, who held the property for
the congregation and who were responsible for keeping that
property in good condition. In later years more and more of the con-
gregations made use of the opportunity offered them by the


Religious, Educational and Charitable Institutions Act of Queens"
land, and have become incorporated. This step has proved very
beneficial indeed and did away with much inconvenience, strife
and expense.
The pastor of the congregation was supported by a committee
of elders, who, together with him, watched over the welfare of the
congregation. In earlier days these elders stood somewhat higher
in the estimation of the Church than is at present the case. They
were with the pastor the spiritual leaders of the congregation, whilst
at present the development is, that they take care of its temporal
affairs only. All business of the congregations is regulated at their
meetings which are in most cases presided over by the local pastor.
It is true that on some occasions at such meetings the welfare of
the congregation was forgotten and personal strife held sway, which
led to bitter words and much recrimination; but as a rule, the merm
bers attended quietly to the great and small matters placed before
them.
CHAPTER 11.
THE TRANSITION PERIOD.
From the very inception of German Churches and congrega-
tions in Queensland, the language question was a problem, which
was of utmost importance. Whether this importance was realised
or not, the question involved the very existence of the congregations.
The German congregations were being established in an English
country, in which the official language was English, and in which
all business was conducted in that tongue. It was therefore neces-
sary that the new-comers should acquire that language, in order to
enable them to transact their business to the best advantage.
The public schools gave the growing generation the opportunity
of learning the language of the country, but they offered no
religious instruction whatever. What could be done to keep the
growing generation in the Church? How was the faith of the
fathers to be preserved? It fell to the Church to find a solution of
this problem. The Church had to provide the religious instruction
for the youth, in order that parents and children might worship
together. Long before the synodical organisation of the Church
took place, the congregations realised this need. Some organised
Sunday Schools, but others instituted parish or denominational
schools. Bethania, Philadelphia (Eagleby), Elkana (Alberton),
Pimpama Island, Toowoomba (St. Paul’s) and Maryborough (St.
John’s) installed teachers, erected school buildings and teachers’
residences. In these schools English and German were taught. Ac-
cording to the understanding of the time, the solution of the great
problem lay in making the growing generation bilingual.
The present generation can only marvel at the sacrifices which
the early settlers brought to preserve the language and, above all,
the religion of their fathers for their children. There was no political


object behind their action; they were not actuated by any national-
istic ideas. It was their Church and their religion, which ihey had
brought with them from the old world, and which they desired to
preserve for the coming generations. Their children were certainly
to learn English to fit them to become citizens of the new country;
but they were also to learn German that they, together with
their parents, might worship God according to the faith of their
fathers.
The German Lutheran congregations had great difficulty in
obtaining the necessary pastors to minister unto them. They found
it even more difficult to find teachers for their schools. The salaries
they could offer were but small, because in those pioneering days
the German settlers were poor. Not many men were willing to
volunteer for positions that offered so little remuneration and no
prospects for the future. And though some came forward and did
valuable work —as Mondientz, Thiedecke, Suess, Brandt, Haymann,
Saenger—others possessed but little education and no teaching
abilities.
The members of the congregations took a keen interest in these
schools. This became evident each year when the examination was.
held. It was a public affair, and the local pastor usually acted as
school inspector. There were many witnesses : fathers, mothers and
friends of the children, watching and listening intently how the
children would acquit themselves. Incidentally the teacher, too, was
on trial himself, and, more often than not, it was he who was more
severely criticised in the end. Pastor T. Langebecker, of Toowoomba,
knew how to stage such examinations and Pastor C. G. Hellmuth,
in the Logan District, was quite an expert at it also. The day
usually ended as a picnic for the children and, before a welhset
table and with good prizes for their sports, they soon forgot the
anxiety of the morning hours.
But despite the sacrifices made for the parish schools the results
were not satisfactory. The constant changes in the teaching staff
discouraged more and more of the parents and the schools had to be
abandoned, one after another, until by the year 1895 there was no
parish school in existence.
In the year 1903 the parish of Bethania-Beenleigh-Eagleby
made an attempt to re-open its parish school, and went to con-
siderable expense for that purpose. These congregations called a
parish teacher from South Australia, Mr. J. F. W. Schulz, who had
graduated from the Teachers’ Training College at Point Pass
(established there by Pastor F. Leidig). They erected a residence
for him. Whilst conducting a full-time school, in both German
and English languages, at Bethania, he taught the Beenleigh and
Eagleby children German on one day per week. Thus the German
language was to be preserved and the children were to receive a
firm grounding in religion. In the year 1909 the teacher, Mr. J. F. W.
Schulz, resigned his position, and all efforts to acquire a successor
for him were in vain. And so came to nought an undertaking which


at the time offered the only real hope of preserving German as the
language of the Church.
The effort of the Bethania parish confirmed the experiences of
earlier years: children, passing through a parish school and acquit'
ing two languages, were not able to compete in English—the lan'
gauge of the country, of its business, of its officials—with those
children who were taught in English only. And again, on the other
hand, there were always children who did not attend the parish
school. They became a great problem for pastor and congregation,
when their Confirmation and their Church membership came into
consideration. It became clear that it was impossible, quite impos'
sible, to keep the congregations and the Synod of the Lutheran
Church exclusively German.
Meanwhile, in all congregations in Queensland, pastors had
taken upon themselves the duty of teaching the children. With
very few exceptions every congregation had set aside one day of
the week, on which the pastor instructed the children in German
and in religion. What an immense amount of faithful work was
put into this task! Besides all other ministerial duties, pastors con'
ducted school on two and three days every week, year in and year
out, and not a few wives of the pastors assisted their husbands..
Further, taking into consideration the distances between the con'
gregations, the state of the roads at that time and the means of
conveyance in general use, the services the pastors rendered to the
congregations cannot be too highly commended. And in the
congregations there are many men and women, who, to this day,
remember with grateful hearts those hours, when their pastors tried
to instil in them a knowledge and a love of the language and of the
faith of their fathers.
It may here be repeated, what was said before, that there was
no political significance whatever in this labour. Although notice
was taken of it in Germany and the authorities there gave support
in school equipment (maps and books, etc.), the pastors here had
no other object but to preserve for the Lutheran Church those who
were of the Lutheran faith.
The faithful work of the Lutheran pastors was not without its
measure of success, especially in the more closely settled districts,
and as long as the first generation of the immigrants was still
alive. But there grew up an ever increasing number of young
people who understood German but imperfectly, or not at all.
During the first 15 years of the present century the Annual
Conventions of the Synods registered ever anew the complaints
that a distinct loss of spiritual life was taking place, that the in'
difference toward God and His Church was increasing. The dele'
gates discussed the problem again and ever again. Papers were read
on the question how to deal with the indifference which was
spreading within the congregation, also on the question of keeping
the rising generation within the fold of the Church. As quite a
deal of the blame for the existing conditions was ascribed to the
fact that the German language was not fostered as faithfully as


should be the case, resolutions were passed exhorting pastors and
members to cultivate the German language more diligently and thus
to perpetuate the Lutheran heritage. To-day, so many years later,
it is clear that some of the leaders of the Lutheran Church of that
time did not realise that one check to the drift, of which they were
complaining, was the introduction of religious instruction for the
growing generation in the language which it understood : the
English language.
There were men who saw the trend of events. The first Presi-
dent of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland, Pastor A. Sueltmann, of Bethania —who had come to
this country when over 50 years of age—in the year 1889 expressed
it as his considered opinion that the children, who understood Ger-
man but imperfectly, should receive their religious and Confirmation
instruction in the English language. Pastor E. Becker and the com-
mittee of jhe Lutheran Nazareth Congregation of South Brisbane
arranged regular English services in their church in the year 1896.
Pastor C. F. Schmidt, of Bundaberg, had a class in Sunday School
which was instructed in the English language even before 1896,.
and he confirmed in the English language and conducted English
services regularly about the same time as South Brisbane. In both
cases there existed no desire to attract English people to the
Lutheran Church. Pastors and congregations aimed at keeping the
children of the congregation within the fold of the Church of the
fathers.
It is clearly evident to-day that during those years the Lutheran
Church lost many of its children! Too late came the general
realisation, that it was an impossible task to keep the coming genera-
tion bilingual, and that it was much less possible to provide for it
sufficient religious instruction in the German language. It must
fill the hearts with sorrow, when it is realised, how many of the
youth of the Lutheran Church have joined other denominations
because they could not understand the language spoken in the
Church of their fathers! And greater is such sorrow, when it is
seen, that a much larger number than one dares to admit have be-
come indifferent and irreligious, because they did not receive suf-
ficient religious instruction in the language they could understand.
It was a strange misreading of the signs of the times when
pastors and congregations objected to the youth receiving religious
instruction in the language of the country. With deplorable short-
sightedness—which was often mingled with a good deal of narrow-
mindedness —the introduction of the English language into the
Church was opposed, in some cases most strenuously opposed.
Reports in old minute books tell us of instances, when the elders of
congregations would not permit the children of the congregation,
that had been prepared for Confirmation in the English language, to>
receive that holy rite in the church! They had to be confirmed in
some other building. Many staunch Lutherans honestly believed
that the loss of the German language meant the loss of the Lutheran


faith, because they could not understand how the Lutheran faith
could be rendered and expressed in the English language.
The fact that the use of the German language was diminishing
was observed not only by the members of the Lutheran Church,
but it disturbed also all circles, here and in Germany, that were
interested in the retention of the German language and of the
German customs. Efforts were made to foster and to cultivate the
German language and a branch of the German Language Association
(Deutscher Sprachverband) was organised in Brisbane. Its members
paid annual dues and solicited contributions which were subsidised
from funds in Germany. In 1914 the fund which had been de-
posited with the Commonwealth Savings Bank in Brisbane amounted
to nearly £4OO. With the outbreak of the Great War all efforts in
this connection came to an end and a practical result of the under'
taking has never become evident.
During the War-period it was seen more clearly than ever before
that the effort to retain the German language as the language of ffie
Lutheran Church in Queensland was doomed to failure. It is a
fact that in South Australia both languages have been used side by
side successfully by succeeding generations, and the Church has to a
great extent been able to retain the German language. In South
Africa the settlers of German descent, though fully conversant with
the English language, use the German language only in their
Churches to the third and fourth generations. In both cases circum-
stances differ from those in Queensland. The majority of the Ger-
man settlers in Queensland had originally come out of economically
and socially depressed circumstances and surroundings and their
mother-tongue was the Low-German. In Germany school and
Church had taught them the knowledge of the High-German, even
though they spoke Low-German in their homes. In Queens-
land, their children and grandchildren acquired the Low-
German in their homes, in the school they learned English.
Thus High-German was, and remained to them, a foreign
language. The Church, when it used the German language,
did not speak the language of the home of this young generation.
It must be admitted that the families did not cultivate the German
language as they might have done; and when the members of these
families did speak German, it was not the language of the Bible
or of the hymn book, it was not the language of the Church, Those
who have worked among them and have seen their difficulties in
this connection know, that it is not generally true what has re-
peatedly been stated : that the indifference and the apathy of
parents and children have led to the loss of the German language.
And there is also no reasonable foundation for the assertion
that the younger, bilingual pastors have precipitately or prematurely
introduced the English language into the Lutheran congregations.
The reason for such loss was the natural, inevitable and irresistible
consequence and outcome of the conditions and circumstances by
which the Lutheran congregations were surrounded. The War-
period hastened the process so much that both pastors and congrega-


tions were almost overwhelmed, and for some years difficulties upon
difficulties confronted the Lutheran Church in Queensland in this
connection. The suddenness with which it was called upon to
change over to the new position —that English was the language of
the Lutheran Church —and the completeness of this change con-
stituted a real crisis in its life.
The Lutheran Church (U.E.L.C.A.) was not in a position to
supply bilingual pastors immediately. Previous to the War all pas-
tors received their theological training in Germany. The young
Australians who sought to enter the ministry could not obtain their
training in Australia. They had to proceed to Germany or to the
United States of America in order to complete their theological
studies. Only after the War did the Lutheran Church (U.E.L.C.A.)
of Australia begin to offer opportunities for theological training in
Australia; but it was not before 1925 that the first of its graduates
could be placed into the service of the Church.
For some pastors the necessity of introducing the English
language was like a catastrophe, as they were not in a position to
lead their congregations in that language. Therefore some of them,
with long records of faithful service, had to relinquish their charges
and hand them over to younger bilingual men, as for instance :
Pastor G. Heuer, of Hume Street, Toowoomba; Pastor W. Schmet-
2er, of Mackay; Pastor H. Wallatt, of Plainland; Pastor P. B.
Hoefner, of German Station; and Pastor J. Koehnke, of Pimpama
Island.
At this time, the aftermath of the War-period—the worshipping
of the material, fleeting things of this life, which swept through the
human race like a tidal wave—threatened completely to engulf, too,
the younger generation of the Lutheran Church in Queensland.
An indifference towards God and His Church was abroad, which
was very disquieting indeed—it has not yet been overcome. It was
a time of changes, which brought with it quite a new order
of things in many respects; and many of the older generation, de-
ploring the loss of the German language and of the German cus-
toms, predicted the end of the Lutheran Church. But God held
His protecting hand over His Lutheran Zion in this State.
During the first years after the War the English work of the
Lutheran Church had to contend with a great disadvantage, with a
real hardship. It lacked the English Lutheran literature, which it
required. Hymn Books, Bible Histories, Catechisms were almost
unprocurable and the Australian customs regulations made the im-
portation of such books impossible. Though they were printed in
English, consignments of books from America were impounded be-
cause the books stated that translations from the German were
contained therein. It required a good deal of time and much labour
to compile and publish the necessary books in Australia. But since
these are procurable they have proved of the greatest help and
blessing in the Church, in the Sunday Schools, and in the home.
The transition period brought forth ever new problems. The
young mothers did not know English prayers to teach their little:


children. The fathers of the household did not know the English
wording of grace at table. In their homes they had heard and
learned them in German. In the Sunday School and Confirmation
Class they had been taught in German. They had committed quite
a deal of Christian teaching to memory, but they had never
fully understood it and had forgotten it all. The hymns
and the quotations from Holy Writ, too, were gone. For
many years they had not practised any German speaking.
Many of them had ceased attending at service because they
were unable to understand the German language; and when
the services were conducted in English the termini used were
strange to them, and they found it difficult to follow. What a task
to help these young people and win them back to the faith of their
fathers! A most intensive work had to be undertaken in an effort
to retrieve the position! Pastors and members had to do their
utmost to regain a whole generation which was in danger of being
lost to its Lutheran Church.
CHAPTER 111.
THE PRESENT GENERATION.
Clearly the foremost duty is to train the children. Without
religious instruction, the best educational system must lead to
modern heathendom and to the destruction of true morality. If the
rising generation is to prove its citizenship and its Church member'
ship, the foundation must be laid in the hearts of the children. The
Lutheran Church in Queensland has no Christian day schools.
They would be the ideal for the training of the children. These
schools would use the English language, but religion would not
■only be a subject, religion and the Word of God would constitute
the atmosphere in which every subject was taught and in which
teacher and pupils had their being. As such schools are not in
existence the Church must make every effort to use to the utmost all
opportunities, which are offering to instruct the children in the faith
of their fathers. Until the religious instruction was
imparted during the week on the day of the German school; but
during that period, in 1917, the Queensland Education Department
enforced a rule that any other private instruction was no longer
accepted as a valid excuse for absence from daily lessons. The
new regulation was brought into being by an Act of Parliament
shortly after the first Labour Administration in Queensland had
taken office, and Mr. Hardacre had become the Minister of
Public Instruction. The object was to close the German classes and
schools, and it was not at first realised that the new regulation also
closed all week'day classes of religious instruction. The efforts made
by the Secretary of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran
Synod of Queensland to have the clause altered by the Upper
House proved of no avail.


A thorough re-organisation had to take place. The opportu-
nities offered under the Bible in State Schools regulations were made
use of. These regulations provide that a minister of religion may
enter the State school and give religious instruction to the children
of his denomination during one hour each week. In many cases the
scattered nature of a parish would make it necessary for a pastor to
visit so many different schools that the task would be beyond him.
Still, this part of the work of imparting religious instruction to the
young is being developed ever more widely, and, according to latest
statistical information, 691 Lutheran children are thus being taught.
Greater stress is being laid on Sunday School work. Children
had been gathered into Sunday Schools ever since the Lutheran
Church was established in Queensland. However, as religious in-
struction was imparted to the children during the week, not so
much emphasis was placed upon Sunday School. In the year 1914
the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queens-
land showed in its statistics that 36 congregations were affiliated
with it. In 24 congregations the children received religious instruc-
tion on a week-day, and there were in existence 13 Sunday Schools.
But when the Sunday School proved to be the only medium
through which religious teaching could be given, great efforts were
made to organise it thoroughly. Synod discussed the important
question repeatedly and, at the Convention at Bundaberg in the year
1925, a separate Committee was appointed for the purpose of
organising the religious instruction of the youth of the Church.
Pastors T. J. Fuhlbohm, M. Reuther and A. E. Reuther were the
members. Much good result has come from the work of this Com-
mittee. There are now Sunday Schools in almost all congregations,
the children attending, either on Saturday or on Sunday, for the
purpose of receiving religious instruction. Men and women, old and
young, are offering their time and abilities to teach the children,
thus helping the good cause of training the youth.
The Committee endeavours to be of special help to the teachers;
it calls them together for annual Conventions, the first one meeting
in the Beenleigh Church “To the Cross” towards the end of 1927.
By means of lectures and class demonstrations the teachers study
and learn to become efficient. The Committee also suggests and
provides uniform plans of instruction. At present the Committee is
constituted as follows: Pastors M. Reuther (chairman), H. Schmidt
(secretary), M. Lohe, and the Brethren C. Harch (treasurer), and
C Radke.
The Committee further makes arrangements that Lutheran
children who are unable to reach a Sunday School are instructed by
correspondence. Mrs. Larsen, the wife of Pastor Larsen, at Mackay,
.and Miss A. B. Petersen, of Kingaroy, are attending to this work
and are meeting with quite a deal of success.
Since 1924 the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Austra-
lia publishes a separate monthly paper for the Sunday School
children : “The Children’s Friend”, the editor of which is Pastor


E. Gutekunst, of Toowoomba. A special School Hymnal has also
been published and is widely used in the Sunday Schools.
And for the purposes of the Sunday School as well as of the
Confirmation Classes the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in
Australia has published an exposition of Luther’s Small Catechism
and a Bible History. Both books have recently appeared in much
improved form. The pastors of the Queensland District have ren-
dered their share in connection with the compilation of these very
important publications. It is gratifying that ever more uniformity
is being achieved; this helps in no small degree toward the upholding
of the Lutheran Church.
At present the Queensland District of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia numbers 79 Sunday Schools and
1837 children are on the roll. But the state of perfection has not yet
been reached. There are still many parents who do not realise the
great importance and the far-reaching influence of the Sunday
School and of religious instruction for their children. The very
future of the Church, the very existence of our people and our
State depends on the instilling of religious principles in the minds
of the children. Their hearts must be stablished in faith toward
God and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Another great task was to win and to influence the young
people of the Church. Many of the boys and girls were confirmed
in German: their knowledge of the German language had
been only imperfect and in the course of a few years they had almost
completely forgotten it. Under the influence of the War-psychosis
they had no desire at all to retain such knowledge and had slipped
into an unfortunate antagonism and antipathy towards their Church.
In this case, too, the Church, recognising her duty, sought to retrieve
the position by regaining the confidence of her young people.
Young People’s Societies were instituted in the congregations. They
organised the youth and brought them into closer touch with the
Church and with her doctrines, her activities and her problems.
Such societies had been established here and there many years
earlier. At Bethania, for instance, as far back as 1884, there was a
Lutheran Young Men’s Society “Concordia”, and its president was
Martin Noethling; there was one also at South Brisbane; but lack-
ing precedent and leadership, they lapsed again. Only the one
in connection with the St. Paul’s Church at Toowoomba
founded in the year 1895, remained in existence and has always
proved a blessing to the congregation and to its members.
Now many such societies have been formed and the pastors
have not spared themselves in their efforts to render these organisa-
tions as productive of good as ever possible. In devotional, educational
and social meetings the young people are influenced to become
faithful members of their Church and good citizens of their country.
There are 37 such societies within the Queensland District of the
United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia, with 929 mem-
bers. Most of these Lutheran Young People’s Societies have joined
together and organised an Association, and at annual Conventions


they consider ways and means to help their Church and to receive
encouragement to live up to their motto: "’ln God we trust .
The first of these Conventions took place in connection with a
Sunday School Teachers 1 Convention at Murgon in the year 1929.
Since the year 1934 this Association publishes its own periodical,
the “Lutheran Youth 11 , which is edited by Pastor M. Lobe, of South
Brisbane, and which appears every second month. The Lutheran
Young People’s Societies in the Southern States have also adopted
the “Lutheran Youth 11 as their organ.
The libraries established in connection with the Lutheran
Young People’s Societies and the sets of lantern slides in use among
them also do quite a deal to educate and influence the youth of the
Lutheran Church along the lines of sound Christian training.
It is generally acknowledged that women are more deeply and
more fervently religious than men, and their gentle influence in the
homes is of inestimable value. The mother’s pious training has made
many a man great, and has preserved many another one from the
downward grade. The quiet and unobtrusive work of women is also
felt in the life of the congregations, and the Lutheran Church is
proud of the number of women who have served her with prayer,
with deeds of mercy, and with sacrifice. Pastors’ wives and members 1
wives of the past and present generation, too, have never tired
of helping the good cause. Some were known in wider circles, as
for instance, Mother Schneider, of Waterford, Miss Mengel and
Mrs. Kleimeyer, of Toowoomba, Mrs. Quast, of Beenleigh, Mrs.
Heuer, the wife of Pastor Heuer, of Toowoomba; but Mrs.
Schmidt, the wife of Pastor Schmidt, of Bundaberg, in her labour
of love reached beyond the boundaries of her own Church, and her
name, and her sympathetic help in word and deed, was known in
many lands, and far beyond the seas. Throughout the Common-
wealth, perhaps just as much among the aborigines as among the
Europeans, in the wilds of New Guinea, in the teeming cities of
India, in Jerusalem, in many towns and homes in Germany and in
America, the goodness of her heart was known, and her passing
away in the year 1933 caused deep-felt sadness in a wide circle.
It has been a step in the right direction that the efforts of the
women have been organised in Ladies’ Aids, or Ladies Guilds;
they have done good work in the Church. The oldest of them —in
the Phillip Street Congregation, at Toowoomba, in the Nazareth
Congregation, at South Brisbane, in the St. John’s Congregation, at
Bundaberg, in the congregation “To the Cross”, at Beenleigh—
have existed more than 25 years. In many congregations such
organisations have come into being since then. The local congrega-
tions and the Church at large are under a great debt of gratitude to
them. They have never grown weary of beautifying the houses of
worship; they have visited the sick and helped the poor; they have
supported the Home and Foreign Mission activities of the Church;
and they have shown themselves ever ready with their sympathy
and their practical help. There are in the Queensland District of
the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia 22 Ladies’


Guilds, with 569 members. Perhaps, if they could be organised into
an association, they would themselves experience great benefit and
their influence might become still more far-reaching.
An important aid to create greater interest in the Lutheran people
of this State for their Church, has been the distribution of Christian
and Lutheran literature, especially periodicals. The German immi-
grants read quite a number of Church and Mission papers, the
majority of which came from Germany. One of the most widely
distributed Christian periodicals was the “Abendschule” (Evening
Journal), published in America. Again and again the question of
publishing a Church paper in and for Queensland was discussed,
and in the year 1900, Pastor E. Becker, of South Brisbane, edited
such a publication for a short time : “Lutherischer Sonntags-
freund”. It appeared in the German language. Later, efforts were
made to win subscribers for the various Church papers published in
South Australia and Victoria, but without much success until after
the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia was constitu-
ted in March, 1921. Since then the “Lutheran Herald”, in English,
and “Das Kirchenblatt”, in German, have found their way to the
members of the Church in Queensland, though it will take some
time before every home has its Church paper. During recent years
quite a number of parishes have begun to publish parish papers,
monthly or quarterly publications, mostly for the purpose of making
known the service plan, and of bringing happenings within the
parish to the knowledge of the members.
As mentioned above, the youth of the Lutheran Church is
offered wholesome reading through the “Lutheran Youth”, whilst
the Sunday School children receive the “Children’s Friend”. The
“Christian Book Almanac” and the “Kalender” are publications of
the Lutheran Church and find their way into many homes.
When the amalgamation of the Synods took place, in March.
1921, there was a danger that, with regard to the English Hymn
Book, a similar chaos might come about as was the case with regard
to the German books. A number of the congregations of the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland were
using a small hymn book (because of its green cover usually called
“the green hymn book”), which they had imported from the
Missouri Synod of America. The Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Queensland had published its own hymn book, which was to serve
both Church and Sunday School. Besides these, the Wartburg
Hymnal, published in America, was introduced by one or the other
congregation. Fortunately the United Evangelical Lutheran Church
in Australia decided to make use of the Australian Lutheran
Hymnal, which is being published by the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Australia (Missouri), in Adelaide. With its companion,,
the Tunebook, it is being used in all the congregations in Queens-
land. Though it may not be perfect—neither with regard to the
hymns nor to the tunes —both hymns and tunes are slowly becoming
the real and inner property of the Church-members. How heartily do
these people sing the old hymns of their fathers, clothed in the new


form of the language of their country, and set to the tunes of long,
ago! The Lutheran Church is a singing Church and old and young
should know and show and prove it!
A happy augury for the future of the Lutheran congregations-
are the many choirs which help to beautify the Sunday and Festival
services. Unfortunately, some of these choirs were ilhadvised when
procuring their music, and they often sing anthems of little value,
especiallv as far as the music is concerned. It would require na
areater effort to sing really good music, but it would be well it
they would seek the advice of such in the Church as have the
necessary qualification and experience to help and to direct them.
The Young People’s Societies, too, love to sing, and here it must
be acknowledged that, unfortunately, suitable songs are lacking.
The young people are in real need of a collection of good folk songs,
both spiritual and otherwise.
With regard to Church architecture an improvement is
evident. As the Lutherans became more prosperous and were able to
St. Matthew’s, Murgon.
avail themselves of more of the comforts of their time they also
strove to render more beautiful their houses of worship The churches
were lined, ceiled, and painted; and many were rebuilt and pro'
vided with a chancel, as for instance, Cloyna, Crows Nest Mackay,
Kalbar, Milbong, Pimpama Island, Murgon, Beenleigh ( lo the
Cross’"), Maryborough, Nudgee Road, Till mere, Alberton an
Kingaroy.
The desire for correct Lutheran principles of Church arcnn
tecture is further revealed by the fact that the Convention of Synod,
at Beenleigh in the year 1936, appointed an Advisory Committee on
Church Architecture. This Committee consists of Pastors M. Lohe,
of South Brisbane (chairman) and G. Dohler, of Ipswich, and
Brother C. Radke, of Nudgee Road (secretary).
It is a sad fact that the family altar has of late years been much
neglected throughout the Lutheran Church in this State, and it


must remain one of the great aims to restore it among its members.
The reading of the Bible in the homes, the singing of hymns, the
grace at table are a necessity as great as the daily bread. Books of
devotion, books of sermons, and other devotional literature are
available as a help for the homes and families. In this respect a
return to the customs of the fathers is urgently desirable.
It is noticeable, too, that the attendance at the Sunday -services
is not as good as it was when the fathers and grandfathers were still
alive. The churches may present a more pleasing aspect, both as to
their exterior and their interior; runners and carpets and comfortable
seats may seem ever so inviting, yet the greatest adornment of a
church, a numerous regular congregation of worshippers, is in
many instances missing. It should be unbearable to Lutheran con-
gregations that their churches remain closed on any Sunday. Yet
there are within the Queensland District of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia not a few congregations in which there
is no Sunday service, when the pastor is unable to be present. The
reading services, which were customary in all congregations when-
ever the pastor was absent, have not generally been continued
when the congregations adopted the English language for its Sunday
worship. More recently young men have shown greater readiness
to read the service and the sermon on Sundays, but there is still
a good deal of room for improvement.
German is still used in some of the churches in order to give
the older generation, which is continuously dwindling in number,
an opportunity to worship in that language, with" which it is
really acquainted best. Thus during the year 1936, 73 congregations
affiliated with the Queensland District of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia heard 476 German sermons, whilst
during the same time 2211 English sermons were preached in their
churches. All work in Sunday Schools, in Confirmation Classes and
in the Lutheran Young People’s Societies is carried on in the
English language.
At was much variety with regard to the order of the
English service. Soon, however, the demand arose for a uniform
order of service. Pastors L. Doehler and O. Theile had translated
into English the German order of service, which had been printed
in the year 1916. But Pastor F. Richter, D.D., the President of the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of lowa and other States of America,
who was at that time, 1921, in Queensland, strongly advised and
urged the adoption of the “Common Service” as the order of
service. And quite a number of pastors and congregations followed
that advice. At the General Convention of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia at Walla Walla, N.S.W., in March,
1928, this Common Service was adopted as the uniform order of
service throughout the Church. Since that time nearly all the con-
gregations in Queensland have introduced this form of service. Such
course has certainly brought them into closer harmony with one
another and with the Lutheran Church throughout the world. It is
wonderfully impressive, when taking part in the Lutheran service in


the various congregations of this State and of other States and
countries, to find the same order of service, the same hymns, the
same tunes. The unity of the faith immediately becomes evident and
Christian fellowship is promoted thereby.
The Common Service is the common consent of the pure
Lutheran Liturgies of the sixteenth century, and these are based on
earlier liturgies of Reformation and days, in parts
dating back to the liturgical forms of the early Christian Church. In
its newest parts it is as old as the time of the Reformation; in its
order and in the great body of its contents, it represents the pure
service of the Christian Church of the West from the earliest times;
it embraces all the essentials of worship from the establishment of
the Christian Church on earth; and it has given expression to the
devotion of countless millions of believers throughout many
tions. It can lay claim, as no other form of service now in use can,
to be the Common Service of the Christian Church of all ages. As
this Common Service is widely used in the Lutheran Churches of
Germany, Denmark, Norway, Sweden and the United States of
America, it affords a real Communion of the Saints. But it must
not remain form only. Faith must fill it with living power and
strength.
The forebodings of some of the older generation, that the
introduction of the English language into the congregations would
be the end of the Lutheran Church in Queensland, have proved to
be unfounded. It is a pleasure to observe that, on the whole, the
younger generation is taking a very lively and a very active interest
in its congregation and in its Church. The language is changed
but the message is the same. The sound may be different, but the
rhythm beats true. On the membership lists of the Lutheran com
gregations are the same names which were there fifty years ago; the
same Word of God is being preached; the same hymns and the
same tunes are being sung; the members confess their faith with
the same three articles of the Apostolic Creed; they bring their
children to the same Sacrament of Holy Baptism and at the altar
they receive the same Holy Supper. But the language used is no longer
the German. It is the language of the country —English. The
Lutheran Church in Queensland has learned and experienced that
the Lutheran faith, the faith of the fathers, is not bound to the
German language only. Lutheran doctrine and teaching and form of
worship can well be rendered and practised in the English language.
jji jJj
It is necessary that all Lutherans stand firmly together in order
to uphold the faith of the fathers. They must take up a definite
and decided position over against the superficial trend of the times.
They must grasp the deep and sober truths of the Lutheran faith
and hold to them. Not new methods of organisation, not new
ways of approach to the hearts of men are the chief requirements of


the moment. God’s Holy Word and the Sacraments of Jesus Christ
are the foundation of the Lutheran Church! Word and Sacrament
are the means of grace, and they are the only means of grace!
Lutherans must read and study the Bible that it may be and remain
the lamp unto their feet and the light unto their path. Lutherans
must gather at the Table of the Lord and seek communion with
Him. The present time, with its worship of the material things,
treats the Holy Sacrament with much indifference and the Lutherans
are in danger of becoming infected by this indifference. Holy
Communion really and truly imparts richest grace to the individual
Christian, and its blessings become apparent in the life of the con"
gregation. Through Word and Sacrament, and through Word
and Sacrament alone can the efforts of the Lutheran Church be
crowned with success! Thus alone can it be filled with that Life
which has its foundation in Him Who is Life!
Goombungee Synod, 1937.


PART 111. THE ACTIVITIES OF OUR LUTHERAN CHURCH
IN QUEENSLAND.
CHAPTER I.
FOREIGN MISSION
When the white settlers came to Queensland they found a
native race in possession. Without adequate compensation being
made, the country —the natural heritage of those natives —was
taken from them; and the white man established himself on the
land, which was not only the hunting ground of the aborigines—the
source of their livelihood, but also the holy book of their religion
and their folklore. The white man destroyed that which constituted
the foundation of the moral strength of these people. He detribalised
them, to whom tribal connections and tribal customs meant every'
thing worth living for. The consequence was that here and there,
between the aborigines and the representatives of the European
civilisation, clashes occurred, which led to outrages on both sides.
The treatment, at that time meted out to the original inhabitants of
this country, will always remain a blot on our civilisation and on
the fair name of our country. The aborigines were in many in'
.stances looked upon as wild animals, rather than as human beings,
and were hunted and exterminated like some animal pest.
We are grateful that the German settlers did not join in this
contemptuous and barbarous treatment of the native population.
The Erst German settlement, as we have learned, was comprised of a
party of missionaries, that established itself at Zion s Hill, or
Nundah, near Brisbane. The fact that the leader of the Scottish
Church of New South Wales—Rev. Dr. John Dunmore Lang-
instigated this missionary enterprise, is evidence that there were also
other men whose heart went out in pity and in love for the original
inhabitants of this land. And, a year earlier (1837), the Church
Missionary Society of the Church of England had sent Rev. John Handt
(who also was a German) to the Moreton Bay Settlement at Bris'
bane, for the purpose of establishing a Mission among the aborigines.
The undertaking of the German Mission at Zion s Hill proved
a failure. In the year 1861 the Government of Queensland ap'
pointed a Select Committee which was charged to inquire, inter
alia, into the conditions of the aborigines generally. August Rode
and J. L. Zillmann, two members of the first party of German mis'
sionary colonists that arrived at Brisbane in the year 1838, were
among those who gave evidence. Both stated that their efforts to
civilise and to christianise the aborigines in the vicinity of Brisbane
had been of no avail. For eight years, to the year 1846, they had
laboured, but they had experienced no success. They attributed their
failure in the first place to the lack of support on the part of the
Government and of the public, but the nature of the aborigines was
a contributory factor. Both declared themselves convinced that the
aborigines could be influenced for the better and could be lifted
from their wild and savage state, if the necessary means were avail'


able and the necessary area of land was set aside for them. Mr.
J. L. Zillmann contended that his plan to establish a large cotton
plantation for and with aborigines could be made self-supporting
within live years. Nothing came of the proposal but the evidence
the above gave proves that these men and the three other members
of their party whom they mention, C. Gerler, F. Frans and W. Geh-
ricke, still took the liveliest interest in the welfare of the aborigines
of Queensland. In fact ail German settlers that came into this,
country always recognised their duty towards the aborigines.
Under the circumstances which prevailed and which renderedit so
very difficult for them to obtain pastors for themselves and for their
children, they found it impossible to effectively and directly help
the aboriginal inhabitants of the country. But some of the con-
gregations raised regular offerings in aid of Foreign Mission work,
and forwarded the proceeds either to South Australia as a contribu-
tion to the work among its aborigines, or to Germany in aid of
Foreign Mission work carried on by German Societies.
In the year 1866 Pastor J. G. Flaussmann, one of the original
German missionaries who had come to Queensland in 1838, again
attempted to bring the Gospel message to the aborigines of Queens-
land. He established a mission station near Beenleigh, on the Albert
River, just opposite the Yellow-wood Mountain (Mt. Stapylton)
and called it Bethesda. As has been mentioned before, the Gossner
Mission Society of Berlin sent quite a number of its missionaries to
assist him in his undertaking; and a conference of the German
pastors, who were then stationed in Queensland, promised to sup-
port him. Pastor J. G. Haussmann and his son, Pastor John Hauss-
mann, tried also to interest the general public in this undertaking
by addressing public meetings in Brisbane. Several such meetings
took place towards the end of the year 1866.
Pastor J. G. Haussmann took up the plan which Mr. J. L,
Zillmann haa propounded before the Select Committee, mentioned
previously. Not a cotton plantation, however, did he establish, his
mission station was a sugar plantation; the natives were to be in-
duced to settle there, work the plantation, and thus earn their living,
whilst at the same time they were being brought into contact with
the Word of God. In the light of present-day missionary experience,
it would appear that the method adopted on this station moved
along correct lines; but the close proximity of European settlement
rendered all efforts futile. (In this connection it is interesting to
note that the granddaughter of this pioneer of mission work amongst
the aborigines of Queensland, Miss B. Haussmann, for many years
has been, and still is, an official in the office of the Australian Board
of Mission of the Church of England, at Brisbane, thus in her part
carrying on the good work so nobly begun by her grandfather.)
After the settlement Bethesda, near Beenleigh, had finally
proved a failure, the Lutheran pastors, especially Pastors Hellmuth
and Goessling, continuously explored ways and means of
bringing to the original inhabitants of Queensland the blessings of
the Gospel message. And when, in 1883, four young pastors arrived!


from Hermannsburg, in Germany, it was the intention of t e
German pastors and congregations in Southern Queensland as well
as of the Society at Hermannsburg which had sent them out that
■one or two of them should establish a mission station among the
aborigines of the colony. The arrangement was that the Mission
Society at Hermannsburg, in Germany, would support such an
undertaking with £2 50 per annum. But the need of pastors among
the German settlers was so great that none of the new arrivals could
be spared for the purpose of mission work among the aborigines.
At that time the Government of Queensland realized its
obligation towards the aborigines of the country more fully than
earlier in the history of the Colony. In the year 1885 Missionary F.
A. Hagenauer, who had laboured among the aborigines of Victoria
since 1858, came to Queensland, in the interests of the Moravian
Mission Society of Herrnhut, in Germany, of which he was a mem"
ber. He made inquiries into the condition of the aborigines here
and into the opportunities of beginning missionary work among them.
His investigations led him north to the Bloomfield River and west
almost to the Gulf of Carpentaria. The observations of this expern
enced missionary, whose successful efforts on the station Ramahjuck,
in Victoria, were widely and favourably known, encouraged the
Queensland Government, under Mr., later Sir Samuel Griffith, to
favour and support missionary efforts. (It maybe mentioned incideii"
tally that the Missionary F. A. Hagenauer attended a missionTestival
at German Station on the 31st of May, 1885, and addressed a very
large and deeply interested congregation of Lutherans on his experi"
ences among the aborigines of Victoria. Pastor J. G. Haussmann
also was present, who, almost 50 years earlier, had at German
Station tried to win for Christ the aborigines in the vicinity of
Brisbane.)
MARI YAMBA.
At the Foundation Meeting of the United German and Scan"
dinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, in the year 1885, the
•question of mission work among the aborigines was discussed, and
Pastor C. G. Hellmuth, of Maryborough, was instructed to make
the necessary investigations, and to report to the next meeting.
During that time, 1885 to 1886, Missionary J. Flierl (who was on
his way to German New Guinea and who for some months was
detained at Cooktown) drew the attention of Pastor A. Sueltmann
(the Superintendent of the Synod) and of Pastor C. G. Hellmuth to the
Bloomfield River area near Cooktown, as a very promising field for
a mission station. Both pastors felt favourably disposed towards
this proposal, but, before action was taken, the Evangelical Lutheran
Immanuel Synod of South Australia —which also had been advised
of this field —decided to take up the work there.
Meanwhile Pastor G. Heuer, of Mackay, pointed out that north
of Mackay, inland from Bowen, on the Proserpine River, there was
good opportunity for missionary enterprise. Two members of his
congregation, Messrs. F. Tanzky and W. Grosskreutz, explored the


area and gave to the authorities of the Synod a comprehensive:
report on their investigations. At the meeting of Synod in August,
1886, Pastor Hellmuth was able to state that Missionary Chr.
Claussen (who had been sent to New Zealand by the
burg Mission Society and who had gained some experience among
the Maoris) was willing to come to Queensland. After the Govern-
ment had granted an area of 30 to 36 square miles near Bowen and
Proserpine, north of Mackay, for the purpose of the Mission, Mis-
sionary Chr. Claussen began his work there in the beginning of the
year 1887. Missionary Chr. Claussen was accompanied by Missionary
M. Doblies and some Danish colonists. The place was given the
native name Mari Yamba. Missionary C. Claussen, Mr. G. R.
Weise, of Ipswich, and Mr, H. Mewing, of Pimpama Island, were
appointed as trustees, and Mr. G. R. Weise was elected treasurer
of the missionary undertaking. Synod placed the general control of
the Mission into the hands of a committee, of which Pastor J. F.
Goessling was chairman and Pastor J. Koehnke was secretary.
Much interest was taken in the work and the members of the
congregations, both men and women, earnestly supported it with
prayer and sacrifice. But the question of staff was always a difficult
one. Missionary M. Doblies did not remain very long, and his
successor, Pastor L. Krause, who arrived at Mari Yamba early in
1891, accepted a call to the congregation at Mackay before the end
of that year. Prior to this, dissension had arisen because of one of
the laymen on the station —a member of one of the Danish con"
gregations—and this led the Danish pastors and congregations to
sever their connection with the Synod in the year 1889.
As the work continued the difficulties which beset all mission
work amongst the aborigines in Australia became ever more
clearly evident. The aborigines are nomadic tribes and are very
difficult to approach and to place under the influence of the Word of
God. Furthermore, the contact with European civilisation is of the
most far-reaching influence, an influence that is a great hindrance
to the evangelisation of the aborigines. And European settlement
was then extending towards Mari Yamba. But the greatest set-back
that this work experienced at that time was, that, in the year 1893,
the missionary, Pastor Chr. Claussen, suffered a breakdown in
health, which necessitated his leaving the mission station. Mr. H.
Mewing undertook the management of the station until a new mis-
sionary could be placed in charge. Great difficulties were experi-
enced before a new missionary could be found and the Government
threatened to withhold its subsidy of £lO per month if the station
were not placed in charge of a trained missionary. At the end of
1894 the new missionary, R. Hansche (sent from Neuendettelsau, in-
Germany) arrived. Fie was commissioned at the mission festival
which took place in connection with the Annual Convention of
Synod at the old Lutheran church at South Brisbane on the 9th
November, 1894, and then took charge of the work. To the great
joy of all that supported the Mission, 2 adults and 2 children were:
baptised during the following year.


Unfortunately, neither Missionary R. Hansche nor hdissionary
A. Mohr, his co-worker, proved suitable for the work and, because
of much’ dissatisfaction among the neighbouring settlers over the
lack of discipline on the station, the Government withheld its sub'
sidy for five months, until matters had been remedied and adjusted.
At various times layhelpers had been sent to Mari Yamba, but none
of them had remained for any length of time. The station was
visited annually by one or the other member of the committee, but
it was impossible to overcome the difficult conditions which were,
.as we have previously seen, not caused by the staff alone. In the
year 1898, Pastor Hansche, the missionary, relinquished his
position and returned to Germany. The work was now carried
on by a layman, Mr. Freiboth, who had been sent out from Her'
mannsburg, in Germany, to the mission station Hermannsburg, on
the Finke River in Central Australia, and who had transferred from
there to Mari Yamba, in Queensland. At the time there were 23
-aborigines on the station.
The finances of the Mission were in a precarious condition. By
the year 1901, the deficit of the mission station amounted to over
£2OO, and, as all efforts to obtain a missionary had been in vain, the
interest of the congregations diminished so much, that in one year
the offerings for the purposes of the Mission amounted to only £8!
The Annual Meeting of the Synod, at Toowoomba, in the year
1901, therefore decided to abandon the undertaking. Mr. E. Becker,
a former pastor—at that time the editor of the German paper “Die
Nordaustralische 2>eitung —was authorised to make all arrange
ments with the Government and the trades people, etc., in order to
give effect to the resolution of Synod. With the aid of the Govern'
ment, as many of the aborigines as so desired were transferred to
the Hope Valley mission station, at Cape Bedford, north of Cook'
town; thus, in the year 1902, Mr. Freiboth took 23 of them to that
station. All movable property was sold, and it was possible to
liquidate all debts. And so, after 15 years, an undertaking which
had been launched with much love and hope came to an end! And
much work and many sacrifices of those that were immediately con'
nected with this Mission were rendered futile!
The Synod and its committee for the Mari Yamba Mission met
with much adverse criticism from among its own members, and lost
their confidence in no little degree. But, though mistakes were
made, the statement made before must be emphasised : all mission
work" amongst the Australian aborigines offers difficulties not met
with on any other field of Foreign Mission! The aborigines are
nomads, with whom it is very difficult to get into contact, and to
approach their mind offers further and new problems. Because the
Mission at Mari Yamba had to experience constant changes of staff,
and because European settlement moved into ever closer proximity,
there was no other course left but to give up the undertaking. The
large number of abandoned mission stations in Australia prove that
the course taken by Synod was the only one possible.


BLOOMFIELD.
Another missionary undertaking relinquished at the same time
was the one on the Bloomfield River, about 60 miles south of
Cooktown. At the recommendation of Missionary J. Flierl the Evan-
gelical Lutheran Immanuel Synod of South Australia, in the year
1886, decided to establish a mission station on that Reserve for the
aborigines on the Bloomfield River. Missionary C. A. Meyer (who
had been a co-worker of Missionary J. Flierl, at Bethesda, on the
Cooper’s Creek, in Central Australia) was selected to proceed to
Cooktown for that purpose. He brought with him a Christian
native from Bethesda, Johannes Pingilinna. For a short time the
party remained at Elim, north of Cooktown, a mission station,
which Missionary J. Flierl had established for the Neuendettelsau
Missionary Society in Germany. The party relieved him (Flierl) of
his obligation towards the Queensland Government and set him free
to proceed to New Guinea. But after Missionary J. G. Pfaber had
arrived from Germany to take over the station Elim, Missionary
C. A. Meyer, in January, 1887, began the work at Bloomfield.
The Reserve, comprising more than 50 square miles of land,
partly consisted of good soil, which would produce anything. The
climate was less suitable for agricultural undertakings, because the
rainfall, though heavy enough, was restricted to three months of
the year, the remaining nine months being dry. Regarding health,
Bloomfield compared unfavourably with Elim and Hope Valley :
malaria being prevalent. About 130 aborigines, with 42 children,
were found in the vicinity.
The work was begun with much enthusiasm. It is astonishing
what large sums of money were spent in order to bring about a
successful issue. And yet the whole undertaking came to nought!
After a comparatively short time, Missionary C. A. Meyer had to
leave the Mission in 1892. He had, unwittingly, come into conflict
with the regulations of the Queensland Government regarding the
aborigines; and, though Pastor J. G. Rechner (of Lights Pass
President of the Evangelical Lutheran Immanuel Synod in South
Australia) personally visited North Queensland in the year 1890,
he could not alter the position. Missionary C. A. Mieyer was per-
mitted to remain in charge until his successor, Missionary J. Bogner,
took ovei the management, early in 1892. In the same year
Missionary S. Hoerlein also arrived. The two missionaries, sup"
poitcd by several laymen, worked hard in order to influence the
natives, and to accustom them to a settled life. The women,
especially the wives of the missionaries, suffered continuously from
malaria, and in the year 1895 Pastor J. Bogner had to leave the
Mission on account of the continued ill-health of his wife. In his
stead Missionary C. Mack was sent to the station. He took charge
of the school and instructed 23 children that attended with more or
less regularity. Meanwhile, Mrs. Hoerlein suffered much from
malaria, and, finally, early in the year 1900, she succumbed whilst
she was at Cairns seeking medical treatment. In consequence of this


(bereavement, Missionary S. Hoerlein asked to be relieved of his
charge.
On behalf of the Committee of the Evangelical Lutheran lim
manuel Synod of South Australia, Pastor Kaibel, of Natimuk, in
Victoria, visited the station and reported on the conditions as he
found them. The result was the decision to abandon the station.
Thus, in the year 1901, the Evangelical Lutheran Immanuel Synod
withdrew from Bloomfield. As much of the station as possible
was transferred to Elope Valley; a number of the aborigines, too,
settled on the Cape Bedford Aboriginal Reserve. It fills the heart
with sadness when it is realised that sixteen years of effort and
sacrifice remained without any result. During those years not a
single native was baptised! The frequent changes in the staff and
the encroachment of European settlement rendered the position
hopeless. And as Mari Yamba, so also is Bloomfield but a sad
memory of a great effort come to nought!
As some of the aborigines from the Mari Yamba Mission had
found a new home at Efope Valley, on the Cape Bedford Aboriginal
Reserve, the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland now supported Eiope Valley Mission. The sum of £SO
was paid annually for its purposes and some Christmas Cheer also
was sent. (Besides this, the fiermannsburg Mission, in Germany,
was supported regularly from the contributions for Foreign Mission
received by the Synod Treasury.)
In 1911 Pastor O. Theile, the Secretary of the Synod, was
instructed to visit the Eiope Valley Mission. Upon his return he
reported to the congregations of the Synod what he had seen and
experienced. It was the first time that lantern slides were used for
this purpose in the Lutheran churches of Queensland. Interest in
the mission work was promoted and Eiope Valley received com
siderably more support than before. It was highly necessary that
more interest be aroused. At the Annual Convention of the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland
at Wilsonton in the year 1910 it was reported that only one parish,
that of Bethania, had celebrated a mission festival during the
previous year.
Several times, during the years from 1911 to 1914, the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland was re"
quested to take full charge of the Mission at Eiope Valley; but the
Synod could not summon enough courage to shoulder the responsi"
bility.
The Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland also supported
Foreign Mission work. At first the moneys collected were mostly
distributed according to the individual inclination of pastors or
■congregations. At the Annual Convention in the year 1886, how"
ever, the Synod resolved that it would support the Moravian Mis"
sion if it established a missionary undertaking in Queensland, and
when, in the year 1890, such a Mission was established (on the
Gulf of Carpentaria), under the general control of the Presbyterian
Church, the congregations of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of


Queensland accorded it regular support. The missionaries were
Moravians from Herrnhut, in Germany—Hey and Ward, and later
Richter. They founded the stations Mapoon, Aurukun and Weipa.
This missionary undertaking was the result of the visit to Queens-
land, in the year 1885, of Missionary F. A. Hagenauer, of Ramah-
juck, in Victoria, mentioned on a previous page.
Missionaries Hey and Richter, at different times, addressed the
congregations of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland.
Missionary Richter was present at the dedication of the Milbong
Church, for instance, in the year 1907. Missionary Hey used lam
tern slides to illustrate his lectures in the year 1912. (Over eighty
years of age, this fine missionary now lives in retirement in Sydney!)
Besides this, the missionary undertakings of the Basle Mission
Society—with its fields in Africa, India, and China —received sup'
port. Australian missionaries who, at that time, were members of
staff of the Basle Mission—as Pastors E. Hiller, W. Basedow, and
R. Rohde —the last mentioned in the year 1911 —on various oc-
casions personally reported to the congregations on the work in
which they were engaged.
It appears that the congregations and parishes of the Evan-
gelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland celebrated a comparatively
large number of regular annual mission festivals, in many cases on a
set day each year, as Easter Monday, Ascension Day, Whit Monday
and others. But the offerings were nearly always used for the
purposes of the local congregations. That is probably the reason
why these festivals were given the name tea-meeting.
NEW GUINEA
When the Great War, 1914-1918, broke out, Hope Valley was
seriously affected, as it could receive no support from the Neuen-
dettelsau Mission Society in Germany. But it was of consequence,
much more far-reaching, that the Lutheran Mission in German New
Guinea, dependent on the same Neuendettelsau Mission Society,
was likewise cut off from its base. Pastor O. Theile (who had
received his theological training at Neuendettelsau, and who, as
Secretary of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod
of Queensland, had, for many years, been in touch with Hope
Valley) was, in God’s plan, the man who was to undertake the
relief work for these missionary enterprises in Queensland and in
New Guinea. Shortly afterwards there was also added the support
of the Rhenish Mission, in New Guinea, which found itself in the
same difficulties as the Neuendettelsau Mission.
It will always be remembered to the credit of the parish of
Bethania-Beenleigh-Eagleby, that the members in no wise hindered
their pastor in the arduous work that was thrust upon him, and
which grew in volume with every succeeding year. The whole
Synod, too, assisted him willingly, as much as circumstances per-
mitted. Through its officials it decided to devote all its offerings for
Foreign M ss : on for the maintenance of Hope Valley, whilst many,
many donations were offered for the New Guinea Missions.


The securing of the necessary means, the raising of the
thousands of pounds which were required and which came from
Australia and from the United States of America was, in those
years of mistrust and suspicion, not an easy undertaking. It was
also an arduous task to disburse these moneys for the thousands of
items which were necessary to provide for a staff of about 80
European members, and to support a Mission which was in touch
with almost 150,000 natives. During the five or six years, which
here come into consideration, more than £31,000 passed in and out
of Pastor Theile’s study in the parsonage at Bethania : £5,000 were
donations from the members of the Evangelical Lutheran Church
Federation in South Australia and Queensland, and £26,000 came
from the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of lowa and other States
Pastor O. Theile,
Director of Missions.
in America. To live through those long years in continuous in'
security and fear —both with regard to personal freedom and to the
future of the missionary undertakings themselves —constituted a
strain that was almost too great. It was of the Lord’s mercies that
we were not consumed.
When the War had come to an end the question of the future
of the Missions in New Guinea led to most anxious negotiations
with the Government of Australia. These, also, were conducted by
Pastor O. Theile, of Bethania, in Queensland. At that time Dr. F.
Richter (the aged President of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
lowa and other States of America) came across to Australia and
took part in these negotiations, helping to bring them to such a con'


elusion that the Lutheran character of these Missions was saved. The
National Missionary Council of Australia rendered all support pos"
sible in this connection. The control of these Missions and their
property was placed into the hands of the Australian Lutheran
Church and the American Lutheran Church —as represented, at that
time, by the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia and
the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of lowa, and other States, respec"
tively. The Lutheran Church in Australia will ever gratefully re"
member the help it received in these negotiations from another
Queensland gentleman, Mr, Arnold Wienholt, of Kalbar, who was
at that time the Member of Parliament for the Moreton Electorate
in the House of Representatives.
The welcome result of these negotiations, which throughout
the Lutheran Church in Australia was accepted as the divine answer
to many prayers, placed upon the United Evangelical Lutheran
Church in Australia a great responsibility. It affected, in equal
manner, also the Queensland District of that Church, At the first
Convention of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Aus"
tralia a Board of Foreign Missions was appointed. Its first meeting
took place at Bethania, in Queensland, on the sth and 6th of April,
1921. Dr. F. Richter, the President of the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of lowa and other States in America, was present. It was
decided that the Executive Committee of the Board was to be in
Queensland, consisting of Pastors O. Theile (chairman and
treasurer), L. Doehler (secretary), A. Hiller, and Mr. M. T.
Schneider. In the year 1925 a reorganisation took place. Pastor
O. Theile, having been appointed the Director of the Mission, re"
linquished his seat on the Board, and the Executive Committee then
consisted of Pastors A. Hiller (chairman), L. Doehler (secretary),
E. Gutekunst (treasurer), and the brethren M. T. Schneider and
C. Behrendorff.
In the course of time, when conditions became normal again,
the German Societies that had founded the Missions in New Guinea
were permitted to again take part in the work. Finally no objection
was raised on the part of the Australian Government to their taking
control of their former interests in New Guinea. A conference of
representatives of all parties connected with the Mission in question
was called. It met at Brisbane in the month of May, 1929. There
were present: Director of Missions, Dr. F. Eppelein, and Pastor A.
Schuster, as representatives of the Neuendettelsau Mission Society;
Director of Missions, R. Schmidt, and Inspector A. Hoffmann,
representing the Rhenish Mission Society; Pastor R. Taeuber, for
the Board of Foreign Missions of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
lowa and other States of America; Pastor J. J. StoU, General Presi"
dent of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia;
Pastor O. Theile, the Director of the Lutheran Mission, New
Guinea; Pastor A. Hiller, the Chairman of the Board of Foreign
Mi ssions of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia,
and all members of this Board. As representatives of the field itself
the Missionaries G. Pilhofer and A. Wullenkord also were present.


/ • Vi
’ \d . -/ 5 ; ' ' aSm I . ; : ;} ..sb.' '-’
:# . Mil I I W* . ; #
, >f K
IBKjK.1 JBk ’3w4k /ji, §
"i r -V m M ■***
|3n||Bp r jflKwt * jffif jB^Hk
. , ■»
Mr. %$L£JSHWp %* r
*V
• ‘ ? ''
The result of the discussions was that the Rhenish Society
took full control again of the greater part of its former field, which
had its centre at Madang. Neuendettelsau did not feel strong enough
to take full control of its former field with the centre at Finsch-
hafen. A three-party control was therefore agreed to with regard
to this field: Neuendettelsau, in Germany; the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of lowa, in America; and the United Evangelical Lutheran
Church in Australia. These were conjointly to be responsible for
this Mission. But separate spheres of interest were assigned to each
party. Neuendettelsau was to take care of the greater part of its
former field in New Guinea. The Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
MISSION CONFERENCE, BRISBANE, 1929.
Sitting: Director R. Schmidt, Pastor A. Hiller, Director O. Theile, Pastor
R. Taeuber, Director Dr. F. Eppelein.
Standing: Inspector Hoffmann, Pastor E. Gutekunst, Missionary A. Wullen-
kord, Missionary G. Pilhofer, Pastor L. Doehler, Missionary A.
Schuster.
lowa was to look after the Rai Coast and its hinterland, which in-
chided part of the pre-War Neuendettelsau held and part of the
pre-War Rhenish field. The United Evangelical Lutheran Church in
Australia was to further the work at Hope Valley on the Cape Bed-
ford Aboriginal Reserve in North Queensland.
It soon became apparent that this three-party system of control
was too cumbersome altogether. The Convention of the United
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia, in the year 1931, there'
fore resolved to withdraw from the active control of the Mission,


thus leaving a two-party control, thereby rendering the work less
cumbersome. It dissolved its Board of Foreign Missions, and placed
its interests into the hands of a small Committee, consisting of the
three Queensland pastors: A. Hiller (chairman), H. Prensler
(secretary), and E. Gutekunst (treasurer).
Meantime the congregations had shown great willingness to
support the cause of Foreign Missions. Evidence is the readiness
with which they supplied the means for the purchase of the Rest
Home at Toowoomba, in the year 1922! During the course of the
next 12 years many members of the staff of the New Guinea and
the Hope Valley Missions used the Rest Home, either to spend
their furlough or to wait for the steamers which were to carry them
to their destination. More than 50 adult men and women, belonging
to the Mission, have made use of the Rest Home, and remember it
favourably. A Committee, comprising the pastors of Toowoomba
and their good wives, took care of the Home and saw to the welfare
of its inmates. The property is held for the Church by the trustees:
Pastors G. Heuer and A. Hiller, and the Brethren A. Radke, W.
Bielke, and J. Donges.
A District Committee of Foreign Missions, consisting of
Pastors G. Heuer, A. Hiller, and E. Gutekunst, was appointed for
the purpose of organising the efforts of the Queensland District in
support of the Missions in New Guinea and at Hope Valley. Mission
festivals, addresses, lantern lectures were arranged, and the Christ'
mas Cheer was collected, packed and despatched. It was a time of
fine coordinated effort. But the position was, unfortunately, deeply
affected by the evil times which the worldwide depression inflicted
upon Australia during the period from 1931 to 1934.
Young men and women, members of the Lutheran Church in
Queensland, offered their services to the Missions and went forth,
trusting in the Lord that He would make use of their abilities and
their willingness to serve. The first one was Brother T. Radke, of
Bethania, who went to New Guinea in September, 1922, and who
is now on the American field at Ragetta. He was followed, in
January, 1923, by his sister Anna, who married Brother W.
Schulz; on account of ilbhealth they had to leave the field in 1932,
and are now living at Bethania, in Queensland. In October, 1924,
Brother Chr. Claussen, of South Brisbane, together with his wife,
went across and gave to the Mission eight years of valuable service
as carpenter; in the prime of life, at the age of 41 years, God called
him away in July, 1932, and he sleeps the last long sleep on the
little cemetery beneath the palms at Finschhafen. In February, 1925,
Brother Hermann Miers, of Pimpama Island, went to Finschhafen,
and for eight years he was engineer and captain of the auxiliary
schooner ''Bavaria 1 ’; he was one of the most sincerely loved and
widely trusted men among Europeans and natives in the Morobe
District; after a short, acute illness he was called to higher service
in November, 1933, and was laid to rest near his fellow-* worker.
Brother Chr. Claussen. In the year 1926 Miss E. Proeve, of
Toowoomba, married Missionary H. Boettger, and accompanied her


L \ WNK tHI MHtUK * BI * **""* **** **' **
husband to New Guinea, where he is in charge of the printing
establishment on Logaweng, near Finschhafen. In the same year
Miss L. Meisenhelter, also of Toowoomba, married Brother J.
Hertle, and accompanied him to New Guinea, where he filled the
position of carpenter at Butaweng, near Finschhafen. Miss A.
Schloss, of Hatton Vale, went to Sattelberg, in New Guinea, in
order to help in the large household there, in the year 1927; in
1929 she married Brother A. Obst, who is in charge of the plan'
tation Salankaua, at Finschhafen. In July, 1927, Brother Con.
Keese, of Phillip Street Congregation, at Toowoomba, went to
Hope Valley, in North Queensland, and for nine years rendered
faithful service among the aborigines there. To our deep regret he
relinquished his post in 1937, and returned home. Miss Annie Giess,
of Engelsburg, Kalbar, was sent to the station Kajabit, in New
Guinea, in the year 1930; she is now on the American field, the
centre of which is at Madang. In the same year Brother L. Behren'
dorff, of Dugandan, went to Finschhafen and, after serving on the
auxiliary schooner “Bavaria” for a time, he is now in charge of the
“Lutmis”, South Brisbane.
sawmill at Butaweng, near Finschhafen. Brother C. Lewald, of
Engelsburg, Kalbar, entered the American field at Madang, in
February, 1935; only 15 months later God took him away and we
had to sow this precious seed on Ragetta Island. Miss Esther Yens,
also of Engelsburg, Kalbar, went to Madang in May, 1936. Brother
Victor Behrendorff, of Biloela, entered the Hope Valley Mission in
September of 1936 and took up work there. Quite a number of
others offered their services, but for various reasons (health, age,
etc.) could not be accepted.
The Lutheran Church has reason to thank God for all these
brethren and sisters of the Lutheran Church of Queensland, whom
He has called to special service. And everyone of her members
should support these mission-workers with prayers and sacrifices.
They are, as it were, in the front line trenches in the great fight
against the darkness of heathendom. Above all, the graves of


Chris. Claussen, Hermann Miers, and Chas. Lewald should call
to us with a voice of irresistable power to uphold the life’s work of
these brethren.
In the year 1932 a total reorganisation of the mission-field in
New Guinea took place. The Rhenish Society found it was unable
to bear the burden the work imposed. At a conference at Columbus,
Ohio, in the United States of America, which took place in May of
the year 1932, the position was thoroughly discussed between
representatives of the Neuendettelsau Society, the Rhenish Society*
and the American Lutheran Church. As a result Neuendettelsau
took over the sole and full control of the whole of the field it had
held previous to the War, whilst the American Lutheran Church
took over the sole and full control over the whole field which was
previous to the War held by the Rhenish Society. Hope Valley, in
North Queensland, was entrusted to the sole care of the United
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia.
The two Missions in New Guinea have been wonderfully
blessed of God, especially during the difficult times of the War
period and during the years that have passed since then. A shortage of
the necessary men and the lack of means has severely hampered the
work. A staff of nearly 140 adult men and women is devotedly at
work to win for Christ the natives of New Guinea, of whom about
250.000 have been brought into contact with the Gospel message,
and of whom about 55,000 are now baptised members of the
Church.
Since 1935 the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Austndia
(Missouri) has also entered the field of missionary undertaking in
New Guinea. Its intention is to open up quite new territory in
northern and north-western districts of the mainland of New
Guinea. For that purpose it desired to obtain from the Lutheran
Mi ssions already existing in New Guinea native helpers and
evangelists. The obstacles in the way of an arrangement with
regard to such helpers and the great scarcity of missionaries which
just then prevented the Lutheran Mission, Finschhafen, to fill the
vacancy on Ruk Island, led to the result that the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri) purchased the Lutheran
station on Ruk Island and took up the mission-work among its
4.000 inhabitants. Thus it gained a basis for its work and a source
from which to draw the native helpers it requires. Pastor F. W.
Noack, of Toowoomba, has been appointed Director of this Mission.
The Linited Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia accepted
the responsibility for the mission station Hope Valley in North
Queensland. It dissolved its former small Board of Foreign Missions-
and entrusted the care of Hope Valley co its two Districts: New
South Wales and Queensland. The latter was charged with the
immediate control of the undertaking; and, at the Annual Con-
vention of the Queensland District, at Pimpama Island, in May,
1933, a Board was appointed to attend to this duty. It consists
of Pastors E. Gutekunst (Toowoomba, chairman), O. Theile (Bris-
bane, secretary and treasurer), R. Rohde (Hatton Vale), and the


Brethren E. Prenzler (Ipswich) and W. SchuU (Bethania). The
latter, a South Australian, was formerly a member of the staff of
the Lutheran Mission, New Guinea, from 1913 to 1932.
HOPE VALLEY.
Hope Valley Mission was founded in January of the year
1886. Missionary John Flierl, the pioneer of the Lutheran Mission
in New Guinea, established it. He had received his training at
Neuendettelsau, Germany. In the year 1878 he was sent to South
Australia, where the Evangelical Lutheran Immanuel Synod
stationed him as missionary among the Dieri tribes, at Bethesda, on
the Cooper's Creek. After seven years he offered his services to the
society at Neuendettelsau, in order to establish a Mission in that
part of New Guinea, which had just then been declared a German
Colony. On his way to that destination, he was delayed at Cook-
town, in North Queensland, because the New Guinea Company,
which held the charter over the new German Colony, did not grant
him permission to land in New Guinea. He used the enforced idle-
ness to begin mission work among the tribes around Cooktown.
The Government of the day gave him every encouragement and
support. Thus he established himself as missionary on the Cape
Bedford Aboriginal Reserve, choosing for the settlement a spot on
the bay, North of Cape Bedford, which he called Elim. Before a
second missionary—Missionary Pfaffier —arrived, the way to New
Guinea was opened, and Missionary J. Flierl left in July, 1886, to
begin the great enterprise, which has prospered so wonderfully
under the blessing of our God.
For a short time a South Australian, Missionary C. A. Meyer,
had charge of Elim, until Missionary J. G. PfaUer took over. In
September, 1887, the latter was joined by Missionary G. H. Schwarz.
Missionary G. H. Schwarz had also received his training at Neuen-
dettelsau, in Bavaria, and was still quite young when he graduated
from the seminary. On the 10th of July, 1887, he was ordained in
his hometown, Hoechst an der Nidder, in Hessen. Joining a
steamer of the British India Line, he passed through the Torres
Straits and landed at Cooktown on the 13th of September, 1887.
From that time until to-day he has been in charge of the Mission on
the Cape Bedford Reserve!
Missionary G. H. Schwarz has seen men and women come and
go. Missionary J. G. Pfaber transferred to New Guinea and Mis-
sionary W. Poland came to his assistance in the year 1888, and Mrs.
Poland joined her husband a little later, her sister accompanying
her. Year after year they laboured together under most difficult
conditions, when there was little money and provisions were scarce,
when poverty and sickness and failure stared them in the face.
Mrs. Poland's sister had to leave the station, broken down in health,
and passed away in an institution in Southern Queensland. On the
Cooktown cemetery rests the first child of Missionary and Mrs.
Poland, a little daughter, who had been the joy and comfort of their
life, so lonely and so solitary!


j ' : p
In 1901 Missionary G. H. Schwarz found in Miss Allan a
partner willing to share his life on the Mission. She has faithfully
stood by him "and never spared herself in rendering all the help in
her power for the cause of the Mission. A year earlier Missionary
and Mrs. Wenderlein arrived at Hope Valley. They had seen ser-
vice in East Africa, and it was thought that their experience would
be of considerable help at Hope Valley, and would give Missionary
G. H. Schwarz an opportunity to go home on furlough. These
hopes were not realised. After a little more than 12 months, Mis-
sionary and Mrs. Wenderlein returned to Germany.
Beginning with the year 1902 the United German and Scam
dinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland began to support Hope
Valley regularly, as is stated earlier in the chapter. Pastor P. B.
Hoefner, of German Station, was appointed by Synod to manage
this part of its activities. In later years the matter was entrusted to
the Secretary, Pastor O. Theile.
In the year 1905 Missionary and Mrs. W. Poland, and their
little boy, Willie, went on furlough to Germany. Missionary Poland's
Missionary G. H. Schwarz.
health was in a very low state. He arranged to address the con-
gregations' in Southern Queensland on his work on the mission-
field, but, during his first attempt, at Bethania, he collapsed and had
to desist. He returned two years later, just after a cyclone had made
an almost complete wreck of the mission-station.
The full force of the storm struck the station at night-time.
The station was not then, as now, equipped with a cyclone-proof
underground shelter. When Missionary Schwarz felt that his
residence was no longer safe, he took his wife and their two little
daughters to a black’s camp about half a mile away. In the howling,
storm and in the pitch-black night the party became separated,
fallen trees blocked the track, and the progress was slow. After
hours of struggle and anxiety they were united in the hut of an
aboriginal family and found shelter there. The morning disclosed
the havoc that had been caused- the church was a total wreck, the
school had been blown away—its timbers were found scattered
about for a mile, the dormitories for the boys and girls on the


station were greatly damaged and the missionary's residence was a
sad ruin, whilst its contents were soaked by the heavy rain which
had accompanied the storm.
Grateful that no life was lost, no limb broken, Missionary G. H.
Schwarz, with characteristic energy, at once began to rebuild the
station. Help was offered from many directions. The Government
made a grant of £l5O and the Lutherans in Queensland gave
liberally towards the cost of re-establishing church, school and
mission station.
In the year 1909 Missionary W. Poland decided to leave the
Mission. Two missionaries were not necessary. The Mission needed
another man, fit to do the hard bodily labour, which was required
to teach the natives how to till the soil and gain a living from it.
Mr. Kenny filled that position admirably. He had been a policeman,
in the northern parts of Queensland and knew well how to deal
with the aborigines. In 1911 the authorities of the Mission in.
Neuendettelsau sent a young missionary—H. Wiedemann. But
after Mr. Kenny had left, Missionary Wiedemann, too, relinquished
his position. An aged member of the Lutheran Church in South
Australia, Mr. Scheibner, of Wilmington, came to Hope Valley to-
give the remainder of his life to the work among the aborigines.
His daughter and her husband, Mr. Gruenberger, accompanied the
old man. When the War, 1914-1918, broke out, and it was quite
uncertain where the money for the upkeep of the Mission was to
come from, Mr. Scheibner and Mr. and Mrs. Gruenberger left the
station.
Shortly after the outbreak of the War, the Neuendettelsau
Mission Society requested Pastor O. Theile to extend a call to
Pastor L. Doehler, and to arrange for him to be stationed, in ad"
dition to Missionary G. H. Schwarz, as the second missionary at
Hope Valley. Quite apart from the many other difficulties in the
way, the Chief Protector of Aboriginals strongly advised against the
proposal, and therefore it was not carried out.
Thus Missionary and Mrs. G. H. Schwarz were quite alone, and
remained so for many years. At intervals a labourer was employed’
for a shorter or longer period, for instance Mr. Peter Byrne and
others. In July, 1927, Brother Con. Keese, of Toowoomba, went to
Hope Valley as layhelper, and rendered fine services for more than,
nine years, when he left the work and returned south. Early in,
1928 Missionary F. Medingdoerfer came from Germany to assist in
the mission work on the Cape Bedford Reserve. In 1929 he was
joined by his young wife. But the health of Missionary F. Meding-
doerfer was not able to resist the strain, and, in 1932, he and Mrs.
F. Medingdoerfer left the station. Towards the end of 1936, Brother-
Victor Behrendorff, of Biloela, entered the services of the Mission
as a layhelper, and is now assisting Missionary G. H. Schwarz in his.
many and various duties. Missionary G. H. Schwarz has seen all
these fellow-workers come and go; but he has remained at his post
all the time, and is still there, hale and hearty, despite his years.


As men and women have come and gone, so have plans for
the welfare of the natives come and gone. Hopes have been raised
and failures have dashed them to pieces. The first reports from Elim,
telling of the growth of vegetables and field products, read to-day
like the ramblings of a highly imaginative writer. Could that sand
•ever have produced vegetables and maize? It is true, there are
fine coconut palms at Elim, but nothing else will grow since the
land has been cleared of the bush and scrub which originally
•covered it.
Missionary Schwarz then moved the station 8 miles further
towards Cape Bedford. There was a sweetwater swamp at this
place. Miles of drains were dug and, when the swamp was dry,
sweetpotatoes and pineapples grew and appeared to thrive, and
coconut palms quickly shot up. All the worry over the question of
food supply seemed at an end. Two years later not a sweetpotato
would grow on that soil, and the pineapples ceased to thrive! This
Mission Station, Hope Valley,
happened from 1900-1903. To-day, even the coconut palms offer
hut a miserable sight.
Nothing daunted, Missionary G. H. Schwarz started the cul-
tivation of sisal hemp. The plants seemed to do very well indeed.
And how the natives laboured to clear the ground for further
plantations: five acres here, three acres there! Wherever the soil
seemed suitable, the trees were uprooted, the undergrowth was
burned, the ground was broken up, and the plants put in. Ninety
acres of sisal hemp growing there in 1911 made hopes run high, the
future seemed assured. The Government made a special grant,
Lutheran Church members gave special donations, even the German
newspaper of Brisbane opened a list for the purchase of a decor-
ticator, to deal with the succulent leaves of the sisal hemp plants
and to render the fibre ready for the market. Everybody admired
.the large quantity of long white threads that were sent to Sydney
to be marketed. And then came the stunning information: "The
fibre is not good enough! There is something missing in the soil,


kout pomr
3 AND mic'*' ff/) - „
. v . ;.■■;•<•■' #/// & DeCAf>ot ->-* **€*
i. vyMtrc * ° £ * C< * H
I CAPE _--
| ABORIGINAL RESERVE - '
f 106,000 ACRES ' -f f y-"Ui'm{{p/r fX^APEL
B VV ■'•■■■ " n,, " r '^JFLATTER*
| (I ««.«#/• ® ~D
I °/J(\ 5AW HlLL e
J v^/xa3(///?iwaJ vU
t*f A -Mmv m
tT (# >
f-S M i(/_ Wj / / LOW WOOD'I 2
Sfo* VNc?!/ §
> wVT 1 w//~^r r ~ %
\ ■wEtf vxy / v o §
\ M c I vp^dPfo¥ 7/ * /^i\{/ /'e- /(([ co^ical . *-
„. AiK\ ffoc«
vfl(/glE I(, Am '4#' flfos W
B GUBBmsfc Mi *rr/- ;> ££
I * A }Sf l|r |
I C4Pf BEDFORD S
*'**'27, , ''V 11 s 1 HOP£ MJLLfY >
“Ti e
% T/^VST
)k \ (fir Sn°8 #>0 ' wt
°?«A f
J *&** t0t*^J? o,Ati H£AC>
0w/ ;
K r 0 W N


and thus it has not come to proper maturity! 11 There are still some
sisal hemp plants growing around Hope Valley. The women and
girls make thread from the fibre and manufacture little mats, etc.
these are the reminders of hopes that ran high and then proved
utter failure.
The Government extended the Reserve to the Mclvor River,
25 miles to the north of Hope Valley, at Cape Bedford.
There was red soil along the banks of the river. Now it should be
possible to grow food for the natives. With much hard labour the
flats were cleared and all hearts were gladdened when they saw
the sweetpotatoes and especially the bananas, which came from
Wayarego, on the Mclvor River. An agricultural expert gave
instructions how to grow cotton. This proved a failure. But soon
it also was evident that the soil along the Mclvor River had no
lasting qualities. Ever and again fresh areas were prepared for culti-
vation; yet after a few years they failed to render a return.
Meantime, beche-de-mer and trochas shell fishing proved a
very remunerative undertaking. Even though the necessary ships
and their upkeep were quite a costly item, the return was a great
help to the Mission. But only a limited number of the inhabitants
of the Reserve could be employed in this fishing industry. For the
remaining men and women employment had to be found on tne
Reserve. It was heartrending that this labour on the land was so
unproductive. And, finally fishing, too, proved not so profitable
as before.- The prices dropped, the fishing grounds in the vicinity,
which were not too deep for the diving of the boys, became exhausted.
Further out, there was interference with the boys on the part of
Japanese and other fishermen. In short, difficulties arose, which
rendered the fishing a problematical undertaking.
About this time, 1934, the Queensland Government lent its
ear to the representations of those interested in the Hope Valley
Mission, and granted an extension of the Reserve into country,
where it was believed that good soil existed for farming purposes.
Before a proper test could be made, the grant was partially with-
drawn. This left the Reserve with a boundary so impractical that
the Mission could do but one thing: withdraw from this northern
■ end of the Reserve. The consequence was the withdrawal from
Wayarego on the Mclvor River. Thus here also, after 25 years, a
total failure was experienced.
Missionary G. H. Schwarz has not yet given up hope, that
finally the Mission can be established on a permanently satisfactory
basis. The whole missionary establishment is at present being re-
organised at Springhill, in the southern area of the Reserve. From
here the aborigines are to farm on arable land, just outside of the
Reserve. The great pity is that the shortage of ready money is
hindering the early execution of the plans. Pray God that He,
Himself, show ways and means, and grant success to the under-
taking.
It has been a comfort to the missionary and to all who know
and love the Hope Valley Mission that the work of Christianising


■"%& V*-^ * h^ySffife, ;
the aborigines has not been in vain. In 1896 and 1897 some of the
girls had been baptised, and since then the Word of God has
gained greater influence. Ever more and more groups of boys and.
girls, men and women, broke away from the old heathenish ways
and accepted God and His Word.
In the year 1903 the little church, which was erected a little
further up the hill behind the Hope Valley station, was opened for
divine service. Here the growing Christian community gathers
regularly for worship. Of almost 300 inhabitants on the Reserve,
270 are baptised Christians. The Word of God has brought about a
wonderful change in the lives of the natives. No longer are they
wild, bloodthirsty nomads. They have settled down and try to
earn their food and clothing with the labour of their hands. No
longer are they thievish, as of yore, when nothing was safe from
them: to-day there is no lock on any door on the mission station!
They would not take a grain of rice or sugar without the knowledge
Church and Congregation, Hope Valley.
of the Missionary or Mrs. Schwarz. They really try to live according
to the Word of God, as they have learned it and as they under'
stand it. They have not become angels! They still stumble and
often fall in their walk after Christ, but they always return to the
Word for strength and try again.
The school was at first the main medium of approach to the
aborigines; and the school has remained the object of special care
in this Mission. In 1899 the Government appointed Miss Mary
Allan as teacher of the school at Cape Bedford, or Hope Valley.
After her marriage to the Superintendent of the Mission, Missionary
G. H. Schwars, in the year 1901, she continued in that capacity for
35 years. With singular devotion and faithfulness she attended to
this part of her work; nearly all the present inhabitants of the
Reserve have, at one time or another, been pupils in the school
conducted by Mrs. Schwarz. At present there are 56 school children
at Hope Valley, 44 boys and 12 girls.


The Queensland Government has shown increasing under-
standing for the missionary undertakings in the State, especially
since the beginning of this century. The Department for Health
and Home Affairs, to which the care of the aborigines is entrusted,
has given much support to the mission work of the Lutheran
Church. At first the subsidy granted was very small. Even to-day it
it not adequate. It amounts to £750 per annum, and a sum of £B4
per annum is granted for the support of the camp blacks. During
recent years the department has also made liberal grants for special
needs and purposes. Hope Valley requires, approximately, £1,750
per year. Taking the average of the past three years, the Govern-
ment has subsidised the Mission every year with £872, the Lutheran
Church has supported it with £573, and the station has raised
£221. But that expenditure has only just been sufficient for the
upkeep of the station! At present more means are an urgent neces-
sity in order to assure the future continuance of the work.
It is a wonderful privilege that God has given the Lutherans of
Queensland. They may here, at Hope Valley, fulfill the commission
the Master has given: to carry the Gospel to every creature. The
Lutheran Church knows that her sacrifices are not in vain, and that
her prayers are heard. But it is necessary that ever greater faith-
fulness be shown, in order that the remnants of the race, that once
peopled Queensland, may have the greatest treasure: the Word of
God, and, with it, the grace and peace and love of God.
Dr. Elkin, Professor of Anthropology at the University of
Sydney, estimates that, at the beginning of the past century, some-
what over a hundred years ago, there were perhaps 300,000
aborigines in Australia. To-day there remain but about 60,000! Of
these, about 17,000 are in Queensland. The Lutheran Church has
always kept in mind the special need of the aborigines, and has
earnestly tried to bring the Gospel of Jesus to them. But has it
done enough? “Our white race has taken their country from them,
killed their game, interfered with their women, and, in many cases,
shot them down, because they were a nuisance.” That is the
observation of an old squatter of Queensland, as it appears in a
recent publication. The white man is the black man’s debtor, and
he must meet his obligations and liquidate his debt.
CHAPTER 11.
HOME MISSION
Long before the term “Home Mission” had come into use, the
practice, which it describes, had been known and had been applied
by the German pastors in Queensland. When Pastor C. F. A. Schir-
meister, of Brisbane, in the sixties of the past century, visited settle-
ment after settlement of Germans around Ipswich, in the Logan
District, and even at Toowoomba —that was Home Mission! When
ten years later, Pastor G. Hampe, of Toowoomba, sought contact


with German settlers at Warwick, Tenterfield, and Grafton, in
order to bring to them the ministrations of their Church—that was
Home Mission! When, again, ten years later, Pastor J. Koehnke, of
Toowoomba, followed Pastor G. Hampers footsteps, and visited
Germans to the south and west of Toowoomba —that was Home
Mission! And quite a number of the other German pastors,
stationed in Queensland at that time, rendered similar services to
the new settlers in the various districts. But in all these instances
we are dealing with the efforts of individuals. The work they were
undertaking should have been most widely and readily understood,
and most willingly supported by an organised body.
But, when at last the German congregations of Queensland be-
came an organised Church, they found themselves divided into two
separate bodies; the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran
Synod of Queensland and the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Queensland.
And just in that sphere, in which they should have undertaken
united work, and in which concerted action was necessary, they
found themselves in competition with each other.
Individual efforts were never relinquished. Individual pastors
and some of the congregations were continually seeking the Ger-
mans and the Lutherans that were scattered through the country,
keeping in touch with them, and bringing to them the Word of
God and the spiritual blessing of the Church, of which they were in
need. In both Synods the need of energetic Home Mission work
was discussed repeatedly, but the measures decided upon and
undertaken were rather weak and ineffectual. The great problem
was not entered upon with a full understanding and with the
necessary efficiency, for the Synods neither grasped the urgency of
their duty, nor the extent of the need and of the sacrifice it called
for. And when their officials, especially the pastors, tried to under-
take some effectual work, the lack of the necessary financial support
frustrated the efforts.
Already at its Annual Meeting, in the year 1888, the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland discussed
the desirability and the necessity of appointing an itinerant pastor;
but, as no funds were available, the matter was left in abeyance. In
the year 1893, the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland
decided to call an itinerant pastor for Southern Queensland. The
congregations were asked to indicate definitely how much they
would contribute towards this undertaking. The response afforded
little encouragement and the call did not eventuate. In the follow-
ing year, Pastor I. Egen, of Nundah, was appointed for this purpose;
but he was to attend to the duties connected with that position in
addition to his parish work. Despite his never-failing, faithful
attention to his duties—in which connection he travelled long dis-
tances, serving small congregations and preaching-places at Steg-
liU, Ipswich, Pittsworth, Laceys Creek, Mt. Beppo and Witta, near
Maleny—he was unable to devote the necessary time to real Home
Mi ssion work. The position was made even more difficult for Pastor


n ' f m9m 1 Jl* ■
BBBBSp?'raR *».
* jv - jj3&&4 1s £fa >£ »s ''^IBmI^
■Hw •** *► §m *£L ** ■*■ ' jfBSojK
♦ *» i! Aka jShflSSM
HfSttSUiHk a. «% * r* «™hm
• ~ -.. ~. ■ y^piijfeiM - - HBife
Egen when, in the year 1903, the Synod appointed him chaplain to
the institutions for the poor, the insane, and the imprisoned.
The United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
'Queensland took a decided step in the right direction when, in the
year 1900, it adopted the proposal of Pastor J. Koehnke to
establish a special fund for the purpose of helping small and weak
•congregations, and decided that every congregation should support
this fund with an annual collection. This was, in reality, the begin-
ning of the Home Mission Fund. When, two years later, the
resolution was passed, that an itinerant pastor be called, this fund
proved to be of great help.
HOME MISSION COMMITTEE.
Left to Right: Pastor H. Prenzler (Chairman), P. H. Schmidt (Treasurer),
H. Sippel, P. A. E. Reuther (Former Chairman), P. R. B. Reuther
(Former Treasurer), W. Oppermann, P. M. Reuther, P. R. Rohde,
P. E. Wiencke (Former Secretary), P. L. Doehler. Inset: P.
Simpfendoerfer (Secretary).
It was in connection with this activity of the United German
and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland that the generous
support of the Lutheran Treasury of God (Lutherischer Gottes
Kasten) of Hanover, came to be of such effective help. The chair-
men of this society, Pastor Greve, and, after his passing away,
Pastor Lohmann, and the secretaries of this organisation, Pastor
Funke and, after his demise, Pastor Stisser, never tired in their
interest and in their work for the purpose of helping the Church
in Queensland. Through their efforts Pastors J. Thun (1902), A.


Hartmann (1903), G. Fisher (1906), and M. Wittig (1911) came
to Queensland. The Lutheran Treasury of God of Hanover not only
defrayed the travelling expenses of these men, but it also paid a
contribution towards the general expenses of the Home Mission
.activities in Queensland, amounting to £25 and more annually.
But money was not the paramount need in Queensland. Men,
pastors, were required. When it became ever more evident that the
pastors must be bilingual—German and English—the friends in
Hanover found it very difficult and actually impossible to render
the help so urgently required. And then came the War, 1914T918.
It destroyed the channels, which had conveyed much blessing from
the Church in Germany to the Church in Queensland. May the
members of the Lutheran Church in Queensland never forget the
help and support which their Church received from across the seas
.at the beginning of the present century.
The congregations at Boah Peak and Doctors Creek, at Kulpi
and Narko, at Kingaroy and Mondure, owe their existence to the
Home Mission work of the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland during the first decade of the
present century. Not all the work could be done by the home
missionaries. The work in the Kingaroy District was actually
begun by Pastor J. F. Goessling, who, after his retirement from
active parish work, was living in that district. He gathered the
German settlers, holding services for them in the Danish Lutheran
•church at Edenvale. After he had left, the pastors of the Synod,
in rotation, travelled to the Kingaroy District every month, con-
ducting services and establishing several additional preaching places.
At that time many of the younger members of the older con-
gregations, especially in the Fassifern, Marburg, and Lockyer Dis-
tricts, were moving on to farms in the Kingaroy, Wondai, and
Murgon Districts. Not only the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland, but also the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Queensland followed them, Pastor Doblies, of Rosevale,
establishing the congregation at Taabinga, and Pastor T. Frank, of
Maryborough, organising the congregation at Cloyna.
The pressing need of those days was to obtain pastors capable
of using both German and English languages. At that time the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland
was able to obtain, besides Pastor Wittig (who had earlier in his
life spent some years in Australia) a number of Australian-born
pastors for its Home Mission work: M. G. Reuther, A. E. Reuther,
T. Fuhlbohm, and H. Proeve.
During the first 12 years of the present century, further large
numbers of German immigrants came to Queensland. They formed
community settlements in the Mundubbera and in the Mt. Larcom
Districts, and, north of Rockhampton, on the Alligator Creek,
Pastor T. Frank, of Maryborough, visited the Mundubbera settlers
and was able to organise a congregation, which built a church.
Pastor O. Theile, of Bethania, repeatedly visited the settlers in the
Mt. Larcom District, and also those north of Rockhampton, on the


Alligator Creek, but when it seemed as though a congregation would
be organised, the outbreak of the War put an end to further
regular visits.
The Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia (which had
seceded from the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland in
the year 1912, and which was connected with the State Church of
Prussia) had great difficulty in supplying its Home Mission fields in
the Murgon and Mundubbera Districts. It made an agreement with
the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland,
according to which Pastor Wittig, home missionary of the last-
named Synod stationed in the South Burnett District, was to take
over the care of the congregation at Cloyna, and the preaching
places at North Mondure and at Murgon. For this service the
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia promised a contribution
of £25 per annum from its general funds towards the Home Mission
Fund of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland. The agreement regarding this matter was signed at
Maryborough on the 3rd February, 1913, by Pastors G. Heuer and
Chr. Schmidt, of the last named Synod, and by Pastors C. E. Treus
and T. Frank of the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia.
A year later, early in 1914, it became increasingly evident that
Pastor Wittig was unsuited for the task of home missionary, and
it was decided that he be replaced. But the outbreak of the War
caused the execution of this decision to be delayed for a considerable
time. However, in the year 1915, Pastor Wittig went to America,
whilst Pastor A. E. Reuther, who was then itinerant pastor in
Western Australia, came to Queensland and filled the vacant
position.
The War caused quite a deal of difficulty on the Home Mission
field also. In the year 1916 Pastor Fuhlbohm, home missionary in
the Kulpi-Narko field, was interned. But, fortunately, Pastor H.
Proeve could be stationed in his place a year later, in 1917. The
agreement with the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia
now lapsed, because all the active pastors of that newly-formed
Church were interned. However, Pastor A. E. Reuther was the
right man for the South Burnett District. He very satisfactorily
cared for the congregations concerned in the agreement mentioned
above, and they joined the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland.
Since the amalgamation of the Synods in 1921, and the advent
of more young pastors who were able to use both the German and
the English languages, Home Mission work has received more and
more attention. It has taken the members of the Lutheran congre-
gations quite a time to realise that the work of the Home Mission
was their responsibility. Often they learned to understand the
necessity for this activity only when their own sons and daughters
had moved into a new district and had settled far distant from their
Church. But then they took part in the work wholeheartedly and
supported it willingly. All the pastors, too, of the Queensland Dis-
trict worked together energetically and thus the North Coast field


{extending along the railway line to Gympie) which had first been
by.Pastor L. Doehler in the year 1916, was regularly
visited; also Laceys Creek, where Pastor E. Wiencke had begun
work in the year 1924 at the instigation of the President, Pastor E.
Hiller. Pastor E. Gutekunst established the small congregation at
Oakey, 1927, whilst Pastor T. Fuhlbohm extended his work to
Maclagan. The greatest expansion at that time was taking place in
the KingaroyAVondahMurgon District, where Pastor A. E. Reuther
was greatly overburdened with work, until, in the year 1923, Pastor
H. Premier was stationed at Kmgaroy, and was able to take over
part of the field. In the year 1925 Pastor M. Lohe was stationed
at Mackay and, in addition to his work in that parish, he worked the
northern Home Mission field in the Dawson Valley and in the Mt.
Larcom area. Pastor B. Reuther laid the foundation for the com
gregation at Beaudesert, and at Eight Mile Plains, whilst Pastor E.
Wiencke, of Alberton, served Lutherans on the Coomera and at
•Southport.
Home Mission matters were for years in the care of the Church
Council of the Queensland District of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia. But at its Annual Convention, in
the year 1927, at Hatton Vale, Synod appointed a special Home
Mission Committee, and entrusted to it this important part of its
activities. Pastors A. E. Reuther, E. Wiencke, and B. Reuther. and
Messrs. C. Behrendorlf and H. Sippel were the first members. The
Home Mission Committee has done excellent work, but the lack
of men and means has been a continual hindrance in its activities.
The Committee has used every opportunity to enlighten the mem"
bers of the Church on the extent of the field, on the urgency of the
need, and on the financial requirements; and it has met with much
encouragement indeed. At present the committee is constituted as
follows: Pastors H. PrenHer (chairman), A. Simpfendoerfer (sec"
retary), and H. Schmidt (treasurer), and the Brethren H. Sippel
and W. Oppermann.
Since the merger of the two Synods in Queensland (the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland and the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland, in May, 1921) the
Home Mission field around Kingaroy has been organised into an
independent parish. Another selTsupporting parish was established
in and around Ipswich. In some instances Home Mission congrega"
tions have been added to existing parishes: as Maclagan to
Toowoomba, Hume Street; Crows Nest to Highfields; Coalbank to
Goombungee; Eight Mile Plains to South Brisbane; Oakey to
Toowoomba, Philipp Street.
Three home missionaries are at present at work: Pastor
H. Minke, who is stationed at Nambour, and who is re"
sponsible for the North Coast field and Beaudesert; Pastor A. Schu"
Bert, stationed at Proston, who cares for the field in the South Bur"
nett District and Gympie; Pastor J. StoU, stationed at Mundubbera,
who is entrusted with the work at Mundubbera and Monto, and at
.some preaching places near Bundaberg. Quite a number of pastors


are also caring for Home Mission centres besides doing their regular
parish work: Pastor A. R. Reuther, of Bethania, at Canungra and
Tambourine; Pastor F. Lienert, of Alberton, on the Coomera and
at Southport; Pastor A. E. Reuther, of Murgon, at Windera and
Wondai; Pastor M. Reuther, of Bundaberg, at Bucca, and Winfield;
Pastor J. Larsen, of Mackay, in the Dawson Valley and in the Mt.
Larcom District; Pastor H. Schmidt, of Kingaroy, at Yarraman;
Pastors H. and A. Simpfendoerfer, at Chinchilla and other
parts of that district. During the past 16 years quite a number of
new churches have been erected for the newly organised congrega-
tions in new areas, as at Baffle Creek (1921); Taabinga (1921);
Narko (1921); Crows Nest (1926); Oakey (1928); Nambour
(1929); Rosewood (1930); Guluguba (1931); Coalbank (1931);
Beaudesert (1933);M0nt0 (1936); and Maclagan (1936).
At the first Convention of the Queensland District of the
United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia a Lutheran
Settlers Committee was appointed and was instructed to bring
vendors and purchasers of farms in touch with one another with the
aim of helping Lutheran land-seekers to settle in the vicinity of
existing Lutheran churches. It was also possible that German im-
migrants would arrive in Queensland and the Committee was to
help them to find work in the towns or in the country and if pos-
sible to settle them on the land. The Committee also tried to find
positions for those who were looking for work and labourers for
the employers who required them. Brother J. Donges was the
secretary of this Committee. He did not spare himself attending to
his duties and Pastor E. Gutekunst supported him loyally in an
undertaking that was meant to help the Church and which, because
of lack of understanding, was not made use of to the extent that
had been expected.
Since a separate Home Mission Committee has been appointed,
the Lutheran Settlers Committee’s duties have been absorbed by it.
The Home Mission Committee also tries to keep in touch,,
through correspondence, with Lutheran individuals and families,
that live beyond the reach of its missionaries. By means of letters
and periodicals, tracts and pamphlets, these members of the Church
are shown that they are remembered, and the contact thus estab-
lished is often the source of much joy and comfort. For several
years Pastor H. Schmidt had charge of this work from which he
resigned in the year 1935. Pastor O. Adler was his successor.
City Mission work is another activity of the Home Mission
Committee, and Pastor L. Krause, of South Brisbane has, for quite a
number of years, attended to it m Brisbane. He visits the sick in
the hospitals, the mentally weak at the institutions at Goodna, the
aged at Dunwich, on Stradbroke Island, and he seeks approach to
the German seamen who enter the port of Brisbane. Pastor R.
Mons, of North Brisbane, is the chaplain to those in gaol. There is
also a large amount of City Mission and Inner Mission work being
done at Toowoomba by Pastor E. Gutekunst, and at Ipswich by


Pastor G. Dohler, but it is not under the supervision of the Home
Mission Committee.
Ever since radiobroadcasting was established in Queensland,
Church services have been included in the programmes. The Home
Mission Committee was instructed to make arrangements that
also Lutheran services be broadcast over the National Station 4QG.
It took some time before the necessary arrangements could be
completed, but since Pastor M Lohe has taken charge of the
Lutheran Nazareth Congregation at South Brisbane, in the year
1932, the Lutheran services of that congregation are broadcast
regularly 4 or 5 times every year. The responsibility for these
services now rests with the Church Council of the Queensland
District. This Council has entrusted Pastor O. Adler to arrange
for the Lutheran devotional service that is broadcast over the
National Stations every month.
Meanwhile the commercial stations also have permitted the
broadcast of religious items and of Church services. St. Paul s
Congregation, at Toowoomba, appears to have been the first
among the Lutheran congregations of Queensland to get on the
air” regularly through station 4GR. The congregation has its own
direct connection with the studio and its services are broadcast
every four or five weeks. Pastor E. Gutekunst also broadcasts a
week-day devotional address at regular intervals through the
Toowoomba station 4GR. Near the end of the year 1937 the com-
mercial station at Ipswich, 4IP, too, began to include Sunday ser-
vices in its programmes, and St. John’s Lutheran Church has its ser-
vices, conducted by Pastor G. Dohler, broadcast every five weeks.
Pastor M. G. Reuther, of Bundaberg, broadcasts a devotional address
every Thursday forenoon through the local station 4BU.
No one can measure or estimate the influence of these broad-
cast messages, and they afford a wonderful opportunity to the
Church to get into the homes and hearts of listeners who otherwise
arc out of touch with the Church, and the seed thus sown will
grow and bear its fruit.
* * * *
In the meantime the character of the Home Mission work has
undergone a complete change. It had originally been a search for
German settlers, who, in the old country, had been members of the
Evangelical Lutheran Church and who here, in Queensland, had
founded a home away from the larger groups of Lutheran settle-
ment. It has developed into a following of the sons and daughters
of the original settlers who launched out further afield and estab-
lished new settlements. Now it is no longer a search after German
settlers, it aims at finding the members of the Lutheran congrega-
tions in dispersion. Such dispersion is much wider than was
previously the case, and the intermingling with the other inhabi-
tants of Queensland is far more general. Intermarriage, too, is
much more frequent. The Lutheran Church also recognises its duty
over against the great mass of unchurched people, of people who
have lost contact with religion and with God. If it is true that


only 10% of the population of the State attend the services of the
Church, then there is a vast field that requires immediate and
thorough attention. Unfortunately, the Lutheran Church is still
labouring under a certain disability. It is looked upon and is
treated as a German organisation, with German nationalistic- or
German political aims and tendencies. Apparently it will take some
time until the fellow-citigens learn that the descendants of the old
German pioneers are Australians, and that they, according to their
religious convictions, are Lutherans, just as the Scotchmen, for
instance, are Presbyterians.
The Lutheran Church is singularly adapted for the work among
the unchurched. For her faith the Lutheran Church knows of no
other foundation than the inspired, infallible Word of God. It is
the only basis of her work. The Lutheran Church will not permit
human reason to be arbiter in questions of faith. She accepts the
Bible as the revelation of God and of His love for all mankind. In
the Bible the human mind finds what it seeks, namely the Truth. In
the Bible the human heart receives comfort in its distress, namely
peace. With the Bible the Lutheran Church offers balm for all
wounds, peace in all wars, grace for all sin, and a life that exists
beyond death and the grave. The Bible alone, grace alone, faith
alone, is the theme of all Lutheran preaching and teaching. The
Lutheran Church holds to the centrality of the Cross, to the Holy
Sacraments, to a definite Creed, to her evangelical doctrines, to a
liturgical service, and to a catechetical training of the youth.
The Lutheran Church abhors all sensationalism, all emotionalism,
all sentimentalism. The Lutheran Church leads her members to
become obedient to the laws and to seek the welfare of the country,
but she avoids all political activity or interference. She seeks no
favour from the powers that be, but is grateful for the freedom
granted to the Church to practice her ministry of the Word and her
ministry of mercy. In the midst of the distresses and anxieties, in
which mankind finds itself in the present age, the Lutheran Church
is well fitted to bear her witness and fulfill her mission. Thus
ec l u TP e d> the Lutheran home missionaries go forth into the high-
ways and byways of the country and of the cities and offer just
that, what the human heart requires.
CHAPTER 111.
BENEVOLENCE
1. The Period of Separate Existence of the Two Synods.
The German settlers soon learned the great lesson of the
pioneering days of this country, that self-help was the key to
success. It was much later when immigrants and settlers began to
look to the Government for support in their life’s battles. With
regard to the religious life and Church establishment, however,
self-help has always remained the only means of progress. And the
manner in which the German settlers financed their Churches and


congregations and Missions has always aroused the admiration of
their fellow-citizens. Very rarely indeed have they appealed for
help and support to members of other denominations around them.
A fine spirit of partnership existed amongst them revealing itself
in all the needs which arose, at a time when general provision for
such need —as is available to-day—was unknown. The older people
have often expressed their regret that the mutual love, so apparent
in the early days, has disappeared. Selfishness and uncharitableness,
they maintain, has taken its place. There is some truth in their
complaint; but, since all things have become better organised,
charity, too, has in many respects taken on different forms, forms
that do not reveal so openly the mutual love of the earlier days. Yet
all the social services provided by the Governments of to-day are
unthinkable, if Christ had not taught men how to love one another.
No religion outside of the Christian religion has any knowledge of
that love, nor does any one of them practise charity.
In the various settlements that sprung up around Brisbane,
Ipswich, Toowoomba, and Maryborough, in the valleys of the
Logan and Albert Rivers, in the Fassifern and Rosewood Districts,
the settlers certainly stood by one another in days good and evil.
They rejoiced with one another, and they shared one another’s sor-
rows. They toiled together, and helped one another in poverty and
in days of illness. Widows and orphans and the poor were objects
of the charity of the congregations.
In the Lutheran congregations the members assisted one another
with money and gifts in kind and with labour, to erect the churches
and parsonages, the schools and the residences of the teachers. And
when a congregation was unable to raise enough in its own midst,
it appealed to other Lutheran congregations for help, and such ap-
peals were never made in vain. Usually two men would set out with
a list and solicit support for the building of a church, or for the
purpose of reducing the debt. When the St. John’s Church at
Westbrook-Aubigny had been built in the year 1886, the sub-
scription lists were published in the German weekly newspaper of
Brisbane and showed that £167 were collected. In the year 1894 Mr.
C. Thiedecke published, in the same periodical, a statement showing
the amount he had collected for the purpose of erecting church and
school at Teutoburg (Witta).
In the historical description of the parishes in a later part of
this book, the remark will repeatedly appear that this or that church
was built with outside help. These remarks refer to the above mode
of financing such undertakings.
As the Lutheran Church became more firmly established, it
followed the development which was taking place in public life.
Gradually the social services were organised by the Government
and began to be a real help to the community: hospitals and
ambulances took care of the ill and the injured, Government depart-
ments took care of the deaf and the dumb, the orphans and the
aged, the disabled and the unemployed.


Gradually, too, but much more slowly, did the Church organise
its benevolence, and it is still labouring to make this activity more
satisfactory.
At the foundation of the two Synods, the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Queensland and the United German and Scan"
dinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, each instituted a Synod
Treasury or Synod Fund. The Church Councils of both Synods
controlled the funds from which all Synod expenses were defrayed.
The United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queens"
land levied a Synod-tax of 6d. per communicant per annum, whilst
the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland relied on the free"
will offerings of the affiliated congregations. This was altered in
later years to an assessment based on the number of families in a
congregation. A congregation of 60 families paid <£3 per annum,
one of 20 families, 10/". The former Synod paid the travelling
expenses of all delegates to the Annual Conventions, the latter left
the regulation of such expenses to the individual congregation, and
used its Synod Fund for office expenses and, at the same time, for
its Home Mission work.
The United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland had a second fund, the Mission Fund, for which it
appointed a separate treasurer. This fund was controlled by the
Committee for Missions (at that time Mission always indicated
Foreign Mission). This Committee was entrusted with the mis"
sionary undertaking of the Synod at Mari Yamba, near Mackay.
No assessment was made in connection with this fund, it received
free-will offerings only. Mr. G. R. Weise, of Ipswich, was the
treasurer until the Mission was abandoned in the year 1901. Pastor
P. B. Hoefner thereafter was treasurer for a few years, after which
the fund was entrusted to the Synod Treasurer, who managed it
under supervision of the Secretary of the Synod.
The Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland left it to the
individual congregations to distribute and remit their collections for
the support of Foreign Mission.
Both Synods dealt with all other expenditure as occasion de"
manded, and raised the necessary funds by special appeals to the
congregations.
When, in the year 1897, Pastor C. Claussen died in the prime
of life, leaving a widow with a young family unprovided for, the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland
came to the aid of the family bereft of its breadwinner. It col"
lected just enough to secure a home for the family. Again and
again at meetings of Synod the question was discussed whether a
fund should not be instituted for superannuated pastors, for pastors’
widows and their orphans. The problem was so great that it was
postponed from year to year.
In the year 1909 Pastor J. Thun passed away; he also left a
young family unprovided for. Again the congregations collected
and in a short time they were able to give to the widow about £2OO.
But this case only emphasised how necessary was some fund which


would provide for such cases. As far as the orphans were concerned,
the Government department afforded relief, but the widows were
still not provided for. Likewise no provision has been made for the
aged and infirm pastors.
In the year 1905 the Annual Convention of the United German
and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, which met at
Bergen, passed a resolution that a Superannuation Fund should be
inaugurated. Pastors were to contribute a certain percentage of
their stipends and the congregations were to do their share by
means of annual offerings. Pastor S. Hoerlein, of Plainland, who
sponsored the plan, was appointed treasurer. Upon his death, in the
year 1908, the matter remained in abeyance.
The Lutheran congregations had soon learned that with re-
gard to their Church the principle of self-help was the only one
applicable in this country. In the old country, in Germany, the
State had attended to the expenditure connected with the Church.
The Church there was a charge on the public treasury. liere the
congregations had to raise the means they required—for their
church and parsonage buildings, for the stipend of the pastor and
for other incidental expenses —through personal assessment and
regular contributions. It was clear to them that they themselves
were responsible for their Church establishment. It was evident
that no one else would shoulder such responsibility, or provide the
facilities they required. But that they had duties extending beyond
the boundaries of their congregation or parish was a lesson which
they had not yet mastered. They had not yet learned that Foreign
Mission, Home Mission, training of pastors, superannuation of
pastors, etc., etc., lay within the sphere of their personal responsi-
bility. However, they supported these activities of their Church and
any need that arose, and an appeal to their charitableness was never
in vain. They gave proof of that ever again during the first 20
years of the present century.
Foreign Mission has always appealed most strongly to the
members of the Lutheran congregations and they have always
willingly supported its needs. Mission festivals were always well
attended and the congregations listened with rapt attention to
reports on the work of the Christian Church among heathen people
in foreign lands, and they liberally gave towards the collections
raised on such occasions. From year to year the Christmas Cheer
for the Missions was more freely supported and more congregations
joined in the good work. When Hope Valley mission station was
devastated by a cyclone in 1907 the friends of the Mission at once
helped with special donations; when certain machinery was required,
when a buckboard and farm implements were necessary, or an
organ for the church was desired, special gifts came in freely.
In the year 1901 the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland decided to create another separate
fund: the Congregations' Provident Fund (Synodale
kasse). Its purpose was to support weak and small congregations
in the maintenance of their Church establishment. The congrega-


tions supported this fund by regular annual collections and, later, a.
part of the collections raised at mission festivals was also assigned tO'
it. Through subsequent developments this fund became known as-
the Home Mission Fund of the Synod and the means at its disposal
were used for the purposes of Home Mission work.
At the time of the Annual Convention in the year 1906, the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland
had three funds which received regular contributions from the com
gregation: the Synod Fund, its income was £35/2/9; the Con'
gregations 1 Provident Fund (UnterstueUungskasse), its income was
£54/1/4; the Foreign Mission Fund, its income was £SB/14/2 —a
total of £147/18/3.
In the year 1907 the Annual Convention of the United German
and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland resolved that
Harvest Thanksgiving Services be conducted annually in all con'
gregations, and later it was decided that the offerings on that day
be used to support the Immanuel College at Point Pass, South
Australia. This was done in anticipation of obtaining, in later years,
pastors who had received their college education at Point Pass. In
the course of about eight years £lßl/2/2 was raised for this pur'
pose.
At the Annual Convention of the Linked German and Scan'
dinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, at Pimpama Island, in the
year 1908, Pastor P. B. Hoefner appealed to the delegates for the
support of a young man who wished to study for the ministry and
who did not have the necessary means. Synod agreed to render
help and a fund for Indigent Students was inaugurated, of which
Pastor P. B. Hoefner, of German Station, was the treasurer. £256
was raised during the following 10 years and two young men were
afforded the necessary support, which enabled them to complete
their course of studies. They are at present pastors of the United
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia.
At the Annual Convention of the United German and Scan'
dinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland in the year 1910 four funds
had received general support from the congregations during tiie
previous year: the Synod Fund, its income was £SO/7/1; the Con'
gregations 1 Provident Fund (Synodale Unterstuetsungskasse),
£55/14/5; the Foreign Mission Fund, £B2/6/9; the Indigent
Student Fund, £36/14/6; a total of £265/2/9. This represented a
marked increase in regular giving during the four years from 1906
to 1910.
During the period of the Great War, from 1914 to 1918, the
Synods were greatly hindered in their work, and the congregations
suffered much loss during that time; but to their honour be it
stated that they did not grow weary in welhdoing. The United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland from
1914 to 1920 —when the first Convention of the Synod after the
War met —raised for the Synod Treasury £230/5/5; for the Con'
gregations Provident Fund (Synodale Unterstuetsungskasse),
£384/14/4; tor Foreign Mission (Hope Valley and New Guinea),


<£soo/19/'; for Christmas Cheer for Hope Valley, <£732/1/10; for
the Immanuel College at Point Pass, South Australia, £134/4/6; for
the Indigent Student Fund, £95/14/10 —a total of £2082/12/11.
The Synod at that time numbered 3,300 communicants.
It is very unfortunate that such particulars are not available
with regard to the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland, its
records having been lost.
Apart from these regular contributions for Church purposes
only, much support was forthcoming for the prisoners of war in
the internment camp and their dependents. Obtaining permission
to collect for this special purpose, Pastor O. Theile took the matter
in hand, and sent out the appeals. Every month he remitted money
and sent gifts in kind to the internment camps, whilst Pastor L.
Krause, of South Brisbane, in co-operation with Mr. K. Reber, regu-
larly distributed sums of money to the dependents of the interned.
No distinction was made with regard to Church-membership or
creed, but the donations were given by members of the Lutheran
Church. Between £3OO and £4OO were in this way distributed dur-
ing the years from 1916 to 1919.
And when the Great War came to an end the members of the
Lutheran Church in Queensland remembered the victims of the
dreadful conflict on the other side of the world. The well-
springs of their charity opened when they learned of the sufferings
of their kinsfolk in Germany. Hunger and starvation caused by
the blockade—which continued for many months, even after the
armistice had been signed, and which shut the German people
off from the food supplies of the world —took a terrible toll of the
old and the young.
Though the Government regulations regarding dealings with
Germany rendered the work very difficult at first, much help in
cash and in kind was rendered to the poor and needy in Germany.
Many donations were sent through that indefatigable worker in the
cause, Pastor A. Ortenburger, of Appila, in South Australia. But
each of the two Synods in Queensland had its own treasurer, who
received such funds. For the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland, Pastor O. Theile, of Bethania,
acted as the treasurer, whilst Pastor R. Monz, of Milbong and later
of North Brisbane, acted in like capacity for the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod in Queensland. After the merger of the two
bodies, Pastor J. Koehnke, of Beenleigh, was entrusted with the
work in connection with the Relief Fund for Germany. In the
course of years more than £2,500 was remitted in cash, and much
relief was thereby afforded in Southern and Northern Germany,
mainly to institutions which were concerned with the welfare of the
children. When Pastor O. Theile visited Germany in the year 1936,
he was in various places almost overwhelmed with expressions of
gratitude because of the support the German people had during
those years of their direst need —1920 to 1925 —received from the
Lutherans in Australia.


2. The Period since the Amalgamation of the Two Synods.
Great problems and tasks lay before the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia when it was constituted at Ebeneser*
in South Australia, in March, 1921. And these problems and
tasks were also laid on the shoulders of the members of the Queens-
land District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Aus"
tralia when it was organised in May of the same year. And members
rose to the occasion! The reports placed before the second Con"
vention of the District Synod at Toowoomba in May, 1922, showed
that, during the first year of its existence, the sum of £1,875 was
donated for synodical benevolence.
The members of the Lutheran Church began to realise that a
great responsibility rested upon them and that a thorough organisa"
tion was necessary to meet the demands made on them. It was
perhaps an easy matter to make a special effort to meet an
emergency, as for instance to purchase the Rest"Home for mis"
sionaries at Toowoomba, for which the congregations raised £3OO
in a very short time early in the year 1922; or to contribute to the
Relief Fund for the German people for which £386 were raised in
the year 1921/22; or to share in the purchase of the Angas College
at North Adelaide, for which purpose nearly £SOO were raised
during the same year. But it was quite a different matter to shoulder
the continuous expense which of necessity arose in the organisation
responsible for every phase of the Church establishment.
In Germany—whence the Lutherans of Queensland had emi"
grated—the State provided for the training of the pastors, for the
cost of travel in case of transfer from one charge to another, and
for the superannuation of the pastors. In Germany large societies
controlled Foreign Mission and Inner Mission. In the years prior
to the War, Seminaries for Missionaries in Germany also provided
the training of the pastors in Queensland.
In Australia the Lutheran Church was now thrown upon its
own resources, it was dependent upon its own sacrifices and its own
organisation.
In order to meet the office and incidental expenditure of the
District Synod, a Synod Treasury was inaugurated. The contribu"
tions were at first assessed according to the rule previously adopted
by the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland. It was in later
years altered to a flat rate of 1/3 per voting member of the con-
gregations. At first quite a number of congregations failed to pay
regularly, but in later years all have remitted their assessments quite
regularly. The contributions thus raised amount to about £125 per
annum.
Another fund, which is distinctly a District Fund, is the Home
Mission Fund which receives its supplies by means of voluntary
offerings. During the first seven years these offerings amounted to
between £IOO and £l3O per annum. The lack of men in the Home
Mission field restricted the work considerably, and the demands on
the fund were not so great. During the past 10 years these demands-


have grown steadily and the congregations have responded willingly,
the offerings rising from £2OO to £4OO per annum during the past
two years. Since the amalgamation of the Synods, in the year 1921,
to 1937, nearly £4,000 has been received for the purposes of this
fund.
All other funds which call for regular contributions are in
support of General Synod activities, and Pastor Finger was the
Treasurer thereof, with the exception of the contributions to the
Foreign Mission Fund. Later, all funds, without exception, were
placed under the control of the District Treasurer, who remitted
them to the committees in charge of the respective activities. All of
these funds were supported by offerings raised by the congregations:
as the contributions to the General Synod Fund, to the College and
Seminary Funds, to the Foreign Mission Fund, to the Martin Luther
Fund (the last mentioned being the Indigent Student Fund).
It was one of the first actions of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia to provide superannuation for the
aged and infirm pastors. The Government provides an Old Age
Pension, but it appears irreverent and against the spirit of the
Lutheran Church and the Word of God that those, who have
throughout their life served Christian congregations with the
Bread of Life for a comparatively low, and in many cases, inadequate
remuneration, should in their old age be dependent upon the
Government. The Lutheran Church has recognised that it has a
solemn duty towards the faithful old pastors; but our congregations
and their members are only very slowly realising that this duty of
the Church is their own duty.
It was not before the year 1927 that the Queensland District
joined with the Southern Districts of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia in providing a Superannuation Fund
for its pastors. Every pastor contributes a certain percentage of his
stipend and every congregation supports the fund with annual
collections.
During the first seven years of its existence the Queensland
District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia
raised, as regular contributions to the various General and District
Funds, on an average £1,300 per annum. The extraordinary and
special collections which were raised during that time for the pur-
chase of the Rest Home at Toowoomba and for the Angas College
at Adelaide have not been taken into consideration.
There were, however, reasons for dissatisfaction. Some of the
regular activities of the Church were deprived of necessary funds as
there were congregations that failed to render the support which was
expected of them. Pastor E. Wiencke, of Alberton, therefore, in the
year 1927, placed before the District Synod a comprehensive ap-
portionment plan, showing each congregation and each member of
the congregation how much was required of it in order to meet
the commitments of Synod, thus placing the finances of the Synod
on a proper and sound basis. But Synod would not adopt the plan,


many fearing that the free-will offering principle would thereby be
set aside and a bureaucracy established, which would be unbearable.
A year later, 1928, Synod was convinced that the somewhat
lax way of financing that it had practised hitherto needed some
supervision, and it appointed a Committee of Finance, electing as
members Pastor E. Gutekunst and the Brethren W. Gierke and O.
Peters. In conjunction with the Treasurer, Brother M. T. Schneider,
the Committee was to place before the District Synod a compre-
hensive balance sheet and submit for its approval fully prepared
estimates; furthermore, it was to inquire into the question of pastors'
stipends.
The depression, which everywhere affected the finances of
individuals, congregations and Churches, caused the District Synod
much anxiety and the Committee of Finance found that its recom-
mendations could not be given effect to. But as conditions improved
the various appeals of the Committee found a more ready response
and the last three years a decided upward movement in the
amount contributed to the regular funds is noticeable: 1934, £879;
1935, £1,047; 1936, £1,250. The members of the Committee of
Finance are Pastors E. Gutekunst, O. Theile and the Brethren F.
Schilling (the Synod Treasurer), and W. Gierke.
Besides the funds which are in existence in connection with
the regular activities of the District Synod and Church, special
appeals have frequently been made, for instance, for the purpose of
erecting new churches in new districts of the Home Mission field.
It is very gratifying how sympathetically such appeals are received
and how willingly the established congregations support the strug-
gling sister-congregations, which have just been founded. The con-
gregation at Crows Nest was supported with £226; Coalbank with
£l2O, and Downfall Creek with £60., etc.
With the object in view of organising the support, which the
congregations rendered in connection with the building of new
churches, and preserving the money for the Lutheran Church at
large and making it available again and again, a Church Extension
League was inaugurated in the year 1930. Pastor A. E. Reuther
sponsored this new organisation. Each member was to pay 5/-
annually and the accumulated capital was to be made available as a
u-Vo tQ - C con £ re g a d° ns requiring help in connection with the
binldmg of churches. The congregation at Monto availed itself of
t e facility thus offered. This good idea did not find as much sup-
port as expected. But the effort has not been without its results, and
it may see an acceptable revival.
nu h ha * C ,X er " been as a definite shortcoming in the Lutheran
Church ot Queensland that it has not been able to establish an
institution of mercy, which could offer shelter for those in need of
it. At the same time such an institution would give an opportunity
to young Lutheran men and women to become efficient in the
ministry of mercy which the General Prayer of each Sundays
Liturgy includes amongst the objects for which the congregations are
led to older their supplications. There were the aged and infirm, the


feeble in mind, the blind, the orphans, the sick, which all had a claim
on the Church and its mercy.
In the congregations there was certainly much sympathy with
such needs but the sense of responsibility was not greatly developed
and the means required to meet those needs were not readily ob-
tainable. These facts deterred the leaders of the Lutheran Church
-who, as it was, were continually faced with overwhelmingly
great problems—from taking fthe necessary steps towards the
'establishment of some home of mercy.
Since the Rest Home at Toowoomba was no longer required
for the purpose of the Foreign Mission for which it had been pur-
chased and maintained, pastors and laymen especially of
Toowoomba—considered ever again whether this institution could
not be used as a Home for Aged People. The Annual Convention of
Synod, at Dugandan, in the year 1935, authorised the Committee
of the Rest Home to take the necessary steps to give effect to the
Lutheran Old Folks’ Home, Toowoomba.
plans it had placed before it in that direction. Pastor G. Heuer
was elected patron of the Toowoomba Lutheran Old Folks’ Home,
and Pastors E. Gutekimst, H. and A. Simpfendoerfer and
Brother F. Meisenhelter were appointed a Committee with power to
add members of the various congregations on the Downs to their
number.
On the first Sunday in Advent, the Ist of December, 1935,
the Lutheran Old Folks’ Home was solemnly dedicated to its
special purpose. The Premier of the State, the Hon. Forgan Smith,
the Mayor of Toowoomba, Alderman J. D. Annand, and many
others from far and near were present, when the President of the
Synod, Pastor A. R. Reuther, opened the Home in the Name of the
Triune God. Pastors G. Heuer, E. Gutekunst, A. Simpfendoerfer
and O. Theile were also present. The reports received since then
have been very encouraging, and, at the Annual Convention at
Goombungee in April, 1937, Synod authorised the Committee to
extend the building and thus provide more accommodation.


The Committee has been, reorganised and is at present com
stituted as follows: Brother P. Heuer, chairman; Brother W. Fitt-
kau, secretary; Pastor E. Gutekunst, treasurer; also Mesdames E.
Gutekunst, P. Heuer and W. Fittkau, Pastor and Mrs. H. Rogge,
Brother and Mrs. F. Meisenhelter. Pastor G. Heuer is an honorary
member.
If this small beginning, through the blessing of God, would
lead to greater and more extensive undertakings, the Lutheran
Church would experience a wonderful strengthening of its faith
and charity.
At the Convention of General Synod at Walla Walla, New
South Wales, it was resolved that the Board of Finance be instruct
ted to make inquiries and evolve a system of insurance of churches
and parsonages. The consequence was that, after long dissensions
and much waiting, the Synodical Mutual Aid was instituted. In
Queensland the Convention of the Synod at Dugandan in the year
1935 appointed Pastors E. Wiencke and O. Theile and the Brethren
W. Gierke and O. Peters as a Committee to begin with the insur-
ance in question by the Ist of July of that year. The practical pro-
posals of Brother W. Gierke were given effect to, and the Com
vention of Synod, at Goombungee, 1937, was informed that 38
congregations had insured 50 separate properties with the Synodical
Mutual Aid. The value of these properties amounted to over
£23,000.
After Pastor E. Wiencke left Queensland and accepted a
position in South Australia, Pastor G. Dohler, of Ipswich, was
appointed in his place, and is the secretary and treasurer of the
Committee.
The question of expenses in connection with the transfer of
pastors from congregation to congregation and from State to State
has found a solution through the General Synod, and, though the
rules of the First Call Fund now and again come up for revision,
the hardship which previously rested on congregations and parishes
has been eased to a considerable extent.
When the Workers 1 Compensation Act was placed on the
Statute Book of this State of Queensland, it became compulsory that
the congregations keep those persons who receive payment from
them for work done insured. This accident insurance has, since
the amalgamation of the Synods, been effected through the Secre-
tary of the Synod.
The general measure of benevolence expected from the member
of the Lutheran Church in Queensland, apart from his share of the
expenses of his congregation, amounts to under 5/- per annum.
That sum is certainly not excessive, but in very many instances it
is not raised. Do Lutherans fully realise the duty of stewardship
which not the rules and regulations of the Synod, nor of the Church,
but which the Word of God imposes upon them? God has set all
Christians as stewards over everything they are and over everything
they have. He expects them to use all His gifts in the light of His
Word and in the light of eternity. Stewardship involves the whole


V.
life of the Christians, their words and their deeds, their witness for
God in their homes and among their in every walk of
life. Especially should their stewardship become evident in the use
of their money. Not only for every word but also for every penny
will the Christian be called to give an account on that day which
decides the eternal destiny of man. Compared with eternity the
worldly possessions seem of so little value and significance and yet
their proper use will have an influence on that eternity for the
individual. All Lutherans in Queensland will agree that there is
much room for improvement and progress. Now that they are able
to view the Lutheran Church and its organisations at work, they will
be more inclined to help the Church in which God has blessed
them. And the more clearly they see that it really was God Who
established and guided and guarded that Church for them, the
more grateful will they be to God for their Church and the more
dearly will they love their Church!
Murgon Parish Lutheran Young People’s Societies Rally,
Cloyna, 1935.


y!v:
S»ooa5}«X»ww?ww5w^
wwwwwwwwwwqWok:^^^
PART IV. THE PASTORS OF OUR LUTHERAN CHURCH
IN QUEENSLAND.
1. The Pastors of the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland from 1885 to 1921.
Pastor A. Sueltmann: He came from Germany in the year 1884.
After having received an academic training, he was a pastor
in the State Church of Prussia. Confessional scruples led him to
secede from the State Church of Prussia, and to enter the ser-
vice of the Free Church of Hanover, being for a time lecturer at
the Seminary for Missionaries at Hermannsburg in Hanover, after-
wards ministering to a small congregation in the city of Hanover.
In September, 1884, he was inducted into the charge of the parish
of Bethania, Beenleigh “To the Cross”, and Bethlehem Church, at
Pimpama Island. He was the first President of the Synod, which
position he relinquished in the year 1899. A few months later, in
1900, he resigned from the pastorate of the congregations at
Bethania and Beenleigh “To the Cross”, whilst he retained the
Bethlehem Congregation at Pimpama Island until 1907. He passed
away on the 18th of May, 1909, and was laid to rest in the Bethania
cemetery on the following day.
Pastor C. G. Hellmuth: Having received his training at the
Seminary for Missionaries at Hermannsburg, in Germany, he came
to Australia in the year
1862. He was stationed at
Lobethal, in South Aus-
tralia, and transferred from
there to Bethania, in Queens-
land, in the year 1867. He
relinquished his charge in
that parish in the year 1876
and moved to St. John’s,
Maryborough, where he was
pastor at the time of the
constitution of the Synod.
Shortly afterwards he handed
his charge over to his son-
in-law, Pastor Chr. Schmidt,
and retired into private life.
He continued to assist in
Church work wherever he
could. In 1890, for instance,
he served the Mackay Con
gregation for 8 months. On
the 14th August, 1895,
whilst with his son-in-law.
Pastor Schmidt, at Bundaberg, he was called Home and was laid to
rest in the public cemetery of that city.
Pastor C. G. Hellmuth.


Pastor G. Heuer: He came from Germany, where he had
received his training at the Seminary for Missionaries, at
burg, Hanover, and arrived in Queensland in March, 1883. He
was stationed at Mackay. In November of the year 1888, he ac-
cepted a call to the Lutheran Trinity Congregation, of Hume
Street, Toowoomba. A year later the newly formed congregation
at Gowrie Road, or Wilsonton, joined the parish. In the year
1900 he was elected President of Synod, which office he held until
1907. He was again elected President in the year 1911 and re-
mained in that office until 1921, when the amalgamation of the two
Lutheran Synods in Queensland took place. In November, 1913,
the congregations celebrated the 25th anniversary of his pastorate
in their midst. On this occasion the German Government decorated
him with the Cross of the Order of the Eagle. During the War he
had to suffer the indignity of being interned, but to the joy of his
friends he was released after seven weeks, the only one of the
pastors interned from Queensland, who had that satisfying experi-
ence. In the year 1920 he resigned the pastorate of the parish of
Toowoomba —Gowrie Road, and since then he has faithfully
served the small congregation at Guluguba, more than 150 miles
west of Toowoomba. In November, 1928, the Toowoomba parish
celebrated, in the ageing pastor's honour, the fortieth anniversary
of his residence in its midst. In the year 1932 the whole Synod
rejoiced with the venerable pastor at the completion of 50 years of
service in the ministry, which was celebrated in the Hume Street
Church at Toowoomba, and two years later his eightieth birthday
was widely remembered. Since 1932 he is honorary member of the
Church Council.
Pastor J. F. Goessling: He received his training at the Seminary
for Missionaries at Hermannsburg, Germany, and, together with
Pastor C. G. Hellmuth, he came to Australia in 1862. He was at
first stationed as missionary among the aborigines on the Cooper’s
Creek, in Central Australia He then was pastor of a Lutheran
congregation at Gerogery, in New South Wales, and later went as
missionary to New Zealand. He returned to Australia, and in the
year 1879 accepted a call to the parish of Kirchheim, near Wal-
loon. He was a foundation member of the Synod, and took a
very active part in bringing about its organisation. On account of
dissension regarding the liturgy and the Church discipline, he had to
leave his parish in 1886, and he settled at Plainland, where he
served the Lutheran congregation at that place. From there he
helped to establish further congregations at Deep Gully, beyond
Gatton, and at Rosevale, beyond Rosewood. In the year 1900 he
accepted a call to the Christ Congregation, at Highfields, remaining
there until, on account of old age, he retired from parish work in
the year 1905. After his retirement, he still served his Church
wherever possible. He began the work in the Kingaroy District,
and, after substituting at South Brisbane during the absence, on a
visit to Germany of its pastor, E. Becker, he served the congrega-
tions beyond Gatton, at Deep Gully and Mt. Sylvia, after the death


of Pastor Hoerlein, in the year 1908. Finally this foundation mem-
her of the Synod, for some unaccountable reason, seceded from his
Church and, taking the congregations at Deep Gully and Mt.
Sylvia with him, joined the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Aus-
tralia (Missouri) immediately after celebrating with his former
Synod and Church its 25th anniversary at Bethania, in October,
1909. He died on the 29th January, 1917, and was buried in the
cemetery of the Lutheran congregation at Plainland.
Pastor C. Prenzler: He received his training at the Seminary
for Missionaries at Hermannsburg, Germany, and came to
Queensland in March, 1883. He was stationed in the Fassifern
District, living at Hoya, near Boonah. On account of dissension he
had to relinquish his position at Hoya in the year 1890, and a few
years later the majority of the members of the Engelsburg Congrega-
tion also seceded, whilst in the year 1900 nearly the whole of the
remaining members joined the congregation of Pastor T. Frank.
Living on his farm, he served a few faithful families who assembled
for worship in an Anglican church, near Teviotville, until the year
1914. He remained in retirement until in May, 1922, he passed
away. He was buried in the cemetery of the congregation at
Milbong.
Pastor J. Koehnke: Having been trained at the Seminary for
Missionaries at Hermannsburg, Germany, he arrived in Queens-
land in March, 1883. For a short time he was itinerant pastor,
helping Pastor M. Eberhard at Bethania in his extensive parish. At
the time of the foundation of the Synod he was pastor of the Perth
Street Congregation at Toowoomba, serving also the St. John’s
Congregation at Westbrook. After much strife the pastor had to
relinquish the charge and he accepted a call to Ipswich, where he
was inducted on the 7th November, 1886. In the year 1889 Pastor
Koehnke transferred to the congregations Philadelphia (Eagleby)
and Alberton. In the year 1899 he began to serve also the small
congregation at Logan Reserve, which had seceded from Bethania.
In the year 1904 a quarrel in Philadelphia led to that congregation
seceding from his parish. Living in his own residence near Been-
leigh he continued to serve Alberton and Logan Reserve and when,
in 1907, Pastor Sueltmann relinquished Bethlehem Congregation
at Pimpama Island, it joined his parish. In consequence of dis-
sension Alberton left that parish in the year 1913. Pastor J.
Koehnke then served the Bethlehem Congregation at Pimp&ma
Island and Logan Reserve until 1924, when the demand for
English services forced him to retire. Pastor Koehnke served the
Synod faithfully and well, being its Secretary for a number of years,
and its President from 1907 to 1911. During his term of office the
Synod celebrated its 25th anniversary, the semi-jubilee, and Pastor
Koehnke compiled a pamphlet for the occasion, showing the his-
torical development of the Synod. The publication appeared in the
German language. When, after the War, hunger and starvation
afflicted the German people in Europe, Pastor Koehnke received
and transmitted the relief that was donated by the Lutherans in


Queensland. In recognition of his services the German Government
decorated him with the Red Cross. After his retirement in 1924,
Pastor Koehnke took up his residence at Graceville, near Brisbane,
and continued to take an active part in the works of his Church,
until God called him from this life on the 26th of April, 1930. He
was laid to rest in the Bulimba cemetery, near Brisbane.
Pastor J. C. Pedersen: He came from Santos in Brazil, where
he had been a Danish missionary to seamen. On the 30th August,
1880, he took charge of the Danish congregation at Brisbane. He
proved himself to be a real leader in his Church and among his
countrymen, extending, organising and consolidating the Church
work among Scandinavians throughout Queensland. It was mainly
through his influence that the Danish pastors and congregations
became members of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran
Synod of Queensland in the year 1885. A year later, in December,
1886, continued ilhhealth forced him to leave Brisbane and return
to Denmark.
Pastor Ditlef Hansen: As a missionary he came to Queensland
from Denmark at the call of Pastor J. C. Pedersen, who ordained him
and stationed him at Maryborough in the year 1881. From there he
served also the Scandinavians at Tiaro, Nikenbah and Pialba. He
was one of the foundation members of the United German and
Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland. In the year 1888 we
find Pastor Hansen in Mackay, and records say that at the end of
that year his name was struck off the roster of the Synod. He re-
turned to Maryborough where he made an effort to save the Danish
congregation, but he could not check the disintegration which had
set in after the church had been sold. He opened a small business
in the town and never tired in trying to gather his fellow-country-
men of the whole district around the Word of God.
Pastor Christian Christensen: He also came to Queensland from
Denmark at the call of Pastor J. C. Pedersen, the latter and Pastor
A. Sueltmann ordaining him in November, 1886, and he became the
successor of Pastor J. C. Pedersen, in South Brisbane. Like Pastor
Pedersen, he travelled about a good deal in an effort to keep the
Scandinavians, scattered throughout Southern Queensland, in con-
tact with the Lutheran Church. In June, 1889, he left Brisbane and
went to Maryborough. Before the end of that year the Danish
pastors and congregations decided to withdraw from the member-
ship of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland. Pastor Christensen later on moved to Bundaberg and
in the year 1896 he returned to Denmark.
Pastor Jens Christian Larsen: He was a Norwegian who had
been ordained at home and in June, 1889, he came to South Bris-
bane as the successor of Pastor Christensen. Before he was of-
ficially received into membership of the United German and Scan-
dinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, the Scandinavians
declared that they were withdrawing from the Synod. Pastor
Larsen, after a short stay in Brisbane, returned to Norway.


Pastor Christian Schmidt: He had come to Queensland as a
boy and received his schooling in this country. As a young man
he was teacher of the parish school at Philadelphia, Eagleby. Later
he went to Germany and received his theological training at the
Seminary for Missionaries at Hermannsburg. He returned to
Queensland early in the year 1885, and was ordained on the 7th of
June of that year, and became pastor of St. John’s Lutheran Church
at Maryborough. He was not present at the Foundation Meeting of
the Synod, but his name is on its first roster. From Maryborough he
served the congregation at Bundaberg until, in the year 1891, he
took up residence in that town, and continued to serve Maryborough
from Bundaberg. He also established preaching places at Cordalba,
Childers and Goodwood. In the year 1897 he was excluded from
the Synod because he asked that the question of Pastor E. Becker s
entry into the ministry and into the charge at South Brisbane be
cleared up. In the year 1909 he rejoined the Synod to the great
satisfaction of its members, and the congregation also decided to
apply for membership. In May of the year 1914, the Synod con-
vened at Bundaberg for the first time in its history. That convention
was also the last one before the outbreak of the War. Shortly
afterwards serious illness befell Pastor C. Schmidt, and he passed
away on the 4th of September, 1914. He was laid to rest in the
public cemetery at Bundaberg.
Pastor M. Doblies: He had received his training at Breklum, in
Slesvig-Holstein, Germany, and came to Australia on his own am
count, with the object of establishing himself as a missionary among
the aborigines of Queensland, or among the natives of New Guinea.
After quite a deal of travelling he joined Missionary J. Flierl at
Finschhafen, in German New Guinea, in the year 1886, and helped
him with the establishment of his first station at Simbang. As he suf-
fered much from the effects of the climate, he returned to Queens-
land, and was present at the 3rd Annual Meeting of the Synod at
South Brisbane on the 9th November, 1887, as missionary destined
for Mari Yamba, the mission station of the United German and
Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland. From 1888 to 1890,
he was pastor of the congregation at Mackay, after Pastor Heuer
had left. Later he travelled about here and there and willingly
rendered services wherever they were required, for instance, at
Maryborough, or at Rockhampton, where a goodly number of Ger-
mans had settled and where he had been in the year 1885. The
congregation there possessed a church and were glad of the
services of a pastor. In the year 1891 he was present at the Annual
Synod Meeting at Highfields—he was then the home missionary
and itinerant pastor of the Synod and was stationed at Springside,
serving various small preaching places, mainly in the Pittsworth
District. In the year 1900 Pastor Doblies took charge of the parish
of Plainland, when Pastor Goessling moved to Highfields. He did
not remain very long, but moved to South Brisbane, where he
served the Nazareth Congregation until 1904. Without consulting
the officials of Synod, he took charge of the congregation at Rose-


1 * J \
I I ff ;
i
vale, in 1905, and thus endangered the very existence of the parish
of Ipswich. This action led to his exclusion from the United Ger-
man and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland. Besides
Rosevale, he also visited his former congregation at Springside and
together with these congregations he joined the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Queensland in the year 1909. (See page 159).
Pastor Chr. Claussen: He had received his training at Her-
mannsburg, Germany, and had been sent to New Zealand to the
Mission among the Maoris there. In the year 1887 he was called
to Queensland by the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran
Synod of Queensland, and was sent to Mari Yamba, near Mackay,
to establish there a missionary undertaking amongst the aborigines.
In November, 1893, the state of his health forced him to relinquish
his position on the mission station, and, after a period of recupera-
tion, he accepted a call as pastor of the Christ Congregation at High-
fields early in 1896; but, after a short time of service, God called
him Home on the 14th August, 1897. He lies buried in the High-
fields cemetery. Bro. Christian Claussen, who laboured on the
New Guinea missionfield and died there in the year 1932, was his
eldest son.
Pastor Chr. Claussen.
Pastor W. Burghardt.
Pastor W. Burghardt: He had been sent to Queensland by the
Gossner Mission Society of Berlin, and arrived here in the year
1566. He ministered to the parish of German Station until 1874,
when he transferred to the St. Paul’s Congregation at Toowoomba.
In the year 1882 he accepted a call to Christ Church, Highfields, and
he was pastor of that parish when, in the year 1890, he joined the
Synod. In the year 1895 he accepted a call to the congregations at
German Station and Zillmere, returning to Highfields in the year
1900, when a second congregation, Holy Trinity, was founded be-
cause of the Missourian tendencies of the pastor of Christ Church,
Pastor Backen. He remained at Highfields until his death on the
22nd May, 1917. He was laid to rest in the cemetery at Highfields.
Pastor J. F. Holtermann: Sent from Hermannsburg, in Ger-
many, he was for a time in Victoria, stationed at Germantown, near
Geelong. From there he was called to Ipswich, in Queensland, in
the year 1890. In September, 1897, he moved to Douglas, near
147


Goombungee, as pastor of that congregation and Gowrie Flat
(Djuan). In October, 1900, he went to Back Plains and Springside,
near Pittsworth. Living on his own farm he served the small com
gregations there. In the year 1912 he resigned his membership
with the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland, accusing the Synod of following false doctrine. He
joined the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri), but
it seems he was accepted as a private member only, not as a member
of the ministry.
Pastor L. Krause: He came from Hermannsburg, in Germany,
and landed in Brisbane in the year 1890 in order to proceed to Mari
Yamba as missionary. He was ordained at Bethania on the 3rd
December, 1890. A year later the congregation at Mackay called
him as its pastor, where he laboured until he came to South
bane early in 1910. In the year 1931 he retired from parish work,
but as emeritus he still acts as city and seamen’s missionary in
Brisbane.
Pastor E. Becker: In the year 1891 he came to Queensland,
alleging to be a theologian from Germany, and offered his services
first to the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland, and then
to the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod. In the
light of later information, it would appear that his statements re'
garding his own person were not according to facts, and his entry
into South Brisbane was not honest and above board. After an
examination and a colloquium orthodoxiae, the President of the
last named Synod ordained him in September, 1891, and the com
gregation of South Brisbane, which formed part of the parish of
German Station, under Pastor I. Egen, and with that parish and its
pastor was member of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of QueepS'
land, opened its doors to him, and called him as its pastor. From
1892 to 1899 he was Secretary of the Synod and during the year
1899 to 1900 its President. In 1901 he resigned from the ministry.
In the year 1905 he returned to the ministry and acted as pastor of
South Brisbane, until the end of 1908, when he finally left for
Germany. During the lasPmentioned period he was not connected
with either of the Synods in Queensland.
Pastor R. Hansche: Having received his training at the
Seminary for Missionaries at Neuendettelsau, in Bavaria, he was
ordained at Cottbus, in Silesia, by Superintendent Fengler, of the
Lutheran Free Church of Prussia, and came to Queensland in the
year 1894, to serve as missionary at Mari Yamba. Early in the year
1898 he returned to Germany.
Pastor A. Mohr: He was sent from Hermannsburg, and acted
at first as teacher in the parish school at Bethania. In the year 1895,
he was ordained by the President of the Synod at Bethania, and was
sent to the mission station, Mari Yamba, in support of Missionary
Hansche. A year later he left the station again, and for a time
served the congregation Logan Reserve, at first under the local
Pastor, A. Sueltmann. When, in 1898, he had been inducted as
pastor of that congregation he left and returned to Germany, only


JHpl .JB \
to come back here a year later, 1899, when he took over the con-
gregations Douglas and Djuan. In 1900 he left this parish and
went to Germany, and almost immediately returned and again took
charge of the parish of Douglas. Early in 1902 he again left the
parish and travelled to Germany. Though he crossed the ocean at
least on two further occasions and repeatedly expressed the desire
to enter the service of the Synod, his offers were not considered.
Pastor P. B. Hoefner: He was sent from Hermannsburg, in
Germany, in the year 1889, and had been pastor in South Australia
until in April, 1901, he accepted a call to the vacant parish of
German Station and Zillmere, which he served until he retired from
active service in July, 1923. In March, 1924, he was called to rest
and was buried in the public cemetery at Nundah.
Pastor F. O. Theile: Australiamborn, he received his theological
training at Neuendettelsau, in Germany, and came from there
accept a call from the parish of Bethania and Beenleigh “To the
Cross” in September of 1901. In the year 1904 the congregation
Philadelphia (Eagleby) joined the parish. From the year 1903
until 1921, when the Synod amalgamated with the Evangelical
Pastor S. Hoerlein.
Pastor W. Fuhlbohm.
Lutheran Synod of Queensland, he was its Secretary. He was also
the first President of the Queensland District of the United
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia, in 1921, relinquishing
that position on account of his connection with the Lutheran
Mission, New Guinea. In 1922 he was appointed Director of this
Mi ssion, and consequently had to relinquish parish woik at Easter-
time, 1923. Since then he resides in Brisbane as Director of
Lutheran Missions. In his official capacity as Director of Lutheran
Missions he has on numerous occasions made visits of inspection to
New Guinea and Hope Valley, as well as done propaganda work in
the Southern States on behalf of the Mission. In the interests of the
Missions of New Guinea he visited Germany and the United States
of America, in 1936, to take part in the 50th jubilee celebrations of
the New Guinea Mission. He is chairman of the Finance Committee,
member of the Publication Committee and of the Synodical Mutual
Aid Committee.
Pastor W. Fuhlbohm: Sent to Australia from Hermannsburg*
he had been in parish work in South Australia for quite a number


■of years when in December, 1901, he accepted a call to the vacant
parish of Ipswich, Stone Quarry and Rosevale. Partly in conse"
quence of dissension within the parish, but mostly on account of
serious ilhhealth, he retired from Ipswich, in the year 1905, settling
on a farm near Pittsworth. Here he died after much suffering, in
August, 1916. Pastor Theo. Fuhlbohm, the President of the New
South Wales District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in
Australia, is his son.
Pastor S. Hoerlein: Having received his training at the
Seminary for Missionaries, at Neuendettelsau, Germany, he was sent
in the year 1891 to the mission station Bloomfield, in North
Queensland, which was supported and controlled by the Evangelical
Lutheran Immanuel Synod in South Australia. When this Synod
relinquished its work in the year 1901, he accepted a call to the
vacant parish of Plainland, Deep Gully, and Mt. Sylvia, and was
inducted in February, 1902. During the same year the congregation
at Lowood, which had till then been a member of the Evangelical
Pastor J. Thun. Pastor J. H. Asbeck, D.D. Pastor A. Hartmann.
Lutheran Synod of Queensland, joined the parish. Over the
question of diminishing the work, which certainly was too great for
the pastor, and over other matters of a personal nature much dis'
sension arose, which finally caused him to leave Plainland. On the
evening of the day on which he had preached his farewell sermon,
30th August, 1908, he passed away suddenly. He was buried in
the public cemetery at Gatton.
Pastor J. F. Thun: He was the first pastor sent to Queensland
by the Lutheran Treasury of God (Lutherischer Gottes Kasten),
Hanover. He had received his training at Kropp, in Germany, and
after arrival in Queensland he took charge of the parish Douglas,
Bergen, Djuan in July, 1902. After only seven years of labour
'God called him to higher service in July, 1909, and he was laid to
rest in the public cemetery at Douglas.
Pastor A. Hartmann: He also was sent to Queensland by the
Lutheran Treasury of God (Lutherischer Gottes Kasten), after


having received an academic training at the University at Heideh
berg. In October, 1903, he arrived here and was stationed at
Doctors Creek as home missionary for the district. In October,
1905, he accepted a call to the vacant parish Highfields and Glen-
coe. In 1912 he resigned his membership in the Synod after accept-
ing a call to a parish in Southern New South Wales.
Pastor H. Walla tt: He was rormerly a member of the ministry
of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland. For a time he
had followed a layman s calling, when the vacant congregations
Ipswich and Stone Quarry extended a call to him in the year 1905.
Accepting this call he was received as a member of the ministry of
the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queens-
and. In October, 1906, he began to serve also the congregation at
Lowood, and in September, 1908, he moved to Plainland as pastor
of Piainland and Lowood. Because of the necessity of English ser-
vices he left Lowood in the year 1923, and shortly afterwards he
went into retirement, living on his own property at Plainland.
Pastor J. H. Asbeck: He received his training at the Seminary
or Missionaries at Hermannsburg, in Germany and was a pastor
m America, when in the year 1889, he offered his services,
to the Synod. Nothing came of the negotiations at that time. In
the year 1904 he came to Queensland from Erie, Illinois, U.S.A.,
where he had been a member of the New York Ministerium. He
began to conduct services in the hall of the Technical College, at
outh Brisbane, for a party that was dissatisfied with the conditions
then existing in the Lutheran congregation of South Brisbane.
Later this party forcibly took possession of the Nazareth Church.
Being welhknown to some of the pastors of the Synod who had
been his fellow-students at Hermannsburg, in Germany, he was
mem k ors bip in its ministry and was later inducted as pastor
of South Brisbane. Nine days later he left, and returned to America
in November, 1904. He died in U.S.A. on the Ist November, 1909.
Pastor G. Fischer: Australian-born, he received his training
at Hermannsburg, in Germany, and was sent here through the
kind offices of the Lutheran Treasury of God (Luthenscher Gottes
Kasten), of Hanover, in May, 1906. He was placed in charge of
the Home Mission field around the congregations Doctors Creek and
Boah Peak. Evergreen and Springside were for a time also under
his care. In 1908 the congregation Goombungee, formerly member
of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland, joined the two
other congregations and the three formed a separate parish under
Pastor Fischer. During the World War he had to suffer imprison-
ment in an internment camp for several years, returning to his
parish in the year 1919. In the year 1923 he accepted a call to the
vacant congregation at Maryborough.
Pastor W. Poland: Neuendettelsau, in Germany, sent him as.
missionary to Hope Valley, near Cooktown, North Queensland, in
the year 1889, where he remained until 1909, when he accepted a
call to the congregations Ipswich and Stone Quarry, serving from


there also the congregation at South Brisbane. In January, 1910,
he was called to the parish of Douglas, Bergen, Djuan, which he
served until his retirement from the active ministry in the year 1933.
He now lives at Crows Nest, in Queensland.
Pastor W. Schmetzer: Trained at Neuendettelsau, Germany, he
arrived in Queensland in February, 1911, and was inducted as
pastor of Mackay in March of that year. In July, 1920, he re'
linquishcd the position and left Queensland for South Australia. He
is now pastor in Bavaria, Germany.
Pastor M. Wittig: Through the medium of the Lutheran
Treasury of God (Luthenscher Gottes Kasten), of Hanover, he was
sent to Queensland in October, 1911. He had previously been a
teacher in a parish school in South Australia, and then a missionary
of the Methodist Church in German New Guinea, afterwards re'
turning to Germany. After his arrival in Queensland, he was
ordained at Plainland, Bth October, 1911, and stationed in the
Kingaroy'Wondai District as home missionary. He lived at Wooroo'
lin, later on moving to Mondure, and from there he also served the
preaching places established in the district by the Evangelical
Lutheran Church of Australasia. Quite a deal of dissatisfaction
arose which made it necessary that he relinquish his work, and in
the year 1915 he left Queensland for America.
Pastor A. R. Reuther: Australiamborn, he received his
college education at the Immanuel College at Point Pass, South
Australia, and his theological training at Neuendettelsau, Germany.
He arrived in Queensland in March, 1913, and was stationed at
Highfields, serving the congregations Highfields (Christ Church),
and Glencoe. During his ministry the Trinity Congregation
amalgamated with the Christ Congregation, whilst the small con'
gregation at Meringandan also joined the parish. In 1926 a new
congregation was formed at Crows Nest, which, too, became a
member of the Highfields parish. From 1923 to 1928 he was the
Secretary of Synod. Since 1928 Pastor A. R. Reuther is President
of the Queensland District of the United Evangelical Lutheran
Church in Australia. In 1936 he accepted a call to the parish of
Bethania.
Pastor M. G. Reuther: Australiaivborn, he received his college
education at the Immanuel College at Point Pass, South Australia,
and his theological training at the Seminary for Missionaries at
Neuendettelsau, Germany. 11l July, 1913, he arrived in Queensland
as the home missionary of the Synod. He served the congregations
at Alberton in the Logan District, and at Kulpi and Narko, beyond
Oakey, to which later on was added Kirchheim, near Marburg. In
February, 1915, he followed a call to Bundaberg, to which he added
further congregations and preaching centres in the course of time:
Baffle Creek, Gin Gin, Cordalba, Winfield, Bucca, and Goodnight
Scrub. He serves his Church as chairman of the Sunday School
Committee.


Pastor L. Doehler; Australian-born, he received his college edu-
cation at the Immanuel College at Point Pass, South Australia, and
his theological training at the Seminary for Missionaries at Neuen-
dettelsau, Germany. He arrived in Queensland in the year 1913.
He temporarily served the parish Kirchheim, Marburg, Minden for
the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland, until the pastor,
that had been called from Germany, arrived. After he had returned
to South Australia early in 1914, the congregations at Alberton and
at Norwell, together with the congregation Kirchheim, extended a
call to him, and on the 28th February, 1915, he was inducted as
their pastor. In 1923 he accepted a call to the congregations
Lowood, Kirchheim, Ipswich and Stone Quarry. In order that a
new parish might be formed, he, in 1929, voluntarily resigned from
Ipswich and Stone Quarry. Thereafter his parish consisted of
Lowood, Kirchheim and Mt. Beppo. From 1921 to 1931 he was a
member of the Board of Foreign Missions; he is now statistician for
the Queensland District.
Pastor F. J. Fuhlbohm: Australian-born, he received his
theological training at Hermannsburg, in Germany, and at the
Luther College, St. Paul, Minnesota, U.S.A. After his arrival in
Queensland in the year 1914 he was placed in charge of the Home
Mission field in the Evergreen-Kulpi District. In 1916 he was,
unfortunately, one of those pastors who were placed into an intern-
ment camp in New South Wales and only in the year 1919 did he
regain his freedom, being then again placed in charge of the
Evergreen-Kulpi field. A year later, in 1920, he accepted a call to
the congregation at Hume Street, Toowoomba, and at Gowrie Road,
which were combined with the small congregations, Kulpi and
Narko, to form one parish. In 1928 he accepted a call to the Mil-
brulong parish in the New South Wales District of the United
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia.
Pastor A. E. Reuther: Australian-born, he received his college
education at the Immanuel College at Point Pass, in South Aus-
tralia, and his theological training at Neuendettelsau, Germany. In
the year 1913, he was stationed as home missionary in Western
Australia, but the outbreak of the War made the continuance of
this work impossible. He therefore accepted a call as home mis-
sionary in Queensland, and, in May, 1915, he was stationed in the
Kingaroy-Wondai District. In 1923 he was relieved of serving the
congregations around Kingaroy, and he continued as pastor of the
Murgon-Mondure-Cloyna parish. He was chairman of the Home
Mission Committee and is now a member of the Church Council..
He is also chairman of the Church Extension League.
Pastor H, Proeve: Australian-born (a Queenslander), he
received his training in Hermannsburg, Germany, and at St. Paul,
Minnesota, in America. He returned to Queensland in 1916, and
was placed in charge of the Home Mission work in the Evergreen-
Kulpi District until Pastor Fuhlbohm was released from the intern-
ment camp. Early in the year 1920 he was called to Mackay. After


a ministry of four years he accepted a call to Goombungee, in the
year 1924, and, four years later, he transferred to the Victorian
District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia.
* * * *
2. The Pastors of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queens-
land from 1883 to 1921.
Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister: He came from Germany, where
he had followed academic studies, and where he was ordained as a
pastor of the State Church of Prussia. Pastor Gossner, of Berlin,
sent him as leader of a missionary party to the Chatham Islands in
the year 1847. Ten years later, 1857, he came to Sydney and Rev.
Dr. John Dunmore Lang sent him to Queensland, where he began
to work among the German settlers, serving them with exceeding
faithfulness. He was the founder of the Lutheran St. Andreas
Congregation of North Brisbane, and its pastor until his death.
He was a foundation member of the Synod in 1885, and its first
President, in which office he continued until God called him hence
on the Bth October, 1887. He was buried in the public cemetery at
Toowong.
Pastor E. Heiner: He came from Germany, where he had re-
ceived an academic training, and where he was ordained as a pastor
of the State Church of Prussia. He was inducted as pastor of the
Lutheran congregation at Ipswich in August, 1866. He continued in
that position" until the time of the foundation of the Synod, of
which he was the first Secretary. The congregations at Ipswich and
Stone Quarry would not join the same Synod and their objection
led him to relinquish his position there. From 1887 to 1889 he
was President of the Synod. He remained in Ipswich, however, and
continued to serve congregations at the Reserve, in the Fassifern
District, and in the Brisbane Valley, until the year 1899. He passed
away on the sth February, 1901, and was laid to rest in the public
cemetery at Ipswich.
Pastor E. O. Maier: Having received his training at the
Seminary for Missionaries at Basle, in Switzerland, he came to
Queensland in November, 1877, and took charge of the congrega-
tions at German Station and Zillmere and after a time he extended
his work to South Brisbane also. In the year 1886 he accepted a
call to the German congregation at Charters Towers, in North
Queensland. But two years later he returned south and accepted
the call to the vacant congregation of St. Andreas, at North Bris-
bane. From 1889 he was the President of the Synod to the time of
his sudden death on the 15th March, 1905. He was laid to rest
in the public cemetery at Toowong.
Pastor T. F. Langebecker; He was sent to Queensland by the
Gossner Mission Society of Berlin, and arrived here in September,
1866, where he was stationed as pastor of St. Paul’s Congregation
at Toowoomba. On account of serious eye-trouble he left
Toowoomba and Australia in the year 1874. But, having recovered,


h.e accepted, in the year 1883, the invitation to return to the charge*.
He was a foundation member of the Synod, and from 1905 to
WaS •^ >res^en t' Not long after the congregation had
celebrated his years continuous service in its midst, he
passed away, after a short illness, on the 13th July, 1909. He was
laid to rest on the public cemetery at Toowoomba.
Pastor F. Copas: He also was sent to Queensland by the Goss'
ner Mission Society of Berlin, and
arrived here in September, 1866 He
was at first stationed at German Station,
but after ten months he went to Mary'
borough, and followed his calling there,
as long as he lived. He was a foundation
member of the Synod. In December,
1906, he passed away, after a serious
operation, which he had to undergo,
and was laid to rest in the public
cemetery at Maryborough.
Pastor I. Egen: He received his training in the Seminary for
Missionaries at Basle, in Switzerland, came to Australia in the year
1872, and was stationed at Walla Walla, New South Wales. In the
year 1886 he accepted a call to the parish German Station'-Zillmere-'
South Brisbane, and joined the Synod. In the year 1891 the com
gregation at South Brisbane seceded from the parish, and took an
independent course In the year 1894 dissension arose in the com
gregation German Station, in consequence of which a part of it
went with the pastor, and founded a new congregation, which,
erected its own church at Nundah. He was, at the same time, the
itinerant pastor of the Synod, and as such he often travelled over
long distances, serving small congregations at Teutoburg, Cabooh
ture, Laceys Creek, Steglitz, Pittsworth and others. He’was also,
the chaplain to the gaol at Brisbane. Just before Christmas, 1924,
seiious heart attacks made it necessary that he retire from the active'
ministry. As emeritus he remained in Nundah until on the 20th
February, 1932, he was called home. He was laid to rest in the
public cemetery at Nundah.
Pastor J. F. Frank: He had received his training in the Seminary
.or Missionaries at Basle, in Switzerland, and was sent to its
field in India, where he laboured from 1869'72. In consequence of
the continued illness of his wife, he came to Victoria, in Australia,
where he was stationed as pastor of the parish Castlemaine-Maldon’
Yandoit, and later of the parish Ni, in the
Wimmera District. In the year 1888 he came to Queensland and
took charge of the parish KirchheinvMarburg'Minden, where he
laboured until he retired from the active ministry in 1913. Together
with his parish he joined the Synod, and was for many years its.
Secretary, whilst from 1908 to 1912, he filled the position of Presri
dent. During this time the German Government honoured him by
Pastor F. Copas.


decorating him with the Cross of the Order of the Eagle. In the
year 1912 he, with other pastors, seceded from the Synod, ana
helped to found the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia.
After his retirement he lived at Sherwood, near Brisbane. During
the years of the War he very faithfully served the congregations at
North Brisbane and at Maryborough, the pastors of which were
interned. After the amalgamation of the Synods in Queensland had
taken place, he joined the Queensland District of the United
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia in 1922. On the 16th
February, 1927, he passed away peacefully, and was laid to rest in
the cemetery at Kirchheim.
Pastor J. G. Haussmann: He came to Queensland with the first
missionary party sent by Pastor Johannes Gossner, of Berlin, in the
year 1818 After having endeavoured to bring the Gospel to the
aborigines until the year 1848, he went to the Australian College
at Sydney, founded by Dr. J. D. Lang, and received further
theological training. Having been ordained in the year 185 3he
followed his calling among the aborigines and among the white
settlers of Southern Queensland until 1855, when he went to Vic-
toria and was pastor of German Lutheran congregations at German-
town, at Bendigo, and other places. In 1861 he returned to Queens-
land and organised the Lutheran congregation at South Brisbane.
In the year 1866 he formed a missionary settlement for the
aborigines on the Albert River, near Beenleigh, and in conjunction
therewith he gathered the settlers in the vicinity into a Lutheran
congregation After the missionary settlement had to be abandoned,
he remained pastor of the Lutheran St. Peter’s Congregation at
Beenleigh, and founded from there congregations at Mt. Cotton,
and at Gilston, on the Nerang River. In the year 1883 he and his
congregations joined the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Victoria.
Pastor Haussmann was present at the foundation of the Synod, but
he acquired actual membership, when, in 1890, the Synod joined the
Evangelical Lutheran General Synod of Australia. In October,
1901, he celebrated his ninetieth birthday, and on the last day or
that year he passed away. He rests in his last long sleep in the
public cemetery at Beenleigh. The decoration, the Cross of the
Order of the Eagle, with which the German Kaiser had honoured
Pastor Haussmann on the occasion of his ninetieth birthday, arrived
only after his demise.
Pastor A. D. Hartwig: In those early years, when it was very
difficult for the German settlers and congregations to obtain pastors
for their spiritual guidance, the layman A. D. Hartwig was selected,
in the year 1873, by Pastors Haussmann, Burghardt and Gaustad,
and by the congregations German Station and Zillmere, as a man
suitable to undertake such spiritual guidance. For two years he was
under probation, studying, and at the same time helping in the
practical work in the congregations, and in 1875, he was ordained
and inducted as pastor of German Station and *Zillmere. In the
-year 1877 he accepted a call to the congregation at Douglas and


from that centre he helped to establish congregations at Meringan'
dan, Highfields, Glencoe and Goombungee. After serious illness in
the year 1883, he retired from the pastorate of all congregations
except Douglas and served this congregation until, in consequence
of dissension, he retired from here also in the year 1897. Living on
his farm property, he followed the call to serve the congregations at
Lowood (until 1902) and Fairney View (1915). He served the Mt.
Beppo congregation from 1897'1921. He also went to a small con'
gregation at Engelsburg until 1900. The dissension at Douglas,
mentioned before, led to the formation of a second congregation in
1901, and to this congregation he ministered until he retired from
active service in the year 1921. In May of that year he celebrated
the golden jubilee of his ordination, and on the 11th December of
the same year, 1921, he was called from this world and was buried
in the public cemetery at Douglas.
Pastor W. Guhr: He was sent to Queensland by the Gossner
Mission Society of Berlin, and arrived in Queensland in September,
1866. He assisted Pastor J. G. Haussmann on the missionary settle'
ment near Beenleigh, and in the year 1870 he was stationed as
teacher in the parish school in connection with St. Paul’s Congrega'
tion at Toowoomba. In the year 1887 Pastor Schirmeister ordained
him and he served as the itinerant pastor of the Synod, various
congregations at Meringandan and Westbrook, Aubigny and
Goombungee. In the year 1890 he accepted a call to the congrega'
tions Goombungee and Glencoe. This latter congregation seceded
from him in 1905, and, in 1908, on account of ilbhealth he retired
from the active ministry, living for the rest of his days with his
only son, a teacher of the Queensland Education Department. On
the 28th April, 1919, he passed away at the public hospital at
Toowoomba, after much suffering, and was laid to rest in the
cemetery at Meringandan.
Pastor H. Wallatt: He had been an evangelistic preacher in the
eastern part of Germany, and in Lithuania, in the Memel region.
Arriving in Queensland in the year 1888, he continued to be an
evangelist as he had been in Germany. Soon he gathered quite a
number of unchurched Germans in the Boonah District, who
desired him to be their pastor. On the 24th May, 1889, he was
subjected to a colloquium orthodoxiae, and was ordained by Pastors
Heiner, Maier, and J. Frank, at Dugandan, and was installed as
pastor of this congregation. For a time he served also the con'
gregations Mmden and Deep Gully. In the year 1890 the congrega'
tion at Hoya joined the parish. In 1904 Pastor Wallatt retired from
parish work. Two years later he accepted a call to Ipswich and
joined the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland. (See page 151.)
Pastor M. Millatt: He was an itinerant evangelist in Tilsit, East
Prussia, when, on the recommendation of his friend, Pastor Wallatt,
of Dugandan, he was called to Queensland, where he arrived in
November, 1890/ On the 29th January, 1891, he was ordained by


the President, Pastor E. O. Maier, and was inducted at Hatton
Vale as pastor of this congregation and those of Hillside, Deep
Gully, and Wongo Creek. In the year 1909 the two congregations
beyond Gatton, Deep Gully, and Wongo Creek were persuaded to
sever their connection with the parish and to join the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri). In 1910 a congregation
was established at Lockrose and joined the parish at Hatton Vale.
In 1912 Pastor Millatt seceded from the Synod and joined the
newlyTormed Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia. During
the War he was, with other pastors, imprisoned in an internment
camp, from which he was released in 1919. Dissensions arose in his
parish, which led to his retirement from the active ministry in 1923.
Since then he lives on his private property at Plainland.
Pastor Theo. Frank: Australiaivborn, he received his training in
the Seminary for Missionaries at Basle, in Switzerland, and returned
to Queensland in the year 1899, substituting for his father at
Kirchheim, whilst the latter visited Germany, The congregations
Milbong, Reserve and Engelsburg extended a call to him, and on
the Ist January, 1900, he was inducted as pastor of this parish. In
the year 1907 he accepted a call to the vacant St. Matthew’s Com
gregation at Maryborough. In 1912 he seceded, with others, from
the Synod and formed the new Synod, the Evangelical Lutheran
Church of Australasia. During the War, from February, 1916, he
was imprisoned in an internment camp in New South Wales. After
his release, 1919, he returned to his charge at Maryborough, and
after the amalgamation of the two Lutheran Synods in Queensland,
he joined the Queensland District of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia. In the year 1923 he transferred to
the Victorian District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in
Australia, and died there as pastor of the Melbourne Congregation
in October, 1934. There is in existence a treatise on the value of
the German Reformation written by Pastor Theo. Frank, in German,
and published in Berlin.
Pastor C. E. Treuz: Having received his training in the Seminary
for Missionaries at Basle, in Switzerland, he accepted a call to
Queensland, where he arrived during July, 1902. He was stationed
at Beenleigh, serving the St. Peter’s Congregation at that place and
the congregations at Mt. Cotton and Gilston. In the year 1906 he
accepted a call to the St. Andreas Church at Brisbane. He was, for
several years, the Secretary of the Synod. In the year 1912 he joined
the State Church of Prussia, and this step led to his defection from
his Synod in Queensland. He was a foundation member of the
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia, and was its first Presh
dent. Early in 1916 he was imprisoned in the internment camp in
New South Wales and after the War he was deported to Germany.
Pastor E. Hiller: Australiaivborn, he received his training at
the Seminary for Missionaries at Basle, in Switzerland, and after a
visit to Australia, he proceeded, in the year 1893, to India, as a
missionary, and was there, for a period of 12 years, a member of


the staff of the extensive missionary undertakings of the Basle
Mission Society. In the year 1905 he accepted a call to the St
Andreas Congregation at North Brisbane, which had become
vacant through the death of his father-in-law, Pastor E. O. Maier.
Dissensions within the congregation indicated to him, early in 1906,
that it would be a wise course to relinquish his work there. Later,
1907, he accepted a call to the vacant parish of Beenleigh-Mt.
Cotton-Gilston. Later on Steglitz was added to the parish, while
Gilston ceased to exist. In 1912 he was elected President of his
Synod, and when the amalgamation of the two Synods in Queensland
took place and the Queensland District of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia was constituted, he was its first
Vice-President, and almost immediately Acting President, which led
him to the Presidency at the second Convention in 1922. Until
1928 he filled the presidential chair, and during that time helped
to lead the Lutheran Church in Queensland through many a dif-
ficult passage.
Pastor M. Doblies: In the year 1909 he was received into mem-
bership of the Synod, together with his congregations at Rosevale
and in the Pittsworth District. Formerly he and the congregations
had been members of the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland. He went his quiet way, faithfully
attending to his duties, until in 1926 it was reported to Synod that he
had resigned his charge. Shortly afterwards he left for Germany
and no one has heard of him since. He had spent 40 years here in
Queensland.
Pastor Chr. Seybold: Having received his training in the
Seminary for Missionaries at Basle, in Switzerland, he accepted a
call to Queensland, and arrived here in June, 1905. On the 12th
July, 1905. he was inducted as pastor of the parish, Dugandan
and Hoya. Members of the Dugandan Congregation living at a
distance established themselves, in the year 1908, at Mt. Alford, as
the third congregation of the parish. During the War, in 1916,
Pastor Seybold was imprisoned in an internment camp in New
South Wales, and after the War was deported to Germany.
Pastor R. Monz: Having received his training in the Seminary
for Missionaries at Basle, in Switzerland, he came to Australia in
the year 1905, and was pastor in Southern New South Wales. In
the year 1907 he accepted a call to the parish Milbong-Engelsburg-
Reserve. In the vear 1920 he followed a further call to the St.
And reas Church at North Brisbane.
Pastor J. G. Hegelau: He received his training in the Seminary
for Missionaries at Basle, in Switzerland and came to Australia in
the year 1890. He was at first itinerant pastor in South Australia,
and in 1 897 he transferred to Victoria, being stationed at Horsham.
In the year 1909 he accepted a call to the vacant St. Paul’s Con-
gregation at Toowoomba, but in 1911 he returned to Victoria,
living in retirement at Melbourne since then.


Pastor E. Gutekunst: He received his training in the Seminary
for Missionaries at Basle, in Switzerland and came to Australia in
the year 1908, being stationed at Milbrulong, in Southern New
South Wales. In January, 1912, he accepted a call to the St. Paul’s
Congregation at Toowoomba. Towards the end of the same year
he seceded from the Synod and with others formed the new Synod,
the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia. During the War
he was, in the year 1916, imprisoned in an internment camp in
New South Wales. After his release at the end of 1919 he returned
to his charge at Toowoomba, and rejoined the Synod, and, after
the amalgamation of the Synods, he was the first Secretary of the
Queensland District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in
Australia. For some years he was its Vice-President and was member
of various important committees. He was from 1925 onwards mem-
ber of the Board of Foreign Missions and is now chairman of the
Hope Valley Mission Board and member of the Finance Committee.
Fie is also the editor of the “Lutheran Children’s Friend”.
Pastor A. Hiller: Australian-born, he received his training in
the Seminary for Missionaries at Basle, in Switzerland, and was
sent to India as a missionary in the year 1907. When after two
years it became evident that his health could not endure the climate,
he accepted a call to St. John’s parish at Tanunda, South Australia,
in the year 1909. In 1911 he followed a call to Pleasant Hills in
New South Wales and from there he transferred to the vacant
parish of Dugandan-Hoya-Mt. Alford in Queensland in the year
1920. He was actively engaged in the negotiations that led up to
the establishment of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in
Australia, and was from 1921 a member of the Board of Foreign
Missions, and from 1925 to 1933 its chairman.
Pastor F. Finger: Australian-born, he received his training in
the Seminary for Missionaries at Basle, Switzerland. After he
returned to Australia in the year 1919, he accepted a call to the
parish Milbong-Engelsburg-Reserve, where he was inducted early
in July, 1920. In the Synod he was member of various committees,
but he served his Church at large, especially, in his position as its
book steward and as District Secretary for two years.
* ❖ * *
3. The Pastors of the Respective Synods in Queensland prior
to the Amalgamation in 1921.
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queens-
land: G. Heuer, Toowoomba, President; F. O. Theile, Bethania,
Secretary; J. Koehnke, Pimpama Island; H. Wallatt, Plainland; L.
Krause, South Brisbane; P. B. Hoefner, German Station; W. Poland,
Douglas; G. Fischer, Goombungee; A. R. Reuther, Highfields;
L. Doehler, Alberton; M. G. Reuther, Bundaberg; A. E. Reuther,.
Murgon; T. Fuhlbohm, Hume Street, Toowoomba; H. Proeve*
Mackay.


Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland: E. Hiller, Been'
leigh. President; R. Monz, North Brisbane, Secretary, I. Egen,
Nundah; A. Hiller, Dugandan; F. Finger, Milbong; E Gutekunst,
Phillip Street, Toowoomba; M. Millatt, Hatton Vale; A. Hartwig*
Pastors J. Frank, Sherwood, and Th. Frank, of Maryborough,,
joined somewhat later.
4 The Pastors who have entered the Ministry of the Queens-
land District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church since the
Amalgamation in 1921.
Pastor R. B. Reuther: Australian-born, he received his college
education at the Immanuel College at Point Pass South Australia,
and his theological training at the Wartburg Seminary of the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of lowa, in America. After his re urn
to Australia, he accepted a call to the vacant parish of Bethama-
Beenleigh-Eagleby, in the year 1923. The congregation at Logan
Reserve was added to the parish in the year 1924_ From the time
Synod created a Home Mission Committee, Pastor B Reuther acted
as its treasurer. In the year 1936 he transferred to the South Aus-
tralian District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in
Australia.
Pastor R. Rohde: Australian-born, he received his training at
the Seminary for Missionaries at Basle, in Switzerland, and was
sent as missionary to German Cameroons in Africa, in t e year .
The Great War placed upon him vast responsibilities, when the
German members of staff were deported, and he found himself
in overwhelming difficulties which culminated in his own eporta,
tion to England. He served a German congregation in London, and
after the War he returned to Australia, where he was stationed as
pastor of the congregation at Germantown, now Grovedale, near
Geelong. In the year 1924, he transferred to the Queensland
accepting a call to the parish of Hattonvale-Plam and-
Hillside-Lockrose. He served his Synod and the Church at large
on various committees, for instance on the Church Council and
the Hope Valley Mission Board,
Pastor H. Prenzler: Australian-born (Queenslander), he re-
ceived his training in the Seminary for Missionaries at Hermanns-
burg, in Germany, being compelled to remain there much longer
than anticipated, in consequence of the Great War intervening.
After his return to Queensland, in 1923, he was stationed at Kinga-
roy as home missionary. In 1928 he accepted a call to the parish
of Goombungee-Doctors Creek-Boah Peak, to which was added the
newly formed congregation at Coalbank. He served his Synod and
the Church at large on various committees, for instance, the Board
of Foreign Missions and the Toowoomba Rest Home Committee. At
present he is the Vice-President of Synod and the chairman of the
Home Mission Committee,


PASTORS. QUEENSLAND DISTRICT, U.E.L.C.A., 1937.
A.. i
Thg* 1MHT ■■r * • fgBf •
% •*•■ Je f * nEk iffa £ JWi£ ? * ‘v3H| ,;5, ,
.!£. . * ’''I ?■ \\M^- v <y»: >4* \ ',/ 4L.jS| ' i||
i i syj^^i^l‘'?^^^^mjHwWninw r> * " > : | v** ., ■■■ ' £ -5' ,.i'."'
W ;‘ mB0: • I; .' ■; ,. ■' , > ; : ,;.
I <-. ,,. m « Vl' : r/ * IlfMl $ * ./P*. * V v ' /; * * * * * V .fv
;!n .*• MBk* * IliLS lilMj./ * t3»|r b JJ nk , ' ; ®Jfe
; ~ &r!&» * lillllll
< j[ % %. x Milai: - g Ik; |- -k\ . .
Mi, -;'•*■ ' ’•* -• j|||j|& ‘.. Sr ’
‘ s-i ‘ W|y|i> -’ &> f - ; fc : ' 'i.4
•* 'WmmmL. & A'- Malm |“*% mSKSSK *• ‘
aaiBspfe". m * 1 'i £mm&mMm£msm f JBMilMMi , . * * & s? \ <K s , -.! Jawaffiffllp ■* I
?<pHk- • lfc|| : l| : :;
yT*''i ■ 'C - «HB. - C ._,-• j >
**lr :
v 4 .
Sitting: L. Krause, W. Poland, H. Prenzler, A. R. Reuther, M. Lohe, H. Wallatt, M. Millatt.
Second Row: A. E. Reuther, G. Fischer, O. Theile, A. Hiller, E. Hiller, R. Rohde, E. Gutekunst, G. Dohler.
Third Row: H. Rogge, L. Doehler, H. Schmidt, O. Adler, F. Lienert, F. Finger, M. G. Reuther.
Back Row; J. Stolz, A. Schubert, H. Proeve, G. Venz, H. Minke, A. Simpfendoerfer, J. M. Larsen,
Insets: G. Heuer and R. Monz.


Pastor E. Wiencke: Australian-Lorn, he received his college
education at the Immanuel College at Point Pass, and his theological
training at the Wartburg Seminary of the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of lowa, at Dubuque, in America. After his return to
Australia he accepted a call to the parish AlbertomPimpama Island'
Norwell in the year 1924. For a time he was Secretary of Synod*
and filled positions on various committees, as for instance, Home
Mission Committee, Board of Publications, Synodical Mutual Aid*
Sunday School Committee and others. In 1936 he transferred to
South Australia.
Pastor O. Adler: Australian Lorn, he received his theological
training in the Wartburg Seminary of the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of lowa at Dubuque, in America. Returning to Australia he
accepted a call to the parish of Nundah'Nudgee Road'Zillmere in
the year 1925. He was inducted as pastor of the parish in the
Nudgee Road Church on the 22nd March, 1925. He is in charge
of the week-day devotional address over National Stations 4GR
and 4QG, and also takes care of the diaspora work.
Pastor M. Lohe: Australian Lorn, he received his training in the
Immanuel College, Point Pass, and the Seminary at North Adelaide
and was a member of the first class that graduated from that
Seminary in the year 1925. He was stationed as pastor of Mackay,
and was at the same time the home missionary of the northernmost
district of the Church in Queensland. In the year 1932 he accepted
a call to the Nazareth Church of South Brisbane, and was inducted
into the charge on Pentecost Sunday of that year. He has served on
various committees of the Church, mainly as the Secretary of Synod
and as editor of the periodical “Lutheran Youth" 1 . He, furthermore,
edits the Sunday School Lesson Helps every month, and is chairman
of the Queensland Publication Committee.
Pastor H. Minke: German-born, he emigrated to Queensland
with his parents in his early youth, and received his training in the
Immanuel College and Seminary at North Adelaide. After gradu-
ation he was, in the year 1928, stationed as pastor in the Kingaroy
District, where he was inducted on the 12th August, 1928. He ac'
cepted a call to Mackay in the year 1932, and was installed as pastor
of Mackay, and as home missionary of the northern field. Early in
1935 he relinquished his position and withdrew from active ministerial
work. A year later, 1936, he accepted a position as home missionary
in the field along the North Coast Line, and resides at Nambour.
Pastor H. Schmidt: Australian-born, he received his training
in the Immanuel College, Point Pass, and the Seminary at North
Adelaide, and after graduation he was stationed at Nambour as
home missionary of the North Coast Line, being inducted into his
charge on the 26th August, 1928. In the year 1932 he accepted a
call to the parish of Edenvak'Taabinga'Home Creek, and was
inducted at Edenvale on the 19th June, 1932. He serves his Church
as treasurer of the Home Mission Committee; he is a member of the


Sunday School Committee, and also a member of the Executive of
the Lutheran Young People's Association of Queensland.
Pastor G. Dohler: Australian-born, he received his college
education at the Immanuel College at Point Pass, South Australia,
and his theological training in the Wartburg Seminary of the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of lowa at Dubuque, America. After
his return to Australia in 1923 he accepted a call to the parish of
Natimuk-Horsham, in the Victorian District. He was for some years
Secretary of the Victorian District of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia. In the year 1929 he transferred to
the Queensland District and took charge of the parish of Ipswich-
Stone Quarry-Rosevale-Rosewood, and was installed as pastor of
that parish and as home missionary of the district on the 7th April,
1929. He serves the Church as member of the Board of Publications
and as the treasurer of the Synodical Mutual Aid.
Pastor H. Rogge: German born, he emigrated to Australia
where he received his training in the Immanuel Seminary at North
Adelaide. After graduation he accepted a call to the parish Hume
Street, Toowoomba-Wilsonton-Kulpi-Narko-Maclagan. He was in-
ducted as pastor of that parish on the 21st September, 1930.
Pastor A. Simpfendoerfer: German-born, he emigrated to Aus-
tralia and received his training in the Immanuel Seminary at North
Adelaide. After graduation, in the year 1932, he was stationed at
Nambour as home missionary of the North Coast Line, and was in-
ducted on the 19th May, 1932. In 1933 he accepted a call to the
parish of Douglas-Bergen-Djuan, and was inducted as pastor of that
parish on the Bth October, 1933. For a time he was the chairman of
the Toowoomba Rest Home Committee. At present he is the chair-
man of the Executive of the Lutheran Young People’s Association,
and treasurer of the Home Mission Committee.
Pastor J. M. Larsen: Born in India, he received his training
partly in Germany and Denmark, partly in America. His theological
studies he absolved at the Theological Seminary of the Danish
Lutheran Church, at Blair, Nebraska, U.S.A. After his graduation
he went to India as member of staff of the Breklum Mission in
East Jeypore in the year 1931. After some years, in 1934, it be-
came evident that his health could not withstand the influence of
the climate of India, and he came to Australia. After substituting
for the Danish pastor of Brisbane, Pastor Ligaard, who meanwhile
visited Denmark for about six months, he applied for membership
in the Queensland District of the United Evangelical Lutheran
Church in Australia, and accepted a call to the congregation at
Mackay. He was inducted as pastor of the Mackay Congregation
and the northern Home Mission field on the 9th June, 1935.
Pastor G. Venz: Australian-born, he received his training in
the Immanuel College and Seminary at North Adelaide. After
graduation, in the year 1934, he was appointed as home missionary


in charge of the North Coast field, and was inducted into his charge
at Nambour on the 10th June, 1934. In 1936 he accepted a call to
the parish Highfields"Glencoe"Crows Nest'Meringandan, and was
inducted on the 12th July, 1936.
Pastor F. Lienert: Australiamborn, he received his theological
training at the Luther College at Saint Paul, Minnesota, U.S.A. He
was ordained in America in July, 1918, and served as pastor in
that country until 1924, when he returned to Australia. He was
stationed at Edithburg, South Australia, from 1925 to 1932, at
Sydney, New South Wales, from 1932 to 1936. He accepted a
call to the AlbertoivPimpama Island'Norwell parish and was inducted
at Alberton in September, 1936. He serves the Church as its
statistician.
Pastor A. Schubert: Australiamborn, he received his training at
the Immanuel College and Seminary at North Adelaide. After
graduation he was appointed home missionary in the South Burnett
District. He was inducted to his charge on the sth July, 1936, and
resides at Proston.
Pastor J. Stolz: Australiamborn, he received his training at the
Immanuel College and Seminary at North Adelaide. After gradu"
ation he was stationed as home missionary in the Mundubbera"
Monto District and was inducted to his charge on the 3rd July, 1936.
He resides at Mundubbera.
i|c ❖ ❖
Since the Lutheran Church of Queensland was organised in
the year 1885, 74 pastors have served in her ministry. Of these one
was struck off the roster, four seceded, eighteen left the State, and
twenty'one have passed away. At present there are 30 pastors in
the ministry of the Queensland District of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia; only one of the foundation mem"
bers of the Church is left —Pastor G. Heuer, of Toowoomba. The
average term of service of those who have passed away is thirty"
three years. Taking into consideration the 17 pastors of the Evaiv
gelical Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri) there are at present
47 Lutheran pastors in Queensland. Of the 30 pastors of the United
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australia in Queensland, 10 are
foreigivborn (9 Germans, 1 Dane), whilst 20 are Australiamborn.
Eighteen received their theological training in Germany, 4 in
America and 8 in Australia.


PART V. THE PARISHES AND CONGREGATIONS OF OUR
LUTHERAN CHURCH IN QUEENSLAND
ALBERTON PARISH.
CONGREGATIONS: Alberton, Pimpama Island, and Nor-
well. Pastor F. Lienert.
1. Alberton: The first settlers in this part of the Logan Dis-
trict came from Bethania, further up the river, in the year 1868.
Among them were: W. Harch, F. Rachow, F. Billiau, W. Bahr, G.
Wolff, Miers and others. At first these families met alternately in
their respective residences for Sunday services, but during the fob
lowing year they erected a church, built of slabs and
This church was located on ground which is still used as cemetery
and which was given the name Elkana. The congregation joined the
parish of Bethania, and Pastor C. G. Hellmuth was its spiritual
adviser. The first elders were: W. Harch, G. Gross and Chr.
Schild. As the congregation desired that its children should receive
proper education, including, above all, religious instruction, the
members very soon erected a school and a residence for the teacher*
but more in the centre of the settlement, on a rise nearer the river,
where to-day the church is located. This was at a time when State
schools were still scarce, and when the educational facilities were
not as accessible as they are at present. The congregation always
had difficulty in obtaining suitable, competent teachers and, with
the constant change of teachers, the school could not prosper as it
should. Taken as a whole, however, Alberton fared somewhat
better than other congregations. Among its teachers were some
able and competent men, namely: G. Wolff, Walter C. Thiedecke
and J. Saenger.
In the year 1876 Pastor C. G. Hellmuth relinquished his
position as pastor of the parish. It was some question concerning
the parish school at Elkana (Alberton) which brought about his.
resignation. Together with Bethania and Philadelphia (Eagleby),
Elkana (Alberton) had much difficulty in securing a successor.
After three years Pastor M. Eberhard arrived from America. For
the management of the affairs of the parish, a church council had
been appointed, which met once a month, alternately, in the three
congregations. This council consisted of about 18 members and
Elkana (Alberton) was usually represented by C. Rehfeld, F.
Rachow and G. Gross. This council was at no time so active as.
during the period of the vacancy before Pastor M. Eberhard arrived,
and during tne time he was pastor of the three congregations:
Bethania, Philadelphia (Eagleby) and Elkana (Alberton)/
In the year 1883 Pastor Eberhard had to leave Bethania because
of his romanising tendencies; but the two congregations at Phila-
delphia (Eagleby) and Elkana (Alberton) retained his services. A
good deal of dissatisfaction had arisen in these two congregations-
in connection with the erection of a new residence for the pastor,
before Pastor M. Eberhard had arrived. Now they formed x
separate parish and the pastor resided at Philadelphia (Eagleby).


The old church had become very dilapidated, and, as the com
gregation had become quite a deal stronger, a new church was
erected on a rise, near the school, in the year 1886. Its dimensions
are 50 x 26 ft. It is still the house of worship for the congregation.
It was dedicated on the 17th January, 1887, as St. Peter’s Church.
Pastor M. Eberhard officiated.
Shortly after the building had been completed a flood (which
in consequent years was generally known as “the great flood )
submerged all the lower lying areas, and many farmers took refuge
in the church on the rise and lived and waited there until the waters
had subsided and they could return to their homesteads.
In the year 1889 Pastor M. Eberhard resigned his charge, and
the parish Philadelphia (Eagleby) and Alberton called Pastor J.
Koehnke, who was at that time pastor at Ipswich. In that year
the congregation joined the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland.
Meanwhile the teacher, J. Saenger, was in charge of the school,
but when a State school was erected nearby the congregation found
it very difficult indeed to finance its parish school. The proposal to
share the services of the teacher and the expense with the congrega-
tion at Pimpama Island did not meet with a favourable reception.
The arrangement to have the school on three days, and later, but
on one day in the week did not solve the problem. When personal
differences arose between pastor and teacher the latter resigned in
the year 1897. Thereafter Pastor J. Koehnke gave German lessons
and religious instruction to the children of the congregation on one
day of each week.
During those years Church life at Alberton declined very
much. Literature of a critical school of thought was read, and
indifference and opposition over against the Church caused the
pastor and the faithful members much heartache.
In the year 1898 the congregation Logan Reserve joined the
parish which then consisted of the three congregations: Philadelphia
(Eagleby), Alberton and Logan Reserve, until, in 1904, Phila-
delphia (Eagleby) seceded. This left the remainder of the parish
which retained Pastor J. Koehnke without a residence for the
pastor. Therefore Pastor J. Koehnke erected his own residence near
Beenleigh and the congregations paid him some rent.
In the year 1912 the question of the rent for the pastor’s
residence led to a dissension which caused Pastor J. Koehnke to
resign his charge at Alberton.
Thereafter the congregation was served by the pastors of the
Synod until, in the following year, 1913, the itinerant pastor, Pastor
M. G. Reuther, was placed in charge. At the end of the year 1914
Pastor M. Reuther accepted a call to Bundaberg, and Pastor L.
Doehler took charge of Alberton. He was inducted on the 28th
of February, 1915, by Pastor O. Theile, of Bethania. During his
pastorate the congregation erected a residence for the pastor in the
year 1920.


In the year 1923 Pastor L. Doehler accepted a call to Lowood
and, during the vacancy, the congregations Alberton and Norwell
were served by the pastors of Synod, until, in the year 1924, Pirn-
pama Island joined the parish. The enlarged parish called Pastor E.
Wiencke as its spiritual leader; he was inducted on 6th April, 1924,
by the President of the Synod, Pastor E. Hiller, of Beenleigh.
The congregation became anglicised very quickly, there being
now but one German service every six weeks. In 1932 a Young
People’s Society was organised; this is proving a great benefit to the
congregation and augurs well for the future. A Ladies’ Guild is
also in existence, and does its share in the upbuilding of the
Church.
In the year 1934 the congregation, with the financial assistance
of Pimpama Island Congregation, extended the parsonage and gave
their pastor a roomier and more comfortable residence.
In the years 1893 and 1904 Alberton was host to the Synodical
Convention; but it was not till 1932 that it ever celebrated a mission
festival.
In 1936 Pastor Wiencke transferred to the South Australian
District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia
and Pastor F. Lienert, formerly of Sydney, N.S.W., accepted the
call to Alberton. He was inducted on the 27th September by the
President of the Synod, Pastor A. R. Reuther, who was assisted by
the Pastors E. Hiller and M. Lohe.
In February, 1937, the congregation celebrated the jubilee of
its church. For this occasion the interior of the building was re-
modelled and reconditioned, rendering it a very pleasing and im-
pressive house of worship. The local Pastor, F. Lienert, was assisted
by Pastors A. R. Reuther, of Bethania, L. Doehler, of Lowood, and
O. Theile, of Brisbane.
The congregation was served by the Pastors C. G. Hellmuth,
1867 to 1876; vacancy 1876 to 1879; M. Eberhard, 1879 to 1889;
J. Koehnke, 1889 to 1913; M. Reuther, 1913 to 1914; L. Doehler,
1915 to 1923; E. Wiencke, 1924 to 1936; F. Lienert, 1936 to the
present.
Statistics at the end of 1936 show: 172 souls; 144 communi-
cants, 24 children in Sunday School, 20 members of the Young
People s Society, 10 members of the Ladies’ Guild.
2. Pimpama Island: From Bethania and Alberton, settlers
moved further east toward the mouth of the Logan River and the
coast. In the year 1870 they began to take up land beyond the
swamps on what is known as Pimpama Island. Among the first
were the families: C. F. Kleinschmidt, C. Huth, W. Huth, J.
BiHiau, H. Mewing, Ernest Heck, Bressow, F. Denk-
mann, G. Oross and others. As they had come from Bethania and
Alberton, it was but natural that the pastor of that parish, Pastor
C. G. Hellmuth, should visit them and conduct services. The people
met in Mr. J. Billiau’s residence for these services and, when the
pastor could not be present, Father J. G. Gross conducted reading
services.


\ , ' ! "
In the year 1876 Pastor C. G. Hellmuth relinquished his
position and it was over two years before the Bethania parish could
obtain a pastor. During the vacancy Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister,
of Brisbane, attended to the spiritual needs of the congregation, but
that was possible only at long intervals. Father J. G. Gross was
appointed as deacon. He conducted the Sunday services, read the
sermons, baptised and instructed the children, and buried the dead.
When Pastor M. Eberhard arrived at Bethania in the year
1879 he took charge also of the congregation at Pimpama Island.
In the year 1882 the congregation erected a church on half an
acre of land which John Billiau, Jr., had donated for that purpose.
On the 10th December, 1882, the Bethlehem Church was dedicated
and the local Pastor, M. Eberhard, was assisted by Pastors J. F.
Goessling, of Kirchheim and C. F. A. Schirmeister, of North
Brisbane.
The preparation of the children for Confirmation was a great
problem. They were supposed to attend the necessary lessons at
Bethlehem Church, Pimpama Island.
Bethania, 14 miles away. The elder of the congregation, J. G.
Gross, went to much trouble to teach the children German and give
them the religious instruction required, but this was only a make-
shift. For many years this difficulty was a serious hindrance to the
development of the congregation.
Because of his overbearing manners and his romanising ten'
dencies Pastor M. Eberhard had to relinquish his position at
Bethania in the year 1883. Bethlehem Congregation, too, severed
its connection with him. The congregation decided to call Pastor
J. Koehnke, who, a month earlier, had arrived in Queensland. As
Pastor J. Koehnke did not accept the call, the congregation joined
the congregation at Bethania in calling Pastor A. Sueltmann of


Hanover, in Germany. He arrived and was inducted in September,
1884.
The congregation was one of the foundation members of the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland,
when that body constituted itself in August, 1885.
In the year 1893 the congregation was deeply agitated by a
sad shooting tragedy which occurred in its midst. Whether in play"
ful jest or in rage, whether with full comprehension of the con"
sequences or not, a youth shot a schoolboy and killed him. Before
court the youth was acquitted of the charge of murder, but the
congregation placed him under Church discipline. However, feelings
over the regrettable happening ran so high that relatives and friends
of the boy"victim, 10 families, seceded from the congregation and
built their own church. The breach thus brought about is still in
existence, though it is observed only in the outward fact of two
churches within measurable distance of one another, affiliated with
the same Synod.
In the year 1900 Pastor Sueltmann left Bethania and resided
on property he owned at Pimpama Island, from where he con"
tinued to serve the Bethlehem Congregation at Pimpama Island
until, in the year 1907, he relinquished the charge.
The Bethlehem Congregation now joined with Alberton as a
parish and Pastor J. Koehnke became its spiritual leader. Pastor J.
Koehnke recognised the great need of more instruction and training
for the children in German and in religion. With great energy he
took up this task. The Steglits Congregation also availed itself of
the services of Pastor Koehnke in the school. In order to place the
whole matter on a satisfactory basis, members of both congregations,
in September, 1907, formed an educational society (Schulverein)
which took charge of the whole matter of German and religious in"
structions, and provided the school building and its equipment
apart and separate from the two congregations.
In the year 1908, the Bethlehem Congregation erected a fine
new church, which was dedicated on the 9th of August, 1908.
Pastors A. Sueltmann, J. Koehnke, J. G .Goessling, P. Hoefner
and O. Theile officiated on the festive occasion. Pastor I. Egen, of
the Steglitc Congregation, was also present.
The old church was taken over by the educational society
mentioned before and was adapted to its school purposes. The
opening ceremony took place on the day of the dedication of the
new church.
In the year 1913 the congregation at Alberton seceded from
the parish of Pastor J. Koehnke and he now served Pimpama
Island and Logan Reserve.
In the year 1914 a member of the congregation, Mr. H. Heck,
donated a bell, and a neat belfry was erected for it in front of the
church, but apart from the building.
The War, 1914 to 1918, interfered seriously with the school
at Pimpama Island, and the great efforts of Pastor J. Koehnke to
stem the tide and to stop the anglicising process, which, he was


convinced, would destroy the Lutheran Church in Queensland,
were rendered ineffective. Early in the year 1924 the demand for
English services caused him to resign his charge, and to retire from
the active ministry.
The parish, Pimpama Island, together with Alberton and
Norwell, called Pastor E. Wiencke, a South Australian who had
just returned from America, where he had graduated at the Wart'
burg Seminary of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of lowa, at
Dubuque, lowa. He was inducted at Alberton on the 6th of April,
1924, by the President of the Synod, Pastor E. Hiller, of Beenleigh.
In February, 1925, the congregation farewelled one of its
members, Hermann Miers, who had been choir conductor and
Sunday School teacher in its midst, and who had volunteered for
service on the mission field in New Guinea. The young people of
the congregation stood behind their friend, the mate of their school'
days, and, when he was on furlough in 1930, they listened to the
stories of his experiences with rapt attention. Three years longer
he served on the mission field, and now he sleeps under the rustling
palm leaves of Finschhafen in New Guinea. At the age of 34 God
called him to higher service.
The anglicising process which was mentioned above progressed
so rapidly that in 1926 the last German class was confirmed. Since
then all instruction is carried on in the English language. Never'
theless German services are still conducted regularly for the older
members.
In the year 1930 the Bethlehem Congregation undertook an
extensive renovation of its church, adding a chancel and a vestry
and otherwise beautifying its house of worship. The rededication
took place on the 31st August, 1930. The local Pastor, E. Wiencke,
was assisted by Pastors E. Hiller, of Beenleigh, and H. Prender. of
Goombungee.
On various occasions Pimpama Island has been host to the
Synod Conventions: in October, 1900; in October, 1908; in April,
1921; in April, 1926; and in May, 1933. The Convention which
took place in April, 1921, was the last Meeting of the United Ger'
man and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland before its
amalgamation with the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland.
The Convention in May, 1933, was at the same time the celebration
of the fiftieth anniversary of the foundation of the Bethlehem Con'
gregation. For this jubilee Pastor O, Theile delivered the occasional
sermon.
In the year 1936 Pastor E. Wiencke transferred to the South
Australian District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in
Australia, and since September of that year, Pastor F. Lienert
ministers to the congregation.
The congregation has been served by the Pastors C. G. Helh
muth, 1870 to 1876; vacancy 1876 to 1879; M. Eberhard, 1879 to
1883; A. Sueltmann, 1884 to 1907; J. Koehnke, 1907 to 1924; E.
Wiencke, 1924 to 1936; F. Lienert, 1936 to the present.


The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 265 souls, 195 com'
municants, 53 children in Sunday School, 19 members of the Young
People's Society, 15 members of the Ladies' Guild.
3. Nor well: The Norwell District of Pimpama Island was
selected during the first 15 years of the present century. The new'
comers were mostly men from the older settlements near by, who
made their homes at Norwell. For a time they worshipped in their
former churches. In 1914 they organised as a separate congregation.
There were about 16 members.
The first services took place at the residence of Mr. G. C.
Sempf, and were conducted by Pastor M. G. Reuther, who was at
that time itinerant pastor of his Synod and resided at Alberton The
congregation at once proceeded with the erection of a church on a
block of land donated for that purpose by Mr. C. Sempf. The new
church was dedicated on the 19th July, 1914, the President of the
Synod, Pastor G. Heuer, of Toowoomba, officiating. He was
assisted by Pastors M. G. Reuther, of Alberton, and O. Theile, of
Bethania. Norwell shares its subsequent history with Alberton.
Nearly all work is carried on in the English language, but a
number of German Sunday services are conducted by the pastor for
the older members of the congregation.
The congregation was served by Pastors M. G. Reuther, 1914;
L. Doehler, 1915 to 1923; E. Wiencke, 1924 to 1936; F. Lienert,
1936 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 160 souls, 99 com'
municants, 31 children in the Sunday School, 18 Members of the
Young People’s Society.
Pastor Lienert also has charge of the Home Mission centres,
Oxenford and Southport: 51 souls, 31 communicants.
* * * *
BEENLEIGH PARISH.
CONGREGATIONS: St. Peter's, Beenleigh, Mt. Cotton, and
Steglits. Pastor E. Hiller,
1. St. Peter’s, Beenleigh: When, in the year 1863, the first
German immigrants, not under contract, arrived in Queensland,
Pastor Haussmann, of South Brisbane, accorded them much advice
and help. After they had settled in the Logan District, he visited
them periodically and brought to them the ministrations of their
Church. Even though the main congregation at Bethania did not
desire him as its pastor, new settlements were formed further along
the river, and Pastor Haussmann never tired of bringing the Word
of God to the newly established farmers at Beenleigh and Eagleby.
In the year 1866 he founded a mission station, which he called
Bethesda, a short distance from Beenleigh, on the Albert River.
Here he hoped to settle aborigines, train them to work on a sugar
plantation, and bring them into contact with the Gospel of Jesus.
On that mission station he also gathered the surrounding Ger'
man settlers, and with them he built a substantial brick church. As


time went on, dissension arose within the congregation; at a State
election party politics caused much dissatisfaction, and then menu
bers took objection to the mission station. They said it had become
a business undertaking. Quite a number of members seceded, and
the remainder found themselves without a church, when, in 1883,
the sugar plantation was sequestrated by the creditors. The church
at Bethesda was part of the estate. With characteristic energy
Pastor Haussmann found a way out of the difficulty. Together
with his congregation he purchased the Good Templars’ hall in
Beenleigh, and the property belonging to it; and, after the con-
gregation had erected a small residence, he moved there and
remained with his congregation until ihe end of his life.
The Good Templars’ hall was repaired and equipped as a
church and dedicated as St. Peter’s Church in the year 1884. From
here Pastor Haussmann served also congregations at Mt. Cotton and
at Gilston. At the latter place, near Southport, on the Nerang
River, he had gathered a small band of Lutherans that erected a
church in the year 1880.
St. Peter’s Church and Parsonage, Beenleigh, 1884.
In the year 1883 Pastor Haussmann and his parish joined the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Victoria, there being no similar
organisation in Queensland. When the Evangelical Lutheran Synod
of Queensland was instituted in 1885, Pastor Haussmann was
present, but he and his parish entered into formal fellowship only
after the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland had, in the
year 1889, decided to join the Evangelical Lutheran General Synod
of Australia, of which the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Victoria
also was a member.
On the 10th December, 1889, the congregation celebrated with
Pastor J. G. Haussmann the twenty-fifth anniversary of his pastorate
among the Lutherans in the Logan District. Pastors E. O. Maier, of
Brisbane, J. Prank, of Kirchheim, and I. Egen, of German Station,
were present.


In the year 1901 the congregation arranged a celebration in the
School of Arts at Beenleigh, the occasion being the 90th birthday
of its Pastor J. G. Haussmann. The Synod also convened at Been-
leigh on this last Sunday in October, and visitors were present
from far and near, to do honour to the venerable old pastor who
had spent so many years (63) in the effort of building up in
Queensland the Kingdom of God. But a few weeks later, on the
last day of the year 1901, God called him Home into eternity.
In July, 1902, Pastor C. E. Treus arrived from Germany, and
filled the vacancy. In 1903 the congregation erected a fine new
residence for their pastor. A new organ was installed in the church,
and regular instruction in German and religion was arranged for.
The congregation made quite a deal of progress during this time.
In April of the year 1906 Pastor C. E. Treus accepted a call to
the congregation at North Brisbane, and the parish of Beenleigh
remained vacant for nine months. On the 12th of January, 1907,
Pastor E. Hiller was inducted into the charge by the President of the
Synod, Pastor T. Langebecker, of Toowoomba, who was assisted by
Pastor C. Seybold of Dugandan.
Shortly afterwards another preaching centre was opened in the
Gilston area, near Southport, and Pastor E. Hiller began to conduct
services at Mudgeeraba. In the year 1910 the congregation at
StegliU also was added to the parish.
In the year 1909 the St. Peter's Congregation celebrated the
25th anniversary of the dedication of its church. The building had
been thoroughly repaired and painted for the occasion.
As a consequence of the War and its influence on the Lutheran
Church, Beenleigh had the sad experience that it lost part of its
parish. In the year 1919 the two small congregations at Gilston and
Mudgeeraba ceased to exist and the church building at Gilston was
sold.
When, for the first time, the General Synod of the United
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia held its Convention in
Queensland, in the year 1925, St. Peter's Congregation, together
with the other congregations in the Logan District, was host to the
Convention, and the pastors met in St. Peter’s Church for their
conferences.
The congregation was served by the Pastors J. G. Haussmann,
1867 to 1901; C. E. Treus, 1902 to 1906; E. Hiller, 1907 to the
present.
Statistics at the end of 1936 show: 158 souls, 113 communicants,
27 children in Sunday School.
2. Mt. Cotton: In the year 1872 German families settled at
and Mt. Cotton. Some of these are still represented in
that district as Stern, Sommer, Benfer, Holsapfel, Heinemann and
others. At first they went on foot and attended the services at
Pastor J. G. Haussmann’s Church at Bethesda. Soon, however, they
made plans to erect a church. Meanwhile Pastor J. G. Haussmann
conducted services for them in Mr. Heinemann's barn. In Decern-


ber, 1875 they dedicated their St. Paul’s Church, Pastor J. G.
Haussmann officiating. The church is in an isolated position,
midway between Mt. Cotton and
timber and brick.
The history of the congregation is closely interwoven with
that of St. Peter’s Congregation, at Beenleigh. The same pastors
ministered to both of them.
In the year 1902 the congregation purchased and installed an
organ. On the 6th of December, 1925, it celebrated its 50th anni-
versary. For the occasion the church was thoroughly renovated, the
shingle roof being replaced by one of iron. Pastor E. Hiller con-
ducted the jubilee services and was assisted by Pastors R. Rohde, of
Hatton Vale, F. Finger, of Engelsburg and Missionary H. Boettger,
of the Lutheran Mission, New Guinea.
The congregation was served by the Pastors J. G. Haussmann,
1875 to 1901; C. E. Treu*, 1902 to 1906; E. Hiller, 1907 to the
present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 133 souls, 88 communi-
cants, 24 children in the Sunday School.
3. Steglitz: In the year 1894 ten families seceded from the
Bethlehem Congregation at Pimpama Island. (The particulars
are stated in connection with the history of that congregation.)
They were F. Kleinschmidt, sen., A. and F., and H. Kleinschmidt,
W. Ludwig, H. Devantier, W. Lubach, W. Kropp, R. and
W. Koppen. Somewhat nearer the coast they erected a new church,
which was dedicated as the St. John’s Church on the 29th July,
1894, Pastors J. G. Haussmann, of Beenleigh and I. Egen, of
Nundah, officiating. These two pastors ministered to the congrega-
tion conjointly for a time, until Pastor J. G. Haussmann withdrew,
and Pastor I. Egen served St. John’s, StegliU, until June, 1910. At
that time the congregation was embodied in the parish of Been-
leigh, and Pastor E. Hiller has ministered to it since then.
The congregation was served by the Pastors J. G. Haussmann
and I. Egen, 1894 to 1896; I. Egen, 1896 to 1910; E. Hiller, 1910
to the present.
Statistics as the end of 1936 show: 106 souls, 74 communicants,
15 children in Sunday School.
* * * *
BETHANIA PARISH.
CONGREGATIONS: Bethania, Beenleigh “To the Cross”,
Eagleby, and Logan Reserve. Pastor A. R. Reuther.
1. Bethania: After the separation of Queensland from New
South Wales in 1859, free settlers began to arrive here in large
numbers. From among the German immigrants brought by the
“Susannah Godeffroy” in January, 1864, a group of about 20
families came up the Logan River and settled on land that Pastor
Haussmann and Mr. J. C. Heussler had pointed out to them. The
nucleus of this party was formed by 11 families that in Greiffen-


berg, in the Uckermark, had been members of the same congregation
of the Lutheran Free Church of Prussia (Preussische Freikirche).
They had, during the voyage across the ocean, regularly gathered
for their devotions and services, and they continued to do so in the
new country they had come to. The first service was held in the
shade of a leafy gum tree, and later the people met in Mr. J. G.
Schneider s "grass humpy". As soon as the first house was erected
(it belonged to Mr. A. Holdieimer) the services were conducted in
it. It was in this house also, that the congregation was organised, its
first elders being J. G. Schneider and Ohr. Berndt.
The settlement continued to grow. About 40 families were
residing at Bethania and Waterford by Christmas of the year 1864.
Pastor J. G. Flaussmann had visited the settlers repeatedly during that
year, in order to bring the "Whrd of God to them. But, in January,
1865, the congregation decided that Pastor Haussmann should not
come again. The members wished to remain Lutherans and they
maintained Pastor Flaussmann was not really a Lutheran. The
congregation desired to have their own Lutheran pastor, and,
despite^their poverty and the difficulties of their position, they ar-
ranged for a salary of £75 per annum for their pastor. They also
set aside 40 acres of land for him, on which they planned to erect
his residence. But in those times it was very difficult to obtain a
pastor. For three years their search and their inquiries were in vain.
Meanwhile the elders conducted the devotions and services and
instructed the children, and, whenever necessary, they asked Pastor
Schirmeister, of Brisbane, or Pastor Fleiner, of Ipswich, to officiate
in their midst.
At last, through the good offices of Pastor J. C. Auricht, of
'Tanunda, in South Australia, they obtained the services of Pastor
C. G. Flellmuth. He had been sent to Australia from the Seminary
for Missionaries at Hermannsburg, in Germany, and had for some
years been pastor at Lobethal, South Australia. Pastor C. G.
Hellmuth arrived at Bethania in the year 1867 and began to serve
the three centres which had been formed in the district: Bethania,
Philadelphia (Eagleby), and Elkana (Alberton).
These three congregations had instituted a church council for
the parish, which met every month for the purpose of the proper
and orderly management of all Church matters. J. G. Schneider, of
Bethania, was the soul of the arrangement and he certainly knew
how to make it effective. The council consisted of about 18 menu
bers, appointed by the respective congregations, and the meetings
were held alternatively at the three centres. It was due to the activity
of this council and to the influence of J. G. Schneider that Lutheran
principles were upheld, not only in the Logan District, but also in
other districts. It was this church council which was largely instru-
mental in keeping within bounds the religious fanatics, who were
trying to gain access to the pulpits of the Lutheran Churches.
The pastor was the chairman of this council, but during a
vacancy J. G. Schneider was the chairman. And Bethania experi-
enced several vacancies of long duration!


Before Pastor Hellmuth arrived the congregation had built its
first church of rough-hewn slabs and shingle-roofed. The members
had also established a parish school, which was in charge of teacher
Arnold, who was succeeded by J. G. Gross and then by H. Fien.
In the year 1872 the congregation Bethania built the brick
church 50 x 28 ft. which is its house of worship to this day. It
required much sacrifice on the part of the members, but they were
able to open their new church free of debt.
After he had faithfully served the congregations and the whole
district for 8-9 years, not only as spiritual adviser, but also as
medical helper in all bodily ailments, Pastor Hellmuth relinquished
his position. There was a vacancy of over two years before the
charge could be filled. The elders tried through their leader, J. G.
Schneider, to obtain a pastor from the Lutheran Free Church of
Prussia; but the negotiations came to nought. At last Pastor M.
Eberhard accepted the call. Born in Germany, he had studied in
America in the Seminary of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
lowa, and other States at Mendota, Illinois, had later joined the
Buffalo Synod, and now came to Queensland in the year 1879.
Meantime the congregation at Bethania had exchanged the area
of land reserved for the pastor for another piece of ground that was
in more convenient proximity to the church. They had erected a
new parsonage, which the members had also furnished for the new
pastor. In addition, they had raised £2OO for the travelling ex-
penses.
Pastor M. Eberhard was inducted at Bethania on Thursday,
the 27th March, 1879. Pastors C. F. A. Schirmeister, North Bris-
bane, and E. O. Maier, German Station, officiated.
Pastor M. Eberhard was, without doubt, an able and highly
qualified man. Unfortunately he was a domineering character, and
tried to force his opinions on to the congregation, which was ex-
pected to accept them in perfect obedience. He showed a great
preference for romanist tendencies and introduced private con-
fession. This private confession was not unknown to the former
members of the Lutheran Free Church of Prussia, but they would
not submit to it as the only available form, and, when the pastor
developed private into auricular confession and endeavoured to
introduce other romanising customs, he had to leave Bethania in
the year 1883.
Partly through misunderstanding, but for the greater part be-
cause of the intriguing of the pastor, the congregations Phila-
delphia (Eagleby) and Elkana (Alberton) became separated from
Bethania, the latter being left alone together with a small congrega-
tion which was then being established at Pimpama Island. But
another small body at Beenleigh, which had two years earlier seceded
from Pastor M. Eberhard, at Eagleby, and which later on erected
its own house of worship “To the Cross 11 , joined Bethania. On the
recommendation of some young pastors, who had arrived a year
earlier from Hermannsburg, in Germany, they called Pastor A.
Sueltmann. He had originally been a member of the Prussian State


Church, had joined the Hanoverian Free Church, and had been a
lecturer at the Seminary for Missionaries at Hermannsburg. The
Bethania parish paid £IBO as travelling expenses. The new pastor
arrived and was inducted at Bethania on the 11th September, 1884,
by Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister, North Brisbane, who was assisted
by Pastor E. Heiner, Ipswich, and C. Prender, Fassifern.
During the time of Pastor M. Eberhard’s pastorate, the con-
gregation had erected a new school and a residence for the teacher,
and had always made every effort to retain its parish school. Un-
fortunately it was impossible to obtain qualified and reliable teachers.
It appears that to Bethania belongs the distinction of having
been first in Queensland to recognise the necessity of caring for the
youth of the congregation. In the year 1884 a Christian Young
Men’s Society was formed which was named "'Concordia 11 . Martin
Noethling was its first president. It did not exist for any length of
time.
When the German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod was
founded in the year 1885, Bethania was one of the foundation
members, and its elder, J. G. Schneider, was a member of the Church
Council for over 30 years, until he passed away in the year 1917.
For 16 years Pastor Sueltmann ministered to the congregation
at Bethania until increasing infirmity and old age made it necessary
for him to resign early in the year 1900.
After quite a long time of waiting and a good deal of
negotiating the congregations, in 1901, called Pastor O. Theile, a
South Australian, who had just graduated from the Seminary for
Missionaries at Neuendettelsau, in Germany. On the 11th Sep-
tember, 1901, he was inducted as pastor of Bethania and Beenleigh
“To the Cross 11 . Pastor A. Sueltmann officiated and was supported
by Pastors G. Heuer, J. F. Goessling, P. B. Hoefner and J. Koehnke.
Pimpama Island Congregation was still being served by Pastor Suelt-
mann, who was living on his own property at that place.
During the vacancy a new parsonage had been erected at
Bethania and the congregation had raised the travelling expenses,
amounting to £45.
Once more the congregation tried to organise a parish school,
and, in the year 1903, called Mr. J. F. W. Schuk, who had received
his training in the College at Point Pass, South Australia, under
Pastor F. Leidig. For several years he had been teacher of the
parish school at Lights Pass, South Australia.
In the year 1904 the congregation at Philadelphia (Eagleby)
joined the parish Bethania and Beenleigh and even as the pastor
was its spiritual leader, so also Mr. J. F. W. Schuk was the teacher
of the children. The three congregations, in 1905, willingly raised
the necessary means to erect a residence for the teacher at Bethania.
But, when, in 1909, Mr. Schuk resigned his position, all efforts to
obtain a successor were in vain, and the full-time parish school had
to be abandoned. The pastor, aided by his wife, gave German
lessons and religious instruction on one day of each week in each of
the three congregations, Bethania, Beenleigh and Eagleby.


In the year 1914 the fiftieth anniversary of the landing of the
first party of settlers on the Logan and of the organisation of the
congregation at Bethania was celebrated. The congregation installed
a new organ on the occasion. Many pastors of the Synod were
present and the festival was attended by many former members of
the congregation and by an appreciable number of the first settlers
and their descendants. Shortly afterwards the congregation
renovated and enlarged the residence of its pastor.
The years of the Great War caused, perhaps, less disorganisa'
tion here, than in many other congregations and parishes. The
parish gave its pastor much freedom and willing support in the
many and varied duties which fell on his shoulders in consequence
of the War. We mention specially the mission fields in New Guinea
and at Hope Valley, which were cut off from their home base in
Germany, and for which the local pastor was the medium of sup'
port and help as rendered by the Lutheran Churches in Australia
and America.
This work in support of the Lutheran Missions was the reason
which, in the year 1923, caused Pastor Theile to relinquish his
parish work. His successor was Pastor Berthold Reuther, a South
Australian, who had just then graduated from the Wartburg
Seminary at Dubuque, lowa, U.S.A. He was inducted in May,
1923, by the President of the Synod, Pastor E. Hiller, of Beenleigh.
In Pastor Theile’s time English services were conducted oc'
casionally, and finally several of the younger generation had been
confirmed in that language. It now became necessary to increase
the number of English services, but, though it meant much heart'
ache for the older generation at first, circumstances were too
powerful for opposition to continue.
Shortly after the arrival of Pastor B. Reuther at Bethania the
congregation at Logan Reserve was added to the parish, which now
consisted of the congregations: Bethania, Beenleigh “To the Cross”,
Eagleby and Logan Reserve.
An English Sunday School was organised besides the existing
German one, and later a Young People’s Society also was formed.
The congregation frequently was host to the Annual Meetings
of Synod; in the years 1889, 1895, 1903, 1909, 1912, 1920, 1924
and 1929.
During the past twenty years Bethania Congregation has con'
siderably diminished in numbers. Many, especially of the younger
people, have moved away and have settled elsewhere, whilst many
of the older settlers have been claimed by death, and their small
holdings, which, in their original comprised but 6 acres of
river flat, have been bought by neighbours.
In the year 1936 Pastor B. Reuther transferred to the South
Australian District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in
Australia and Pastor A. R. Reuther, the President of the Queens'
land District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Aus'
tralia, took over the charge of the parish. He was inducted at
Bethania on the 28th June, 1936, by Pastor G. Heuer, of


Toowoomba, who was assisted by Pastors E. Wiencke, of Alberton,
and M. Lohe, of South Brisbane.
The congregation has always shown a great love for foreign
mission-work and its Mother J. G. Schneider has the distinction of
having initiated the custom of sending Christmas Cheer to the
mission station Mari Yamba, which custom was followed by nearly
all congregations of the Synod. The two members of this con-
gregation who went forth to serve on the mission field were her
grandchildren. Brother Ted Radke was commissioned in September,
1922, and is still a trusted member of the staff of the Lutheran
Mission, Madang: and his sister Anna, Mrs. W. Schub, left
Bethania some months later, accompanying her husband to New'
Guinea. After 10 years her health necessitated her return and,
with her husband and family, she now resides at Bethania.
Bethania is one of the very few, probably in Queensland the
only congregation, in which the pastor conducts more German than
English services. During 1936 there were 22 of the former and 18
of the latter; German reading services also outnumber those m
English.
The congregation has been served by the Pastors C. G. Hell-
muth 1867 to 1876; vacancy 1876 to 1879; M. Eberhard, 1879 to
1883; A. Sueltmann, 1884 to 1900; O. Theile, 1901 to 1923; R. B.
Reuther, 1923 to 1936; A. R. Reuther, 1936 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 187 souls, 125 com-
municants, 32 children in Sunday School, 14 members of the Young
People’s Society, 16 members of the Ladies’ Guild.
2. Beenleigh “To the Cross”: In the year 1881 dissension arose
in the congregation Philadelphia (Eagleby) between Pastor M.
Eberhard and some of the members, regarding the private con-
fession and also in connection with the parish school. In conse-
quence some members seceded from the congregation. They were
F. Stolbnow, C. Eichmann, J. Noethling, H. Schaefer, G. Wolff, E.
Lohrisch and others. They began to conduct services in the Good
Templars’ hall at Beenleigh. When they constituted themselves as
a congregation, other Germans in the district soon joined them, and
at long intervals Pastor C. G. Hellmuth came from Maryborough
and officiated for them.
When the Bethania Congregation also broke away from Pastor
M. Eberhard, this Beenleigh Congregation (known generally as
"The Beenleigh Crowd”, Rotte) joined it for the purpose of calling
Pastor A. Sueltmann.
During that time Pastor Haussmann and his Bethesda Congre-
gation purchased the Good Templars’ hall and the Beenleigh Con-
gregation found itself compelled to erect its own church. With the
ready help of the congregation at Bethania the building was erected
at the farther end of Beenleigh on two allotments, which the Elder
Wolff had presented. One of the first official acts Pastor Sueltmann
performed was the dedication of the new church, which received
the name "To the Cross” (Zum Kreuz). This occurred on the 14th


of September, 1884, and besides Pastor A. Sueltmann of Bethania,
Pastor C. G. Hellmuth was present.
It was a great drawback to the development of this congrega-
tion that its children, whilst without regular German and religious
training, were expected to attend the Confirmation lessons at
Bethania. In addition, it laboured under a debt which remained from
the time of building its church. Therefore it was little wonder that
the number of its members dwindled away, until, in the last years
of the past century, there were but 6 paying members left.
When, in 1900, Pastor A. Sueltmann relinquished the charge,
he retained the congregation at Pimpama Island. The two remain-
ing congregations, Bethania and Beenleigh “To the Cross”, were
hardly able to support a pastor, but they called Pastor O. Theile,
who was inducted at Bethania on the 11th September, 1901.
The new pastor at once began to conduct German and religious
instruction for the children in the hall at Beenleigh, and prepared
the children for Confirmation and confirmed them in their church at
Beenleigh. The consequence was that the congregation became
stabilised and regained the ground it had lost.
When Bethania, in the year 1903, called a parish teacher, Mr.
J. F. W. Schulz, he came to Beenleigh one day every week and
gave the German instruction—at first in a building owned by the
treasurer of the congregation, Mr. P. Quast, and later in the
school-building which the congregation erected near its church, in
the year 1906.
Meanwhile the congregation had installed a new organ in the
year 1904.
In 1910 the congregation celebrated the 25th anniversary of the
dedication of its church and made it a day of special thanksgiving,
for it had been able to wipe out the debt it had carried for so long
a time. In the same year a Ladies' Guild was organised, which has
done a great deal of good work for the congregation and for the
Church at large and its mission.
The church was enlarged by the addition of a chancel and a
vestry, and the whole building was lined and painted. The re-
dedication took place on Whit Monday, 1912, Pastors J. Koehnke
and L. Krause assisting the local pastor.
Towards the end of the Great War, when it became impossible
to continue German instruction, the congregation resolved that all
such instruction should be in the English language, fully realising
that such resolution would slowly lead to a complete anglicising of
the congregation. It demanded quite a great sacrifice on the part of
the older members of the congregation, and they felt it very much,
when, in 1921, the decision had to be made that certain services,
which had hitherto been conducted in the German language, would
now be English.
In 1923 Pastor Theile relinquished his position in the parish
and congregation, which he had held for almost 22 years, and Pastor
B. Reuther became his successor. He was inducted at Bethania in
May, 1923.


During his pastorate the congregation experienced considerable
progress. A new organ was installed, an organ and choir gallery
were added to the church. In the year 1932 the congregation re'
built the school building and considerably enlarged it, and it is now
a spacious hall.
Beenleigh was host to the Synod in 1913 and, together with
the other congregations in the Logan District, to the General Synod
in the year 1925. The District Synod convened in its midst in the
years 1931 and 1936.
In 1936 Pastor B. Reuther transferred to South Australia and
the President of the District Synod, Pastor A. R. Reuther, took over
the charge.
The congregation was served by Pastor C. G. Hellmuth to
1884; A. Sueltmann, 1884 to 1900; O. Theile, 1901 to 1923; R. B.
Reuther, 1923 to 1936; A. R. Reuther, 1936 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 279 souls, 203 com'
municants, 40 children in the Sunday School, 21 members of the
Young People’s Society, 24 members of the Ladies’ Guild.
3. Eagleby; The first settlement of Germans on the Logan at
Bethania caused other immigrants to come to the same district,
and it was only a little later that Eagleby—the pocket formed by
the confluence of the Logan and the Albert Rivers —was taken up.
The first settlers went to Bethania and attended divine services
there, but soon they built their own church of “slabs” on the area
of land where the cemetery is tO'day. They gave their congregation
the name Philadelphia, and formed part of the Bethania pansh
when Pastor C. G. Hellmuth came to Queensland, in the year 1867.
The congregation also established a parish school and had
the same experiences as Bethania : the school suffered from the
•constant change of teachers, and it was impossible to obtain and
retain a really competent man.
In 1876 the congregation built a new church of brick on the
rise nearer the Logan River, on land given to it by its member
Hester. This church is still the house of worship for the con'
gregation.
The same year Pastor C. G. Hellmuth left the parish and not
until 1879 did the new minister, Pastor M. Eberhard, arrive.
As may be learned from the history of the congregation Been'
leigh “To the Cross”, Philadelphia, in the year 1881, through the
domineering ways of its new pastor, lost a number of its members.
On the other hand, it gained some when Pastor Haussmann’s Con'
gregation, in 1884, had to leave Bethesda, on the Albert River,
and move into Beenleigh.
Meantime, Philadelphia had severed its connection with
Bethania, and, together with the congregation Elkana at Alberton,
retained Pastor M. Eberhard, whom Bethania had asked to leave
the parish. A parsonage was built near the church, and Pastor M.
Eberhard resided there until 1889, when he left the district.


r
|E^^& ) J.ijL 'Jit'
'liiir
;1 J : j| o' l|||
' \ \"S' r "’ 'o -M ;, : ...i s 5. vo>: : :‘■■■ : ; : .'
Philadelphia, together with Alberton, called Pastor J. Koehnke,
who was then pastor at Ipswich, and also joined the United German
and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland. Pastor Koehnke
put much effort into teaching German and religion to the children
of the congregation, and a new school building was erected during
that time. In 1904 a new organ was installed.
In the year 1904 serious dissension arose, and Pastor J. Koehnke
resigned the charge. The congregation thereupon joined the parish
Bethania'Beenleigh, and, beginning with July, 1904, Pastor O.
Theile was its spiritual leader. The teacher of Bethania, Mr. J. F. W.
Schulz, gave German instructions every Saturday, and after his
departure, the pastor attended to this duty. The parsonage, which
had been erected in 1883, was sold and removed.
In 1913 the congregation removed the shingles and roofed the
church with iron, ceiled it, and generally renovated it.
When, during the War, in the year 1917, it became in'
creasingly difficult to conduct the German classes, the Saturday
St. John’s, Eagleby.
being required to conduct Confirmation Class in the three congrega'
tions, Eagleby—as it was now called —decided that English should
be the language of instruction in Sunday School and Confirmation
Class. From this time Pastor O. Theile gave religious instruction in
the Eagleby State School, for one hour every week.
In 1923 Pastor O. Theile relinquished parish work, and
together with Bethania and Beenleigh, Eagleby called Pastor R. B.
Reuther as the successor. He was inducted at Bethania in May
1923.
After 13 years Pastor B. Reuther transferred to South Aus'
tralia and Pastor A. R. Reuther, the President of the Queensland
District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia,
took over the charge in the year 1936. He was inducted at Bethania
on the 28th June, 1936.
The work in general is carried on in the English language, but
besides the 20 English Sunday services, the pastor conducted 18 in


German, for the older generation, who appreciate such services very
much indeed.
The congregation was served by Pastors C. G. Hellmuth, 1867
to 1876; vacancy 1876 to 1879; M. Eberhard, 1879 to 1889; J.
Koehnke, 1889 to 1904; O. Theile, 1904 to 1923; R. B. Reuther,
1923 to 1936; A. R. Reuther, 1936 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 152 souls, 118 com'
municants, 21 children in the Sunday School, 35 members of the
Young People’s Society. 18 members of the Ladies’ Guild.
4. Logan Reserve: The settlers on Logan Reserve were
originally members of the congregation at Bethania. At a time
when there were no motor cars the distance to their church was
rather great, and that was felt mostly by the children who had
to attend school and Confirmation Class. The people, therefore,
erected a school, and the teacher of the parish school at Bethania
came and taught the children there on one day each week. Out of
this arrangement the custom developed that the Logan Reserve
people gathered for reading service in their school on Sundays,
when the pastor was not conducting the service at Bethania. And
when Pastor A. Mohr was the parish teacher at Bethania, it was
a step further that this teacher, who was an ordained man, should
be pastor of a Logan Reserve Congregation of about 20 families.
These families, therefore, erected a church, not without some ob'
jection from the elders and members of the Bethania Congregation.
On the 9th October, 1898, the new church was dedicated as Bethel
Church. The President of the Synod, Pastor A. Sueltmann, of
Bethania, officiated and was assisted by Pastors E. Becker, South
Brisbane, and J. Koehnke, Philadelphia. Pastor A. Mohr was on
the same day inducted to the charge.
Pastor A. Mohr left the congregation after a very short time
and proceeded to Germany, leaving the new congregation in a very
serious quandary. They approached Pastor J. Koehnke, who came
from Philadelphia, and included Logan Reserve in his parish:
Philadelphia'Alberton. He continued to serve Logan Reserve until
he relinquished his charge in the year 1922, in consequence of some
dissatisfaction which had arisen.
The congregation was served by the Synod for a time and in
1923 was incorporated in the Bethania parish, and Pastor R. B.
Reuther became its spiritual leader.
On the 17th January, 1936, the Bethel Church was demolished
by a severe storm. With help from other congregations of the
Synod the building was rejected and put to its former use.
Meantime Pastor R. B. Reuther had transferred to South Aus'
tralia and Pastor A. R. Reuther, of Highfields, took charge of the
parish, being inducted at Bethania on the 28th June, 1936.
The congregation was served by Pastors A. Mohr, 1898; J.
Koehnke, 1898 to 1922; R. B. Reuther, 1923 to 1936; A. R. Reuther,
1936 to the present.


The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 134 souls, 91 com-
municants, 14 children in the Sunday School, 14 members of the
Young People’s Society.
* * * *
BRISBANE (NORTH) PARISH.
CONGREGATION: St. Andreas, North Brisbane. Pastor
R. Mons.
Pastor Goethe, of Melbourne, Victoria, had, in the year 1856„
ordained the missionary colonist C. Gerler, at Zion’s Hill, and had
installed him as pastor of the newly organised congregation at that
place. This Pastor C. Gerler now and again conducted divine ser'
vice for the German settlers in Brisbane in one of the English
churches. But regular services were held only after Pastor C. F. A.
Schirmeister had arrived in Moreton Bay Settlement towards the
end of 1857. Whilst living at Zion’s Hill, he conducted those
services in the Courthouse, in the School of Arts, and in private
residences. In 1858 he was able to influence 12 men to organise a.
congregation, and to obtain from the Government of New South
Wales a grant of 1 \ acres of land on Wickham Terrace for the pur'
poses of the Lutheran Church. In the year 1861 the first small
wooden church (40 ft. x 24 ft.) was built, and at Christmas of that
year it was dedicated as the St. Andreas Church.
After a few years, when it became evident that the area of
land belonging to the congregation would become very valuable,,
serious dissension arose. Some members of the congregation, main'
taining that the land was granted not solely for Church purposes,
but for the benefit of the German community in general, desired
to erect thereon a club'house. When the pastor objected, his
opponents took possession of the newly erected church, living on the
premises and keeping watch day and night. Until the controversy
was decided and settled, Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister conducted the
Sunday services in a hall. The courts had to be invoked before the
congregation was restored to the possession of its house of worship.
After this fierce storm and bitter experience the congregatioa
remained in peace and progressed to such an extent that, in the
year 1882, a new church of brick and stone construction (61 ft. x
24 ft.) was erected and dedicated on the 30th of April of that year.
In the following year a schoohhall was built.
Together with Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister the congregation
was a foundation member of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Queensland and the first Convention of the Synod took place in its-
church on the 16th September, 1885.
On the Bth of October, 1887, Pastor Schirmeister was called
Home, after 30 years’ faithful service in Brisbane and Queensland.
His successor was Pastor E. O. Maier, who was at that time pastor
at Charters Towers, in North Queensland. He was inducted as
pastor of the St. Andreas Church, Wickham Terrace, Brisbane, in


July, 1888. He found much acceptance and the congregation
willingly supported him in his work.
On the 22nd December, 1889, the schoohhall which had been
rebuilt and considerably enlarged was dedicated by Pastor E. O.
Maier.
In the year 1895 a new parsonage was erected in place of the
former unsuitable building. At the end of February of that year
the residence was ready for occupation. The congregation was able
also, through careful and wise management, to make profitable use
of the land it had at its disposal for its Church. Early in the year
1905 Pastor Maier was taken out of the midst of much blessed
work through sudden death, The congregation has ever held its
two first pastors in grateful remembrance, and has given evidence
thereof in a memorial tablet in the church.
A son-indaw of the late Pastor E. O. Maier, Pastor E. Hiller,
who was at that time a missionary in India, took charge of the St
Andreas Congregation. But, after a year, he relinquished the charge,
St. Andreas Church and Parsonage, Brisbane.
and Pastor C. E. Treu*, who was then pastor at Beenleigh, was
called to North Brisbane, and was inducted there in the year 1906
by the President of the Synod, Pastor T. Langebecker, of
Toowoomba.
In the years 1886, 1890 and 1900 the congregation had been
host to the Synod and from the 21st to the 23rd of November, 1909,
the 25th anniversary of the Synod was celebrated in the St. Andreas
Church.
On the 28th of April, 1912, the congregation celebrated the
50th anniversary of the dedication of its church. Great efforts had
been made worthily to commemorate the event. St. Andreas being
the oldest organised Lutheran congregation, was the first to reach
the age of fifty years. The church had been considerably enlarged,
and the whole interior was artistically decorated and furnished. The
Empress of Germany had presented a Bible for the altar and the
Governor of Queensland, Sir William McGregor, was present at


the festive services which were conducted by Pastors C. E. Treu
J. Frank and E. Gutekunst. A few months later, on the 23rd June,
1912, the fine new organ which had been installed in connection with,
the jubilee, was dedicated to its purpose.
Shortly afterwards Pastor C. E. Treuz and his congregation
began negotiations with the State Church of Prussia with a view to-
being accepted into membership of that body. The German
Consulate in Brisbane, which had instigated these negotiations,,
furthered them assiduously, and the benefits—especially those of a
financial character, guaranteeing liberal pension-rights to the pastor
-—finally decided the congregation to declare for the affiliation. This
question of affiliation with the State Church of Prussia was the
cause of the separation between the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Queensland and those pastors and congregations that formed the
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia towards the end of
1912, and, from the 24th to the 26th May, 1913, the Foundation
Meeting of this new Synod took place at the St. Andreas Church.
The Great War came, and in February, 1916, the pastor of the
congregation, Pastor C. E. Treuz, was interned, and, at the end
of the War, was deported to Germany. Pastor J. Frank, senr., who
was at that time living in retirement at Sherwood, faithfully served
the congregation with Word and Sacrament; but it sustained heavy
and irreparable losses during those years.
In 1920 the congregation called Pastor R. Mons, who was
then stationed at Milbong, to fill the vacancy. He was inducted on
the 7 th of March of that year by Pastor J. Frank. But before the
congregation could recover the ground lost during the period of the
War, dissension arose, and in the year 1923 the dissenting party
appealed to Synod for adjustment of its grievances. As the St.
Andreas Congregation had not yet affiliated with the Synod it was
impossible to render the desired help. Quite a number of members,
among them tried office-bearers of many years 1 standing, dissociated,
themselves from the Church they had learned to love.
At the Annual Convention of the Synod at Hatton Vale, in.
the year 1927, the congregation was received into membership of
the Synod.
Further strife arose in that year, 1927. The ultimate reason of
the disagreement was in every case the property and its management.
The property had grown very valuable indeed. This time the strife
led to one of the most deplorable occurrences in the history of the
Lutheran Church in Queensland. The opposition party, which had
made arrangements with Pastor T. Reimers of the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri), forcibly entered the St.
Andreas Church on New Years Day, 1928, and kept possession of it
for months. During this time Pastor T. Reimers, with the approval
of his Synod, conducted regular services in the church. Efforts were
also made to evict Pastor R. Mons; from the adjoining parsonage.
After days of argument before the Supreme Court, in Septeim
ber, 1928, the case was settled, leaving Pastor R. Mons and his
adherents in possession of the property. But the members, which


deserted the St. Andreas Church and joined the congregation of the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri), so strengthened
the latter, that it was enabled to erect its own church in Warren
Street, at no great distance from the St. Andreas Church.
The St. Andreas Congregation is still labouring under the effect
of'these losses. And, despite the fact that it possesses valuable
property and has the means which seemingly guarantee its future,
it will require much concerted effort to assure the existence of the
congregation.
On the 11th December, 1929, the congregation rejoiced with
its Pastor, R. Mons, on the occasion of the 25th anniversary of his
ordination. The President of the Synod, Pastor A. R. Reuther,
delivered the occasional address. Pastors J. Koehnke, O. Theile, L.
Krause and O. Adler also were present.
On Pentecost Sunday, 20th May, 1934, the son of the local
pastor, candidate Hans Monz, was ordained in the St. Andreas
Church by his father, who was assisted by Pastors L. Krause and O.
Theile.
The congregation was served by the Pastors C. F. A.
meister, 1858 to 1887; E. O. Maier, 1888 to 1905; E. Hiller, 1905
to 1906; C. E. Treus, 1906 to 1916; J. Frank, 1916 to 1920; R.
Monz, 1920 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1935 show: 130 souls, 70 communP
cants, 20 children in the Sunday School, 35 members of the Young
People’s Society, 25 members of the Ladies’ Guild.
* * * *
BRISBANE (SOUTH) PARISH.
CONGREGATIONS; Nazareth, South Brisbane and Eight
Mile Plains. Pastor M. Lohe.
1. South Brisbane: The first German Church services were
held in South Brisbane by Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister soon after
his arrival in Queensland. It was through his agency that, in
December, 1857, the Government of New South Wales granted an
area of land in South Brisbane, for the purposes of the German
Lutheran Church. The organisation of the congregation took
place a few years later, when Pastor J. G. Haussmann, who had
returned from Victoria in the year 1861, took charge of the work.
The foundation members were, besides Pastor Haussmann, G.
Appel, F. Wecker, F. Hornung, F. Finckner. A year later, in 1862,
a church was erected on the land mentioned above, in Cordelia
Street, South Brisbane. When Pastor J. G. Haussmann, in the
year 1866, moved to Bethesda, near Beenleigh, Pastor G. Hampe
took charge of the congregation until 1868. It was then added to
the parish of Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister, of North Brisbane, who
served it until 1881. Other pastors assisted him in the work, as for
instance, Pastors C. Gaustad and C. Berndt and others. In the year
1881 the congregation was embodied in the parish of German
Station and Zillmere under Pastor E. O. Maier, who came across to


South Brisbane every second Sunday, in the afternoon. The same
arrangement was continued when Pastor I. Egen became the suc-
cessor of Pastor Maier, at German Station, in the year 1886. The
congregation, which had enlarged its church in Cordelia Street, in
the year 1881, joined the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queens-
land at its foundation in the year 1885.
For quite a time, South Brisbane had felt the necessity of
becoming an independent congregation. Its interests could not
receive the necessary undivided attention whilst it was part of a
parish. But the scarcity of pastors and lack of means prevented
any steps being taken in the direction desired. In the year 1891 Mr.
Erwin Becker appeared in Brisbane and offered himself as pastor to
South Brisbane. He claimed that he had studied theology in Berlin,
but was not yet ordained.
South Brisbane severed its connection with the parish of Ger-
man Station, and also with the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Queensland, and called Mr. Erwin Becker as its pastor. With the
help of the officials of the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland, Candidate E. Becker was ordained,
registered and inducted into the charge. Although he was a mem-
ber of the ministry of the Synod, the congregation did not join
until 1897.
The whole occurrence was certainly open to criticism, not
being in accordance with the spirit of Christian and Lutheran
principles. However, the contention of the South Brisbane con-
gregation—that a congregation in a town must have its own pastor,
otherwise it could not prosper —was proved correct. Under Pastor
E. Becker s leadership, the congregation increased perceptibly, and
the church in Cordelia Street proved altogether too small. With
the permission of the Government, the property in Cordelia Street
was sold, and a new property in Hawthorne Street, Woolloongabba
—more centrally situated, and out of flood reach—was purchased.
Here a very fine church of brick was erected, the Nazareth Church,
which was dedicated to its divine purpose on the 10th May, 1896.
The President of the Synod, Pastor A. Sueltmann, officiated, and
besides the local Pastor, E. Becker, there were present the Pastors G.
Heuer, J. F. Goessling, J. Koehnke, A. Mohr, M. Doblies and W.
Burghardt. A large concourse of people rejoiced with the South
Brisbane Congregation at the fulfillment of its wishes. It possessed
a church of real liturgical and architectural beauty.
It must have been very impressive indeed when on the Sunday
prior to the dedication of the new church the congregation took
leave of its old church in Cordelia Street, in which it had wor-
shipped for thirty-five years. In solemn procession pastor and
elders carried the holy vessels and the furnishings of the altar out
of the building, and the large congregation, mid prayer and hymn,
watched its old church being locked. This old church was after-
wards re-erected beside the new church and served as school and
hall another forty years. This hall was opened together with the
new parsonage in September, 1896.


Some years earlier the congregation was incorporated under
the Religious, Educational and Charitable Institutions Act, being
perhaps the first of all Lutheran congregations in Queensland to
avail itself of that Act.
Recognising the need of providing for the youth of the com
gregation 'which, in city surroundings, was quickly becoming
anglicised, Pastor E. Becker began to introduce the English lam
guage. Though he was a German, he adapted himself to his
roundings and to the circumstances in wonderful manner. The first
English service in the Lutheran Nazareth Church of South Brisbane
Nazareth Church South Brisbane.
took place on the 31st May, 1896, and the first Confirmation in the
English language on the 20th June, 1897.
The Nazareth Congregation certainly prospered during those
years, but it soon became evident that the prosperity was not a
lasting one. Were there some qualities lacking in the character of
the pastor? Or was it that the blessing from on High was withheld
because of the manner of his entry into the office at South Brisbane?
The fact is, that despite the outward flourish, there definitely was
noticeable a loss of inner life, the lack of which destroyed the
glamour.


At the end of the year 1900 Pastor Becker resigned from the
ministry. Then South Brisbane entered a period of much dissension
and strife, during which it lost many of its members and missed
many opportunities which offered themselves to the congregation.
The Synod appointed Pastor M. Doblies, in a temporary
capacity, until a new pastor could be called. Soon the congregation
was divided within itself, a majority insisting that Pastor M. Doblies
should be called as the permanent pastor, a large minority objecting
strongly to that course. For years the position could not be clarified.
Repeated conferences and negotiations did not lead to any result.
In July, 1904. Pastor J. H. Asbeck, from America, appeared on the
scene. He was known to some pastors of the United German and
Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, with whom he had
studied in the Seminary for Missionaries in Hermannsburg, Ger-
many. He was invited by the above-mentioned minority party to
conduct services in the South Brisbane Technical College Flail. He
found much favour, and one Sunday morning in August, 1904,
Pastor M. Doblies, who had continued at Nazareth Church, found
the church in possession of the opponents of his party, and Pastor
J. H. Asbeck preached in his pulpit. The officials of Synod were in
a great quandary over the whole occurrence, but after much
deliberation, Pastor Asbeck was inducted as pastor of Nazareth Con-
gregation, South Brisbane, on the 6th of November, 1904. Nine
days later Pastor J. H. Asbeck had left South Brisbane, and was on
his way, returning to America.
The two parties in South Brisbane became united and recalled
Pastor Erwin Becker (who was conducting some business in Charters
Towers, North Queensland), as their pastor, at the same time
severing the connection with the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland. From the beginning of 1905 Pastor
E. Becker was again pastor of the Nazareth Congregation, South
Brisbane. The great bane of South Brisbane at that time was its
bad financial position, and Pastor E. Becker tried hard to retrieve it.
In the year 1907 he conceived the fantastic idea that he pro-
ceed personally to Germany and procure the Gaumont Chronophone
—a moving picture machine with synchronised phonograph attach-
ment, the first effort to produce “talkies I ’. The profits from the
show were to enrich the shareholders of a syndicate and were to
fill the coffers of the congregation.
The first part of the project was duly carried out and during
the absence of the pastor in Europe, Pastor J. F. Goessling, without
knowledge and approval of his Synod and its officials, ministered to
the Nazareth Congregation of South Brisbane. On his return the
result of the undertaking proved such, that it made Pastor E.
Becker impossible as pastor, and caused considerable loss to several
members of the congregation. In September, 1908, Pastor E.
Becker left South Brisbane for Germany.
For a few months Pastor C. E. of North Brisbane,
assisted South Brisbane conducting Sunday services, and then the
congregation applied to the United German and Scandinavian


Lutheran Synod of Queensland for help. Just at that time Pastor
W. Poland had left the mission station Hope Valley, and was avail'
able for parish work in South Queensland. He was stationed at
Ipswich, and every second Sunday he came to Brisbane and, begin'
ning shortly after Easter, 1909, conducted services in the Nazareth
Church at South Brisbane.
At Christmas, 1909, Pastor L. Krause, who had relinquished
his position at Mackay, came to Brisbane. Though the South Bris'
bane Congregation, in view of the load of debt under which it was
labouring, and in view of its depleted ranks, could offer only the
very small stipend of £6O per annum, Pastor L. Krause declared
himself willing to accept a call. He was inducted as pastor of the
Nazareth Congregation of South Brisbane on the 23rd of January,
1910, by the President of the Synod, Pastor J. Koehnke, who was
assisted by Pastor W. Poland.
The congregation decided to remain a purely German con'
gregation, and Pastor Krause took up the work with great energy.
Quietly and steadily, without any sensational means, he set about
to retrieve the almost hopeless position. With God’s help he
succeeded. It was a slow process, it demanded self'sacrifice and
tedious labour. But the congregation was gathered together again,
the debt was reduced and wiped out, and the stipend was increased.
It was a very happy congregation indeed, when, on the 16th Novem'
ber of the year 1912, it celebrated the fiftieth anniversary of its
existence. Pastor L. Krause was assisted by Pastor G. Heuer, the
President of the Synod, and by Pastors P. B. Hoefner, W. Poland
and O. Theile, Pastors C. E. Treuz and I. Egen were also present.
The Empress of Germany, Auguste Victoria, presented the con'
gregation with a beautifully bound Bible for the altar, and the
Premier of the State, the Hon. D. Denham, appeared in person to
express the good wishes of the Government.
In the same year the congregation installed a new organ, which
it imported from Germany. The instrument is in use to this day and
is still rendering good service.
The War'period was a specially difficult time for the congrega'
lion and it had to suffer many losses. It became necessary to re'
introduce the English language and Pastor L. Krause, with
characteristic energy undertook the hard task of accommodating
himself to this new condition. But finally, in 1931, the congregation
saw that it was necessary to do more for the youth of the con'
gregation. It must be deplored that the readjustment could not be
carried out without bitterness and heartache. In March, 1931, Pas'
tor Krause retired from the Nazareth Congregation, after having
served there for 21 years with great and devoted faithfulness.
For a year the congregation was vacant, and the pastors of the
Synod took it in turn to conduct services, whilst Pastor O. Adler,
of Nundah, attended to the Confirmation Class. Then Pastor A.
Simpfendoerfer, who had just graduated from Immanuel Seminary
at North Adelaide was stationed at South Brisbane as substitute,
until a pastor could take over the charge. Pastor M. Lohe, of


Mackay, accepted the call and on Pentecost Sunday, the 15th of
May, 1932, he was inducted by Pastor O. Theile, who was assisted
by Pastors G. Dohler, R. B. Reuther and O. Adler.
The young pastor put all his effort into the task of re-organising
the whole work and with the blessing of God it has prospered.
English is the predominant language, but regularly German services
are conducted for the older members of the congregation. All other
work in Church and Sunday School, in Confirmation Class and
Young People’s Society is conducted in the English language.
On Sunday, the 10th of May, 1936, the congregation cele-
brated the 40th anniversary of the opening of its present church.
To commemorate the occasion, leadlight windows were donated by
the Ladies’ Guild and by various members of the congregation. The
local Pastor, M. Lohe, was assisted by Pastors G. Heuer, L. Krause,
G. Dohler and O. Adler.
For several years the congregation and its organisations felt the
need of a more commodious hall. On the 15th November, 1936,
the fine new hall which had been erected was dedicated by the
President of the Synod, Pastor A. R. Reuther, of Bethania. Pastors
L. Krause and O. Adler also assisted the local Pastor, M. Lohe, in
the festive services. The hall, with its appointments, has already
proved itself of the greatest value to the congregation, especially for
the Sunday School and the Young People’s Society.
A year later the interior of the church was reconditioned and
artistically improved.
A very willing Ladies’ Guild is a great help in all activities of
the congregation, and a fine choir helps to enhance the Sunday
services.
Once only in its history had the congregation been host to the
Synod, in 1894, in the old church in Cordelia Street. In 1937
Nazareth Congregation acted as host to the General Convention of
the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia. Such a Con-
vention takes place in Queensland only once in twelve years, and
this was the second occasion that General Synod convened in this
State. Everyone was impressed with the excellent arrangements
made, with the hospitality experienced, and with the general con-
ditions of the congregation.
Before the year 1937 came to an end the Nazareth Congrega-
tion celebrated the 75th anniversary of its foundation. As it
gratefully views the past years with their vicissitudes, it looks for-
ward to a bright and blessed future. The local Pastor, M. Lohe, was
assisted by the President of the Synod, Pastor A. R. Reuther, and
by Pastors A. Simpfendoerfer, W. Poland, O. Theile and O. Adler.
In the year 1924 the Nazareth Congregation had the privilege
of commissioning Brother Chr. Claussen and his wife, nee Elizabeth
Prenzler, fellow members in the congregation, for work in the
Lutheran Mission, New Guinea. After 8 years of faithful service
Brother Claussen passed away at Finschhafen, New Guinea, and
his widow returned to Queensland.


The Nazareth Church of South Brisbane is used for the
Lutheran Broadcast Services over the National Stations 4QG and
4QR. On four or five occasions each year its service is “on the air I ’.
The congregation was served by the Pastors J. G. Haussmann,
1862 to 1866; G. Hampe, 1866 to 1868; C. F. A. Schirmeister,
1868 to 1881; E. O. Maier, 1882 to 1886; I. Egen, 1886 to 1891;
E. Becker, 1891 to 1900; M. Doblies, 1902 to 1904; J. H. Asbeck,
in 1904; E. Becker, 1905 to 1908; W. Poland, 1909; L. Krause,
1910 to 1931; M. Lohe, 1932 to the present.
The statistics at the end .of 1936 show: 350 souls, 265 com'
municants, 75 children in the Sunday School, 110 members of the
Young People’s Society, 63 members of the Ladies’ Guild.
2. Eight Mile Plains: Eight miles south of Brisbane along the
Logan Road there is a farming settlement which is named Eight
Mile Plains. It is an old settlement and among the farmers there
have always been a number of Germans. Some of these were
loosely connected with the South Brisbane Lutheran Church, others
attended the churches at Bethania or Beenleigh. In the course of
time the settlers at Eight Mile Plains erected a small Union church
in their midst and the minister of the Presbyterian Church, of South
Brisbane, conducted services for them at regular intervals.
Mr. C. Stiller and his family settled in this area some twenty
years ago. Originally hailing from South Australia he was a Church'
loving Lutheran. He did not mind the long distance to Bethania,
and attended there regularly. When his own family grew up and he
saw other children in the vicinity without religious instruction he
began a Sunday School in the church at Eight Mile Plains. This
Sunday School has proved to be of much blessing and is in existence
to this day.
In the year 1929 Pastor R. B. Reuther began to conduct
Lutheran services in the church at Eight Mile Plains and continued
them at monthly intervals. When Pastor M. Lohe came to South
Brisbane he took charge of the preaching centre at Eight Mile
Plains and served there every fortnight. On the 13th April, 1935,
the Lutheran St. John’s Congregation was organised and at the
Annual Convention of Synod at Dugandan in that year the con'
gregation was received into membership of Synod.
All work is carried on in the English language.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 39 souls, 29 communi'
cants, 8 children in Sunday School.
❖
BUNDABERG PARISH.
CONGREGATIONS: Bundaberg, Baffle Creek, and several
preaching centres. Pastor M. G Reuther
1. Bundaberg: Immigrants from Germany and settlers from
Maryborough acquired some of the rich lands of the Woongarra
Scrub, near Bundaberg, in the seventies of the past century. In
1877 they began to gather for divine services, at first in an empty


shop building, later in the Pioneer School. Pastor Hellmuth, of
Maryborough, came regularly and ministered to the spiritual
needs of these people. In 1882 the congregation built a church m
Tantitha Street, and Pastor Hellmuth dedicated it on Pentecost
Sunday, 1882. In the following year, 1883, Pastor Johann Koehnke,
who had just arrived from Germany, was inducted as the resident
pastor of the congregation. One year later, on the Bth July, 1884,
Pastor Koehnke succumbed to an attack of typhoid fever! Pastor
Giezendanner was his successor. As he developed the same in-
temperate habits that had caused him to leave Toowoomba, he had
to relinquish the congregation in the year 1886 For nearly three
years the congregation was without a pastor, and all its efforts to
secure one remained without result. At last, in the year 1889,
Pastor C. Schmidt, of Maryborough, accepted a call, serving the
congregation for two years from Maryborough, until proper pio-
vision could be made for a residence at Bundaberg.
St. John’s, Bundaberg.
The congregation acquired a block of land in George Street and,
in 1891, erected a church thereon. A year later a parsonage was
added. The church was dedicated as the Lutheran St. Johns
Church on Rogate Sunday, the 23rd of May, 1892. The President
of the Synod, Pastor A. Sueltmann, of Bethania, officiated, and was
assisted by Pastors C. F. Schmidt, C. G. Hellmuth and C. Christen-
sen, of Maryborough.
During the same year Pastor C. F. Schmidt moved to Bunda-
berg, and from here served the St. John s Congregation at Mary-
borough every month.
A few years later, the St. John's Congregation at Bundaberg
imported a very fine pipe organ from Germany, and Messrs White-
house 6? Co., of Brisbane, erected it in the church.
Though Pastor Schmidt regularly gave German instructions, it
soon became necessary to prepare children for Confirmation in the
English language, and English services had to be introduced. In the


year 1897, Pastor Schmidt was declared to have lost his membership
in the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland, and the congregation stood by its pastor. Both, pastor
and congregation, remained without synodical connection for 12
years.
In the year 1908 the St. John’s Congregation at Maryborough,
with the concurrence of its pastor, amalgamated with the St. Mat'
thews Congregation of the same town and thus its connection with
the St. John’s Congregation, at Bundaberg, came to an end. This
connection had been in existence for 20 years.
Prior to this, Pastor C. Schmidt had begun to serve the
Lutherans settled in the Isis District, and conducted services at
Cordalba, Childers and at Goodwood.
In the year 1909, the Annual Convention of the United German
and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, in session at
Bethania, rescinded the resolution, which had, twelve years earlier,
excluded Pastor C. F. Schmidt from Synod, and much mutual joy
was felt when the pastor, and two years later, at the Convention at
Plainland, the St. John’s Congregation of Bundaberg, also, were
again members of Synod.
In May of the year 1914 the congregation was, for the first
time, host to the Annual Convention of Synod. A few months
later, on the 4th September, 1914, God called Pastor C. Schmidt to
His eternal Home.
At the end of the year, Pastor M. G. Reuther, then at Alberton,
accepted the call to this congregation, and on the 29th of February,
1915, he was inducted by the President of the Synod, Pastor G
Heuer, of Toowoomba, who was assisted by Pastor A. R. Reuther,
of Highfields.
In the year 1909 a Ladies’ Guild had been organised, the first
one within the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod
of Queensland, Under the able and ever faithful guidance of Frau
Pastor Schmidt, who was its president until death called her away,
in August, 1933, this guild has been of great help to the congrega-
tion, and has always liberally supported the activities of the Church
at large. In March, 1934, this Ladies’ Guild celebrated the 25th
anniversary of its inception with a festival, at which Pastors L.
Doehler, of Lowood, and O. Theile, of Brisbane, assisted the local
Pastor, M. Reuther, and addressed the festive gathering.
On Rogate Sunday, 1917, the congregation quietly celebrated
the 25th anniversary of the dedication of its present church. On
that occasion it honoured the memory of its former Pastors: C. G.
Hellmuth, J. Koehnke and C. F. Schmidt, by placing a marble
memorial tablet into the church.
In 1925 the congregation was again host to the Convention of
Synod.
On the 4th of December, 1927, the congregation commemora-
ted the 50th anniversary of its foundation. Pastors A. E. Reuther,
of Murgon, and G. Fischer, of Maryborough, assisted the local
pastor at the services.


In the following year, on the 29th July, 1929, the new Sunday
School hall was dedicated to its purpose, with the Word of God
and with prayer. Pastor G. Fischer, of Maryborough, assisted the
local pastor. The first donation towards this building was a sum of
£lOO which a member of the congregation, Mr. Carl Zahn, had
bequeathed for that purpose.
On the sth of September, 1937, the congregation celebrated
the 60th anniversary of its foundation, and Pastors A. Jericho,
President of the Victorian District of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia, and J. Doehler, the General Secre-
tary of that Church, addressed the rejoicing congregations.
The German language is still used regularly on two Sundays
every month, all other work is carried on in the English language.
The pastor of the congregation is making use of the most modern
means of spreading the message of the Gospel. He is on the air
every Thursday at 10.30 a.m., and speaks from station 4BU,
Queensland.
In the year 1933 Pastor M. Reuther re-opened the preaching
centre at Cordalba, which had not been visited for about 20 years.
New Lutheran settlers have taken the place of the former ones who
had mostly left the district. This centre has now been placed in
the care of the Home Mission Committee.
The following pastors served this congregation: C. G. Hell-
muth, 1877 to 1883; J. Koehnke, 1883 to 1884; A. Giesendanner,
1884 to 1886; vacancy 1886 to 1889; C. F. Schmidt, 1889 to 1914;
M. G. Reuther, 1915 to the present.
Statistics at the end of 1936 show: 540 souls, 360 communi-
cants, 107 children in Sunday School, 64 members of Young People’s
Society, 45 members of Ladies’ Guild.
2. Baffle Creek: About the year 1910, newly-arrived immi-
grants from Germany, and older settlers —especially from the Logan
District —established themselves in this area, and began to meet
for devotional services in the residence of Mr. A. Kleinschmidt.
In the year 1911 these settlers applied to the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Queensland for regular visits of a pastor to
officiate in their midst. Synod readily promised the desired services.
The outbreak of the Great War in the year 1914 made regular
visits on the part of distant pastors impossible, and the people,
through Mr. A. Kleinschmidt, in the year 1915, approached Pastor
M. Reuther, of Bundaberg, to come and serve them regularly. On
the sth of December, 1915, Pastor M. G. Reuther organised a
congregation, the foundation members being A. Kleinschmidt, Sil-
cock, Sbresni, Dangeleit, Willert, Wendtland.
In the year 1921 the congregation erected a church which was
dedicated on the 17th July, 1921, as the St. Peter’s Church. The
President of the Synod, Pastor O. Theile, of Bethania, officiated
and was assisted by Pastors M. G. Reuther, of Bundaberg, and A. E.
Reuther, of Murgon.


On the 9th of November, 1929, the congregation installed an
organ, which now accompanies the singing and enhances the ser-
vices. The services are conducted once German and once English
per month.
Statistics at the end of 1936 show: 91 souls, 49 communicants*
29 children in Sunday School.
Pastor M. Reuther also conjointly served the preaching places
of Gin Gin-Wallaville since 1915, services having been held in the
Union church at Currajong 4 or 5 times a year. When the parish
purchased a car for its pastor he was able to hold monthly services
in Gm Gin. To-day the members of Wallaville are being served
by the home missionary, Pastor J. Stoß, since 1937, whereas the
Gin Gin members still retain their connection with the Bundaberg
Congregation.
Statistics, Gin Gin: souls 55, communicanst 34, Sunday School
children 4.
Wallaville: souls 47, communicants 27, Sunday School child'
ren 9.
The two promising preaching places of Bucca and Winfield
are also served monthly by Pastor M. Reuther since 1933. Great
interest is being revealed in these services by all sections of the
people.
Statistics, Bucca: souls 51, communicants 27, Sunday School
children 3.
Winfield: souls 33, communicants 9, Sunday School children
27.
❖ % sfj
DOUGLAS PARISH.
CONGREGATIONS : Douglas, Bergen, Djuan. Pastor A.
Simpfendoerfer.
1. Douglas: From the beginning of the year 1875, German
immigrants and settlers made their way into the bush and scrub of
Gomorran and Douglas, founding farms and homes, and experience
ing all the hardships of the pioneering days in the process.
These settlers, feeling the need of spiritual nourishment — as
most of the German immigrants of those early years did —here and
there met in their rough-built homes, and worshipped together.
With their primitive conveyances they now and again travelled to
Meringandan, to the little church where Pastor Langebecker pro-
vided them with the ministrations of their Church. In the year 1877
the congregation at Meringandan and the settlers at Douglas called
Pastor A. D. Hartwig, who was then pastor at German Station and
Zillmere. Though the parish was small, and the outlook for ob-
taining a living smaller still, Pastor Hartwig believed it to be a call
from God, and followed it. In order to overcome the problem of
providing the necessities of life for himself and his family, he took
up a farm at Douglas. From there he began to visit the settlements
already established, and those in process of establishment, and


brought the of God into many houses and to many gatherings
of people here and there. He may have been but a plain and simple
man, he may not have possessed the wisdom of which the later
generation is so proud, but he was sincere and his heart knew but
the one desire: to bring divine comfort to the immortal souls of his
fellow-countrymen.
In Douglas the people at first, 1878, gathered in Pastor Hart"
wig’s home for their worship, and later the services were conducted
in the State school building. It was not until the year 1888 that
the congregation, which had constituted itself in 1886, found itself
in a position to erect its own church building. The land for the
purpose was donated by Mr. G. Krause. Besides the members of
the congregation, friends also contributed towards the expense of
the building. The dedication of this church, the Jesus Church, took
place in the month of July, 1888.
Nearly ten years later, in the year 1897, dissension arose within
the congregation. This led to one of those humiliating experiences
Jesus Church, Douglas.
in the history of the Lutheran Church in Queensland, when human
sin revealing itself in stubbornness and unreasonable selfishness —
overruled the spirit of Christian charity.
After unseemly scenes within the church, Pastor A. D. Hart"
wig finally relinquished his charge. When he withdrew from the
■congregation his adherents followed him. The Jesus Congregation
had already approached the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland and had been granted membership.
It had also been promised support in its quest for a pastor. The
Secretary of the Synod, Pastor E. Becker, who had been conducting
the negotiations, was commended at the Annual Meeting of Synod
in the year 1897 for the good work he had done!
Pastor J. Holtermann was called to Douglas and was inducted
into the charge on the 26th September, 1897, but he was not able
to heal the breach that had occurred, and, as early as January, 1899,
he relinquished his charge. After a vacancy of several months


Pastor A. Mohr took charge of Douglas and Djuan (Gowrie Flat)
towards the end of the year, only to leave again a few months later,,
March, 1900. Synod, through its Church Council, then temporarily
stationed Pastor Doblies at Douglas and tried to secure a suitable
pastor for the position. At the time of the Annual Meeting of Synod,,
September, 1900, Pastor Doblies had left Douglas, and it was
reported that Pastor Mohr was returning from Germany in order to
take up the work again in the congregation. The next Annual
Meeting of Synod in September, 1901, received the report that
Pastor Mohr was in charge of the three congregations: Douglas,,
Bergen and Djuan. He had been inducted in January, 1901. At
his wish, before he arrived, the congregation Douglas purchased the
parsonage, which was at Bergen, and erected the same beside its
church. But in January, 1902, Pastor Mohr decided to leave the
congregation again.
When Pastor Hartwig, who was living on his farm in the
immediate vicinity of the church at Douglas, saw what was going
on year after year, he at last, in the year 1901, acceded to the wish
of his personal friends and founded a second congregation which
built a second church only a short distance away. Of this he was the
pastor until the year 1921. This congregation was, as long as it
existed, affiliated with the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queens-
land.
In July of the year 1902 Pastor Julius Thun arrived from
Germany. Pastor G. Heuer, the President of the Synod, inducted
him at Douglas as pastor of the three congregations: Douglas, Ber-
gen and Djuan. And now a period of quiet and peaceful develop-
ment followed which was only broken when, after a long and
painful illness, Pastor J. Thun was called by God to higher service,
on the 19th July, 1909.
In September, of 1908, the congregation had installed a new
organ in its church.
On the 13th of March, 1910, Pastor W. Poland, who had been
stationed at Ipswich, was inducted as pastor of the parish—Douglas,
Bergen, Djuan—by the Vice-President of the Synod, Pastor G,
Heuer, of Toowoomba, who was assisted by Pastors A. Hartmann,,
of Highfields, and G Fischer, of Goombungee.
Hitherto, all worship and all instruction had been carried on in
the German language. It soon became evident that the English
language would have to be introduced, and Pastor Poland laboured
very hard indeed to keep his congregation abreast of the times in
this important part of his work. Unfortunately he, also, was one of
those pastors on the Downs who, during the War period, was
subjected to the unjust treatment of being placed into the intern-
ment camp. On Good Friday, of 1916, he was imprisoned, im-
mediately after the forenoon service. The congregations were
served by the Synod as often as possible, until, in the year 1919,
Pastor Poland was released and could take up his work again.
In the year I°2l the two congregations at Douglas united as
one congregation. Thus the breach, that had caused much heart-


ache, was healed in proper Christian spirit. A year later the con-
gregation added a vestry to the church and beautified the interior
■of its house of worship by lining it.
In the year 1933 Pastor Poland, on account of his age, recog-
nised that the growing needs of his parish overtaxed his strength and
resigned from active parish work. The Douglas parish called Pastor
A. Simpfendoerfer, who was at the time home missionary at
Nambour. He was inducted on the Bth October, 1933, by the
President of the Synod, Pastor A. R. Reuther, who was assisted by
Pastor W. Poland.
In the year 1934 the congregation, with the help of the other
members of the parish, considerably altered and improved the
parsonage of Douglas
All work in Church and Sunday School is carried on in the
English language. For the older members a German service is con-
ducted about once every five weeks.
The congregation was served by the Pastors A. D. Hartwig,
1878 to 1897; (he was again pastor of part of the congregation
1901 to 1921); J. F. Holtermann, 1897 to 1899; A. Mohr, 1899 to
1900; M. Doblies, 1900 to 1901; A. Mohr, again, 1901 to 1902; J.
Thun, 1902 to 1909; W. Poland, 1910 to 1933; A. Simpfendoerfer,
1933 to the present.
Statistics at the end of 1936 show: 198 souls, 120 communi-
cants, 40 children in the Sunday School, 30 members of the Young
People’s Society.
2. Bergen: The German settlers in this district were originally
members of the parish of Douglas-Djuan, belonging to either one or
other of the two congregations. In the year 1898 they erected a
parsonage at Bergen which was, geographically, the middle of the
parish, in order somewhat to relieve the pastor in his work. Pastor
A. Mohr, however, requested that the parsonage be placed near the
church at Douglas, and, in the year 1900, the Douglas Congregation
purchased the residence from the Bergen people and re-erected it
alongside of their church.
Meanwhile the members at Bergen had constituted themselves
as a separate congregation and Pastor M. Doblies, in July, 1900,
conducted the first service for them in the parsonage before it was
moved to Douglas. Immediately afterwards they erected a church
which was dedicated on the 16th March, 1901, as the Peace Church,
by the President of the Synod, Pastor G. Heuer, of Toowoomba, the
local pastor then being Pastor M. Doblies.
From its foundation the congregation affiliated with the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, and in
the year 1905 was host to its Annual Convention.
The congregation, closely united with Douglas, has the same
history as the latter congregation. Both were always served by the
same pastor.
Since the year 1910 the English language began to take the
place of the German and in the year 1916 all German instruction


ceased. At present German is used in about one'third of the Sun'
day services.
The congregation was served by the Pastors M. Doblies, 1900
to 1901; A. Mohr, 1901 to 1902; J. Thun, 1902 to 1909; W. Poland,
1910 to 1933; A. Simpfendoerfer, 1933 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show; 121 souls, 92 communi'
cants, 20 children in Sunday School, 20 members of the Young
People’s Society.
3. Djuan: Eight German families settled in the Gowrie Flat
region in 1892, and Pastor A. D. Hartwig, of Douglas, visited them
and officiated in their midst. In the year 1897 the congregation
joined with Douglas and constituted a parish and it has remained
in that parish ever since. In the year 1898 a church was built,
which was dedicated on the 22nd January, 1899, as the Holy Trinity
Church. The Vice' President of the Synod, Pastor G. Heuer, of
Toowoomba, officiated, assisted by Pastors J. F. Goessling and J. F.
Holtermann. During the afternoon the last named addressed the
congregation in the English language.
At the Annual Convention of Synod in 1901 the congregation
was received into membership of Synod.
In 1934 the congregation lined and ceiled and otherwise beauth
fled its church.
As it was impossible to arrange regular German instruction,
the anglicising of the congregation was a more rapid and more com'
plete process than in the two other congregations of the parish. All
worship and instruction is at present being carried on in the English
language.
The congregation was served by the Pastors A. Mohr, M.
Doblies, 1899 to 1902; J. Thun, 1902 to 1909; W. Poland, 1910 to
1933; A. Simpfendoerfer, 1933 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 99 souls, 66 communi'
cants, 23 children in Sunday School, 14 members of Young People’s
Society.
❖ * * *
DUGANDAN PARISH.
CONGREGATIONS: Dugandan, Hoya, and Mt. Alford.
Pastor A. Hiller.
1. Dugandan: Some of the German settlers who established
themselves around Boonah in the early eighties of the past century,
came from the Walloon'Marburg'Minden District. There they
learned to know Pastor C. Berndt, who was, at the time, the
spiritual leader of congregations in Minden and district. For Eve
years, between 1883 and 1888, Pastor Berndt came from Minden to
Dugandan every six weeks, and conducted services in the home of
Mr. W. Gruenow. On the other Sundays the settlers met in various
homes and gathered around the Word of God. One of them would
read a sermon, and they would sing the hymns they had brought
with them from Germany. Shortly before Christmas of the year


1888, Pastor Berndt visited them, accompanied by Mr. Wallatt, who
had just arrived from Germany, where he had been an evangelist in
the Eastern Districts of Prussia. The settlers around Dugandan
constituted themselves a congregation on the 26th December,
1888, and decided to erect a church and to call Mr. Heinrich Wallatt
as their pastor. Mr. C. Wichmann donated an acre of land for
Church purposes. Until the church was built, Mr. H. Wallatt con'
ducted the services in the barn of Mr. C. Retschlag, and also in the
home of Mr. W. Gruenow. On the 24th of May, 1889, the new
church was dedicated, and received the name St. Paul’s Church.
On the same day Mr. H. Wallatt was ordained and inducted as
pastor of the congregation. Pastors E. Heiner, of Ipswich; E. O.
Maier, of Brisbane; J. Frank, of Walloon; and C. Berndt, of Minden,
were present, and officiated. The new church was 40 ft. x 26 ft.,
built of hardwood. The congregation at once made arrangements to
provide a residence for its pastor, who at first lived with Mr. W.
Schulz, at Bunburra. Early in the year 1890 the parsonage was
finished and Pastor Wallatt moved into it. The congregation at
that time affiliated with the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queens'
land.
In the year 1890 the congregation Hoya joined with Dugandan,
and thus the parish of Dugandan was formed.
The Dugandan Congregation built a gallery for choir and
organ, purchasing an organ in the year 1896.
Towards the end of 1904 dissension arose between the parish
and Pastor Wallatt, in consequence of which he relinquished his
charge. During the vacancy the pastors of the Synod served the
parish. In June, 1905, Pastor Chr. Seybold—who had been called
from the Seminary for Missionaries at Basle, in Switzerland —ar'
rived and was inducted by the President of the Synod, Pastor T.
Langebecker, of Toowoomba, on the 12th of July, 1905. Pastors J.
and T. Frank, E. Hiller, C. E. Treuz and M. Millatt were also
present.
The parish had, meantime, added a new kitchen to the parsom
age. Later, in the year 1908, the parsonage was further extended
to make it roomier and more comfortable for the growing family of
the pastor.
German school and Sunday School were organised, and a
strong congregation was happy in the possession of its church and
the blessings it brought into its midst.
Then came the War, 1914 to 1918, and Pastor Seybold was
one of the unfortunate pastors whom the Government of our
country thought wise to place into an internment camp. Pastor
Monz of the neighbouring parish, Milbong, took charge and served
the Dugandan parish as much as possible. But it can readily be
understood how the parish had to suffer in consequence of being
without the services of its own pastor for so long a time. And
when at last the War had come to an end, Pastor Seybold was not
permitted to return to his work. Together with his family he was
deported to Germany in the year 1919.


The parish called Pastor A. Hiller, of Pleasant Hills, New
South Wales, and he was inducted on the 19th November, 1919, by
the President of the Synod, Pastor E. Hiller, of Beenleigh, who was
assisted by Pastor R. Mons, of Milbong.
On the 26th and 27th September, 1920, the congregation was
host to the Annual Convention of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod
of Queensland. It was the first meeting after the War, and, on the
Sunday, the renovated and beautified St. Paul’s Church was solemnly
re-dedicated to its purpose, as house of worship for the Dugandan
Congregation.
On Easter Sunday of the year 1930 the congregation had
an experience unique in its history. A member of the congregation,
Leonard Behrendorff, was commissioned in the St. Paul’s Church
for service on the mission-field in New Guinea. The local Pastor,
A. Hiller, at the same time chairman of the Board of Foreign
Missions, officiated.
The 25 th anniversary of the ordination of Pastor A. Hiller
was made the occasion of a festive gathering in the St. Paul’s
St. Paul’s, Dugandan.
St. John’s, Mt. Alford.
Church on the 17th June, 1931. The President of Synod, Pastor
A. R. Reuther and Pastors E. Hiller. R. Monz, R. Rohde and F.
Finger were present to rejoice with their fellow-pastor and his
parish.
On the 29th and 30th April, 1935, the parish of Dugandan was
again host to the Annual Convention of the Synod. This time it
was the jubilee of the organised Lutheran Church in Queensland.
The two Synods, which had come into existence fifty years earlier,
now celebrated the jubilee in unity as the Queensland District of
the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia.
A limited number of Sunday services are conducted in the
German language for the older members of the congregation; all
other worship and instruction is carried on in the language of the
country.
The congregation was served by the Pastors C. Berndt, 1883 to
1889; H. Wallatt, 1889 to 1904; C. Seybold, 1905 to 1916; R. Mons,
as substitute, 1916 to 1919; A. Hiller, 1919 until the present.


The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 231 souls, 187 com'
municants, 24 children in Sunday School, 35 members of the Young
People's Society and 45 members of the Ladies’ Guild.
2. Hoya : This is the oldest centre of the settlement of Ger'
mans in the Fassifcrn District. Before 1880 there were 40 families
here that gathered in some farmhouse or other on Sundays where
they sang hymns and listened to the reading of a sermon. In the
beginning of 1880, 40 families decided that they constitute as a
congregation and they applied to Pastor Heiner, of Ipswich, for
help and advice. Beginning with the 23rd April, 1880, Pastor
Heiner came to Hoya every fourth Thursday and conducted service
in the home of Mr. W. Gesler. And beginning with the 20th July
of that same year, Pastor Heiner was able to come occasionally on
Sundays. As the congregation increased and the home of Mr.
Gesler proved too small, Pastor Heiner conducted the service as
usual at Hoya but went to Engelsburg for a second service on the
same day. On the other Sundays the people met for reading service.
In the year 1881 one of the members, Mr. G. Wissemann,
presented an acre of land for Church purposes, and the congregation
erected a church of timber 30 ft. x 20 ft. At the same time an
adjoining acre of ground was purchased to serve as cemetery. On
the 24th January, 1882, the new church was dedicated as St.
Matthew’s Church. Pastors E. Heiner, of Ipswich, E. O. Maier, of
German Station,, J. F. Goessling, of Walloon, and M. Eberhard, of
Bethania, were present. The opportunity was taken to discuss the
question how the congregation could obtain a pastor, and Pastor
J. F. Goessling was commissioned to write to the Seminary for Mis-
sionaries at Hermannsburg. Thus it came about that a year later,
on the 16th March, 1883, Pastor C. was inducted at Hoya
by Pastor Schirmeister of North Brisbane. During the same year
the congregation erected a parsonage near the church.
Pastor Frontier and his two congregations at Hoya (at that
time called Dugandan) and Engelsburg (at that time called Fassh
fern) were foundation members of the Llnited German and Scan'
din avian Lutheran Synod of Queensland.
In the year 1890 dissension arose in Hoya between pastor and
congregation and led to the result that Pastor Premier had to leave
Hoya, and that the congregation severed its connection with the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland.
It joined the newly constituted congregation at Dugandan and
Pastor Wallatt officiated in Hoya for the first time on the 11th May,
1890.
During the following years it became necessary to enlarge
the church by adding 15 ft. to its length. In the year 1907 the
building required extensive repairs; it was old, and white ants had
destroyed much of it. The congregation decided to demolish it and
build a new church with the dimensions that were required at that
time—36 ft. by 20 ft. The roof was of iron, and it was lined and
ceiled. On the 9th October, 1907, this new church was dedicated to
its divine purpose. Pastor Langebecker, of Toowoomba, officiated.


and was supported by Pastors C. Seybold, I. Egen and C. E. Treus.
The congregation lost quite a numer of members about this time, as
they moved to new districts, especially along the Kingaroy line,
where they could obtain larger areas, and had better opportunities
for themselves and for their families.
On the 7th of September, 1930, the congregation celebrated the
50th anniversary of its foundation. Pastors H. Wallatt, Plainland;
E. Hiller, Beenleigh; R. Mons, Brisbane; F. Finger, Engelsburg,
assisted the local Pastor, A. Hiller, in the services, which took the
form of a mission festival.
The congregation was served by the Pastors E. Heiner, 1880 to
1883; C. Prender, 1883 to 1890; H. Wallatt, 1890 to 1904; C. Sey'
bold, 1905 to 1916; R. Mons, as substitute, 1916 to 1919; A. Hiller,
1919 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 42 souls, 28 communh
cants, 8 children in the Sunday School.
3. Mt. Alford: The German settlers in this region were menu
bers of the congregation Dugandan. But, as the distance was great
and the roads were often bad, a regular attendance at service in the
church at Dugandan was impossible. Therefore, with the consent
of the parish. Pastor C. Seybold began to conduct special services
for these distant members. On the sth April, 1908, the first of such
services took place in the School of Arts at Mt. Alford. Sunday
School was held prior to the service. But, as other Church bodies
also made use of that hall, and it appeared impossible to arrange
regular dates, those interested met on the 12th October, 1908, at
Mr. W. Wissemann's home, and decided to erect a church.
Mr. W. Wissemann offered an acre of land for that purpose. With
the help of friends, a church was built, 34 ft. by 30 ft., and pro'
vided with all necessary furnishings, an organ also being installed.
On the 28th of April, 1909, it was dedicated as the St. John’s
Church by the President of the Synod, Pastor T. Langebecker, of
Toowoomba, Pastors J. Frank, R. Monz and I. Egen also being
present. Beginning with the Ist of July, 1908, German instructions
were given by Pastor Seybold every second Thursday, whilst Messrs.
W. and C. Behrendorff conducted Sunday School every Sunday.
On the 10th of May, 1936, the congregation celebrated a
mission festival in commemoration of the 25 th anniversary of the
opening of its church. The church had been thoroughly renovated
and beautified. Pastors E. Hiller, Beenleigh; R. Rohde, Hatton
Vale; and F. Finger, Engelsburg, assisted the local Pastor, A. Hiller.
All worship and instruction in the congregation is carried on in
the English language.
The congregation was served by the Pastors C. Seybold, 1908
to 1916; R. Mons, as substitute, 1916 to 1919; A. Hiller, 1919 to
the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 70 souls, 39 communh
cants, 30 children in the Sunday School.


ENGELSBURG PARISH.
CONGREGATIONS: Eagelsburg (Kalbar), Milbong, Reserve,
and Aratula. Pastor F. Finger.
1. Engelsburg; When the scrubland of the Fassifern District
was thrown open for settlement in the eighties of the past century,
many German families found their way to that area and established
themselves there. The German farmers who settled in and around
Engelsburg at first attended divine service at Hoya, near Boonah.
But because of the distance and the bad, heavy roads, they organised
themselves as a Lutheran congregation in the year 1880 and soon
built their own church on 2 acres of ground, which they purchased
from Mr. J. Domjahn. (The church was locally known as Dorm
jahn’s Church.) Pastor E. Reiner, of Ipswich, served the congrega-
tion until Pastor C. Prenzler arrived from Germany in March, 1883.
When Pastor C. Prenzler took up the work in the Fassifern
District his parish comprised the two congregations Hoya and Fassif
fern (Engelsburg). Early in the year 1885 some dispute arose
regarding the question of confirming the children of non-members.
And when, in August of the same year, 1885, the two Synods were
formed in Queensland, the majority of the congregation at Engels-
burg objected to their pastor being a member of the United German
and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland and would not
permit him to officiate in the church.
That part of the congregation retaining the church (Domjahn’s
Church) called Pastor E. Reiner, of Ipswich, to serve them. (Pastor
E. Reiner had been their pastor previously and was even then
regularly serving Milbong, near Roadvale, not far from Engelsburg.)
Pastor Prenzler and about 15 members remaining faithful to
him had services in the residence of Mr. E. Iker. They immediately
erected a church on an acre of land, which they purchased from
Mr. E. Iker. This new St. John’s Church of Engelsburg was dedi-
cated on the 28th October, 1885, and Pastor C. Prenzler, residing
at Hoya, served the two congregations Hoya and St. John’s, Engels-
burg, as his parish. Early in 1890 he relinquished the position at
Hoya and moved on to his own farm at Teviotville. From here he
served St. John’s, Engelsburg, until fresh strife arose in the year
1897, when the dissenting portion of the congregation called Pastor
A. Hartwig, of Douglas, to officiate as its minister. Both congrega-
tions, the one served by Pastor Prenzler and the one served by
Pastor Hartwig, used the same St. John’s Church as their house of
worship. The congregation of Pastor Hartwig even erected a
parsonage beside the church in order to induce its pastor, who came
the long distance from Douglas, to reside in its midst. Its solicitude,
however, was in vain.
Thus there were three Lutheran congregations at Engelsburg,
each one numbering from 10 to 15 members. One was served bv
Pastor E. Heiner, of Ipswich, in “Domjahn’s” Church, another was
served by Pastor A. D. Hartwig, of Douglas, in the St. John’s
Church. Both pastors were members of the Evangelical Lutheran


*
Synod of Queensland. The third one was served by Pastor C.
of Teviotville, also in the St. John’s Church; this latter
pastor was a member of the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland.
When Pastor E. Heiner, on account of increasing old age and
infirmity, retired from the active ministry, Pastor Theo, Frank, on
the Ist January, 1900, was inducted as his successor at Milbong and
Engelsburg (Domjahn’s Church).
The young pastor soon had the joy of establishing peace and
union between the warring parties. In March, 1900, the “Dom-
jahn’s” Congregation and Pastor Congregation decided to
unite, and the greater part of Pastor Hartwig’s Congregation also
joined, and on Ascension Day,
1900, all united in worship in
the St. John’s Church. “Doin'
jahn’s” Church was sold to the
congregation of the Church of
England, Kalbar. A few families,
about six, remained faithful to
Pastor C. Prensder and were
served by him in the Church of
England chapel at Teviotville
until 1914.
In Engelsburg alf were
united and the congregation
prospered. Before the end of
the year the St. John’s Church
proved too small, and in the
year 1901 the church was re'
built and much enlarged. Its
measurements were 40 ft. x 22
ft. and it contained a roomy
gallery for organ and choir.
This almost new building was
dedicated on Easter Monday,
1901.
Besides German instruction on a week'day, which was con'
ducted in a school building erected by the congregation, a German
Sunday School was organised, and the elders of the congregation
supported their pastor faithfully. A band and a choir helped to
beautify the services.
In the year 1903 a cyclone severely damaged both church and
school, but in a very short time the necessary repairs were carried
out. In the year 1907 the congregation ordered from Germany a
fine fulhtoned bell, weighing five hundredweight, for their church.
It was hung into a tower 55 ft. high, which the congregation had
erected for it. On Easter Monday, 1908, the bell and belfry were
dedicated by Pastor J. Frank, who was assisted by the local Pastor,
R. and by Pastor C. Seybold.
St. John’s, Engelsburg.


Meanwhile Pastor Theo. Frank had accepted a call to Mary'
borough and had left the Fassifern District, and Pastor R. Mons,
from Milbrulong, in New South Wales, had become his successor.
He found it necessary, especially in consequence of the difficulties
placed in the way of German instruction during the War period, to
introduce the English language into classes and into the services. In
the year 1920 Pastor Mons accepted a call to North Brisbane, and
in July of 1920, Pastor F. Finger was inducted as pastor of the
parish.
From the 21st to the 23rd May, of 1921, Engelsburg was host
to the Synod Meeting which finalised the amalgamation of the two
Lutheran Synods in Queensland, and which, at the same time, con'
stituted the Queensland District of the United Evangelical Lutheran
Church in Australia.
When in January, 1922, the parsonage, the residence of Pastor
Finger, at Milbong, was destroyed by fire, the parish decided to
erect the parsonage, a fine and commodious residence, at Engels'
burg, Kalbar, where it was erected just opposite St. John’s Church.
In the year 1929 the congregation decided to commemorate its
jubilee by the erection of a new church. Thus, for the third time
since its foundation in 1880, the congregation built a new and
larger church. On the Bth of June, 1930, the stately new building
with its imposing exterior and its artistic interior was dedicated to
its divine purpose. Inclement weather had necessitated a postpone'
ment of the festivities on two occasions. This accounted for the
small number of pastors present. The local Pastor, F. Finger, was
assisted by Pastors A. Hiller, of Dugandan, and G. Dohler, of
Ipswich. There was, however, a large concourse of people present
to help the St. John’s Congregation rejoice over the blessings of
God during fifty years, and over the new house of worship which it
had erected.
The congregation has the joyous satisfaction that a number of
its members have come forward to render personal service in the
Kingdom of God. Miss Annie Giess was commissioned in St. John’s
Church in August, 1931, for her work on the missionffield in New
Guinea. On the 27th January, 1935, Chas. Lewald was in like
manner sent forth to New Guinea. (Brother Chas. Lewald laboured
but 16 months on the missionffield when God called him Home.)
In May, 1936, another member, Miss Esther Yens, was farewelled
for the same field. On 3rd of June, 1934, the congregation witnessed
the ordination of one of its sons, Pastor G. Yens. The President of
the Synod, Pastor A. R. Reuther, performed the holy rite in St.
John’s Church, at Engelsburg, and was assisted by Pastors F. Finger
and A. Simpfendoerfer.
All work is carried on in the English language. During the
year 1936 the pastor conducted 10 services in the German language
for the sake of the older members of the congregation.
The congregation has been served by the Pastors E. Heiner,
1880 to 1883; C. Premier, 1883 to 1900; E. Heiner, 1885 to 1899;


A. D. Hartwig, 1897 to 1900; T. Frank, 1900 to 1907; R. Mons,
1907 to 1920; F. Finger, 1920 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 333 souls, 259 com'
municants, 42 children in the Sunday School.
2. Milbong: As in the case of Engelsburg, the settlers around
Milbong at first attended the services at the Lutheran Church at
Hoya, but as the number of settlers grew they decided to erect their
own church. For this purpose they purchased an acre of land from
Mr. A. F. Badke, part of which was used for cemetery purposes.
Here they built a church of timber, 30 ft. x 20 ft., and it was dedb
cated on the 23rd September, 1885, as the St. Luke’s Church.
Pastors C. F. A. Schirmeister, E. Heiner and E. O. Maier officiated.
Pastor Heiner served the congregation regularly, coming from
Ipswich every three or four weeks. The congregation continually
improved and beautified its house of worship by painting it, by
purchasing chandeliers, and by installing an organ. This latter
addition was made in the year 1889.
As more members joined the congregation the church proved
too small, and, within a few weeks time, in the year 1891, it was en-
larged in length by the addition of 12 ft. In the same year, in
November, the congregation acted as host to the Annual Convention
of the Synod.
A few years later, in the year 1897, the congregation replaced
the old organ with a new one, which it had imported from America.
In the year 1899 Pastor Heiner, on account of old age, retired
from the active ministry. The congregation Milbong, together with
the congregation belonging to Domjahn’s Church, at Engelsburg,
and the one at Reserve, called Pastor Theo. Frank, who was inducted
at Milbong on the Ist January, 1900, by the President of the Synod,
Pastor E. O. Maier, of Brisbane.
Pastor Frank at once organised the instruction of the growing
generation by giving German lessons one day every week, and by
opening a Sunday School. Thus, with the pastor living in its midst,
the congregation and the parish benefited considerably.
When the pastor desired to get married the parish erected a
parsonage at Milbong, not far from the church. It was opened on
Ascension Day, 1902. Pastor J. Frank officiated.
In the year 1906 the congregation began to make preparations
for the building of a new church in place of the old one, which was
getting dilapidated. On the 10th April, 1907, the new building,
large and pleasing, was dedicated to its divine purpose. The PresL
dent of the Synod, Pastor T. Langebecker, of Toowoomba, officiated,
and, besides the local Pastor, T. Frank, Missionary Richter, of
Aurukun, in the Gulf country, was present.
In March, 1907, Pastor T. Frank accepted a call to Mary-
borough, and Milbong had some difficulty in finding a successor.
Theie wtre even proposals made to join the United German and
Scandinavian Lutheran Synod. But finally Pastor R. jMon2;, who was
then stationed in New South Wales, was willing to transfer to
Queensland and he was inducted at Milbong, after the close of the


Annual Convention of the Synod which had taken place at Dugan-
dan, on Tuesday, the 19th of November, 1907. The President of the
Synod, Pastor T. Langebecker, officiated and Pastors T. Frank and
C. Seybold assisted.
Pastor R. Monz ministered to the congregations: Milbong, St.
John’s, Engelsburg and Reserve and soon had to introduce the
English language into the work. The period of the Great War
emphasised the necessity of this English work and it brought for
Pastor R. Monz an added burden of work. Because of the fact that
the pastor of the neighbouring parish, Pastor C. Seybold, of
Dugandan, was interned, he had to serve the latter parish together
with his own.
In March, 1920, Pastor R. Monz accepted a call to North Bris-
bane and Pastor F. Finger (an Australian who had just returned
from Basle, in Switzerland, where he had followed a course of
theological studies) succeeded him. He was inducted early in July,
1920, by the President of the Synod, Pastor E. Hiller. In January,
1922, during the absence of the pastor and his family, the parsonage
was destroyed by fire. The parish decided to place the new parson-
age near St. John’s Church, at Engelsburg, Kalbar.
In the year 1929 the congregation Milbong reconditioned its
church by lining and painting it. At the reopening on the 17th
October, 1929, Pastors A. Hiller and O. Theile assisted the local
Pastor, F. Finger. A year later, in 1930, the organ which had done
service for 33 years, was replaced with a new one, imported from
Germany.
In the year of the jubilee of the Synod, Milbong St. Luke s
Church celebrated its fiftieth anniversary on the Bth of September,
1935. The church was once more beautified for this occasion. A
sanctuary was erected within the building and five chancel lights
were added. The President of the Synod, Pastor A. R. Reuther, and
the Pastors R. Monz, A. Hiller, H. Prenzler, and F. Finger were
present.
The work in the congregation is mostly carried on in the
English language. During the year 1936 the pastor conducted 19
German and 26 English services.
The congregation has been served by the Pastors E. Heiner,
1885 to 1899: T. Frank, 1900 to 1907; R. Monz, 1907 to 1920; F.
Finger, 1920 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 210 souls, 149 communi-
cants, 31 children in the Sunday School.
3. Reserve: At the time of the large influx of German immi-
grants in the sixties of the past century, many moved out from
Ipswich towards Harrisville, and settled on the forest areas there.
As in other places they gathered for worship, and soon appealed to
Pastor Heiner, of Ipswich, to officiate for them. Though mostly
beginners, labouring under the difficulties and disappointments of
their pioneering life, they erected a church at Mutdapilly Reserve,
which was then the centre of the settlement. The land was donated


by Mr. Fuellekrug. The new church was dedicated on Easter Morn
day, 31st March, 1869. As more farmers settled in the vicinity, the
church soon proved too small, and 10 ft. were added to its length.
Pastor E. Heiner, of Ipswich, served the congregation faithfully
until he retired from the active ministry in the year 1899.
Until 1880 the congregation maintained a good membership,
and with leaders like J. Althaus, who was an elder for more than
forty years, Church life prospered. That became evident outwardly,
in the painting of the church and in the purchase of an organ.
When, shortly afterwards, the rich scrublands of the Rose-
wood and Fassifern Districts were opened to selection, many of the
settlers left the poorer forest lands and established themselves in the
new districts. Many members also left the Church because they
required English for their children. Thus it came about that the
congregation consisted of but 13 members when Pastor T. Frank
took charge on the Ist January, 1900. From Milbong he came to
the Reserve quite regularly every three weeks. Fie also conducted
German instructions for eight months of each year, and in conse-
quence the congregation slowly increased to 25 members. Finally
English had to be introduced as the language of worship and in-
struction.
When Pastor Frank moved to Maryborough in 1907, Pastor R.
Mon* succeeded him.
Just before the War began the congregation replaced the old
organ with a new one which had been imported from Germany.
Through faithful labours, Pastor R. Mon* led the small congrega-
tion through the difficult period of the Great War. In fact, even
before the end of the War the congregation demolished the old
church and erected a new one in its place, which was dedicated in
the year 1918. But the German language was abandoned now and
the English language alone was used for worship and instruction.
In 1920 Pastor R. Mon* accepted a call to the congregation at
North Brisbane. Elis successor was Pastor F. Finger, who was in-
ducted into the charge at Milbong in July of that year.
In the year 1930 the congregation celebrated the sixtieth anni-
versary of the dedication of its church, and for that purpose the
building had been neatly lined and ceiled. The local Pastor, F.
Finger, was assisted by Pastors O. Theile and G. Dohler.
The congregation has been served by the Pastors E. Fleiner,
1869 to 1899; T. Frank, 1900 to 1907; R. Mon*, 1907 to 1920: F,
Finger, 1920 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 86 souls, 59 communi-
cants, 20 children in the Sunday School.
4. Aratula: When the Fassifern Estate, south-west of Kalbar.
was thrown open for closer settlement, quite a number of Lutherans
acquired holdings there. Finding the distance to the Engelsburg
Church, beyond Kalbar, too great, they formed a new congregation
nnd erected a church for themselves in the small township Aratula.


Pastor R. Moru, of Engelsburg, served them and assisted them with
his advice.
On the 6th May, in the year 1914, the new church was
dedicated, nearly all the members of the Engelsburg Congregation
came and rejoiced with the new congregation, the choir was also
there to enhance the worship with its anthems and the brass band
added music to the joyousness of the day. The President of the
Synod, Pastor E. Hiller, of Beenleigh, officiated and Pastors Mons*
of Engelsburg, and C. Seybold, of Dugandan, assisted him.
In March, 1920, Pastor R. Monz accepted a call to North Bris-
bane and Pastor A. Hiller took charge of Aratula and served the
congregation until the year 1923, when he delivered the charge to>
Pastor F. Finger, of Engelsburg, Kalbar.
At the last Convention of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Queensland at Engelsburg, on the 21st of May, 1921, the congrega-
tion was received into membership of the Synod.
All worship and instruction in the congregation is carried on,
in the English language.
The congregation has been served by the Pastors R. Mens,.
1914 to 1920; A. Hiller, 1920 to 1923; F. Finger, 1923 to the
present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 101 souls, 75 communi-
cants, 21 children in the Sunday School.
>!<
GOOMBUNGEE PARISH.
CONGREGATIONS: Goombungee, Doctors Creek, Boab
Peak, and Coalbank. Pastor H. Pren^ler.
1. Goombungee: German immigrants arriving in Queensland
had penetrated from Toowoomba ever further across the Darling
Downs, had conquered the wild scrub, and had established them'
selves on the fertile lands that comprise the “Downs”. Thus in the
seventies and eighties of the past century, they also came to Goom-
bungee. Among the new settlers was Mr. Wiecks, who had been
member and elder of St. Paul’s Church, at Toowoomba. He applied
to his former Pastor Langebecker for Church services and offered
his residence as a place for the worship. The itinerant pastor of the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland, Pastor W. Guhr, then
residing at Toowoomba, was appointed to include Goombungee in
the number of settlements on the Downs which he was visiting.
From February, 1888, he regularly conducted monthly services in the
residence of Mr. Wiecks. Previously the surrounding settlers had
met for reading services and prayer meetings in the same house. But
they also attended, as far as possible, at the church in Meringandan,
12T4 miles distant, where their children had to go for catechetical
instructions, and where they were confirmed. As soon as the con'
gregation was organised, steps were taken to erect a church at
Goombungee. On the 28th September, of the year 1890, the new
St. Matthew’s Church was dedicated. On that occasion the Presi-


dent of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland, Pastor E. O.
Maier, installed Pastor W. Guhr as pastor of the newlyTormed
parish: Goombungee and Glencoe. Pastor W. Guhr took up his
residence at Goombungee in a house which was rented by the con'
gregation until, in the year 1896, it erected a parsonage beside the
church. The Church property had been presented to the congrega'
tion by its member, Mr. Peters.
Besides the congregations forming his parish, Goombungee and
Glencoe, Pastor Guhr continued to visit the settlers in the surround'
ing districts and conducted services in their midst, at Aubigny,
Doctors Creek, Evergreen and Cockatoo.
All work in Church and school was carried on in the German
language, and it is evident that many who originally were Lutherans
were lost to their Church because it did not minister to them in the
language they understood.
In the year 1905 the congregation at Glencoe severed its con'
nection with Goombungee. A few years later Pastor Guhr, because
St. Matthew’s Church and Parsonage, Goombungee.
of continued ilhhealth, relinquished his work at Goombungee. In
the following year, 1909, the congregation joined up with the con'
gregations at Doctors Creek and Boah Peak to form a new parish.
This parish called Pastor G, Fischer, who was then the itinerant
pastor of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod
residing at Doctors Creek. The parsonage was enlarged and repaired,
and Pastor G. Fischer took up his residence at Goombungee in the
year 1911. In the same year, 1909, the congregation affiliated with
the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queens'
land.
Pastor Fischer began to introduce the English language, but
still most of the work was continued in the German language. The
War period brought a great change in this respect. During that
time the whole Downs District was sorely affected, for in the year
1916, 4 of the Lutheran pastors of that district were placed in
internment camps, among them also Pastor Fischer, of Goombungee!


Only under great difficulties could Synod serve the various con-
gregations regularly, and the Confirmation Classes everywhere had
to suffer much under those conditions.
In 1919 Pastor Fischer returned to his charge and again took up
his work. In the year 1923 he accepted a call to Maryborough.
Goombungee, with its sister-congregations Doctors Creek and Boah
Peak, called Pastor H. Proeve, who was then pastor at Mackay, in
North Queensland. He was inducted on the 27th April, 1924, by
the President of the Synod, Pastor E. Hiller, who was assisted by
Pastors G. Heuer, W. Poland, A. Reuther and O. Theile.
In the year 1927 Pastor H. Proeve, with his family, visited
America. After his return dissension arose and he relinquished his
position, whereupon the parish Goombungee called Pastor H.
Prensler, who was then stationed at Kingaroy. On the Bth July,.
1928, he was inducted at Goombungee by the President of the
Synod, Pastor A. R. Reuther, assisted by Pastors W. Poland and O.
Theile. In the year 1934 the parish completely rebuilt the parsonage
at Goombungee, rendering it a comfortable residence for its pastor..
The German language has almost disappeared, only three ser-
vices were conducted in German during 1936. All other worship
and all instruction is carried on in the English language.
The congregation has been served by the Pastors W. Guhr,,
1888 to 1908; G. Fischer, 1909 to 1923; H. Proeve, 1924 to 1928*
H.
The statistics at the end of the year 1936 show: 126 souls, 79'
communicants, 32 children in the Sunday School, 17 members of the
Young People's Society.
2. Doctors Creek: As early as 1888 divine services were held
on the same place where we now find St. Paul's Church at Doctors
Creek. The people sat around on logs or on the ground and listened
to a sermon read to them or to any preacher who came along:
Methodist, Congregational or Salvation Army. Among those who
addressed these people was Pastor C. A. Anger, who had been the
first pastor of St. Paul's, Toowoomba, in 1863. Somewhat later,
Pastor W. Guhr, of Goombungee, came to Doctors Creek now and
again, and conducted German Lutheran services in the home of
Mr. L. Spiess. But not until Pastor J. Thun came from Douglas in
the year 1902, was a congregation organised, the first elders being
C. Lowein and W. Pushmann. During the following year, this,
congregation erected a church which was dedicated as St. Paul’s
Church, on the 29th November, 1903. The President of the Synod,
Pastor G. Heuer, of Toowoomba, officiated. At the same time the
congregation, supported by Boah Peak, erected a parsonage on the
Church property at Doctors Creek, and the itinerant pastor of the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland,
with which the congregation had become affiliated, Pastor A. Hart-
mann, who had just arrived from Germany, took up his residence
there.


In the year 1905, Pastor A. Hartmann, accepting a call to High-
fields, left Doctors Creek, and Pastor G. Fischer took charge of the
Home Mission field here in the year 1906.
In December, 1907, the congregations Doctors Creek and Boah
Peak, and the preaching centres Evergreen and Cattle Gully decided
to establish an independent parish. Two years later, in 1909, the
congregation Goombungee applied to Pastor G. Fischer for services.
As a consequence the congregations Goombungee, Boah Peak and
Doctors Creek formed a parish and the preaching centres Ever-
green and Cattle Gully were again a charge on the Synod.
After Pastor G. Fischer had taken up his residence at Goom-
bungee, the congregation, in the year 1911, sold the parsonage at
Doctors Creek, which had been the cause of quite a deal of argu-
ment between the two congregations of Doctors Creek and Boah
Peak. The proceeds were used to beautify the church.
On the 25th November, 1928, the congregation celebrated the
25th anniversary of the opening of its church, and many joined in
its rejoicings. Pastor G. Heuer, who had officiated at the dedica-
tion of the church, was present, as were also Pastors G. Fischer, T.
Fuhlbohm, W. Poland and the local Pastor, H. Premier.
All work in Church, in Sunday School and Confirmation
Classes is now carried on in the English language. During 1936 but
one service was conducted in the German language.
The congregation was served by the Pastors W. Guhr and J.
Thun to 1903; A. Hartmann, 1903 to 1905; G. Fischer, 1906 to
1923; H. Proeve, 1924 to 1928; H. Premier, 1928 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 104 souls, 62 communi-
cants, 31 children in the Sunday School, 9 members of the Young
People’s Society.
3. Boah Peak: The settlers at Boah Peak, for the greater part,
had come across from Highfields, at the end of the last century.
Although from 1899 onwards they met in Mr. R. Brueggemann’s
home for Sunday services, they considered themselves members of
Highfields, and attended services there, whenever an opportunity
offered. In the year 1891 Pastor J. F. Goessling, of Highfields,
visited his members at Boah Peak and conducted service in Mr. R.
Brueggemann’s, and then later in Mr. A. Schmidt’s home; and he
and other pastors of the Synod continued such visits. There is no
record to show when the congregation was organised and consti-
tuted; but Synod minutes show that it was affiliated with the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland in the
year 1903. In the year 1904 a resolution to erect a church was
carried and on the 6th of February, 1905, Christ Church, Boah
Peak was dedicated to its divine purpose by the President of the
Synod, Pastor G. Heuer. The land for Church and cemetery pur-
poses, 2 acres in extent, was donated by ME. Mfathies. As a centre
of the Home Mission field, Boah Peak was placed in charge of the
itinerant pastor of the Synod, Pastor Hartmann, who, in November,
1903, had been stationed at Doctors Creek. As Boah Peak


was always connected with Doctors Creek, it shared all parish
experiences with this congregation and Goombungee. The ordination
and induction ol'Pastor Fischer took place in Christ Church, Boah
Peak, on the 27th May, 1906. The President of the Synod, Pastor
G. Heuer, officiated and was assisted by Pastors P. B. Hoefner, A.
Hartmann and O. Theile.
On the 26th January, 1912, a cyclone destroyed the church
building at Boah Peak. The congregation set to work and re-built
its house of worship and on the 28th of April of that year the
church was re-dedicated by the President of the Synod, Pastor G.
Heuer, who was assisted by Pastors P. B. Hoefner and W. Poland.
Soon afterwards the building was lined and ceiled, and in the year
192 3 the first organ was placed into the church.
Until 1912 all worship and all instruction was carried on in the
German language, and although English had been introduced in that
year, that language was dropped again. But since 1916, the lan-
guage of the country has been used continually and in increasing:
measure, and in recent years the pastor gives a short address in the
German language at the close of every second or third Sunday
service; all other work of the Church is being carried on in the
English language.
After postponement on account of inclement weather con-
ditions, the Christ Congregation, Boah Peak, celebrated the 25th.
anniversary of the dedication of its church on the 27th of April,,
1930. Besides the local Pastor, H Premier, Pastors G Fischer, W.
Poland, L. Doehler and E. V. H. Gutekunst were present and many
friends joined in the celebrations.
The congregation was served by the Pastor J. F. Goessling to
1903; A. Hartmann, 1903 to 1905; G. Fischer, 1906 to 1923; H.
Proeve, 1924 to 1928; H. Premier, 1928 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 104 souls, 71 communi-
cants, 20 children in the Sunday School, 25 members of the Young
People's Society.
4. Coalbank: On the 21st March, 1915, Pastor T. Fuhlbohm,.
at that time the itinerant pastor of the United German and Scan-
dinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, residing at Kulpi, on the
Cooyar Line, conducted the first Lutheran service in this district, in
the home of Mr. Richard Cooke, at Thornlands. At intervals such
services were repeated, until Pastor Fuhlbohm shared with other
Lutheran pastors the humiliating experience of being interned. The
consequence was that Lutheran services in this district had to be dis-
continued. The work was not again taken in hand until Pastor H.
Prenzler called the settlers together for a service in the home of Mr.
A. Lowein, at Coalbank, and on the 27th August, 1929, a congrega-
tion was constituted. Most of the members of this new congregation
had moved out from older settlements, and were out of touch with
their Church for years, and there were quite a number of adults who
had to seek Confirmation before they were able to claim full mem-


bership in the congregation. But to the joy of the Chmrch-loving
people, a fine Lutheran congregation has been established.
In 1930 the congregation affiliated with the Queensland District
of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia. At the
end of that year it proceeded with the erection of a church on
ground donated by a member, V. Schefe. The dedication took
place on the 4th of January, 1931, when the building received the
name St. John’s Church. The President of the Synod, Pastor A. R.
Reuther, officiated, Pastors H. Prensler, W. Poland, E. V. H. Cute'
kunst and L. Doehler were also present.
All work in Church and Sunday School, which was established
with the congregation itself in the year 1928, is effected in the
English language.
The congregation since its foundation has been served by
Pastor H. PrenMer.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 105 souls, 59 communi-
cants, 16 children in the Sunday School.
In the year 1935 Pastor H. PrenMer established another preach-
ing place at Nut Grove with 30 Souls and 18 Sunday School
children.
❖ %
HATTON VALE PARISH.
CONGREGATIONS: Hatton Vale, Plainland, Hillside, and
Lockrose. Pastor R. Rohde.
1. Hatton Vale: German settlers began to establish themselves
in this district about 1870, and beginning in the year 1876, Pastor
Chr. Berndt, of Mmden, came across the hills to conduct services
for them in their homes. In the year 1881 the congregation erected
a church, 30 ft. x 20 ft., at a cost of £IOO. It was dedicated on the
6th August, 1881, by Pastor C. Berndt, who was assisted by Pastor
A. D. Hartwig. At the end of the year 1889, Pastor Berndt had to
retire from the pastorate of the congregations St. John’s, Minden,
and Hatton Vale, because he had been registered as a minister of
the Congregational Church of Queensland. During the latter years
of his pastorate the congregation at Hatton Vale had suffered con-
siderable losses through the activities of a German sect, which
called itself the Apostolic Church It had its centre at Hatton Vale,
and the apostle, Mr. H. Niemeycr, resided there. At a conference
early in 1890, the Hatton Vale Congregation decided to affiliate with
the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland. It was decided to
adopt the recommendation of Pastor Wallatt, of Dugandan—who
was then serving the congregations at Hatton Vale, Minden and
Deep Gully—that these three congregations should organise as one
parish and call as pastor his friend, M. Millatt. (Mr. M. Millatt
was at that time an evangelist in Lithuania and East Prussia.)
In preparation of his arrival a parsonage was erected beside the
church at Hatton Vale. On the 29th January, 1891, the new pastor
was ordained and inducted by the President of the Synod, Pastor


E. O. Maier, of Brisbane. Under the new pastor the congregation
recovered some of its losses and increased in membership. In con'
sequence thereof the church was enlarged in 1895, by adding 15
ft. to its length; an organ was installed, and a bell was hung in a
small tower erected over the church. The renovated church building
was re-opened for service on the 29th September, 1895.
In the year 1893 the congregation at Hillside joined the parish,
whilst in the year 1909 the congregations beyond Gatton, at Rupeley
(Deep Gully) and at Wongo Creek, seceded from the parish under
circumstances described in the first part of this book.
In the following year, 1910, a new congregation was organised
at Lockrose, and joined the parish which now consisted of the
congregations: Hatton Vale, Minden, Lockrose and Hillside.
German school was conducted regularly by the pastor, and
Sunday School by various elders and members of the congregation.
In the year 1912 Hatton Vale was host to the Annual Convention
of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland.
Then the Great War came and Pastor Millatt was also one of
those unfortunate pastors in Queensland who were, in the year 1916,
St. Paul’s Church and Parsonage, Hatton Vale.
placed into an internment camp in New South Wales for a period
of nearly 4 years. Though his old friend Pastor Wallatt, of the
neighbouring parish of Plainland and Lowood, took upon himself
much extra work, the fact that the youth of the congregations be-
came anglicised very quickly caused much loss. When Pastor Millatt
returned in 1919 he found himself before a new and difficult
position which he was unable to master. Dissension arose, not only
over the problem of introducing the English language, but also over
questions of a personal nature, and finally he resigned in the year
1923.
Meantime the congregation St. John’s, Minden, dissatisfied with
the slow progress made in obtaining a new pastor for the parish,,
seceded from the Queensland District of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia and applied for services to the:
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia (Missouri).
In the year 1924 Pastor R. Rohde (who was then pastor at
Grovedale, Victoria) was called to the parish which had been joined
by the congregation at Plainland. Thus the parish now consisted of
the congregations: Hatton Vale, Plainland, Lockrose and Hillside.


Pastor Rohde was inducted at Hatton Vale on the 29th May, 1924,
by the President of the Synod, Pastor E. Hiller.
The English language was introduced and all instruction in
Sunday School and Confirmation Class was conducted in the
language of the country. On account of the older members of the
congregation, German was still continued in some of the Sunday
services.
In the year 1927 the congregation was host to the Annual
Convention of the Queensland District of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia.
In the year 1930, the congregation celebrated its fiftieth annh
versary and in commemoration of its golden jubilee, it completely
xeTuilt its church, which was re-dedicated to its divine purpose on
the 21st September, 1930. The President of the Synod, Pastor A. R.
Reuther, officiated and was assisted by the local Pastor, R. Rohde,
and by Pastor L. Doehler.
On the 24th of June, 1927, the congregation farewelled one of
its members, Miss Annie Schloss, who had offered her service to the
Lutheran Mission, New Guinea. It has prayerfully remembered her
ever since.
The congregation was served by the Pastors Chr. Berndt, 1876
to 1889; H. Wallatt, 1889 to 1890: M. Millatt, 1891 to 1923 (ex'
cepting four years, during which he was interned, and Pastor H.
Wallatt substituted for him); R. Rohde, 1924 to the present.
The statistics at the end of the year 1936 show: 197 souls, 128
communicants, 50 children in the Sunday School, 24 members of
the Young People’s Society.
2. Plainland: About the year 1878 the first German settlers
established themselves here, 12 families, most of them having come
from West Prussia and Brandenburg. Two years later, 1880, Pastor
J. F. Goessling, then stationed at Kirchheim, came over the Little
Liverpool Range and gathered them for the first Church service in
the home of Mr. Kachel; and he continued to visit them every three
weeks. In the year 1884 the congregation built a small church which
was dedicated on the 14th of May of that year as the St. John’s
Church. Pastors J. F. Goessling, KirchheimAValloon; E. Heiner,
Ipswich; J. Koehnke, Toowoomba; and C. Prender, Fassifern,
officiated. The first elders were the Brethren Kachel, Stephan and
Beutel.
When Pastor J. F. Goessling, in the year 1886, had to leave
Kirchheim, he settled on his own selection not far distant from the
Plainland Church, and served, besides Plainland, congregations at
Rosevale, beyond Rosewood, and Deep Gully, beyond Gatton, all of
which were affiliated with the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland.
In the year 1889 dissension and strife arose in the congregation
beyond Gatton, at Deep Gully. A number of parishioners seceded
and joined the congregation served by Pastor M. Millatt, of Hatton


Vale. After much friction Pastor J. F. Goessling retained the new
church and continued to serve the congregation.
Meanwhile, with the growth of settlement around Plainland,
the congregation had also grown and the church proved too small
for the congregation. A fine, large, new church was erected in the
year 1897. It was dedicated on the first Sunday in Advent of
that year. The old church was retained as a schoohhall.
In the year 1900 Pastor Goessling accepted a call to Christ
Church, at Highfields, and left the parish of Plainland. The Church
Council of the Synod stationed Pastor M. Doblies at Plainland until
a new pastor could be found; but during his stay much strife arose
and the congregation suffered severe losses. In 1901 the congrega-
tion called Pastor S. Hoerlein, who had been a missionary on the
Bloomfield mission station in North Queensland for about eight
years. On Septuagesimae Sunday, the 26th January, 1902, he was
inducted into the charge. The President of the Synod, Pastor G.
Heuer, officiated, assisted by Pastor O. Theile.
The parish consisted of the congregations: Plainland, Deep
Gully and Mt. Sylvia. At the latter place a new church was built
which was dedicated shortly before Easter of the year 1905. Besides
Pastor S. Hoerlein, Pastors G. Heuer and O. Theile were present.
Soon after Pastor S. Hoerlein took up the work at Plainland,
the congregation at Lowood joined the parish, and in the year
1905, the two congregations, Plainland and Lowood, erected a conv
fortable parsonage on 10 acres of land at Plainland, as residence of
their pastor. Unfortunately dissension arose very soon after. An
agreement had been made that Pastor S. Hoerlein should relinquish
the congregations beyond Gatton, Deep Gully and Mt. Sylvia, in
order that he be relieved of the extra work and strain, and be
enabled to devote more attention to the two larger congregations at
Lowood and Plainland. Pastor S. Hoerlein did not honour this
agreement and, when other matters of a personal nature entered
into the dispute, the congregation at Lowood, in the year 1906,
refused Pastor S. Hoerlein's ministrations.
In Plainland, the dissatisfaction over the matter and its develop-
ment continued, and in the year 1908 the congregation asked Pastor
S. Hoerlein to relinquish his position. After delivering his farewell
sermon to the congregation in the morning, Pastor S. Hoerlein
passed away on Sunday night, 30th August, 1908.
In September, 1908, Pastor H. Wallatt, who had since 1906
served Lowood from Ipswich, moved to Plainland and was pastor of
Plainland and Lowood. He was inducted at Plainland on the 27th
September, 1908, by the President of the Synod, Pastor J.
Koehnke, of Beenleigh, who was assisted by Pastor J. F. Goessling,
of Plainland.
The upper congregations beyond Gatton, Deep Gully and Mt.
Sylvia, were, by the Church Council of the Synod, placed in charge
of Pastor Goessling, who was then living in retirement with his
children at Plainland, the Synod subsidising him from its funds. He


attended to this work until the two congregations, in October, 1909,
seceded from the Synod, as described in the first part of this book.
Pastor H. Wallatt extended his work to Blenheim, on the
southern side of the railway line to Toowoomba and founded a
congregation there which, in the year 1911, was accepted into the
membership of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran
Synod of Queensland. With the aid of the Synod the congregation
erected a church, which was dedicated on Palm Sunday, 31st March,
1912, by the President of the Synod, Pastor G. Heuer, of
Toowoomba. This congregation at Blenheim was a member of the
Plainland-Lowood parish and was ministered to by Pastor H.
Wallatt. In later years the congregation could not obtain English
services from its Synod as often and as regularly as it desired ; and
in 1921 it transferred its allegiance to the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Australia (Missouri).
Twice, in the years 1899 and 1911, Plainland was host to the
Annual Convention of its Synod.
German school was carried on in order to fit the younger
generation to worship with their parents, until war-time regulations
rendered that impossible.
On Exaudi Sunday, 1914, the congregation rejoiced with its
pastor on the occasion of the 25th anniversary of his ordination,
and Pastor J. Koehnke, of Beenleigh, conducted the service.
During the Great War, Pastor Wallatt had to bear an extra
burden of work trying to help the neighbouring parish, the pastor
of which, Pastor M. Millatt, was interned. At that time the process
of anglicising made rapid progress and the congregation sustained
quite serious losses. Even after the War it was impossible to apply
the remedy as early as was necessary, partly because the signs and
needs of the times were not yet fully understood —neither by com
gregations nor by pastors —and partly because bilingual pastors were
not so readily available.
At last, in the year 1923, Pastor Wallatt, seeing a successor was
available, relinquished his position. The congregation Plainland,
joining Hatton Vale parish, welcomed a new pastor, Pastor R.
Rohde, who was inducted at Hatton Vale on the 29th May, 1924.
As Pastor Rohde lived at Hatton Vale, the parsonage at Plain-
land was sold, and the congregation used its part of the proceeds to
line and otherwise beautify its church.
The work in the congregation is carried on in the English
language. For the sake of the older members, the pastor delivers
German sermons in the Sunday service, which are otherwise con-
ducted in the language of the country.
The congregation was served by the Pastors J. F. Goessling,
1880 to 1900; M. Doblies, 1900 to 1901; S. Hoerlein, 1902 to 1908;
H. Wallatt, 1908 to 1923; R. Rohde, 1924 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 184 souls, 146 communi-
cants, 20 children in the Sunday School.


3. Hillside: In the year 1889 Pastor Chr. Berndt had to
relinquish his position in the parish of Hatton Vale and Minden,
because he had become registered as a minister of the Queensland
Congregational Church. Eight families of the Minden Congregation
remained faithful to him and Pastor Berndt conducted services for
them in the home of G. Rose. In the year 1891, they erected a
new church at Hillside (Coolana) which was dedicated on the 10th
of that year as St. John’s Lutheran Church. Pastor E.
Becker, of South Brisbane, officiated.
Shortly afterwards Pastor Berndt’s health broke down and he
had to retire from the ministry. The Hillside Congregation now
sought affiliation with the parish of Hatton Vale, which already
had a congregation at Minden. After much negotiation, Hillside was
granted the affiliation in June, 1893.
On the 27th March, 1909, the congregation installed a new
organ and, as it continued to prosper, it enlarged the church in the
year 1913. At the same time a bell was placed into a belfry 35 ft.
high, erected for the purpose. The dedication took place on King’s
Birthday, 3rd June, 1913. Pastor M. Millatt was supported by
Pastors J. Frank, of Marburg, and C. E. Treus, of Brisbane.
The even tenor of the way was much disturbed during the
years of the War. Pastor M. Millatt was interned. Under great
difficulty, Pastor Wallatt, of a neighbouring parish, conducted some
services for the congregation, which on other Sundays gathered
for reading services.
Since Pastor M. Millatt resigned his office in 1923, Pastor R.
Rohde is pastor of the congregation which has remained a member
of the Hatton Vale parish.
The German language is used as necessity demands for the
older generation of members; all other work is carried on in the
English language.
The congregation has been served by the Pastors Chr. Berndt,
1889 to 1892; M. Millatt, 1893 to 1923 (during the years 1916 to
1919, when Pastor M. Millatt was interned, Pastor H. Wallatt sub"
stituted for him); R. Rohde, 1924 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 131 souls, 99 communi"
cants, 20 children in the Sunday School, 18 members of the Young
People’s Society.
4. Lockrose: During the first decade of the present century the
Government of Queensland repurchased some of the large estates
in the Lockyer Valley and opened them for closer settlement. Many
Lutherans acquired farms on the Lockyer Creek, and as soon as they
were settled, they sought the nearest Lutheran church. This was
Hatton Vale, but the distance, together with the bad state of the
roads, made a regular attendance at worship impossible. Therefore
it was decided to erect a Lutheran church in their midst. This
Evangelical Lutheran Church at Lockrose was dedicated to its
divine purpose on Dr. Martin Luther’s birthday, the 10th of Novem"
ber, 1909, when the President of the Synod, Pastor J. Frank, of


Marburg, officiated. Pastors M. Millatt, I. Egen and E. Hiller were
also present.
Pastor M. Millatt was the pastor of the congregation. He came
across from Hatton Vale regularly every fortnight and conducted
the services and attended to and supervised Sunday School, German
instruction and Confirmation Classes. All the work was, at that
time, carried on in the German language.
In the year 1910 an organ was installed, and in 1915 a bell was
hung in a belfry erected for the purpose.
The period of the Great War brought a great deal of hardship
for the congregation. The pastor was interned. Despite much
exertion, Pastor Wallatt, of a neighbouring parish, could serve the
congregation only at long intervals. Furthermore the anglicising
process, which had begun a long time previously, developed with
alarming rapidity.
After his release from the internment camp Pastor M. Millatt
again took charge of his work. But the necessity of extending the
use of the English language, which he could not speak fluently, and
disputes of a personal nature, in the year 1923, led the pastor to
relinquish his position.
Together with the parish the congregation called Pastor R.
Rohde, who was inducted at Hatton Vale on the 29th May, 1924.
On Ascension Thursday, the 30th May, 1935, the congregation
celebrated the 25th anniversary of its foundation. The church had
been lined, ceiled and painted for the occasion. Pastors R. Rohde,
M. Millatt, R. E. Gutekunst and L. Doehler were present at
the festival.
The German language has been abandoned altogether and all
work is being carried on in English.
The congregation has been served by the Pastors M. Millatt,
1909 to 1923 (during the years 1916 to 1919, when Pastor Millatt
was interned, Pastor H. Wallatt substituted for him); R. Rohde,
1924 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 137 souls, 89 communh
cants, 20 children in the Sunday School.
* * * *
HIGHFIELDS PARISH.
CONGREGATIONS: Highfields, Glencoe, Meringandan, and
Crows Nest. Pastor G. Ven^.
1. Highfields: Beginning with the year 1870, German families
settled on the range around Highfields, about 10 miles to the north
of Toowoomba. They soon gathered on Sundays, now in this, now
in that home of a farmer, mostly at A. Dunemann’s, for their
devotions. Pastor W. Burghardt, of St. Paul’s, Toowoomba, came
out to them now and again in order to officiate among them. After
1877, Pastor A. D, Hartwig also came across from Douglas and con-
ducted services, which, according to his reports, took place in an
English church. In the year 1879 the congregation, which had


constituted itself in the year 1876 and elected Kirstenfeld and
Holzwart as the first elders, built Christ Church as its house of
worship. Four years later, 1883, a parsonage was erected beside the
church, and Pastor W. Burghardt was called as the first pastor of
the congregation.
In the year 1887 the congregation added a belfry to its church
and erected a gallery for the organ and the choir. Pastor A. Suelt-
mann, President of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran
Synod of Queensland and Pastor C. G. Hellmuth were present,
when the church with its additions was re-dedicated.
At that time Pastor W. Burghardt also served the congregations
at Glencoe (Gowrie Junction) and Meringandan. Neither the pastor
nor the congregations were members of either Synod after these had
been constituted in the year 1885. Pastor W. Burghardt, however,
attended several Annual Conventions until, in the year 1890, he
joined the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland. The congregation was host to the Annual Meeting of
that Synod in the year 1891, though it was not affiliated with the
Synod.
In October, 1895, Pastor W. Burghardt accepted a call to the
parish, German Station. Highfields now joined the United German
and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland and, during the
vacancy, Pastor G. Heuer, of Hume Street, Toowoomba, served
the congregation. In the year 1896, Pastor C. Claussen, who had
been missionary at Mari Yamba, took charge of Christ Church at
Highfields. He was inducted on the Bth December, 1895, by the
President of the Synod, Pastor A. Sueltmann, who was assisted by
Pastors G. Heuer and M. Doblies. But eighteen months later, 14th
August, 1897, God called him away through death, and Highfields
was again without a pastor.
Pastor G. Backen, of Ni Ni, in Victoria, was recommended to
the congregation by some of the pastors who had studied with him
at the Seminary for Missionaries at Hermannsburg, in Germany.
He was, at the time, a member of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod
of Australia (Missouri). He, however, accepted the call on com
dition that the congregation secede from the United German and
Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, which it did. Pastor
Backen took charge of the congregation in the year 1898. The very
next year, in 1899, dissension arose because of the so-called
Missourian tendencies of the pastor. A number of members left
Christ Church, and forming a separate congregation, built their
own church on the opposite side of the road, a short distance
further along. This Holy Trinity Congregation affiliated with the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland,
and called the former pastor of Highfields, Pastor W. Burghardt,
who was then at German Station. He was inducted on the 3rd
Sunday in Epiphany in the year 1900, and the new church was
dedicated on the sth August, 1900.
In April of that year, 1900, the Christ Congregation, having
also severed its connection with Pastor Backen, again applied for


M$f% * -\ % S : I-llr * *W* '&/* 4 x '-' Wdr
>■ r ■ /’’; - y- *a» ,y--f-. & $ & .4 % jl- H''t-ft t I ' . a | ? •■■• I M t ‘
“
membership with the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran
Synod of Queensland. Every effort was made to unite the two
congregations at Highiields, but without success. Pastor J. F. Go ess-
ling, of Plainland, took charge of Christ Congregation, and thus
these two congregations, both members of the same Synod, existed
beside one another for many years.
In July, 1905, Pastor Goessling retired from parish work, and
the Christ Congregation, together with the congregation at Glencoe,
called Pastor Hartmann, who was then itinerant pastor of the Synod,
stationed at Doctors Creek. After the arrival of a successor, Pastor
Hartmann moved to Highiields, and was inducted on the 13th of
May, 1906, by the President of the Synod, Pastor G. Heuer.
Christ Church, Highfields.
In the year 1907 the old Christ Church was demolished, and a
tine new building erected in its place, the spire, which was a more
recent structure, being made a part of the new church. The opening
took place on the 14th July, 1907, and shortly afterwards, in
October of that year, the congregation was host to the Annual Con-
vention of the Synod.
In 1912, Pastor Hartmann relinquished his charge at Highiields,
and there was a vacancy of about nine months, until Pastor A. R.
Reuther was inducted in Christ Church on the 9th March, 1913, by
the President of the Synod, Pastor G. Heuer, Toowoomba. Pastors
W. Poland, Douglas, and O. Theile, Bethania, were also present.


Some time afterwards, during the War period, the congrega-
tion at Meringandan approached Pastor Reuther that he serve its
members at regular intervals.
When, in the year 1917, Pastor Burghardt, of the Holy Trinity
Church, at Highfields, passed away, the two congregations became
united again. The Holy Trinity Church was sold and demolished,
and as formerly, the Highfields Lutherans worshipped together in
Christ Church.
In the year 1925 both church and parsonage were thoroughly
renovated and painted and in a special service on Sunday, 6th of
September, 1925, the beautiful church was dedicated anew to its
sacred use.
In 1926 the new congregation at Crows Nest was embodied in
the parish.
For the worthy commemoration of its sOth anniversary, on the
22nd September, 1929, the congregation went to considerable
trouble and expense to beautify its house of worship, and a very
large gathering of friends joined in the celebration. Pastors G.
Heuer, E. Gutekunst, H. Premier, W. Poland and L. Doehler as-
sisted the local Pastor, A. R. Reuther, on this occasion.
Shortly after the arrival of Pastor Reuther in the congregation,
the English language was introduced, and, beginning with the year
1915, all German instruction ceased; but the congregation was not
able to regain all the losses it suffered through the English language
having been neglected for so long a time. All worship and instruc-
tion is now carried on in the English language, with the exception
of a few German services for the older generation of members.
In the year 1936 Pastor A. R. Reuther accepted a call to the
Bethania parish and was succeeded by Pastor G. Vens, who was
inducted at Highfields on the 12th July, 1936, by the Vice-President,
Pastor H. Prensler, Goombungee; Pastors E. Gutekunst, Toowoomba
and G. H euer, Toowoomba, assisted.
The congregation was served by the Pastors W. s Burghardt and
A. D. Hartwig, 1870 to 1883; W. Burghardt, 1883 to 1895; C.
Claussen, 1895 to 1897; G. Backen, 1898 to 1899; J. F. Goessling,
1900 to 1905; A. Hartmann, 1905 to 1912; A. R. Reuther, 1913 to
1936; G.
The statistics at the end of the year 1936 show; 212 souls, 160
communicants, 30 children in the Sunday School, 16 members of the
Young People’s Society.
2. Glencoe: Mid hill and dale we find at Glencoe, in very
pleasing surroundings, a settlement of mostly German farmers, who
established themselves here in the late seventies of the last century.
Pastor A. D. Hartwig came across from Douglas and organised a
congregation, which, for a time met for divine worship in the home
of Mr. Stanke. But soon the young congregation thought of building
a church, a member having presented an acre of land for Church and
cemetery purposes. The new church of the Bethlehem Congregation
was dedicated towards the end of the year 1880. Pastor Hartwig


was the spiritual leader of the congregation; but on account of im-
paired health he had to relinquish the charge in the year 1883.
Pastor W. Burghardt then served the congregation from Highfields
until the year 1890.
At the end of the year 1890 the congregation at Glencoe
joined the congregation at Goombungee, and Pastor W. Guhr
served this congregation every fortnight, an elder regularly conduct-
ing reading service on the other Sundays.
In the year 1905 the Bethlehem Congregation at Glencoe
agreed to constitute a parish with the Christ Congregation at High-
fields, and this new parish called Pastor A. Hartmann, then at
Doctors Creek. At the same time the congregation joined the
United Ceiman and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod. Meanwhile,
the church had become dilapidated, and in the year 1908 the con-
gregation, with the help of contributions from outside sources,
erected a fine new building as its house of worship. It was dedicated
on the 13th December, 1908. The President of the Synod, Pastor
J. Koehnke, of Beenleigh, officiated and Pastors G. Heuer, A. Hart-
mann ’ J’ Thun and G. Fischer assisted. The whole proceedings
were conducted in the German language.
Together with Highfields this Bethlehem Congregation experi-
enced a change of pastors in 1912 and 1913 when Pastor A. Hart-
mann left, and Pastor A. R. Reuther succeeded him. The latter
was inducted at Highfields in March, 1913.
The English language was now introduced and beginning with
the year 1915 all instruction was in the language of the country.
Though the congregation has since then shown a steady growth, it
has not been able to retrieve all the losses it suffered through the
delay in introducing the English language.
• u-i° n u ho rr th November, 1930, the congregation celebrated its
jubilee, the fiftieth anniversary of its foundation and of the opening
of its church. The local Pastor, A. R. Reuther, was assisted by
Pastors G. Heuer, R. B. Reuther, E. Gutekunst, W. Poland and H
Rogge.
In the year 1936 Pastor A. R. Reuther transferred to the
parish of Berhania and Pastor G. Veng succeeded him in the parish
of Highfields. He was inducted on the 12th July, 1936.
The congregation was served by the Pastors A D Hartwig
1880 to 1883; W. Burghardt, 1883 to 1890; W. Guhr, 1890 to 1905-
A. Hartmann, 1905 to 1912; A. R. Reuther, 1913 to 1936; G. Yens’
1936 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 131 souls, 89 communi-
cants, 25 children in the Sunday School.
3. Meringandan: This congregation was gathered by Pastor T.
Langebecker, of Toowoomba, about the year 1870. It erected a
small church in which its members gathered for worship. Pastor W.
urghardt ministered to the congregation at Meringandan whilst
e was pastor at Toowoomba. Pastor A. D. Hartwig assisted him
in t e work. Pastor Burghardt continued to serve here after


he had moved to Highfields. In the year 1889 Pastor Guhr took over
the services, but Pastor T. Langebecker, of Toowoomba, also was
pastor of the congregation and conducted services now and again.
The old church was replaced by a larger, much better building,
which was dedicated early in February, 1896. Pastors E. O. Mater,
Brisbane; T. Langebecker, Toowoomba; W. Guhr, Goombungee;
A. D. Hartwig, Douglas; and C. Claussen, Highfields, were present
and delivered addresses to a large gathering of people.
It appears that the congregation was but very loosely organised
and lacked a proper constitution. Pastor W. Guhr was nominally in
charge and conducted German services for the older people in the
vicinity. Pastor T. Langebecker in later years conducted English
services for the younger generation. After Pastor T. Langebecker
had passed away in the year 1908, his successor, Pastor J. G. Hege-
lau, did not continue the connection with Meringandan and the
committee opened the church to anyone who came and desired to
preach. For a number of years the Methodist minister of Oakey
conducted services in the church quite regularly, and it appears
that the younger generation of the Lutherans in the district attended
these services.
Meanwhile Pastor W. Guhr had relinquished the charge and
Pastor A. R. Reuther, of Highfields, was asked to take charge. The
church was used by the Lutheran pastor and by the Methodist
minister. In the year 1918 the party which had attended the
Methodist services, probably without being a Methodist congregation,
made a change and listened to a Church of Christ minister.
At that time Pastor A. R. Reuther was able to organise the
Lutherans as a congregation with a definite constitution, and since
then there has been order, and the members know where they stand
and what they are. The church is used for Lutheran services only.
In consequence of the settlers moving further out into new
areas, the membership has dwindled away considerably.
When Pastor A. R. Reuther relinquished his charge in the
parish of Highfields, his successor, Pastor G. Yens, took charge
also of the congregation at Meringandan.
The congregation has not yet affiliated with the Synod.
All worship and instruction is carried on in the English lam
guage.
The congregation was served by the Pastors T. Langebecker,
1870 to 1873; W. Burghardt, 1874 to 1889; W. Guhr, 1889 to
1915; A. R. Reuther, 1916 to 1936; G. Venz, 1936 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 72 souls, 53 com-
municants.
4. Crows Nest: In the year 1925 Pastor A. R. Reuther, of
Highfields, was encouraged by the Church Council of the Synod to
explore Crows Nest and district in search of Lutherans. He met
with commendable success, and the first Church service was con-
ducted in the home of Mr. F. Voll on the 25th of October of that
year, and on the 22nd of December a congregation was organised.


Six months later this congregation decided to build its own church,
and, the Synod liberally supporting, the new St. Luke’s Church
could be dedicated to its divine purpose on the 24th October, 1926.
Besides the local Pastor, A. R. Rcuther, the Pastors G. Heuer and E.
Gutekunst, of Toowoomba; A. R. Reuther, of Murgon; L. Doehler,
of Lowood; H. Proeve, of Goombungee; and W. Poland, of
Douglas, were present. Two missionaries on their way from America
to New Guinea, Pastors R. Fliehler and R. Hanselmann, also ad"
dressed a few words to the large gathering of Lutherans.
The congregation was incorporated according to the Religious,
Educational and Charitable Institutions Act of Queensland, It was
embodied in the parish of Highfields, and at the Annual Convention
of Synod, at Hatton Vale, in the year 1927, it was received into
membership of the Synod.
In the year 1935, 10 feet were added to the length of the
church, a chancel was built and the building generally beautified. At
the re-dedication of the church, which took place on the 2nd June
of that year, the President of Synod, Pastor A. R. Reuther, who was
also the local pastor, officiated and was assisted by Pastors L. Doeh"
ler, of Lowood: A. Simpfendoerfer, of Douglas; E. Gutekunst, of
Toowoomba; and W. Poland, of Crows Nest.
Together with the parish the congregation experienced a
change of pastors in the year 1936 when Pastor A. Reuther trans"
ferred to the parish of Bethania and Pastor G. Yens succeeded him.
All work in the congregation is carried on in the English lam
guage.
The congregation was served by the Pastors A. R. Reuther.
1925 to 1936; G. Yens, 1936 to the present.
Statistics at the end of 1936 show: 138 Souls, 82 Communi"
cants, 36 children in the Sunday School.
❖ # ❖ *
IPSWICH PARISH.
CONGREGATIONS: Ipswich, Stone Quarry, Rosevale, and
Rosewood. Pastor G. Dohler.
1. Ipswich: During the years before 1850 a number of Cep
mans came to the country which is now Queensland. A few of
them were prospectors or business men, but most of them arrived
under contract to cattle and sheep stations inland, and to planta"
tions in the coastal regions. After the expiry of their contracts
many of them came to Brisbane and to Ipswich and settled there.
As in Brisbane, Pastor Schirmeister also visited the German settlers
in and around Ipswich, and procured for them a grant of land for
Church purposes from the New South Wales Government.
The congregation was organised in the year 1860, and it ap-
pears that the first services were conducted in a Church of England
Sunday School. As the number of Germans coming to this Colony
increased, the congregation prospered and in the year 1864 it wa*
able to erect on its block of land the brick church in which it wop


ships to this day. The dedication took place on the 26th of June,
1864. Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister officiated. In the afternoon
Rev. J. Fletcher addressed the assemblage in the English language.
The first elders were Dr. E. von Lossberg, G. R. Weise, Job.
Fleischmann, G. Spresser, J. J Schorbach. Advised by Dr von
Lossberg. the congregation appealed to Dr. Scheffer (Councillor of
the Consistory at Marburg, in Germany) ior a pastor, and he
arranged that a man with academic training be sent to them. Pastor
E. Heiner arrived in Ipswich on the 18th August, 1866, and was
pastor here until 1885. As most of the members at Ipswich had
come from the rural districts of Germany they moved on to farm"
lands as soon as opportunity offered. Pastor Heiner followed them
to Marburg, Rosewod, Lowood, and to the Fassifern District, and
brought to them the ministrations of their Church.
During his pastorate at Ipswich, especially during the period
from 1875 to 1880, Pastor E. Heiner had a very difficult position to
deal with. The lay "preaching element among the German settlers
seemed to concentrate on his congregation. They claimed the right
to address meetings in Lutheran churches; but this practice is
totally foreign to all Lutheran custom and usage. In sermons and
lectures Pastor E. Heiner propounded in his congregations the sober
truth of the Lutheran teaching, which can not and will not yield to
emotionalism. It was a strenuous fight and he lost some members,
but peace finally returned to his congregation. When, in the year
1885, Pastor Heiner joined the Evangebcal Lutheran Synod of
Queensland, the congregation at Ipswich did not approve of that
step. Therefore Pastor Heiner relinquished his position here and at
Stone Quarry, the congregations joining the United German and
Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland. They called Pastor
Joachim Koehnke, of Toowoomba, who was inducted at Ipswich
on the 7th of November, 1886, by the President of the Synod,
Pastor A. Sueltmann. Pastor C. Prenzler and Missionary C. Claus-
sen assisted. Immediately afterwards a parsonage was erected beside
the church.
In the year 1889 Pastor J. Koehnke accepted a call to the Logan
District. After a long wait and several unavailing calls, Pastor J. F.
Holtermann came from Victoria to fill the vacancy. He was in-
ducted on the 28th September, 1890, as pastor of Ipswich, Stone
Quarry and Gatton. The President of the Synod, Pastor A, Suelt-
mann, officiated, assisted by Pastor J. Koehnke. The congregation at
Gatton (Deep Gully) was, however, soon again placed under the
care of Pastor J. F. Goessling, of Plainland.
In the year 1897 Pastor Holtermann relinquished the position
as pastor of Ipswich and Stone Quarry and the pastors of the
Synod took it in turns to serve these congregations. For the latter
part of the time Pastor E. Becker served Ipswich and Stone Quarry
regularly in conjunction with his Nazareth Congregation of South
Brisbane. During this period English services were conducted regu-
larly in the Ipswich Lutheran Church, but they were abandoned
again. When Pastor E. Becker relinquished his charge at the end


of 1900, the Synod had again to care for these two congregations.
In 1901 the congregation at Rosevale joined with Ipswich and
Stone Quarry and called Pastor W. Fuhlbohm, who came from
South Australia. He was inducted at Ipswich on the 2nd Sunday
in Advent, by the President of the Synod, Pastor G. Heuer, of
Toowoomba, as pastor of Ipswich, Stone Quarry and Rosevale.
In October, 1902, the congregation was host to the Annual
Convention of the Synod. This Meeting took place during an un-
precedented drought and it was astonishing how many delegates and
visitors took part in this meeting,! which was the first one that
arranged the festive services on a Sunday.
In the year 1904 dissension arose between Pastor Fuhlbohm and
the congregation at Rosevale, whereupon Pastor Fuhlbohm relin-
quished his position at Ipswich in the year 1905 and moved to the
Pittsworth District. The congregations Ipswich and Stone Quarry
decided to call Pastor H. Wallatt, who had previously been a mem-
ber of the ministry of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queens-
Parsonage, Ipswich.
land, and after a colloquium orthodoxiae he was inducted as pastor
of these two congregations in July, 1905, by the President of the
Synod, Pastor G. Heuer, of Toowoomba.
A year later, Pastor H. Wallatt undertook to serve the congre-
gation at Lowood from Ipswich, and continued to do so until in
September, 1908, he moved to Plainland and served Plainland and
Lowood as his parish.
The congregations at Ipswich and Stone Quarry were again
without a spiritual adviser and had to be served by the pastors of
the Synod until Eastertime, 1909, when Pastor W. Poland (who
came from the mission station Hope Valley) took charge of the
congregations.. But after nine months he, too, accepted another
call and moved to Douglas, in February, 1910. The congregation
was very dissatisfied with this constant change of pastors, and.
severing its connection with the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland, it appealed for help to the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland, which was abte to


make arrangements, that Pastor I. Egen, of Nundah, could regularly
serve the congregations at Ipswich and Stone Quarry.
In the year 1923 old age and infirmity compelled Pastor Egen to
relinquish Ipswich and Stone Quarry. The congregations joined
together with Lowood and Kirchheim and called Pastor L. Doehler,
who was inducted into the charge at Lowood on the 29th of July,
1923. He served the congregation regularly and faithfully, preach'
ing German to the older generation and trying, with the introduction
of the English language, to win the youth back to the faith of
the fathers.
In the year 1929 Pastor L. Doehler voluntarily resigned from
the congregations Ipswich and Stone Quarry, transferring them
to the Home Mission Committee, which placed in charge Pastor G.
Dohler, who transferred here from Victoria. Pastor G. Dohler was
inducted on the 14th of April, 1929, by the Vice-President of the
Synod, Pastor G. Heuer, of Toowoomba, who was assisted by
Pastor O. Theile, of Brisbane.
In the same year the congregation, assisted by the parish, erected a
new comfortable parsonage, rejoicing that after 20 years it was again
able to support a resident pastor. Though the financial depression
which set in soon after caused both the individual members and the
congregation much anxiety, the congregation has made fine pro-
gress. This was clearly evident when, on the 24th of June, 1934,
it celebrated the 70th anniversary of the dedication of its church.
The church building was renovated and it was beautifully adorned
by the installation of a new altar of artistic finish, and built
according to liturgical principles. Through the generosity of a
member, a powerful new organ could also be purchased. A very
large assemblage of Lutherans, who had came from the surrounding
districts, joined in the celebrations of the local congregation. The
local Pastor, G. Dohler, was assisted by Pastors A. Hiller, Boonah,
R Rohde, Hatton Vale; L. Doehler, Lowood; F. Finger, Engelsburg,
Kalbar; and O. Theile, Brisbane.
Besides St. Paul’s, Toowoomba, this St. John’s Congregation, at
Ipswich, is the only other Lutheran congregation in Queensland
which has organised a Men’s Society, a Brotherhood. The 24 mem-
bers are doing their best to live up to the principles of their Society.
The pastor conducts German services regularly every fortnight;
all other work, however, is carried on in the English language.
More recently the services of this Lutheran congregation are
broadcast through the local station 4IP, and arrangements have
been made for such a broadcast every five weeks.
The congregation has been served by the Pastors. E. Heiner,
1866 to 1885; J. Koehnke, 1886 to 1889; J. F. Holtermann, 1890 to
1897; after a vacancy of four years by W. Fuhlbohm, 1901 to 1905;
H. Wallatt, 1905 to 1908; W. Poland, 1909; I. Egen, 1910 to 1923;
L. Doehler, 1923 to 1929; G. Dohler, 1929 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show; 207 souls, 145 communi-
cants, 42 children in the Sunday School, 21 members of the Young
People’s Society, 32 members of the Ladies’ Guild.


2. Stone Quarry : Soon after the land was thrown open for
selection, the German settlers moved out from Ipswich into the
Ebenmer-Stone Quarry area. Pastor E. Eleiner, of Ipswich, begun
to conduct services in the year 1870 at the residence of Mrs. George
Kelly, just above the site of the present church.
On the 3 9th Apnl, 187.1, the first church of bush timber was
dedicated and named Bethlehem Church . The trustees were
G. R. Weise, J. Larther and Johann Guth. Because this church was
white-ant eaten, a new one was erected and dedicated on the 20th
April, 1898. Pastors A. Sueltrnann, E. Becker, J. F. Goessling, G.
Heuer, J. F. Holtermann, J. Koehnke, C. Premier, B. Petersen and
J. Frank (as guest) were present.
On Whit Monday, June Ist, 1936, this congregation celebrated
the 65th anniversary of its organisation. For this occasion the
church was painted. The Vice-President of Synod, Pastor H.
1 1 wab assisted by Pastors L. Doehler, A. Simpfendoerfer H
Minke, and the local Pastor, G. Dohler. Dr. Braun, of the Lutheran
Mission, Madang, was also present.
The congregation has always been small and its history is
closely interwoven with that of the congregation at Ipswich. It
was always ministered to by the pastors who Served Ipswich.
All worship and instruction is carried on in the English lan-
guage.
Statistics at the end of 1936 show: 44 souls, 37 communicants.
3. Rosevale : Among the foundation members of the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland in the
year 1885 was the congregation Rosevale, which was at that time
being served by Pastor Goessling, from Kirchheim. The Si
Laurentius Church was erected in the year 1881 and dedicated by
i astors J F. Goessling and E. Heiner, on the sth October of that
year. The Erst trustees were: P. Dreier, J. Humberdross, K.
onann, and F. Schoenfisch.
When Pastor Gosling left Kirchheim in the year 1886 and
moved to 1 lamland, he continued to serve the congregation though
iVn a V° far 2 lStai ? t fron : his new P lace of residence. In the year
p 0 1 , ast °r Goesslmg relinquished his pastorate in Plainland and
Rosevale. 1 astor M Doblies filled the vacancy. When he left about
“ year later, Rosevale joined with Ipswich, and, together with that
congregation ,n the year 1901, called Pastor W. Fuhlbohm. But in
the year 1904 dissatisfaction caused the congregation to sever that
connection, and it called Pastor M. Doblies in 1905". As both the
congregation and Pastor Doblies acted without reference to (he
officials of the Synod, both thereby severed their connection with
oynod The congregation and its pastor remained without Synod
tonmuion until theyear 1909 when they joined the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Queensland and in 1921 both took part in the
amalgamation of the Synods.
Pastor M Doblies at first resided at Rosewood and served the
c ngiegation from there until a small residence was erected for him


near the church. In the year 1926, after serving the congregation
for 20 years, he left Queensland and went to Germany, whereupon
the congregation was served by Pastor F. Finger, of Kalbar, and
Pastor R. Rohde, of Hatton Vale.
In the year 1928 the church was destroyed by fire. The Rose"
vale Lutheran cemetery still marks the historical spot where the old
church stood for nearly 50 years. Because the settlement had moved
further west, the new church was erected on a piece of ground
leased from Mr. W. Borchert. This new church was dedicated on
the 12th of May, 1929. Pastor F. Finger officiated and was assisted
by Pastors R. Rohde, H. Prensler, L. Doehler and G. Dohler; Pastor
R. Taeuber, a visitor from America, was also present.
The Home Mission Committee, under whose direction Rose"
vale was served at that time, linked the congregation up with
Ipswich and Stone Quarry, as had been the case 25 years earlier.
Pastor G. Dohler took charge on the Ist April, 1929. Before the
end of that year a new organ was purchased.
It should here be mentioned that since the erection of the new
church in 1929 special services in Mt. Mort have ceased. For
many years Pastor M. Doblies conducted services for the settlers of
the Mt. Mort area and such services were continued by Pastors F.
Finger and R. Rohde. Pastor G. Dohler also conducted services at
the home of Brother F. Meier, but with the advent of the motor car,
and with the erection of the new church at a more convenient
centre, the Mt. Mort Lutherans have joined Rosevale and now
worship in its church.
On the 11th October, 1936, the Rosevale Lutherans celebrated
the 55 th anniversary of the foundation of their congregation and
the erection of a church in their midst. For this occasion the
interior and exterior of the church were painted. The President of
Synod, Pastor A. R. Reuther, and Pastors H. Schmidt and G. Dohler
were present.
All worship and instruction is carried on in the English lan"
guage.
The congregation has been served by the Pastors J. F. Goess"
ling, 1881 to 1900; M. Doblies, 1900 to 1901; W. Fuhlbohm, 1901
to 1904; M. Doblies, 1905 to 1926; F. Finger and R. Rohde, 1926
to 1929; G. Dohler, 1929 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 93 souls, 65 communi"
cants, 19 children in the Sunday School.
4. Rosewood: German immigrants invariably settled on the
land, therefore their churches were out in the country and not
in the towns. Rosewood was a centre of German settlement, yet
there was no Lutheran church in the town. Pastor L. Doehler, of
Lowood, drew the attention of the Home Mission Committee to
this anomaly. He was of the opinion that there were good prospects
of gathering a Lutheran congregation at Rosewood if there were a
proper place of worship. In 1928 the Home Mission Committee
decided to establish a preaching centre at Rosewood, and Pastor H.


Proeve conducted the first service in Brother A. Desjardin’s home
on the 15th July, 1928. Pastors took it in turns to provide services
every four to six weeks.
When, in April, 1 929, Pastor G. Dohler was stationed at
Ipswich as home missionary, the Rosewood District was placed
into his charge. In order to provide a church for this centre Brother
H. Sippel, a member of the Home Mission Committee, offered a
loan, free of interest for five years, to the congregation. At a meet'
ing held on the 2 sth of July, 1929, this offer was gratefully accepted.
Further help came from other congregations in the Synod. Mean'
time, on the 9th of December, 1929, the congregation was organised,
the first members being A. Desjardm, F. Ruthenberg, C. Kamp, W
Baker, W. Schiefelbem and Mrs. E. Maroske.
On the 17th August, 1930, the new Lutheran St. Matthew’s
Church was dedicated at Rosewood. Pastor O. Theile officiated, and
was assisted by Pastors G. Dohler, Ipswich; E. Wmncke, Alberton;
L. Doehler, Lowood; and R. Rohde, Hatton Vale.
All worship and instruction is carried on in the English lan'
guage.
The congregation has always been served by Pastor G. Dohler,
of Ipswich.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 48 souls, 29 communi'
cants, 19 children in the Sunday School.
' Jfc jj« *
KINGAROY PARISH.
CONGREGATIONS: Kingaroy, Taabinga, and Home Creek.
Pastor H. Schmidt.
1. Kingaroy: Early in the present century German Lutherans
established themselves in the Coolabunia Scrub, between Kingaroy
and Nanango. In that vicinity Danish Lutherans settled even
earlier and ouilt their own church at Edenvale, and were visited
by Danish pastors. Pastor Nichterlein, of the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod in Australia (Missouri) had been in the district, coming from
Toowoomba, via Nanango. Then Pastor J, F. Goessling, of the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland,
after retiring from active parish work in the year 1905, made his
home with his daughter living in this district
He began to conduct Lutheran services in German, using the
Danish Lutheran church at Edenvale for that purpose. When he
left the district in the year 1908, he asked the Church Council of the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod to continue the
work he had begun. In the same year this Synod began to serve
the district regularly every month, the pastors taking it in turn to
conduct divine services. The work was carried on in German,
and included also services at Home Creek and at Greenview,
later Mondure, near Wondai. The monthly services were always
conducted in the Danish Lutheran church at Edenvale. As the
Danes at that time were unable to obtain a Danish pastor to conduct


S . • .
t * |
services, there was every hope that an itinerant pastor, capable of
conducting the services in English, would be able to unite the
Danes and the Germans into one English Lutheran congregation.
Unfortunately, years went by and all efforts to secure an itinerant
pastor were in vain; and when, at last, in October, 1911, Pastor M.
Wittig came and took charge of the work, he proved unsuitable for
the task, and shortly afterwards the services at the Edenvale Church,
conducted by the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod
of Queensland, were discontinued.
When Pastor A. E. Reuther took over the work in the
Kingaroy-Wondai Districts in May, 1915, he was soon approached
by members who had formerly attended the Lutheran services at
Edenvale to again officiate for them. The Danish Lutheran church
was then not available, and he conducted service in the home of
Mr. J. Liesegang, at Booie, the first one taking place on the 17th
October, 1915. On the same day a congregation was constituted.
Bethany Church, Kingaroy.
among the members were J. Liesegang, J. Racking, W. Schmidt,
sen., F. Schilling, F. Carl, and others. On the 21st September, 1919,
the congregation, for the first time after many years, again assembled
for worship in the Danish church at Edenvale, and was then known
as the Edenvale Congregation.
In February of the year 1920, when the work in the far-flung
mission field in the Kmgaroy-Wondai District proved too much for
Pastor A. E. Reuther, Pastor T. Fuhlbohm, of Kulpi, on the Cooyar
Line, took over the Kingaroy end of the field, consisting of the two
congregations Edenvale and Taabinga. But when he moved to
Toowoomba, after a short time, the pastors of Synod took over the
services, whilst Pastor A. E. Reuther took charge of the instruction
of Confirmation Classes.
At the Annual Convention of the United German and Scan-
dinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland —the first meeting after the
Great War —which took place at Bethania, in April, 1920, the
Edenvale Congregation was received into membership of Synod.


At last, in 1923, Synod was able to station a home missionary
at the Kingaroy end of the field, Pastor H. Prensler. He was in-
ducted in June, 1923, and with a man of his type on the spot the
work prospered. Already, in August, 1923, we find the Sunday
School under the capable supervision of one of the Danish ladies,
Mrs. Peterson. On the 21st January, 1924, a meeting of the German
and Danish Lutheran congregations decided that henceforth they
together be known as the Bethany Lutheran Church of Edenvale.
All worship and all instruction were conducted in the English
language.
At the Annual Convention of the Synod at Bethania, in May,
1924, it was reported that the congregations Edenvale-Taabinga had
organised as an independent parish. For a short time they received
some support from Synod, but they were no longer Home Mission
centres.
In the year 1928 Pastor H. Prenjer accepted a call to Goom-
bungee, and Pastor H. Minke succeeded him in the Edenvale parish,
where he was inducted on the 12th August, 1928, by the President
of the Synod. Pastor A. R. Reuther, of Highfields, who was assisted
by Pastor A. E. Reuther, of Murgon.
In October, 1928, the parish purchased a residence in Kingaroy
for its pastor; prior to that the pastor had resided in rented premises.
During the year 1931 a Lutheran Young People’s Society was
formed, but other work does not seem to have prospered so well.
Several preaching places, which had been opened up previously,
were one by one closed down, as at Proston, at Hivesville, at
Memerambi, and at Inverlaw.
In the year 1932 Pastor H. Minke accepted a call to Mackay,
and Pastor H. Schmidt, the home missionary of the North Coast,
accepted the call to the Edenvale parish, and was inducted on the
19th June, 1932, by Pastor A. E. Reuther, of Murgon. He took the
work in hand very energetically-, and soon re-established the preach-
ing places Proston, Hivesville, and Memerambi, and took over new
ones at Yarraman, at Bell, and at Brooklands.
In 1936 the Edenvale Congregation decided to take the bold
step of erecting a new church. For that purpose, the members
abandoned the old site and erected their new house of worship
within the town of Kingaroy, on a fine block of land which was
donated by Mr. Youngman. On the 29th of November, 1936, the
new Bethany Lutheran Church, Kingaroy, was dedicated. The
President of Synod, Pastor A. R. Reuther, officiated, whilst Pastors
H. Schmidt, A. E. Reuther and H. assisted. Though a
debt remains, the congregation is happy in the possession of its
really beautiful church.
The congregation was served by the Pastors A. E. Reuther,
1915 to 1920; T. Fuhlbohm, 1920; by Synod, 1920 to 1923; H.
Prensler, 1923 to 1928; H. Minke, 1928 to 1932; H. Schmidt, 1932
to the present.


The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 159 souls, 108 communi-
cants. 25 children in Sunday School, 26 members of the Young
People's Society, 30 members of the Ladies' Guild.
2. Taabinga : The first Lutherans settling in this district, in
the year 1908, came from Rosevale, and the pastor of that congrega-
tion, Pastor M. Doblies, followed them, conducting the first service
in the home of Mr. A. Desjardin, in February, 1909. For 2\ years
Pastor M. Doblies visited the district quite regularly, until ill-health
and the long journey forced him to relinquish the task in October,
1911. Taabinga was thereafter regularly visited by the pastors of
the Evangelical Lutheran Synod in Queensland.
Early in the year 1913 Pastor Wittig, itinerant pastor of the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland
(pursuant to an agreement with the Evangelical Lutheran Church
of Australasia, mentioned elsewhere), took over this field and began
conducting services here on the 7th of April, 1913. It appears that
all work was conducted in the German language.
In the year 1915 Pastor M. Wittig left Queensland, and, on the
11th May of that year. Pastor A. E. Reuther, the new home mis-
sionary of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod,
was inducted into the charge. , It was at once decided that the
English language should be introduced, and after some years Ger-
man was abandoned altogether.
Since the end of the year 1915, the Taabinga Congregation has
always remained together with the Edenvale-Kingaroy Congregation,
and has shared its history.
For nine years the services were conducted in Mr. A. Des-
jardin’s home. Beginning with the year 1917 the home of Mr. C.
FI eischfresser was the place of worship. On the 4th of August of
that year the congregation was formally constituted, the following
members being present: C. Fleischfresser, W. Steffens,, O. Fleisch-
fresser, P. Spann, H. Freischfresser, F. Tegge, A. Desjardin, and
El. C. C. Spann.
In December of the year 1919 the Stuart Valley preaching place
was embodied in the Taabinga Congregation.
At the Annual Convention of the Synod—the first such Con-
vention after the Great War —which took place at Bethania on the
26th and 27th April, 1920, Taabinga was one of a number of con-
gregations which were admitted to membership.
In the year 1921 the long cherished wish of Pastor A. E.
Reuther and the congregation was fulfilled. On an acre of land
donated by Mr. H. Parsons, St. Paul’s Lutheran Church was built,
and on the 21st August, 1921, it was dedicated. Pastor E. Gutc-
kunst officiated. Of the total cost of £230 the greater part, £162/14/-,
was paid by that day, the congregation having received whole-
hearted support from the surrounding parishes of the Synod, whilst
the remaining debt was liquidated during the next few years.
In June, 1923, Pastor H. Premier took charge of the com
gregation, and the work further progressed. It was a festive day for


the congregation, when, on the sth of July, 1925, it installed a
new organ. Pastors A. E. Reuther and H. Prenzler were present.
In 1928 Pastor H. Prenzjer accepted a call to Goombungee,
and Pastor H. Minke was stationed at Kingaroy. and also took over
the work at Taabinga. He remained until 1932, when he was
succeeded by Pastor H. Schmidt, the present incumbent of the
charge.
The congregation was served by Pastor M. Doblies, 1909
to 1911; by pastors of Synod, 1911 to 1913; M. Wittig, 1913 to
1915; A. E. Reuther, 1915 to 1920; T. Fuhlbohm, 1920; by pastors
of Synod, 1920 to 1923; H. Prenzler, 1923 to 1928; H. Minke, 1928
to 1932; H. Schmidt, 1932 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 147 souls, 90 communb
cants, 22 children in the Sunday School, 14 members of the Young
People’s Society.
3. Home Creek : When the United German and Scandinavian
Synod of Queensland began its Home Mission work in the Kingaroy
District in the year 1908, services were regularly conducted in the
Methodist church, at Home Creek, which the Lutherans of the dis'
trict had helped to erect, but to which they had no claim as a
Lutheran body. Mr. Iker, sen., was at that time the leader among
the local Lutherans; when he left the district it was a distinct loss to
the Church, and services seem to have been conducted with less
regularity. After Pastor M. Wittig left they ceased altogether for
some years.
When Pastor H. Prenrier was stationed at Kingaroy in 1923,
he again began Lutheran services in the Home Creek area, conduct'
ing them in the home of Mr. H. Rackemann. On the 2nd of March,
1925, at a meeting at Mr. H. Rackemann’s home, the Bethany
Lutheran Congregation of Home Creek was constituted, when 11
members were enrolled : A. F. Sakrzewski, W. Richters, M. P.
Nielsen, J. W. Horobin, H. Rackemann, H. C. Reinke, C. E. Seiler,
E. Rackemann, A. A. Stuemer, J. Mickan, and G. Rackemann.
Beginning with the year 1927, the Church services have taken
place in the home of Mr. J. W. Horobin. In the year 1934 the
congregation was received into membership of the Synod.
The congregation has, since its organisation in the year 1925,
always been served by the pastors stationed at Kingaroy, namely by
the Pastors H. Prenzler, 1925 to 1928; H. Minke, 1928 to 1932;
H. Schmidt, 1932 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show : 74 souls, 37 communE
cants, 18 children in the Sunday School, 9 members in the Young
People’s Society.
* * * *
LOWOOD PARISH.
CONGREGATIONS: Lowood, Kirchheim, and Mt. Beppo.
Pastor L. Doehler.
1. Lowood :It was about the year 1875 that the first German
settlers established themselves in and around Lowood, and Pastor


Reiner, of Ipswich, began to conduct services for them every third
week. Almost at once a small church was erected and it was dedi'
cated as the Beth'El Church. The first elders were Messrs. Bandidt,
Weise and Marbach. Together with Pastor E. Reiner the congrega'
tion was a member of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queens'
land, when this Synod was founded in the year 1885.
On the 21st May, 1891, a new organ was installed and the
festive congregation that gathered for the occasion was addressed
by Pastors E. O. Maier, E. Reiner, J. Frank, and H. Wallatt.
In the year 1896 the congregation replaced its old church,
which proved too small, with a new and somewhat larger building,
and it was dedicated on Trinity Sunday, the 31st May of that year.
Pastors £. O. Maier, Brisbane, President of the Synod; E. Reiner,
Ipswich; and M. Millatt, Hatton Vale, were present. In November
Beth-el Church, Lowood.
of the same year, on the occasion of the Annual Synod at Kirch'
heim, Pastor Reiner expressed the wish that he should be relieved
of the congregation at Lowood, as his age would not allow him to
attend to the work there. In the following year, 1897, Synod asked
Pastor Hartwig to take charge of Lowood, Fairney View and Mt.
Beppo.
Pastor Hartwig served these congregations from Douglas. But
in a few years 1 time the congregation at Lowood recognised that it
required a pastor, who lived either in its midst or in closer proximity.
Negotiations with the Church Council of the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Queensland not leading to the desired result, the con'
gregation, in the year 1902, severed the connection with this Synod.
It then called Pastor S. Hoerlein, of Plainland, a member of the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland.


In the following year, 1905, it helped Plainland to erect a parsonage
for Pastor S. Hoerlein.
The very next year, 1906, serious dissension arose between the
congregation at Lowood and Pastor Hoerlein. The congregation
demanded that according to previous arrangements the so-called
upper congregations—Deep Gully and Mt. Sylvia, beyond Gatton
—should no longer belong to the parish, but should be handed
over to Synod. As Pastor Hoerlein would not put this agreement
into effect the congregation at Lowood seceded from the parish.
Pastor H. Wallatt took charge of it, serving it from Ipswich.
After the death of Pastor S. Hoerlein in the year 1908, Pastor
Wallatt moved to Plainland and served the two congregations,
Plainland and Lowood, as one parish.
In the year 1910 the congregation built a new church of much
larger dimensions than the previous one. Though the cost amounted
to more than £4OO, it was free of debt when, on the 21st August,
1910, it was dedicated as the BetfnEl Church. The President of the
Synod, Pastor J. Koehnke, of Beenleigh, officiated. He was assisted
by Pastors H. Wallatt, of Plainland, and P. B. Hoefner, of German
Station. Three years later, Easter, 1913, the congregation installed
a new organ.
As during its whole history school and Sunday School instruc'
tion had not been attended to as intensively as should have been the
case, the congregation lost quite a number of members and was in
earlier need, perhaps, than other congregations of work in the
English language.
Meantimef thh Great War had come and Pastor Wallatt
tried his best to meet the demands of the time. But the fact that
the pastor of the neighbouring village, Pastors Millatt, at Hatton
Vale, was interned, placed a vast amount of extra work on to his
shoulders. This condition continued for years and the position was
serious. And when the War was oven,'the lack of bilingual pastors
caused further delay before the need could be met
At last matters could be arranged and Pastor Wallatt left
Lowood. The congregation, together with Ipswich, Stone Quarry
and Kirchheim, called Pastor L. Doehler, of Alberton, as their
pastor. Pastor Doehler was inducted on the 29th July, 1923, and
lived in Lowood.
In the year 1923, the Lowood Congregation purchased a resi-
dence for the pastor, which is situated in Lowood, whilst the church
is some distance away.
In the year 1929, Ipswich and Stone Quarry were separated
from ihe parish, which thereafter consisted of Lowood, Mt. Bepoo,
and Kirchheim.
The congregation was ministered to by Pastors E. Heiner from
the time of its foundation to 1896; A. D. Hartwig, 1896 to 1902:
S. Hoerlein, 1902 to 1906; H. Wallatt, from 1906 to 1923; L.
Doehler, from 1923 to the present day.


Regular German services are conducted about once a month.
All other work in the congregation is carried on in the English
language.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show* 256 souls, 1 5 / communb
cants, 24 children in the Sunday School.
. Kirchheim ; From 1865 to 1873 many of the German iim
migrants established themselves about 8 miles to the west of
Ipswich, on the edge of the Rosewood scrub, and tried to make
their living on the forest lands there. It was the time when, in com
sequence of the Civil War in America, cotton yielded a good return.
Pastor Heiner, of Ipswich, conducted services for these new settlers,
in different homes. In the year 1869 Pastor C. Gaustad (who had
previously been a missionary of the Gossner Mission in India) came
to Queensland and assisted Pastor E. Heiner in his work of serving
the many new settlements to the north, the west and the south of
Ipswich. In March, 1873, the Germans of the Walloon-Kirchheim
District decided to call Pastor Gaustad as their pastor. In the fob
lowing year, 1874, they erected a church 32 ft. by 24 ft., on 2 acres
of land which Mr. Eberhard Federer donated for that purpose. It
was dedicated as the St. Paul’s Church. A parsonage also was
erected as residence for Pastor Gaustad.
Meanwhile the settlers had recognised that the scrublands
further to the west were of richer quality, and offered better possb
bilities of successful farming than the forest lands they were OC"
cupying. Ever more immigrants also came and established them"
selves on those lands, which had formerly been declared worthless.
Pastor Gaustad followed them and conducted services for them at
Tallegalla, at Minden and other places. The homes or the barns of
the settlers served as places of worship. But here, also, dissension
and strife enters into the picture. In nearly all such instances
it was said that one party was strictly Lutheran, whilst the other
stood for greater broadmindedness; but, when the whole matter of
such dissensions was sifted, a personal factor was, unfortunately,
generally found. Ambitious, selfish, domineering men, men with urn
sound sectarian views and principles caused no end of difficulties
and loss. Shortly after the opening of the church at Kirchheim, a
party seceded from the existing congregation. It built a second
church on Sch'eu’s farm along the road towards Marburg, and
Pastor He Aer, of Ipswich, conducted services there.
In the year 1879 Pastor Gaustad left Kirchheim and went to
New Zealand, and Pastor J. F. Goessling, who came from New
Zealand, succeeded him. He was inducted towards the end of 1879.
During his pastorate the parsonage was enlarged, and various neces"
sary outbuildings were erected. Pastor Goessling also conducted
the services in the church on Scheu’s farm, but only for a short time.
The Kirchher'm Congregation was a foundation member of the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland.
In 1886 conflict arose between Pastor Goessling and the con"
grcgations at Kirchheim and at Minden regarding the question of the


liturgy. Pastor Goessling was forced to relinquish his position. The
congregation, seceding from the Synod, applied to the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Queensland for a pastor.
In February, 1888, Pastor J. Frank arrived from Victoria and
was inducted as pastor of Kirchheim by Pastor E. Ffeiner. Pastors
E Egen, of German Station, and M. Eberhard, of Philadelphia, were
also present.
In the following year the congregation enlarged its church by
adding 15 ft. to its length, and installed a new organ.
School and Sunday School were welhorganised, the latter
being for many years under the very able superintendency of Mr.
FI. Mueller, an elder of the congregation, who, with his assistants,
instructed 70 to 80 children every Sunday.
The parsonage had become dilapidated, therefore the
tion built a new one in the year 1895. The question of erecting the
new parsonage at Marburg had been seriously considered but
finally it was built at Kirchheim. In the year 1908, however, the
parsonage was moved to Marburg and was thus placed in the
centre of the parish. Kirchheim had, in the course of years, lost
many members. The older generation had passed away, of the
younger generation many moved to other districts, and a mfmber
left the congregation because they required the English language.
At the end of the year 1912 Pastor J. Frank resigned from his
charge and, after 25 years of faithful service in the one parish, he
left Kirchheim in July, 1913. The parish remained faithful to the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland, and relied on its
Synod to procure for it a new pastor. As unavoidable delay occuired
before the new pastor —called from the Seminary for Missionaries
at Basle, in Switzerland —could arrive, the United German and
Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland rendered help in 1913
by sending a young pastor who was just available, Pastor L. Doehler,
to the KirchheirmMarburg'Minden parish. Early in 1914 Pastor
Koch arrived and took charge of the parish. He was inducted into
the charge on Wednesday, the 11th of February, 1914, the Pastors
E. Hiller, Beenleigh: R. Monz, Milbong; and C. Seybold, Dugan'
dan, officiating. Pastor L. Doehler was also present, the parish
showing its appreciation of his services during the previous four
months by a handsome gift. Unfortunately the parish was dis'
appointed from the outset, as Pastor Koch was not so conversant
with the English language as was necessary and generally desired.
Further dissensions arose, and already in 1915 the congregation
Kirchheim seceded from the parish and applied to the United Ger'
man and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod for service. This was given
by Pastor M. Reuther and was continued when the congregations
Alberton and Norwell combined with Kirchheim to call Pastor L.
Doehler. He was inducted on the 28th February, 1915, at Alberton.
When, in the year 1923, Pastor L. Doehler moved to Lowood
he served Kirchheim from that centre, the congregation now being
a member of the parish LowoodTpswiclvStone Quarry.


In the year 1924 a cyclone destroyed the church at Kirchheirm
After serious deliberation the congregation decided to re-erect it
and the Synod supported the small congregation very liberally. But
the new church of much smaller dimensions was not erected on the
old spot, but on Mr. H. Sakrsewskfs farm, somewhat nearer to
Marburg. On the 13th April, 1924, the building was dedicated;.
Pastors J. Koehnke, J. Frank, O. Theile, and L. Doehler officiated.
The congregation has been served by the Pastors E. Heiner
till 1873; C. Gaustad, 1873 to 1879; J. F. Goessling, 1879 to 1886;
J. Frank, 1886 to 1913; after a vacancy, J. Koch, 1914 to 1915; L.
Doehler, 1915 to the present.
Statistics at the end of 1936 show: 33 souls, 22 communicants,.
3 children in the Sunday School.
Mt. Beppo : The records with regard to this congregation are
very incomplete. It appears that, at a comparatively early date, quite
a number of German settlers went further up the Brisbane River
Valley and settled on the rich river flats at Mt. Beppo. Pastor E.
Heiner, of Ipswich, followed them and brought to them the minis-
tration of the Church. About the year 1888 the congregation
erected a church and dedicated it to its divine purpose, Pastor E.
Heiner officiating.
Pastor E. Heiner served the congregation until the year 1895,
when Pastor I. Egen, of Nundah, took over the work. At the
Annual Convention of the Synod, at Hatton Vale, 1895 the con'
gregation appealed to the Synod for support in its efforts to get rid'
of its debts. The Synod agreed to help as much as possible.
In the year 1897 Pastor A. D. Hartwig took over the charge and
faithfully served the congregation every five weeks until increasing
old age forced him to retire from active work in the year 1921.
Pastors of Synod then served Mt. Beppo until the congregation
joined the Lowood parish in the year 1923 and was henceforth
ministered to by Pastor L. Doehler.
In the year 1930 the congregation enlarged its church and
thoroughly reconditioned it by lining and ceiling it; a vestry also
was added and the whole building neatly painted. On the 13th
of September of that year the church was re'dedicated, Pastors L.
Doehler, of Lowood; G. Heuer, of Toowoomba; and E. Wiencke,,
of Alberton, officiating.
All work in this congregation is carried on in the English lan-
guage.
The congregation was served by the Pastors E. Heiner, of
Ipswich, 1888 to 1895; I. Egen, of Nundah, 1895 to 1897; A. D
Flartwig, of Douglas, 1897 to 1921; after a vacancy by Pastor L..
Doehler, of Lowood, 1923 until the present.
Statistics for 1936 show: 68 souls, 39 communicants, 12 child-
ren in Sunday School.


MACKAY PARISH.
CONGREGATION: Mackay. Pastor J. M. Larsen.
Mackay: This is the most northern congregation of the
Queensland District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in
Australia, being 600 miles north of Brisbane. As early as 1863 a
few German families came to the district. Some years later, 1871
to 1873, quite a large number of German immigrants —about 30
families, nearly all of whom were West Prussians —settled in the
vicinity of Mackay and began to cultivate the land. At the same
time, 1871, Pastor C. Gaustad came from Southern Queensland,
visited the settlers and organised a German Lutheran congregation.
As there were also numerous Danish settlers in the district, mem'
bers of the Lutheran Church, Pastor Gaustad served them also.
It appears that afterwards Pastor D. Hansen served the Danish con-
gregation for a time, whilst Pastor John Haussmann seems to have
been, for some time, resident pastor of the German congregation.
During his time the Germans and the Danes, who constituted
two separate congregations, together erected a church on the Danish
section of the property, facing Peel Street, Mackay. This church
was dedicated for its divine purpose by Pastor John Haussmann. As
the records are very meagre it is impossible to fix exact dates for
this period, but it appears that it was in the year 1879.
In the middle of the year 1883, Pastor G. Heuer came to
Mackay and the congregations built a parsonage on the German
section of the property. This was opened in February, 1884.
Together with their pastor, the two congregations at Mackay
were foundation members of the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland, and the German Lutheran congre-
gation has remained in that affiliation.
At the end of 1888 Pastor Heuer followed a call to the Hume
Street Congregation at Toowoomba, and Pastor M. Doblies had
charge of Mackay for two years, and, after he had relinquished the
charge, Pastor C. G. Hellmuth served the congregation for eight
months of the year 1890. During the years from 1888 to 1890 there
was much dissension between the Germans and the Danes, the
latter being served by Pastor D. Hansen again. The bone of con-
tention was the property. Pastor C. G. Hellmuth, fortunately, was
able to bring about an agreement which was legally settled. The
Danish Lutheran congregation was owner of that half of the
property on which the church was erected; and the German
Lutheran congregation owned the other half with the parsonage.
The German congregation paid an annual rent to the Danish con-
gregation for the use of the church.
Another cause of much trouble and anxiety was the activity of
the Apostolic sect, and many of the German Lutherans were
persuaded to join it.
Early in the year 1892 Pastor L. Krause, who was then mis-
sionary at Mari Yamba, accepted the call to Mackay. Under his
care the congregation regained its prosperity and was greatly


strengthened. Being in the vicinity of the mission station Marx
Yamba, it rendered much support to the work of the Synod there.
In February, 1898, the old church was demolished by a
cyclone, and the German congregation rebuilt it as the St. Peter'
Paul’s Church. But the new building was erected beside the
parsonage, on the property of the German Lutheran congregation..
The new church was dedicated on the 19th June, 1898, Pastor L.
Krause officiating. All work in Church, and school, and Con'
firmation Class was carried on in the German language.
At the end of the year 1909 Pastor L. Krause, who had faith'
fully served the congregation for 18 years, relinquished his charge.
After a vacancy of 15 months, Pastor W. Schmetser —who had
received his theological training at Neuendettelsau, in Germany—
was inducted as pastor of the congregation, on the 12th March,
1911. The President of the Synod. Pastor J. Koehnke, of Beenleigh,
officiated. ' *
St. Paul’s Mackay.
In January, 1918, the church was again struck by a cyclone and
almost demolished. The congregation and its pastor were quite
downhearted and discussed the question whether they should re'
build. But the Synod rallied to the aid of the stricken northern
brethren and supported them in so wholehearted and liberal a
manner that in a very short while the church was re'erected and it
was a happy congregation that it.
It had been evident for years that the English language would
have to be introduced if the congregation were to remain in existence..
The years of the Great War had emphasised that necessity with
ever increasing force. Pastor did everything possible to
meet the need, but, in March, 1919, he relinquished the position and
left Mackay.
Chiefly in consequence of the outbreak of a maritime strike,
the anival of the successor, Pastor EL Proeve, was much delayed.
He took up his work on the 21st March, 1920. Since that time the
congregation receives a subsidy from the Synod.


In the year 1924, Pastor H. Proeve accepted a call to Gooim
bungee. Mackay was vacant for 18 months and was ministered to
by pastors of the Synod. In the middle of the year 1925, Pastor M.
Lohe was appointed to the charge. He was a member of the first
class that graduated from the Lutheran Immanuel Seminary at
North Adelaide. On the 16th August, 1925, he was inducted as
pastor of the Lutheran congregation at Mackay, and as home
missionary of the northern field. The President of the Synod, Pastor
E. Hiller, and Pastor M. G. Reuther, officiated. The work in the
congregation was now almost wholly conducted in English.
On the 17th November, 1929, the congregation celebrated the
fiftieth anniversary of the dedication of its first church. For that
festive occasion it renovated and artistically beautified its house of
worship. Besides the local Pastor, M. Lohe, the Pastors G. Heuer,
A. R. Reuther and M. G. Reuther officiated. A new organ was
installed.
In 1932 Pastor Lohe accepted a call to the congregation at
South Brisbane, and Pastor H. Minke, who was then pastor at
Kingaroy, succeeded him, being inducted on the 22nd May, 1932,
by Pastor M. G. Reuther, of Bundaberg.
Early in the year 1935 Pastor Minke relinquished his position.
On the 9th of June, 1935, Pastor J. M. Larsen—who had previously
been a missionary in India —was inducted as pastor of Mackay, and
as home missionary of the northern field, by Pastor M. Lohe, of
South Brisbane, whilst Pastor H. Minke assisted.
The members of the congregation are scattered over a wide
area and are unable to attend services at Mackay as regularly as
is desirable. The pastors have therefore begun to go out to them,
conducting services in halls or private residences, as at Finch Hatton,
Mt. Martin, and Wagoora.
All work in connection with the congregation is carried on in
English. One sermon on Good Friday of each year is delivered in
the German language.
The congregation was ministered to by the Pastors C. Gaustad,
D. Hansen and John Haussmann from 1871 to 1883; G. Heu'er, 1883
to 1888; D. Hansen, M. Doblies and C. G. Hellmuth, 1888 to 1891;
L. Krause, 1891 to 1909; W. Schmet2;er, 1911 to 1919; H. Proeve,
1920 to 1924; M. Lohe, 1925 to 1932; H. Minke, 1932 to 1935;
J. M. Larsen, 1935 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 247 souls, 133 communb
cants, 38 children in the Sunday School, 22 members of the Young
People’s Society, 58 members of the Ladies’ Guild.
* * * *
MARYBOROUGH PARISH.
CONGREGATION: Maryborough. Pastor G. Fischer.
Maryborough is one of the old towns of Queensland, and
man settlers came here even before 1860. But after the separation
of Queensland from New South Wales, the stream of immigrants


flowed much more strongly; and many were the Germans who
settled in the town itself and on the fertile flats around it. Returning
from a visit to Rockhampton, in the year 1864, Pastor J. G. Hauss'
mann visited the second largest port of Queensland, Maryborough,,
and found here many aborigines and also many of his countrymen.
His heart went out to both, for they were like sheep without a
shepherd, and he did all he could to station a pastor or a missionary
in this town. In the year 1867 Pastor F. Copas —who had been
pastor at German Station and Zillmere for some months —came to
Maryborough and began to gather the Germans and to conduct
divine worship for them. These services sometimes took place in the
courthouse of the town, but more often in the residence of Mr.
George Thurecht. During the same year, 1867, a congregation was.
organised, and it decided to erect a church in John’s Lane. Early in
1868 this new church was dedicated as St. John’s Church. It was
built of timber, and measured 45 ft. by 25 ft. Shortly afterwards a
parsonage was also erected. But a few years later, 1872, dissension
arose, which caused Pastor F. Copas to leave Maryborough. The
congregation appealed to Pastor C. G. Hellmuth to come to its aid.
Pastor Hellmuth took one of the elders of Bethania, Mr. J G.
Schneider, with him and visited Maryborough. It appears that the
congregation thereafter was served by Pastors C. G. Hellmuth, E.
Heiner and C. Gaustad until Pastor C. G. Hellmuth, in the year
1876, relinquished his position in the Logan District and moved to
Maryborough. There he was pastor of St. John’s Church in John’s
Lane.
Meantime Pastor F. Copas had visited the German settlers
in the country districts, especially around Gayndah, and had then
returned to Maryborough, where he began to conduct services in
his own residence. Gradually the congregation around him increased
and contemplated erecting a church. In the year 1877 a property
was purchased in John Street, and, a year later, a church was built
and dedicated on the 10th February, 1878, as St. Matthew’s Church.
Thus there were two German Lutheran congregations in Mary-
borough, and their churches were in close proximity to one another.
This condition continued for 35 years.
In the year 1885 Pastor Hellmuth resigned, and in his place
Pastor Chr. Schmidt, his sondndaw, was inducted in June, 1885, as.
pastor of the St. John’s Congregation. During his pastorate the
congregation erected a Very fine school building.
In the year 1884 St. Matthew’s Church was enlarged by the
addition of another 22 ft. to its length, a building for school pur-
poses was provided, and an adjoining allotment of land was pur-
chased. A year later, 1885, a new organ was procured and installed..
The congregation had a large number of members, and the in'
fluence of its pastor reached far into the surrounding country. In
the year 1886, Pastor Copas met with a serious accident, and his
health and strength were never the same as before, but he con-
tinued faithfully to minister to St. Matthew’s Congregation.


Many of the settlers in and around Maryborough had moved
away in search of larger areas with better and richer soil. Most of
them went to the Woongarra Scrublands near Bundaberg. In the
year 1891, Pastor Schmidt followed them and took up his residence
at Bundaberg. But he continued to serve St. John’s, Maryborough,
■on one Sunday every month.
St. Matthew s Congregation also experienced the loss of many
members, who, early in this century, moved out along the Gayndah
and Kingaroy railway lines and settled in districts which were being
•opened up there. The congregation found it increasingly difficult
to balance its budget and to keep its property in the desired state of
repair. Just then, the 13th of December, 1906, Pastor Copas was
-called away from his earthly held of labour by sudden death after
•an operation. /
St. Matthew’s Congregation at Maryborough was not affiliated
with either of the two Synods in Queensland, though its pastor was
a, member of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland. The
St. Matthew’s, Maryborough.
congregation now joined this Synod and the pastors of the Synod
ministered to it during the time of vacancy. It called Pastor T.
Frank, then pastor at Milbong, in the Fassifern District. He was
inducted at Maryborough on the 11th August, 1907. Pastors T.
Langebecker and J. Frank officiated.
The congregation revived and considerably improved its
property, especially by erecting a new and comfortable parsonage
beside the church. This was opened with divine service on the S Ist
January, 1908. In the same year an arrangement was made between
the St. Matthew s and the St. John s Congregations and their
respective pastors, leading to the two congregations uniting. The
church building of the St. John’s Congregation was shifted on to
the property of the St. Matthew s Congregation, and there formed
a very fine school and hall.
Pastor Frank introduced English evening services, all other
work being still conducted in the German language.


In the year 1912 Pastor T. Frank and his congregation severed
their connection with the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
land, and helped to form the new Synod, the Evangelical Lutheran
Church of Australasia.
Then the Great War came, and, as Pastor T. Frank was among
those Lutheran ministers in Queensland who were taken to an in*
ternment camp in the year 1916, the congregation was for years
without a resident pastor, and had to suffer many losses. After his
release in the year 1919, Pastor T. Frank took up the work again and
with much energy tried to retrieve the losses, and to place the com
gregation on a sound footing. By the grace of God he succeeded to
a large extent.
After the amalgamation of the two Synods in Queensland in
1921, Pastor T. Frank and his congregation joined the Queensland
District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia. But
soon afterwards, in the year 1923, Pastor T. Frank accepted a call
to Melbourne, in Victoria.
The congregation called Pastor G. Fischer, who was then
pastor at Goombungee. He was inducted in Maryborough on the
Ist July, 1923, by the President of the Synod, Pastor E. Hiller,.
Pastors M. G. Reuther and O. Theile assisted.
For the members living further away from the church, the
pastors have conducted services at Pialba, Bidwell, Yengarie. At
present Yengarie, it appears, is the only place where such services
take place regularly.
The congregation has twice been host to the Annual Con-
vention of Synod, once in November, 1908, and then again on
the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the opening of St. Matthew’s
Church, in March, 1928.
On the 11th June, 1933, the congregation had the rare experi-
ence of witnessing the ordination of the son of its pastor, Eric
Fischer. The father, Pastor G. Fischer, officiated and was assisted
by Pastors M. G. Reuther, of Bundaberg, and A. E. Reuther, of
Murgon. Since the late Pastor Chr. Schmidt was ordained in the
old St. John’s Church, at Maryborough, on the 7th June, 1885,
this solemn rite had not been performed in a Lutheran church at
Maryborough.
The work in general is carried on in the English language.
During 1936, 20 services were conducted in the German language
for the older members of the congregation.
St. John’s Congregation was served by the Pastors F. Copas,
1867 to 1872 (there is no record regarding the years 1872 to 1876);.
C. G. Hellmuth, 1876 to 1885: C. F. Schmidt, 1885 to 1908; the
congregation amalgamated with St. Matthew’s in the year 1908.
St. Matthew’s Congregation was served by the Pastors F. Copas,
1877 to 1906; T. Frank, 1907 to 1923; G. Fischer, 1923 to the
present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 315 souls, 225 corm
municants, 40 children in the Sunday School, 22 members of the
Young People’s Society, 20 members of the Ladies’ Guild.


MURGON PARISH.
CONGREGATIONS : Murgon, Mondure, Cloyna, and
Goomeri. Pastor A. E. Reuther.
1. Murgon : Beginning with 1908, when the rich lands of
the South Burnett were thrown open for settlement, many farmers
from the older settlements in the Fassifern, Rosewood and Lockyer
Districts moved and established themselves here. They were fob
lowed up by pastors of both Synods. In Murgon the first Church
service was held in the year 1910 in the Salvation Army hall, by
Pastor Theo. Frank, of Maryborough, at that time a member of the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland. Later, Pastor M Wit"
tig, itinerant pastor of the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland, conducted services now and again
in the home of Mr. PoLin. just outside of Murgon. In May, 1915,
Pastor A. E. Reuther, then home missionary of the United German
and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, began to conduct
regular Church services at Murgon, in the homes of various mem"
hers. The congregation constituted itself on the 29th November of
that year. It consisted of 12 members and joined the parish Mon"
-dure and Cloyna.
In the year 1920 the congregation affiliated with the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland. Its
membership had increased to 20 families and it became necessary to
-erect a church. On the Ist of February, 1920, the new St. Mat"
thews Church was dedicated, Pastor O. Theile performing the
ceremony. The church is situated on 4 acres of land which the rom
gregation had purchased for the purpose in the year 1918.
In the year 1921 the parish, after much serious deliberation,
purchased a residence for its pastor in the town of Murgon.
Through this fact, Murgon became the centre of the parish. In the
year 1929 this residence was sold and a commodious comfortable
parsonage was erected beside the church. The new building was
solemnly opened on the 22nd of December, 1929.
In the meantime an organ had been installed in the church, the
building had been painted and an adjoining area of land had been
purchased in order to have a greater frontage.
All Church work in the congregation is being carried on in the
English language. A German service for the few older members is
conducted about three times during the year.
The congregation, year by year, increased its membership,
and it became necessary to provide more accommodation for the
members and visitors. After very careful consideration of the whole
problem the members decided, in the year 1935, to build a new
church and retain the old one as a Sunday School and as a hall. On
Sunday, the 29th of March, 1936, the very fine, new building was
dedicated to its divine purpose. The President of Synod, Pastor
A. R. Reuther, officiated, whilst Pastors A. E. Reuther, of Murgon;
H. Schmidt, of Kingaroy; and M. Lohe, of South Brisbane, also
were present.


On two occasions the congregation has been host to the Synod,
in 1923 and again in 1932.
The congregation has, since its foundation, been served by
Pastor A. E. Reuther.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 304 souls, 217 communi-
cants, 43 children in the Sunday School, 35 members of the Young
People’s Society, 16 members of the Ladies’ Guild.
2. Mondure : This is the oldest of the four congregations con-
stituting the parish of Murgon. The first Lutheran services were
held in the year 1908 in Mr. H. Marquardt’s home. Later the ser*
vices were conducted in the Union church at Chelmsford. The
pastors of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland came regularly every month, until, in October, 1911,
the newly-arrived itinerant Pastor, M. Wittig, took charge. He at
first resided at Wooroolin, and later moved to Mondure, living in a
settler’s home, not far distant from the church.
The Mondure Congregation was constituted in October, 1911,
and 22 persons entered their names on the register. Six months
later, on the 19th May, 1912, the new church, which had been
erected, was dedicated as the Lutheran St. John’s Church. Pastor O.
Theile officiated together with the local Pastor, M. Wittig.
In the year 1914 the congregation affiliated with the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland.
Pastor M. Wittig had served the congregation about 3J years
when dissatisfaction with his administration of the office of a pastor
grew apace throughout the Home Mission district. Finally he left
for America, in the year 1915. Pastor A. E. Reuther succeeded him,
being inducted by Pastor O. Theile on the Bth of May, 1915, as
home missionary of the district. His field included the congrega-
tions and preaching centres in the vicinity of Kingaroy. Pastor A. E.
Reuther resided for some years with Mr. and Mrs. J. Schorbach, at
Mondure, and travelled on bicycle, sulky and motor-cycle the long
distances from one end of his extensive field to the other. The work
was certainly overtaxing his strength, but the conditions during the
War period made it impossible for the Synod to afford him the
necessary relief.
In 1921 the three congregations, Mondure, Cloyna and Murgon,
combined to purchase a residence for the pastor. They decided that
the pastor should reside at Murgon. Even though it was somewhat
hard for Mondure to lose the pastor from its midst, the members
recognised that the interests of the majority were more important
than the desire of the smaller number, and they have not regretted
their decision.
As the years passed by the congregation improved its church.
The building was painted, a vestry was added, an organ was installed.
But the congregation also increased in numbers and it was evident
that the church was too small. In the year 1927, it was decided to en.'
large it. The building was lengthened by 12 ft. and a vestry was
added. On the 23rd October, 1927, the extended and beautified


church was by Pastor A. R. Reuther, who was assisted
by the local Pastor, A. E. Reuther, and Pastors M. G. Reuther, and
R. B. Reuther.
On the 23rd of May, 1937, the congregation celebrated the
25th anniversary of the opening of its church and Pastor O. Theile,
who had opened it in the first instance, was present and delivered
the jubilee address to the large numbers that were rejoicing.
At the beginning of its existence the congregation used both the
German and the English languages in worship and Confirmation
Classes, but English is almost exclusively used at present. A few
times during the year a German sermon is delivered for the older
generation of members.
The congregation was served by the Pastors M. Wittig, 1911 to
1915; A. E. Reuther, 1915 to the present.
Parsonage, Murgon.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show; 167 souls, 114 communi-
cants, 27 children in the Sunday School, 18 members of the Young
People’s Society.
3. Cloyna : The first Lutheran service was conducted by Pas'
tor Theo. Frank, of Maryborough, in the year 1910, in the home of
G. Dowse. He continued with regular visits, and on the 30th of
July, 1911, the congregation was constituted after a church had
been erected, which was dedicated as St. Theodor’s Church on the
22nd June, 1911. Pastors J. Frank, of Marburg, and T. Frank, of
Maryborough, officiated.
During the following years the congregation was served by the
pastors of the Synod, until, in the year 1913, Pastor M. Wittig, the
itinerant pastor of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran
Synod of Queensland, began to serve the congregation according to
an agreement between his Synod and the Evangelical Lutheran
Church of Australasia, of which Pastor T. Frank had become a
member. Dissatisfaction arose very soon regarding the manner in
which Pastor Wittig attended to his duties, and the congregation, in
1914, very earnestly demanded a change. After an inquiry by the


Secretary of the Synod, the Church Council became convinced that
that demand was justified. But the outbreak of the War somewhat
delayed the re-organisation of the work. In May, 1915, Pastor M
Wittig left the district, and Pastor A. E. Reuther was inducted on
the Bth of May, 1915, as his successor in the Home Mission work of
the district, which comprised at that time: Mondure, Cloyna,
Taabinga Resumption and other centres. Pastor A. E. Reuther
worked with much acceptance and the various congregations in-
creased their membership. But the conditions of the War period pre-
vented the early organisation of an independent parish. At the first
Convention of Synod after the War, at Bethania in the year 1920,
the congregation was received into membership of the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland. On the
21st February, 1926, a new organ was dedicated by the local pastor.
In the year 1933 the congregation considerably enlarged and
beautified its church and the rejoicing was great when the building
was re-dedicated as St. Luke’s Church, on the 25th of June, 1933.
The President of the Synod, Pastor A. R. Reuther, officiated, and
Pastors A. E. Reuther, Murgon; E. Wiencke, Alberton; and H.
Schmidt, Kingaroy, were also present. Three years later on the 21st
of lune, 1936, the congregation celebrated the 25th anniversary of
the dedication of its church. Pastors H. Prender and O. Adler
besides the local Pastor, A. E. Reuther, addressed the gathering.
All work in the congregation is being carried on in the English
language.
The congregation was served by Pastor T. Frank and other
pastors of the Synod, 1911 to 1913; M. Wittig, 1913 to 1915; A. E.
Reuther, 1915 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 216 souls, 146 communi-
cants, 22 children in the Sunday School, 58 members of the Young
People’s Society.
4. Goomeri: When Pastor A. E. Reuther,- at Murgon, was
relieved of the responsibility of the Kingaroy end of the South
Burnett District, he turned his energy in the other direction, and on
the 25th September of that year he conducted the first Lutheran
service at Goomeri, in the residence of Mr. W. Christiansen. The
development was much slower than along the railway line towards
Kingaroy. The settlement was not so dense and Lutherans were few
in number. The congregation was constituted on the 18th Novem-
ber, 1928, and in the year 1932 it affiliated with Synod, the Queens-
land District of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in
Australia.
The congregation has not its own church. It has always been
served by Pastor A. E. Reuther.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 34 souls, 27 communi-
cants, 4 children in the Sunday School.


NUNDAH PARISH.
CONGREGATIONS: Nudgee Road (German Station), ZilL
mere, and Nundah. Pastor O. H Adler.
1. Nudgee Road : This congregation was formerly named
German Station, and, though it is not the oldest Lutheran congrega-
tion in Queensland, it certainly has its origin in the first German
congregation. It is not unlikely that the church on Zion’s Hill, the
little rise near the railway station Toombul, was the very first and
earliest house of divine worship in what is to-day the State of
Queensland. Zion’s Hill was the site where the first party of Ger-
man missionaries and colonists —sent here by Pastor J. Gossner of
Berlin—established their settlement in the year 1838, and began
their work among the aborigines of the district, under the auspices
of the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales. They built a
church of roughly-hewn timber, and gathered there for worship.
Wlien the Government of New South Wales opened the district for
general settlement in the year 1842, other German immigrants
St, Paul’s, Nudgee Road.
settled in the vicinity and also attended the services in that little
church on Zion s Hill. In 1843 Ludwig Leichhardt, the noted Ger-
man explorer, visited the settlement and gave expression to his
pleasure of the fact that he had been able to attend a German Church
service on the Sunday he spent in the midst of these settlers.
It appears, though, that for years there was no organised com
gregation at Zion s Hill. Very likely there is some truth in the
reports that there was much dissension and strife among those early
settlers. After the leaders, Pastor C. Eipper (1844) and C. W.
Schmidt (1845) haa left the settlement, some of the members of the
missionary party adopted heretical views regarding Baptism, and
regarding the ministerial office of the Church. When, in the year
1856, Pastor Goethe, of Melbourne, visited Zion’s Hill, he prevailed
on the settlers of the district to organise as a Lutheran congregation
and to join ihe Synod he had established in Victoria: the Evan-


gelical Lutheran Synod of Victoria. The resolutions adopting his
proposals were passed at a meeting which took place on the 28t o
October, 1856. Pastor Goethe ordained C. Gerler (he had arrived
at Zion's Hill with the second party of missionary colonists, in the
year 1844), and appointed him as pastor of the newly organised
congregation. It was also arranged that Pastor G. Wagner (who had
been ordained at Sydney by Dr. John Dunmore Lang, in October,
1850) should visit the scattered German settlers in the Moreton Bay
District.
The congregation at Zion's Hill adopted the Church constitution
of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Victoria, and Bunsen s Book
of Worship, as recommended by Pastor Goethe. At the Meeting of
the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Victoria in 1857, the statistics
mention a congregation at Zion's Hill, and two preaching places in
the Moreton Bay Settlement, but no further record can be found
that the congregation continued to exist. Pastor Schirmeister, who
arrived at Zion's Hill a year later, also found much dissension and
turned his attention to the Germans who were settling in Brisbane,
and organised them into a congregation.
New settlers now came in larger numbers. Those that estab-
lished themselves around Zion’s Hill in German Station were mostly
emigrants from Wuerttemberg. They took objection to the conditions
which they found in the Church at Zion s Hill. They wished to
retain the faith of their fathers and remain Lutherans. Therefore
they established their own congregation. Among them were George
Fischer, Michael Kuebler, David Wildermuth, Johannes Deuble,
Carl Goeldner, SchuL, Thiele, Grauf, Blin2,inger, and others. Pastor
Schirmeister came out from Brisbane, and served them with Word
and Sacrament. According to Pugh’s Almanac, Pastor J. P. Niquet
was registered as pastor of German Station for the year 186 m How
ever. Pastor 1. P. Niquet, during a visit to Queensland in that year,
assisted Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister for a few months and soon
returned to the Southern States.
In the year 1866 these new settlers at German Station built
their own church on the other side of Kedron Brook, about a mile
to the east of Zion's Hill. Pastor Friedrich Copas— of the
party of missionaries sent by the Gossner Mission Society of Berlin,
which arrived in Brisbane on the 18th September, 1566 -was ap-
pointed pastor of German Station and of Zillmere. After but 10
months he went to Maryborough. His successor was Pastor Wil-
helm Burghardt, another member of the party which had arrived in
September, 1866. He remained until the year 1873, when he ac-
cepted a call to the St. Paul’s Congregation at Toowoomba. As
there was no pastor available for German Station and Zillmere,
Pastors Burghardt, Haussmann and Gaustad selected a layman,
August Daniel Hartwig—being confident that he could and would
faithfully serve as a pastor —and placed him in charge of the two
congregations, on the sth Sunday after Trinity, 1873. After two
years of probation they ordained him, in 1875. During his pastorate


■f MM I ' W]
VIM 3'
m ~j£9 * | — -
I W *p i«if^
it*jilpi ||»%F i»” ■ 't,}ai.inL.jH - r - r '■.*'_■ •
r
Pastor Hartwig gathered a small congregation at Caboolture com
sisting of 13 families, which also erected a church.
In 1877 Pastor Hartwig accepted a call to a newly-formed
congregation at Douglas. Then the congregations, German Station
and Zillmere, sent a call direct to the Seminary for Missionaries at
Basle, in Switzerland, and Pastor
E. O. Maier was sent to them.
He arrived in November of the
year 1877. During his pastorate
the congregation German Station,
in March, 1883, built a new
church, the St. Paul's Church.
To-day it forms the main-part
of the church in which the
present congregation worships.
About that time a parsonage
was also erected. The congrega-
tion was in a flourishing con-
dition, and the Word of God
dwelt richly among the members.
When, in the year 1886,
Pastor E. O. Maier left the parish
and followed a call to Charters
Towers, North Queensland,
Pastor I. Egen, who had been
pastor of congregations in the
Riverina District of New South
Wales for 14 years, came to
German Station and Zillmere.
The parish then included also the congregation at South Brisbane.
The latter, in 1891, seceded from the parish. Three years later, in
1894, dissension arose between the congregation at German Station
and Pastor I. Egen. All efforts on the part of the Synod could not
effect a re-approachment, and, after much bitter feeling had been
engendered, Pastor Egen left German Station. A portion of the
congregation remained faithful to him and established a new con-
gregation at Nundah.
German Station and Zillmere severed their connection with
the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland. They called Pastor
W. Burghardt, who was then at Highfields, and who had been their
pastor twenty years earlier. He was a member of the United Ger-
man and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, but the
parish did not join that Synod. Pastor Burghardt was inducted on
the 20th October, 1895. The President of the Synod, Pastor A.
Sueltmann, officiated, and was assisted by Pastors J. Koehnke and E.
Becker. After 4\ years, in 1900, Pastor W. Burghardt returned to
Highfields. German Station and Zillmere, joining the United Ger-
man and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, called Pastor
P. B. Hoefner, who was then a pastor in South Australia. He was
St. Paul’s, Nudgee Road.


inducted into the charge in May, 1901, by the President of the
Synod, Pastor G. Heuer, of Toowoomba. Pastors C. Premier and
M Doblies assisted.
At first the congregations of the parish seemed to rally around
their Church and in the year 1906 they were able to invite Synod
for its Annual Convention. But as the younger generation lost the
use of the German language more and more, conditions in the
Church began to decline. And during the time of the Great War
they seemed to grow worse even more rapidly. When Pastor Hoeh
ner, after 22 years of faithful service, resigned the charge in the
year 1923, it seemed as though the congregation at German Station
had reached the end of its existence.
The Synod, through its President, Pastor E. Hiller, came to
its aid, and pastors, in rotation, served the parish. English services
were introduced and efforts were made to obtain a pastor able to
use both languages. During the period of vacancy the old parsonage
was sold for removal.
After more than 18 months a new pastor was secured, and on
the 22nd March, 1925, Pastor O. H. Adler was inducted as pastor
of the parish, which now comprised German Station —from now on
called Nudgee Road —Zillmere and Nundah. The President of the
Synod, Pastor E. Hiller, officiated.
The congregation at Nudgee Road, adopting English as the
only language of worship and instruction, began to prosper.
That became evident in the appearance of the church building it'
self, which already, in 1926, was beautifully renovated and re'
roofed with iron in place of the shingles. A new organ also was
installed, the gift of one of the members.
In 1933, on the 2nd of April, the congregation celebrated the
golden jubilee of the dedication of its church. The church building
was enlarged by the addition of a chancel, a vestry, and an
elders’’ room. For this festival many of the old and former members
attended and rejoiced with the congregation. Pastors A. R. Reuther,
of Highfields, and O. Theile, of Brisbane, officiated, together with
the local Pastor, O. Adler.
In the course of its existence German StatiomNudgee Road has
been. ministered to by Pastors C. A. F. Schirmeister to the year
1866; F. Copas, to 1867; W. Burghardt, 1867 to 1873; A. D. Hart'
wig,. 1873 to 1877; E. O. Maier, 1877 to 1886; I. Egen, 1887 to
1894: W. Burghardt, 1894 to 1899; after a vacancy, P. B. Hoefner,
19Q1 to 1923; after a vacancy, O. H. Adler, from 1925 to the
present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 147 souls, 119 communh
cants, 62 children in the Sunday School, 35 members of the Young
People's Society, 22 members of the Ladies’ Guild.
2„ Zillmere : The congregation at Zillmere came into existence
at about the same time as that at German Station, and throughout
its history it shared the experiences of that congregation. The
records are exceedingly meagre and everything must be drawn from


the stores of memory only. The congregation at first worshipped in a
church built of slabs which was This may have been
erected in the year 1865.
Among the names of the first members of the congregatn m we
find Fester, Zillmann, W. Werda, C. Stabe, C. Prackart, C Beck'
mann, O. Mueller, C. Hoehns, W. Duckwits, C. Kolberg, C. Otto,
ri. Garsberg.
A new church was erected about 8 or 10 years later, at the time
when Pastor A. D. Hartwig was ministering to the congregation.
It was dedicated as the St. John’s Church, and it is to-day still the
house ol worship of the congregation.
The congregation, during its early days, had a parish school,
the teacher of which was Mr. Brandenburg. He was one of the
party of lay preachers which caused a good deal of difficulty in the
early history of the Lutheran Church in Queensland, and the
congregation at Zillmere was immediately affected thereby. Led by
t lis teacher, a number of the members of the congregation seceded,
anti worshipped separately in some other building not far distant
St J T ohl p Church. But when Pastor E. O. Maier, in the year
1877 took charge ol the congregation, he was able to heal the
breach and reunite the factions. A period of undisturbed develop-
ment was then experienced
During the pastorate of Pastor P. B. Hoefner the church was
lined, ceiled and painted. In the year 19.12 it was enlarged by the
addition of a chancel and a vestry. The renovated church was re-
dedicated on the 6th of November, 1932, and Pastors G. Dohler,
o pswic , and E. Wiencke, of Alberton, assisted the local pastor.
All work in this congregation is carried on in the English
language. &
During recent years the congregation has suffered quite a deal
ot loss through members moving to other districts endeavouring to
better then* economic conditions.
The congregation was served by the Pastors C. F. A. Schir'
meister to 1866; F. Copas, to 1867; W. Burghardt, 1867 to 1873 *
A. D. Hartwig, 1873 to 1877; E. O. Maier, 1877 to 1886* I Bern
1886 to 1894; W. Burghardt, 1894 to 1899; after a vacancy pT
Hoefner, 1901 to 1923; after a vacancy O. H. Adler rn the
present. ’
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 103 souls. 85 communi-
cants 30 children in the Sunday School, 15 members of the Youn*
People s Society, 1 5 members of the Ladies’ Guild.
3. Nundah : As stated before, this congregation owes its
existence to the fact that a number of members separated from the
congiegations at German Station and Zillmere, in the year 1894.
Ine foundation members of the new congregation were C. Schnk,
R■nT C 5 U " de ’ h Murr > R Staib > G - Dschle, J. Fischlc, R.
Buse Buse H. Buse E. Wruck and others. They erected the St.
tn , k Tu 111 7 Und; : h and wlllln gly brought sacrifices in order
to establish themselves thoroughly. The new church was dedicated


on Sunday, the 12th of May, 1895, and Pastors T. Langebecker. of
Toowoomba, the President of the Synod; J. G. Haussmann, of
Beenleigh, and I. Egen, the local pastor, officiated.
On the 20th June, 1897 the congregation was able to dedicate a
new organ. The King of Wuerttemberg had contributed a part of
the cost of the instrument, which was imported from Germany.
Pastor E. O. Maier, of North Brisbane, delivered the occasional
address.
The proximity to the city of Brisbane caused the process of the
anglicising of the rising generation to gain ground more rapidly than
in country centres, and the congregation, in its efforts to remain
German, lost many of its youth. Pastor I. Egen did much faithful
work and he was well supported by members of his family; but as
he grew older his efforts grew weaker. Shortly before Christmas,
1924, serious illness befell him, and he resigned his charge. The
officials of Synod, especially the President, Pastor E. Hiller, were
able to effect a between the congregation at Nuiv
dah and the congregations at Nudgee Road and at Zillmere. These
latter congregations were also vacant at that time. As a consequence
of this reconciliation the three combined as one parish, and
together called Pastor O. H. Adler. The residence for the new
pastor was erected in Nundah, and was solemnly opened on the 12 th
November, 1925, Pastor O. Theile officiating.
The congregation introduced the English language into the
Church work, and now has the pleasure of seeing many young faces
in its services. In the year 1930 the church was renovated and
beautified, and since then a new organ has been obtained. The
latter was purchased with a legacy bequeathed to the congregation
by its elder and treasurer, C. Vellnagel.
The congregation was served by the Pastors I. Egen, 1894 to
1924; O. H. Adler, 1925 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 103 souls, 78 communh
cants, 24 children in the Sunday School, 12 members of the Young
People’s Society, 12 members of the Ladies 1 Guild.
i'fi * * ❖
TOOWOOMBA (HUME STREET) PARISH.
CONGREGATIONS: Hume Street, Toowoomba, Wilsonton,
Kulpi, Narko, and Maclagan. Pastor H. Rogge.
1. Hume Street : On the 27th of September, 1887, a large
number of Lutherans met in the Shire hall at Middle Ridge,
Toowoomba. They constituted themselves as the Holy Trinity Com
gregation and decided to build a church in Hume Street. They had
been members of the Perth Street Independent German Church,
who, twelve months previously, through the action of the trustees,
had been forced out of their former church. Within a few weeks
the new church was erected and on the 6th of November it was
dedicated as the Lutheran Holy Trinity Church by the President
of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queens^


land, Pastor A. Sueltmann, of Bethama, Pastor J Koehnke, of
Ipswich, also being present.
Pastor J. Koehnke, of Ipswich, ministered to the congregation
until late in the following year, 1888, when Pastor G. Heuer, of
ackay, arrived and accepted the call as pastor of the congregation.
He was inducted on the 26th Sunday after Trinity of that year by
Pastor A. Sueltmann, the President of the Synod.
The congregation had meanwhile erected a parsonage beside the
church as residence for the pastor. The erection of the two build-
ings had put a great strain on the financial resources of the con-
gregation and it was burdened with a considerable debt. With the
help of the sister-parishes of the Synod this debt was steadily
reduced, but quite a number of years went by before it was liquidated.
In the year 1889 the con-
gregation at Wilsonton, on the
Gowrie Road, joined with the
Hume Street Congregation as a
parish and was, for many years,
ministered to by Pastor G.
Heuer. All the work was carried
on in the German language
The Hume Street Congre-
gation from the time of its
foundation affiliated with the
United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland
and in the years 1890 and 1901
it was host to the Annual Con-
vention of the Synod.
In the year 1913 the con-
gregation was deeply shaken and
experienced heavy losses. A bell
had been presented to the
church, and over the erection of
the belfry serious dissension
arose within the congregation,
causing quite a number of
families to secede from it.
them were foundation members who had rendered long
and faithful service to the congregation and to the Synod. It was a
very sad experience. But the congregation saw happy days, too! In
the year 1908 it celebrated the 25th anniversary of the ordination
of its pastor, and in 1913 the 25th anniversary of the dedication of
its church and of the induction of its pastor, Pastor G Heuer
Pastors J. Koehnke, O. Theile, A. R. Reuther, M. Reuther and W.
Poland were present.
It had become evident, even before the War period, that the
introduction of the English language into the congregation was
necessary. The War-period made this necessity even more urgent.
Trim£y Church, Hume Street,
Toowoomba.


Pastor G. Heuer, feeling that he could not cope with that necessity,
retired from the charge in the year 1920. The congregation called
Pastor T. Fuhlbohm, who at that time was stationed at Kulpi as
itinerant pastor. The scarcity of pastors and the financial stringency
made it necessary that the parish Hume Street and Wilsonton
include also the congregations at Kulpi and Narko, though the
additional duties and the travelling involved were almost too great
a strain for the pastor.
Pastor T. Fuhlbohm was inducted into his charge in the Wilson-
ton Church on the sth September, 1920, by Pastor O. Theile,
Pastors G. Heuer, of Toowoomba; A. R. Reuther, of Highfields;
W. Poland, of Douglas; and G. Fischer, of Goombungee, were also
present. The new pastor introduced the English language wherever
necessary and the work progressed quietly.
In November, 1927, the congregation celebrated the 40th
anniversary of the dedication of its church with a mission festival.
The main address was delivered by the founder of the congregation,
Pastor J. Koehnke; another speaker was Pastor G. Heuer, who had
served the congregation for more than 30 years. The local Pastor,
T. J. Fuhlbohm, was further assisted by Pastors A. R. Reuther, E.
Gutekunst and W. Poland. In the following year, on the 4th
November, 1928, the congregation honoured its former pastor,
Pastor G. Heuer, on the occasion of the 40th anniversary of the day
he came to live in its midst. Pastors T. Fuhlbohm, A. Reuther, H.
E. Gutekunst and W. Poland addressed the congregation.
In 1929, Pastor T. Fuhlbohm relinquished his charge,
having accepted a call to the parish of Milbrulong in New South
Wales.
The congregation and parish experienced considerable diT
ficulty before they could obtain a new pastor. During the period of
vacancy which continued more than a year the pastors of Synod and
a student from the Seminary at Adelaide served the congregation
and the parish. At last Pastor H. Rogge, a graduate of the Immanuel
Seminary at North Adelaide, was appointed to the Hume Street
Congregation. He was inducted on the 21st September, 1930, by
Pastor G. Heuer.
On the 23rd of October, 1932 the Hume Street Congregation
once more did honour to its former pastor, Pastor G. Heuer, and
the whole Synod joined in the festivities on the occasion of the
50th anniversary of his ordination. The local Pastor, H. Rogge, was
assisted by Pastors A. R. Reuther, of Highfields; E. V. H. Gute-
kunst, of St. Paul's, Toowoomba; O. Theile, of Brisbane; H.
Prenzler, of Goombungee; and L. Doehler, of Lowood.
Five years later, on the 7th of November, 1937, the congrega-
tion celebrated its own jubilee, the 50th anniversary of the dedica'
tion of its house of God. It was a very fine festival at which the
local Pastor, H. Rogge, was assisted by Pastors A. R. Reuther,
President of the Synod, G. Heuer, E. V. H. Gutekunst, H. Proeve,
and G. Yens.


The Hume Street Congregation has the distinction of having
seen in its pulpit two of its own sons, who were baptised and coiv
firmed in its church, the two Pastors, Hermann and Ernst Proeve,
both stationed in Southern Districts of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia. In addition a sister of these two
is the wife of Missionary H. Boettger, a member of the staff of the
Lutheran Mission, Finschhafen.
With the exception of very few German sermons for the older
members, all work in the congregation is carried on in the English
language.
The congregation has been served by the Pastors J. Koehnke,
1887 to 1888; G. Heuer, 1888 to 1920; T. J. Fuhlbohm, 1920 to
1929; after a vacancy H. Rogge, 1930 to the present.
At the end of the year 1936 the statistics show: 98 souls and
76 communicants, 15 children in the Sunday school, and 12 members
of the Ladies 1 Guild.
2. Wilsonton : In the year 1889 the Independent German
Church of Perth Street, Toowoomba, ceased to exist, and the
trustees offered the church building for sale and removal. Some of
the former members, together with some of the members of the
Phillip Street Congregation, who all lived along the Gowrie Road,
constituted a new congregation at Wilsonton. They purchased the
Perth Street Church and rejected it at Wilsonton. On the 24th
November, 1889, the newly erected church w r as dedicated as the
Lutheran St. John’s Church of Wilsonton. Pastors G. Heuer, of
Toowoomba; and W. Burghardt, of Highfields, officiated.
The Wilsonton Congregation joined with the Hume Street
Congregation and called Pastor G. Heuer as its pastor. Ever since,
the two congregations have remained members of the same parish
and their history is closely interwoven.
Ten years after the foundation of the congregation, in the
year 1899, a school hall was erected, which was used for the purpose
of the German classes, the Sunday School and Confirmation Classes.
This hall was opened on the 4th of October, 1899, when Pastors
G. Heuer and W. Burghardt addressed the assemblage.
In the year 1901 the congregation affiliated with the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, and in
1910 it was host to the Annual Convention of the Synod.
In 1928 and in 1934 the Sunday School Teachers’ Convention
met in the Wilsonton Church.
The pastor conducts a few services in the German language
during the year; all other work is carried on in the English language.
The congregation was served by the Pastors G. Heuer, 1889 to
1920; T. Fuhlbohm,, 1920 to 1929; after a vacancy by Pastor H.
Rogge, 1930 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show; 135 souls, 96 communb
cants, 26 children in the Sunday School, 28 members of the Ladies’
Guild.


3. Kulpi: When Pastor A. Hartmann was the home mis-
sionary of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland, iiving at Doctors Creek, near Haden, he, at various
tim.es, visited Kulpi, which was then known as Evergreen, He con
ducted services in the home of Mr Beckmann. But the work did
not prosper much. The pastor could not speak the English lan
guage and the people settled here knew little German. In the year
1906, the successor of Pastor A. Hartmann, Pastor G. Fischer, took
over the work. He was Australian-born, and used the English
language, when necessary.
At Christmas time of the year 1907, the congregations Doctors
Creek, Boah Peak and Evergreen (Kulpi) decided to form an in-
dependent and self-supporting parish. But when, two years later,
in the year 1909, the congregation at Goombungee became em-
bodied in that parish, Evergreen (Kulpi) reverted to its former
position and was a Home Mission centre.
For many years the services were conducted in private homes,
mostly in that of Mr. Beckmann. On Trinity Sunday of the year
1913, however, the new church, which the congregation had
erected, was dedicated. Pastors G. Heuer, of Toowoomba: and O.
Theile/of Bethania, officiated. A month later Pastor M. Reuther
began to minister to this congregation. He lived at Alberton and
regularly travelled every month to the Kulpi-Narko Distiict.
Another year later, on the 9th of August, 1914, Pastor T. Fuhl-
bohm (a Queenslander who had graduated from the Luther
Seminary at Saint Paul, Minnesota, U.S.A.) took up the work in
this district. He was inducted by the President of the Synod, Pastor
G. Heuer. The congregation began to prosper. The attendance at the
services was good, property matters were put in order, and the con-
gregation built a small residence for the pastor. At the Annual
Convention of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran
Synod of Queensland, at Bundaberg, in May, 1914, the congrega-
tion was received into membership.
And then, in 1916, the pastor was taken away by the military
authorities and placed behind the barbed ware of the internment
camp! For the time being the pastors of Synod served the vacant
parish as best they could, and Kulpi received as much consideration
as possible. In July, 1917, the position improved, for another
Queenslander, Pastor H. Proeve, arrived from America where he
also had graduated from the Luther Seminary at St. Paul, Minne-
sota. He was stationed at Kulpi and helped to serve the many con-
gregations on the Downs whose pastors were absent .
When he was released in 1919, Pastor T. Fuhlbohm again took
over the work and remained at Kulpi until he transferred to Hume
Street, Toowoomba. He retained the congregations Kulpi, Narko
and Maclagan, continuing to serve them from Toowoomba.
Pastor Fuhlbohm left his sphere of work in Queensland in
August, 1929, and after a vacancy, his position was filled by Pastor
H. Rogge, in September, 1930.


The congregation was served by Pastors A, Hartmann, to 1906-
G. Fischer, 1906 to 1913; M. Reuther, 1913 to 1914; Theo, Fuhh
bohm, 1914 to 1929, excepting for the period when he was interned
from 1916 to 1919; H. Rogge, 1930 to the present day.
All work in the congregation is now carried on in the English
language.
The statistics at the end of the year 1936 show: 124 souls, 78
communicants, 8 children in the Sunday School.
4. Narko: This place was originally called Cockatoo or Cattle
Gully. When the railway was built the station received the name
Narko and the district has retained that name. Pastor W. Guhr,
of Goombungee, visited Lutherans settled here, and conducted ser-
vices in various private homes. But the first settlers moved away
again and Pastor Guhr s visits ceased. Other settlers came and the
home missionaiy, Pastor G. Fischer, began to conduct services for
them in the home of Mr. Politsch. The small congregation was part
of the parish Doctors Creek, Boah Peak, Evergreen (Kulpi)
In July of the year 1913, Kulpi and Narko were made Home
Mission centres again; and Pastor M. Reuther regularly travelled the
long distance from Alberton on the River Logan every month to
conduct services. At the Annual Convention of the United German
and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland, at Bundaberg,
in May, 1914, the congregation at Cockatoo (Narko) was received
into membership. In August, 1914, Pastor Fuhlbohm took over the
work and Narko shared all the experiences of Kulpi.
In the year 1921 the congregation erected a church which was
dedicated on the 12th February, 1922. Pastors T. Fuhlbohm, of
Kulpi, G. Fischer, of Goombungee; and A. E. Reuther, of Murgon,
omciated. All work in the congregation is carried on in the English
language.
The congregation was served by Pastors G. Fischer until 1913 ■
M. Reuther, 1913 to 1914; T. Fuhlbohm, 1914 to 1928; during
the period when he was interned, 1916 to 1919, pastors of Synod
and then Pastor H. Proeve served it; H. Rogge, 1930 to the present
The Statistics for 1936 show: 59 souls, 33 communicants 21
children in Sunday School.
5. Maclagan : Pastor G. Fischer, of Goombungee, first visited
tms centre and conducted services in the Union church, which had
e< j n V reCte re - The services do not seem to have been regular
and the work declined.
In the year 1924 Pastor T. Fuhlbohm, of Hume Street,
loowoomba, again took up the work, and on the 13th of July of
ttiat year organised a congregation which has shown steady growth
The congregation is a member of the Hume Street, Toowoomba,
pansh and, at the Annual Convention at Bundaberg, in the year
J9A, it was received into the membership of the Synod.


In the year 1935 the congregation erected its own church. It
was dedicated for its divine purpose on the 2nd November, 1935,
and given the name Lutheran St. Matthew’s Church.
All work in connection with the Church is carried on in the
English language.
St. Matthew’s, Maclagan.
The congregation was served by Pastors G. Fischer, until 1913;
T. Fuhlbohm, until 1929; FI. Rogge, 1930 until the present.
The statistics of the year 1936 show: 154 souls, 96 communi-
cants, 26 Sunday School pupils, 8 members of the Young People’s
Society, 7 members of the Ladies’ Guild.
$ $ $ $
TOOWOOMBA (PHILLIP STREET) PARISH.
CONGREGATIONS: St. Paul’s, Phillip Street, Toowoomba,
and Oakey. Pastor E. V. H. Gutekunst.
1. St. Paul’s, Toowoomba: Soon after his arrival in Queensland
in the year 1857, Pastor C. F. A. Schirmeister, of Brisbane, made it
his business to undertake the arduous journey to Toowoomba —at a
time when there was no railway line, and when the road was just
a track cut by bullock-waggons—in order to find German settlers,
and to take care of their spiritual needs. It was through his agency
that the Government of New South Wales here also made a grant of
two acres of land in Phillip Street for the purposes of the Lutheran
Church. Pastor Schirmeister and Messrs. Holl, Bubeck and Klein
were entered as trustees for the property. As Pastor Schirmeister
was overburdened with work, and could not ask for support from
the missionaries at Zion’s Hill because of differences on question of
principle and confession, he appealed to the Gossner Mission
Society at Berlin, which sent a Mr. C. A. Anger to his aid. Mean-
time the congregation fenced the property and erected a suitable
building on it. This hall and residence combined faced Stuart
Street.


On the 10th of May, 1863, Pastor Schirmeister ordained Pastor
Carl August Anger and stationed him as pastor of the St. Paul’s
Congregation at Toowoomba. Unfortunately this man proved him-
self unworthy of the trust placed in him, and he had to relinquish
his charge at the Phillip Street Church. A short while afterwards,
in May, 1864, Pastor Schirmeister sent a young man, Pastor Carl
Ludwig Heyde, to take charge of the congregation, but he remained
only two years, when he left for Sydney. In that same year, 1866, a
party of missionaries arrived, sent by the Gossner Mission Society, at
Berlin, to Queensland, to support Pastor J. G. Haussmann in his
new attempt to missionise the aborigines of Southern Queensland,
Pastor Schirmeister was able to secure the services of a member of
this party, T. Langebecker, for Toowoomba. He ordained him and
placed Pastor T. Langebecker in charge of the St. Paul’s Congrega-
tion in Phillip Street, where the new pastor began his ministry at
Eastertime of 1867. Pastor Langebecker entered on his task with
energy, and the congregation prospered. He recognised that a parish
school was the great need in order to assure the future. He estab-
lish eci such a school, and he undertook to teach the children on
five days of each week. Besides the congregation at Phillip Street,
all the pioneer settlements on the Downs, which were being
established, looked to the pastor of Toowoomba for the ministrations
of the Church. Therefore Pastor G. Hampe, who had been stationed
at South Brisbane, came to Pastor T. Langebecker’s aid in the year
1868 and for quite a number of years the two, Pastors Langebecker
and Hampe, worked side by side in the interests of their Church.
In the year 1870 Pastor Langebecker secured Mr. W. Guhr* -
who had arrived with him in Queensland in the year 1866, and
placed him in charge of the parish school, which was conducted in
both languages, German and English.
At that time the same building had to serve as church, as
school, and as residence of the pastor; but when Mr. W. Guhr was
installed as teacher, the congregation purchased a residence for their
pastor. As the congregation continued to grow in numbers, it
became evident that a larger church also would have to be built.
Pastor Langebecker instituted a fund for that purpose, but unfortu-
nately his health broke down at that time, in the year 1873, his eyes
especially being badly affected. As he could not find relief in Bris-
bane and Sydney, he resigned his charge in the year 1874, and
returned to Germany.
In the meantime, Pastor G. Hampe had taken charge of the
"Independent German Church’* in Perth Street. The St. Paul’s
Congregation therefore called Pastor W. Burghardt, who also had
come from Berlin with Pastor Langebecker in the year 1866. Pastor
W. Burghardt was at that time stationed at German Station and
Zillmere. He accepted and began his ministry at St. Paul’s,
Toowoomba, on the Ist July, 1874.
During his pastorate the new church was erected in the year
1877. It faces Phillip Street and was built of bricks, and measures


60 ft. x 40 ft. and has porch and vestry. The fine lofty building is
to this day the house of worship for the congregation.
Pastor W. Burghardt had to meet strong opposition from
people bent on following spiritistic inclinations, and he did so
successfully. But, at the end of 1882, he left Toowoomba and went
to Highfields, a congregation which he had helped to organise
and which he had served for several years previously.
St. Paul's Congregation approached Pastor T. Langebecker, its
former pastor, who had regained his health in Germany, and who
had then been pastor in California, U.S.A. for seven years. He
accepted the call, and reached Toowoomba in August, 1883. He
found the congregation labouring under a load of debt; but, sup-
ported by a strong committee of men, the liabilities were reduced,
and finally liquidated. A new school was erected, also a residence for
the teacher. These buildings were solemnly opened in the year
1884. The parsonage had also been enlarged.
St. Paul’s, Toowoomba.
Together with their pastor, St. Paul's Congregation joined the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland upon its foundation in
the year 1885. On various occasions it invited the Synod into its
midst, and showed it great hospitality.
Pastor Langebecker was always willing to serve the settlers
on the Darling Downs, who were establishing themselves, and who
desired the blessings of their Church; in some cases such visits led to
the formation of congregations, as at Meringandan and at West'
brook. The teacher, Mr. W. Guhr, supported his pastor loyally,
and, finally, Pastor Schirmeister ordained him. As Pastor Guhr he
then took over the congregation Westbrook-Aubigny.
The departure of Pastor Guhr from Toowoomba resulted in
the closing of the parish school The children now became pupils
of the State schools, and received German and religious instruction
one day per week, which was given by Pastor Langebecker.
In the year 1897 the congregation built a new parsonage, a
commodious and comfortable residence, which was opened on the


17th March of that year. In 1899 extensive repairs to the church
building were effected, whilst in 1904 the school had to be sub'
stantially enlarged in order to meet the needs of the Sunday
School.
On the 6th September, 1908, the congregation celebrated the
25 th anniversary of its pastor’s induction in its midst, and not
only the congregation, but also the Synod and the citizens of
Toowoomba joined to do honour to the revered pastor, who had so
faithfully served and laboured in their midst. Not quite a year
later, on the 13th July, 1909, God called him Home after a short
illness.
The congregation called Pastor J. G. Hegelau, who had been
itinerant pastor in South Australia and Victoria. He was inducted
on the 13th March, 1910, by the President of the Synod, Pastor
J. Frank, of Marburg, Pastor C. E. Treu£, of North Brisbane,
assisted; but Pastor J. G. Hegelau remained only a short time,
leaving Towooomba in November, 1911, and returning to Victoria.
Pastor E. V. H. Gutekunst, of Milbrulong, in New South
Wales, accepted a call, and was inducted as pastor of St. Paul’s
Congregation, Toowoomba, on the 21st of January, 1912, by the
President of the Synod, Pastor J. Frank, of Marburg. Pastor C. E.
Trent;, of North Brisbane was again, on this occasion, the assisting
pastor.
Together with its pastor, the congregation in October, 1912,
seceded from the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland and
joined in founding the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia.
The second Meeting of the new Synod took place in its midst, the
10th and 11th May, 1914, and the congregation was seriously coiv
sidering the proposal to affiliate with the State Church of Prussia,
when the Great War broke out, and with it much heartache and
loss. In the year 1916, Pastor Gutekunst was interned, and for years
the congregation was dependent for services on the pastors of the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland. It suffered almost
irretrievable losses during those years, during which it was
deprived of its pastor. It was placed under suspicion of disloyalty;
it was despised and defamed and its members were intimidated. The
calumny and slander heaped on the congregation culminated in an
incendiary act which very nearly destroyed the belfry on armistice
night.
By the grace of God quieter days followed. Pastor E. Gute'
kunst was released at the end of the year 1919 and returned to his
charge. Gradually the congregation recovered from its evil expern
ences during th£ Both pastor and congregation rejoined
the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland and took a leading
part in the efforts to bring about greater unity among the Lutheran
Churches and Synods in Queensland and in Australia. The second
Convention of the Queensland District of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia met in St. Paul’s in April, 1922, and
the congregation was again host to the Synod in April, 1934.


When passing from the year 1927 into 1928, the St. Paul’s
Congregation celebrated the 50th anniversary of the dedication
of its church. In commemoration of this important event it installed
a line new German pipe organ which was erected by the firm of
Whkehouse & Co., of Brisbane. At the same time a marble
memorial tablet was placed into the church in honour of Pastor T.
Langebecker, who had so long and so faithfully served St. Paul’s
Congregation. Besides the local Pastor, E. Gutekunst, Pastors G.
Heuer, Toowoomba; T. Fuhlbohm, Toowoomba; and L. Doehler,
Lowood, addressed the congregation. Representatives of the Govern'
ment of the country and of the city joined in the rejoicings and gave
expression of the good wishes of the community. The service in
connection with this jubilee celebration was the first Lutheran
service to be broadcast in Queensland.
On the 14th May, 1933, the congregation celebrated with the
pastor the 25th anniversary of his ordination. Pastors A. R. Reuther,
Highlields; G. Heuer, Toowoomba; and R. Rohde, Hatton Vale,
were present.
In January, 1937, St. Paul’s Congregation again had occasion
to rejoice. It was the 25th anniversary of the induction of Pastor
E. Gutekunst into the charge at Phillip Street. Pastor O. Theile,
of Brisbane, was the speaker for the occasion.
The congregation remembers, with justifiable pride yet prayer'
fully, those of its members who have gone from its midst into the
service of the missionary activities of the Church: Miss Laura
Meisenhelter, who followed her husband, Brother J. Hertle, to New
Guinea in the year 1926, and Brother Con Keese, who was fare'
welled in this church in June, 1927, before he proceeded to Hope
Valley, in North Queensland, where he helped Missionary Schwarz
among~the aborigines on the Reserve for more than nine years.
The Young People’s Society, which has proved of great value
indeed to the St. Paul’s Congregation, has the distinction of having
a longer continuous existence than any other such organisation in
the Lutheran Church in Queensland. It was founded by Pastor
T. Langebecker early in February, 1895, with 35 members, the
pastor being its first president and Miss Mengel the vice'president.
It met every week and was a constant source of blessing to its
members.
The St. Paul’s Congregation is one of the two Lutheran con'
gregations in Queensland which has organised a Men’s Society under
the name of Christian Brotherhood. It aims above all to lead to a
definite and decided Christian life in fellowship with Christ and
to a definite personal witness for the Master and His Church.
Nearly all work in the congregation is carried on in the English
language. For the sake of the older members the pastor, during the
year 1936, delivered 30 sermons in the German language.
Pastor E. Gutekunst and the St. Paul’s Congregation have
begun early to make use of that most modern means of spreading the
Gospel message: the radiobroadcast. For some years past the ser'
vices of the congregation have been “on the air” at regular intervals


through station 4GR, and Pastor E. Gutekunst also takes his
allotted turn in week'day devotions which the local studio includes
in its programme.
The congregation has been served by the Pastors C. A, Anger,
1863 to 1864; A. L. Heyde, 1864 to 1866 ; after a vacancy by T.
Langcbecker, 1867 to 1874; W. Burghardt, 1874 to 1882; T Lange'
becker, 1883 to 1909; G. Hegelau, 1910 to 1911; E. V. H. Gute'
kunst, 1912 to the present.
Statistics at the end of 1936 show: 465 souls, 339 communE
cants, 52 children in the Sunday School, 30 members of the Young
People’s Society, 45 members of the Ladies’ Guild.
Oakey: When Brother J. Donges, a member of St. Paul’s
Congregation, at Toowoomba, moved with his family on to a farm
near Oakey, he found in the vicinty some other families which
desired to have the ministrations of the Church brought to them.
Therefore Pastor E. Gutekunst, in the year 1927, began to conduct
services at Oakey, at first in a hall, where the congregation was
organised. The first elders were J. Donges, H. Naumann, F. Lubo'
mirski, A. Steger and E. A. Steger. Later the services were con'
ducted in the School of Arts.
In the year 1928 the congregation availed itself of the oppor'
tunity of purchasing the mortuary chapel on the public cemetery at
Toowoomba and re'erected the building at Oakey as its church. On
Sunday, the 11th November, 1928, it was dedicated as the
Lutheran St. Paul’s Church. The President of the Synod, Pastor
A. R. Reuther, officiated and Pastors E. V. H. Gutekunst, G.
Eieuer, T. Fuhlbohm, H. and W. Poland were also present.
A great concourse of people rejoiced with the small congregation
and widespread interest in its welfare was evidenced by many
donations which had been made to the building fund. Not the least
acceptable among the donations was an organ which accompanied
the singing on the day of opening.
(Incidentally the festivity of the day was much enhanced by
the ordination of Pastor W. Bergmann. Coming from Germany he
had spent some time in Queensland with the object of acquiring a
knowledge of the English language and was now on his way to New
Guinea in order to join the staff of the Lutheran Mission.)
All work in the congregation is carried on in the English
language. At the Annual Convention of the Synod at Bethania in
April, 1929, the congregation was received into membership of the
Synod.
In recent years the congregation has suffered serious loss by the
removal of members to other districts.
The congregation has always been served by Pastor E. V. H.
Gutekunst, of St. Paul’s Church, Toowoomba.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 30 souls, 19 communi'
cants, 4 children in the Sunday School.


HOME MISSION CENTRES.
Beaudesert : Quite a number of younger people from the Logan
District around Bethania had settled further up the Logan and
Albert Rivers in the Beaudesert District. When the Great War had
come to an end Pastor O. Theile, of Bethania, began to visit them
and conduct services for them at Tabragalba. They met at the
residences of either Mr. Aug. Radke or Mr. Herm. Stegemann on a
week-day. Pastor R. B. Reuther, who succeeded Pastor O. Theile
at Bethania, continued these services. As more Lutherans settled
in the district the services were held in Beaudesert, and here the
first one took place on the 6th May, 1928, in the residence of Mr. C.
Schmidt. A few months later, on the sth of August, 1928, a con-
gregation was organised, the foundation members being A. Radke,
T. Ludwig, W. Flesser, H. Ludwig and C. Schmidt. The new con-
gregation joined the Queensland District of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia and was placed under control of the
Home Mission Committee which arranged regular services. During
the years 1929 to 1932 the itinerant Pastor, H. Schmidt, of Nambour,
was in charge. From May, 1932, Pastor M. Lohe, of South Brisbane,
was also pastor of Beaudesert under the direction of the Home Mis-
sion Committee.
In the year 1933 the congregation, with the help of Synod, was
able to erect its own church at Beaudesert, which was dedicated as
the St. Paul's Church to its special and divine purpose on the sth of
November of that year. Pastors A. E. Reuther, M. Lohe, R. B.
Reuther and H. Schmidt were present.
In the year 1936 the Home Mission Committee again attached
this congregation to its North Coast field and Pastor H. Minke, of
Nambour, ministers to it.
All worship and instruction is carried on in the English lan-
guage.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 80 souls, 54 communi-
cants, 20 children in the Sunday School, 24 members of the Young
People's Society.
Biloela: When the Callide Valley, west of Rockhampton, was
thrown open for selection, in the year 1924, some Lutheran families
settled there. They came from fihe Boonah District and Pastor A.
Hiller, of Dugandan, brought to them the ministrations of their
Church.
After Pastor M. Lohe had been stationed at Mackay in the
year 1925, the Church Council of the Queensland District of the
United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia instructed him to
serve the Callide Valley settlers. The centre was Biloela and, as
more farmers selected land in this area, the number of those who
attended increased, and a Sunday School was organised.
When Pastor M. Lohe, in the year 1932, followed a call to
South Brisbane, his successor. Pastor H. Minke, took over the work
at Biloela and he in turn was succeeded in the year 1935 by Pastor
J. M. Larsen, who also served Biloela from Mackay.


In the year 1936, on the 2nd of August, the Lutherans
organised themselves as the Trinity Lutheran Congregation and
decided to become incorporated under the Religious, Educational,
and Charitable Institutions Act of Queensland. A committee was
appointed to watch the interests of the congregation and to make
preparations for the erection of a church. As a result of the
activities of this committee three allotments were obtained in the
town of Biloela as a site for the proposed church building.
On the 27th September, 1936, the young congregation had the
unique experience of helping to commission one of its members,
V. D. BehrendorfF, for service on the mission field at Hope Valley,
to which he had been called by the Hope Valley Mission Board.
The Presbyterian church was kindly made available for the occasion
and Pastor J. M. Larsen officiated.
At the Annual Convention of the Synod at Goombungee, 1937.
the Trinity Congregation at Biloela was received into membership
of the Synod. It was then stated that the congregation numbered
18 members. Later in the year the Home Mission Committee of the
Synod appealed to the members of Synod to assist the congregation
in the erection of a church at Biloela.
Downfall Creek, Guluguba : Between the years 1909 and 1911
some South Australian Lutherans took up prickly pear selections in
the area between Miles and Taroom, about 160 miles to the west of
Toowoomba. They had undertaken a big contract to render pro-
ductive the land which was infested with the greatest pest in plant
life ever known in Queensland. With stout hearts they tackled the
task and sought ever fresh strength in the faith they had brought
with them.
Every Sunday they gathered in one of the homes —beginning
with the year 1915 it was always that of Brother A. Hoffmann—
and had their regular services as they had been accustomed to do in
South Australia. They applied to the United German and Scan-
dinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland for the ministrations of
their Church. Pastor A. Hartmann, of Highfields, visited them
regularly every three months. The first such visit took place early in
May, 1911. At the Annual Convention of the Synod at Plainland,
1911, the St. John’s Congregation of Downfall Creek was received
into membership.
When some months later Pastor A. Hartmann transferred to
New South Wales, his successor, Pastor A. R. Reuther, also took
over the congregation at Downfall Creek.
The connection with the parish of Highfields and its pastor
was dissolved in the year 1915. It was then arranged that Pastor
C. Prenzler, of Teviotville, should take over the charge. The
pastor was to reside at Downfall Creek and, besides his pastoral
duties, he was to conduct school for the children. The arrangement
was of short duration. Pastor C. Frontier returned to Teviotville and
the congregation was taken over by Pastor T. Fuhlbohm. After he
had been interned in 1916, it was served in rotation by pastors of
Synod until, in the year 1920, Pastor G. Heuer—who had retired


from parish work —took charge of Downfall Creek as his
tion. To this day, for seventeen years, he has faithfully served the
little band of Lutherans, established further inland than any other
congregation in Queensland.
Meanwhile the scientists discovered that little insect named
“cactoblastis” and through it freed millions of acres of Queensland
soil of that fearful pest, the prickly pear. The properties at Dowm
fall Creek experienced the benefit thereof and farming was certainly
made easier, though it still left enough work for the man engaged in
it. The members of the congregation at Downfall Creek were filled
with fresh hope. In 1931 they erected a church on a block of ten
acres, which Brother J. Stiller had donated for Church and cemetery
purposes as far back as 1912. The new St. John’s Church was dedh
cated on the Bth of December, 1931, by Pastors G. Heuer and E.
Gutekunst, both of Toowoomba.
St. John’s Guluguba.
On the 16th October, 1932, the congregation at Downfall
Creek celebrated the 50th anniversary of the ordination of its
venerable Pastor, G. Heuer.
Hitherto all services had been conducted in the German lam
guage, but in June, 1934, the first English reading service took
place, Brother S. Stiller serving as lector.
As the children of the congregation receive their education
through the Primary Correspondence School in Brisbane, the com
gregation, in July, 1937, appointed Miss Stark, of Engelsburg, as
teacher, who supervises the children at their work and gives them
religious instruction. For the purposes of this work they have
erected a school near the church. This school was dedicated to its
special purpose by Word of God and prayer on the 24th October,
1937.


Throughout the years of its existence this congregation, though
small, has set an example to all other Lutherans in Queensland,
by its faithfulness in attending its Sunday services and by its willing'
ness to do its share, and more, towards all activities of the Church.
The congregation was served by the Pastors A. Hartmann, 1911
to 1912; by various pastors of Synod to 1920; by G. Heuer, 1920 to
the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 54 souls, 35 communi-
cants.
Gympie ; The Home Mission Committee decided on the sth
November, 1935, that Gympie and its surroundings should be ex-
plored with a view to opening a preaching centre. Pastor A. E.
Reuther, of Murgon, took the matter in hand and on the 24th of
that month conducted the first service in the Congregational church
at Gympie—l7 souls attended. Various pastors conducted the ser-
vices at regular intervals, the general supervision being in the hands
of Pastor A. E. Reuther.
On the 12th July, 1936, the congregation was organised as the
Trinity Congregation of Gympie. Eight members signed the con-
stitution and passed the resolution that application be made for
membership with the Queensland District of the United Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australia. This application was granted at the
Annual Convention of the Synod at Goombungee in April, 1937.
The congregation has since then increased to 15 members. The
congregation is being served by Pastor A. Schubert, of Proston, the
work being under the supervision of Pastor A. E. Reuther, of Mor-
gen. All work is carried on in the English language.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 35 souls, 20 communi-
cants, 8 children in the Sunday School.
Hivesville : Pastor A. E. Reuther conducted the first service in
this region on the 20th March, 1921, in the hall at Kinleymore and
continued to do so every month until in the year 1925 he handed the
charge over to Pastor H. Premier.
Under Pastor H. Minke, who had succeeded Pastor H. Prem-
ier, the services at Kinleymore were discontinued at the end of
1929.
In the year 1930, Pastor A. E. Reuther made a fresh effort at
gathering the Lutherans of the district. The first service took place
on the 9th March, 1930, in the home of Mr. E. Joseph. Further
regular services were conducted in the public hall at Hivesville.
The congregation was reorganised as the Evangelical Lutheran Con-
gregation of Hivesville.
When in the year 1932 Pastor H. Schmidt took charge of the
Edenvale-Kingaroy parish he also took over Hivesville and served it
monthly.
In the year 1936 the Home Mission Committee stationed
Pastor A. Schubert as home missionary in the district and placed
Hivesville under his care. He was inducted at Proston on the sth
July, 1936.


All work in the congregation is carried on in the English lan"
guage.
The congregation has been served by the Pastors A. E.
Reuther. 1921 t0'1925: H. Prenzler, 1925 to 1928; H. Minke, 1928
to 1929: A. E. Reuther, 1930 to 1932; H. Schmidt, 1932 to 1936;
A. Schubert, 1936 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 58 souls, 28 communh
cants, 16 children in the Sunday School.
Lacey’s Creek : The Creek is a wild stream, especially when the
heavy seasonal rains have set in, and it knows no respect of fences,
or roads that men have made in the narrow valleys between the
hills and mountains of the D’Aguilar Range. On the slopes of the
hills German Lutheran farmers have built their homes. For forty
years and more they have laboured hard, growing bananas and
attending to their dairy herds. Their nearest railway station was 20'
miles away and the roads were often impassable. Conditions have
altered: the railway is close at hand, the roads are improved. But
Lacey’s Creek is still in a remote corner of those picturesque ranges
to the north-west of Brisbane and in the rainy season the creek is
still a wild and roaring torrent.
But the men that had settled here desired to hear the Word of
God and at long intervals they travelled to German Station and
Nundah and attended worship there and visited their friends and
relatives. Later, Pastor I. Egen, of Nundah, came and brought the
ministrations of the Church to them. It was usually a week-day
which was set aside for service in a private home or in the public
hall.
As the younger generation grew up they attended the services
of the Presbyterian ministers who came to the public hall regularly.-
In the year 1925 the President of the Synod, Pastor E. Hiller, who
knew the particulars of the connection of Pastor I. Egen with this
district, asked Pastor E. Wiencke to pay a visit to Lacey’s Creek
and to explore the possibilities of that district.
Since that time pastors of the Synod regularly served Lacey’s.
Creek until in the year 1927 it was linked up with the Home Mis-
sion activities on the North Coast and Pastor H. Schmidt, of Nam-
bour, took charge. In the year 1929 a congregation was organised
and in 1930 it was received into membership of Synod. Pastor A.
Simpfendoerfer succeeded Pastor H. Schmidt in the year 1932 and
served the congregation for a year when he accepted a call ta
Douglas. Pastor O. Adler, of Nundah, then served Lacey’s Creek for
twelve months until Pastor G. Venz was stationed as home mis-
sionary at Nambour in the year 1934. In the year 1936 Pastor H.
Minke became his successor, and, residing at Nambour, he serves.
Lacey’s Creek every month.
This congregation does not possess a church; the services are
conducted in the public hall at Lacey’s Creek. All worship and
instruction is carried on in the English language.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 62 souls, 46 communi-
cants, 10 children in the Sunday School.


Monto : This centre, in an area which was but recently thrown
open to selection and which is quickly becoming settled, was first
visited by Pastor H. Schmidt in the year 1930. The first Lutheran
service was conducted in an upstairs room of Patrick’s Cafe, on Sun'
day, 16th November, 1930 —11 persons attended. Further services
were arranged and they were all held in the Oddfellows’ hall. The
congregation was organised on the 22nd November, 1931, and, when
it acquired an allotment of half an acre in Monto in the year 1932,
it decided to become incorporated under the Religious, Educational,
and Charitable Institutions Act.
On different occasions members of the Home Mission Com'
mittee, Pastors A. E. Reuther, H. Prentjer and A. Simpfendoerfer,
visited the district in order to gain a personal insight into the field.
At the Annual Convention of the Synod in the year 1932 the
congregation was received into membership of the Synod.
Under the direction of the Home Mission Committee the
Monto District was served by the home missionary stationed at
Nambour. Pastor H. Schmidt was succeeded by Pastor A. Simp'
fendoerfer, 19324933; and by Pastor G. Vent;, 1934 to 1936.
Whilst Pastor Vent; had charge of the field in the year 1935, it
St. Paul’s, Monto.
was decided to erect a church and with the help of the Synod the
work was accomplished.
On the 29th of September of that year the new St. Paul’s
Church was dedicated to its divine purpose, Pastors A. E. Reuther,
of Murgon, and H. Schmidt, of Kingaroy, officiating.
In the year 1936 the Home Mission Committee was at last in
a position to appoint a home missionary to the district, Pastor
Joachim Stols being inducted on the 3rd of July, 1936, by Pastor A.
Simpfendoerfer, of Douglas.
All work in this congregation is carried on in the English lan'
guage.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 75 souls, 40 communi'
cants, 15 children in the Sunday School.


4*
i*’: BjH '
Mundubbera : Among the groups of German settlers which
Mr. H. F. Niemeyer, of the Apostolic Church of Queensland,
brought to this State from 1907 to 1910, there were quite a number
of Lutherans. Those that had settled in the Mundubbera'Mundow'
ran District, beyond Gayndah, soon desired to have the ministrations
of their Church. Pastor T. Frank, of Maryborough, visited them and
on the 18th of August, 1912, they constituted the Evangelical
Lutheran St. John's Congregation of Mundowran. The first services
took place on the selection of F. Zumbansen. The congregation
gathered for worship in the shade of a bottle-tree, and later in the
house of Mr. Zumbansen. At the Annual Convention of the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland at Hatton Vale, on the
27th October, 1912, the congregation was received into membership’
of the Synod. But it seceded almost immediately and affiliated with
the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia.
In the year 1914, definite steps were taken to erect a church..
Mr. F. Zumbansen donated two acres of land for Church purposes
and on the 27th January.
1915, the new church was
dedicated, Pastors T. Frank,
of Maryborough, and C. E.
Treus, of Brisbane, officiating.
The service arrangements
provided that five times
ing a year pastors should
come and minister to the
congregation and three times
the Lord’s Supper should be
celebrated. The Great War
prevented this arrangement
being put into effect,
especially after Pastor T.
Frank had been interned early
in the year 1916. The serving of the congregation was very diT
ficult because of its distance from other Lutheran centres and
because of the time lost when travelling there and back.
Pastors of Synod in rotation served the congregation about
every eight weeks until, in the year 1923, Pastor H. Pren^ler —who
was stationed at Kingaroy as home missionary—was entrusted with
the care of the Mundubbera District. But his work prospered to such
an extent that he had to relinquish his position at Mundubbera.
Synod again provided pastors in rotation for the services in this
congregation.
On the 16th September, 1928, Pastor H. Schmidt took over the
congregation. He was home missionary in the North Coast field,
living at Nambour. For some years he served the congregation at
Mundubbera regularly.
In the year 1929 the congregation decided to move the church
from Mundowran into the town of Mundubbera, a more central
situation. Two acres of ground were purchased, the church was re-
St. John’s, Mundubbera.


n
W ' ' " ; 'i'
I
4 ' ■ -4'V :
,
erected and a vestry added to it. On the 13th July, 1930, this
newly"erected St. John s Church was dedicated, Pastors H. Schmidt
and E. Wiencke officiating.
After Pastor Schmidt had accepted a call to the parish of
Kingaroy in the year 1932, Pastor A. Simpfendoerfer first, and then
Pastor G. Venz, ministered to the congregation at Mundubbera,
both coming from Nambour. In 1936 Synod was at last able to
appoint a resident home missionary, Pastor Joachim Stolz, to the
district. He was inducted on the 3rd of July, 1936, by Pastor A.
Simpfendoerfer, of Douglas.
The worship is conducted in the German and English fail"
guages, but the instruction of the young is given in English.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 127 souls, 72 communh
cants, 36 children in the Sunday School, 14 members of the Young
People's Society.
Nambour: When one of the Church elders of his Kirchheim
Congregation, Mr. H. C. Clem, moved to the North Coast area,
Pastor L. Doehler followed him
and conducted Lutheran services
in the home of the new settler
at North Arm on Tuesday
evening of the 9th of May, 1916.
He continued these services
under many difficulties until the
year 1923. Other centres were
added as time went on: Kiamba,
Didillibah, Image Flat and Per"
willowen, near Nambour, where
the first services took place in
Mr. P. T. Stollznow's home.
After Pastor L. Doehler
had transferred to Lowood, the
North Coast field was served by
the pastors of Synod, from 1923
to 1925: Pastors O. Theile, F.
Finger, M. Reuther and others.
Pastor E. Wiencke con-
ducted the first Lutheran service
in the town of Nambour on the
27th September, 1925. The
Presbyterian church was kindly
made available for this and subsequent services, which were con-
ducted more or less regularly every month by the pastors of the
Synod. Gradually all the preaching places mentioned previously
became merged into this one centre.
In July of the year 1928, the Home Mission Committee placed
Pastor H. Schmidt, who had just graduated from the Immanuel
Seminary at North Adelaide, in charge of the North Coast field,
with Nambour as the centre. He was inducted on the 26th of
St. Luke’s, Nambour.


August, 1928, by Pastor A. E. Reuther, the chairman of the Home
Mission Committee. The congregation was properly organised on
the 28th of October of the same year and plans were made for the
erection of a church, which was dedicated as the Evangelical
Lutheran St. Luke's Church on the 24th of November, 1929, by
Pastor A. E. Reuther, of Murgon, Pastors H. Schmidt and O. Theile
assisting.
Pastor H. Schmidt, in the year 1932, accepted a call to
Kmgaroy and his successor as home missionary was Pastor A.
Simpiendoerfer, who was inducted on the sth of June, 1932. He
remained but one year. In 1933 he left for Douglas. After a vacancy
of some months, Pastor G. Yen* was inducted as home missionary,
on the 10th of June, 1934. But he also soon accepted a call, going
to Highhelds. Pastor H. Minke became his successor in 1936. A
small residence has been erected on the church grounds and the pastor
lives there with his family. From here he ministers to the North
Coast centres, the main ones being Nambour, Witta, Lacey’s Creek.
To these is joined Beaudesert in the southern area beyond Brisbane.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 93 souls, 38 communis
cants, 16 children in the Sunday School, 15 members of the Young
People’s Society, 20 members of the Ladies’ Guild.
Proston : In the year 1925, Pastor H. Prenzler, of Kingaroy,
who was serving the congregation at Hivesville, extended his work
to Proston and began to conduct services at this centre every
month.
His successor, Pastor H. Minke, in the year 1929, discontinued
the services at Proston, but Pastor A. E. Reuther, of Murgon, in
March, 1930, re-opened this preaching centre. Pastor H. Schmidt
took charge in June, 1932, and continued regular monthly services.
Early in the year 1936 a congregation was organised and at
Beenleigh, 1936, at the Annual Convention of Synod, this Redeemer
Congregation was received into membership of the Synod. Later in
the same year the Home Mission Committee stationed Pastor A.
Schubert, a recent graduate from the Immanuel Seminary at
Adelaide, as home missionary in this district. He was inducted into
the charge on the sth of July, 1936, by Pastor A. E. Reuther, of
Murgon, who was assisted by Pastor H. Schmidt, of Kingaroy. The
services are conducted in the Methodist church at Proston and the
home missionary, Pastor A. Schubert, has his residence in that
township.
All work in this congregation is carried on in the English lan'
guage.
The congregation was served by the Pastors H. Prenzler, 1925
to 1928; H. Minke, 1928 to 1929; A. E. Reuther, 1930 to 1932;
H. Schmidt, 1932 to 1936; A. Schubert, 1936 to the present.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 107 souls, 44 communi-
cants, 28 children in the Sunday School.
Witta : Early in the nineties of the past century, the scrub-
lands on the Blackall Range, to the west of Landsborough, were
thrown open for selection by the Government of Queensland. Quite


a number of people from the Logan District made new homes for
themselves in this new area, which they called Teutoburg—after a
hilly woodland district in Germany. Among them was Mr. C.
Thiedecke, who had been teacher of the parish school at Alberton.
He gathered the new settlers for worship on Sundays and instructed
the children in a school which he organised. He also drew the at'
tention of the officials of the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland to the isolated settlers at Teutoburg
who required the ministrations of their Church. Pastor E. Becker,
of South Brisbane, visited them in the year 1892, organised a con'
gregation, and arranged for regular Church services, which were
conducted by the pastors of the Synod.
After the school at Teutoburg had been recognised and regis'
tered as a State school, the teacher, Mr. C. Thiedecke, in the
year 1893, spent his holidays collecting funds among the fellow'
Lutherans in various districts towards the building of a church
This was duly erected on land which Mr. Bergann donated for the
purpose. Unfortunately, Mr. Bergann died before the land was
surveyed and the transfer completed. As the owner had died in-
testate, considerable difficulty arose regarding the title to the church
ground. This led to dissension. In the year 1895 a number of the
settlers asked Pastor I. Egen, of Nundah, a pastor of the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Queensland, to minister to them, and thus for
several years pastors of both Synods served the small settlement of
Lutherans at more or less regular intervals.
In August, 1902, Pastor O. Theile, of Bethania, a pastor of the
United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland,
was able to adjust the differences which had arisen. He served the
reunited congregation for two years. Then Pastor P. B. Hoefner,
of German Station, took charge of it; he was followed by Pastor L.
Krause, of South Brisbane, in April, 1910.
In the same year the congregation decided to erect a new
church on a block of land, which it had previously purchased—•
somewhat to the east of the location of the old church. On the
22nd January, 1911, the new church was dedicated. Pastors J.
Koehnke, of Beenleigh, President of Synod, and L. Krause, of South
Brisbane, officiated.
In the year 1925, Pastor L. Krause ceased his regular visits to
Teutoburg, or Witta—as it was now called, the War having
eliminated the old German name—and Pastor O. Adler, beginning
in the year 1925, ministered to the congregation until early in 1927.
During this time the congregation thoroughly reconditioned its
church, lining, ceiling, painting and otherwise beautifying it. On
the 28th February, 1926, the church was re'dedicated, Pastors O.
Adler, L. Krause, and O. Theile officiating.
In the year 1927, the congregation was linked with the North
Coast field of the Home Mission and has been served regularly by
the home missionaries stationed at Nambour.
In the course of its existence, the congregation has been minis'
tered to by pastors of the United German and Scandinavian


Lutheran Synod of Queensland from 1892 onward and a part of it
by Pastor I. Egen, of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queens-
land from 1894 onward. Reunited, it was served by the Pastors O.
Theile, of Bethania, 1902 to 1904; P. B. Hoefner, of German
Station, 1904 to 1910; L. Krause, of South Brisbane, 1910 to 1925;
O. Adler, of Nundah, 1925 to 1927; H. Schmidt, 1928 to 1932; A.
Simpfendoerfer, 1932 to 1933; G. Venz, 1934 to 1936; H. Minke,
1936 to the present.
Whilst in the beginning the worship and the instruction was
carried on in the German language, this has in the course of years
given way to the English language, which is at present in use
exclusively.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 55 souls, 38 communi-
cants, 13 children in the Sunday School, 19 members of the Young
People’s Society.
Yarraman : Ever on the look-out for Lutherans who may be
without the ministrations of their Church, Pastor H. Prenzler, of
Goombungee, in the year 1931, visited Yarraman and began to con-
duct services there in a Methodist church, which was not in use.
He continued to minister to the Lutherans he gathered every month,
until the Home Mission Committee, in the year 1932, placed Pastor
H. Schmidt, of Kingaroy, in charge, who organised the Calvary
Congregation of Yarraman and continues to serve it regularly until
the present time. All worship and instruction is carried on in the
English language.
At the Annual Convention of Synod in 1936, at Beenleigh, the
Calvary Congregation was received into membership of Synod.
The statistics at the end of 1936 show: 48 souls, 26 communi-
cants, 10 children in the Sunday School.
ns !d id
CONCLUSION.
The Mission of the Lutheran Church.
The Lutheran Church has always gone its way quietly, and has
always kept strictly to its own business. Perhaps it has been too
reticent in the past. Such reserve was due partly to the use of the
German language and partly also to the Lutheran principle, accord-
ing to which the Church tries to avoid all entanglements outside of
its own province.
Times have changed! Since it has adopted the English language,,
the Lutheran Church is in much more intimate touch with its sur-
roundings, and with its fellow-citizens. That fact involves dangers
and temptations, it also imposes new duties. The spirit of the time
is anti-Christian. In Australia it makes its appearance in an
indifference to God and His Holy Word, an indifference which
is truly appalling. There lies the danger! Press and radio, sport
and cinema tend to lead all—the Lutherans included — into that in-


difference which passes by the institution which God Himself has
established —the Christian Church. He has entrusted the means of
His Grace, His Word and Sacrament, to this Christian Church.
There lies the duty of the Lutheran Church, to come out of her
reserve and proclaim her message.
The present time is a time of great anxiety. A generation is
growing up which shows much religious ignorance and which is
saturated with disrespect for all authority. Self'control, self'
restraint, and discipline are deemed to be olddashioned virtues. From
the press, from the chair of the lecturer, even from some pulpits a
pagan intellectualism and a cynical scepticism is broadcast, which
are a direct negation of the Divine Word. There is a shifting of the
rural population into the cities, seeking greater ease, more comfort,
and especially more amusement, than the country can offer. There
is the surge of the classes against one another; the masses desire a
greater share of the fruits of their labour and a greater economic
security. All this must lead to economic and social changes that
will have a most far-reaching influence on the whole nation. The
dissolution of home life is going on apace, contributing factors
being the loss of parental authority and the unwillingness of married
couples to take upon themselves parental responsibility. Nations
call themselves Christian, but Christian morality has been discarded
to a great degree. In the political and financial life of the nations
it has never been more than a convenient veneer; but now moral
life, too, is openly defying Christian principles. Perhaps the more
brazen claims are subsiding somewhat, but the open advocacy of
birth control and all it involves is producing results which are
viewed with much concern not only by the Churches, but also by
many nations.
Educationally the present time is drifting into the shallows of
human wisdom. A philosophy of life that is wholly materialistic,
and relies only on the fleeting, visible things of this world, has a
destructive influence not only on the intellectual life, but also on
the religious and the moral life as well.
But on the other hand, evolutionism and rationalism are losing
their power and there is a definite trend back to the Old Bible.
Yes, a seeking after basic Truth and after fundamental Realities
is noticeable. It seems that the satisfaction of a generation ago has
largely disappeared. Much earnest thinking is being done, especially
among the younger generation, but too often it remains without
positive result.
And there are still the seven thousand in the land, that have
not bowed their knees before Baal. There is still a Communion of
Saints in Australia, too, and it is an active force scattered throughout
the length and breadth of the land doing God’s work!
In such a world, in such surroundings, the Lutheran Church in
Australia has its mission. That mission is to instil into Australian
consciousness and life the true knowledge of God’s salvation in
Christ Jesus, the true knowledge of Sin and Grace. Its mission is to
work towards the aim that Jesus Christ be the Lord in Australia.


The Lutheran Church stands four-square on the Bible as the in-
spired Word of God! It recognises no other authority of faith and
life. The centre of its teaching is Christ and Him crucified. In Him
is daily forgiveness of sin for all who believe on Him. The
Lutheran Church insists that man must be born again by the Holy
Spirit, there is no other way to get free of sin and all its horrible
ramifications; all must choose this way, for all have sinned. It
stresses the foundation of salvation laid by God in Christ Jesus and
the work of the Holy Spirit in declaring Christ, and it also stresses
the need of man’s repentance, faith and holy living. It accepts all
the means of grace, making use of both the Word and the Sacra-
ments, thereby bringing to man the fullness of God’s Grace. Thus
it brings peace and joy to men, true freedom and liberty, in short,
true salvation.
Salvation cannot be brought to the bewildered race of to-day
through more learning, through more organisation or through more
funds, but only through the knowledge of Jesus Christ, for in Him
alone is salvation.
The Lutheran Church preaches this salvation, but it must be-
come more convincing. Lutheran businessmen, Lutheran labourers,
Lutheran scholars, Lutheran pastors, yea, all Lutheran men and
women must live more convincingly. They must show a love for
Christ that they cannot hide, they must have a zeal for the salvation
of their neighbour. Lutherans must be filled with the Holy Spirit of
God and thus fulfil their mission in this world.
One hundred years have passed since God has led the first
Germans to this part of the world. From their settlement sprang
the Lutheran Church of to-day. From the days of early beginnings
until to-day has been a long and tedious way. The beginnings were
so small, so poor. In the beginning there was no foundation and no
definite aim was in view. It is marvellous how, out of the com-
parative chaos of the early years, a Church emerged which, after
much argument and dispute, found a firm foundation and became an
organisation. Men did the arguing, men disputed with one another,
much shortsightedness, weakness and much sin was intermingled;
but God sheltered the tree that was growing in Queensland. The
present generation may criticise the bygone years and find fault
with the generation which has passed away. The latter laboured
and fought and struggled and left for the following generation the
result of its life, which was capable of further development and
which is to-day a well organised Church. Built on a firm foundation
it is a monument to those who have gone before, it is a refuge
for its present members, and it is well fitted to harbour and shield
the coming generation, too. In fact, it is the Zion of God; it has its
origin in the eternal mountains, and when its course is run it will
find its eternal home in the eternal mountains. The Church militant
will be the Church triumphant; the poor handmaiden, here despised
of the world, will be decked as the Bride of the Son of God, Jesus!


C • — -r *;r-_ ‘
- , _
Cottage erected on Zion’s Hill by Missionary Wagner, photographed in 1891


TORR f. 5/ 5Tf?AIT r ~')
f !»• '
( \99s£>f* pi: yOKK 1
iim. f «iasi«B
/ faff <r«4/v v/tt »
I I a**' N
LARPt H TARIA \W
j )]aL 'netrent *
I iff *"4% {“’’S^KcooktowH S
I /if "VmII X*
7 PACIFIC
OCEAN
* ♦ \f )' ) «»««',. ') , -/ // /^ n 'aS\\\ '
I *• / /* o'v. ; ’; Cirt<«^VT- ! < X'
k ( v. V\v %
Y \% 0 \s # 's
; I A SV. *JP&a s> 0 \
1 1 S’ a a. %?,, , %«2, .o'‘ --N\f« X <o
._h*j““ % fP^si\tiSr) %' N V
I CLOnCU^b-mmmmm —u»—~T* 1 ** V /i 1, \ '-,
♦ M r )3A a CLOnCU **Jr ,>i N J| N /—,
1 \ V\ -> ***&**> 1 J>afik«AC»<flr % \
\ j' — HAT - r W' 1 % )
n J *\ 'il | iff f I 4
> I V\ / -§f \/ I J. H o V J K*. \roc*h*"pto" 1
r > ♦ \ / 1 j;^ a, | „ , I |
> r 1 ) J il * f 1
! / J i* / % r ?/S, vr'VxA 1
1 ( */ </ CVJxm
jfy j
-■“•"* '"J T//-7
1 \ ( / J cl c c ? I T 'C
f J ! j iV ,4 7 - >-*- s , r v',,
ffi / \ 4?V\ * I v-
i j 1 V» T
\ j | /'/ / I* / ’ "5
I il_il[ v-Vf F> I
Darling Downs


i NP/f>(A C *‘‘*jjjiI I
\* V \Vy y y a//1
* * \, v, / i 'yy \_ ( J Ti
* V / ' y / ( a, 91‘MOSBCHove.n |\
■%k /JmCJr/ / J s
,/v’ xV c Y ' J V— p '
: % - t^^jjjjoae-TON'
"'"\ \ <j BAY f |
'»<■».■) v
:-7*°" frs'W/
V ' . UlLLilDC V \n !l:0}\sr HELENA
X'Z’Z+vut* >''{ /
3 £ ro ” ' r 1
( 1 ( ri,L£ If *
, v' */, y \i -, rS.<£r tt > { JrfcB£rHANi* x
y ~‘ M 'j*W I wHSTfwr
/ > Y/ V Y \> n O -*X OCEtjfEliiHjtt AC ±t o iJ’YrjIJg- A
> \‘ i"V r / \ v, /? Yjf TJX <* f
iC- /-y »v' ( X ) y /*«**«*++i - /
>; / /»iv s v ; (‘-r r r> / ,tLA *° j. Ts . Trct,r *AfcT' / y
Brisbane, Logan, West Moreton and North Coast Districts.


jt | V
J & [X^y^
I, | y v ~ I
nonDuoO£/tA V j
TO -/* 1 L S(^1 __ \ f . er I\ e X. [
DUROtiQ \ *' <C I *V.
-nP/fOST-on \ icLOYAvp 1 1 f* St ** m zr^ y \ \ k ) \
North Coast and Burnett Districts.


LUTHER’S BATTLE-HYMN.
1 A mighty Fortress is our God,
A trusty Shield and Weapon ;
Our faithful Helper in all need,
Our Stay, whate’er may happen.
The old evil foe
Now means deadly woe :
Deep guile and great might
Are his dread arms in fight,
On earth is not his equal.
2 With might of ours can nought be done
Soon were our fall effected ;
But for us fights the Valiant One,
Whom God Himself elected.
Ask ye: Who is this ?
Jesus Christ it is.
Of Sabaoth Lord,
And there’s none other God —
He holds the field forever.
3 Though devils all the world should fill,
All eager to devour us ;
We tremble not, we fear no ill,
They shall not overpower us.
This world’s prince may still
Scowl fierce as he will ;
He can harm us none ;
He’s judged—fore’er undone,
One little word can fell hum.
4 The Word shall stand despite all foes,
—No thanks they for it merit —
For God is with us and bestows
His gifts and Holy Spirit.
And take they our life,
Goods, fame, child, and wife :
Though these all be gone,
Yet have our foes not won ;
The kingdom ours remaineth.—Amen.
4
SOLI DEO GLORIA.




r~~ ' ~ ~ ———————
NATIONAL
J_y2.t6 Uu0 LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
31 m 2014 I
—— ? “
1
r_ " “ ~
I


I 3 1 5080^^^^^^^


