









©ne Dun6rei> locate
Wbt Moxp of tfje
iflelbourne ftetoreto Congregation
V**vr* jvnw p'p
1841 ■1941
Sssucb in Commemoration of its Centenary.


brochure
CORRIGENDUM
Page 32, Line 23
Before “RABBINIC SCHOLARSHIP”
insert
“ACHIEVED A CONSIDERABLE REPUTATION FOR”


©nc Ibunbrcb locate
Wst i?>torp of tlje
JHelbourne ftefjreto Congregation
rvnKtr p"p
1841=1941
Ssteuefc in Commemoration of its Centenary.


LIST OF PAST PRESIDENTS
5601-1841 Michael Cashmore.
5605-1844 Asher Hymen Hart.
5607- Solomon Benjamin.
5608- Asher Hymen Hart.
5610- Michael Cashmore.
5611- David Benjamin.
5614- Hon. Edward Cohen.
5615- Michael Cashmore.
5616- Edward Cohen.
5617- Michael Cashmore, J.P.
5619- Elias Ellis.
5620- Hon. Edward Cohen.
5621- Isaac Lyons.
5622- Edward Isaacs.
5624- Henry Horwitz.
5625- Samuel Lazarus.
5626- Hon. Edward Cohen.
5628-1868 Benjamin Benjamin.
5635-1875 Simeon Cohen, J.P.
5637-1876 Lewis Myer Myers.
5639-1879 Alderman Benjamin Benjamin, M.L.C., J.P.
5641-1880 Hon. Nathaniel Levi, J.P,
5643- Mark Marks.
5644- Ephraim Laman Zox, MX.A., J.P,
5646-1885 Hon. Sir Benjamin Benjamin, K.B.
5652-1891 Jacob Abraham Cantor, J.P.
5654- Jacob Bernard Kaufman.
5655- Cr. Edward Hart.
5658-1897 Cr. Jacob Marks.
5662- Leon Crawcour.
5663- Cr. Moses Alexander.
5664- Hon. Nathaniel Levi, M.L.C.
5665- Moss Marks.
5667- Samuel Ackman.
5668- Alderman Jacob Marks, J.P.
5669- Levi Isaacs, J.P,
5672-1911 Phillip Cohen, J.P.
5680- Moses Alexander.
5681- Joseph David Joseph.
5683- Moses Alexander.
5684- Louis S. Benjamin, J.P.
5686-1926 Albert E. Jones, LL.D.
5690- Louis S. Benjamin.
5691- Phillip Cohen, J.P.
5696-1935 Alfred A. Mendoza.
5699-1938 Dr. Jacob Jona, J.P.


MELBOURNE HEBREW CONGREGATION.
(Founded 5601-1841)
5701—1940-41.
Trustees :
Mr. MICHAEL H. COHEN, Mr. MAURICE JOSEPH, Mr. JOSEPH G, BASCH
President:
Mr. ALEC. MASEL, 8.A., LL.B.
Immediate Past President (Ex Officio):
Dr. JACOB JONA, J.P.
Vice-President:
Mr, SAMUEL FRIEZE.
Hon. Treasurer :
Mr, MORRIS J. COHEN, F.CA. (Aust.).
Board 6f Management:
Mr. OSWALD D. BENJAMIN
Mr. WALTER S. JOSEPH
Mr. H. L. GOLDSMITH
Mr. LEONARD M. STANTON
Mr. BENJAMIN DAVIS
Mr. SAMUEL L. CRAWCOUR
Mr. ARTHUR HEYMANSON, 8.A., LL.B
Mr. H. W. CLICK
Hon. Auditors :
Mr. ELEAZER PYKE, Chartered Accountant (Aust.).
Mr. I. S. ALEXANDER, Chartered Accountant (Aust.).
Hon. Solicitor :
Mr. ARTHUR HEYMANSON, 8.A., LL.B.
Hon. Architect:
Mr. JOSEPH PLOTTEL, F.R.V.I.A.
Minister :
Rabbi Dr. H. FREEDMAN, 8.A.,
Assistant Reader and Secretary :
Rabbi L. M. GOLDMAN (On Active Service).
Hon. Secretary.
Mr. SAMUEL L. CRAWCOUR.
Chazan :
Mr, J, KALB.
Shommos :
Mr. ABRAHAM SOLOMON,
Choir Master :
Mr. B. HESELEV.
Clerk :
Mr. I. SCHEINER.
Collector:
Mr. M. SELZER


SPECIAL CENTENARY MESSAGE
from
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE SIR ISAAC ALFRED ISAACS.
P.C, G.C.8., G.C.M.G.
Alec. Masel, Esq., 8.A., LL.B.,
President,
Melbourne Hebrew Congregation,
Toorak Road, South Yarra.
Dear Mr. President,
In offering to the Melbourne Hebrew Congregation my heartfelt con-
gratulations on the completion of its first century of existence, I desire to say
it is most appropriate to mark the occasion by a Thanksgiving Service. It will
be a privilege to my wife\ and myself to join in this commemoration.
Even in ordinary times, the event would find in such a Communal Service
its most suitable expression.
But at this fateful moment, and in this country of human freedom and
God-fearing people, where happily the appalling persecution and oppression
and the unparalleled sufferings of Jews in some other countries are both
unexistent and deplored, we have special reason for rendering our humble
gratitude to God for the blessings that have made possible so noble a retrospect
and so promising a future, and for rededicating our lives and our possessions
to the safety and welfare of our beloved country.
Like all true pioneers, the tiny company of founders of this now great
and flourishing Congregation builded better than they knew. They could not
foresee the momentous, the revolutionary changes in our daily life that have
transformed the world. But they were building on foundations that are im-
perishable and eternal, and that serve all ages of civilized humanity. The bond
that united the pioneers and that formed the foundation of their structure was
the spiritual revelation of the relation of God to mankind vouchsafed to the
Jewish people. This revelation it has been the proud and glorious mission of
Judaism to declare to the world, to preserve faithfully and through incredible
trials for thousands of years, and which she shares in varying degree with her
noble daughters in religion, the Christian and Moslem faiths.
To-day this Congregation stands as one of the firm citadels of that revela-
tion, and with the help of God will so continue far beyond our own power
of vision.
With renewed and warmest congratulations, and all good wishes for
the future.
Yours very sincerely,
ISAAC A. ISAACS.


Wfyt H>torp of tfje
iflelbourne Hereto Congregation
At least one individual of Jewish origin was concerned in the actual
foundation of Victoria. J. Solomon, of Launceston, Van Dieman's Land, was
intimately associated with John Batman in the unauthorised settlement on the
shores of Port Phillip Bay, and, as a member of the Port Phillip Association,
shared in the huge grant of land Batman obtained from the aborigines. His
flocks were pasturing on these shores in 1835, and Batman, on his survey map
of Port Phillip and in his diary under entry dated Ist June, 1835, records :
A “mount where appeared most beautiful plains under it and nearly to the top
clear of timber ... I have named Mount Solomon after Mr. J. Solomon of
Launceston/'
The real beginnings of Jewish settlement in this State date from the year
1839. It was then that the first immigrant ship, the “Hope," arrived from
England, although other settlers had previously come from New South Wales,
South Australia and Van Dieman’s Land. These colonists were not scholarly
Jews but they were sincere in their desire to retain their Jewish loyalties, and
on New Year and the Day of Atonement, Solomon Benjamin and Michael
Cashmore called their brethren of Port Phillip together (though their number
was insufficient even to form a Minyan) in the home of Mr. Lazarus, in Collins
Street, for worship. Their numbers were increased by the arrival of Edward
and Isaac Hart, S. H. Harris and Isaac Lincoln, all of whom were imbued with
a sincere devotion to their faith. On Rosh-Hashonno and Yom Kippor, 1840,
the Jewish residents of the Colony gathered in the store of Solomon Benjamin,
in Collins Street, for public worship, and for the first time on these shores a
Minyan was obtained. Edward Hart, a sweet singer in Israel, “with an apti-
tude for Chasonoth," conducted the services, assisted by Michael Cashmore,
S. H. Harris and Isaac Lincoln. The last mentioned was a draper by occupation
who, with a zealousness for his faith, had learned to perform the rite of circum-
cision and thereby equipped himself to render a signal service to the community.
Life in the infant colony was hard. The rewards from commerce were
slow and poverty was prevalent. The census of the year 1841 showed that the
Jewish Community in all numbered fifty-seven souls, yet it had its social prob-
lems and a “society for the relief of the poor and infirm" was in existence. In
that year there arrived in the colony one who was to organise the life of the
community, and, by example and service, ensure the permanency of a Jewish
Congregational life in Melbourne. This was Asher Hymen Hart. On 12th
September, 1841, he convened a meeting of Jewish residents at the home of
Edward and Isaac Hart, and urged them to dissolve the society for the relief
of the poor and infirm. There was no need, he asserted, for “any formal


pledge" to assist their Jewish brethren, and “any poor Jew from the neighbour-
ing colonies who came to Melbourne would find friends to assist him." His
plea being successful, he then submitted a resolution, which was seconded by
Mr. M. Lazarus, and carried, “that a society be formed and called the Jewish
Congregational Society," and this marked the formal establishment of Jewish
Congregational life in Melbourne. An election was held. By “a majority of
voices" Michael Cashmore was elected President. Solomon Benjamin (Vice-
President), and M. Lazarus, I. Lincoln, Mr. Fonsaker and H. Davis formed the
Committee with L. Davis as Secretary. The Melbourne Hebrew Congregation
had come into being. Asher Hymen Hart became Honorary Reader to the
Society and conducted services. The Rosh-Hashanah and Yom Kippor ser-
vices were held in the Port Phillip Hotel, Flinders Street (then unoccupied),
in 1841, and the attendance numbered twenty-five persons. Edward Hart and
Lewis Nathan, of Hobart Town, assisted Asher Hymen Hart in conducting
the service.
Committee meetings of the Society were held weekly from its inception,
probably with a view to ensuring its continuance, and the first laws were drawn
up to ensure proper management. These provided (inter alia) for fines for non-
attendance at Committee meetings, the contribution by each member of the
Society of at least sixpence weekly, and for the payment of two guineas member-
ship fee by any Jewish resident of Port Phillip, knowing of the Society and not
becoming a member within six months of his arrival. They further provided
that no person was to hold office who was “married or reputed to be married
contrary to the Jewish faith," and that philanthropic relief be granted from the
funds of the Society, one of the laws providing that “should any needy persons
arrive in Melbourne power be given to the Vice-President (Treasurer) to
relieve them to the amount of £l, the same being sanctioned by two other
Committeemen. Should any further relief be necessary a Committee be called
to arrange same."
The first concern of the infant congregation was not the establishment of a
synagogue but provision for a last resting place for their dead in consecrated
ground. A Jewish girl named Davies had been buried in unconsecrated ground
before the arrival of Asher Hymen Hart, and this impelled him to use his efforts
to prevent a similar occurrence. The first action of the Society therefore was to
purchase its own burial ground and, on 10th October, 1841, it authorised the
payment to a Mr. Abrahams of fifteen pounds “as purchase money for half an
acre of land" for the purpose, and resolved that “the ground be securely
enclosed by a close fence consisting of narrow palings having three pails and
a pair of substantial gates."
The first minute book of the Society is then silent until 24th July, 1842,
when it records a General Meeting of the Society held at the Royal Exchange,
twenty persons attending. There the laws of the Society were adopted and
arrangements made to hold the services for the ensuing New Year and Day
of Atonement at the Mechanics’ School of Arts. The meeting also carried


unanimously a resolution moved by Mr. M. Cashmore and seconded by Mr.
S. H. Harris, “that immediate steps be taken for the erection of a modern
building (on the burial ground) 15 feet square, with brick chimney, two ledge
doors with locks and bolt, and one window, the whole to be 8 feet high inde-
pendent of shingle roof/' No steps, however, were taken to carry this into
immediate effect.
The Society identified itself with Jewish affairs outside the district of
Melbourne and also seemed anxious to let the general public know of its
existence. On the death of Chief Rabbi Solomon Herschell a memorial notice
was published in the Melbourne papers. For the erection of the Sydney Syna-
gogue in York Street, in 1842, the members of the Society contributed £22/10/-.
The project for the erection of a building on the burial ground and the
necessity for establishing a Synagogue, however, were kept in the forefront.
Asher Hymen Hart insisted that the funds of the Society be applied only “in
the first place for the establishment of a burial ground . . . and afterwards as
an accumulating fund for the purpose of establishing a Synagogue/'
The burial ground the Society had purchased was found to be unsatis-
factory, and it was decided to request the Crown to grant a piece of ground
in the boundaries of the City of Melbourne as a Jewish cemetery. Through
the efforts of Asher Hymen Hart this was granted, and “one acre of land out
of the unappointed portion of lands for cemeteries of different denominations”
was “given to the members of the Jewish persuasion as a burial ground.” Asher
Hymen Hart, Michael Cashmore and Solomon Benjamin were the trustees of
this grant.
The first burial in this ground was that of Lewis Hart, a brother of Asher
Hymen Hart.
The funds of the Society were used for fencing the new burial ground, a
sum of £24/19/- being expended for that purpose, and it was agreed to call for
tenders to erect a building thereon.
In the same year, 1843, the first public service was held for the Passover
Festival, New Year and Day of Atonement. Services were held in the premises
of Messrs. Harris and Marks in a room appropriated “for that purpose
gratuitously.”
In the same year a move was made towards establishing a Synagogue. At
a meeting held 3rd September, 1843, Mr. Benjamin moved and Mr. Lincoln
seconded a resolution “that application be made to the Colonial Government
for a piece of land to erect a Synagogue thereon,” and Messrs. Edward Hart,
Cashmore and Fonsaker were appointed a Committee to carry this into effect.
However, at the same meeting, on the motion of Mr. Cashmore, this was
rescinded !
The year 1844 marks a turning point in the history of the community.
Asher Hymen Hart had been elected President in October, 1843. The efforts


of the Society hitherto had been directed towards the pious task of proper
provision for the burial of their dead. Now that that had been accomplished
and a burial ground with a suitable building for prayer and the performance of
the last rites to the dead had been erected, provision for a Synagogue became
the necessity. On the 21st January, 1844, it was agreed to discontinue the
name of “Jewish Congregational Society” and resolved that in future it be called
“The Holy Congregation of The Remnant of Israel” P X *1 ** JV “} N W p"p,
the name which the Congregation bears to-day.
It was not until the third year of the Society’s existence that steps were
taken to procure a Sepher-Torah, although Hebrew books had in the past been
obtained from Sydney. Asher Hymen Hart and Michael Cashmore accordingly,
at a quarterly general meeting of the congregation, submitted a resolution “that
the increasing population of the Jewish community in Port Phillip and their
apparent anxiety for the establishment of our Holy Religion on a sure and firm
basis renders it incumbent on the Committee of this Congregation to provide,
among other necessaries, a ’Sepher-Torah’,” and it was agreed that Solomon
Benjamin, through his agent in London, should procure a Sepher-Torah, a limit
of twenty pounds being allowed for its purchase.
In the same month of April an offer was received by the congregation
from the Government of a piece of ground on which to erect a Synagogue
from “Allotments 6 and 7, Block 19 in the Town of Melbourne.” Allotment 6
was “unanimously chosen,” the site in Bourke Street on which the first Mel-
bourne Synagogue was erected. The fee of the land was vested in Asher
Hymen Hart, Solomon Benjamin and Michael Cashmore. A silver snuff box was
presented to Captain Buckley in the name of the congregation “for his efforts
and the anxiety evinced by him in obtaining its grant of land from the
Government.”
In the same year a motion was carried that “no application for conversion
to the Jewish faith be received by this congregation or be entertained in any
shape.” This was the first attempt to restrict intermarriage. Their numbers
were so small and there was a definite shortage of “marriageable females” of
our faith and a grave social problem had to be faced. In 1845, a meeting was
called “to decide as to the propriety of making Geurists” and the whole sub-
ject was referred to the Chief Rabbi in England. All persons of the Jewish
faith desirous of having their wives made Jewish were instructed to make
application to the Honorary Secretary of the Synagogue and to state their
grounds for reference to the Chief Rabbi. The following year the congregation
was in communication with Rabbi Meyers Cohen, of Hobart Town, Van
Dieman’s Land, to ascertain his powers in such cases. This was the social
tragedy facing the infant Jewish communities in the Antipodes—the desire to
retain within the fold male Jewry and the force of circumstances which led to
intermarriage, a problem which became more acute in the coming years, and led
to several crises in the congregation’s life. The first Jewish marriage in Mel-
bourne was celebrated in 1844 by Asher Hymen Hart, acting under authority
from the Colonial Secretary in Sydney.


E A P S 3 I) £ H O U J ,£ ) - 1
| “PP I
V." i a 'w-V' ojwvhmJp
i fp & 5 be a J A ryj I JL*J I
, m*~ ~ * ;
| |
PLACE OF FIRST SERVICES
(Store of D. 6 S. Benjamin —Collins Street)
BOLIRKE STREET SYNAGOGUE




The numbers in the community showed a small increase in these years*
Solomon Benjamin had set apart a special room in his house for worship, and
Asher Hymen Hart conducted regular services there in “an able and systematic
manner.” The New Year and Day of Atonement services, 1845, were con-
ducted with proper ceremonial. Mrs. Asher Hymen Hart had presented to the
congregation a white cover for the Sepher Torah, a silver pointer, a white
curtain for the Ark, and a white silk cover for the Reading Desk. Services
were held also for the Feast of Tabernacles, and the Committee assumed the
power to appoint a Chosan Torah and Chosan Berishis, and to fine any person
refusing the honour the sum of two guineas.
By 1846 the total Jewish population in the Port Phillip Settlement
amounted to 117, and of this number 92 lived in Melbourne and the surround-
ing districts. Commerce was their main calling. As drapers, clothiers, store-
keepers, auctioneers and hotelkeepers they obtained a goodly livelihood, while
the few who were tradesmen earned fair wages.
In March, 1846, a Committee was appointed to obtain a Reader, and in
November of that year an application was received from Hobart Town from
a person to act as Reader and Schochet, but the Committee decided the
applicant was unsuitable.
In December of that year Asher Hymen Hart wrote to the Committee
“setting forth the necessity he felt of resigning the office of Honorary Reader
to the congregation owing to the non-attendance of a sufficient number of
members to make Minyan.” “I will not any longer,” he wrote, “(to be plain)
submit to the insult of attending the Synagogue on Sabbaths and Holy Days
without the means of celebrating public worship.” A motion to discontinue
public worship until New Year next (1847) was negatived, and with a laudable
desire to retain the services of Mr. Hart and in compliment to his sincerity,
“the following members then voluntarily agreed to attend the Synagogue every
Friday night and Saturday morning or subject themselves to a fine of five
shillings on each occasion of their absence unless a substitute be provided or
sufficient cause be shown to the President, N, Nathan, M. S. Davis, I. Marks,
S., M. and D. Benjamin and S. H. Harris.”
The period of service of the Honorary Reader was, however, nearing its
close. Asher Hymen Hart had, by his continuance in office as Reader from the
foundation of the Society, established the religious life of Melbourne. The
erection of a Synagogue and the appointment of an official to act as Reader and
teacher to the children would ensure its permanence and stability.
A meeting in June, 1847, decided “that a sub-committee be appointed to
make all necessary enquiries relative to the obtaining of a place of public wor-
ship,” and on 4th July a report was submitted recommending that the building
on Mr. N. Nathan’s property (in Little Collins Street) “be rebuilt at an
expense of £76,” but the meeting decided that any expense incurred should be
“on the property belonging to the congregation in Bourke Street.”


Accordingly, on the 11th of July, the Building Committee presented its
report. A plan had been drawn up by Mr. Laing, the architect, and he esti-
mated the cost of the building at £250. The lowest tender was however £435
“and this was considered by the Committee as being much beyond our means
or intentions." They decided to wait on Mr. Webb, the builder, to reduce the
amount and so leave them “in a position to have a suitable building of 20 x 30 feet
17 feet high, with an outer porch, for £270 (supposing Mr. Webb will make no
reductions to this amount). The Committee, in order to be well prepared, have
added £BO for fittings, privy, a little fencing, etc. —this, it must be obvious, is
allowing more than it is likely will be required."
For financing the building it was ascertained that £IOO was in the hands
of the Treasurer; there were good debts amounting to £SO due to the congre-
gation, and a further £SO was expected from offerings on New Year and Yom
Kippor. By 12th December the Committee was able to report the building was
“nigh completion" and asked that they “be empowered to negotiate a loan of
not more than £2OO for a period not exceeding two years for the purpose of
completing the Synagogue." The Sub-Committee appointed in 1846 to procure
a Reader was “requested to proceed forthwith with the object for which they
were appointed," and in October, 1847, “ a distinct offer of an engagement" to
Mr. Lindenthal, of Sydney and Goulburn, was authorised. It was proposed “to
give him £75 per year and the support of the congregation generally in a school
which it was expected he would open for the instruction of Jewish children in
Hebrew and English." Mr. Lindenthal accepted the engagement but relin-
quished £lO from his salary “rather than be compelled to read the Torah."
In January, 1848, Mr. Lindenthal was appointed Chazan at a salary of £65
per year with a distinct understanding that he alone was “to have the privilege of
teaching Hebrew which, with his superior abilities to teach English and other
languages also, would enable him to establish a good and it is hoped a profitable
school." On the recommendation of the Shommos of the Sydney Synagogue
and Mr. Rintel, its schoolmaster, “as a useful man in any capacity the school
might require him," Mr. Isaacs was appointed Shommos and to read the Torah
at a salary of £35 a year.
It was decided that an additional two rooms be built adjoining the Syna-
gogue “to serve as a committee room and residence for some person who should
have charge of the building."
By February, 1848, the Synagogue was completed and a general meeting
held for the allotment of seats. A resolution was passed “that the thanks of the
congregation are due to Mr. A. H. Hart, President, for his valuable past ser-
vices as Honorary Reader and also for his zealous and indefatigable exertions
in assisting to establish this congregation and promoting all matters connected
with our Holy Religion." In June a copy of the Chief Rabbi's Code was
received and the congregation decided to adopt “so much of those laws as were
applicable to our circumstances." A very interesting record of the congrega-
tion is contained in a letter written by Asher Hymen Hart to the Chief Rabbi


dated 27th June, 1848. In it he writes, “there have been registered in our books,
besides three marriages, nearly forty births and six deaths (two adults and four
children). Of the births, about half were boys, and you will be pleased to
know that all are circumcised by a self-taught, tho’ skilful operator, a resident
member.” The reference is, of course, to Isaac Lazarus Lincoln. Referring to
Mr. Lindenthal’s appointment, he continues: “Within the last few months we
have engaged a young man to teach Hebrew and English to the children who
are mostly very young. The congregation provide him a residence and school
room and allow him an annual sum to assist in the service of the Synagogue.
His pupils number seventeen, and in the course of another year, if he remains
among us, there will be an addition of at least six male and female pupils/’
Lindenthal’s appointment was terminated in September, 1848. He was dis-
missed from office and notice thereof published in the newspapers in the
Colony. He was also removed “from the premises he occupied belonging to the
congregation.” Mr. I. H. Anderson was appointed to the office of Reader for
a period of three months” with an addition of ten pounds to his salary * for the
purpose of enabling him to employ a man to clean and trim and light the lamps
and clean the Synagogue.” A certificate was presented to Mr. I. L. Lincoln
“setting forth his having practised as a Mohel for seven years to the entire
satisfaction of the community.”
In January, 1849, Moses Rintel of Sydney was appointed Reader to the
congregation, a position he was to hold until his resignation in 1857. Moses
Rintel was of Polish birth, but he had been concerned in revolutionary activities
and fled from his native land to London. There he became a Schochet, and
later came to New South Wales where he was engaged in teaching. His
appointment ensured a fuller congregational life. On the 30th July, 1850, Mr.
Ebden, the member for Port Phillip in the New South Wales Legislative
Council, in which Victoria was represented, as it had not been separated from
New South Wales, presented a petition from certain members of the Jewish
persuasion resident in the City of Melbourne, Port Phillip, praying aid for the
completion of their Synagogue and minister’s residence. The Legislative
Council agreed to place a sum “not exceeding Five hundred Pounds in the Sup-
plementary Estimates for the purpose of enabling the Jewish persuasion to com-
plete their Synagogue and minister’s dwelling in the City of Melbourne.” On
the 13th August, Governor Fitzroy informed the Council “he did not consider
himself at liberty to comply with the present application without previously
obtaining the sanction of Her Majesty’s Government.” The Jewish community
at once took up the challenge. State aid had been given to other denominations
and they felt they should likewise be entitled to share in the public revenue
appropriated for religious establishments. Asher Hymen Hart, as President of
the Synagogue, by advertisement in the newspapers, convened a meeting of
members of the congregation and others of the Hebrew faith, and the same was
held at the Synagogue on 25th August. Three resolutions unanimously carried
at that meeting showed the spirit of these Jewish pioneers. There was no


cringing to authority and no niggardly demand for privileges* They decided
that this meeting views with sorrow and disappointment the refusal of His
Excellency the Governor to place on the estimates the small sum of £SOO as
recommended in the address of the Legislative Council towards the completion
of the Synagogue and minister's dwelling in the City of Melbourne/' —“That
the Jews of Melbourne, considering themselves equally loyal subjects of the
British Crown with the rest of their fellow colonists and contributing alike with
them towards the support of the State, believe themselves justly entitled to a
share of the revenue raised in this colony to assist them in maintaining their
religious establishment," and “that as the limited space of our present unfinished
Synagogue does not and cannot afford accommodation to the many individuals
professing the Hebrew faith arriving in the colony, a petition embodying the
foregoing be prepared and forwarded to the Rt. Honorable the Secretary of
State for the Colonies praying the attention of His Lordship to the urgency of
our claim and the injustice of withholding the same from a large body
of deserving and influential colonists."
Solomon Benjamin, Asher Hymen Hart, H. I. Hart, and Edward Cohen
were appointed a Committee to prepare the petition, and it was also resolved
to address the Board of Deputies of British Jews, soliciting their interest in the
cause at the Colonial Office. This was the real beginnings of the demand by
the Jewish residents to receive State aid for their religious establishments? a
demand which was persisted in until 1857 when they were allowed to participate
in the grant. Until the year 1869, when State aid to religious establishments
was finally abolished by the Victorian Legislature, the Jewish congregation
shared in the grant.
The year 1851 is the turning point in the story of Jewish life as well as in
the general life of the colony. It was the year of great gold discovery in
Victoria.
The Jewish population in that year had numbered in all 364, yet by 1854
their numbers had increased to 1,547, three years later to 2,181, and at the end
of the decade to 2,903.
This sudden increase in numbers augured well for the future of Jewish life
in the colony. Hitherto the main stream of immigration had been from the other
colonies and a few immigrants from the homeland, but the stories of the for-
tunes to be obtained in Victoria, where golden nuggets could be had almost for
the stooping, were told and re-told in all the lands of the Old and New World.
From Germany, France, the Netherlands, Russia and America, Jewish
migrants came to these shores and they brought with them some of the fires from
the ancestral hearths of Judaism in the Old World, to give a new warmth and
a fresh impulse to the life of the Anglo-Jewish pioneers already settled in Port
Phillip.
In the great events which lead to gold discovery here, it was fitting that
the Jewish community should take its part. The whole commercial structure of


\ / Cx' / ■(„' 'f '
\ v*. j
/ jSKt 4(9
I 0 w wwm
Mr. ASHER HYMEN HART
(President 1844-1846; 1847-1850)
Photograph reproduced by permission of Trustees
of National Art Gallery, Melbourne.
Mr. MICHAEL CASIIMORE. J.P.
(President 1841-4; 1850-1; 1854-5; 1857-9)
Mr. SOLOMON BENJAMIN
(President 1846-7)




Port Phillip was threatened by depopulation when the goldfields of Ophir and
Bathurst in New South Wales revealed their golden splendour* No one desired
to glean a livelihood from commerce or remain an employee when gold in New
South Wales was to be obtained by merely turning over the earth with a spade*
Only the discovery of gold in Victoria could avert disaster from the colony*
Asher Hymen Hart drew up the requisition to the Mayor of Melbourne
and obtained the signatures of the influential Jewish merchants and other
citizens that led to the formation of the Gold Committee of which he became
Honorary Secretary. A reward of £2OO was offered by the Committee to any
person who discovered a gold mine in Victoria, and the search for gold began
in earnest. Asher Hymen Hart, with the Commissioner for Crown lands,
visited the field where gold was first discovered and soon Mts. Alexander and
Buninyong, Ballarat, and Sandhurst revealed their golden treasure.
Truly of Asher Hymen Hart has it been said that “he was the originator
of the means which led to the discovery of gold in Victoria."
A new era had opened for Victoria and for the Melbourne Hebrew
Congregation.
In December, 1851, David Benjamin laid before the congregation the draft
of a petition for State aid and it was placed in the hands of Mr. Westgarth for
presentation. A sturdy independence marked its tone. It claimed “only
as a just and in accordance with the liberal views of the age a proportionate
allowance from the Public Revenue to which in common with others who are
the recipients of the said support your petitioners also contribute/' But no aid
was forthcoming.
The effects of gold discovery on Jewish life was seen in the year 1852.
In February it was resolved “That this congregation do send to Sydney for 100
lbs. weight of Passover cakes to be applied as the President and Treasurer may
hereafter direct/' and “that Mr. M. Lazarus," who had been appointed collector
of the congregation at a commission of 5 per cent., “and the Reverend Mr. Rintel
be requested to send to Sydney for Motzos for those parties who may apply to
them." Indicative of the improvements in finances is a comparison of balance
sheets presented September, 1851, showing “a balance due to the Treasurer of
£B4/13/3," and the half-yearly balance sheet in March, 1852, “which shewed a
balance in the hands of the Treasurer of £IOO/10/3." The quarterly meeting
held 28th March, 1852, faced the difficulties created by the influx of population.
Asher Hymen Hart remarked: “As our congregation is increasing daily it is
rendered necessary that an additional room be procured for an additional place
of worship on the next New Year and Day of Atonement as our Synagogue
will not contain the quantity of people who will doubtless be in Melbourne at
that period. The present flourishing state of the funds and the probability of
increasing annual accession will quite justify the congregation in making
these alterations." He also proposed, “That a fund be established and an
account book be kept expressly for the purpose to be called ‘the Building Fund/


the same to be allowed to accumulate for the space of two years from the ensu-
ing Passover and whenever the amount in the hands of the Treasurer shall have
reached £2O it shall be placed in the bank to the credit of the ‘Synagogue
Accumulating Fund’.”
The meeting decided that the Legislative Assembly be approached again
“to have so much of Sir Richard Bourke’s Church Act repealed as tends to
exclude the members of our faith from its participation, and that immediately
after this initiatory step be completed further application be made to the
Council to grant us a sum of money of not less than £I,OOO towards enlarging
and completing or rebuilding the present Synagogue and minister’s dwelling,
furthermore that they be pleased to allow an annual stipend for the support of
our minister,” Mr, Westgarth raised the matter on behalf of the congregation
on the 10th September, 1852, but the motion was lost by one vote. The cost of
living had increased greatly. The premises attached to the Synagogue where
“Rev. Rintel lived had become too small for his increasing family and it was
agreed to enlarge and alter the present bedroom , , . and to build a kitchen.”
His salary was raised from £l5O to £250 per annum.
A presentation to the Synagogue by Henry Wolff of Geelong of a Yod
“manufactured of silver and Victorian gold” was made in August, 1852. The
increase in numbers had led to the duties of the Honorary Secretary becoming
more onerous. The office always had been hard to fill. A law imposing a fine
of £2/2/- on any person who resigned from that office had not solved the
problem, and in September, 1852, at the annual meeting “which was the most
numerous yet collected,” the employment of a paid secretary at £SO per annum
was authorised, and in November of that year Elias Israel was appointed to
that office. In that month, too, the Committee met “to take into consideration
the propriety of presenting a testimonial to Mr. S. Benjamin, Treasurer, upon
his leaving the colony.” A special general meeting was called and it was
resolved to “publicly thank him for his long-continued zeal on behalf of the well-
being of his Jewish brethren in this colony and of the Cause of Judaism gener-
ally during his residence amongst us”—a fitting tribute to one of the first pioneers
and founders of the community.
In January, 1853, the Rev. Rintel and Mr. Lazarus were again “requested
to procure Motzos from Sydney for those who desire them,” while to relieve the
distress among the Jewish poor (for not all had won wealth from the gold dis-
covery), “the Committee was empowered to procure Motzos for the poor in
such quantities as they may deem necessary,”
Notice of motion was given by A. H. Hart “that immediate steps be taken
for procuring the necessary funds for erecting an extensive building as a place
of worship to meet the growing wants of our co-religionists in order that it may
no longer be a reflection on this important congregation that she is so far behind
her neighbours of other denominations.”


A meeting of members of the Hebrew faith, some not members of the con-
gregation, was convened on Sunday, 20th February, 1853, in response to a
requisition signed by twenty-six Jews. The requisitionists were anxious that
the congregation should be enabled to obtain Kosher meat, ritual baths, and
attendants on the sick and dead, and in the event of the congregation sanction-
ing same the requisitionists pledged themselves to aid in carrying them out.
A. I. Cohen moved, and Mark Jacobson seconded a resolution that a
committee of five gentlemen be appointed (with power to add to their number)
to enquire into the probability of procuring and supplying the Jews of Mel-
bourne with Kosher meat at all times when necessary," and a further resolution
“that a society for attending to the last rites of the dead be forthwith estab-
lished ♦ ♦ . empowered by the sanction of the Synagogue to frame laws and do
all necessary work connected with such institutions and the funds be provided
by the Synagogue for the purpose" was also carried. The roll of membership
of the congregation had increased but the Synagogue accommodation was in-
adequate for the number. Arrangements were made for services to be provided
for the new members on Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, and they were given
all the privileges of membership with the exception of seats in the now too-small
Synagogue. A special general meeting on the 20th February, 1853 unanimously
carried a resolution proposed by A. H. Hart “that in consequence of the extra-
ordinary influx of Jewish emigrants into the colony of Victoria and Melbourne
in particular, the congregation of the first Jewish Synagogue have deemed it
necessary to call a meeting of all Jewish residents for the purpose of consult-
ing with them as to the most advisable way of setting about procuring the means
for building a Synagogue on the ground belonging to the present congregation
sufficiently large to meet the expected demands."
Two meetings of the community were held and it was resolved to open a
subscription for a building fund and “to collect subscriptions among members
of the Jewish faith."
A further meeting was held on 27th March, 1853, and the Building Com-
mittee, comprising D. Benjamin, A. H. Hart, Henry Harris, I. Pulver, H.
Abrahams and L. M. Myers were empowered “to procure plans and specifica-
tions and tenders and other preliminaries for the purpose of enlarging the
Synagogue as required."
The Committee exerted themselves in this project, and in July were able to
report that “the City of Melbourne, as far as was practicable, was canvassed
for subscriptions, and they had received promises of about £1,500" which
included “£IOO previously subscribed by Mr. Solomon Benjamin prior to his
departure from the colony." The Committee reported that the lowest tender
for extension to the existing building by reason of “the very high price of
labour and materials" amounted to £B,OOO.
They decided, therefore to have other plans prepared “to provide the
skeleton of a building to be finished at a future time," at a cost of £4,680 which.


after taking into account the money in hand, left ‘a balance of £3,180 to be
provided for/'
It was decided that the names of subscribers to the Building Fund “be
advertised twice in each week for six months in the 'Argus’ and 'Morning
Herald’ papers’’ and with undiminished optimism “that application be made to
the Legislative Council for aid towards building a Synagogue/’
Overflow services that year were held in the store of David Benjamin.
On the 23rd February, 1853, Mr. A. Barnard was elected Secretary at a
salary of £IOO per annum. The engagement was for three months in the first
instance, but on 9th June of the same year he was re-elected at a salary of £125
per annum. At the same time as he was first elected, Mr. Solomon resigned his
position as Shomer (presumably of the meat).
The continuous growth of the community doubtlessly brought with it new
religious problems, and in June, 1853, Rev. Rintel requested the setting up of a
Beth Din. It was decided that he, together with Mr. I. Pulver, should prepare
a letter on the subject which, after having been approved by the Board of Man-
agement, would be submitted to the Chief Rabbi, Dr. N. Adler. (It appears that
at this stage the Chief Rabbi withheld his permission, possibly on the ground
that the community was too small, or, perhaps, the proposed personnel of the
Beth Din did not meet with his approval. Be that as it may, the present local
Beth Din did not come into existence until 5626 —1866, some thirteen years
later.)
Even in these days of rapid transport, when distance has been annihilated,
Australia is in great measure cut off from Europe. In those distant days its
remoteness, of course, was enormously enhanced. Nevertheless, it was not for-
gotten. Sir Moses Montefiore, with his all-embracing love for his fellow Jews,
no matter how far away, offered the community a Sepher Torah. It was intro-
duced into the Synagogue on Sunday, 4th September. We can easily imagine
the joy and pride in which it was received, and it is still one of the most
treasured possessions of the congregation.
It is, perhaps, worth while to note the financial position of the congregation
at this time. The Audit Report for the period January to October, 1853 shows
an income of £1,298/3/5 as against an expenditure of £585/l/l| (the |d. is
very intriguing —one wonders what it represented). Being a treasurer in those
days must have been a sinecure. However, that happy state of affairs, for the
Treasurer, at least, was not long to continue. The need for a new Synagogue
was imperative, and its erection would abruptly bring to an end these days of
affluence, to be replaced by a period of hard struggling to make ends meet.
Early in the following year the Government was asked for permission to
lease out part of the Synagogue ground at the rear in Little Bourke Street. Such
permission was necessary since the land was a Crown grant. At the same time
the title deeds of the Synagogue were deposited with Mr. M. Benjamin.


\ •j^^^BB- ,v -.■ ■•, -■'' j
x • -^V
/ \
/ \
/ \
Hon. Sir BENJAMIN BENJAMIN, K.B.
(President 1868-75; 1879-80; 1885-91)
Hon. EDWARD COHEN, M.L.A.
(President 1854; 1855-7; 1860-1; 1866-8)
Hon. NATHANIEL LEVI, M.L.C.
(President 1880-2; 1904-5)




In March of 1854, a special meeting was called to consider a communi-
cation from the Chief Rabbi, in which he complained of the insufficient supply
of Kosher meat in Melbourne, and, after pointing out the important place held
by the dietary laws in Judaism, offered to supply an assistant Shochet to Rev,
Rintcl, if the latter could not cope with the work himself. Were space to per-
mit, it would be most interesting to quote the letter sent in reply in extenso. It
repudiates the suggestion that the officers are insensible to the importance of
the matter as an ex parte statement, and goes on to inform him that a committee
for the supply of Kosher meat had been set up some two years previously.
This committee had, unfortunately, met with many insurmountable obstacles,
among which are detailed “the difficulty of obtaining a slaughterhouse as well
as a butcher to supply us regularly, the inadequacy of funds ~ ♦ the unsettled
state of the members of the community , , , the exorbitant charges of labour
and necessaries as well as the difficulty of procuring the former at any price,”
However, many of those difficulties, as well as others, had by now been over-
come, and David Benjamin, the former President, would confer with the Chief
Rabbi on his arrival in England, whither he was shortly proceeding, on the
appointing of a suitable person. This meeting decided to appoint a Shochet at
the salary of £250 per annum; subsequently Mr. I. Pulver was so appointed on
16th October, 1854,
A little later a letter was received from the Chief Rabbi asking for subscrip-
tions towards establishing a Jews’ college for the training of ministers. The
state of the funds, however, did not permit of this request being complied with.
For, by now, the halcyon days noted earlier were a thing of the past. The
community was expanding, and this meant new commitments. On 21st May,
1854, the Cemetery Committee recommended the acceptance of a tender of
£6OO for building a “Metaher” house, whilst on 9th July it was reported that
the contracts for the new Synagogue now amounted to £7,500. The new Syna-
gogue was, indeed, nearing its completion, and it was possible to arrange for its
temporary opening for service on the Holydays of that year, services being now
held in both Synagogues.
A curious entry in the minutes reads that on 2nd April, 1854, it was resolved
“that the attendance of the clock-maker be discontinued at the expiration of
this year.” One cannot help wondering what were his functions.
The Sephardi clement (i.e., Spanish and Portuguese Jews) must have been
quite considerable in those days, for on 23rd July, 1854, we find a Mr, Pirani
asking for facilities to hold separate services on the Holydays in accordance with
their own particular rite (minhag). Incidentally, this is the first mention made
of them. Their request was granted in this and many subsequent years, with
the proviso that none but Spanish and Portuguese Jews would be permitted to
attend them.
The new Metaher house was consecrated on the 6th of August, 1854, It
was decided that the old one, which was situated on a site where now stands
the Victoria Market, should be offered as a residence to a respectable Jew, at


a rental of 1/- per month, on condition that any corpse brought from outside
Melbourne might be kept there until interment.
The early records of the Synagogue illumine conditions abroad too, as
well as the relationship between Jew and Gentile in Australia itself, A letter
having appeared in "The Times" on the distress amongst the Jews of Jerusalem,
the President of the congregation, Michael Cashmore, on his own authority,
convened a meeting of the Jews of Victoria, through the medium of an adver-
tisement in the "Argus," for the purpose of raising a relief fund. The Com-
mittee readily endorsed his action; a provisional committee was formed, as a
result of which the very substantial sum of £2,000 was forwarded to Sir Moses
Montefiore for distribution. It is particularly pleasing to note that many non-
Jews subscribed, which made it possible to send a further sum soon after.
Australia had thus, at this early stage of its history, already practically
demonstrated its tolerance and broadminded humanity, of which it was to give
many more proofs in subsequent years. To this day, when we are fighting for
freedom against the Nazi doctrine of enslavement of "inferior" peoples, these
characteristics surely rank among its crowning glories. The covering letter
which accompanied the remittance, ventured to express the hope that a scheme
for permanent relief would be adopted. The young men, "without neglecting
their duty to God," might engage in "agricultural pursuits, which would enable
them to provide, if not all their requirements, at least a good portion thereof"
(letter dated 6th Tishri, 5615). If only these pioneers of the Melbourne Jewish
community could have anticipated what the Chalutzim, the pioneers of Eretz
Israel, were destined to achieve in that sphere years later under the impetus of
the Zionist Movement!
In 1853, a "Jewish Emigration Society" had been founded in England with
Nathaniel Montefiore as its President. Its object was "to encourage emigration
among single females" as there was an appalling shortage of young marriage-
able women in the colonies. Possibly this society had its counterpart in a com-
plementary body in Australia for the reception, etc., of the new arrivals, for
from an instruction to Rev. Rintel concerning the disposal of money collected
in the Synagogue on Tisha Be'Ab we learn that as far back as 1854 there was
an "Emigrants' Aid Society"—a forerunner of the "Australian Jewish Welfare
Society" of today.
On 3rd September, 1854, Mr. M. Solomon was appointed Beadle.
The new Synagogue was proceeding apace. It was consecrated on the
Sunday preceding Passover of 5615 (1855), and opened for service on the first
day of Passover. The seats in this Synagogue were allotted by ballot; the privi-
leged members balloted first and the non-privileged members a week later.
This method was subsequently challenged, but a special sub-committee
endorsed it. Yet, in spite of this system of two classes, the congregation was
moving in the direction of greater democracy. As a body of revised laws was
about to be submitted, the fee for privileged membership was reduced on the


25th March, 1855, from five guineas to two, so that a larger number would be
able to vote on them*
The paramount importance of the rising generation was not lost sight of,
and on 15th July, 1855, the Committee was instructed to investigate and report
on the “best means of establishing a proper scheme for educating the rising
generation of this community.” Its report was submitted at the end of the year.
Several schemes had been examined and rejected, and it finally recommended
that “the National Model and Training Schools” —the precursors of the present
State school—offered the best possibilities, and it proposed that a Jewish teacher
should be sent there for the purpose of imparting religious instruction. In con-
formity with this, Rev. Rintel was requested to give religious instruction in those
schools. In the meanwhile a general meeting had decided by 19 votes against
18 to levy an annual impost of 15/- for educational purposes. Nevertheless
the Committee subsequently resolved not to implement this, and a special
general meeting held on 13th April, 1856, approved the Committee's action.
It might be observed that in a letter to the “Jewish Chronicle and Hebrew
Observer,” dated 1856, a correspondent writes: “I ought to mention that we
have at present two Jewish schools in Melbourne. One is conducted by Mr.
Solomon of Sydney who has about 20 scholars; the other by Mr. Myers of Hobart
Town, who has just started. Both gentlemen are said to be very competent.”
It is not out of place to add that a Jewish school was inaugurated under the
“common school” system, which combined a religious and secular education.
It was in existence in 1862, in which year it had 70 pupils. £lO5/4/- was paid
in school fees, whilst a Government grant of £3lO was received. This State
subsidy probably ended in 1872.
An interesting fact emerges from one of the very early minutes (3rd
February, 1856). It appears that when a man made application to be married,
his brother had to sign an undertaking to give halizah should the necessity arise.
Later in that year (1856) it was decided to use the Great Synagogue only
for the High Holydays (“Great Synagogue” is the phrase recorded in the
minutes. It is not clear whether it was intended that this should be the name
of the new Synagogue, or whether its use was inadvertent only). In spite of
this decision an application was made by several members for the use of the
small Synagogue for the Holydays, so that additional people could be called up
to the Torah. This application, however, was refused. Again Mr. Pirani was
granted permission to hold a separate service in his own home for the Sephar-
dim. Curiously enough, it appears that this time the application was in respect
of Yom Kippur only, although in previous years Rosh Hashanah too had been
included.
The financial difficulties of the Synagogue is a constantly recurring theme,
and on 9th November, 1856, it was resolved to ask the Government for a grant
in order to liquidate the debts on the new building. A letter was accordingly
sent to the Chief Secretary, requesting that the sum of £2,500 be placed in the
estimates for the coming year for that purpose, and stating that this had been


approved in principle in February of that year when the application had first
been made. (Later a grant was made, but by that time there were several other
claimants too, and the sum received by this congregation was probably less
than anticipated.)
In February, 1857, a complaint was made against the minister (Rev. Rintel)
and the Secretary on account of their absence from a mid-week service. Rev.
Rintel resigned and immediately set about creating another Synagogue, which
was the genesis of the present East Melbourne Hebrew Congregation. (It was
originally called the “Mikveh Yisroel Melbourne Hebrew Congregation.” Its
present name, “The East Melbourne Hebrew Congregation,” is used for the first
time in connection with a marriage on 24th May, I860.) Needless to say, rela-
tions between the Synagogue and its ex-minister (as well as the new congrega-
tion) were strained for a time, yet it is satisfactory to note that this was but
short-lived, for in the following year. Rev. Rintel was permitted to assist at a mar-
riage ceremony in the Synagogue, whilst a proposal emanating from the new
sister congregation in 1860, seeking to promote harmony and co-operation, was
warmly welcomed. Practical proof of this new spirit of friendliness was shown
in the letter of thanks to Rev. Rintel for writing the Hebrew required in the
new Synagogue? whilst, at the same time, it was resolved to present the tablets
on which was written the Prayer for the Royal Family to the East Melbourne
congregation (18th August, 1861). A year earlier the congregation had sought
and obtained Rev. Rintel's permission, as Chairman of the Shechita Board, to
appoint a certain Mr. Goldrich as a temporary Shochet. It is also pleasing
to remember that in 1863 this congregation acceded to the request of the East
Melbourne Synagogue for the use of its Torah Scrolls at its consecration.
But all this has been somewhat anticipating events. On the resignation of
Rev. Rintel, Emanuel B. Myers was elected Reader pro tern (10th May, 1857).
In this connection it is curious to read that the house adjoining the Synagogue,
which had been occupied by Rev. Rintel, was now offered to Mr. Myers at a
rental of 1/- per week ! Very soon after his election Mr. Myers proposed the
formation of a choir, but for the time being this had to be shelved, owing to
lack of funds.
About this time an inventory was taken of the contents of the iron safe.
An item of interest was the “Declaration Book of the Hebrew Faith,” but one
can only speculate what this was.
Although, as stated above, the new Synagogue was consecrated on the
Sunday preceding the Passover of 5615 (1855), it must at that time have been
still far from complete. A correspondent writes in 1857 to “The Jewish
Chronicle and Observer,” which has already been mentioned: “Our
present Synagogue is a fine large building, but internally is unfinished, the ceil-
ing and walls being hung with calico.” The ceiling and walls were not allowed
to remain in that state, and when the interior, too, was completed, the building
was re-consecrated on Thursday, 2nd September, 1858. A choir, conducted by


- '/ • ■ _-'
x
I I
Mi*
I
Rev. MOSES RINTEL
(First Minister of Congregation)
Rabbi ISRAEL BRODIE, 8.A., B.Litt.
Rabbi Dr. JOSEPH ABRAHAMS, M.A.
Rabbi Dr. H. FREEDMAN, B.A.




S. Nelson, assisted at the consecration service* Even then, however, there was
much left undone, as references occur later to tenders for the completion of the
building* A few days later a certain Mr* Solomon offered to erect a permanent
Succah at his own expense* The new Synagogue now having been consecrated,
permission was granted to Mr. Mendoza to use the small Synagogue for a
Sephardi service on Yom Kippur.
On 31st August, 1859, the Secretary, Mr. Phillips, who had been appointed
some time earlier, resigned. An offer by Mr. Myers to act as secretary until
the appointment of a successor was accepted, and in the following year he was
permanently appointed to this position. It was also decided to amalgamate the
offices of Reader and Secretary. Similarly, when Mr. Pulver resigned his post
as Shochet a little later, it was decided to combine the offices of Shochet and
Second Reader. Mr. Pulver was subsequendy allowed to withdraw his resig-
nation, and he was then given the dual position.
In October, 1859, the Denominational School Board informed Mr. I. Hart
that a sum of money had been appropriated for Jewish schools, this being the
first appropriation to be made for that purpose. A sub-committee, consisting of
Messrs. Silva, Solomon and Horwitz, was appointed to wait upon Mr. Hart and
obtain all possible information about this grant.
Now that the new Synagogue was permanently in use, a further step in
education was taken by granting the use of the small Synagogue for a Jewish
school, and Dr. Iffla and Messrs. N. C. Pirani and I. Pulver were appointed,
in May, 1860, a local Board of Education to look after its interests. A little
later there is a reference to an annual rental of £IOO for the school. The
reference is not quite clear, but presumably it means that the school was to pay
out of its revenues £IOO per annum to the Synagogue.
As the community grew, its members began moving further afield, and this
led to a demand for a branch Synagogue in St. Kilda. The demand was met by
the appointment of a sub-committee to investigate the matter.
On 3rd February, 1861, congratulations were extended to Mr. Nathaniel
Levi on his election as a member of the Victorian Parliament. He was the
first Jew to enjoy that honour, but the years both before and after this show
the remarkable part played by Jews in public fife and the great number who
were rewarded for their services by lofty and important positions in the com-
munity. A few months later congratulations were similarly extended to Edward
Cohen, the then President of the Synagogue, on his election to the Legislative
Assembly.
In the outside world, far beyond the seas, the faint breath of the Religio-
National revival, which was to find its ultimate expression in Pinsker's “Auto-
emancipation,^” Herzks “Judenstaat,” and modern Zionism, was already stir-
ring. (“Rome and Jerusalem/" by Moses Hess, a Zionist classic, was published
in 1862.) It is gratifying that even in those early days the Melbourne com-


munity, remote though it was from the centres where these ideals and aspira-
tions were gradually taking shape, nevertheless took an active part
in the work. Towards the end of 1861 a certain Rabbi Hyam
Zvi Schneersohn arrived in Australia in order to raise a special
fund for the purchase of land on Mount Zion. A special committee meeting,
held on 26th November, 1861, took the initiative of convening a public meeting
of the Jews of Victoria. The mission was approved, and a sub-committee was
set up to further its objects. But, even in those days, there was overlapping,
for a couple of months later a certain Rabbi Jacob Levi Saphir arrived in order
to collect for the poor in Palestine. The Committee decided that, while sympa-
thising, it could not render any active assistance as it would clash with the
fund already established.
On the 9th June, 1862, a tablet in honour of David Benjamin was conse-
crated, This tablet was removed when the Bourke Street building was demol-
ished and is now in the present building in Toorak Road.
Reference has already been made to the migration to St. Kilda. During
the High Holydays of 5622 (1862) a “minyan” was held at St, Kilda, but
apparently without the requisite appurtenances, and the Synagogue wrote to
the people concerned that had application been made, they would have been
pleased to supply them with these, such as the Shofar, etc. A few months later,
early in 1863, a motion was carried to establish a branch Synagogue for the
residents of St. Kilda, but before implementing same their opinion was to be
ascertained. Apparently they were not favourable to the project.
To go back a little, in 1862 Mr. Edward Cohen was elected Mayor of
Melbourne, and the Synagogue presented him with a special congratulatory
address.
On 19th June, 1864, Rev. E. M. Myers resigned his post as minister. In
the following year a certain H. I. Marks was appointed, but held office only
for one year. He was succeeded by Rev. F. G. Ornstein, in 1866, who was
minister until 30th September, 1874, when he, too, resigned. In the same year
Sol. Phillips was temporarily appointed to the post, whilst Raphael Benjamin
was appointed Second Reader. The latter resigned in 1879. Two years pre-
viously, on 27th May, 1877, Dr. Dattner Jacobsohn had been appointed minister,
in which post he continued until his resignation on 26th August, 1882.
Several other events of this period stand out and are worthy of recording.
On sth May, 1871, a “Joint Committee on General Purposes” of the Melbourne
and East Melbourne congregations was set up with Mr. (later Sir) Benjamin
Benjamin as President, and Rev. M. Rintel as Honorary Secretary. This has
every appearance of being a forerunner to the present Advisory Board.
The forty years’ existence of the congregation gave it an historical con-
sciousness, and a special sub-committee was appointed to investigate the
foundation and origins of the congregation. It presented its report on 16th
April, 1878.


Ever conscious of its duty as loyal citizens, on 11th May, the congregation
resolved to present an Address of Welcome to the sons of H.H. The Prince of
Wales, i.e., Albert and George (the latter, of course, was later to become King
George V.), who were due to arrive in Australia*
Demands for modernisation of the service are not new* A proposal was
brought forward early in 1882 to introduce female voices into the choir, but
the Chief Rabbi vetoed it as being contrary to Jewish law*
At this stage it may be convenient to retrace our steps and give some
further details about the building itself* On 19th June, 1874, a general meeting
of members resolved to erect a new Synagogue in Lonsdale Street as being
more central! Presumably that means at the top end of Lonsdale Street, near
Parliament Place. However, the scheme did not materialise, although there is
no reference in the minutes to a rescinding of the resolution, or to any other
reason why the new building was not erected. In 1877, the Bourke Street
building was renovated and some alterations and additions were made, at a
cost of £1,600, whilst a little later it is reported that a gallery was to be erected
outside the rear of the Synagogue* These alterations had necessitated the tem-
porary closing of the Synagogue, and on 26th August, 1877, it was re-opened
and re-consecrated*
On 22nd July, 1883, Rabbi Dr. Joseph Abrahams was appointed minister*
His brother was the famous Israel Abrahams, Reader in Semitics in the Univer-
sity of Cambridge and author of (among many other works) “J ewis h Life in the
Middle Ages,” which is now a classic. Dr. Abrahams himself had had a bril-
liant scholastic career. He obtained the B.A* at the University of London and
his M.A* and Ph.D. at Leipzig. He pursued his Rabbinical studies in Hilder-
sheimer's Seminary in Germany, where he obtained the Rabbinical Diploma. It
says much for his scholarship and reputation that when the Sydney Beth Din
was to be formed in 1886, the Chief Rabbi requested that Dr* Abrahams might
be permitted by the congregation to act as Assessor on it; although the request
had to be refused, since it was likely to interfere with the discharge of his other
duties* He was thus the first minister of the congregation to be educated in
England and his appointment marked a definite step forward in its progress*
One month earlier, on 21st May, Mr. S. M* Solomon had been appointed
Secretary* This began an association which lasted for many years, during
which he progressively assumed more and more important posts.
Once again the building was in need of repairs and these were effected,
and on 30th August, 1885, it was re-consecrated, the officiating clergy being
Dr* Abrahams, Rev* A* B. Davis, of Sydney, and Rev* E* Blaubaum, the then
minister of the St* Kilda Hebrew Congregation.
On 17th October, 1886, Michael Cashmore passed away. He had been
the first President of the congregation, in the founding of which he had played
a prominent part, and had worthily served the community and the cause of
Judaism throughout his life.


Two other matters must now engage our attention* The first is that of the
Melbourne Hebrew School. The passing of the Education Act of 1872, making
education "free, secular and compulsory’' in Government schools, resulted in
the discontinuance of the subsidy, and it was realised that a denominational
school could “only be maintained at the cost of some self-sacrifice on the part
of the community." The Hon. Edward Cohen realised that in education Jewish
children “required more than the State could give, and if we thought they
ought to have it we must provide it ourselves." He wished to see “a free school
establishment." An incentive to continue the Jewish day school was found by
reason of the fact that the text books used in the State schools contained
religious dogmas “inimical to the Jewish children attending such schools."
Many Jewish parents accordingly paid fees to the Melbourne Hebrew School
so that their children would receive a proper Hebrew and secular education,
while children of parents who could not afford to pay fees had the same
remitted. On 2nd August, 1879, a meeting of members decided that henceforth
it should be conducted under separate management. On 23rd May, 1880, it was
voted a subsidy of £250. It was, in fact, doing excellent work, as was attested
by Mr. (now Sir) Isaac A. Isaacs, who examined the pupils on 27th August,
1882, and by other Government examiners. Mr. Joel Fredman, who was already
a teacher, was appointed headmaster on 31st January, 1884. It must be borne
in mind that this was a general secular school, besides being an institution for
religious instruction, and it may be presumed that this involved a heavy drain
on the Synagogue finances, as education can never be self-supporting. Accord-
ingly, a special meeting was held in June, 1884, to consider a resolution that the
school should confine itself to religious instruction only and discontinue secular
education. The resolution was not carried on this occasion. A year later,
however, it was carried by 30 votes to 25, and on 14th March, 1886, it was
resolved that it should take effect as from Ist January, 1887. Strenuous efforts
were still being made to preserve the original character of the school and on
19th September, 1886, Mr. P. Blashki first moved that the resolution be
expunged altogether; and then, with permission, altered it to an amendment
that it should not take effect until Ist January, 1890. Both these efforts for a
reprieve failed, and the original resolution was confirmed and acted upon.
On 27th May, 1888, a conference of the three congregations—Melbourne,
East Melbourne and St. Kilda—unanimously resolved that it was desirable that
united action be taken for the improvement of Hebrew and religious education
and a sub-committee was appointed to work out a practical scheme. This body
recommended the setting-up of a United Jewish Education Board and sub-
mitted a definite scheme on 12th July, 1888. The St. Kilda Synagogue, how-
ever, rejected these recommendations and the scheme lapsed. Nevertheless on
31st March, 1889, another attempt was made, and it was decided to convene
a general meeting of the Jewish community for the purpose of establishing a
general Jewish Education Board.
The question of secular education now came to the fore again. At a
special committee meeting held on sth June, 1892, it was unanimously resolved


it* 1
JP - / Iri'S'SS
,; w I-
§
/mmmm
/■Hi. *s> %k
Mr. ALEC. MASEL, 8.A., LL.B.
(President at Centenary)
Dr. JACOB JONA, J.P.
(Immediate Past President)
Mr. PHILLIP COHEN, J.P.
(President 1911-19; 1930-35)




that it was desirable to rescind the resolution limiting the scope of the
Melbourne Hebrew School. A scheme for the re-introduction of secular edu-
cation was submitted to the members on 19th June and adopted, and the school
reopened for secular and religious education on 4th August, 1892. Neverthe-
less, its day was coming to an end. The precarious state of the funds of the
congregation and the need for the most stringent economy finally brought
about the closing of the school. In January, 1895, the teaching staff “was re-
engaged on monthly engagements.” In February, the teaching staff was given
notice that their services would not be required after the 31st March, 1895,
and the Jewish denominational school system which had played so great a part
in the training of the Jewish children of Melbourne came to an end.
The second matter to be dealt with as a consecutive whole is the question
of the amalgamation of the Melbourne and East Melbourne congregations.
The latter, as we have seen, had been founded in 1857. Several years later
the need for unity made itself felt, and amalgamation was mooted for the first
time. On 19th December, 1869, a sub-committee was appointed to confer with
the East Melbourne Hebrew Congregation for the joint erection of a Synagogue
for both congregations. The negotiations broke down on 3rd August, 1870, on
the question whether Rev. M. Rintel should be styled “Minister” or “Chazan.”
Three years later, on 7th December, 1873, a special general meeting carried a
motion by 52 votes to 28 “that in the opinion of this meeting it is desirable that
the two metropolitan congregations should amalgamate.” Only a month later,
on 4th January, 1874, an adjourned general meeting carried a motion that amal-
gamation was impracticable. This did not deter the Boards of Management
of the two Synagogues, and they jointly approved certain concrete proposals
for amalgamation. These, too, were rejected at a special meeting of the
members by 58 to 41 on 21st February, 1875, and for a while the scheme was
dropped. Emboldened possibly by the narrowing majority against it, on 7th
July, 1878, East Melbourne asked for the appointment of a sub-committee to
discuss the question. Again, however, concrete proposals were rejected by a
general meeting (25th August, 1878).
We can now return to general matters. A letter of condolence was
sent in August, 1884, to Her Majesty Queen Victoria on the death of her son,
Prince Leopold.
On 30th June, 1884, the Centenary of Sir Moses Montefiore was
discussed and it was decided to approach all other congregations in the
southern hemisphere for their co-operation in founding a “Sir Moses Monte-
fiore Scholarship” in some college or university. This proposal, however, was
turned down, for a conference, held on 26th January, 1885, decided to erect
a “Sir Moses Montefiore Alms House” and to raise an endowment fund for its
upkeep. In conjunction with the other congregations of Victoria a congratula-
tory cablegram was sent to Sir Moses Montefiore in October, 1884, whilst in
the same month a special centenary service in his honour was held.


In the early part of 1885 the choir of the Synagogue won several prizes
in the first musical competition held under the auspices of the Tonic Sol Fa
Association of Victoria.
On 29th June, 1885, it was decided to send congratulatory addresses to
Sir Nathaniel Meyer Rothschild and Baron Henry de Worms, on their elevation
to the peerage. Various other congregations of Victoria co-operated and the
presentation of the addresses was made in London on 18th February, 1886,
by David Benjamin, Solomon Benjamin and Dr, Herman Adler (representing
the Chief Rabbi), on behalf of the Jewish community of Victoria.
Sir Moses Montefiore died on 25th July, 1885, after a long life tirelessly
expended on behalf of his co-religionists. His death evoked universal sorrow,
and a special memorial service was held in conjunction with the East Melbourne
and St. Kilda congregations. As the Synagogue was undergoing repairs, the
service was held in the East Melbourne Synagogue.
A special service, in honour of the jubilee of Queen Victoria's accession
to the throne, was held in the Synagogue on Saturday, 18th June, 1887.
Mr. Joel Fredman resigned his position of choirmaster in May, 1888, in
order to take up a position with St. Kilda Hebrew Congregation, and in August
of the same year he was succeeded by Mr. Alfred Mendoza who was later to
become President. In the meantime, the choir had won the first prize in a com-
petition at the Juvenile Industries Exhibition.
Mr. Morris Myer, the Hebrew headmaster of the Melbourne Hebrew
School, had to retire owing to ill-health in the latter half of 1888. He was
succeeded in rapid succession by Rev. J. Friedlander and then by Mr. L.
Mendelssohn. The latter resigned on 30th January, 1890, and his work was
temporarily entrusted to Mr. J. M. Solomons, who worked to such good effect
that he was made permanent headmaster in June of that year. Some three
months later Dr. Abrahams recommended that he should be recognised as
Reserve Reader, which recommendation was adopted.
It is interesting to note that in September, 1888, a letter was received from
the Hebrew congregation of Adelaide proposing the formation of an Australasian
Synod to deal with all religious questions that might arise. Apparently the pro-
posal came to nothing.
The Melbourne Hebrew Congregation expressed the spirit of the older
colonists and the English emigrants. With rapid increases in population, it
naturally followed that new Synagogues would come into being, as even the
then spacious Synagogue in Bourke Street could not accommodate all. The
East Melbourne Hebrew Congregation was an offshoot of the parent congre-
gation. It came into being when Moses Rintel and a number of members
seceded in 1857. Its first Synagogue was erected at the corner of Little Lons-
dale and Stephen (Exhibition) Streets, Melbourne, and later the present Syna-
gogue erected in Albert Street, East Melbourne, became the centre mainly of


European Jewry* The St. Kilda Hebrew Congregation, reflecting the move-
ment of the Jewish population from the Metropolis, was founded in 1872, while
a number of “Minyonim”—independent gatherings for worship in private
dwellings—flourished; the origins of the Carlton United Hebrew Congregation
and the Woolf Davis Chevra.
During these crowded years in the life of the community and the swarm-
ing period in immigration, the Melbourne Hebrew Congregation retained its
leadership; due largely to certain of its members occupying high political posi-
tions in the life of the general community and so reflecting credit on the whole
Jewish people. The Honourable Edward Cohen, a Minister of the Crown and
Mayor of Melbourne, was a shining example of Jewish citizenship, holding
office as President and Treasurer of the congregation, and, despite a crowded
life in municipal and political affairs, remained ever active in the service of the
congregation. His successor to his constituency in Parliament, Ephraim Lamen
Zox, one of the most lovable of men, whose portly figure adorned with white
waistcoat —the older members of the community can recall with wistful remem-
brance —an authority on hospital and charitable systems, was also President of
the congregation. Sir Benjamin Benjamin, K. 8., the first Jew and first citizen
to receive a knighthood in Victoria, Mayor of Melbourne, and member of the
Legislative Council, a scion of the family of the Synagogue’s founders, was
many times President of the congregation. He died on 7th March, 1905.
The Honourable Nathaniel Levi, the first Jew to be elected to the Vic-
torian Parliament, also graced the office of President. Isaac Alfred Isaacs, on
the threshold of a great and brilliant career, which was to be crowned by his
appointment as first Australian-born Governor-General, adorned the member-
ship roll, and on matters on which the Committee of the congregation required
legal advice, his services were readily available. It is pleasing to record that
he acted as an examiner at the school conducted by the congregation and was
first President of the United Jewish Education Board.
The “nineties” were a critical time in the congregation’s history. The
Jewish population, which, since the discovery of the goldfields with its resultant
effects in the new avenues open for commerce and manufacture, had increased
greatly in numbers, declined. In 1871 it numbered 3,571, by 1881 it had in-
creased to 4,330, in 1891 to 6,459, but by 1901 the numbers were reduced to
5,907. The decline in population was due to the acute depression following the
land boom, and many had departed to New South Wales and even further
afield to Western Australia where the discovery of the goldfields had
inaugurated a new era in the life of that colony and led to the establishment
of another strong Jewish community in the Antipodes.
The last decade of the nineteenth century and the opening years of this
century were very full ones in the history of the congregation. One feature that
marked this period was a desire for some sort of Federation or Union of the
congregations in Melbourne. “Federation was in the air”—in the Australian
colonies as a political movement, and it reacted on the life of the Jewish com-


munity. There was discord between the congregations and there were problems
of common interest, such as “Shechita” Kosher food supply, Jewish education,
and the ever-recurring problem of proselytes, that cried out for common action.
Meetings of delegates from the Melbourne, East Melbourne and St. Kilda
Hebrew congregations, held in February, 1898, carried a resolution “that a Board
of Delegates consisting of two members from each of the three congregations
be formed for the purpose of adopting joint action in connection with such
communal matters as may be agreed upon . . , with power to extend with the
approval of the executives of the three congregations the scope of the Board
from time to time.” The Honourable Nathaniel Levi desired to go even fur-
ther and recommended “the union of the three congregations” and the creation
of “a united Synagogue.” But the time was not ripe for Federation or Union,
and the most that was achieved was a form of loose consultation.
The reform movement in Judaism was reflected in a movement in the con-
gregation for the introduction of a choir of male and female voices and an organ
for the Synagogue service. In December, 1894, a resolution that “with a view
to enhancing the solemnity of the service in the Synagogue it is desirable to have
male and female voices in the choir” was carried, and in January, 1895, W. J.
Turner was appointed choirmaster. A further move to “reform” the service
was taken in April, 1896, when a special general meeting was called “to discuss
as to whether the organ was to be used in the Synagogue on the first day of
Passover.” The feeling in respect of the proposal was considerable and “the
press” was excluded from the meeting. The meeting decided “that organ music
be an accompaniment to the Synagogue choir on all occasions subject to the
consent of the Rev. Dr. Abrahams thereon.” The Rabbi declined his consent
and the matter was referred to the Chief Rabbi, who upheld the refusal of the
Rev. Dr. Abrahams and organ music was not introduced into the service.
Other events chronicled in the story of the congregation during these years
were the visit of Rev. Van Staveren, of New Zealand, in May, 1895, to Mel-
bourne, and he preached in the Synagogue. In August of that year a letter
was received from E. N. Marks, then of Coolgardie, Western Australia, a
former member of the congregation, who had left Melbourne to take part in the
“gold rush” in the West, “requesting the loan of a Sipher Torah for use dur-
ing the ensuing New Year holidays and for which he would guarantee to take
every care of and return.” The request was complied with, on condition that
all offerings were made for the benefit of the congregation and an insurance of
twenty pounds effected on the Sipher Torah which was sent. The sum of six
guineas was later received from the offerings.
The United Jewish Education Board, which was formed to provide Jewish
education following the decline in the numbers of pupils attending the Jewish
day school, made frequent requests to the congregation for subsidies for its
work. In December, 1895, it asked for a subsidy of fifty pounds for a year,
otherwise it would “close the school,” and the congregation, which was finan-
cially embarrassed agreed to give twenty-five pounds a year. A subsidy for


PRESENT SYNAGOGUE— TOORAK ROAD




Jewish education has been voted continuously since that year. In March, 1896,
Rev. Dr. Abrahams offered to present a new pulpit as “when preaching he
could not be seen by the ladies sitting on the side of the gallery next to the
pulpit and complaints had been made to him about it.” A new pulpit was erected
and the cost thereof was paid by the congregation.
On the 23rd April an “In Memoriam" service for Baron Hirsch, the
founder of the Jewish colony in the Argentine, was held. An effort to liquidate
the heavy liabilities of the congregation was made in this year by an enthusi-
astic committee which held a “Bazaar and Art Union" in the Melbourne Ex-
hibition. It commenced on Derby Night and lasted for three weeks, and prizes
in gold were offered. The affair, however, proved a financial failure and the
Committee was called upon “to take steps to pay the creditors." An address
was presented in December, 1896, to F. D. Moccatta, that inspiring figure in
British Jewry, on the occasion of his seventieth birthday.
The year 1897 was the year of the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria,
and the congregation took the lead in drawing up a loyal address, in association
with the sister congregations, for presentation to Her Majesty. As part of the
Jubilee celebrations a Sacred Concert was held in the Melbourne Town Hall
in which the Synagogue choir took part, and Rev. Dr. Abrahams, in the
address he delivered on that occasion, revealed himself as one of the foremost
preachers in the colony, gaining an oratorical triumph and enhancing greatly
the name of the Jewish community. The proceeds of the evening were given
to the proposed “Queen's Memorial Fever Hospital." Mrs. Mark Capua pre-
sented six mantles for the Sephorim to the congregation, “four of silk velvet
and two of white satin, in celebration of the Diamond Jubilee of the reign of
Queen Victoria."
Abraham Solomon was elected Shammos in this year and still continues
to serve the congregation.
The state of the Synagogue finances became more critical. The Bank of
New South Wales, which held a mortgage over the Synagogue property,
served notice. Frantic at the prospect, the Committee sent a cable to the Chief
Rabbi: “Received notice mortgagee to pay off. Strongly urge Nathaniel Levi to
use strenuous endeavours to save Synagogue disaster." A Mortgage Redemp-
tion Fund was opened and, despite the depression, the members responded
freely, and from England, whither many of the older members of the congre-
gation had returned, contributions were received through Nathaniel Levi then
on a visit to the homeland.
The achievement of Federation of the Australian colonies was marked by
the Commonwealth celebrations in Sydney between 28th December, 1900 and
Bth January, 1901, and Rabbi Dr. Abrahams was invited by the Government of
New South Wales as “a guest." Inspired by the Federal idea, the Sydney
Hebrew Congregation suggested periodical conferences of ministers and lay
representatives of the Hebrew congregations in Australia. This Synagogue


notified that it was “willing to fall in with their view/' but once again the pro-
posal remained only an expression.
An address from the Jewish community was presented to the first Governor-
General, the Earl of Hopetoun, on the 11th April, 1901, and an address for
presentation to His Royal Highness the Duke of York was prepared.
The year 1902 saw the congregation faced with the necessity of carrying
out urgent repairs to the Synagogue buildings. “The present dilapidated
appearance of the outside of our Synagogue and the surrounding buildings is
a standing disgrace to our community,” the report declared. The interior also
needed renovation and repair, and it was decided also to extend the ladies
gallery “as a means of considerably augmenting the annual income.” The
means to carry out the necessary alterations and repairs were not readily forth-
coming and the same were deferred. In 1905 they were effected, and while
the work of renovation and repair was being carried out, services were held
in the old Synagogue at the rear of Bourke Street. On the 24th September,
1905, when the work had been accomplished, the Synagogue was crowded for
the re-consecration service.
The year 1903 was a year of crisis in the life of the congregation. The
proselyte question caused burning resentment and sincere efforts were made
to arrive at a solution which would be satisfactory to the ministers and the
community. Matters reached a climax when in September, 1903, Rabbi Dr.
Abrahams resigned as minister to the congregation. A deputation from the
Board of Management induced him to withdraw same and he remained as
minister of the congregation until his retirement in 1919, when the honour of
Rabbi Emeritus of the congregation was granted him.
The Hon. Nathaniel Levi was elected President in 1904 and Mr. Henry
Cohen, the Treasurer, deputised for him in the Synagogue, Mr. Levi explain-
ing “that owing to his not riding on the Sabbath he would not be present in
the Melbourne Synagogue.” During his presidency a scheme for union was
again brought to the fore and almost succeeded but it was not to be. He advo-
cated also the re-establishment of a Jewish day school “where English and
Hebrew could be taught during the ordinary school hours similar to what the
congregation had in former years, and which was a credit to the community.”
The Jewish day school was by then a memory, and the congregation did not
desire its re-establishment.
The last twenty-five years in the congregation's story are not chronicled
in detail here. The events concerned are well known to the members and it is
considered sufficient to make broad reference to them. New figures loom in
the congregation's life. Phillip Cohen, J.P., who before and during the trying
years of the Great War, when so many members of the families of the congre-
gation offered themselves willingly in the cause of freedom, stands out prom-
inently. From 1911 to 1919 he remained in office as President and guided the
destinies of the congregation during those years. He continued also the tradi-


tion of service to the Jewish as well as the general community which has been
so characteristic of the congregation's presidents. In the Masonic world he
occupied the highest offices and as a distinguished public servant —
Secretary of Mines —he earned a reputation for fearless integrity that
won the esteem and respect of his ministerial superiors. In the closing
years of his life he again held the office of President for five successive
years, and at the time of his death at the grand old age of 85 years, he
was Vice-President of the congregation, his immediate successor in that office
being Mr. Alec Masel, 8.A., LL.B., who now holds office as President. Two
institutions in Melbourne, the United Jewish Education Board and the Melbourne
United Shechita Board, of which Phillip Cohen was President for so many
years, remain monuments to his memory. Dr. Albert Edward Jones, a Mel-
bourne barrister and solicitor, held office as Treasurer successively from 1916
to 1926 (a record in the congregation's history), in which year he became
President. Louis S. Benjamin, son of Solomon Benjamin, the first Treasurer of
the congregation and the first to organise a Jewish service in Melbourne in the
year 1839, first assumed office as President in 1923, and it was fitting that when
the present Synagogue was erected he should have held that office, directly
linking in family connection the Synagogue in Bourke Street with our present
building in Toorak Road. For patriotic services during the Great War he
brought the highest esteem on the Jewish name and upheld the family tradition
of service to the general community. Of all the past presidents of the congre-
gation there are to-day only two survivors, Jacob B. Kauffman, President in
the year 1893 and now resident in the United States, and Dr. Jacob Jona, J.P.
(Immediate Past President), who now holds the office of Chairman of the Vic-
torian Jewish Advisory Board. The Chief Rabbi (Dr. Hertz) paid an official
visit to Melbourne in 1921 and attended service at the Bourke Street Synagogue.
The retirement from office of Rabbi Dr. Joseph Abrahams in 1919 created
a vacancy in the congregation which was not filled until the year 1923, when
Rabbi Israel Brodie, 8.A., B.Litt. (Oxon), received the “call" to the ministry
here. With an intensely Jewish outlook, imbued with the ideals of the Zionist
movement and actively promulgating them, he interpreted Jewish teaching and
conducted the service with song and speech in a manner that attracted to the
Synagogue the newer migrants who came from the countries of Europe where
the Jews were still oppressed and their rights under the “minority treaties"
merely expressions. The centre of gravity of the Jewish population had also
moved and no longer was the Synagogue in Bourke Street regarded as central.
Increasing traffic dangers and the increase and change in distribution of popu-
lation, had, it was considered, rendered the situation in Bourke Street no longer
desirable. In 1927 the site was sold to the Equity Trustees Company and the
last service in the Bourke Street Synagogue was conducted by the Emeritus
Rabbi Dr. Abrahams in April, 1929. The work of demolition com-
menced the following day and on the site of the first Melbourne Synagogue
a modem office building has arisen. On the vacant land at the rear of


an old outbuilding there remains affixed a small sign, “Common School No.
180.”
Until the present Synagogue was consecrated, services were again con-
ducted in the old Synagogue at the rear of the demolished building which had
been used for the school and later as a gymnasium by Jewish clubs.
On the 25th May, 1930, in the presence of a brilliant and distinguished
gathering of Australian Jewry and with fitting ceremony and solemnity, in which
Jewish ministers from every Victorian congregation and from South Australia
and New South Wales took part, the Synagogue was consecrated; Rabbi Brodie
preaching the sermon. In 1932, Rev. L. M. Goldman succeeded the Rev. S. M.
Solomon (who had given nearly 50 years' service to the congregation) as
Second Reader and Secretary, and to-day he is with many sons of the members
of this congregation and the flower of Australian Jewry, serving as Chaplain
in the Middle East.
In 1930, the Ladies' Auxiliary was formed, with Mrs. C. Mayer as its first
President. The Auxiliary has rendered and continues to render invaluable ser-
vice to the congregation.
During Rabbi Brodie's ministry, he founded the Junior Melbourne Hebrew
Society which, to-day, remains an important adjunct to the Synagogue's
activities.
The resignation of Rabbi Brodie in 1937 brought to the leadership of the
congregation our present minister, Rabbi Dr. H. Freedman, 8.A., who had
Rabbinic Scholarship.
The desire for unity among the congregations has gained clearer expres-
sion in these latter years, and to-day the Jewish Advisory Board is fulfilling
to a large extent the movement for collaboration in the community which this
congregation has so continuously sponsored.
The story of the Melbourne Hebrew Congregation has been recounted in
these pages; rising from very small beginnings to its present high position in
the life of Australian Jewry. The laymen who, without spiritual leadership or
guidance but possessed of intense Jewish consciousness, founded and nurtured
the congregation have long gone to their last resting places. The spiritual
leaders who followed received the mantle from them and with their co-opera-
tion raised the level of the congregation, and Victorian Jewry became one of
the chief outposts of Judaism in the Empire. The congregation now attains its
hundredth year of existence, in a year of trial and tribulation for Jewry and
the civilised world. It can look back with just pride on the history of those
eventful years. The descendants of the pioneers can well cherish the memory
of their forebears, who well and solidly built edifices to Judaism which time and
change have erased, and raised imperishable monuments to the Jewish name.
Loyalty and service to the State and loyalty to their faith were the watch-
words of the founders of the congregation. May “The Holy Congregation of
a Remnant of Israel” PXI 'JV")MtP p”p in its year of centenary witness
the coming of the union of Israel and all mankind in universal brotherhood.


[This Brochure is issued by authority of the
Board of Management of the Melbourne Hebrew
Congregation, and was compiled by Rabbi Dr. H.
Freedman, 8.A., and Mr. A, Newton Super, M.A.,
LL.B., who were assisted by Messrs. Oswald D.
Benjamin and Arthur Heymanson, 8.A., LL.B.]


Printed by FREEMAN PRESS,
181 Lygon St., Bast Brunswick.
Phone: FW 2931 •








