

One Hundred Years of
Christian Worship
in
kenton Valley
ÆNON CHAPEL
180-1949


Kenton Valley Baptist Church
Ænon Chapel


■ HE Kenton Valley Baptist Church or "the Religious
Church of Trinitarian Protestants known by the
Denomination of Particular Baptists at Kenton Valley,”
to give it its full title as entered in the records of the
Registrar of Companies in South Australia was formed in the
year of our Lord 1849 with an initial membership of eight persons.
Although the early records contain no reference to the fact, it
is generally known that this little cause was born as a result of a
theological controversy arising in the church formed a few years
previously at Gumeracha. We would say "a case of religious in-
tolerance” but e’er we say it let us remember that "tolerance” is
easiest where men value truth too lightly to be capable of feeling
intensely concerning it; and let us give thanks to God that although
in the throes of discord and strife the Valley Church was born in
His grace it has lived to bear its witness for a century of time;
proving a blessing to many and giving to the cause of Christ a
number of fine Christian men and women.
EARLY PIONEERS
It is not possible in the limited space of this little book to refer
to all who have through 100 years been associated with the work
but a few words must be said concerning those who were its
pioneers. Their human leader was Rev. J. P. Buttfield, an ex-
missionary recently arrived in this State and settled at Gumeracha
after having served in the British Honduras. Rev. Buttfield was
also pioneer minister in the causes later established at Uley and
Port Lincoln, both of which prospered under his able leadership
but closed in subsequent years. (The cause at Port Lincoln was
re-opened later). When dissension arose at Gumeracha he, with a
number of followers, commenced holding services in a private
building (now unfortunately demolished) some distance from
where the church now stands. These folk banded themselves to-
gether in an organized body and so the church was formed under
his able leadership but closed in subsequent years. Associated with
him in his work here was his devoted wife Hannah Buttfield, a
granddaughter of the world-renowned William Carey, pioneer of
British missionary work in India. These two remained in the work
at Kenton Valley but a short while, removing in August, 1851, to
Uley, near Gawler, where Mrs. Buttfield was called to her great
reward.
Foremost among those other six who comprised the original
band was William Wire. His period of service was not long as death
claimed him on January 1, 1861, at the early age of 49; and, after
less than ten years of loyal service, he was laid to rest in the little
church yard. However, in that short time he won he esteem of his


fellow members and appears next to their minister, to have been
their recognized leader. He was appointed first treasurer of the
church in 1854 and was one of the two first deacons appointed in
1858. Descendants of his have for many years been actively associ-
ated with the work at Gumeracha.
Also worthy of special mention was James Levett, although he
apparently left the district shortly after the church was formed
and is reported at a very early date to have joined the Wesleyans
at Chain of Ponds. His interest, however, continued to find prac-
tical expression for many years and his ability as a lay preacher
and his devotion to the cause brought him frequently to Kenton
Valley. He rendered conspicuous service to the church in connec-
tion with its incorporation in 1891, but more concerning that will
appear later in this booklet.
Thomas Sinkinson although in some ways the "stormy petrel”
of this little band, remained actively in the work for a longer
period than any of his fellows; rendering more than forty years of
unbroken service till his connection ceased in 1890. He was twice
elected to the office of deacon. He deserves distinction in that he
alone of the pioneers has descendants bearing his name still carry-
ing on the work a grandson, Mr. W. T. Sinkinson, a great grand-
son, Mr. R. M. Sinkinson, and two great granddaughters, Mesdames
D. J. Cornish and A. W. Lee being in membership —at the
present time.
Flora Wise, wife of William Wise; Susannah Morris and
Janet Gosden, completed the original membership.
In those days, even more than in our own, the woman’s part
did not afford her a great deal of the limelight. The names of
Sisters Wise and Morris are, however, frequently mentioned in the
church records as messengers appointed to interview persons of
their own sex applying for church membership. Mrs. Morris was
the wife of a very early settler who took up land at Retreat Valley
and later resided near Hartley Vale; later occupying the posi-
tion of clerk of the Talunga District Council. He was for some
time organist at Kenton Valley Church and is credited with having
made from local timber the seats which are still in use there.
Concerning Janet Gosden very little is known. The records
simply stating that she joined another Christian association in 1850
or 1851. It would seem probable that she was a member of a family
of the same name well known in Kenton Valley in those days, but
even that cannot be known for certain.


EARLY ACHIEVEMENTS
This little band of stout-hearted men and women undertook
all legal responsibility in regard to the support of a minister and
the erection of a suitable place of worship. However, the follow-
ing year — 1850 saw the erection of their chapel a solidly
built stone edifice still in use to-day as a vestry. The name Tnon
Chapel and the date 1850, are engraved in the stone by the side
of the doorway.
Before a decade had passed a seven-roomed manse had been
built and entirely paid for; and six years later —in 1865 the
present church a fine lofty structure with floor space, if fully used,
sufficient to seat 200 persons was also erected, and by March, 1869,
twenty years after the cause was founded, the debt on the entire
property was reduced to £3O a truly remarkable achievement.
The new building was first used for Divine Worship on December
31, 1865.
Needless to say a great deal of assistance was given by men
and women whose names do not appear on the church roll. John
Moore and Joseph Morris, although not members, were trustees of
the church property; the former being also a Sunday school
teacher. Joseph Morris was treasurer of the chapel building fund.
Other contributions by him have been mentioned previously. Two
members were appointed each quarter to tour the district collecting
contributions to the minister’s salary, and the size of the church
building where, we are told, seating accommodation was often fully
utilized, bears eloquent testimony to the fact that support was
moral as well as financial.
The land on which the church and manse stand was made
available by the South Australian Company and a copy is still in
existence of a trust deed, dated February 19, 1853, whereby the said
land was transferred by the company to Messrs. Joseph Morris,
William Wise, John Moore, Thomas Sinkinson and James Levett,
as trustees for the Kenton Valley Church. There is no mention of
any payment having been made and from what is known of the
company’s generosity in its dealings with other churches, it would
appear beyond doubt that the transfer was a free gift.
The pulpit Bible, still in use to-day and in an excellent state of
preservation despite its great age, bears the inscription:
THIS BIBLE
presented to the Baptist congregation under the pastoral
care of Rev. John P. Buttfield, worshiping at Kenton
Valley, Gummaracca,
BY JOSEPH BOUCH.


Who this Joseph Bouch was whether a local resident or a
distant friend —no one appears to know. Unfortunately the in-
scription bears no date but the reference to Rev. Buttfield would
seem to indicate that the presentation was made not later than 1851.
REV. H. L. TUCK’S MINISTRY
For the success of those early days credit in no small measure
is due to Rev. H. L. Tuck, who, with his wife, Harriet, arrived from
England and took over the work in succession to Rev. Buttfield in
August, 1851. His work commenced happily with the first real in-
crease in membership. One member, Mrs. Lydia Green, had been
added during 1850 and one lost; but in December, 1851, there were
received into membership from other churches two families
George Usher, bootmaker and local postmaster, with his wife,
Susannah; and John, Arthur and William Saunders, with their
sister, Elizabeth (Mrs. F. Hannaford). Miss Saunders and Mr.
Hannaford were the first couple to be married in Ttnon —in
1851. William and Arthur Saunders are reported as having be-
come prominent workers in other spheres during later years.
In 1853 Mr. and Mrs. F. Bond, Mrs. Sinkinson (wife of one
of the foundation members) and also Miss Sarah Tuck (later Mrs.
Pitt) identified themselves with the work. The Tuck family proved
a tower of strength in those early days. Miss Sarah, recently
arrived from England, accompanied by two of her sisters, was a
sister to Rev. H. L. Tuck. Misses Sophy and Elizabeth Tuck (the
sisters mentioned) joined the church at Kenton Valley in No-
vember, 1855. Yet another sister. Miss Harriet Tuck, arrived from
the Old Country in 1867 and was received into membership in
November of that year. She left the district in 1868 but apparently
returned shortly afterwards and joined her sisters in their occupa-
tion as mistresses of the local school. All were excellent church
workers, as was Mr. Edward Tuck, a brother who settled at Mt.
Torrens, five miles away; and, despite the distance to be travelled
by slow means of transport over rough roads, threw himself whole-
heartedly into the work He and his wife became members in 1865.
Highly esteemed by the brethren he was elected deacon in 1871 and
when he resigned that office in 1874 because he "felt the distance
of his residence from the chapel too great for him to be able to
discharge his duties conscientiously,” his resignation was accepted
with reluctance.
The ministry of Rev. Tuck extended over a period of almost
seventeen years, during which time, including his own and that of
Mrs. Tuck, fifty names were added to the church roll. Outstand-
ing among them were; Elizabeth Wise (later Mrs. W. Giddings);
William Wise, Junr., one of the greatest supporters TEnon Chapel


has ever had; John Wise, who removed to Hallet in 1880 and
rendered faithful service in the North; Miss Ann Teakle (Mrs.
W. Wise); Mr. Robert Redman, a contractor, who for a number of
years owned the property now belonging to Mr. A. W. Lee, and
who in 1868 was transferred to a church at Port Elliot, and his
wife, Jane; also Mrs. Moore, wife of John Moore, of "Hartley
Vale.” But these were days when, with new districts opening up
and new ventures calling, many came and many went; and of those
fifty Mr. Sandercock, Mrs. Sinkerson, and a Mrs, Lee, who was
probably grandmother of the present Lee family, are the only
persons whose names are still included among the residents of the
district. They were also days in which neglect of church worship
meant erasure from the church roll and, in spite of all that had
been achieved, by the year 1868 the number of members listed
was twenty-six, including possibly several who were absent.
In 1863, Rev. Tuck was elected first president of the newly-
formed South Australian Baptist Association, now the South Aus-
tralian Baptist Union, Incorporated a signal honour to a great
servant of God and a unique distinction among the churches of this
State for the cause of which he was then pastor. Strangely enough
Kenton Valley did not decide to join the association until four
years later, September 10, 1867, and the date of her actual affilia-
tion has been given elsewhere as May 10, 1869.
Toward the close of 1867 Rev. Tuck received an invitation to
take charge of the Linwood and Stockport churches and, although
expressing reluctance to leave the district where he had laboured
so long and faithfully, the fact of the church with its depleted
numbers finding some difficulty in maintaining him with his large
family of children, compelled him to feel it his duty to accept the
call. He preached his farewell sermon on May 10, 1868, his text
on that occasion being 1 Tim. 6; 12: "Fight the good fight of faith,
lay hold on eternal life”; and removed to his new sphere of labour
where he ministered till death claimed him in 1880.
One of his daughters, Miss Bertha Tuck, who has been beauti-
fully described as "one of God’s own princesses,” gave her life in
missionary service in India. Rev. B. E. C. Tuck, for many years
Superintendent of the Baptist West End Mission, is a grandson of
Mr. Edward Tuck.
REV. FULLARD
The successor to Rev. Tuck was Rev. F. Fullard. Mr. Fullard
is reputed to have been a strong, virile young man, a faithful
pastor and an eloquent preacher. Furthermore, he was a farmer’s
son and the difficulty of finance, unavoidable in a small centre, was
solved in an unusual way. Mr. W. Jackson allowed the pastor the
use of the 80-acre section of land extending from the manse to


what is still known as the Jackson’s Hill road. Fifteen teams of
horses were gathered in a working bee, the pastor himself taking
charge of one, and very soon a crop was sown. Mr. Fullard also
procured a number of cows; and so the work was maintained.
REUNITED CHURCHES
A few years later an even happier solution was found. Under
the date June 2, 1872, we read: "The Church was asked to con-
sider the desirability of meeting and co-operating with the Church
of Christ worshipping at Salem Chapel, Gumeracha, to maintain
one minister, his labours to be divided between the two churches.
After a good deal of discussion it was resolved by a large majority
that "the proposed arrangement was the best that could be made
for the church at Kenton Valley under the circumstances.” And
so within a quarter of a century of their separation the two churches
became reunited. The probability that there had never been any
real bitterness between them is suggested by the apparent touch of
sentiment which prompted the choice of the name "/Enon” mean-
ing "nigh unto Salem.”
Perfect harmony did not at first characterize the new union.
Both churches had apparently been accustomed to holding services
morning and evening and the new arrangement necessitated Kenton
Valley changing her practice by holding afternoon services, with
the pastor in attendance at an evening service once a month (two
evening services had been desired but could not be arranged).
Whether other evening services were conducted by laymen is not
recorded. However, the first attempt at holding afternoon services
met with little success and it was resolved in March, 1873, to hold
evening services only contingent upon Gumeracha being able to
release Mr. Fullard for one more Sunday evening in each month.
As there is no record to the contrary it would appear that such
remained the practice until Rev. Fullard’s ministry terminated at
the close of 1874. His ministry was short compared with that of
his predecessor but it was an extremely fruitful one. During a min-
istry of six and a half years fifteen persons had entered the church
mainly through conversion and among them some truly great souls.
Mr. and Mrs. Alexander Teakle who had settled in the district
some years previously and whose daughter was already a member,
joined the church by transfer from North Adelaide in 1869, and
their descendants are still in the work.
But what of the young people who professed conversion
under Rev. Fullard’s preaching? Margaret White (later Mrs. John
Wise) removed to Hallet with her husband and joined with him in
Christian service there. Samuel Wise also removed to Hallet and
identified himself with the Baptists at Appila. David Grieg within
two years was appointed deacon of the church and served faith


fully till his removal and has a descendant in the Methodist minis-
try to-day. John Jamieson, as a young man scarcely out of his
twenties, played a tremendous part in establishing Baptist causes at
Orroroo and Black Rock and remained a pillar of strength through-
out his long life. Bessie Dpbney joined John Jamieson as wife and.
loyal helpmeet in his work and witness. Mrs. S. A. Cornish and
Miss Jamieson, well-known in Christian Endeavour circles, are their
daughters.
Alexander Jamieson became the best known of them all. A
tower of strength in the North, twice President of the Northern
Districts Association and once President of the Baptist Union of
South Australia.
Of eleven converts all removed to other centres in subsequent
years all but two are known to have become workers in the churches
whither they went. One withdrew her name and of one trace has
been lost. A truly remarkable ministry and yet in November, 1874,
Rev. Fullard resigned saying that he felt his work here was finished
and it would be better for himself and the congregation that he
sought another sphere of labour. Elijah was not the only great soul
who became pessimistic. Rev. Fullard removed to Mt. Gambier
and two years later to a larger sphere in Geelong, Victoria.
PASTORLESS YEARS
Following the departure of Rev. Fullard there occurred a
period of five (5) years during which both churches were without
a settled pastor. Unfortunately no record of happenings during
those years is to be found in the church minutes. It is evident that
the early records were kept by Rev. Tuck himself and if Rev.
Fullard followed the same practice (and the handwriting in which
the notes were made suggest that he did) then the reason for the
abrupt ending of the record at this stage is apparent. It is known,
however, that arrangements were made for the Baptist Association
to send supplies from Adelaide on two Sundays in each month dur-
ing this period and with the help of laymen from neighbouring dis-
tricts the work was carired on. From the latter source excellent help
was given by James I.evett (previously mentioned) and John
Paynter of Kersbrook (later well-known and loved as Rev. John
Paynter). Indeed so closely did the latter become associated
with the work that in one quarter he has been named as the pastor
of the church during those years. This assertion, however, cannot
be substantiated from the actual records and it appears extremely
doubtful whether any actual appointment was made.


ITEMS OF INTEREST
Before proceeding with the story of later years, there are some
facts concerning those early and intensely interesting days that are
worthy of note. It is regrettable that the early records deal almost
exclusively with membership and concerning property and various
church activities little is known.
Finance
No reference is made to finance until June, 1854, except a
resolution that quarterly collections be taken for lighting and
cleaning the chapel, although a large amount of money must have
been raised prior to that date. It seems to have been the practice
to raise such money as was required from time to time and as the
need arose. However, on June 15, 1854, at a special meeting called
to discuss the matter, a full financial statement was given and
Mr. Wise appointed treasurer. At that meeting the wish was
expressed that 'finances be reviewed once a year.” Even under the
new system the practice continued of raising money specifically for
various funds; and, when in later years anniversary services were
held, each occasion was followed by a church meeting at which a
statement of net takings was made and the amount disbursed to —■
"Incidental Fund,” "Sunday School,” "Minister’s Salary,” etc., as
thought desirable. An interesting note made in 1882 tells us that
the treasurer’s cash account had a surplus of £7 5/9 and he wanted
instructions as to what should be done with the amount. Five
pounds was given as a present to the pastor and the remainder to
the Sunday school. They didn’t believe in allowing wealth to
accumulate and lie idle in those days.
It was not until 1866 that a system of weekly offerings was
instituted an offering box near the entrance being the method
used. Means for receiving offerings have changed from time to
time the offering box, collection plate and an envelope system
all being used but the practice of making contributions at services
still continues.
Deacons
The first deacons were appointed in 1838, being two in number.
William Wise as previously stated, was one who was chosen and
with him a William Stanger, who had joined the church a month
previously having been associated with one in Lincolnshire. Mr.
Stanger seems to have disappointed the trust reposed in him and
his name passed from the roll in 1863. Mr. Wise had by this time
passed away and with the dismissal of Mr. Stariger the office lapsed
for some years.
It was reintroduced on February 4, 1871, when Rev. Fullard
as minister requested the appointment of deacons. On this occa


sion the matter was approached in a spirit of deep earnestness. A
special meeting for prayer was called for February 8 to seek Divine
guidance in whatever decisions were made; and at the close it was
resolved that the number of deacons to be appointed be three. The
election was still deferred till February 6, when William Wise,
Junr., Edward Tuck and David Greig were chosen to fill the office.
The choices were wise ones, all three rendering excellent service
to the Kingdom of God.
In those days such offices were filled by appointment for an
indefinite period; vacancies occurring only through death or resig-
nation or (as in the case mentioned) at the request of the church.
Mr. Edward Tuck resigned the office, as previously stated, in
1874, and David Greig left the district in 1878, leaving Mr. Wise
as the sole deacon until in 1883 when Mr. Schultz, a fine Christian
worker who, from membership at Flinders Street, came to reside at
Lobethal and tendered excellent service for many years at Kenton
Valley, was appointed to the office.
In later years, and more particularly since the establishment
in 1889 of the practice of electing officers annually, the position
of deacon has assumed less importance in the life of the church.
Church Discipline
Church life during the middle of the nineteenth century and
even later was subject to rigid discipline and, although cases may
not have been frequent there is ample evidence that inconsistency
or non-attendance over a period resulted in erasure from the roll
of members; or, in the case of less serious misdemeanours, in being
reprimanded or suspended for a period. A rule adopted on Feb-
ruary 16, 1871, is typical of the spirit of that age. It stipulates
"That in event of any members absenting themselves from the
Lord’s Table for three months following, the same be visited by the
pastor and deacons, and if they cannot give satisfactory reasons
for such neglect of church privileges they be remonstrated with;
after which if there be no amendment such members shall be sus-
pended from the church for three months; and lastly in event of
their not being reclaimed their names shall be erased from the
roll of church membership.” This rule was rescinded in 1889 and
a more liberal one substituted.
THE TRUST DEED
The Trust Deed, previously mentioned, contains several
points of interest. Under its terms' great care was taken to ensure
that the government of the church was to be congregational decis-
ions in all matters to be by a majority vote at a properly constituted
members’ meeting and such decisions to be binding upon members
whether present or not. In regard to matters of doctrine the only


stipulation is contained in a clause which declares that the church
must consist of not less than twelve persons "acknowledging and
maintaining the faith and practice of Baptists,” it being also stated
that the church intended to practise "open communion.” A some-
what unusual clause demanded that only male members were to be
allowed a vote in matters of a temporal nature although ladies were
accorded equal franchise with men in regard to the choice of min-
isters and deacons and in all matters of discipline or of a spiritual
nature. Let us reassure the ladies that this rule is no longer in
force.
CHURCH ACTIVITIES
A feature in the life of the church in its early years was a
quarterly members’ tea meeting for Christian fellowship and
special prayer, which was instituted in 1859. One can well imagine
the zest with which these times of social intercourse would be
entered into by the folk of those days when little in the way of
entertainment was known. Business was often discussed and so
they became tea meetings for business and prayer. How long they
continued is not known but certainly for quite a number of years.
They lapsed, possibly during the pastorless period beween 1874-
79 but were recommenced in the year 1888 and were probably
forerunners of quarterly business meetings which continued into
the next century
The first anniversary service recorded was held on February
21, 1869, —although it is quite possible, and the wording of the
minute may be taken to imply, that such celebrations had been
held at an even earlier date. On this occasion the preacher was
Rev. Stonehouse, of North Adelaide. Anniversary always con-
cluded with a public tea meeting, generally on the following
Tuesday (Monday was evidently needed as a "breathing space”)
and at these meetings it was the custom to invite two or three
speakers. They were not the days of sermonettes either. Hand-
bills were usually printed and circulated throughout the district
and speakers were always assured of large audiences. A reference
in 1891 speaks of the "Anniversary of the Church and Sunday
School,” although for how long the church and school had com-
bined in such celebrations is not revealed. Separate anniversary ser-
vices for the Sunday school are of a comparatively recent origin.
CHURCH ORDINANCES
Concerning the keeping of the ordinances we find that in April
of 1866 it became the practice to observe Communion every week;
but five years later it is referred to as a monthly practice.
The first baptism recorded is that of Margaret White, on
December 5, 1868, at the commencement of Rev. Fullard’s ministry.
If there were such services earlier, and probably there were, the


records of them were not entered in the church minutes and have
been lost. The last baptism was that of Miss Ruby Bleeze, on
October 10, 1910, since when those desiring to obey our Lord’s
Command in this regard have availed themselves of the more
convenient facilities at Gumeracha.
THEIR NEW CHAPEL
During the year 1865, while their new church was being built,
the little flock were without a spiritual "home” and for some time
services were conducted in what was known as Redman’s barn a
large stone building still standing and in use on the property now
owned by Mr. Angus Lee. Meanwhile local residents familiar with
the art of building were erecting to the glory of God an edifice of
which they had reason to be justly proud. Who was in charge of
the work is not known for certain but the names of Dobney, Kitto
and Sinkinson have always been associated with it.
In the grounds surrounding the church a little cemetery was
opened and became the last resting place of several of the pioneers.
Fears as to the possible effect on underground supplies of water in
the locality led to its being closed within a few years. Only two
names those of William Wise and Susan Moore (a daughter of
John Moore) —are now decipherable upon the memorial stones
erected there.
REV. T. A. FIELDWICK
And. now to return to the story as it centres more directly
around the ministry of the Word. The long period without a pastor
and its detriment to the work came to an end late in 1879 During
that year Rev. T. A. Fieldwick, who being without a church at the
time had linked himself with the Christian at Norwood, was intro-
duced by Mr. W. Finlayson to- some of the folk at Salem and for
several months he assisted by conducting services occasionally in
both churches. In October, 1879, officers from "Salem” waited on
Mr. Wise and requested that this church join them in inviting Mr.
Fieldwick to take charge of the work; his services to be so appor-
tioned that of eight morning and evening services in each four
Sundays the pastor would conduct three at Kenton Valley and five
at Gumeracha. 'VEnon” was to raise £5O per year toward the min-
ister’s salary and "Salem” a minimum of £lOO. Kenton Valley
members gladly agreed to this suggestion and, the invitation being
passed on to Rev. Fieldwick, he replied that although he had not
sought the position he believed God was leading and accepted for
a term of six months, commencing November 1, 1879. Those six
months proving happy ones for pastor and people the call was
extended for an indefinite period in April, 1880, and accepted.
A united prayer meeting held at the home of Mr. W. Cornish
to welcome the pastor, had proved so pleasant and profitable that
the practice of meeting in this way was continued and became an
important feature in the life of the churches for a number of years.


PROBLEMS AND DIFFICULTIES
The union, however, was destined once more to meet with diffi-
culty regarding the arrangement of services. Mr. Verco, of Kers-
brook, a man greatly esteemed as a lay preacher and a splendid
help to the churches in those days had been compelled for health
reasons to give up the work and Mr. Paynter had probably entered
college with the result that Gumeracha was experiencing increasing
difficulty in supplying the pulpit. They requested that Kenton
Valley substitute an afternoon for their morning service on one
Sunday in each month. Past experiences in regard to afternoon
services, however, and fear of confusion resulting from any attempt
to hold services at times varying made the people at Kenton Valley
very reluctant to consent to change. Accordingly Gumeracha
decided to carry on alone and invited Mr. Fieldwick to be their
minister, which he consented to do. The church at Kenton Valley
not being in a position to follow a similar course, Salem offered to
release the pastor on the morning of the first Sunday in each month
to supply the pulpit there and Mr Fieldwick offered his services on
the afternoons of other Sundays. Kenton Valley was to be released
from all financial obligations as regards salary but was expected to
find transport. Individual members from Salem ultimately came to
the assistance with transport it being more easily arranged from
that end of the circuit and with a great deal of misgiving in the
hearts of many the little church consented to try the new arrange-
ment for six months, expressing, however, their intention of still
contributing to the minister’s salary in so far as they were able.
At the close of six months, it having been found that the
alteration had worked better than was at first anticipated, the
members unanimously agreed to accept it as a permanent arrange-
ment. The practice of holding one morning service in each month
and afternoon services on other Sundays has continued ever since,
although in more recent years the Sunday upon which worship
is conducted in the morning has been changed from the first to
the last. ,
UPWARD AGAIN
During its pastorless period when few additions were made
to offset losses occasioned by the removals which were frequently
taking place the church roll had dwindled until there were only
sixteen resident members but during Mr. Fieldwick’s ministry the
work was steadily built up sixteen new members being added in
five and a half years. Unfortunately many still continued to
move to other spheres and so the full benefit of these additions
could not be realized but by the year 1884 twenty-three were in
membership. More important perhaps than actual numbers was
the fact that several excellent workers were gained; John Teakle,
deacon of the church, treasurer for sixteen years and fine helper


in all activities of the church; James Woolard, also deacon, Sun-
day school Superintendent and great Band of Hope worker;
Thomas Edwards, who rendered excellent service as church or-
ganist and for five years treasurer. (Mr. Edwards was largely
instrumental in starting a little cause at "Woodlands,” two and
a half miles distant, where services were held for some years once
a month, and, later in life did good work at Birdwood till advanc-
ing years prevented him); Mr. Schultz (whose work has been
referred to previously), with his wife and daughter; and Mrs.
John Teakle all became valued helpers in the work.
In the early ’eighties two visits to South Australia were
made by a remarkable woman evangelist, a converted Jewess by
the name of Mrs. Baeyertz, who did a splendid work in many
of our churches, and many of those who at that time applied for
admission into Kenton Valley church testified to the influence
of this lady’s preaching on their lives.
In 1883 unhappy relationships having arisen between
himself and several members of the sister church- —-Mr. Field-
wick resigned the pastorate. Kenton Valley, declining to accept
his resignation, asked him to continue as its minister for so long
as his place of residence was sufficiently near for him to be able
to do so. His departure, however, took place in April, 1885,
when he accepted a call to the Jamestown Circuit.
REV. GILMOUR
A joint committee was formed on April 19, in which several
non-members, as representatives of the congregation, were asked
to co-operate with the male members of the church in arranging
supplies for t,he pulpit until the services of a settled pastor could
be obtained. However, early in the following month a call was
extended from both churches to Rev. W. Gilmour, of Mt. Gam-
bier, and accepting the invitation he commenced his ministry on
July 5 of that year.
GROWING IMPETUS
Under his pastoral care numbers increased rapidly. Conver-
sions were recorded within six weeks of his entry into the work
and in a little over two years seventeen were added to the church
roll. His ministry, however, was to be a short one. Troubled con-
siderably with his throat, he announced in March, 1888, that,
deep though his joy in the work had been, he felt compelled to
seek a warmer climate before the winter set in. Possibly he may
have rested for some time as we hear no more of him till 1891,
when he took charge of the work at Terowie,
Among those seventeen who entered the church during Mr.
Gilmour’s ministry, two at least are living to-day and are, as far


as can be ascertained, the oldest living links with the past days
of the cause. They are Mrs. W. H. Cornish and Mr. T. H.
Norsworthy, both of Gumeracha. Mrs. Cornish was not for long
associated with the work, but Mr. Norsworthy remained an active
supporter for many years. In those days two treasurers were
appointed and, first with Mr. Edwards and later with Mr. Teakle,
he held that office for six years besides serving for a number of
years as assistant organist.
Miss Ada Lee, another member of that group, was a keen
supporter throughout her long life. Of the others all excepting
two removed in subsequent years to other parts and all trace of
them has been lost.
During this ministry it became the practice of members to
meet for prayer at 2 p.m. on Sundays when afternoon services
were held (the main service commenced at 2.30 p.m.) but for
how long the practice continued is not reorded.
Another important move, which remains to this present day,
was the decision to use unfermented wine at Communion services.
In 1888 the numerical strength of the church reached thirty-
five and remained at a high level for many years; although
removals as many as six in twelve months continued to have
their effect upon the state of the roll. At that same period there
was, in connection with the work, a Sunday school of over thirty,
with a staff of three teachers. Kindergartens were, of course,
not thought of then.
REV. SEXTON
At the removal of Mr. Gilmour in May, 1888, Rev. J. H.
Sexton, of Georgetown, took up the work. Mr. Sexton’s ministry
was a notable one in several ways. In October, 1889, the rules
of the church were revised and the decisions made then
although few in number and, it is to be feared, often loosely held
remain in force to the present time. The former ruling in
respect to "absenteeism” was rescinded and the following substi-
tuted:- —
Rules
"Any member of the church absent from the Lord’s Table
for three consecutive months without just cause known to the
Church may, by vote of the Church, be struck off the members’
roll; and any member guilty of conduct deemed inconsistent
with a Christian profession may, by similar vote, be subject to its
discipline.”
In regard to members residing in other districts it was
ruled:


"Members removing to a distance will be expected to com-
municate with the Church through its pastor once a quarter and
whilst retaining their membership with the Church will further
be expected to have Communion with any Evangelical Church in
their neighbourhood and throw themselves into such Christian
work as they have time and ability to perform. Any member
neglecting this course and not applying meantime for a letter of
transfer to another church will be liable to erasure from the roll.”
(To this was added in 1906 a further clause that all distant
members, if their names were to remain on the church roll, were
required to subscribe at least 2/6 per annum to the funds not an
unreasonable request since their membership involves the Church
in certain financial obligations to the Baptist Union on their be-
half) .
It was also ruled that:
"No person under the age of sixteen years shall be allowed
to vote in matters of church business”
INCORPORATION
In 1890 came the incorporation of the church. In this year
the little flock passed through its one and only internal crisis and,
although it is better that we draw the veil over all names and
some of the details it may be said that as a result a very difficult
situation arose between the church and one of its trustees. This
would have presented a lighter problem but for the fact that
probably only three trustees remained at that time and of those
Mr. Levett, now advanced in years and living at a distance, had
expressed the desire that he be relieved of the responsibility.
The church was thus faced with the urgent necessity of either
appointing new trustees not an enviable position under the
circumstances —or become an incorporated body. The latter
course was decided upon and a request sent to Mr. Levett that he,
as trustee and thus empowered to act put the resolution into
effect. This he consented to do and a certificate of incorporation
was granted on January 12, 1891. It reads;
I, William David Scott, Master of the Supreme Court
of South Australia, do hereby certify that the Religious
Church of Trinitarian Protestants known by the Denomination
of Particular Baptists at Kenton Valley is registered under
the provisions of the Associations’ Incorporation Act, 1890,
the memorial required by law having been duly filed.”
Dated this 12th day of January, 1891.
(Signed) W. D. SCOTT,
Master of the Supreme Court.


The seal of the church is an interesting relic held by the
Baptist Union of South Australia in which body this church later
became merged. The first seal holder was Mr. John Teakle. His
appointment, however, was only temporary, persons in Adelaide
(A. S. Niel and J. V. Scott) taking over that position.
EXCELLENT WORKERS
During the five years of Mr Sexton’s ministry several good
workers were gained in the persons of Mr. and Mrs. Tilley, Miss
Ethel Teakle and Mr. and Mrs. F. V. Lee. Mr. Tilley was a fine
type of simple-hearted Christian who, in addition to the faithful
support he gave in general ways, did more conspicuous work in
the Sunday school and for many years in the office of deacon.
Concerning Mr Lee more than a passing comment must be made.
Although he was reared in Kenton Valley his earliest active con-
nection with Christian work was in "Salem” Church from which
he was transferred with his wife to Kenton Valley on July 1,
1892, becoming immediately a most zealous worker. The Sunday
school Superintendent, Mr. Woolard, having left the district in
February of that year, Mr, Lee, still a member of Salem but
attending at Kenton Valley, was asked to fill the vacancy. This
he consented to do and with one break of three years he served
in that capacity until 1915 twenty years in all. His work as
secretary of the church extended over an even greater period.
Appointed to that office in 1892 he carried out its duties continu-
ously for no less than forty-five years, laying aside the task only
when compelled to do so by the weight of his advancing years.
So prominently did Mr. Lee become identified with the work in
his younger days that at one stage for a period of nine years he
was holding at the one time the offices of Sunday school Superin-
tendent, Secretary and Deacon a doubtful policy in church
management perhaps but a striking tribute to the man so called
to serve. He was elected life elder in August, 1937, and passed
suddenly and peacefully to higher service on July 27, 1946. His
is surely a record it would be difficult to surpass.
Rev. F. Milton Lee, well-known in the Baptist Churches of
South Australia, is a son of Mr. F. V. Lee.
Rev. Sexton’s resignation, which came in April, 1893, was
received with regret by the people among whom he had worked
faithfully for almost five years.
TWENTY-FIVE GLORIOUS YEARS
He was succeeded by Rev. E. J. Henderson, who came from
Goodwood Church in July, 1893. During his ministry and also
under the subsequent pastorates of Revs. R. Taylor, E. H. Kentish
and A. Talbot we note a period, extending over a quarter of a
century, of intense and varied activity in the life of the church.


Sunday evening services were commenced; fortnightly and
for a time weekly prayer meetings were arranged on mid-week
nights; a Band of Hope and a Christian Endeavour Society be-
came included among the church’s auxiliaries; choirs were formed
to assist on special occasions; Harvest Thanksgiving services be-
came included among the special events of the church early in
this century and, in later years, were held in combination with the
church at Gumeracha. Activities of a more secular nature also
became part of the church’s life. Entertainments were arranged
for the purpose of raising funds (the first mentioned being in aid
of a Sunday school library and held in December, 1896), and in
1905 a committee was formed to organize such functions. One
a social held in May, 1905 —is of special interest in that it
was arranged for the purpose of raising funds to assist a Sunday
school which had been started in connection with the work at
"Woodlands.” (Indeed the church became generally responsible
for the witness which was maintained there for a number of
years). "Christmas trees,” from which "gifts” were purchased and
the funds used for church purposes and also strawberry fetes are
included in the records and even a bazaar is mentioned.
But secular activities, while of passing interest and an in-
dispensable part of a true record, are unimportant things. What
was of importance is that the true purpose of the church’s exist-
ence was not overlooked. Within the two decades from 1890
early in Rev. Sexton’s ministry —to 1910 no less than sixty new
names were added to the roll of members.
Reference cannot of course be made to all but in passing
one notes the names of several family groups: Olive, Annie, Lilian
and Elliot Teakle; Mr. and Mrs. Robert Moore and the family
of Alfred Moore; Mr. and Mrs. Rowland (tenants for a time of
the manse) and their family; also members of the families of
Messrs. F. V. Lee, J. Sandercock, S. Hannaford and R. Fox.
Mr. and Mrs. H. Brooks and their son Gordon joined at this
time and also Mr. T. H. Norsworthy, Mr. W. T. Sinkinson and
Mr. and Mrs. J. Porter. Mr Porter, in addition to being a deacon
for 18 years, is also the present treasurer of the church, an office
he has held since 1910, a period of thirty-nine years. Messrs.
Rowland, Brooks, Teakle and A. M. Moore, from among those
mentioned, became in turn Superintendent of the Sunday school
and others have served as Sunday school teachers, deacons and
deaconesses and mission agents.
In 1906 Rev. Taylor, who was then minister, was granted six
months leave for the purpose of making a trip to England and
his place was filled by Rev. P. J. Clarke. Those in the ministry


at Kenton Valley during these fruitful years with the length of
their pastoral work were: Rev. E. J. Henderson (1893-1903), Rev.
R. Taylor (1902-1910), Rev. E. H. Kentish (1910-1913), Rev. A.
Talbot (1913-1920).
THE MORE DIFFICULT DAYS
It casts no reflection upon the excellent and faithful services
rendered by ministers of God in this district since then to note
that in more recent years the measure of success that has attended
the work has been less marked. During two world wars and in
the uneasy peace between, there has been a tendency for men
everywhere to turn to a form of morality minus religion with tragic
results, not only to the churches, but, as an honest study of con-
ditions everywhere reveals to the world in general, and Kenton
Valley church has not entirely escaped its effects. Still the work
has been carried on and the witness maintained with occasional
additions to numbers and much blessing received.
After the departure of Rev. Talbot in June, 1920, several
short term ministries, with occasional pastorless periods, occur-
red. Rev. E. B. Woods, who came from England and took up the
work in October, 1920, conducted an energetic ministry for
eighteen months leaving for Burnie, Tasmania, in May, 1922. He
was followed by Rev. H. A. De La Rue, whose successful ministry
ended prematurely in January, 1925, when he was called urgently
to take up important and difficult work at Broken Hill. Then
came a period of ten months without a pastor, the next to accept
a call being Rev. G. W. Paice, whose work extended from Decem-
ber, 1925, to November, 1927, when owing to ill health he was
compelled to relinquish it. Although the stay of these men was
short there are those in the work here and elsewhere to-day who
can thank God for the influence borne upon their lives then.
In 1922 it was discovered, to the consternation of the
members that, owing to some mistake having been made in con-
nection with the delineation of the land the title deeds held by
the church were for a vacant piece of land adjoining the block
upon which their buildings stood. A rather difficult legal position
may have arisen, although under the original trust deed, the land
transferred was defined as the block upon which the church and
manse had been built. However, with the willing assistance of
the owner of the adjoining land and the South Australian Com-
pany a double transfer was effected with no other costs than
those involved in the actual transfer.


Rev. C. O. Lundberg commenced work at Kenton Valley in
February, 1928, and ministered faithfully till November 1931,
when he was succeeded by Rev. H. E. P. Bunday, a young man
with abounding energy who had recently concluded his training.
Mr. Bunday carried on the work till March, 1935, when he left
for England the land, of his birth to return three years later
to the South Australian ministry.
After another period without a minister extending until
December, 1935, Rev. C. J. Chamberlain undertook the care of
the church, to be followed in May, 1941, after seven years of
deeply spiritual work, by Rev. E. C. Walsh, for the past eight
years highly esteemed minister of the chutch.
Little reference has so far been made to auxiliaries of the
church and before this record is completed a few words must be
written concerning them. It is not known when Sunday school
work was commenced but it is probable that its origin was of
almost as early a date as that of the church itself. From various
sources we learn that Mr. J. Moore, Mr. Morris, Mr. Wise and
Miss Sophy Tuck were among the early teachers and some are
still living who can remember Miss Sophy’s services in that regard,
her association with the school having extended over many years.
The first mention of a school which is to be found in the church
records is in connection with the disbursement of anniversary
funds in 1874. For many years (as previously stated) all officers
were appointed for indefinite periods and it was not until the
practice of holding annual elections was instituted in 1889 that
we find any mention having been made to a Sunday school Super-
intendent. From that time the office has been held by Messrs.
J. Woolard, J. Tilley, F. V. Lee, F. Carter, M. Rowland, F. V.
Lee, H. Brooks, P. J. Cornell, E. Teakle. A. M. Moore, H. W.
Nickels and J. J. Porter.
In more recent years the school has extended its work by the
inclusion of a kindergarten under the leadership of Mrs. A.lwyn
Cornish. ,
A Christian Endeavour Society, which was formed in the
early part of the present century, continued to function during
the pastorates of Revs. Taylor, Kentish and Talbot. And later, in
May, 1931, a Young Peoples’ Society, combining literary with
devotional work, came into existence. This latter society has done
much excellent work and although at present operating on a
restricted programme is still functioning to-day.
Music has always played an important part in the life of the
Christian Church and although, as in many other instances, we
are hampered in our attempt to give a complete record by lack
of information, mention must be made of the excellent service
rendered at the organ by Mr. Morris, Mr. W. Moore (who served


for 25 years), Mr. T. Edwards, Mr. T. H. Norsworthy and Misses
E. Teakle, N. Moore, M. Porter (Mrs. Cornish) and Miss C. Lee.
The first appointment of deaconesses was made on April 6,
1909, when Mrs. R. Moore and Mrs. F. V. Lee were chosen to fill
the office. Miss Pappin and Mr. Brooks respectively were the
first Home and Foreign Mission agents appointed in 1899.
In compiling these records no greater difficulty in gathering
information has been experienced than in regard to the important
office of church secretary. It would appear certain that the ear-
liest records were kept by the minister of the church and when
the necessity arose for a letter to be written (and one was sent
each year to the Baptist Association reporting on the year’s work)
some brother or brothers were deputed to do the work. Bro.
Wise appears to have generally been given the task. With the
advent of Rev. Fieldwick the practice of confirming minutes and
having them signed by the minister as chairman is noticed; sug-
gesting that at this stage someone other than the minister was
doing the secretarial work. There is, however, no reference to a
secretary until 1887 (and that an indirect one) and no appoint-
ment to the office is recorded prior to the election of Mr. F. V.
Lee in October, 1892. He was succeeded in the office by his
daughter-in-law, the present secretary, M'rs. V. A. Lee, as previously
stated, in 1937.
The appointments to the office of treasurer have, however,
been faithful 1 y recorded and include Messrs. W. Wise, Senr.,
W. Wise, Junr. (who served from 1866-1899), T. Edwards, T. H.
Norsworthy, J. Teakle (16 years) and J. Porter (39 years).
And now, in closing, to all those who have identified them-
selves with the activities of the church in recent years the writer
expresses his sincere regret that space will not permit a full account
of their work. That is something which is well known to all to-
day and we must leave it to some future historian to set in order
for the benefit of generations to come. Also to any who may
be disappointed by any unintentional omission he offers his sin-
cere apology.
It may be noticed that in some places this account differs
slightly from others previously prepared but wherever this has
occurred the greatest possible care has been taken to ensure that
what has been written is a true and faithful record of events as
they actually took place.


HUNKIN. ELLIS ft KINS LTD.. C I ItS
mtNTINS CRAFTSMEN • ADELAIDE
