

AN OLD YET YOUNG COLONIST.




ONE MODE
PASSING AWAY
A SPARE DAY.
AN OLD YET YOUNG COLONIST.
ADELAIDE;
1857.
f (33 C fs-'




fftfldjj of lading
A SPARE DAT.
It is no less remarkable than true, that instead of our
Colonists blinding* themselves to the grievances which
they are naturally compelled to bear, owing- to the
immature ag-e of our Colony, they allow their minds to
become prejudiced by reminiscences of the past, and
recalling- to memory the days of conviviality and
pleasure they have experienced in their native countries,
leaving- their many unhappy and wretched ones to
sink ? neath the deep tides of oblivion.
Certainly the feeling- of reg-ard which all entertain
for their birth place, is but natural, and well becomes
us, although it need not be so interwoven with our
affections as to admit of love for none other. We
cannot banish the tender feeling of respect which we
entertain for our parents : still we can look upon the
partner of our life with more enthusiastic love and
fervency, without lessening in the slightest degree that
parental affection. Why cannot we then extend this
same feeling to the great globe itself, wherein we live
and die ; and learn to know that the land which best
satisfies our cravings is the most entitled to our love
and gratitude ? If this were to be the case, the petty
complaints which are brought forward with so much
pleasure and zest to- prove the miseries of colonial life,


*
would cease to exist, from the fact that they would then
meet with well merited contempt, instead of that en-
couragement which unfortunately they at present re-
ceive ; and the advancement and prosperity of the
colony be looked upon as of paramount
with our own individual welfare. But, however, it
requires but a poor philosopher to inform us that every-
thing has a beginning • and it is certainly not yet too
late to suppress these prejudicial feelings, and frivolous
causes of complaint, which are so prevalent, more
especially amongst what are termed our “new chums/’
whose chief delight seems to exist in noting and
ridiculing every little discrepancy which they see;
and comparing a colony of twenty-one years’ existence
with a country where the hand of civilisation has been
at work for centuries! although this may be looked
on more as an unnecessary exposal of their ignorance
than otherwise.
But our present paper compels us to confine our-
selves to one charge, which is undoubtedly the most
prominent of all, “ want of amusement,” for it is an
allegation which all who owe their nativity to a
different part of the globe, even if it be to the north
pole itself, feel bound to concur in; although the class
we wish mostly to notice, and who are undoubtedly
the most severe, in this respect, are those shallow-
pated youths of about twenty years of age, who have
just arrived from London, and who usually resort to
the pit of the theatre, (notwithstanding their utter
disgust for the performance), where they are able to
give vent to their criticisms and ridicule, and at the
same time a full account of what they have seen in
their time, telling you, that its all a pack of nonsense
attempting to act or sing here (as the case may he),
although it may be very well for those who have
never seen anything better : then talk to you in a very
dignified and mysterious manner of all the popular
places of amusement in London, (that is supposing


you to have admitted never having* been there); affect-
ing* great familiarity with Yauxhall, Cremorne, Eag*le,
Olympic; Old Drury; Lyceum; Saddler’s
Wells, Opera; Astley’S; Arg*yle Rooms, and every
other place they can call to memory; always relating*
some remarkable and peculiar incident relative to
themselves, in connection with the respective places:
then run throug*h a list of the most eminent actors;
sing*ers; equestrians; &c., having* of course a distinct
remembrance of Edmund Kean; Kemble; Mrs. Sid-
dons • and if you admit very great ignorance they
will venture on Garrick; Foote; and others of the last
century; giving*; of course; a decided preference to the
two latter. Phelps, Charles Kean, Brooke; Buckstone,
Matthews, Bedford;Mrs. Kean, Mrs. Nesbitt,Raphael;
Grisi; Jenny Lind; Russell; Reeves, and the rest of
the most eminent artists; they will confidently assert
they used to hear so often that they actually g*ot tired
of them; and a few minutes after they’ll tell you that
its impossible to ever g*et tired of them. Should you
evince very considerable astonishment at the amount
of information they possess —which; of course; you
should do, and express the most intense surprise at the
different scenes they have witnessed—they will tell
you of their having* seen horses g*alloping* on ceiling-s,
and of their having* seen actors really killed on the
stag*e to make it appear more natural; but then they
will wind up by telling* you they can afford to do this
owing* to the immense number they have.
Now it happens in many instances that these very
individuals have never even seen the inside of the
before mentioned places ; and as to their familiarity
with the names of eminent characters, this arises from
their having* seen them constantly fig*uring* on placards,
or from hearsay \ then ag*ain, there are those who have
witnessed and experienced the many pleasures de-
rivable from these sources, and consequently entertain
the absurd idea that anything* other than that of the


old country, is undeserving of patronage or notice ;
and to such an extent does this feeling exist, that if
Yauxhall and all its appurtenances could he removed
to South Australia, they would ridicule the idea of
there being’ any similarity between it and their Yaux-
hall, as they are pleased to term it.
But it must not be supposed, dear reader, (as the
lady authors say,) that it is our intention to state,
we have plenty of amusement, but to show the ab-
surdity of judging from the opinions of such a pitiable
class as this; and that many who join in the cry
of “no amusement/’ are those who have never wit-
nessed any superior to what it now lies in our power
to enjoy; and they consequently cannot feel so bitterly
as they represent the loss of that which they never
had. Neither must it be supposed that we have no
means of passing our time; for if the pleasure-seeking
man will listen with patience, we will acquaint him
with one mode of passing away a day to serve him, as
occasion shall require.
Let us pay our first visit to that well known edifice
at the corner of one of the principal streets, and ad-
joining the Post Office. On entering the outer hall, we
find ourselves in the midst of some six or seven police-
men, who are discussing the probable result of a
certain case, which has come under their notice —in
which they are exercising and displaying all their
legal and oratorial talents to several persons who are
regarding them with as much attention as if they were
receiving an opinion from Lord Campbell himself.
After making our way through here, we find ourselves
in a court yard, where on turning to our right and
walking u few steps, instead of finding the place we
are seeking, we behold to our astonishment a fireplace
with three or four pots in it, and an old lady with her
sleeves tucked up making a dumpling pudding, who
politely informs us that we are to g*o straight across,
which we of course do; and after passing through


another hall, and turning to the second door on the
right, we find ourselves in a crowded room, of about
fourteen feet by thirty ; not however, that this is what
is literally meant by the term of a “ place of amuse-
ment/’ although it frequently affords no inconsiderable
amount of mirth, but it is in fact a place with which the
villain, the innocent, the too fond mother, the poor
misguided girl, and the heartbroken father have be-
come too well aware of its awfulness, and the sad
reality, that it is a court for the dispensation of justice;
the decree of which must be obeyed, however severe it
may be.
Those three gentlemen who appear a little elevated,
compose the tribunal: that tall gentleman in the
middle is the most important; and, from his general
manner and the popular opinion, there could not be
a more fitting Mann : after striking out the last “ n,”
and apologising for so ridiculous a mistake, we will
proceed. That fat-faced gentleman in the military
costume, and displaying all the silver consistent with
his station, and perhaps a little more, is next in im-
portance—that is, in his own opinion—although he
would make a much better master of ceremonies at
a small dancing-party; for, if he had only been
favoured with that fair proportion which even a
porter bottle is adorned with, he would have come
under that denomination which his aspirations cer-
tainly entitle him to, viz., “ a swellbut we must
apologise for having so given vent to our thoughts,
regardless of his present exalted position and that
of a policeman—we beg his pardon, we mean a soldier
—although, considering that he has only had one
opportunity afforded him of displaying his courage
in the field, when he certainly behaved in the most
courageous manner, and evinced that firm (throwing
aside the fact of his almost tumbling off his horse),
intrepid, undaunted, and decisive spirit which so
characterized the now departed yet immortal hero


of Waterloo. But we must refrain from giving any
farther or more decided opinion, only that on this
occasion, which occurred at an election broil, he rode
through a band of twenty riotous Irishmen. The
people cheered him, the Irishmen yelled, and every-
thing was in a perfect state of confusion; and just
when he was about to cut them down, he discovered
there was no one to cut at, for it appeared the Irish-
men had cut it—or rather endeavoured to make their
escape, and in so doing became an easy prey to the
foot police, who also behaved most manfully, by hand-
cuffing the men and knocking them down with their
staves; but we have forgotten to mention that there
were thirty armed troopers at his back when he rode
through the Irishmen, although they were of no use
whatever. What this daring and intrepid individual
would have done had there not been so speedy an
issue, remains a mystery. However, as it was, he
received three vociferous cheers from the electors as
an acknowledgment of his heroism and valour.
That little confidential-looking gentleman who puts
on such a very knowing look, is undoubtedly well
qualified for the position he holds; notwithstanding,
as far as appearance is concerned, an auctioneer’s
box suits him best. This may probably arise from
the sight being more familiar to us.
A little below these officials are some ten or eleven
lawyers, many of whom are busily engaged in
drawing horses, ships, &c., in lieu of drafts, and
having nothing else to engross but their time. These
gentlemen make it a practice—more for the want of
practice than anything else—to attend constantly, for
the sake of keeping up their dignity in the profession.
That remarkably interesting-looking gentleman
with the peculiar cast of countenance wffiich charac-
terizes certain animals of Africa (in consideration
of which his faithful clerks honour him with the very
applicable title of “ Monkey,” is conducting the pro-


sedition of the case at present on with more of what
is termed “ bounce” than talent; and, as a very com-
municative friend at our side has observed, “ he will
be regularly flummoxed” by the tall, gentlemanly,
affable-looking person who is engaged in the defence,
and is certainly making the Monkey (as we have
taken the liberty of terming him, although it must
be borne in mind that we cannot claim the originality
of the appellation), look very ridiculous at times.
That little gentleman with the greedy-looking face is
out of a job at present, and has walked up with the
view of dropping on a little case—a fall which is
attendant with very little danger—although we fear
he will be unsuccessful; and he had certainly better
go home and endeavour to make AMends in some
other way. That sickly-looking person who is so
intimate with the Monkey, and makes improper use
of his nose by talking through it, has only called in
for a few minutes to see that his friend manages the
case properly—which is certainly a very wise course
to adopt, and one he had better follow out if he wishes
to retain his business; for, judging from rumours and
facts, it is fast leaving him. That tall gentleman with
the unhandsome, yet intellectual, countenance, is no
mean member of the profession; and notwithstanding
he is one of our colonial-made lawyers, and has been
reared in our own colony, there are but few that can
compete with him; and there is no doubt that we see
in him one destined to occupy no minor position in
the future career of South Australia. That he may
prove himself to be as sound a politician (when it
shall please his country to need him as such), as he
has a lawyer, is our earnest wish.
That gentleman with the open and affable-looking
countenance, and the eye-glass swinging from his
neck, we know but little of, only that he has gained
for himself the reputation of a gentleman, which we
beg to designate him.


The tall gentleman whom we have before noticed
as engaged for the defence is too well known, both
at the bar and the turf, for his talent and honour, to
require notice.
The stout person, who bears at the end of his name
the three well-known letters, M.L.C., we decline
offering our opinion in regard to his talent, for it may
be a prejudiced one, and hurtful to his feelings.
That unmistakeable Hibernian face near the last-
mentioned, we are totally unacquainted with; but
trust, out of respect for the profession, he is not one
of its members. The gentleman with the feature
slightly after the Homan cast is also one of our
colonial-made lawyers ; and though one whose name
is familiar to every vagabond South Australia has
hitherto produced, still he is a credit to his profession
in every respect.
The gentleman with the quackish-looking face we
recollect seeing twice before —once at a Methodist
tee-total meeting or something of the kind, at the
conclusion of which he contributed in a very hand-
some and praiseworthy manner to the coffers of the
church, for which the Sunday-school boys, preachers,
congregation, and minister cheered him most tre-
mendously, and were actually on the point of carrying
him round the room in a chair, when they recollected
that idolatry was forbidden by the commandments,
and, consequently, he was disappointed of his ride;
but the latter time of our seeing him, how different
was his position! Hot as the godlike man presiding
at a sociable tea-drink meeting, and making very
handsome donations to be cheered, but as the votary
of fashion after a bout of dissipation, seated in the
box of a theatre with a—what ? Shall we proceed,
gentle reader ? Ho, pardon us the task ; ’tis too sore
a one, and let this suffice.
The young gentleman with something of a Jewish
expression of countenance is only an embryo lawyer,


although he has exhibited symptoms of genius when
he has had the opportunities. And as to the old
gentleman who, though last on the list is by no means
least, who is there that knows him not ? He is so
intimately associated with our recollection, and with
every event which has occurred in the annals of our
colonial history ; from the first uncivilised days of
the colony to the present, his face is so strikingly
familiar to our gaze, that he forms, as it were, a link
in our remembrance of jrast days and events; and
from the respect which all pay him, he is a universal
favourite, not merely amongst his fellow-members,
but by his fellow-colonists.
The next in importance and deserving of notice are
the common law clerks, the assumption of whom is
really amusing; and any person unacquainted with
these petty retailers of law would certainly imagine
them to be very intimately connected with the Bench
from their manner, and the way in which they keep
walking in and out of the Court, always carrying with
them a red book and an immense bundle of papers
tied round with red tape, to give it a legal appearance.
Then come the constables; for no one can surely ever
enter this place, or indeed any other of the same nature
throughout the worlds without noticing the dignified
air which these officers of the crown put on, and in
what a hold determined position they place themselves,
with their arms folded across their breast, and casting
their eyes on every one with an expression tantamount
to saying—“Ah, let me catch you * ” even if you have
remained in the most humiliating position, with your
hands at your side, and standing like a soldier at
attention, neither looldng to the right nor to the left.
Then again, if you should neglect to uncover your
head immediately on stepping inside the doorway, in
what an authoritative manner the request is made,
accompanied with a look which of itself is enough to
alarm a man with any pretensions to nervousness.


Let us now turn to the people who make it their
daily custom to visit this place. There are men in old
blue shirts and moleskin trowsers at the last stage of
poverty, or hanging as it were between poverty and
crime; and women, poor miserable-looking creatures,
with tattered’ clothes and haggard looks, that have been
O O J
or soon will be in the same position as the prisoner
at the bar. Then there are a few of what are termed
u dirty swells,” who certainly soar a little above the
former, with threadbare clothes, which tend to show
they once occupied a better position; cabbage-tree
hats, inclining towmrds the front and back ; boots that
have not undergone the operation of cleaning for the
last five or six wrecks. These are the gentlemen that
carry on the embezzling and forgery business, and are
sure to be found out in not being properly acquainted
with the signature, or in some other way w hich they
can never understand. The rest are chiefly mechanics,
who have obtained an hour’s grace to wmtch the case,
being perhaps a little interested on account of knowing
the prisoner.
We will now watch the proceedings. The case at
present on is one wherein Mr. somebody is charged
with stealing from a Mr. somebody else a certain sum
of money —to wnt, the sum of ten pounds. This is
according to the statement made by the Monkey, who,
after making a very complicated speech, and w hich in
the end amounted to nothing, being so unintelligible
that neither lie nor anyone else could understand its
purport, called for Mr. William Hopkins, which was
echoed by the constable at the door until it arrived at
the constable in the hall * —but it appears, Mr. Hopkins
had but just stepped across to the public house to have
a drop of something’ to drink, by way of inspiring him
with courage to undergo his frightful examination ;■ —
however, after the constable singing out for William
Hopkins three successive times, in a manner which
would have well become Stentor himself, the said in-


dividual was seen rushing’ from the public house and
endeavouring’ to articulate the words—“ Here, here,”
which was no easy task, considering’ he had half a g’lass
of porter in his mouth, which, in his hurry, he had’nt
properly disposed of.
Mr. Hopkins at length arrived at the door, per-
spiring and panting like a dog after ten miles run, and
after wiping the larg’e drops of sweat which were
rolling from his face, apologised to the policeman for
his not having been in immediate attendance, and
taking off his well-brushed old beaver, he walked into
the court, where he was told to step into the box, which
he did, as fast as his trembling limbs would allow him,
having previously deposited his hat at the side in the
most humble manner imaginable,—and we now see
him the picture of assumed pleasantry. The Bible is
handed to him, and the oath about to be administered,
but the clerk observes, that he must take off his glove,
which is a sore task, for his nerves are in such an
agitated state that he hardly knows what he is about.
Having got through this, he kisses the Bible, and takes
out his handkerchief, which he puts to his mouth, where-
upon he indulges in a modest cough, and looks about
with a very broad smile, but at what he has’nt the
slightest notion.
The Monkey now stands up, and after putting his
fingers through his hair, then his thumbs in the arm-
holes of his waistcoat, commences the examination in
a very gruff tone. Now, Mr. Hopkins—your name is
Mr. Hopkins, is it not ? Mr. Hopkins politely bows,
and admits the fact, and puts his hand to his mouth,
and gives a very slight sneeze. Now, Mr. Hopkins,
you know the prisoner, do you not ?
Pretty well, I thank you, sir, —very well indeed.
No, no ; now what’s the use, what’s the use of talk-
ing like that * just answer me straightforwardly —do
you see ?
Yes, I can see pretty well, thank you, sir, returns


poor Hopkins, who hardly knows what he’s talking*
about himself, or the lawyer either.
No, no ; now just" look here. (Mr. Hopkins
stretches himself over the box, thinking* • that this
request has reference to some object on the table.)
You don’t seem to understand me. I mean, you are
to give me a definite reply to all my interrog-atives.
This is decidedly the worst cut of all; for now Mr.
Hopkins doesn’t know what to say, and no doubt
thinks this has reference to some subject beyond the
limits of his comprehension. He however ventures a
reply; and says, that he quite agrees with the Monkey;
which is followed by a roar of laughter, in which
Hopkins joins with the greatest of pleasure, for the
sake of extricating himself from the dilemma.
Now, Mr. Hopkins, continues our friend, what do
you know of the case I have just opened ? —tell me.
Is it a case of wearing apparel? Now this inno-
cently asked question, when looked at in its proper
light, is not so absurd as might appear —for Mr.
Hopkins is warehouseman at a certain drapery estab-
lishment—and when he heard that familiar term of
opeiung a case, his thoughts immediately flew back to
his own calling, and imagined that the lawyer’s mean-
ing had reference to some case of wearing* apparel he,
the lawyer, had recently purchased, and which he
wanted his opinion on. This was of course followed
by frequent rounds of laughter, in which the gentlemen
on the bench condescended to join for a few minutes,
and instantly relapsed into a state of majestic dignity.
Several of the lawyers immediately commenced crack-
ing* jokes about trowsers; and from what we could
understand, it appears that the Monkey recently lost a
pair of trowsers in an unpleasant affray. One gentle-
man observes, that the witness ought not to be allowed
to talk about wearing apparel, or wearing* anything*
else ; another, that the Monkey will be completely
worn out with the ignorance of the witness; all of which


are of course very absurd attempts at satire. However,
Mr. Hopkins is "politely requested to leave the box,
which he evidently does with no very considerable
amount of regret, and walks quietly out of the court
on tiptoe, and actually has the impudence to bid the
constable, who opens the door for him, good morning,
much to the annoyance of that functionary, who raises
himself on his toes, expands his chest, and gives a look
of the most profound contempt, wondering, no doubt,
at little Hopkins’s impudence.
Mrs. Brown is now called on the charge of drunken-
ness, which she of course denies. She is also charged
with committing an assault, with intent to do the
policeman harm —which she also denies ; but the state-
ments of the policeman are so correct and free from
exaggeration, and this being the sixth time in the last
month, she is committed to gaol for a week, with a hope
that she will come out a better woman, and grace that
society which her sex entitles her to. With this, Mrs.
Brown is taken away, at the same time remarking
that it’s a shame, and she doesn’t care who says it isn’t.
The case now called on is one of furious riding, which
the defendants most positively deny • but as the con-
stable swears that they were riding at a terrific rate,
they are compelled to suffer the penalty of the law by
paying £5 each, because their horses happened to start
into a canter, and which the ignorance of the gentle-
man with the white buttons, who has just arrived from
the sweet land of Erin, caused him to mistake for
galloping; but it is to be hoped this will serve as a
warning, not to allow your horses to canter through
the street.
The next case, judging from the opinions of one or
two at our elbows, will be a u rattling spree.” It is a
charge of theft preferred by a lady of not very pleasing
appearance, against a young girl of about seventeen or
eighteen years of age. Our friend, the Monkey—as we
have taken the liberty to designate him, although it is


a liberty which we are aware his affable, amiable, and
lenient disposition will excuse —opens the case, by re-
marking’, that its one of the clearest cases of theft ever
come under his notice; and after losing’ himself in
endeavouring- to make a speech, calls the prosecutrix,
who seems quite at home, and evidently to be in the
rig’ht box at last. Mrs. Night, or Day, we are not
sure which, only as nig’ht generally succeeds day, and
as day came to an end some time back, we imagine it
must be the former, is requested to give a straight-
forward statement of the facts, which she commenced
as follows “ I keep a crib in the fag end of Currie
Street, next to Jack Baker’s, the pig killer, —and I
dare say one or two of these swell coves here knows
it,” —(this remark has reference to the legal gentle-
men) —but as I was saying, “ I took that girl—just
look at her, the spooney —0, the hussy ] when I think
on her, drot her body, I could make mince meat of
it. Yes, I took her without a blessed tanner in her
pocket, grubbed her, gave her a shake-down, and plenty
of tin beside,” —(here one of the gentlemen on the bench
requests her to state the facts of the case merely, with-
out using such slang expressions.) —“Well now, don’t
you flurry yourself, you shall have it all in a brace of
shakes.” —(Laughter.) “Well, as I said, I took that
girl, and” —(here the military gentleman evinced a
very strong desire to put some question, but was
politely hinted not to make a fool of himself* by his
more learned friend, which course he thought fit to
adopt, and remained in a state of mute dignity.)
Mrs. Night, however, continues, “ Well, I kept her,
but there, when I think on her, what an ungrateful
wretch she’s been —just hark at the hypocrite bel-
lowing there like a great calf—ah, but it’s no use my
beauty! you’ve stepped your foot into it now (as I
once said when I saw a horse bogged).” “ I must
request that you will confine yourself to the case, and
not meddle with your private affairs, or I shall dismiss


the case immediately,” interrupts the chief magistrate.)
“ 0 you needn’t think I want to meddle with any
private affairs, as you call it, but I’m not going to
confine myself either to the facts as you call it, so you
needn’t think that, cockey.”—(“ Silence there,” cries
the policeman —for a man actually had the impudence
to sneeze, which is of couse centempt of court, inasmuch
as a court is not to be sneezed at.) u Well, as I was
going to say, I lost the stockings, three as good pairs
as ever Yiccy put on in her life—l means Victoria you
know ; I always calls her Yiccy—but it wer’nt neither
for the loss of the stockings exactly, or for what they
were worth, although they was a real good pair of
spun ; but it was because poor Dick Jones gave them
to me just before he went away, poor fellow ! ” —(here
the lady has actually brought a stray tear to her eye,)
and proceeds in a broken voice — C( Well, I couldn’t tell
whatever had got with them, until I began to think
whether Sail had them, so I kept quiet, and the first
chance I got, I had a squint at her box, and there sure
enough they were : and now, if that what I’ve said
isn’t true, may I be struck dead as a crowbar!” After
the delivery of this very explicit and affecting state-
ment, Mrs. Night descends, as she afterwards observed,
“ the restrum,” and the unfortunate girl, who has been
crying most bitterly, is called on for her defence, and
asked if she has anything to say, which of course she
has ; but it is the sad tale of hundreds !
u She came out under the care of a kind mother,
who died immediately on her arrival, leaving her with-
out a friend, and exposed to the rude blasts of the
world—which an orphan is invariably subject to. She
obtained a situation which she was obliged to give up,
on account of her employers leaving for Melbourne,
and was once more without a home or a roof to shelter
her. About this time, in the midst of her sorrow and
distress, she became acquainted with the prosecutrix,
who held out inducements nevlr to be realised, and


offered her a home, not as a servant, but as a com-
panion.”
She of course accepted. What creature in the same
situation would do otherwise ? But, alas ! starvation,
and the keenest pangs which the world can inflict on
us are better than dishonour. The remainder of the
pitiable girl’s tale may he'read ; for it is but that of
hundreds of others, though a sad one to reflect on.
Mrs. Night was compelled to be escorted from the
court by two constables, on account of her constant
interruption ; and the three gentlemen on the bench,
after a few minutes consultation, acquit the prisoner.
And, thank heaven, there is now a Eefuge for her,
whereby she can save herself from utter ruin, and live
to become a better member of society, by seeking pro-
tection from that society, which has been formed for
the sole purpose of benefiting those unfortunate girls
who have been led from the paths of virtue and
honesty. As to Mrs. Night, there is certainly little
hope of her, although her behaviour to-day is perhaps
accountable to her having indulged her propensity for
love of liquors. But, however, unless she alters ma-
terially that too, ere the night expires, her morning
will indeed be a fearful one. This being the last case
on the list, and the hour having arrived, which, accord-
ing to the rites of custom is set apart for indulging the
cravings of our appetite, we will conform thereto, and,
for the present, say —Adieu !
u Here we are again ! ” as the clown says; what’s
to be done now ? Let us again shape our course in
the same direction as we did in the forenoon, until we
arrive at a small stone building, situated in the centre
of a large vacant piece of land, opposite the post office,
being nothing more or less than a day theatre. The
building is certainly rather small for the nature of the
place, although quite capacious enough for its purposes,
as the performance generally consists of what is termed
(C complete farces,” intermixed with drolleries, amusing


anecdotes, and other innumerable absurdities necessary
for the enlivenment of themselves and their visitors
although it must not be supposed that this is any of
your pettifogging* private theatre acting, but the
genuine thing itself. The manager is not, as is too
frequently the case, a poor shallow-pated fellow, but a
regular old stager, bred to it all his life; well versed
in every style of acting, whether heavy drama, low
comedy, broad comedy, or gravedigging comedy ; one
that can take the part of gentleman, and the whole of
rogue, publican, magistrate, criminal jew, gentile, or
indeed any other character that the play requires him
to perform ; one that can turn his coat or laugh in his
sleeve before the whole audience, without being ob-
served, which is universally admitted to be rather a
dexterous feat; and indeed he can impersonate any
character, and impose upon the people with such
extraordinary success, that many have
asserted it to be real, and no joke at all ] although, of
course, this is extremely ridiculous.
Such, then, is the man who so ably conducts this
really innocent place of amusement; and w r e may add,
that its present state of efficiency is accountable in no
inconsiderable degree to the exertions and zeal of this
renowned individual.
What a striking contrast is presented in the present
and previous managers, and how strongly it tends to
show the triumph of genius ! In the latter we see the
man wffio once possessed the same opportunities and
privileges as the former, but who had not wit sufficient
to retain his office, and has consequently sunk into
insignificance, wffiere we must certainly allow him to
remain.
With this brief description of the manager and ex-
manager, we will enter. The which they
adopt is entirely different from the usual mode, there
being no entrance fee ! it being supported by public
contributions. The actors are more numerous than


would be supposed, from the size of the buildings and
the attendance select in the extreme. The manager
is of course the most dignified; and sits very composedly
u with his nose in the middle of his face/’ as a comical
friend of ours observes—a fact which is too plain on
the face of it to allow of contradiction. The play; or
rather farce, which is about to be acted is a new piece,
entitled, u Laughable discussions on the wants of a
City,” and one which we fear will be hardly- worth
listening to. The coughing and other preliminary
formalities having begun, it will not be long ere it
commences, and in the interim we will notice a few
of the actors, some of whom are really, to do them
credit, comical-looking fellows. That stout individual
with a thick walking-stick, thick head, and a beard and
moustache that has been under cultivation for the
last six or seven days, is only a minor character,
although he has a corporation like an alderman, as
the saying is. This person, we understand, is very
good in an Irish row, or anything in the low style of
acting, such as turnkey, gaolor, &c. That handsome
gentlemen, who we always think looks best seated at
a table, is remarkably clever as a mimic, being ac-
quainted with the art of taking anyone off to life.
That rather attenuated figure with black hair, and
possessing a great deal of that for which a sheep’s-
head has gained such celebrity, is very good as Crepin
the cobbler, or in the farce of Box and Cox, the latter
character of which he always appears himself in.
That stout gentleman who looks as if he was troubled
with the gout is pretty well as Falstaff, although hardly
nimble enough for the running part. The small gen-
tleman enveloped in a cloak, and looking very much
what we should imagine a toad to look when standing
on his legs, is only a supernumary, as also the indi-
vidual with the thick walking-stick; but as the farce
has commenced, we must bring our description to a
a close.


Ist Scene —Mayor, Aldermen, Councillors, and a
few of their officers discovered.
The thick-headed gentleman rises, and after giving
a wink to one of the audience and a few very gruff
coughs, proceeds: —“ My attention has been directed
to the disgraceful state of many of the streets in the
back part of the town in the district which I have the
honour to represent; and as the duty of seeing to
these matters resolves, or devolves—l don’t care a tig
which—on me, I, of course, am compelled to mention
it, or you may depend I should not have done so ;
for it doesn’t pay to go wasting time in searching for
grievances. (Hear, hear, hear; and one or two thumps
on the table.) So that I wish you to understand,
although I, of course, don’t wish to say so, that it is
nothing to me whether you notice the complaint I’ve
made or not. You see lam bound to say something
about it, as I told you before, or I should have two
or three citizens bullying me, I daresay you under-
stand what I mean, all of you.” |
After this very pathetic appeal, accompanied by
some eccentric gestures, and a few bursts of laughter
from the rest of the actors, occasioned by a very jolly-
looking councillor who was telling some most mar-
vellous and affecting tales, including that of the
Babes in the Wood, a brief description of Little Jack
Horner’s proceedings in connection with his Christmas
pie, as also the appalling sight which old Mother
Hubbard met with on going to the cupboard for a bone,
which, as may be easily imagined, created more amuse-
ment, and excited more interest on the part of the
actors than did the farce itself. Crepin now rises and
proceeds :—“ That in my very humble opinion there
ought to be more facilities afforded to pedestrins and
equestrins for perambulation, and, what shall I say,
ridation—although the word is certainly different
from what Walker would say; but it will do, and the
reporters will put that to rights, I know. But I will


not detain you long, for all I have to say is this (great
laughter), that I don’t wish to detain you long, only
that I merely wish to mention that, in my very humble
opinion, something ought to be done.’ 7 Another of
the actors, with whom we are totally unacquainted,
although he is certainly a rising actor, says :—“ Now,
the question seems to me, which is the most suitable
for repairing roads—since such must be done—
whether wood, sand, stone, or bricks is best, has of
course to be seen. Now, I have been reading upon
this subject a good deal of late, and I find that sand
is of a loose substance, while stone is of a compound
of different mineral compounds or vegetable, I’ll not
be sure which, but I think it is mineral, embodying
in itself sand, granite, quartz, and other very hard
substances, while wood and brick is different alto-
gether.” Everyone evinces very great astonishment
at this astounding announcement, but remain in per-
fect ignorance as to its meaning, although they cry
out “ Hear, hear,” so stentoriously, at the conclusion
of which this bright luminary proceeds—Now, with
all due deference to the subject which has been under
debate, allow me to make a proposition, which I know
everyone will be delighted with, which is, 6 That there
be a Philosophical and Mineralogical Society formed.’ ”
At this everyone starts to their feet and were about to
commence clapping, but this they did not do; however,
there is a Philosophical and Mineralogical Society
formed, the committee appointed (notwithstanding some
of the gentlemen being unacquainted with the nature
of it), and the first subject for debate is the formation
of man, determining to have a fair start from the com-
mencement ; and the before-mentioned thick-headed
individual actually proposes that they should “ w r et it,”
meaning.that they ought to send for a bottle of brandy;
but, thanks to the manager, whose mind is not quite so
debased as this, the proposition is negatived. The
argument on the subject of the roads, so ably proposed


and seconded, is referred to the Public Works Com-
mittee.
The gentleman that has risen is above the rest, being
an Alderman, so that we may expect something better
from him. He proceeds—“ My motive on rising is to
say a few words on the bread subject (here we observed
a baker at our side give a shudder), as one which is of
the greatest importance to the community at large.
I shall, however, not dwell upon it, but leave that to
some more able person.” This is what they all say.
u I am a man of a large family, and an expensive one;
and consequently feel it very bitterly; for my good
wife informed me this morning, that she had lessened
the children’s allowance from three slices to two, in
consequence of the light weight in bread. I say, the
citizens ought to have their way (weigh) as well as the
bakers. (Hear, hear.) Why cannot we bring in an
act to enforce the full weight of all bread sold within
the province. (Loud cheers from all except the thick-
headed gentleman, who, it is understood, has some
interest in a baking establishment, and the baker we
before mentioned, who gave one or two rather indistinct
groans.) And until this is done; mind, I say until
this is done —(Ah, you may groan as much as you like
Mr. JBulder) —but I say until this is done, we shall be
chizzled right and left.” (Hear, hear.) After this
very determined speech the gentleman resumes his
seat, and the thick-headed gentleman rises and says
u that it’s all humbug malang a fuss about such a
trifling thing as a few ounces of bread.” But, how-
ever, after several letters, and, amongst others, one
from Mrs. Newcomber, being read, complaining of the
light weight in bread, and after a little discussion, or
we may say a warm discussion, for several of the
gentlemen were perspiring very freely, this is referred
to the Bread Committee. Another of the actors now
rises, and, with an expression of the deepest emotion
depicted upon his countenance, says “ that he has been


requested by a friend, who is near his grave, to pray
the remittance of a certain fine for allowing’ pigs to
stray.” Referred to the Pig Committee for conside-
ration. A letter is read from Mrs. Grumble, com-
plaining of people allowing their geese to stray at night,
thereby disturbing her night’s rest. Referred to the
Goose Committee. Also of a certain house in her
neighbour’s yard being in a state calculated to injure
her health. Referred to the Committee. A letter
is also read from Mr. Jeremiah Grumble, complaining
of the top of his chimney having been blown off, and
requesting them to erect a breakwind at the west end
of the town. Referred to the Breakwind Committee ;
or rather, it was about to be, when they recollected
there had not been one formed; which, however, was
soon done, and accordingly referred. The thick-headed
gentleman announces his intention to mizzle, and
accordingly takes up his calf-skin cap, and having
previously given a wink to the little gentleman in the
cloak, who seemed fully to understand its meaning, as
he also followed the example of his friend; and after
an interchange of “tattas,” “salaams,” “ take care of
yourselves “mind you don’t get on the spree,” and
other similar adieuals, these two interesting-looking
individuals adjourn to the nearest public-house to pass
away a few spare hours. Another gentleman who
had been amusing himself by catching flies in the
corners of the windows, and holding them up to his
ear by their wings, by which means he produced that
melodious sound better known as a buzz, also inti-
mates his intention of “ hooking itso that we had
better adopt that course which so many of our colonists
have endeavoured of late to do, familiarly termed
“ boltingbut ere we do so, let us say farewell to
the actors who have been the means of causing so
much amusement, and to express our hope that, ere
long, we shall have an opportunity of criticising their
performances minutely.


It is yet but a quarter past three o’clock, and what
is to be done now? Well, let us endeavour to fill up
our cup of pleasure, and indulge in a trip to the
Port, which, thanks to the ingenuity and enterprise
of our colonists, we are able to do without being com-
pelled to bear the miseries of an omnibus, or what is
ten times worse, a Port cart; although there were a
few little incidents which were highly amusing in this
mode of travelling —a remark in which, we may rest
assured, the elder portion of the fair sex will concur
—amongst others, that of “ running into a cart,”
which the driver would inform you was a rare bit of
fun; or “ having a spill,” racing at the rate of five-
and-twenty miles an hour, and being jerked about
two feet from the bottom of the cart, and sometimes
out altogether, was very amusing; the felicity of
being jammed in with about a dozen jolly tars, smoking
and filling the atmosphere with their delightful per-
fume ; leaving alone the pleasant position which you
are obliged to place yourself in, with your knees in
close proximity with your mouth, on account of having
an immense trunk at the bottom of the cart; or in the
middle of three or four old ladies, who are screaming
and creating a most awful disturbance, to the infinite
amusement of the driver. But however pleasant all
this may be, we have certainly relinquished it with
little regret, and can now view the beauties of nature
through a dirty glass, and listen to the fascinating
sound of a steam-engine, exclusive of the treat of
inhaling the smoke, which is given in.
Having arrived at the Station, we will instantly
obtain a ticket, as there is little time to lose; and
they might, perhaps, by way of a change, leave for
once at the proper time, although it will be rather
an unusual thing if they do. We have at last arrived
at the Promenade, after obtaining our ticket and
nearly broken our neck in tumbling down forty or


fifty steps, knocking, during our descent, an old lady
against the wall, and a little boy over altogether, for
which we received a storm of abuse from the old lady,
notwithstanding our repeated prayers for pardon. We
are now conducted to a carriage by a tall gentleman
in a gloomy suit of black, where we seat ourself by
the side of a very jolly-looking person, evidently an
old sea captain, and whose name is familiar to us from
seeing it frequently at the end of books. The before
mentioned old lady has also entered, as also a very
aristocratic dignified-looking individual, so that the
occupants of our compartment only amount to four.
We are now in a state of muteness, or rather cough-
at the rate of twice a minute, for the sake of doing
something. We have already said that it is a fine
day, and several other remarks concerning the weather •
so it will not do to broach this subject.
The guards and ticket takers are running about at
a terrific pace, (for it has been hinted that one of the
directors is coming down ; so, of course, this accounts
for itj) shouting out —“Port? Port? First class,
mum ? Yes, sir, in a moment. Second class, sir ?
Yes, mum. Pll see to you in a moment. Here you
are, sir ! ” and other similar interesting observations.
Ladies and gentlemen are coming down the stairs,
tumbling and slipping alternately, in fear of losing the
train. The station master now demands —“if all’s
ready ?” and having received an affirmative reply, the
bell rings, and the engine screams, in which the old
lady next to us joined —for it appears, this is her first
railway trip, and she of course imagines it to be either
a child under the wheel, or the boiler burst; (for
ladies are generally in fear concerning the boiler.)
However, the captain consoles her, by the information,
that its only the driver got his leg under the wheel.
We are now what is termed “flying along V 9 going
at the least fifteen miles an hour. The captain has


commenced amusing’ us by relating* a few accounts of
railway collisions, and the terrible consequences arising*
therefrom ; of the heartrending* screams of the women,
and the agonising* cries of all present, which is working
the old lady almost to madness ; at which, our old
friend the captain winks, and seems highly deligdited,
whilst the aristocratic individual opposite assumes a
look bordering on threatrical grandeur. The captain,
however, still continues recounting the many accidents
which are likely to take place on new lines, and gives
a most alarming start whenever the carriage swerves j
whereupon, the old lady gives a faint scream, and asks,
whatever it could have been ? and expresses her firm
determination never again to venture on a railway, for
it would surely be the death of her! But this, the
captain informs her, is nonsense ; and then pictures to
her the awful scenes which he has witnessed; of the
engine running off the line ! the boiler bursting ! or of
tumbling into a river ! while the old lady remains
breathless with anxiety and fear, and says, that if it
please God, she should arrive safe, it is the last time
she’ll ever put her foot in a railway carriage. Although
even this is nothing to the scene which took place
while crossing the bridge, and the expression of the
old lady’s face at that moment, will certainly remain
in our memory, and be held to be the truest definition
of what fear is that can possibly be delineated, exclu-
sive of the iron grasp which she gave our arm during
that awful moment to her ; and we could certainly not
help reflecting on the contrast which was exhibited by
this weak-minded woman, as she then appeared, looking
an object of pity —and as the bullying*, enraged, in-
furiated person, as she appeared after our unfortunate
encounter with her at the railway station.
We have at last arrived safely at the Port, much
to the gratification of the old lady; and as to the
captain, he remained in the carriage for a few minutes,


to indulge in a roar of laughter at the spree he has had.
As our adventures at the Port will only be a tedious
narrative of uninteresting’ incidents, we will allow the
curtain again to drop; but ere we do so, let us hope
that our lady friends will learn to treat such characters
as our companion, the captain, with that contempt they
so well deserve, and not be prejudiced against railway
travellings by accounts of boilers bursting, or running
off the lines ] for we must bear in mind that accidents
with horse vehicles far outnumber them * and if we
entertain such vulgar notions as these, or allow them
to come between ourselves and our happiness, our share
of pleasure will be but small indeed.
It is now half-past eight o’clock, and we again
appear to prosecute our search for pleasure and amuse-
ment ; after having spent a pleasant afternoon at Port
Adelaide, unaccompanied by any remarkable event,
(except that of being capsized out of a boat), and re-
turned again to town, done ample justice to our evening
meal, and renovated our person, so as to appear as
becomes a debauchee. And now, having’ witnessed
the solemnity of the court of justice, the amusement of
the theatre, and experienced the pleasure of a railway
trip —(the boat excursion we will not notice, as the
unpleasantness of being emerged into the water com-
pletely cancelled all pleasure,) —we will conclude the
day with the revelry of the ball room.
Now the questions of course are — u Where is the
ball room V 9 and a what is it like V 9 It is a Bal
Masque ; and from rumour, it will be the finest that
has ever taken place in Adelaide j but as there has only
been one before, and that the most disgraceful affair
ever witnessed, this recommendation is no criterion
whatever. As to its whereabouts, we shall not say:
but anyone that has travelled through the lovely
Italy, and is acquainted with all its most beautiful
waterfalls, will recognise a familiar term in the name


of the hotel ; wherein this unprecedented affair is to
take place; and where; after a few minutes’ walk; we
find ourselves. Having* paid the fee for admittance*;
viz., five shillings and .the domino (which is of course
indispensable); one shilling*; we will enter. The room is
certainly a fine one, and well adapted for its purpose,
althoug*h, as yet, there are not a great many in it.
They are now promenading in readiness for the music,
during which time we will notice a few of the most
prominent characters. As a king ought always to be
looked upon as the chief personage in whatever sphere
he may move, we must, in accordance therewith, make
it our duty to commence with him, in this present
instance. The mighty monarch—the crooked backed
tyrant—is impersonated by a short individual of
about five feet two inches in height, and who is
evidently well acquainted with the grandeur of his
position. He walks at the rate of thirty steps to the
minute, with his eyes fixed intently on the ground,
utterly disregardless of the lady hanging on his arm,
who is dressed in whiteness—we were going to say
virgin whiteness—but must refrain.
The king’s dress is of the most extravagant nature,
and the bits of glass and spangles look very dazzling.
The crown, which is made of pasteboard and most
ingeniously ornamented with ladies’ hair pins, but-
tons, and gilt, looks surpassingly beautiful; while the
red velvet cloak and handsome shoes make a fine
finish to the dress.
Next to Richard comes the poor heart-broken
• Hamlet, walking with all-becoming grace and dignity,
blended of course with sorrow, although, at times; we
fear he entirely forgets the loss of his noble father,
and indulges in a, fit of laughter, in which the female
in pink takes paft. This noble youth is followed by
a person in a blue shirt, which contrasts very poorly
with the splendid attire of the two former. This


individual is ridiculing the king and prince in a most
traitorous manner, and deserves at the very least to
be exiled according to the customs of the country.
Next to this inelegantly attired character comes
one in a most eccentric kind of dress, and has
evidently been made from the dictates of his imagi-
nation, although he asserts most positively that it is
one of the ancient style; but if it is so, it must be
an antideluvian costume.
The next one is decidedly the most amusing
character in the room, and reminds us of a cat on hot
bricks or in tights. This is an impersonation of the
celebrated Grimaldi, and is remarkably well sustained.
Then come a lot more eccentrically dressed gentle-
men—supposed to be of the reign of Charles the First.
Others, in blue shirts and their every day clothes—
all walking with the dignity which they imagine is
due to their respective stations; and certainly, taking
them on the whole, present as fine and true a defini-
tion of what are termed guys as can possibly be.
The female portion are of course very elegantly
attired. Here is the pretty innocent girl of sixteen,
just commencing her career of dissipation, from which
she will never be released —a reality sad indeed to
reflect on. Here again is the coarse vulgar looking-
scullery girl, in satins, silks, and lace, and whose
faults are greatly hidden by the mask. This is the
class of young ladies that mostly enjoy bal masques
—with pock-marked faces and offensively low looking
countenances, who attend, night after night, at this
well-known place of amusement, in the vain hope of
being able to indulge in their propensity for dancing,
which of course they are always disappointed in,
until the arrival of the much-admired bal masque, on
which occasion they hide the imperfections of their
skins with an elaborately worked domino, and make
their first appearance as Lola Montes in the Spider


Dance, or some other such popular character, and to
a certain extent succeed; but, like the donkey with
a lion’s skin, there is something which they cannot
hide by adopting this course. An inelegant figure
which bespeaks ungracefulness, and an assumption of
that which they are not, which is emblematic of the
basest ignorance.
It is a fact which ought always to be borne in mind,
that enjoyment at a place of this kind depends chiefly
on the amount of confidence, impudence, or what is
improperly termed gallantry which a person possesses,
as they are decidedly the most necessary ingredients
to constitute pleasure; and it invariably happens that
those who are favoured so plentifully with these are
devoid of those better feelings which come under the
denomination of sensitiveness and pride, and though
adorning as they do our nature, are little fit to asso-
ciate with dissipation and debauchery, or to befit us to
be made the dupes, and succumb to the spurns of a low
despicable class of females, whose mode of subsistence
alone entitles them to the world’s contempt.
Poverty alone is contemptuous to the aristocrat;
what, then, ought to he a combination of poverty,
ignorance, and vice ?
But if enjoyment is to hold the sway,
Pride and our finer feelings must give way.
After apologising for having committed so rash an
attempt at poetry, we will venture to give an instance
which will fully prove this assertion. Having selected
a partner for the quadrille, obtained her consent,
bowed, and several other incidental feats, we took our
place, delighted at the idea of having obtained so
pleasant and interesting a young lady. After a little
conversation on different subjects, which w r ould not
interest our readers if we were to mention them, she
walked across the room to speak to a friend, as she
said. This of course was nothing, to leave a set of


quadrilles, to hold a few minutes’ conversation with a
friend; so we assumed a look of the most perfect in-
difference, and put what is termed the best face on the
matter. The music struck up, and the dancing* com-
menced, while we, being* fortunately at the side,
anxiously awaited the arrival of the lady. At leng-th,
our turn came, but, alas ! no partner * when, on
looking* round—conceive our consternation and disgnst,
on beholding* her whirling* through the dance with
o # O O
some horse-dealing* gentleman!
We are quite ready to admit that an old gentleman,
seated cosily in an arm chair at his fireside, would look
quite as much u at home ” as we did at that very in-
teresting discovery. So having* made as polite a bow
as could be expected under the circumstances, we
walked to the end of the room, and indulged in a
nobbier, leaving the young lady no doubt highly amused
at the game she had played—a game which it is pretty
evident we admired exceedingly. But this we after-
wards learnt was a mere nothing, and there was never
any notice taken of such, which made us even worse
than before; for if this was nothing, whatever could
the something be ? surely, nothing less than blowing
your brains out for fun ! Acting therefore on this
assurance, and bearing in mind the old adage, and in
this instance, an appropriate one,—“ That if we are
in Borne, we must do as Borne does,” or something to
this effect, we concealed our feelings of disgust, and
passed it off to the best possible advantage —for if such
little annoyances as these were taken notice of, we
should have to retire to a corner and hold a consul-
tation with our feeling’s once a minute.
It is now highly amusing* to watch some of the
fancy dress gentlemen (what they would term) dancing
—many of whom have evidently but just acquainted
themselves with the art, and to see in what a graceful
manner they keep treading on the ladies’ toes j or in


endeavouring- to do some extraordinary feat, come down
on their backs or noses, and g-et up with a very knowing 1
look, wishing to indicate, that it was done on purpose.
But take it all together, the dancing- is got through
admirably, although there is no doubt many of them
have had a hard and tedious day's work, in finishing a
pair of boots or trowsers, urged on and exhilarated by
the anticipation of this grand event, let alone the
wearying nights they have had in thinking of it, and
how easy it is to fancy with what pains have their
mothers or sisters taken to make that ridiculously fine
domino or frill shirt, which, as they severally expected
would create quite a sensation throughout the room,
aided, of course, by the fierce and alarming moustaches,
hooked into the nose : but, alas ! it is a vain thought
j o
to imagine that any dress, however fine, will be noticed
here; for they all study too much their own amuse-
ment to observe such trifles.
The dancing gets very exciting, and each one, as a
matter of course, imagines he is being regarded with
intense admiration. Grimaldi is better than ever, and
is a source of amusement to all, disfiguring his coun-
tenance in a most horrible manner, and jumping and
leaping about to such a frightful extent, that a tall
gentleman had the audacity to say that it reminded
him of leap year. The noise is now very great \ —one
or two of the young ladies have evinced a slight desire
to display their pugilistic abilities, but it ended at the
second round, or rather, the fifth scratch, and the
fourth hit \ and after an interchange of the most dis-
gusting language conceivable, it terminated ; —and we
actually heard one of them say to a friend, that if it
hadn't dropped, she would have knocked daylight
through the infernal—female of a dog! but this is
looked upon as being a very slight occurrence. King
Richard has completely lost all his dignity and fierce
aspect; and as to Hamlet, he is becoming quite up-


roarious, and melancholy sits very badly on his counte-
nance, or rather doesn’t sit at all.
The most conspicuous class of individuals now
present are youths of about eighteen or twenty years
of age, a greater part of whom belong to the Jewish
persuasion, who swagger about with cigars in their
mouths, hallooing for something to drink, exhibiting
their money —which no one knows where they get it
from—threatening every now and again to punch some
modest individual’s head, until they ultimately make a
mistake in their character, and have the felicity of
being kicked across the room, which they pass off with
all becoming impudence, but never think of resenting;
so that our friends will know what course to adopt in
reference to such as these. There are also a great
many of what are termed flash swells, with riding
whips and large moustaches —very frequently seen in
the stage boxes of theatres, or at the doors of concert
rooms, and who have a very bad habit of making their
ingress to these places without payment of admittance
fees. These men are without either principle, wit, or
money, but whose chief custom is to, what is termed,
spong’e on whoever is foolish enough to allow them.
The refreshment table or bar, whatever it may be
termed, is surrounded with customers, —for getting
drunk is the principal feature in both sexes, and is
considered indispensable to the evening’s amusement,
especially with young men who, were it not for this,
would be unable to relate on the following day of their
remarkable adventures, of their having got drunk and
given a fellow a good thrashing, of being taken in
charge by a policeman, of having knocked the policeman
head over heels into a ditch and took to their heels; of
having broken in the door of an old woman’s house,
and again being chased by a constable, and innumerable
other occurrences which their imaginations conjure up.
The scene is now anything but a pleasant one. The


dancing- is certainly more spirited —if it is spirited to
create a disturbance and jump about. The masks are
mostly dispensed with, so that there is now a better
opportunity of viewing* the beauties of the room, such
as they are. There, among*st the pretty, interesting
looking, yet fallen girls of fifteen or twenty, is a woman
who, but a few months ago, was convicted of theft, and
has just paid the penalty of her crime ; and there, the
more despicable brothel keeper. Turn again to the
male portion of the assemblage 5 there are numbers of
w T hat are termed our aristocrats, dancing, laughing, and
enjoying themselves in the company of these females,
more no doubt than those of their own sphere ; but if
these are the noble feelings which constitute that
superior mind which we look for in our aristocracy, the
race must certainly be degenerating. There, again,
are a number of articled clerks, who form by no means
the smallest portion of the assemblage: government
clerks of the junior or lower order, suffering the
excruciating pain of having their heads propped up
and their chins cut by the novel shirt collar, familiarly
termed all rounders, which of course gives rise to a
little facetiae amongst the lower class, such as “its
enough to give him the “ coherer morbus,” or “ twig
collarsanother remarks that it is a pity to see a
man committing suicide for the sake of fashion, and
various other remarks of the same nature. Next to
them come the town fops, including Jew boys, billiard
markers, drapers’ assistants, grocers’ assistants, shoe-
makers, and theatricals of the lowest order. We could
even go lower than this \ but we must not forget the
fact that we ourselves are, though not associating with
them, in their company.
The ladies with the sweeping dresses look very
uncomfortable, as some clumsy chieftain treads on them
and almost draws the skirt from the body; and cer-
tainly, as far as appearance is concerned, the aspect is
not so pleasing as in the forepart of the evening. Many


of the gentlemen are quite boisterous and are standing
about in clusters, tossing or sparring—the latter game
of which will end in a serious disturbance. The costly
dresses begin to look very queer indeed—for what with
perspiration, porter, and wine stains, it is not to be
wondered at. Everything' is now approaching what
may be truly called confusion. The effects of the
drink are becoming too visible with both sexes; and
the spectacle, truly an unpleasant one \ for to behold
one or two hundred persons, of both sexes, almost in a
state of inebriation, is a sight that can hardly be imagined ;
besides that which accompanies it, such as their conver-
sation which is of the most disgusting nature, and their
behaviour obscene and offensive in every respect,
although of course we do not mean to say that all in
the room are in the state just described; for we shall
be only doing justice to a few, but a very few, of the
female portion in paying' that their behaviour, or, at
least, what we have witnessed to-night would become
the most refined class and could not offend the most
fastidious ; and it is certainly a matter of deep regret
to think that those who were ordained by nature to
adorn society should associate with scenes which, how-
ever indifferent they may seem to them, cannot but
harrow up feelings of the bitterest pain. Let us then
take our departure, ere a more melancholy aspect is
presented ] for it tends, at present, far more to awaken
indignation and disgust than to promote amusement in
the slightest degree.
Our day’s adventures are now at an end j and our
promise to acquaint the pleasure-seeking man with one
mode of passing away a spare day is now fulfilled.
True, many of the scenes we have witnessed are not of
every day occurrence, although, in this respect, we
must congratulate ourselves on our good fortune, in
having selected a day affording more than ordinary
amusements. But, ere we seek that pleasure, which
will be sweeter than all we have yet experienced—calm


repose • let us express a sincere wish, that those kind
citizens, to whom our allusions have been too severe,
will show their g*ood sense, by not allowing* themselves
to be in the least offended, more especially our much
respected fellow-colonist, who has appeared under the
nomine de guerre of u Monkey;”—(this is indeed
knocking* a man down and asking* him how he came
there) —although, as we before remarked, we know,
from his naturally kind-hearted disposition, this excuse
is quite unnecessary; but our conscience has stricken
us with the fear, that we have perhaps encroached a
little too far on that amiability.
As to our old friend the manager, we candidly con-
fess he has but received his full share of praise ] there-
fore, he cannot of course complain.
It is trusted, however, that these few apologies will
suffice, from one who hopes, at some future time, to
compensate for the errors he has fallen into, in criti-
cising* a people, the welfare of whom is his chief deligffit j
and if he but receives a small share of encouragement,
will make it his duty t 6 endeavour, as far as lies in
is power, to promote. So ends our epilogme. A waive
of our hand, a kind g*ood nigiit to all, and the curtain
falls—may we earnestly hope, to a not displeased
audience.


