

SPEECH
OF
The Hon. Sir Henry Parkes,
G.C.M.G.,
TO
THE CITIZENS OF SYDNEY,
IN THE GAIETY THEATRE,
Saturday , June 13th, 1891 .
“ONE PEOPLE: ONE DESTINY.”
SYDNEY:
TURNER AND HENDERSON,
HUNTER STREET.
1891.




SPEECH
OF
The Hon. Sir Henry Parkes,
G.C.M.G.,
TO
THE CITIZENS OF SYDNEY,
IN THE GAIETY THEATRE,
Saturday, June 13th , 1891.
“ONE PEOPLE: ONE DESTINY."
SYDNEY:
TURNER AND HENDERSON,
HUNTER STREE
1891.


NOTE.
The following speech is from the excellent report
of The Sydney Morning Herald , of June 15th,
with some few corrections, for the most part
verbal.


Sir Henry Parkes at the Gaiety Theatre.
“ONE PEOPLE: ONE DESTINY.”
AN ENTHUSIASTIC RECEPTION.
On Saturday evening, June 13, in response to an invitation
from Sir Henry Parkes to the citizens of Sydney, an
immense audience assembled at the Gaiety Theatre to hear
an address by the Premier. The hour fixed for opening
the proceedings was 8 o’clock, but long before that time
the building was literally packed. At half-past 7 o’clock it
was impossible for anyone to get much beyond the passage
leading to the stalls, and that space soon became blocked.
Late arrivals found that they could obtain no more than a
glimpse inside the main entrance to the theatre, and several
hundred persons congregated outside who were perforce
content to gather from the cheering inside an idea of how
things were progressing. It had been announced that a
portion of the dress circle would be reserved for ladies, but
so vast was the crowd that a few minutes after the doors
were thrown open all the available room was occupied by
the sterner sex. Fortunately the committee, with the
assistance of Mr. Foley, the lessee, managed to keep
inviolable the privacy of the stage boxes on either side, and


here a number of ladies—amongst whom were Lady Parkes
—secured comfortable accommodation. A large attendance
of citizens was, of course, anticipated, but the Gaiety
Theatre has probably never before held so great an
assemblage; and as a political demonstration the meeting
of Saturday night has been unequalled for some years past
for enthusiasm and good order. Looking from the back of
the dress-circle the picture was striking enough, but the
effect was much enhanced where one could view the
audience from the back of the footlights. From this
position it seemed somewhat difficult to realise how such a
concourse of people could have jambed themselves in the
comparatively small area bounded by the walls of the
Gaiety. Those who were on the stage found the temperature
exceedingly trying, and the state of affairs in the dress-circle
and stalls is only known to those who were enlightened by
personal experience. Considering the circumstances the
patience exhibited was remarkable, and when at 8 o’clock
the curtain was raised, the upturned and expectant faces ol
the auditory in front was a study, and furnished abundant
evidence that those present were seriously bent upon
hearing and treasuring every word that Sir Henry had to
say. The step adopted of keeping the curtain down
until the last moment was no doubt not arranged
with any view to dramatic display. The audience
knew that behind the painted canvas the scene was a very
matter-of-fact one, but nevertheless when the curtain was
rapidly run up at 8 o’clock the effect was electrifying. The
Premier received an ovation such as never before had made
the walls of the Gaiety ring, and for a minute or two
nothing could be heard but deafening cheers, and scarcely
anything could be seen but waving hats. As an experienced
politician subsequently remarked, the reception accorded
to the veteran statesman was one of the warmest that he


ever remembered. Sir Henry Parkes was accompanied by
a large body of supporters, among whom were the Hon.
Dr. Garran, M.L.C., the Hon. W. H. Pigott, M.L.C., the
Hon. John Macintosh, M.L.C., the Hon. John Davies,
M.L.C., Messrs. C. L. Garland, W. Neill, Dr. Clune, Pastor
Allen, W, Goddard, and other leading citizens. The Hon.
Daniel O’Connor arrived later in the evening, and was
welcomed in such a flattering manner as possibly to wipe
out the remembrance of his recent troubles in the south,
where his political meetings were rendered unpleasantly
sultry for him and the air was laden with anathema,
abnormally ancient eggs and flying bluestone. The speech
of Dr. Garran, who presided over the meeting, was listened
to with respectful attention, but it was evident that the
audience was anxious for the address of the evening, and
when one gentleman fired off a feeble joke, and asked Dr.
Garran if he would “ guarantee ” anything, the chairman
prudently sat down. The Premier, on rising, was enthusi-
astically greeted, and throughout the course of his speech
there was not the slightest attempt to foment disorder.
One rash person ventured to inquire about the North Shore
Bridge, but was promptly silenced by a remark from Sir
Henry that he would be very glad if the querist would go
over any bridge which would lead him out of that meeting.
For any little pleasantry of this kind the speaker was, as
usual, apt in repartee, and for any interruption having an
exasperating or exciting tendency he administered a caustic
reprimand. The great majority of the audience, too,
quickly applied a drastic remedy where senseless inter-
jections were indulged in, by ejecting the interjector, who
quickly found himself lifted over the partition near the
entrance to the theatre, where he had ample opportunity
to cool his ardour in the fresh night air. There was, how-
ever, no interruption sufficient to break the continuity of


Sir Henry Parkes’ address, and when he closed with a
peroration in which he pictured the people of Australia
reposing in peace, union, freedom, and prosperity for
ever,” the audience rose and lustily cheered. The usual
vote of thanks was carried unanimously, and Mr. O’Connor
having delivered his philippic, the meeting terminated with
an acknowledgment of the chairman s services and time
cheers for the Queen.
The Chairman said he was going to address them as
fellow-electors, but he remembered that the ladies as yet
were not fellow-electors. But electors or not electors,
they were there that night by the invitation of the
Prime Minister of this country —(cheers)— who had
hired that hall and asked them to come and listen,
because he had something of importance to say to them.
(Hear, hear.) He would almost insult them as free and
independent electors if he entreated them to give him a
fair and courteous hearing. (Cheers.) In his judgment, if
they were not willing to give him a hearing, they were not
free, they were not independent, and they did not deserve
to be electors. (Cheers.) They were all the more under
an obligation to deal fairly with the great speaker that
night because he was not there altogether of his own free
will. (Hear, hear.) If he and his colleagues had been
allowed to carry out their programme, they would have
still been sitting in Parliament, endeavouring to carry on
the business of the country. (A voice ; “ What rot.”)
But the leader of the Opposition had brought about a
dissolution of Parliament. Now, he was not going to say
one word personally offensive to Mr. Dibbs. He was one
of those who believed that honourable politics did not stand
in need of personal abuse. (Cheers.) A great cause lost
more than it gained by such disgraceful proceedings.


(Hear, hear.) But Mr. Dibbs, as a public man, was
responsible to the country fcr what he had said, and what
he had done in his public capacity. He had forced this
appeal to the country, and it was for him to justify the
course that he had taken. In fairness to him, let it be
said that sixty-two members of Parliament voted with him,
and shared the responsibility with him, and they had to
justify to their constituents this indictment—whether
Sir Henry Parkes and the present Government had lost the
confidence of Parliament and of the people. (A voice :
“So they have.”) That was the issue of Mr. Dibbs,
choosing his own time, choosing his own language, writing
the pleadings himself had put before them, and that was
the question which they, the electors, before the end of the
month, would give their verdict upon. (Cheers.) They
were really the political grand jury of that country they
were the last appeal in all disputed political questions.
They would not be on their oath, but they would be on
their honour, and they would have to record their votes
with a sense of the responsibility cast upon them, as the
people had in their own hands the determination of the
destinies of the country. (Cheers.) What was this
•question they had to decide? —confidence or no confidence.
That was the language Mr. Dibbs had selected—confidence
or no confidence —more confidence or less confidence.
Had they confidence in the Ministry that was or that was
to be ? Had they more confidence in the present Ministry
or more in the one that was to be ? It was not a question of
measures, but men. (A voice Measures, not men.”) There
was no reference to measures in the motion Mr. Dibbs sub-
mitted to the Assembly. (Cheers.) Now, how were they to
test public men but by what they had done, or what they might
•do? The present Ministry had been in office two years, and
the principal argument against them was that they had not


done all that they wanted to do. He never knew a Ministry
that did. (A voice: “It would take them fifty years.”)
Perhaps they might if they were prevented, but they did
all they were able to do under the circumstances. (Cheers.
Now, what he would like to ask Mr. Dibbs, without dis-
paragement to himself, was, could he show any two years
in which he controlled the Government of the country in
which he did more for public works, for technical education,
for agriculture and forestry, or in which his administration
could compare more favourably with the present Ministry ?
If he could show that record, it was highly creditable to him ;
but he ought to show it. If he could not show it, why ask
the public to show more confidence in him than in Sir
Henry Parkes ? (Cheers.) This question of no confidence
in the Government meant that they put confidence in
somebody else —not Sir Henry Parkes, but him. Mr. Dibbs
should show, too, that he would do more for them by past
record than Sir Henry Parkes. (Voices: “So he can ” ;
and “ No.”) Possibly he could. (Laughter.) He would
not keep them from Sir Henry Parkes another moment.
(A Voice : “Do you guarantee anything?” and laughter.)
He had only to say this: In addition to matters of local
government, which concerned them all dearly, the whole
country was interested in the great question of federation,
and the question which Mr. Dibbs invited them to consider
at that election was whether the cause of federation was
safer in his hands or those of the present Prime Minister of
the country. That was the issue. (Cheers.)
Sir Henry Parkes was received with tremendous
cheering, the audience rising and waving their hats. He
said : Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —I cannot but return
to you my warmest thanks for the great welcome you have
given me. (Hear, hear.) I come before you this evening,


not to enter into any wrangle with anybody whatever, ta
avoid the indulgence of anything like personal abuse, but
to state the case for which I am responsible as the Prime
Minister of the country. (Hear, hear.) I do not appear
here as taking any special interest In the election of the east
or the west or the south, but I am here to speak to the
citizens of the free city of Sydney. (Cheers.) In this great
contest —and it will be the greatest contest that has taken
place in this country —(hear, hear) —in this great contest
it is gratifying and comforting to me to find that there are
men like Mr. Barton who show a courageous and clear
grasp of principle, a power of exposition and studiousness-
of purpose worthy of any country and any cause —(cheers)
and I will say that it is gratifying to me to see gentlemen
assuming the designation of labour candidates who despise
the trickery and attempts to delude them in this election.
(Loud cheers.) • And we see clearly that the cause of
restriction, the cause of dearness, the cause of the
depreciated value of money, which are all summed up in the
word protection, is not in the interest of the poor man's
family. I see no reason why, in a democratic country like
this, a labouring man should not honourably perform the
duties of a member of Parliament. (Cheers.) I am quite
sure that I have had the honour of the acquaintance of
working men who would perform their duties much better
than I have seen them done, and therefore I am glad that
these men have come out on their own ground, and have
given the cold shoulder to the persons who would be their
pretended advocates for their own purpose. (Cheers.)
Now I want- to call your attention—and pardon me if I call
you attention to facts which most of you know —to the main
points of the government under which the people exists.
(Hear, hear.) I think —and lam not alone in my opinion—
I think the system of responsible government is the freest,.


the highest, and the most just system that has yet been invented
by man. (Hear, hear.) Well, Parliamentary Governmentas it
•exists in England, and which we have pretty faithfully
■copied in our own Constitution, that government is
essentially different from the Presidential government of
America. America cannot be strictly called a republic—
it is a Presidential government pure and simple, and there
the chief magistrate is the chief executor of the laws, the
chief wielder of the executive power, and his Cabinet is
simply a committee of advisers, who have scarcely any
responsibility such as is known under our form of
government. Now, it is necessary to bear these facts
of the difference between these two forms of government
in mind to get a clear hold of the question I am about to
put before you. Under our form of government there is
no fixed period during which the affairs of the government
should be carried on, whether the peop'le like it or not.
In America that is the case. For four years the executive
power, whether its actions are pleasing to the inhabitants
or not, cannot be touched. But not so here. Under our,
as I think, much better form of government, the affairs of
the country are virtually conducted by a committee of men
who cannot continue in office to conduct them one day
longer than they have the confidence of the representatives
of the people. (Hear, hear.) Well, I stand at the head
of a body of men who, up to this point, have been entrusted
in a constitutional way to manage the affairs of this
country. To show you that we w r ere earnest in endeavouring
to transact this business, we convened Parliament in the
middle of May, whereas we might have delayed calling
Parliament until July or August, or even later. As Mr.
Bibbs’ name has been mentioned, I may give you one
illustration. In the year 1874 he called Parliament
together —that is, the Government to which he belonged—


for a short session to pass the Estimates, and sanction the
despatch of soldiers to Egypt. On that occasion he
pledged the Government, if the Parliament would vote
the Estimates in globo , if Parliament would vote them
without consideration, he pledged the Government to
convene Parliament early in May for the despatch of
business, and to pass a District Government Bill. He got
the Estimates in globo without consideration on the pledge
he gave to call Parliament together early in May, but he
did not call it together until the Bth September. There is
an instance of what other Governments have done. We v
being earnestly desirous of transacting the business of the
country, convened Parliament when we had seven unbroken
months before us in which to do the public business. I
challenge the common sense of the whole country to say
if that was not sufficient evidence of our good faith and
earnestness to do the business wanted by the people.
(Cheers, and a voice: “What about the North Shore
bridge ?”) I should be glad if that gentleman would go over
any bridge that leads out of this meeting. (Laughter.) Now,,
everv one of you, if he is a fair-minded man, can follow
me and prove my words by the public records. The
Governor’s speech on the opening of Parliament on 19th
May last stated that we were prepared at once to introduce
this bill, to establish district local government, and there
was plenty of time to pass it into law. If it ever is to be
passed into law there never will be a more favourable season
than there was at the end of May last. (Hear, hear). We stated 1
that we had a bill to amend the electoral law of the country,
to abolish the system of plural voting, and establish the
principle of one-man-one-vote in the country. (Hear, hear.)
Not only so, but this bill of ours went on to afford a remedy
for a great abuse that has been felt by a great class of the
people. The sheaiers, the gold miners, and the seaman of


this country have for years almost entirely lost their votes,
because if they live in Sydney or in any other place and
their particular avocation takes them from home when an
election comes on they cannot exercise the right of the
suffrage. This bill of ours supplied a remedy for this, and
would have given to these men, who are virtually disfran-
chised, their rights wherever they might be. This bill of
ours did more than this. It established a system of self-
registration which would be most effectual in stopping
personation and other forms of fraudulent voting. Here
there was a great reform in the electoral law. Besides this
we had in December last appointed a Royal Commission to
inquire into the conflicts betw r een employers and employed,
over which commission the gentleman in the chair presided.
(Cheers.) I think that a proof of our sincerity and
desire to find a remedy for the disastrous trouble that has
been upon the country —that we appointed this Royal Com-
mission. But, having appointed a Royal Commission, w T e
took immediate steps to turn the inquiry to good account,
and we had a bill prepared to establish in the case of strikes
courts of conciliation, and, if these courts had not the bene-
ficial effect, to establish tribunals for the conduct and deter-
mination of any case of arbitration. Well, these three great
measures, one to deal with local government throughout
the country, the other to thoroughly reform the electoral
law, and the other to endeavour to solve the great problem
of the trouble between capital and labour —these three great
measures were certainly enough for any Government in any
one session. But we went further. We had measures
prepared for regulating coal mining with a view of protect-
ing the lives of the miners and regulating their rights in
other respects; a bill for mining generally ; a bill to pro-
mote the conservation of water ; a bill to give to the electors
of this country the right of saying whether additional facili


ties should be afforded for the sale of intoxicating drinks.
(Cheers.) Well, that was the state of things when Parlia-
ment opened. There was no complaint made by any single
member against the wisdom or soundness of our policy.
(Hear, hear.) Neither the leader of the Opposition—l beg
his pardon, I mean the gentleman who is led by the Oppo-
sition—(laughter and cheers) —neither he nor any other
member raised any objection to the soundness, wisdom
and acceptability of our policy. Now, I want vou to pause.
(A Voice : “ Broken pledges.”) If it was a question of
broken pledges I could show a catalogue of broken pledges
which would smother a man who was not 6ft. 7in. like
Mr. Dibbs. (Cheers and laughter.) But I must beg you to
listen to me and not indulge in your funny interruptions
just now. I want to be heard and I want to be heard fairly
as talking to reasonable men. (Cheers.) If you will pause
and examine what is the usual course taken by a Parlia-
mentary opposition, and in that case I cannot do better than
take the House of Commons. I defy any one ofyoutofind
an instance where the Opposition in the House of Commons
had no complaint to make against the policy of the Govern-
ment, and yet attempted to turn them out of office. There
is no such instance in political history. If the measures
are such as are approved, like honourable men they support
them, and wait for another time for a change of Govern-
ment. (A voice : “That is what we want.”) The gentle-
man who interrupts me is like the Irish immigrant in the
United States, who on the day he landed, and was asked
how he intended to vote, said, “ Agin the Government.”
(Laughter.) Now, having pointed out to you what was the
programme of this administration, what were the measures
they were prepared not to promise, but to proceed to deal
with in Parliament, I will proceed to tell you what followed.
No sooner had Parliament met than the Government gave


notice of a resolution on federation. The reason of giving
notice so immediately was that Mr. Reid had boasted in the
newspapers that he intended to bring this matter forward
on the very first moment of the House meeting, and as we
were not desirous of delaying it we submitted the matter
at once, so that no complaint could be made Now, as I
do not wish to say one word to you which will not bear
proof, I have here in my hand the resolutions of which
we gave notice. This resolution asks the two Houses of
Parliament to approve of the Draft Constitution framed by
the National Convention, but it goes on in these words:
“ But it reserves to itself the right to propose omissions
or amendments, to be fully set forth by the proposer in each
case in a schedule, and to be finally considered, if deemed
advisable, by another convention, similarly constituted,
and in like manner representing all the colonies.” It
added : “ That this House further is of opinion that the
question, as dealt with by this Parliament should be sub-
mitted to the people in their electoral capacity for final
approval.” (Cheers.) The words I have read are from the
resolution of which we gave notice as soon as Parliament
met, and the misrepresentations which have been circulated
by gentlemen who ought to be ashamed of their proceeding
these misrepresentations are a parcel of falsehoods from
beginning to end. (Cheers.) We have all along invited
the Parliament and the people of this country to frame any
amendments they thought well in this Constitution , but
enough we contended that these amendments
should be considered by another body representing all the
colonies. And that must be apparent to every one of you,
that no Legislature by itself—neither that of Queensland,
that of New South Wales, nor that of Victoria—could deal
with the Constitution which had been framed by a body
representing all the colonies on equal terms. (Cheers.)


The Parliament has power, but it can exercise that power
rationally only in the way pointed out by the resolution.
Of course, a body of schoolboys could sit down and amend
on paper the Ten Commandments, but that would only
show they were schoolboys, that is all. Well, I have read>
to you a portion of the resolution which gave to the
Parliament the fullest possible power in the only reasonable
and constitutional way of amending this Constitution.
Surely that was a fair proposal to be made by a Govern-
ment. Surely that was a fair platform on which to invite
any critic who objected to any part of the draft constitution
to frame his amendments. (A Voice : “ What about touching
a comma.”) The gentleman who interrupts shows himself
to be utterly unable to understand what I am talking about.
(Cheers.) It is perfectly correct that I said at Hobart the
Parliament of any one colony could not touch a word or
comma of this Constitution by itself, but I pointed out then
and the dishonesty of these people consists in suppressing
the context of what I said—l pointed out then, that the
people were invited to amend it in any way they thought
proper, to be finally determined only by a convention
representing all the colonies ; and any one who will bestow
the slightest reflection on this great question will see that
is the only possible way. Now, to show you how this is
the only possible way, I must detain you a few moments to
give you a short synopsis of the history of the movement
up to when the Convention met. There was a Conference
in Melbourne in February of last year. At this Conference
all the colonies were represented. They agreed amongst
themselves that the Prime Minister of each colony should
introduce into the Parliament of his colony a resolution
approving of the appointment of delegates to a national
convention, and that these delegates should represent both
sides of the House. These resolutions came on in the
B


Assembly on May 7 of last year, and one of these
resolutions was in these words That the Constitution,
as adopted by the Convention, together with any documents
relating to the Constitution, be submitted as soon as possible
for the approval of the Parliament of this colony. Iht
resolutions submitted here were submitted by myself in my
capacity of Prime Minister. As many of you know, a
serious accident befell me a few days afterwards, and I was
quite unable to attend Parliament, and was detained in my
bedroom. The resolutions were before Parliament for four
months. During that time you will see that I could exercise
no influence in their determination. It is necessary to
explain this, as one of the charges against me is that 1
dominated the Parliament, and obtained the passage of the
resolutions against the judgment of Parliament. Why, !
was not there at all; and during my illness my life was in
danger more than once. I could not influence Parliament
at all. These resolutions were carried by 97 votes to 11.
(Applause.) Parliament appointed myself, the Treasurer,
Mr. M'Millan (cheers), Mr. J. P. Abbott-one of the
strongest men in the country (cheers), and Mr. Dibbs
(groans and cheers) to attend the Convention. You will
see therefore, that I and Mr. M'Millan were appointed
to represent our side of the House, and Mr. Abbott and Mr.
Dibbs to represent the Opposition. In the Council the
same resolutions were submitted, and the gentlemen
appointed were Mr. W. H. Suttor, Vice-President of the
Council, Sir Patrick Jennings,, and Mr. Edmund Barton.
Thus, the whole political life of the country was represented
by these appointments. What took place here took place
in every other colony in Australia. The Convention met in
due time, and it was one of the most orderly, stately, and
creditable bodies that ever sat in any of these colonies. It was
composed of the picked men of the whole country. Fifteen of


the delegates held the office of Prime Minister or had held it
in times past. A number of others—six or eight—held the
office of Attorney-General or had held it; and altogether
the Convention consisted of the very best men in Australia.
(Applause.) Well, they are the authors of this draft Con-
stitution Bill. And this bill has been issued within the
last day or two under the editorship of a distinguished
barrister, with an explanation of every clause which
had been critically examined by Mr. Reid and other men
who have condemned the bill. I advise you all to get this
diaft Constitution and study it for yourselves, and you must
come to the conclusion that even as it stands it is an admir-
able work. ( <l No, no,’’ and cheers.) It is very liberal and
more complete than any other Constitution in any English
colony or in any part of the English dominions. It is
immensely more liberal than the Constitution under which
we live in New South Wales. I say that it is in many
respects a great advance in clearness and in comprehensive-
ness, and gives greater liberties to the people than the
C onstitution under which we live at the present moment,
and it is a great advance upon the Constitution of the
Dominion of Canada. Although I express this opinion, I
-am as sensible as any man that the bill is not perfection,
and I should be quite willing to wait a considerable time to
have it made more perfect than it is I shall invite the new
Parliament—because you may rest assured that I shall meet
the new Parliament as Prime Minister—(enthusiastic cheers)
■ an d we need not wait long, because next Wednesday
night will show that we are 3 to 1 in the elections—(cheers)
■ say that I shall invite the new Parliament to do their
utmost to amend this Constitution in the way that I have
pointed out, which is the only way in which it can be
amended. (A Voice: “You will resign next week.”)
Well, Mr. Reid moved an amendment on the Address-in-


Reply to the Speech from the Throne, which is always
intended to be fatal to a Government, but his amendment
was defeated by a large majority. The Government then
thought they would lay some of their most important
measures before the House, because we had to look after
the interest of New South Wales as well as after the
interests of federation, and we should still have been in
time with the federation resolutions, because the other Par-
liaments were in recess. But we were not allowed to take
that course. Then came the motion of Mr. Dibbs. which
was cut and dried, because he had had it in his pocket so
long that it was nearly worn out. (Laughter.) 1 hat motion
was ready for any emergency. In so many words it meant
that the Opposition wanted to get into our places. It said
that the Government did not possess the confidence of the
House or of the country. Well, 63 members voted for it
and 63 against it. But if the Government could not carry
on in such a House how could Mr. Dibbs ? (A Voice :“ By
the help of Chinamen.”) The want of confidence motion
was defeated on the casting vote of the Speaker; but, of
course, the Government took it as a virtual defeat; they
advised a dissolution, and here we are before the electors
I will now ask you to bear with me whilst I sa)
a few words on the question of the federation of these
Australian colonies., I have gone over the addresses of
the candidates at present before the country. I hey amount
to several hundreds. (A Voice : “ Some of them will lose
their £4O ”) There is not one man out of fifty of them
who dares to say that he is opposed to Federation. So far
then the country has spoken out, not m favour of the
provincialists, but in favour of a united Australia. (A
Voice : “They are all against this Bill.”) I do not want
to be misunderstood. I wish my words to be clearly
apprehended, either for or against me. I believe that we


are now standing on the eve of a great break-up of parties.
I believe that the Protectionist cause, so far as New South
Wales is concerned, is dead and almost buried. (Cheers,
and “No, no.’') The parties who up to this time have
responded to the cries of the parish vestry will disappear,
and a great party of Australian unionists will spring up,
not in this colony alone, but from one end to the other of
Australia. And it will be for this great party of Australian
unionists to carry out the work of achieving our manifest
destiny in erecting the edifice of Australian union. And it
will be for them, for some years to come, to protect the
new Government not only from provincialists and from
disunionists, but from false friends and from dangerous
tinkering. This party will no doubt be confronted by the
advocates of disunion, and by the promoters of discord,
but the good men and true in Queensland, Victoria, and
throughout this colony will stand in one solid phalanx to
protect the new-born giant, and to see that no stealthy
assassin does it wrong. Bear with me for a little, and I
will show you what will take place so soon as Federation is
a consummation. There will from that moment be entire
Freetrade throughout all Australia. The border customs
.will be swept away, and no longer will there exist any
person to set colony against colony, or brother against
brother. What will follow ? Protection will have no hold
in any of the States, excepting in the elections to the
Federal Parliament; because the Federal Parliament must
take over the Customs of the whole of the colonies, and,
therefore, the contention whether the tariff of Australia
shall be a Freetrade tariff or a Protectionist tariff will be
remitted to the higher stage of the Federal Government;
and we in New South Wales, and the people of Victoria,
will have no more to do with Provincial Protection. All
this will be swept away from us except in our capacity as


electors of the Federation Parliament. Everyone will, I
think, admit that the question of settling the tariff of the
country is one in which the best men ought to be employed.
Whether you be in favour of Protection —and I admit as
freely as possible that a man may be honestly and sincerely
favourable to Protection —or of Freetrade, all rational men
will say that the question should be settled by the best,
the most experienced and the most sagacious men amongst
us. And we shall have the best men in the Federal
Parliament. One of the grounds of opposition against the
movement springs from those men of narrow minds and
narrow sympathies, who see that their chances in taking
part in the Federal Parliament will be gone for ever. The
House of Representatives is morally certain to be composed
of the men of the greatest experience, the most mature
judgment, and the greatest capacity in public affairs, and if
they should, unhappily from my point of view, settle this
great question in favour of Protection, I as a good citizen
must submit, but I should submit with a determination to
fight on my battle until the question is reversed. (Applause.)
The first great advantage to us from federation would be
freetrade throughout all the Australian colonies. The next
great advantage would be the remission of the great fiscal
question to the higher stage of the Federal Parliament; and
we as electors, and the people in V ictoria and the other
colonies as electors, to the new House of Representatives,
would fight out our battle ; but the vexed question would
disappear from the politics of the separate States for ever.
Now, there are several points of subordinate interest, but
points which should not be lost sight of, in connection with
this great question of federation. Somewhere or other the
seat of the Federal Government must be placed, and in my
judgment if New South Wales is true to herself —if she acts
the high, generous part of going into this federation as the


chief colony of the group, and aspiring, as she may aspire,
to leadership in the federation—if she goes into federation
in the frank, generous spirit, New South Wales has a better
prospect of having the seat of Government than any of the
other colonies. (Cheers, and “ No, No.”) It seems quite
proper for persons to say “ No, no ” who know nothing at
all about the matter. It is a question which cannot be dis-
cussed before an audience like this, because there are many
delicate considerations which ought not to be dragged pre-
maturely to light; but looking at our geographical position,
looking at the friendly disposition towards us of the other
colonies, looking at our leading position, and considering the
fact that we are the mother of all the other colonies, we have a
fair claim—and probably a better claim than any of the
other colonies—to that high position. But what would be
the case if the provincialists had their way ? If we stood
back and the other colonies federated without us, the seat
of the Federal Government would be gone from us for ever.
That is one disaster that would fall upon us by the blind-
sightedness of these provincialists. But the good sense,
the living patriotism, and the faithful adherence to purpose
on the part of my fellow countrymen of New South Wales
is such that there is no fear of that dangerous result which
the action of the provincialists would tend to bring about.
On the other hand, if we take our place and go into
federation as the leaders of the other colonies—and they
would welcome us as such—from our national qualifications
and from our history we have as fair, if not a fairer ;
prospect to that distinction than any of the other colonies.
But this brings me to another question—the revision of this
Constitution—and you will observe I have claimed the right
of revision. That revision ought to be done in a calm, sober
judicial manner. It ought not to be dictated by the high-
flown fustian that has fallen from the lips of several gentle


men giving voice to their criticisms, but in a spirit of judicial
impartiality worthy of so great a cause. It is only by
conducting our revision in this fair, well-informed, and
judicial spirit that we can hope to have our objections
considered with that authority which ought to attach to
them. Some gentlemen have, in the recent discussion on
federation expressed the opinion that the colonies should
be confederated, each retaining its own State powers. I
have heard many well-meaning men assert that they
would be in favour of a confederation of the colonies, which
would leave each colony independent. Well, that has been
tried. It has been tried in America, in Switzerland, in the
German Empire, and it has been found that a confederation of
States, with each State independent of the other, cannot hold
together for any real good purpose of government. The
great witness of the failure of the American confederation
was George Washington, and such a confederation is only
like a rope of sand. If any time of trouble should arise in
Australia, such as the appearance of a foreign power off
our coast, any decision would have to be referred to New
South Wales, to Victoria, to South Australia, to Tasmania,
to Queensland ; whereas, for the safety of the whole State,
prompt and vigorous action would be required. (Cheers.)
You will see, therefore, that there is no safety except in a
United Australia. (Loud cheers.) We could not get on as
a confederation of independent States. The thirteen
colonies of America, when they won their independence,
could not get on as a confederation of independent States,
and they never asserted their position in the world until
that great constitution was passed which made them one
mighty nation. (Cheers.) Now, gentlemen, do not be
deluded by any professions of confederation upon a plan
such as I have indicated. It would be but a will-o'-the-
wisp, and only a delusion and a snare. There is no other


way for the true federation of this Australasia than to unite
under one great Government—(cheers)—and depend upon
it even then we shall make a mistake if we do not give the
new Central Government adequate power. Every Govern-
ment, to be effective, must be armed with the necessary
power to maintain a national position, to protect national
interests, and to do all things necessary for preservation
of freedom, and the security of national life. (Cheers.)
It will be a fatal mistake, therefore, to curtail the power of
the Government we shall create when we are one as an
Australian nation—(cheers)— as brave and as powerful as
any other nation on the face of the earth, when we shall
have become “ one people, with one destiny,” and when we
shall be bound together by that crimson thread of kinship
that never can perish. (Loud cheers.) Australasia consists
of a territory of 3,161,470 square miles. We, the colony
of New South Wales, have only 310,700 square miles of
this immense stretch of country. The coastline of Australia
that encircles the total area, measures 8,850 miles, and we
in New South Wales have only 680 miles of this coast; so
that you will see New South Wales is but a small corner of the
whole of Australia. Now, federation would not make us sub-
jects of a foreign power ; we should be Australian subjects
still, under Australian government still, but instead of being
merely subjects of a small part of a great territory we should
be citizens of the whole of the vast Island Continent. We
surrender nothing; we, by federation, simply come under
another Australian Government of our own choosing, with
powers equal to that of any separate colony, but with large
additional powers, to frame the future, and under another
Government which will be rooted in the soil of Australia
as deeply as the present Government of New South Wales
is, but possessing powers to deal with all the great national
interests of the whole land. (Cheers.) Our freedom


would not be touched; we should be Australians still,
only we should owe allegiance to a Government stronger
and more colossal in all the attributes of government, be
more respected by the outside world, and be able to bear
our name with honour and authority among other nations
of the world. (Cheers.) You see, therefore, how perverted
people must be to persistently say we are giving up any
rights or privileges. We are only building with our own
hands a greater edifice of liberty, for the new Government
will be as much Australian and as much ours as the
present. The Constitution Bill scrupulously reserves to
the separate colonies every inch of their landed territory;
it reserves to the separate colonies every power for the
disposal of those lands, for dealing with their mineral
wealth, and all other matters necessary for good
government. How, then, can it for one moment be said
that we are about to surrender our rights or privileges, or
to sell our heritage ? (Cheers.) Now I will try to place
before you the facts of the case which brought the members
of the late Parliament face to face with their constituents.
Whatever may be said by candidates on the hustings, the
men who supported the motion moved by Mr. Dibbs voted
against district government, the one-man-one-vote principle,
the attempt to settle labour troubles without strikes, and
against other measures. It is of no use saying a word
to the contrary, because their votes proved the case
beyond dispute. (Interruption at the back of the hall.)
The Government therefore appealed to the country. In
federation itself we shall give commercial freedom between
all the colonies; we shall give a higher authority for the
settlement of the fiscal question ; we shall give colossal
power to deal with a large number of great national
questions, which neither New South Wales nor Queensland,
nor any other colony, can deal with alone. (Cheers.) I


now come, in conclusion, and briefly too, to the subject
of the position of New South Wales. No person, certainly
not one of those gentlemen in the back part of the audience
who are so good-naturedly interrupting me, can feel a
deeper interest in the progress of this colony than I do.
I have shown that interest at every stage of my life ; in
my long Parliamentary career, I have never lost an
opportunity of advancing New South Wales. (Cheers.)
I shall continue so to act. Although I am anxious that
the new Federal Parliament shall be composed of the test
men in the entire country, I can tell you most honestly I
have no ambition to be there myself. I shall be perfectly
contented during the remainder of my life to serve this
colony which I have served so long, and in acknowledgment
of which I have received such generous treatment from my
fellow-countrymen. (Loud and continued cheering.) I shall
do all in my power to bring about this federal union.
When that is accomplished I shall do all in my power to
secure the election of the best men to be found in New
South Wales to the House of Representatives, but for me —
I shall be quite content to occupy a leading place in the old
colony of New South Wales. I look forward to the great
event when we shall become a free great nation, with
aspirations and longings which no language can express.
I know I and those who work with me are on the right road,
and I know that those who oppose us are either mistaken
or wilfully blind, and are only groping along the by-ways of
national life. Long years ago an English poet said of
Australia :
Delightful land, in wilderness e’en benign,
The glorious past is ours, the future thine.
And then again—
Land of the free ! thy kingdom is to come 1


And it is coming swiftly, coming on golden wings, and
under those strenuous and radiant wings a great people
will repose in peace, in union, in freedom, and in national
prosperity for ever. (Loud and prolonged cheering.)
Mr. John MACINTOSH, M.L.C., proposed, and Mr. W.
H. PiGOTT, M.L.C., seconded, a vote of thanks to Sir Henry
Parkes, which was carried with the utmost enthusiasm, the
audience rising en masse and giving cheer after cheer for
the Premier.
During this latter part of the proceedings Mr. O’Connor,
the Postmaster-General, took a seat on the platform. His
appearance was the signal for another outburst of cheering,
which was mingled with allusions of disapprobation at the
treatment Mr. O'Connor has received at his election
meetings.
Sir Henry Parkes, in responding to the vote of
thanks, said : Ladies and Gentlemen, —I thank you from
the bottom of my heart for this renewal of your trust and
confidence. It will be one of the incentives that will cheer
me on to further services. I have been so well received in
all parts of the country that it is most gratifying to me to
find you give me a welcome equal to the warmest, and I
thank you from the bottom of my heart. (Cheers.)
Mr. O’CONNOR (who was cordially received) said that
the meeting had abundantly shown that the love of law and
order was deeply embedded in the hearts of the people of
the colony. In the great struggle which was now pending
between capacity and patriotism on one side, and disunion
and rebellion on the other—(applause)—every well-
ordered mind in this community had a great interest in
maintaining the liberty and privileges of the people, and
any man would be altogether unfitted, not alone for the
high office of Minister, but of the great position of a


member of Parliament, and would be unworthy the
liberty of citizenship, who would not have the courage to
pronounce his opinions and take his side on a great
occasion like this. (Applause.) He had taken his side,
and he was proud of the army in whose ranks he was
fighting, for he was battling side by side with men who
were desirous of preserving the glories, the traditions, and
the heritage of our race. He was proud of this great
country —(A Voice : “Thank you”)—and he believed that
the vast bulk of the people of Sydney and the colony
generally recognised that freedom of speech was a great
inheritance and should be preserved—(applause) —and no
one who had a cause worthy of support would for one
moment deny that freedom. Imagine the leaders who were
opposing the Government having as their auxiliaries men
who arrayed themselves on the side of disorder and anarchy.
(Applause.) They were there to oppose such men, and he
was proud to say that he shared in glory of being a member
of a Government which had the courage to say that the
majesty of the law must be maintained, and that meeting
must convince Sir Henry Parkes and his colleagues and
supporters that the intelligence, freedom, and strength of
the people of this country had endorsed in every way the
action of the Government. (Applause.)
At the invitation of Sir Henry Parkes, three cheers
were given for the chairman and three cheers for the Queen*
and the meeting then concluded. Subsequently Sir Henry*
upon leaving the theatre, was again cheered.


TURNER and HENDERSON. PRINTERS, SYDNEY


