

THE GOLDEN SCEPTRE.
“ All things are of God, who hath reconciled us to himself hy Jesus
Christ , and hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation ; to wit,
that God was 'n Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not im-
puting their tret-orsses unto them ; and hath committed unto us the
word of recone i iation. Now then we are ambassadors for Christ ,
as though God did beseech you hy us; we pray you in Christ's
stead , he ye reconciled to God. For he hath made him to he sin for
us, who knew no sin; that we might he made the righteousness of God
in him.” —2 Cor. v, 18 21.
There are two most blessed truths in this word of
Scripture. The first is, that God has provided a way
by which all may come to Him ; the second, that He
has given the ministry of reconciliation to His ser-
vants, to C£i,rry out the tidings.
The Lord now sits on the throne of grace, the mercy-
seat, with the Golden Sceptre stretched out; and His
servants are commanded to go far and wide to tell of
this good, news, these glad tidings,—transgressors of
the darkest characters are to be entreated to be recon-
ciled : for, “ God was in Christ, reconciling the world
unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them.”
This is to be the great message, —“ BE YE RECON-
CILED TO GOD,” If the sinner asks how a God
of justice can stretch out a golden sceptre to so vile a
wre + ’ then is-the evangelist to i*eply, Jesus died for
sinnera : “He that knew no sin was made sin for us,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in
This is glad tidings!! But O, sinner, beware
yon do not slight the tidings. Po not continue in
open rebellion against God, who still holds out, all


through the day of grace, THE GOLDEN SCEPTRE.
Suppose you were in a city, and that yor a ' the
citizens were in open rebellion against, y° ur lawful
king, and suppose he were able to come a f° rce
that might sweep you all away in an hour ; i nste ad
of doing so, he should hold out a golden' sc _ e l^ re ’ an d
say, “ Come and lay down your arms, I pardon
youand one part of the city were to bli ls l^ ieme the
message, and another were to make light
another were to say, “I am not so bad as o 1^ ers > ana
but few were to go out —what must the l :m o do ■
yes, what must he do ? He must, at last w * ien ids
long-suffering was over, “ miserably des ro y those
wicked men even though he stood so lotS rea dy to
pardon. Their rejection of his good tidi I .gL-^P. a )i~
be even worse than their former rebellion. Now, is
not this a plain case? Well, God is th>, gr'at King—
this world is the city—mankind are its intebitants—
the Gospel is the amnesty*—the saved are those that
come out to the King, believing his message —the lost
are the infidel, the scorner, the careless, that stay in :
for, the long-suffering of the God of all grace being
over, He will miserably destroy those wicked men
when He comes “ in flaming fire, taking vengeance on
them that know not God, and who obey not the gospel
of om Lord Jesus Christ: who shall''be pu. asd
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his (2 Thess. i,
8,9.) Reader, which is your character 1
* The offer of a free; pardon.
$, B. Bateman Printer, 22, Paternoster Row, E. G,


THE SON OF MAN
% J&nmm far % ®inws.
PREACHED IN ST. PETER’S CHURCH, MELBOURNE, ON
SUNDAY, JULY 15, 1866.
(SEVENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY.)
H. H. P. HANDPIELD,
INCUMBENT.
(Published by Request. J
*** One Paragraph has been added to the Sermon since it was
Preached, which seemed necessary to give
COMPLETENESS TO THE WHOLE.
MELBOURNE:
CHARLES MUSKETT, 78 BOURKE STREET EAST,
And 102 BRUNSWICK STREET, FITZROY.
1866.
' ♦ -




A SERMON FOR THE TIMES.
“And take heed to yourselves, lest at anytime your hearts be overcharged
with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and so that day
come upon you unawares. For as a snare shall it come on all them that
dwell on the face of the whole earth. Watch ye therefore, and pray always,
that ye may he accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come
to pass and to stand before the Son of Man.” (Sr. Luke xxi. 34-36.)
Tins text is taken from our Lord’s discourse to liis
disciples, when they asked him, “ Master, when shall these
things he, and what shall he the sign of thy coming (7 mpova-tag)
and of the end of the world”—or the end of the age (T%
awTeXziaQ ruv altivog- — (Matt. xxiv. 3). They express the
lesson which our Saviour specially wished his disciples
to learn from what he was telling them. It was in that
spirit that they were to expect what he predicted; it was in
that spirit that they were to await the fulfilment of his
words. The language of our Lord in describing what
was coming to pass is so remarkable, that it has fixed itself
in men’s minds. Perhaps men have thought more of his
words than of the spirit in which he uttered them, and have
used them rather to stir up the feelings of impatient, ner-
vous anxiety, which he sought to allay, instead of that
patient, enduring watchfulness to all good works —that faith-
ful persistence in well-doing, which he sought to enforce.
I suppose that at the present time, that during the past
week, these words of our Lord have been brought before
the minds of many of ourselves. “When ye hear of wars
and rumours of wars, see that ye be not troubled. For
m :
1 w
#33 ft/ffOSu


nation shall rise against nation and kingdom against
kingdom, and there shall be famines and pestilences, and,
earthquakes, in divers places” (Matt. xxiv. 6,7). “There
shall be . . on the earth, distress of nations with per-
plexity, the sea and the waves roaring, men’s hearts failing
them for fear, and for looking after those things which are
coming upon the earth” (Luke xxi. 25, 26).
Such words as these must appear to us wonderfully and
truly to describe the state of things, of which the news from
Europe has given us the details. Men’s conversations show
that they are conscious that the times are special, that they
are critical—that there is coming an end to this age —to
this state of things; that we are on the eve of changes;
that what is coming no one can tell; that how we are to
come out of it all, no one can tell. The somewhat sensa-
tional way in which the news from Europe was announced
seemed to be an index of how deeply the nature of it was felt.
And, in addition to all this —in addition to the natural
anxiety as to what has happened, what is likely to happen,
and what it is feared must happen yet, there is at the
present time a sort of religious excitement —men are say-
ing, these are the times which Christ foretold —the begin-
ning of the end of the world—the fulfilment of that
which was noted in the Scriptures of Truth by the Seer in
the palace of Shushan; which was foreshadowed to the exile
in Patmos, when “he was in the Spirit on the Lord’s
Day.” Men are indulging, and find a fascination in in-
dulging in vaticinations, which map out the future of the
world, as they conceive it has been, contrary, as it seems
to me, to the express language of our Lord, revealed in
the Bible.
Now, we may be glad that men should, no matter what
causes them to do so, have recourse to the Scriptures to
explain to them the course of this world —to throw a
heavenly light upon the dark things of earth. It is well


that they should learn to believe that the “ Most High
ruleth ” now as of old “in the kingdoms of men ” (Dan.
iv. 35), that Jesus Christ is King of all kings, that it is
our work to watch for his coming “to judge the world in
righteousness ” (Acts xvii. 31). It will, therefore, be good
for us, having had during the week our minds full of the
things that are coming upon the earth, now, on this quiet
Lord’s Day, when we are present before God, to search
whether the Scriptures of Truth have anything to tell us
of God’s mind and purpose in this age, and what God
would have us do.
I. I said that I was glad, if anything caused men to come
to the Scriptures to explain the times. But in coming to
search the Scriptures, it is necessary that we carry on our
search according to the laws of sound interpretation. We
are not to be caught by the mere letter, by the sound of
the words, by a superficial correspondence of the letters to
external events. Scripture warns us against this mode of
interpreting it, which, indeed, is not interpreting it, but
reading our own prepossessed imaginations into it. We
are first of all to examine the. Scriptures, so as to discover
and bring out the mind of the writer or speaker, and to
rest assured that when we have discovered it, that is the
meaning of the passage —that, and nothing else. True, that
meaning, when discovered, may suggest to us principles
of wide and repeated application. We may be utterly
unable to confine the words of Christ, of an Apostle, of a
Seer, of a Prophet, to one time; but that will be, not
because the letter fits this or that time, but because that
letter discloses a principle of eternal value —‘‘the righteous-
ness of its testimonies is everlasting ” (Psalm cxix. 144).
Now, it is a recognised canon of Scriptural interpretation,
the righteousness of which is obvious, that we are not to
interpret a plain passage by an obscure one, but conversely


—figurative language, symbol, is not to rule plain language,
but conversely. We are not to interpret, so says the twentieth
Article of the Church of England, “ one place of Scripture,
so that it be repugnant to another.” Much more are we not
to let the figurative and the symbolic parts of Scripture
explain away the literal and direct, nor cloud our apprecia-
tion of those plain commands, which teach us how we are
to do our duty towards God and towards our neighbours.
Never may any views derived from prophetic study so affect
our conduct or our faith, as to make us doubt that greater
than “ prophecy,” and greater even than “ faith and hope,
is charity ”(1 Cor. xiii. 8, 13); that the whole of religion
and of morals, “ all the law and the prophets is fulfilled in
this :” “ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine
heart, and thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” (Mat.
xxii. 37-40; Gal. v. 14).
11. I am not going—it would be absurd to attempt it —
to offer any explanations of the symbolic prophecies in the
Book of Daniel and in the Apocalypse. These prophecies
could only be understood after much previous examination
into the laws which govern symbolic writings; but I take
the words of Christ, because they are plain; because, more-
over, to the great majority of men, they—more than the
symbolic prophecies —seem to describe the times in which
we live; because the practical conduct which our Saviour
says should be the effect of his predictions, is so plain and
easy of comprehension.
(1.) And, first of all, with reference to our Saviour’s words,
it is necessary to remember that they belong to an age
which is past. This seems to me to be plainly declared
in verse 32: “ Verily I say unto you, this generation shall
not pass away until all be fulfilled.” In whichever of the
Gospels you read them, these words come at the conclusion
of the whole discourse. Therefore, those wars and rumours


of wars, that distress of nations, that perplexity of men’s
hearts, spoken of by our Lord, belonged to a time when
Britain was not a people, nor France, nor Germany, nor
Italy, in any sense such as we now know them ; in fact, to
a world which has passed away. They had their fulfilment
in days, while yet the men who heard our Saviour speak,
were, or might be expected to be, living upon earth. This
consideration, which stands in the forefront of the pas-
sage, shows us that, to attempt any special vaticination
as to our immediate future from Christ’s discourse, because
our times recall his words, is utterly baseless. “ The wars
and rumours of wars, ” of which he spoke, have been ; cc the
distress of nations,” has been. The signs of which he
spoke have taken place ; the “heaven and the earth ” that
then was —however we may expound those phrases —have
passed away. Christ’s words have been fulfilled, and in
their letter they may be said to have passed away.
(2). It is not necessary for my present purpose to point
how the words of Christ were fulfilled in the time of that
generation; it is sufficient to say that I think Christ’s open-
ing words tell us what the event was around which his
predictions circled. It was the casting down of “those
great buildings ” which moved the disciples’ admiration,
when “Jerusalem was compassed about jwith armies” (v. 20),
when the Holy City “ was trodden down of the Gentiles”
(v. 24). That is the central announcement plainly uttered
by Christ, and the whole of his discourse is bound to that
event by links which cannot be broken without outraging
the plainest principles of interpretation and the meaning of
words. If the words “ immediately after,” “in those days,” can
be tortured to mean more than a “ thousand years hence,”
then, indeed, the cynical sentence of the French diplomatist
is applied to the solemn utterances of the Truth Himself.
But there is no need so to distort words ; the passing away
of the Jewish nation, the shrivelling up in a moment of a


Divine economy after centuries of endurance —the founda-
tion of Christendom —the building of a Church upon the
faith that a Son of Man was Lord of lords and Judge of all
the earth, and all the changes that then silently spread
themselves over the world, and which issued from that
growing faith : these historical facts are a fulfilment of
Christ’s words, such as abundantly satisfy any true method
of interpretation. But if any is dissatisfied with this interpre-
tation, still that does not give such an one a warrant to say
that they must have another fulfilment, because they have
not yet been completely fulfilled. Such an assumption is
simply to blind one’s mind to what is really asserted in it,
viz., he who makes it is blind to the fact, that when he makes
it, he denies Christ’s words. That generation has passed
away, but Christ’s words have not been fulfilled.
(3.) We conclude, then, that no vaticination as to the
future can be allowed from this passage —I mean no attempt
to map out the particular events that shall happen—no
assertion that the end of the world, and the personal reign of
Christ will speedily take place. Concerning the time of such
events, I prefer to say that “ the Father has put these things
in His own power,” and that “ it is not for us to know these
times and seasons” (Acts i. 7). If I might hazard such a
thing as a guess upon such a subject, if I might utter my
own opinions, I should be disposed to apply our Saviour’s
words, “ the end is not yet. ” It seems to me that
the world is yet, in one sense, young; it seems to
me that there is much more yet to be developed —
yet to be known —yet to be brought to light —that men
have to learn much more of the use of this earth, and how
to live upon it, and how “to subdue it,” before it “be
cast as rubbish to the void.” People speculating with the
Scriptural dates, fixed the time of the creation at a period
of about four thousand years before the birth of Christ.
Geology, as the most orthodox divines gladly admit, and as


the Scriptures do not at all deny, has shown us a far higher
antiquity for that event. It seems to me not improbable
that those who argue from prophetic dates, from symbolic
figures, as if they were historical, will be taught by expe-
rience that the time of the consummation of all things
has been wrongly inferred from these symbolic figures, as
the time of the beginning of all things has been wrongly
inferred from those far more trustworthy historic dates.
But all this is merely my own opinion, concerning
which all I have to say is that I do not think it
repugnant either to Scripture or to reason, and which, per-
haps, I should not have stated here, and, indeed, would not,
only it is right to remind you that much of what is confi-
dently affirmed as the interpretation of prophecy, is only the
“ private solution,” the private 'opinion of individuals; and
only entitled to credit as it is the legitimate deduction from
the sacred text, and cannot of itself claim, any more than my
opinion can claim, the credence due to the plain utterances
of Holy Writ.
111. Our Saviour’s words must in their literal meaning be
considered as addressed to his disciples, with immediate
reference to that tribulation and distress which was coming
upon their national church and polity. He bids them to
“ possess their souls in patience” (v. 19). He bids them hot
to fear, not to be alarmed when they witnessed the shaking,
the crumbling away of that which was to them most dear
and sacred, most associated with their ideas of permanence,
and the purposes of God. Heaven and earth might seem
to them to be shaken, to yield the most portentous signs
(v. 11) —to pass away; but let them not fear, “ Not a hair of
their heads should perish” (v. 18). Let them be of no
doubtful mind. The rolling away of the old, the rolling away
of heaven and earth should not cause the words of their
Master to roll away —should be the fulfilment of them!


They should see “ the Son of Man coming in a ,cloud with
great glory” (v. 37). “ Their redemption” they might be
sure “was drawing nigh” (v. 38). The winter was passing
away, “the summer was nigh at hand”—“The kingdom of
God was nigh at hand” (v. 30, 31), The victory of God’s
gracious will over the enemies of mankind would then make
itself manifest. How far Christ’s disciples understood all
that their Master said we do not know; but we may be sure
of this, that when these things did come to pass, then they
remembered that He had foretold these things; and their
faith and trust sustained them in the day of evil, and taught
them to see and recognise the sign of the power and glory
of the Son of Man. Only, there was one caution which
Christ had to give them, to “ take heed lest their hearts be
overcharged with drunkenness and the cares of this life.”
Strange it may seem, but so it is, that times of peril are
often with ungodly men times of carnal security. Super-
stitious fear and worldly excess often go hand in hand.
So it was in the days of Noah. So it would be in the days
of Jerusalem’s trouble. So it has been, let me remind you,
in modern times —in the time of the Plague in London, and
in the time of the cholera in Paris, in 1881.* Let the dis-
ciples of Christ, their Master urged, be upon their guard
against this temptation; let them not fix their affections
upon things of the earth, lest when earth passed away their
heart and their treasure should pass away also.
IV. But now that we have considered what is the literal
reference of the words of Christ, and having made out
what he intended his hearers to understand, we may ask
ourselves, is there not underneath them an eternal principle
which is applicable to us, and which shall help us to under -
* This is wonderfully brought out in the celebrated etching of “ Death
the Enemy,” by Alfred Bethel.


stand our times? Certainly there is. The conscience of
men has not been wrong in claiming these words as those
which, while heaven and earth lasted, could not pass away,
but must have a living worth and value for all ages. And,
then let me remind you, that there have been, more than
once, times in the history of the Church, in which there
has been a special expectation that they were going to
receive a special fulfilment. Perhaps the most remarkable
time was at the completion of the first decade of centuries
after Christ, towards the end of the year 1000 a.d., when
there existed a very general expectation throughout Europe
that the world was about to come to an end. The mistake
is, not in believing thrft Christ’s word cannot pass away, but
in confounding the dead with the living —in looking to
the dead letter, the grave clothes, which are cast aside,
having fulfilled their function, instead of to the living spirit,
which is alive for evermore. And, indeed, the practical
nature of this mistake is very great. If we are led by
interpretation of prophecy to identify a particular nation,
or a particular system, which is not directly pointed
out in Scripture, with the enemies of Christ and of
His purposes, then are we under the greatest temptation
to allow our sympathies to be swayed, and our efforts
directed, not by the broad law of justice and charity, but
by the peculiar interpretation of God’s purpose, which we
have adopted, and which is, after all, our own opinion
sheltering itself unlawfully under the authority of Divine
law. The great plain moral law is liable to be obscured by
the dazzling lights —I ought to say the bewildering shades —
of symbolic interpretation, which are thrown athwart it.
It is, I think, important for us to clear ourselves of these
notions, and to remember, with reference to the future, that
“ Christ’s kingdom is not of this world and hence “ his
servants are not to fight ” in support of any worldly system,
because it is identified with His kingdom, or against any


worldly system, because they identify it with the opponents
of his kingdom.
V. What, then, does Christ say to us, and how do His
words explain to us our age ? It seems to me that we may
apply Christ’s own words to ourselves; that He says to us,
“ When ye see these things begin to come to pass be not
terrified, but lift up your heads, for your redemption
draweth nigh.” “In these things may you behold the signs
of the Son of Man.”
Well roars the storm to those that hear
A deeper voice across the storm,
Proclaiming social truth shall spread,
And justice, ev’n tho’ thrice again
The red fool-fury of the Seine
Should pile her barricades with dead.
But ill for him that wears a crown,
And him, the lazar, in his rags:
They tremble, the sustaining crags;
The spires of ice are toppled down,
And molten up, and roar in flood;
The fortress crashes from on high,
The brute earth lightens to the sky,
And the great /Eon sinks in blood,
And compass’d by the fires of Hell;
While thou, dear spirit, happy star,
O’erlook’st the tumult from afar,
And smilest, knowing all is well.
In Memobiam. cxxvi.
And we may know all is well, —we who do not' “ o’erlook
the tumult from afar” —we, around whose feet the waves of
it begin to surge. We may know that the “ Son of Man
has come to judge the earth.” We may see the “ lighting-
down of his arm” “made bare” (Isa. xxx. 30) to destroy
for ever some hoar abuse ripe for the burning. We may see


that He has brought near his fan and fire, to winnow his
wheat from the chaff (Matt. hi. 13). He has come “to judge
the world in righteousness” —“ The day of the Lord is again
upon every one that is high and lifted up”—“ He has come
out of his place to sift the nations” (Isa. ii. 13; xxvi.*3l;
xxx.) —“ to rebuke the proud” —to make manifest some
victory—not for this or that nation, or this or that system —
but for the cause of freedom, of humanity, of charity, of
truth — which is the cause of God and the cause of Man.
He is come to cast into the lake of fire “ the beast and the
false prophet,” to give the death-blow to some form either of
brute oppression or crafty deceit, whereby men have been
held in captivity and error. Therefore is he shaking heaven
as well as earth (Heb. xii. 36) —therefore it may be that
what we have looked upon as most sacred, and most stable,
are trembling now. But if we are to look “ upon a new heaven
and a new earth” —if there is to be a disturbance of old
landmarks, like what took place before Christ’s generation
had passed away, let us be sure that “in that new heaven
and new earth will dwell righteousness” (3 Peter hi. 13) —
that new adjustment will make more clear to all who have
eyes to see it, the sign of the Son of Man.
Surely it has been so. Surely the terrible Indian Mutiny
did not roll by without our English nation learning from it
some lesson of righteousness and just dealing; and learning
to make known to the subject race, that righteousness, in a
manner which hereafter shall reap precious fruit, of which we
wot but little yet. Surely the great American War did not
roll by without disclosing to us the form of the Son of Man
bringing near his redemption; redeeming a race from the
bondage of slavery —redeeming a Christian church and people
from the shame of inflicting it —redeeming a great people
from the danger of mammon worship, to a nobleness of sacrifice
and endurance which has been but little appreciated. Oh,
what may we not hope that the Son of Man will yet work


of redemption for the nations of Europe —for our loved
Fatherland.
(3.) And now, brethren, let me apply the words of our
text to ourselves. “ Take heed to yourselves lest at any
time your hearts be overcharged with surfeitings, drunken-
ness, and cares of this life.” Surely, my brethren, that is
the spiritual lesson which we have to learn. Is not Christ
the Son of Man saying that to us, in the failures of which we
read —the money panic which makes men afraid ? He is
not rebuking commerce and the transactions of business —•
the amassing of wealth. We do not so read his judgments,
seeing that it is He “who makes men rich,” and gives men
“power to get wealth;” but he is saying to us, “A good
name is rather to be chosen than riches (Prov. xxii. 1);
“ Man’s life consisteth not in the abundance of the things
which he possesseth” (Luke xii. 15); “Man shall not live
by bread alone, but by every word of God ” (Luke iv. 4);
“ Labour not for the meat that perisheth, but for that meat
which endureth to everlasting life” (John vi. 37); “ Lay not
up for yourselves treasure in earth, where moth and rust doth
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal, but lay
up for yourselves treasure in heaven, where neither rust nor
moth doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through
nor steal” (Matt. vi. 19, 30). *lt seems to me that we need
these exhortations. The wonderful progress in all the
material arts which has distinguished this age above other
ages has wonderfully increased luxury. Wants are supplied
which once were not known to be wants at all. There is a
danger, then, lest one’s heart should become overcharged
with the luxuries of this world —lest we get to say, “For
these things we live, and in these alone will we have our
conversation.” Therefore, the Son of Man shakes us in our
ease. He says to us, “Behold this night thy soul is
required of thee —whose are those things which thou hast
prepared ? ” (Luke xii. 30). He says to us, “ Men ! not for


you is the life of a swine, or a butterfly; for higher things
were you made —not to rest in selfish ease, but to serve God
and your fellow men —therefore are you now rudely shaken
in your ease and sloth, that you may awake to a perception
of that higher calling wherewith ye are called.” He says
to us, “ If your bams are full, do not build more, but give
away. Turn your appliances to the cause of humanity—of
freedom, of truth—which is My cause; minister to your
poor, your untaught —your brethren who have not heard
that they have a Father in heaven —who are My brethren.
Save the souls alive that will die for lack of the bread of life;
redeem them that have fallen through want and penury,—
through terrible temptation. Strive, oh My people, to make
my name, the name of a Redeemer, of a Helper, Consoler,
Saviour, Brother, known to the least of my brethren.”
“ Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven”
(Matt. v. 16). So, brethren, let us watch for our Master’s
coming. Watch for him “in patient continuance in well-
doing.” Watch for him in such useful works as you have
opportunity to share in. What!
Are there no beggars at our gate,
Nor any poor about our lands ?
Oh, teach the orphan boy to read,
Or teach the orphan girl to sew—
Pray heaven for a human heart.
Tennyson.
Watch for Him in doing your own home work—your
duty—patiently and in faith, honestly in the sight of God
and man; keeping your tongues curbed from evil speaking,
as well as your hands chained from fraud. Serve him by
“keeping a conscience void of offence towards God and
man’’(Acts xxiv. 16); serve him as He specially bids us,
in prayer; “ pray always ” —be much in communion with


Goon Loed Delivee Us.”
God, in the atmosphere of heaven; serve him in the study
of the Scriptures, in the ordinances of the Church, that by
His “holy inspiration you may ever think those things
that be rightful”—(Collect for fifth Sunday after Easter) —
and “ever follow that which is good” (1 Thes. v. 15). “In
your patience possess your souls,” and never “ be weary in
well doing ” (Luke xxi. 19 ; Gal. vi. 9). “ Blessed is that
servant whom his Lord, when he cometh, shall find so
doing,” and “if He come in the second watch, or come in
the third watch, and find them so, blessed are those ser-
vants ” (Luke xii. 43 ; Luke xii. 38).
“ In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth,
in the hour of death, and in the day of judgment,
jT” f O c*f, /OeflU
A/ 1'J'j. Juj
Clarson, Massina, & Co., Printers, 72 Little Collins Street East, Melbourne; and Sydney.
