

Open Letter to the Attorney-General
THE
Hon. W. B. DALLEY. ESQ., M.L.C.




OPEN LETTER
TO THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL, THE
Hon. W. B. DALLEY, ESQ., M.L.C.
Hon. Sir,
The events of the last few months have brought you
prominently into public notice and Imperial favour, so lesser
mortals may be excused for endeavouring to peer beyond the
glamour of popular applause that sits upon you and clothes you
around like fogs on the Northern seas. Amid the dazzling
brilliance created by your fervid banquet eloquence it may not be
amiss to enquire what you have done, and what you are doing
for the country so loudly bestowing you praise.
When the fall of a General, encompassed by the blundering of
the English Cabinet and a corrupt Egyptian Government, was
bruited over the world, you offered, on your own responsibility,
the blood and treasures of this colony for a mission of revenge.
Whilst Parliament was in recess, whilst the Premier was absent
beyond the sea, whilst the Treasurer was from his office in the
city, you compromised all without consulting any. The
patronising acceptance of your offer by the mother-country,
pledged even the colony itself to your proposed course, and one of
the most peaceful of peoples was committed to a policy of war.
Attendant upon the first step in this gigantic folly other acts
of despotism waited. The employes in Government service
lifted up their voices from more than one quarter, at the course
adopted to secure subscriptions to the so-called “ Patriotic Fund.”
The natural and customary holiday of a mining community was
clouded by your refusal to grant them their annual public holiday.
Opponents were roughly refused a hearing at immense gatherings of
both sides when the meetings were convened by your supporters.
Public men of proven service to the colony, veterans whose locks
had become white in their public work, but who happened to
hazard the opinion that all the glory of sending men to the
African deserts, existed simply in your highly romantic brains
were not only not treated with common controversial fairness but


at every opportunity that could be seized upon, were moat
scandalously abused. And on a par with all this hath been your
high-handed bantiness in all the matters relating to the expedition
you had the evil fortune to see despatched from our shores amid
fetes and plaudits from a city transported with sorrow and wild
enthusiasm.
When the pick and flower of this young land were dis-
embarked at Suakim, and submitted to the burning sun and
impure conditions of “ the tented field,” we learned, at length,
that their noble mission was culminating in the capture
of donkeys and goats, and in submitting to the tyranny and
conceit of some of their officers. lam thankful, for one, that
they were not engaged in more serious business. lam as proud
to welcome them back, with a loss of so few from their original
number, as you were to send them away not knowing that a
single one would return. And not only am I pleased at this for
their sakes, but for the sake of those who were defending their
native land and waging a just war against foreign oppression and
invasion.
So disastrously did your spectacle-for-a-world collapse, so
much difference was there between the outside show—the bands,
the colours, the flags, the drums, the shouting and the mighty
promisings and the real thing, that, apparently, with the true
instincts of the showman, you were afraid your patrons might
feel robbed of their money and sternly bring you to task for the
failure ; so again you hammered your drum and “ tooted ” your
horn, and, as unceremoniously as before, offered to transplant your
menagerie to Afghanistan. But the men in the Contingent had
grown a little more sensible in the meantime. Their treatment
was beginning to tell on them, and they, with a few exceptions,
declined to trot the world over at the bend of your little finger.
A second time you offered a part of the hard earned wages of the
farmer, the mechanic, and the labourer without consulting either
them or their representatives. A second time you were willing
to send our brethern to be slaughtered or to slaughter others.
A second time you tramped the Constitution under foot and
ignored the most sacred rights of a free Parliament. A second time
you pointed us out as a nation of spiritless slaves prostrate at the
voice of an irresponsible Minister of the Crown, and for a second
time you directed “ the eyes of the whole world” upon a colony
servile enough to witness complacently its rights, its treasures, and
its sons recklessly sacrificed to the mistaken ambition of one man !
Graciously our “ little army ” has been lauded by the Imperial
jingo party, but even to these it became evident at last that the
trip to Egypt was a farce, useful to nobody. So our men
have returned. When they arrived they were put in quarantine,
where report sayeth they were badly cared for, and seemingly


treated as a crowd of infectious invaders. At their reception they
were bored with speeches and addresses in the bitter rain,
and then told that their original contract was broken, that they
were to be dismissed with a month’s pay, and to get what
wages were due to them, not as it was earned, but just when you
and your colleagues found it convenient. It is a fitting history
that that which begins with tyranny should end thereby !
Of the management of the Patriotic Fund I will say nothing at
present, for the public are alert to the movements of its
Committee, and I feel sure they will see it expended justly in the
long run.
But let me address a word or two about matters less imposing
but more practical. Whilst you are borne aloft, and ensconced
by the clouds of your chivalrous glory, e’en like the heroes of the
hoar antiquity, disdain not to touch the earth for a moment
whilst I plead fora human life.
Doubtless whilst the Government are obliged to treat the public
as criminals, in order to protect the tram department from dishonest
servants, there is a possibility of excessive severity being imposed
upon those who are really branded with the broad arrow. Yet I
have somewhere read that two women who plotted the murder of
a man, in cool blood, and then took his life by inches have, by
the vote of the present Executive, escaped the extreme penalty of
the law. It seems strange, then, when a young man, who
since his sixteenth or seventeenth year has been surrounded
chiefly by incarcerated criminals, should stab another without
taking his life, that he should not only be condemned to death,
but that the pleading voices of others should be hushed, and a
law harsher than that of any civilised country in the world should
be ordered to be carried out to the cruel end of execution.
Now, Sir, in your capacity as Attorney-General, on learning
I intended to lecture upon the case of the condemned man Johns,
you instructed the Police authorities to prevent the lecture. You
did it, too, in what I cannot help but think an underhanded way.
You did not—or I should say the police under your instructions
did not—come to me and forbid the lecture, but they went to the
lessees of the Theatre Royal and threatened to cancel the license
if Iso muchas made reference to Johns’ case. Nay,notonly was the
license to be cancelled, but it was definitely stated in my hearing
that it would never be renewed to its present holders. By what
other name than “tyranny” can this conduct be designated?
By whose authority was such a mandate given ? You, Sir, and
I say it with all deference, had not the lawful power to shut out
for ever, from their just rights, the people who now hold the
license of the theatre. Not until they acted illegally could you
punish them, and not then without leaving them their legal rights
to appeal against, and to seek redress for, any injustice they might
believe they suffered from,


If your idea was to protect the laws of this land, after being
warned, it wasjyour duty to punish the real offender. If, in the
delivery of had it been permitted, I had said anything
prohibited by our laws, you are the Attorney-General, it is your
prerogative to set the law in motion, and you could have had me
punished accordingly. That would have been a manly, a
straightforward course, whereas the course you did take was
calculated to create the idea that you wanted to avert criticism
from certain institutions by preventing free speech and crushing
the liberties of the subject.
And now, I ask, What were you afraid of ? A man’s life was
claimed as the prey of the gallows and the victim of an
unmerciful law. I desired to do my little towards saving that
life, and towards vindicating the humanity of this colony. Is it
illegal to ask for mercy 1 Is it a crime to condemn barbarity 1
Is it an offence to comment, earnestly upon the conduct of
ministers and officials maintained at the public expense ? If it be
permissible to give one’s feeble efforts to spare a mother a
perpetual disgrace, and a young man a shameful death, surely it
was right for me to make use of the rights of a citizen in the
interests not only of mercy, but of what I believed to be simple
justice. Yet you commanded my silence. I repeat, What were
you afraid of 1 It could not, I should think, be honestly
maintained by anyone, that I must wait till the final die was cast,
the last authority delivered, and the young man passed beyond
the realm of every hope, before I lifted up my voice ! The strong
promptings of duty impelled the desire to speak ere deliberations
were concluded, while hope still glimmered, however feeble, in
the sky of an uncertain life, and whilst there was still a chance of
the Executive being touched by compassions’ breath awakened
by the throbbings of the public heart!
A lad at an early age, falls in with a bad, nay, even a mad
adventurer. His mind full of the sensational stories that painted
famous robbers and lawless wanderers in the garb of heroes,
himself possessed of a romantic nature, and perhaps a roving and
daring disposition, he runs away from home and gets into very
serious trouble. In an encounter between the police, and the
gang of which he is a member, one of the policeman is shot; the
gang is then captured and they are tried. The sentence of death
is passed on all, but by virtue of his youth and his previous good
character, the young man’s life is spared by the clemency of the
Governor. Imprisoned for life, his conduct in gaol during his
incarceration up to the present has been admittedly good, and
there were hopes that shortly his good conduct would secure his
release. But suddenly, without motive, he stabs a prisoner who
was his friend, and then tells a story to account for it. His
story is that he fell in love with a lady-bible reader


who encouraged his attentions, and who finally deceived him.
Driven to madness, so he relates, by this fact, and by the taunts
of his fellow prisoners, he committed the deed for which the
Executive Council now have finally declared he must die the
felon s death. That his story and its corroboration by his
mother fit in excellently with each other I can personally testify.
And I am at a loss to know how they could have mutually con-
cocted it when closely watched during their interviews by the
gaol authorities. But the Executive Council have published the
statement that his story is a fabrication ! Hence the law must
take its course.
Yet, ere the final sentence be carried out, I think the public
have a right to know on what evidence the decision is based
Who have conducted all the necessary enquiries ? What
witnesses have been examined 1 Has the lady bible-
reader been examined and cross-examined ? Have the
Executive questioned the prisoner 1 In short, have there
been others than those interested in defending themselves
against Johns’ imputations thoroughly examined h I put the
matter thus plainly because with the best of intentions and with
no desire to be unjust, even those in authority may make mistakes
and admit just the evidence that should be rejected and reject the
evidence that should be omitted. And I think it is only right
that the public should know these things, not alone on Johns
account, but for the protection of the public institutions. That
mistakes can be made within the walls of our gaols we are
convinced from the circumstances of a birth from a female
prisoner incarcerated beyond the natural term of pregnancy,
and by the fact that Johns was possessed of the knife that has
brought him to his present direful straight. The question may
be naturally asked, Are not the gaol authorities somewhat
responsible here for J ohns’ calamity in allowing such a weapon to
be in his possession ?
But, let us grant that Johns’ story is the product of an
ingenious brain aiming at preserving the hold on life. Every
other supposition now would be a reflection on our present
cabinet of such a nature that sane men would hesitate before mak-
ing them, still do I think that Johns’life should be spared. It would
be spared in England, it would be spared in Victoria, and shall we
here be less merciful than the people of these countries 1 Must
we exhibit our barbarity to the world, and hoist a dead body,
victimised to a cruel law, as a sacrifice to formality 1
Hon. Sir, I feel constrained to censure you as a citizen for your
conduct in prohibiting the public voice from sounding, whilst it
seems to me there was yet time to receive suggestions or to make
criticisms. But I sincerely hope you will now make amends by
showing to the public the wisdom of your step and the evidence


on which the decision of the Cabinet rests. Furthermore, I trust
that your heart will here as signally distinguish itself, as have your
magnificent talents in other spheres. As you sought to publish
this colony’s greatness to the world, see that you stain not its flag
by the blood of the unfortunate, made the victim of a law passed
m harsher times and during the midst of turbulent events. Are
you afraid to err 1 But I reply it will be on the side of mercy, it
will be in the cause of charity.
I am asked if I would save a life dangerous to the community 1
Remember, Sir, the thirst for revenge that swelled like a tide
through the State at the bidding of your voice. Remember how
many of our citizens sprang to arms when you told them
that England s honour was insulted. Remember how you
despatched our troops to slay and destroy a people they had never
seen, and reflect that we are all dangerous when our passions are
inflamed. I do not say that Johns’ story is true, though I
cannot conceive how he could invent it, but I say he
was led to his deed by circumstances, as were you when you
invited warriors to avenge Gordon !
I do most earnestly hope that the public will take this matter
m hand, that, if possible, even yet the shame of barbarity may
not rest over our heads, and at least our hands may be clean of
having handed down to our children an example of merciless
severity, and a proof of the cruel imperfection of our laws.
I have the honor to be,
Hon. Sir,
Yours obediently,
THOS. WALKER.
