

/VI /7S
OPEN LETTER
e
Archbishop Mannix
of Melbourne
AND
Cardinal O'Donnell
of Belfast
CV<~
i
g
(Mrs.) ELIZABETH McSWEENEY
A Roman Catholic Woman
Born in Leix (Queen’s County), Ireland
All Non-bigoted Booksellers
1 Darley Place, Darlinghurst,
Sydney, New South Wales
PRICE SIXPENCE
sTlllll!llllllllllllll|||||||||||||||llll|||||[|||||||||!l!|lNlll!lllllll!lllllllllllll!lll!ll|||||lll|i||||||l!llliri!llll|||||||||||||illll|||||||||||||||||||il!l||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||lll|||||lllllli^


Author of the
following:
“Woman, Church and
Press.”
Second;
“Jesus, the Jews and
the Irish.”
Third:
“Ireland and her Three
English-made Gods.”
Fourth:
“Godly Miracle of
Childbirth.”


|iiiMiiiiiiiimiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiw
M
I
s
e
m
g
§
i
M
g
ss
|
I
I
l
I
s
i
H
s
SS
l
S
E
ass
S
1
I
I
s
I
=
s
1
1
B
OPEN LETTER
Archbishop Mannix
of Melbourne
AND
Cardinal O'Donnell
of Belfast
(Mrs.) ELIZABETH McSWEENEY
A Roman Catholic Woman
Born in Leix (Queen’s County), Ireland
All Non-bigoted Booksellers
1 Darley Place, Darlinghurst,
Sydney, New South Wales
PRICE SIXPENCE
m
I
I
i
g|
1
M
s
E
m
e
B
I
|
Mii;iiiniiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinii]i[iii[Tii!iiiiminimimiiiiiniiiiiijimiiiiniiii!iiminiii]f][iii!iiiii]i!ii]iEiiiniiMi[iiiimiii]iiii]iiiiii[[imiiiiiiiiimiiiiimiiin[imiiimii^




1 Darley Place
Open Letter to
Archbishop Mannix, of Melbourne
Cardinal O'Donnell, of Belfast
Most Reverend Gentlemen, —
Again I approach the subject, not with “fear and
trembling, ’ ’ but with an overflowing hope that you will do or
say something during Easter Week, the anniversary of our
Republican victory.
I beg and beseech of you to join hands with Father
O’Flannagan and the great hosts of us Irish of all creeds who
are struggling to develop it, struggling to finalise it.
It will be a hard struggle. It will be a prolonged struggle
without you.
Still, your aloofness will be all in vain. We are bound
eventually to win out the Republic.
Our enemy doesn’t like Republics. She is now engaged
knocking at the Portuguese Republic, and, through the em-
broilment of China, Japan, and America, she hopes to weaken
the latter.
Without in the least dictating to you, I dare not lay down
conditions. Urged on by the never dying, universal and Godly
desire of nationhood, I merely suggest that you put up our
lovely Orange, White, and Green on our altars and vestments,
requesting your congregations to don the colours, thereby
making it into a week of rejoicing.
God knows we have had mourning enough for the past
centuries!
We cling to the weeping Jeremiah business, notwithstand-
ing all that the patriotic Tipperary man, Tom Davis, told us.
This will remove a stumbling block and do more to recon-
cile and unite the people of Ireland than anything that has
happened before.
Every creed in Ireland will rally round this lovely Orange,
White and Green. Patriotic visitors from all corners of the
earth, each one with perfect freedom holding his own religion
in cheek, will flock to Ireland to celebrate this annual week
of rejoicing.


All my life since I came to Australia I heard the old gag,
“No Irish need apply.” Now all hands are trying their level
best to forcibly push us into the Empire against our wish, to
be sat upon, to be their chopping block. Na, Na! Stand up,
you men! You have the power, but not the courage. We are
the weakest race on earth—all for the want of a few words
from a man like you or Cardinal O’Donnell, of Belfast.
On© word even—yea, one half word could sway the untold
thousands of us in all parts of the globe and create the desired
courage. This half word would place our language on an
honest foundation, beginning with the little infants under
seven before sending them to Irish schools or Irish colleges.
At this age they experience no jawbreakers—all enunciating
comes easy. This half word would encourage our people to
discuss every phase of life.
The liberty of discussion is the safeguard of all other
liberties. What is the matter with you, my two children?
Where are you sick, my two illustrious sons of Ireland? Why
withhold this one half word ?
By coming forward to assist this cause you are conferring
a boon on all mankind. No man on this earth can be free while
Ireland is bound and divided. We hear no discussion on how
a German boat one night lately, between dusk and dawn, took
two hundred thousand (200,000) herrings from off the coast
of Galway. England, to secure Germany as a staunch ally for
herself, allows this robbery of our fish. Our priests and
bishops, in order to curry favour with England, keep silent.
They never fail to tell us we must “obey our superiors.”
By accepting this inferiority stunt we weaken the men-
tality of our own people, and make it easier for the Germans
and English to plunder our fisheries.
I, for one —I don’t accept it. It is a diabolical lie. As life
forms or creates on this planet, there is no life superior to our
own Irish life.
This question comes under the heading of “Education”
that they make such a row over, and at the same time malad-
minister. Behold, what a power you have!
Please, gentlemen, visualise the depth of this great power.
Introspect yourselves; find out how, why, and from whom you
got this power. You’ll find out it’s neither kings nor popes, nor
any past deity. No, not all the popes who were ever named
nor all the kings who were ever crowned could do this. Here
again I throw out another challenge.


It was we, the Irish, who endowed you with this power, by
holding you in such a high estimation and by our consenting
to the conditions.
One fact is worth a thousand fancies. We Irish Catholics
are not all oblivious of the fact that in the Vatican the Pope is
prompted by the English cardinals to blarneise the Irishmen
about their “great faith, the faith of their forefathers, etc.,
etc.” Just what it wasn’t; the very thing our earlier fore-
fathers fought against. Columhanes, to wit, who knocked at
the door of the Vatican, telling the Pope to “beware.” Un-
fortunately, this man died abroad, giving the Ingleo-Italeo side
a chance to misconstrue and misrepresent his motive.
The Irishmen of to-day, instead of retaliating on the Pope,
accept the blarney, leaving Ireland to perish. She is now, as
Dr. Mannix said, “On the dissecting table.”
Time is up for a move. I ask any Irishman with the least
splink of sense, even if he doesn’t know “B from a bull’s
foot,” how can we go wrong by looking into the roots of
things and make a few fresh inroads into our affairs?
Why was the old Irish nation newspaper of about forty
years ago set aside, and who started the murderous, deceitful,
and pernicious Independent newspaper in Dublin to take its
place ?
This one act on the part of our priests was more injurious
to Ireland than anything that ever happened in Mexico. The
Mexicans have the desired courage.
Our brave Knights of Columbus, with England and Italy
at their back, allowed themselves to be used as tools to inter-
fere in Mexico. They got a proper snubbing.
Mother is not aware that these self same Knights of
Columbus ever had the inclination or courage to interfere
in Irish clerical treachery.
Self-knowledge and self-criticism are useful if we want our
nation to progress. Discussion of every phase of life is a help
to this end. If a nation won’t discuss its outside affairs it is
apt to remain naive and childish, retaining a self-righteousness
or child-like belief in all outside affairs. We’d find discussion
more beneficial than tumbling down houses or shooting one
another; and more efficacious than prayer.
I look upon English and Italian titles as inappropriate for
our Irishmen. This being so, I have to treat our two most
useful and valued friends as fellow-countrymen. Hence, I am


bound to give Archbishop Mannix pride of place. He was
the first (he won’t be the last) Irish Roman Catholic Arch-
bishop to set aside his ecclesiastic oath and come out into God’s
holy light to tell us he was “nailing our Republican flag to his
mast.”
Some grumbling sounds that his Canberra speech, as re-
ported in the “Sun” of January 31, 1927, was not strong on
the side of our flag. Before finding fault, let us introspect
ourselves. How many of us have put up the colours and fol-
lowed this heavenly messenger—this Irish angel who has ap-
peared in our midst? Why not let him see he is doing what
we want? Is he to be kept in suspense—the suspense that
kills? Give him a visible sign!
Even Irish angels like ocular demonstration as well as
prayer or silent, suffering patriotism.
0, my two beloved sons, what are we to do? English
cunning has complicated our affairs. At the bidding of an
English-prompted Pope we are got to rave over a few re-
ligiously mixed marriages so that we would ignore the greater
evil —ignore the colossal loss of the thousands and thousands
of our girls who are allowed out of Ireland in all their native
innocence to be thrown amongst foreigners and would-be
conquerors.
Although ostensibly at the head of a household, she must
not dare to breathe an Irish aspiration. Under many guises
she is robbed of the never-dying love—love of native land.
She instinctively knows this, and, with true Celtic perversity,
in bitterness of heart and soul, she throws the whole thing back
on us and against us by joining hands with the enemy, hating
her own land, and despising her own countrymen for their
want of tact and initiative.
Behold! how we create scorpions to flog one another. 0,
my two children, what will we do? Old mother thinks it’s
quite clear you ’ll have to use this power we gave you on behalf
of the cause. If delayed too long it will become rusty, lose
energy, then decay.
Mother, having the welfare and prestige of her two sons
at heart, warns you to do this to avoid trouble and bloodshed,
for, if you don’t, as Mr. J. J. O’Kelly, the great Kerry patriot,
said, when speaking some time back in Dublin, “The Irish
people will find a remedy.”


I knew another dear, departed soul from the kingdom of
Kerry, who said: “The people of Ireland are more just and
more holy than the bishops and priests or nuns of Ireland.”
The constant repetition of the English style of hail! Mary
business has destroyed our perception. Any four counties in
Ireland can raise more wealth than the whole of Japan, yet
Japan supports sixty-five millions (65,000,000) of people, while
we have barely four millions (4,000,000).
Print our own paper money and give it confidence in our
own land. Out of this paper fund pay big wages and keep the
rising youth at home. While we allow this wealth to leave
the country the population will follow.
O, my children, what will we do? Hordes and hordes of
Irish-loving souls who, through thoughtlessness and careless-
ness, are spreading English propaganda by all crawling, cring-
ing, and crying out, “It’s no use doing anything, we’re too
late!”
Mother herself regrets not teaching these things to you
in your earlier youth. But she swears vehemently to you that
we are not too late! With another loud, crashing oath Mother
swears to her two most illustrious sons of Ireland that we are
NOT too late!
As sight recedes from this earth visions appear, called by
some a second sight. Mother sees Mussolini in audience with
the Pope, who becomes greatly perturbed on catching sight
of an Irish pilgrim approaching. He fears it’s George Bernard
Shaw, and whispers to Mussolini: “We’ll be all done for if
these Irishmen see the game. We won’t be able to repeat the
trick of setting the Irishmen to cry over the death of a dummy
pope, as carried out by the Kaiser of Germany.”
"V
Mussolini, about to speak, the Pope raising his hand,
says . . . hoosh! . . . continues:“ Some of these wide-
awake Irish are real heathens. They said in New York this
was why the Kaiser fell from grace. Others went so far as
to say, ‘Serve the Kaiser right,’ while all the time the poor
Kaiser was only helping to get through as arranged between
us and the late King Edward. Another audacious Irish
heathen used the word ‘spy’ to our trusted emissary. And
one more daring spirit, a Father Cushing, from Offaly (King’s
County), went into the highways and byways of New York
and declared publicly that Pessi, our Sainted Leo XIII., was
two years in that town they call London learning English
diplomacy prior to his being chosen as Pope.”


As the Pope rises to give Mussolini the blessing, he leans
to his ear, and in a still softer tone of voice says. “As the
English always forget to keep their treaties, you make sure
that they keep ‘hands off Italy.’ ”
On retiring, I caught sight of the English cardinals—who
were at a safe distance—coming from the left wing.
0, my two sons, what will we do 1 Hitherto all our praying
and faith and energy has had only one result, viz.: Prepare
ye the way; make the path easy for Johnny Bull.
0, my children, if you take your minds off the prayers for
a few minutes and listen attentively you will distinctly hear
the march of the Mighty Men of Munster en route with their
rat-tat-tat at the door of the Vatican demanding Dan O’Con-
nell’s heart to be taken home to Ireland.
The aforesaid Mighty Men of Munster have had always a
very strong suspicion that the English priest who attended
Dan’s last illness didn’t stick to the Divine truth as spoken
by Dan.
Mother sees the man coming; she hears the voice in the
distance.
When the storms of Empire are
Raging with havoc, again and again,
A cedar that cannot be shaken
Appears in the forest of men.
—Cornelius Sullivan, “New York Irish World.”
Enough said for the present.
Sinn Fein, Sinn Fein (ourselves, ourselves).
Faithfully yours, in the cause,
ELIZABETH McSWEENEY.


Some time ago in North America I spoke on
two subjects—first, “WOMAN, CHURCH and
PRESS”; secondly. “JESUS, the JEWS, and the
IRISH.” A report of three hundred words con-
gratulating me on my efforts in trying to fix things
appeared in the “New York Herald,” America’s
leading newspaper.
The following translated from the South
American Spanish:—
Extract from “La Nacion,”
Buenos Ayres.
“The Irish community celebrated yester-
ST. PATRICK’S DAY.
“There was a banquet attended by many
people.
“Mrs. McSweeney also made a speech
that deeply moved all people present. She
was warmly applauded, and the cheers con-
tinued for quite a long time.


On a Sunday afternoon in 1922 in Hyde Park,
London, I heard an ordained minister of the High
Church of England declare most emphatically
“that the Methodists were not Christians.” I asked,
“Were the Irish Catholics Christians?” He an-
swered; “Yes, yes, certainly.” “Then what about
the Orangemen?” I queried. He hesitated and
said; “I'll answer that later.” I regret not hearing
his opinion—the boat I was travelling by left for
Australia during the week.
Talk about puzzles. It's a great puzzle to me
to know which of the English schemers coined that
intriguing and deceitful phrase, “The Irish Free
State.”
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by Deaton & Spencer»
1 Douglas Street, Sydney.
