



OPEN LETTER
Concerning
Bishop Sheehan, Parnell,
Paper Money
And the Loaves and Fishes of
Ireland
BY
(Mrs.) ELIZABETH Me SWEENEY
A Roman Catholic Woman
Born in Leix (Queen’s County), Ireland
90 GORDON STREET, PADDINGTON
PRICE
SIXPENCE


AUTHOR OF THE
FOLLOWING:
“Woman, Church and
Press.”
Second:
“Jesus, the Jews and
the Irish.”
Third:
“Ireland and her Three
English-made Gods.”
Fourth:
“Godly Miracle of
Childbirth.”
Fifth:
“Open Letter to Arch-
bishop Mannix, of Mel-
bourne, and Cardinal
O'Donnell, of Belfast.”


1 Darley 'Place
Sydney
OPEN LETTER
Concerning
Bishop Sheehan, Parnell,
Paper Money
And the Loaves and Fishes of Ireland
A reply to the English propaganda of Most Reverend
Michael Sheehan, Roman Catholic Coadjutor Archbishop
of Sydney, re the conditions in Ireland, as per Sydney news-
papers of March 17th, 1927.
You have placed yourself and we Roman Catholics in
a fix.
How can we believe or regard as true anything said
about Church dogma? Your Church dogma may chance
to be quite as deceiving as is your false report about Ire-
land.
I like my priest and I like my Church as well as any-
body else, but we must lead them out from the combined
treachery of England and Italy. They Were cunningly led'
in.
Our respect for the priesthood will be turned into hate
if this lying propaganda continues. We’ll be compelled to
look upon them as more injurious to Ireland, and more to
be shunned than spies or traitors.
I begin to think we don’t want our freedom, or we
would put up the colours and follow Archbishop Mannix.
Must we go on for two or three hundred years before
we can grasp or see what this man has done?
I honestly believe that the constant repetition—repe-
tition, that most powerful of all things—of the English


method of hail Mary business has sapped the infantile in-
stinctive enunciation of our own language. It has sapped
our perception. It has sapped the capacity to think. It
has sapped the courage even of our priests and bishops, as
well as of ourselves.
For instance: When Pope Pius IX. turned tail and
ran away from the Vatican, Cardinal Cullen had the oppor-
tunity and the power, but not the courage, to shift the whole
Vatican business over to Ireland. Anyhow, Cardinal Cullen
and his nephew, Cardinal Moran, were never any good for
Ireland. They have been tried and found wanting.
After they got English Catholicism firmly rooted in
Ireland, they got three turncoat renegades named Browne,
Beal and Staples, natives of England, a country and a people
who looked upon the name of Jesus as only fit to be applied
to their dogs.
When a ship was intentionally fitted up so as it and
all hands would get lost. It would be heavily insured.
Then a fat parson of their own English-made type of god
comes along and christens it Jesus.
Cardinal Moran read English literature where these
things are plain enough to be seen by anyone who knows
how to read. I presume Cardinal Moran knew how, although
I have met very many who went to colleges and Universities,
yet didn’t know how to read.
He was the sore Jesus to the Irish race. That Cardinal
Moran read the English literature, I’m quite certain. His
quotations from it proves this, and throughout the whole
of his own writings he has been to great pains to conceal
this and keep the knowledge to himself. May God forgive
him; he never told one of us. Leaving us in the belief that
the name was good enough for us Irish to bend the knee.
This first knee-bending on the part of our forefathers
was the forerunner of all our thraldom. All our subsequent
trials and tribulations followed in the wake of this first
submissive act.


We are still told to be humble, enabling Johnny Bull to
eternally and ironically cry out; ‘ ‘ The Irish problem again! ’ ’
You take it from me, we’ll give Bull a problem before we’re
done with him.
Browne and company, as mentioned, with their Protes-
tant god in their pockets, -were placed in different parts of
Leinster. Browne in Dublin, Beal in Ossory. I’m not quite
sure whether it was in Meath or Westmeath that Staples
was dumped. Henceforth, after the dumping she called the
province of Leinster “within the pale”—whatever that
vague word may mean—hinting strongly that Browne and
company’s god was more civilised than the previous
Catholic god.
Behold what a steadfast people we are, Protestant and
Catholic alike, we renegaded from our own God and our
own religion to accept these substitutes.
Extract from the Gaelic League Library by 0 ’Connell,
Dan., page 96: “The Irish themselves were a people peace-
able, harmless, and affable to strangers and to all, pious and
good, whilst they retained the religion of their forefathers. ’ ’
Behold again what a firm and steadfast people we are.
Protestant and Catholic alike, we also renegaded from the
colours of our forefathers.
The interest of all Ireland must be the interest of all
Irish, creeds. Our earlier and more learned forefathers ob-
served and knew that the suns, stars and planets are, like
ourselves, in a constant state of birth, growth and decay.
Seeing that the orange was the first colour appearing at
the birth of these heavenly bodies, they seized on it and
adopted it as the colour of the All-Ireland flag.
It was under its banner, and, upholding it as the all
Ireland colour, that Wolfe Tone fought his battles, and after
his success at Castlebar, established a republic—short-lived,
certainly, but still a republic.
We lost this republic through our own apathy, indif-
ference and ignorance.


The Frenchmen have it recorded that “Ireland could
be taken with roasted apples. The Irishmen knew nothing
about fighting for Ireland, but were all willing to fight for
France or the Virgin Mary.” What a laughable matter this
is, only because of its great seriousness.
Man is a more religious animal than woman, but woman
through her motherhood—that twin sister to patriotism—
holds a great power. This power should not be kept dor-
mant. It requires exercise It’s quite possible we are injur-
ing our cause by depriving too many of our girls of this
divine patriotic knowledge.
It was the women of the United States who made
America. They loved and honoured their own countrymen,
without the aid of priest or parson to tell them. The French-
women, too, they love and honour their own countrymen,
and take good care that French courage won’t become a
lost art.
The “wild geese” Irishmen who went to fight for the-
Pope came away subdued, with their “tails hanging.” The
Italian women, several Italian nuns amongst them, swarmed
into the streets of Rome. They threw bricks and stones and
dead dogs at the Irishmen; told them to go home and fight
for their own country. And told them, furthermore, that
they didn’t have a country to fight for.
In spite of England’s lying propaganda re their ignor-
ance, I say: Behold how properly educated the Italian women
are. They raise their own Mussolinis. They raise their own
Popes, and they take very good care to keep the courage
cf their own Italian men intact. These Italian women would
fight to the death to keep rejected outsiders from becoming
rulers in Italy.
Our own women of Derry, Wexford and Limerick have
set us a'splendid fighting example. We boast of our virtue.
We boast of being born in the Isle of Saints. Granted,
granted. Still, even with these advantages in the matter


of raising Popes, these Italian women can knock spots out
of us Irishwomen.
It was mainly through these warring churches that we
lost the hold. Now, by using these churches judiciously,
they will help us to regain our lost hold. The Celtic spirit
of Parnell and Dr. Mannix is permeating all our Irish
churches.
I call upon all Irishwomen of all creeds to put up our
lovely orange, white, and green. Take it calmly and perse-
veringly into our respective churches. This will remove a
barrier and enable men like Dr. Mannix, Charles Stewart
Parnell, Carson and Sir James Craig to unitedly formulate
their ideas.
Even the most ferocious wild beasts instinctively calm
down and club together for mutual safety in time of danger.
For example. When Home Rule was on the verge of
being granted, the English advisers of the Vatican got Pope
Leo XIII. to send Monsignor Persico over to Ireland to tell
the people of Ireland that Home Rule was “inopportune.”
For lending himself to this bit of underhand work against
Ireland, this man Persico was shortly afterwards created a
full-blown Cardinal.
Ha, ha! Molly Doolan. Faith, the day is not far distant
when these “white-anters” will find, to their cost, that it’s
their own interference that’s “inopportune.”
During Parnell’s political troubles, one of his supporters
said to him: “The Catholic bishops are doing all the mis-
chief. Why don’t you speak to them?” Parnell replied:
“Nothing worse wanted, but I daren’t touch it. It must be
a Catholic to do that.” No wonder poor broken-hearted
Parnell w T as afraid to touch the blackguards! If any of my
co-religionists doubt me, I refer them to the “Catholic
Press” of July 1, 1920, where Dr. M. J. O’Reilly, C.M., St.
John’s College, University of Sydney, points out where the
Archbishop of Cashil, with Archbishop Troy of Dublin, plot-


ted and carried on like spies and traitors to upset the Par-
liament of Ireland. There were, and are still, hosts of
priests, bishops and ministers equally injurious as those two.
1 may here state that Dr. O’Reilly, C.M., St. John’s College,
is, like myself, a great believer in (as he calls him) :
MANNIX OF MELBOURNE,
Herewith, I warn every man, woman and child born
in Ireland to look into this condition. I’d like to know
what Bishop Sheehan thinks of this condition. It would
be a useful sermon. We all helped to create it. Behold the
monster we have created! Compelling our best and wisest
patriots to stand aside and see the mischievous thing flourish
on the downfall of their native land.
Who can deny now that we haven’t been led in, when,
instead of our former and natural kindness, we impose such
a hard condition on one another?
During the reign of Henry VIII., and previous reigns,
every man, woman and child in Ireland was persecuted,
flogged, robbed and jailed; often forfeiting their lives in
upholding the orange flag of our forefathers.
Just as later, after they got the green established, we
Catholics were singled out to be flogged, persecuted, robbed
and jailed, and even hanged, for upholding the green.
What the hell is the matter with us Irish Catholics?
How galling on men like John Mitchel, Parnell and
others, who loved their country so well, to see all their
patriotic labor go in vain!
The very minute we get the Catholic University estab-
lished in College Green, without making a single protest
from any of us, we allow our priests and bishops to hand it
over to the tender mercies of a super-human spy and dirty
turn-coat named Cardinal Wiseman.


Now, is it a people’s question? Isn’t it wholly and
solely a priests’ question?
All they can boast about this man is that he was a
“brilliant English speaker.” Had he been a brilliant Irish
speaker, there would be some claim to recognition. What
is this kind of work we keep glorifying the turn-coat. As
if it made any difference to us who turned right-about-left
or the reverse.
We were the last of all the peoples to take it over. Why
must we become embittered over it ? Why must we, Protes-
tant, Orange and Catholic alike, murder one another over
it? What does it matter to us whether anybody turns or
not ? There must be some fundamental significance for our
behaviour.
I don’t know what the priests, bishops, parsons and my
readers may think, but it strikes my mind that we are not
too sure of ourselves. Fearing we ’re not on the right track,
we grab at an excuse, seeking an apology of some kind for
our behaviour.
They have given over preaching the destruction of the
earth by floods, as well as the hell-fire business. They still
dangle the dying threat over our heads.
At death, as at birth, in the case of the mother, we have
a changed mentality.
When the man was being strapped to the electric chair
before being reprieved, he had a changed mentality. He
thought the men tying him were his little children playing
about his shoulders. Also the man drowning; he, too, had
a changed mentality—just on being recovered, he thought
he was wading in long grass, and so tired he must sit down
and rest.
Bar the sudden departures, the entire human family be-
come as little children. We play with the blankets and die
happy.


When you think of the kind of men we nominate to
the head of our Universities, it’s no wonder our internal
and external affairs get maladministered.
A race of semi-idiots couldn’t do more than this. You
can’t tell me that we’re semi-idiots. This is the one only
thing that we accept without inquiry. We stifle the spirit
of inquiry in our children.
For example: “ I was reared in a business-house in Ire-
land. Protestants as well as Catholics had recourse to the
place. If we inquired why one neighbour was a Protestant
and another neighbour a Catholic—it’s a well-remembered
fact by me—we were quickly told by our mother to “Hush,
alana! . . .You mustn’t talk like that.”
She was a Catholic, a native of Kilkenny, and in all
other matters a very clever woman. On this one point
alone, she spoiled every child in the house, sons as well as
daughters. So you see the power of motherhood. It can
be used to kill or create everything.
Our language is a sacred trust —more sacred than any-
thing that was ever handed down by Jesus. No power on
earth could hinder a mother from teaching her child under
seven years to enunciate its own, and one or two more lan-
guages if desired.
At the bidding of cast-off and rejected Jesuits, the
motherhood of Ireland, Protestant, Orange and Catholic
alike, became more powerful than anything else on earth —
and killed it.
In the 15th century, a whole hundred years before Eng-
land took in her penal laws, these Jesuits, with the assist-
ance of Irish motherhood, had the English language
flourishing in several places in the province of Leinster.
These astute gentlemen took good care to hold back the
Irish, knowing as they did, and do, the power and use of
the first seven years for the language. After the first seven
years, this natural faculty dies.
Semi-idiots, indeed! If we only buy a piece of cloth,,
we handle it, we look closely at its texture, at its colouring.


and uses for wear and tear. Before buying a house, we
leave no stone unturned to find its foundations and structure,
and so on, in all our actions throughout the whole of our
lives. As mentioned before, this is the only thing we accept
without inquiry. The cause is more vital than the individual
or the sect.
Let us put our own house in order. Too long we have
neglected our own men. With the Vatican in our own land,
we needn’t be fed up to choking point with old, foreign,
and, for the most part, useless, immoral men as saints. We
have better men at home. There’s Kickham, the man who
suffered in body and soul all his life for Ireland; Tommy
Moore and his imperishable language, whose “Irish Gentle-
man in Search of a Religion’’ ought to be in the possession
of every Irishman.
For goodness sake, I beg of you to look and see what
we are doing! We’re allowing Moore’s works to be mutilat-
ed and interpolated without raising a finger to stop it! Not
for the want of a finger—we have five to the stem. Our
little shamrock, with only three to the stem, has been used
to symbolise numerous trinities, and, at the same time, what
dire havoc in strangling the unities of our beloved north-
ern and southern peoples!
Goldsmith, the immortal; Robert Emmet, whose plan
was so well laid, but got little or no assistance from us;
Michael Dwyer; Parnell, whose every word and move were
wise and good for Ireland.
Great Scott, what’s the matter with him? His morals,
too, were of a very high order, holding, as he did, to the
religion of our ancient ancestors. Whose code of moral, re-
ligious and economic laws, was more superior and more high-
ly civilised than anything ever yet produced on this globe.
Divine love is never premeditated; it springs direct
from an Almighty God as portion of the divine love He
bears His creatures, whereas divorces and other man-mani-
pulated religions and laws frequently become destroyers of


human happiness. All is emptiness without the divine love
strain.
The little Irish newspaper, “Gael,” that ought to be in
every Irishman’s house. It’s only threepence monthly;
yearly, four shillings, post free. Address: Hon. Sec., Gaelic
League, 104 George Street West, Sydney. This paper, with
an Irish Roman Catholic priest as editor, stated in a recent
issue that “Ireland was prosperous and happy in her divine
love before she developed such a complex about the sex
passion.” If canonisation be desirable for any man, that
man should be Charles Stewart Parnell.
What about Roger Casement ? When you do the noblest
work a man can do, a Jew—one of Jesus’ countrymen—is
handed a six-hundred-year-old Act and employed to come
and hang him. This happened to Sir Roger Casement.
Then there’s Tom Davis, the man who dipped his pen
in his heart’s blood for Ireland. To say nothing about the
hosts and hosts of others who are in spirit and suffering
equal to those named.
All the saints in the Roman calendar put together aren’t
fit to blacken the shoes of any one of our own men.
The English Jesuitical writers never tire of telling us
that the English in Ireland became more Irish than the Irish
themselves. Also, that the English were always friendly
disposed towards us. This is all flapdoodle, or a kind of
sophistry, fallacious and subtle. This English Jesuitical,
lying, flapdoodle phrase, during hundreds of years, has
worked round to great perfection.
Every skunk you meet, he cries out: “I’m better Irish
than the Irish themselves!” They didn’t even sympathise
with us until the English-made laws pinched themselves.
Of their friendship, there can be many examples shown.
For the present little publication, two will suffice. The
massacre at Mullaghmast near Athy County, Kildare, and


the martyrdom of Archbishop G’Hurley by the English of
the pale.
Sir Thomas Crosby, commanding the Queen’s troops
in Leix and Offaly (King and Queen’s counties), devised a
diabolical plot for the conquest of the countryside by the
assassination of its leaders at one fell blow. Feigning great
friendship for the neighbouring families, he invited them
wholesale to a feast in the Rath of Mullaghmast. Many a
merry native cavalcade rode into the fort that day, only one
man of them, a scion of the Lalor clan, came forth alive. His
suspicions having been aroused as he approached the Rath,
he entered it with caution, to see his neighbours lying
butchered and find himself murderously assailed. But he
fought his way to safety and to his friends. Of some four
hundred guests who had been invited, only one escaped
the slaughter. One hundred and eighty of the valiant
o’Mores alone having been butchered—a holocaust which
must have shocked even the Saxon soul of the dutiful de
Vere, for he wrote: —
Since that hour the clouds that passed
O’er the Rath of Mullaghmast
Never once a tear hath cast
On the gore-dyed sod.
For the shower of crimson rain
That o’er flowed that fatal plain
Cries aloud, and not in vain,
To the Most High God.
Before Crosby’s door at Strabbally wrote Philip O’Sulli-
van Beare: "Grew a tree of great height and abounding in
spreading branches. From this tree he was accustomed to
hang not only men, but also women and children, for no
crime, and when women were hanging from the tree, he
took an incredible pleasure in hanging their infant children
at the same time by their mothers’ flowing hair.”


The manner of the execution of Archbishop O’Hurley,
of Cashel, was somewhat different. Dr. Renehan says of
him; “He was sentenced to be dragged to the place of exe-
cution, there to be hanged, his head cut off, his body quar-
tered, and the quarters hung up on the four gates of the
city.” The holy martyr was accordingly executed in St.
Stephen’s Green, on the morning of Friday, the 6th of May,
1584, in the sixty-fifth year of his age, and the remains de-
posited in the church of St. Kevin, Dublin.
Necessity knows no law, but the law of necessity,
After thousands and thousands of such horrors passing
along from father to son without inquiry, at last the think-
ing mind of man or woman won’t be satisfied with the
‘ ‘ Hush, hush, alana! ’ ’ that strangler of the Irish intellect.
It will be forced, of necessity, to ask: What was Jesus do-
ing while Crosby did the butchering? I’ll tell you. He was
doing what his countryman, Disraeli, did. In His name,
anything and everything good and useful for Ireland was
getting turned down. No Jew ever did, or ever will do,
any good for the human family. It’s the Celtic spirit of
men like Parnell and Dr. Mannix that’s wanted.
Irishmen will have to turn their attention to something
else besides these warring gods, or else to adore them hypo-
critically, as all the others are doing.
Another instance of England’s friendship can be seen
in the following;—
United States frigate “Jamestown,” April 29th. This
vessel sailed from Boston with provisions, and supplies of
all kinds for the Irish “famine” victims, 1847. When
the American warship approached the Irish coast, she was
met by numbers of vessels carrying away to England large
quantities of food from the very districts in which the
greatest number of deaths from starvation had occurred.


The “famine” of that and other years was as directly
the work of the British Government as is the coercion act
of to-day.
It should be added that the alleged “Government” re-
ferred to had a short time before the sailing of the “James-
town” refused to allow one of its vessels to bring provisions
from America. “It was contrary,” the applicants were
told, “to all departmental rules.” The above episode of
England, Ireland and the American warship (another
trinity) speaks for itself.
It’s wonderful how long we have allowed this kind of
work to go on. While we Protestant, Orange and Catholic
alike (another of the trinities) flock in great numbers in
all climates to hear the mythical sermon of the loaves and
fishes and the still more mythical sermon of “Feed my
lambs, feed my sheep.”
Behold our veritable loaves and fishes!
Behold the “real presence”!
Hey, Presto! Away they float from off the coasts of
Ireland to—
Feed my Johnny Bulls,
Feed my Buckshot Fosters.
Having caught the inspiration from Dr. O’Reilly, I say
as an object lesson:
Mannix of Melbourne.
Kitchener of Khartoum.
Jesus of Nazareth.
Saul alias Paul of Tarsus.
Michael of Kerry.
“Thus saith the Lord, so say I, even I.”—Daniel.
We don’t want Orangemen; we don’t want Protestant


men, we don’t want Catholic men. We want Irishmen. Our
own men—first, last and all the time.
When an Irishman becomes an alias, we look down on
him and despise him. In the case of a stranger, we honour
him with a high holy-day, and pray up to him as we do to
Paul.
Irish Catholics must help our priests and bishops to do
this work. The latter are too long exposed to the two great
fangs— Oxford and Rome, by which their freedom, their
manhood and their patriotism have been torn completely
away, leaving them callous to everything, only their own
hobby called “dogma.”
In “Catholic Press,” May 12, 1927, can be seen where
the “Irish Mission to China” has been blown to pieces—
scattered to the four winds of heaven.
Well done, John Chinaman! While you stick to your
own China god you will be able to combat the enemy.
Now, who has “rats in the garret”—the Chinese or
the pious interlopers?
That mean subterfuge our pious teachers resort to,
by clapping the finger to the temple, denoting you have
“rats in the garret,” instead of honestly answering a
question to the best of their ability!
With the Vatican in our own land, we could behave
honorable to the Chinese and true to ourselves.
The English-prompted Popes get us to keep politics
out of religion, while they themselves put all the politics
of the world through the religion. What was it but a daring
and high-handed mix-up of politics with religion to get the
Kaiser of Germany to bury a dummy Pope ? They were
afraid of meeting another Garibaldi had they employed an
Italian undertaker.
Rejected Jesuits from Catholic countries flocked to
Ireland, and for hundreds of years made such a howl about


keeping politics out of religion until at last it became a
slogan with a man like Dan O’Connell, whose natural Irish
oratory could draw thousands together. Cosgrave has com-
menced to use the same old hidden war cry.
They’re thinking of nothing at the Vatican but politics,
and how to mix them with religion. For instance, when
there is anything politically on for Ireland, the English-
prompted Pope always introduces something deeply religious
into our churches.
What is this subtle move ? A sermon on this kind of
work from our priests and bishops is very much needed,
and I most respectfully beg of them to give us such a
sermon.
Our late lamented Dan, had he suspected the double
treachery, would never be foolish enough to use the slogan
or commit the error of expecting the Whigs to help him.
We’re always bemoaning that England has guns and we
haven’t. England’s gun, England’s God and England’s
paper money would not be so useful to her, only we Irish
pay great attention to her wants —Orange, Protestant and
Catholic alike.
We shoulder her gun; we broadcast her God; we allowed
her 1.0.U.’s full scope, while our high-toned Irishmen put
their own 1.0.U.’s in their pipes and smoked them.
We claim our Pope is infallible and never changes.
Catholic Cardinals assisted to burn Joan of Arc because
she helped her own countrymen to put the English out
of France. Now they are making her a saint. What do
you think of that?
Galleo, for his honest description of the sun and earth,
was imprisoned. What about that? Doesn’t look as if they
were anxious to educate the people!
Now and then we get. a slap in the face, when some
ignorant booby tells us, “Ireland raises nothing but trai-


tors. ’ ’ The truth is, we hate a traitor more than any people
on earth.
But these trinities, double games, and the unnatural
forcing of the first ten or twelve years of life into one
groove, keep us back from hitching on to a remedy. Fatal
to natural ability is the smothering of it in early youth.
It rarely reappears again.
“Vengeance is Mine,” said the Lord. Occasionally,
bke the Lord, we see a little bit of revenge, as in the ease of
O’Donnell the brave, Carey the traitor.
Every Irishman who shoulders her gun and broadcasts-
her God are traitors to Ireland.
Talk about the witty Irish; talk about the clever Irish!
Behold what we have done! We smoked our own 1.0.U.’5,
and accepted England’s 1.0.U.’s in lieu of traitorism. When
we apply the remedy, Father O’Flannagan and Mr. J. J.
O’Kelly speak about when things will be different.
Without thinking, we accuse England as the robber of
our trade. By observing how it happens, it bears another
meaning: looks as though we throw the trade at her feet.
Guinness’ porter is a case in point. By mixing polities
with religion, that is when Father Mathew, a Capuchin
friar residing in Cork, gave a blessing with the pledge, we
swarmed round him like flies round a sugar loaf.
It’s a common and foolish remark that “drink ruined
Ireland. ’ ’ England drinks more per head of the population
than Ireland, Scotland and Wales put together. It’s a
wonder England can do so much drinking and keep from
being ruined.
Father Mathew wasn’t an Irishman. He conveniently
forgot to reprimand the heavy drinkers. It was the Irish,
in England who followed him. Like Mathew himself, the
English knew the game.
Guinness, seeing his industry about to be annihilated,
was forced through instinctive self-preservation, to send it.


over to Liverpool to be bottled and labled. Just think how
we Irish bottle ourselves up.
Father Mathew, knowing the game,
Worked for England with might and main.
It would take a book to itself to describe the closing
down of our last Irish poplin factory in Dublin. How
Cosgrave was kidded on as a pious leader to take a pil-
grimage to Rome, just to counter Archbishop Mannix’s
efforts in favour of our Republic and give the English Jesui-
tical power an opportunity to squelch the Irish poplin
trade; then, when the mischief is done, use all their elo-
quence to hide the snake in the grass. It would take not
only a small book, but a very large volume to give even
a meagre description of our Hibernians with Archbishop
Kelly at their head. Talk about Fascism or black-handism
—these people use axes and other open weapons.
Our Hibernian Society has gradually grown in to be
a wolf in sheep’s clothing. It will require an Irish Hiber-
nian—one of ourselves—to do this work.
The Society, in addition to its other tragedies, has
smashed the printing press into smithereens sooner than
allow any truth to be recorded about Ireland.
Equally important with our language is our own Irish
note issue. Every country under the sun is master of its
own paper money to the extent of the country’s resources.
Churchill told Ramsay McDonald a little while ago
that he would print all the paper money he liked, in spite
•of any Labour Government. Previous to this, they said they
would print paper money as against their industries and
against their population.
It is now over forty years since I heard Gladstone—
he who was called “the grand old man”—speaking slowly


and methodically, say that “money was not gold; money
was not silver. Money was not copper; money was not
paper. Money was—what do you think? Money was confi-
dence.”
Before England ever had a sovereign or a bank note,
they traded amongst themselves with their own 1.0.U.’5,
giving it confidence in their own land first of all. Now it
has a fairly good grip all over.
What were we doing? We kept up the foolery of the
old 1.0. U. pipe-smoking time. We poked fun at the Ameri-
can green-backed dollar. We carried this to, such an extent
that Bancroft, the great American historian, was compelled
to mention it. He has it recorded. “No one ridiculed our
paper money more than our friends the Irish. Still, they
come to our shores.”
You were quite right, Mr. Bancroft. We run to your
shores. Yea! We run to every man’s shores, but the shores
of our own land, where the loaves and fishes are so plentiful
and so good.
Note the irony of the word “friends” in Bancroft’s
report. Well, Mr. Bancroft, on behalf of an inoffensive
and highly sensitive people who shrink from injuring a
stranger, I apologise for the oversight. The double trick
has almost changed our natures. We ought to be d ——n
well ashamed of ourselves.
Our Isle of Saints! Great heavens! how inhuman the
descendants of the saints have become—Protestant, Orange
and Catholic alike. With all our religions, with all eur
holy communion, with all our college building and book
learning, we have never devised a plan to send our surplus
loaves and fishes (and there is a very large surplus) to the
starving in Connemara.
In the millions of us who went to America, not one of
us observed its uses and applied it to our own land, as
Washington did to America. Washington had only a small
majority. They said he could never do without England


and England’s money. The minute he got in he started the
paper money. He employed everyone who landed on his
shores. We can all see the result. It only wants a few
staunch men and women to start it. No power on earth
able to hinder you. Why not, Irishmen, start it at once, in
Belfast, Cork or Dublin—even in one of the smaller towns?
There’s Kilkenny and Galway, places where they were and
are still brimful of the trading spirit—that spirit is dormant,
'"on the verge of death for want of exercise.
We accept English paper money in lieu of our linen,
in lieu of our cattle, in lieu of our loaves and fishes; in fact,
we accept it in lieu of all our wealth.
If English paper money is good enough for Ireland,
Irish paper money is quite good enough for England.
The untold millions of outside money sent into Ireland
has had only one result, namely, to impoverish the country
by luring the population away. With our own paper money
we could assist our factories, and not allow them to be
closed down. With our own paper money we could become
large employers of our own labour, and not as it is at
present, led by an Englishman, to be a bleeding thorn, fes-
tering in the side of an Irish Parliament.
Will any Irishman stand up and show us how it could
fail? America printed very small paper tokens. Every-
one can see the result of her perseverance and repetition
within the four walls of her own land.
We have all seen paper money for small amounts. Your
shilling, sixpenny and penny stamp is as potent to buy
your loaf of bread or pound of meat as it is to carry your
letter all over the globe. It only remains to be put into
circulation. Exchange banks will spring up all over Ireland.
Again, I say, persevere within the four walls of our
own country. It will soon be on the world’s money market.
Bring in equalisation of wages for all concerned. This
will make it popular and do away with the wages strife.


It will help to stop the habit of looking down on one another.
Looking down on labour, indeed! What is the matter with
us? Is the human family not quite civilised? Sure, we’d
have nothing at all only we have labour. Without labour
we are powerless. Labour provides everything. Labour
provides even the paper money. Labour is healthy. Labour
is wholesome. The labouring man, with his large family
and its inevitable co-partner, the divine love strain, stands
a very good chance of being the happiest man both here'
and hereafter. Anyhow, he is more honest and more honor-
able than most of the other occupations.
The vain ideal of looking down is hurtful, but the
real danger lies with the one who looks up.
The Irish are a proud race. We don’t like to give in
that we were so easily caught by the mythical double trap.
But it must be faced. With the least little unity, it can and
will be conquered.
Don’t forget, the Danes fought well. But the Irish
under Brian Boru fought better.
The Almighty God gave us a beautiful and a fertile
land. We parted with it. Through the inspiration of this
land, we developed a useful and classical language. We
parted with it also. Now we are parting with our very
souls. We are handing them over to the substitute English-
made gods. We will never see the face of an Almighty
God until we unitedly do something for Ireland. We ne’er
see well what we are standing on.
What are we doing this very day? Protestant, Orange
and Catholic alike, we are scabbing and renegading on our
own Republic, while we run headlong in a panic with our
youth and our wealth to the Republics established by other
peoples.
One thing we want: it’s an
Irish Truth Society.


Saint Patrick, although nobody knows where he was
born, and after he was forced to do the disappearing trick
out of Waterford, nobody knows where he went to or where
he was buried, was a good Presbyterian. His labours and
result were chiefly amongst our Northern fellow country-
men. It is also admitted that the word presbyterian is the
ancient word priest “written large,” so why not a Catholic
priest and a Presbyterian minister with a patriotic repre-
sentative of the other creeds unite and form such a Society?
Three united can do more than three thirties singly.
The death of a Pope is a function that is diplomati-
cally announced to suit outside conditions. Knowing this,
when the cable rings out the death of a Pope, I very natur-
ally say to myself, “This Pope may or may not be dead.”
Here’s a trinity—the Pope, the death, and the outside
condition. Dying Popes were very active at the beginning
of the last Great War. When tricky Italy backed out of
the Triple Alliance—another trinity—it was a deeply con-
cocted trinity, the Kaiser’s dummy Pope, the late King
Edward and the Nationalists of Ireland
Ha! “You dear little Shamrock of Ireland,” you are
well able and very willing to support all their trinities.
The trinity above referred to re an Irish Truth Society
is very much needed, and would be a great help to our
recognising and understanding one another. The cure of a
disease lies in the knowledge of the disease.
We have forgotten Wolfe Tone’s anniversary, June 24.
“Greater love hath no man” than the Wolfe Tones and
Terence MeSweeneys. They resorted not to the evasive
and deceptive tactics of sending a second-hand son to do
the work. Seeing the state of their own people, they them-
selves accepted the supreme sacrifice. As Kickham, the Tip-
perary man, said of the “Nora Leaheys,” I say of the
crucified Wolfe Tones and Terence MeSweeneys, “they
were not born in vain.”


Lest we forget Easter week, 1916
“Who fears to speak of Easter week,
Who dares its fate deplore?
The red-gold flame of Erin’s name
Confronts the world once more.”
(By 8.J., in “The Gael.”)
Threatened with total blindness and on the verge of
the grave, still with my mind’s eye I see the whole thing
as clearly as if I were looking through a cup of cold water.
The Irishman’s nobility of soul has hindered him, and
is still hindering him from even suspecting—much less see-
ing and grasping the low-down English Jesuitical double
trick. This nobility of soul must and will assert itself.
Ireland; 0 Ireland! from your anguish and pain
Our nobility of soul will unitedly arise, and uplift
you again.
P.S.—“The Mills of God grind slowly.”
During my sorrowful travelling, I noticed every man
laying claim to civilisation put his flag to the breeze; only
my own countrymen—
Alas! not yet,
Archbishop Mannix put us to the test. He found us
“wanting. ”
We bleat, we tramp, we clap, we follow en masse, like
the spiritually well-fed sheep that we are.
When our enemy laid violent hands on him, we ran like
red-shanks up chimneys, down cellars, under beds, into all
manner of corners—to escape helping him. The writer is
not aware of any one man or woman to put up the colours
and publicly speak on his behalf.


Spurious Irish patriotism —North and South—allowed
Ireland to be cut in two. Developed motherhood didn’t
allow Solomon to cut the baby. Developed motherhood
does no compromising. It talks not of cost or trouble or
duty. Like the earth, it yields up its all, and saves the
baby.
Spurious motherhood could do what spurious Irish
patriotism has done. It could turn even the most beautiful
child into a curse.
Unfortunately, notwithstanding all our sad experience,
our priests and bishops, with few exceptions, want to keep
this English connection by suffering and encouraging the
Free State.
Without explanation from Bishop Sheehan, it would
be hard for us to do the believing on religious dogma, when
the lies about Ireland are so glaring. No doubt Bishop
Sheehan has courage enough to stand on his altar and
explain these things. Bishop Sheehan has a keen recollec-
tion of how we treated Archbishop Mannix. He is also
perfectly well aware, if he stood on the altar and told the
truth about the English Jesuitical lying propaganda, a big
police officer with the firm step of authority would grab him
by the shoulder. Another thing indelibly fixed in his mind
is, the very moment this took place, the congregation would
run pell-mell like wildfire, breaking our necks down the
steps, trampling on women and children to get away.
Now Bishop Sheehan is in a bigger fix than the con-
gregation think. If they knew, they would not forsake
him, because Bishop Sheehan is a learned man. He knows
that his substitute English-made god is powerless to release
him from the grip of what authority calls
“Law and order.”
Alas, alas! not yet, not yet.
Will any Irishman or Irishwoman stand up, instead of
leaning on crutches, and tell us.


So far as Ireland is concerned, what’s the difference
between an open oath that keeps the English connection in
existence and the hidden ecclesiastical oath and vows that
turn Ireland down?
Bishop Sheehan, De Valera, Sir James Craig, or any-
one of our Mother Prioresses should know this.
Woman is the light. The key to unravel hidden know-
ledge cannot be found without woman. Woman is symbo-
lised as holding the lamp of light by that great Indian
scientist, Sir Jagadis Bose, whose scientific labours in
India are proving the truth of our ancient Irish ancestors,
who preached the “oneness in all things” and spread the
knowledge without profit. What he now advocates. The
article is well worth any man or woman’s time to read. It
can be seen in “Sydney Morning Herald,” June 25, 1927,
page 11, column 7.
When we establish our Irish Truth Society, these and
kindred subjects can be all thrashed out.
As the Yankee says, “right here and now” is a grand
and a glorious opportunity for some wealthy Irishman or
woman to build a hall dedicated in their own name for use
by the Irish Truth Society.
“He who gives freely gives twice.”
Surely Bishop Sheehan will admit that we can say our
prayers with Ireland free as well as with Ireland bound?
The prayers wouldn’t hurt us if they were our own. The
evil lies in our accepting them after they were adulterated
by the enemy.
Sinn Fein, Sinn Fein (pronounced Shin Fane, Shin
Fane, and meaning ourselves, ourselves).
The wise men of old said: “When God Almighty found
out that he couldn’t be everywhere at the same time, He
created Motherhood to take His place.”


At Mass last Sunday on July 30th, 1927, in Sacred
Heart Church, Darlinghurst, I heard Father McCarthy say,
“The wages of sin is death.” In reply to Father McCar-
thy and on behalf of Ireland, I say: The wages of foreign
prayer is death.
We all know now that it was England who took the
three cursed religions into Ireland. High Mass may have
been good, Holy Communion may he good. The bishops
themselves are well aware that their holy communion is
no good. This can be seen by their antics and humours in
refusing it. Why not do what we can? The willingness
to do the small proves the ability to do the big. Put the
colours up and do what we now know to be the holiest and
greatest of all good —to take a united Ireland into these
three churches. Don’t be afraid. Fear is a killing thing..
Look at the patriotism of 1798. It was cold. It was
empty. It missed the Divine love strain. It was barren
and one-sided. It greatly lacked the Divine pity so abun-
dantly provided and implanted by an all-wise providence in
the heart and mind of developed motherhood.
This divinity in unison with Grattan and his colleagues
would never allow any man-manipulated religion to act as
a deterrent against voting. It would have pitied the con-
dition. It would have made an improvement. It would
have given the neighbour the vote.
Instead of doing what we did, we ostentatiously find
fault with the Pope. But bribe the Pope to keep the neigh-
bour busy. The inward ear and the mind’s eye of the Celtic
neighbour, by a further process of concealed feeing and
bribing, are not allowed to hear or see plainly.
While we hypocritically preach love the neighbour, we
rob him of the vote, and we throw the voting power back
into the hands of the enemy. We then set up a prolonged
and agonising fight, all the time posing as martyrs, howl-
ing to get it back.


I met so many Orangemen who loved Ireland. I don’t
despair of their assisting. There’s no excuse now. Here’s a
piece of land providentially provided by the Lord.
Take Wolfe Tone’s advice: “Put the knife through the
words Catholic, Protestant and Dissenter.” Unitedly roll
up to 90 Gordon Street, near Centennial Park. Form your-
selves into a committee to see about building a temple to
our own men, where we can all meet on a spiritual equality.
Separate the sheep from the goats. Let the spirits above,
as well as the mortals down here below, see that we have
better men in Ireland than the twelve Apostles ever knew
how to be.
In these two oaths lurk a lingering disaster for Ireland.
Why call one a curse and the other a blessing? The fact
remains: they were both planted by the enemy.
Difference in the oaths must be found.
Between two stools we fall to the ground.
Respectfully and faithfully yours in the cause,
P.S.—The test of affection is a tear. On the night of
July 5, 1927, the day I bought the land so accidentally seen
by me for the Hall, with Ulster close by and Saint Francis
looking on, I dreamt, amidst great rejoicings, Archbishop
Mannix and Sir James Craig, each holding a hand, intro-
duced me to a vast assemblage of expectant, anxious,
earnest uplifted Irish faces as the “missing link.”
I burst into tears and awoke.


Result of another spiritualised dream. When on the
bit of land snatched by a McSweeney from the hand of the
Herod, I saw a whole bevy of surpliced clergymen, with
Emmet in the centre, looking steadfastly at me and point-
ing to the bishops. This Hall, when finished, must have
three bishops, representative of Orange, Protestant and
Catholic alike, all born Irishmen, speaking and willing to
teach the Irish language, to unitedly assist in christening
it—the Robert Emmet Preparatory Hall, he who said,
‘ ‘ Then, and not till then, let my epitaph be written. ” “ Seek
and ye shall find.”
Christening must be delayed until request re language
and unity be discovered.
Brethren, bear with one another. Prepare ye the way
to write and immortalise this epitaph.
—E.McS.


iimimi.iiminiiimi
Some time ago in North America I spoke on
two subjects—first, “WOMAN, CHURCH and
PRESS”; secondly, “JESUS, the JEWS, and the
IRISH.” A report of three hundred words con-
gratulating me on my efforts in trying to fix things
appeared in the “New York Herald,” America’s
leading newspaper.
The following translated from the South
American Spanish:—
Extract from “La Nacion,’
Buenos Ayres.
‘The Irish community celebrated yester-
ST. PATRICK’S DAY.
‘There was a banquet attended by many
people.
“Mrs. McSweeney also made a speech
that deeply moved all people present. She
was warmly applauded, and the cheers con-
tinued for quite a long time.


iiuiiimiiiniiitiiiiiiiiitiiimiinmiimimimiiii
miiiiiiiiiMminiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiimmimiiiHiiiiiiiiii
On a Sunday afternoon in 1922 in Hyde Park,
London, I heard an ordained minister of the High
Church of England declare most emphatically
“that the Methodists were not Christians.” I asked,
“Were the Irish Catholics Christians?" He an-
swered: “Yes, yes, certainly.” “Then what about
the Orangemen?” I queried. He hesitated and
said: “I’ll answer that later." I regret not hearing
his opinion—the boat I was travelling by left for
Australia during the week.
Talk about puzzles. It’s a great puzzle to me
to know which of the English schemers coined that
intriguing and deceitful phrase, “The Irish Free
State.”
■■■■■niiiiniiiiiiiiiiiuiimimiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiuiiiiiiiimiiiiimiiiiiiim iiiimiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiimi


Deaton & Spencer, Printers, Sydney.
