

With the Compliments
of THE BROKEN HILL PROPRIETARY
COMPANY LTD.
Souvenir of Opening HEWCASTLE STEEL WORKS
Ju ne 2rd 1915
Australia
J. T. PICKEN & SON [?] MELBOURNE


2nd June, 1915.
OPENING
OF
The Newcastle Steel Works
Newcastle,
New South Wales,
Australia.


With the Compliments
of
The Broken Hill Proprietary Company
Limited






General View of the Ne


astle Steel Works, 1915.


Gold ie Fop tl jz mictpe^ —filvep fop tl 70 maid!
Coppep fop
■•‘Good!” S aid |}apon, in l^all,
lpon—Cold Ipon—ic of all!”
RUDYARD KIPLING.


MANUFACTURE OF STEEL IN AUSTRALIA.
THE BROKEN HILL PROPRIETARY COMPANY’S NEW WORKS
ENTERPRISE SUCCESSFULLY LAUNCHED.
Illustrated Souvenir of Opening.
EDITED AND COMPILED BY F. FOX.
Hag^RON: more iron!” is the cry of the
world, heralding everywhere en-
* lightened civilisation, mercantile
~ I 0! rivalry and material advance-
ment. With the opening at Port
- i Waratah, near Newcastle, New
South Wales, of the great steel
works of The Broken Hill
Proprietary Company Limited,
Australia may be said to have accomplished her
destiny as a manufacturing country. The dis-
tinguishing mark of all the leading nations of the
ILLUSTRATIONS BY E. T. LUKE.
world is the possession of rich deposits of iron
ore, and the talent to convert that crude material
to the useful arts. Our nascent industries may
flatter us with gradual expansion, and the
promise of substantial progress. But those
dependent on iron and steel manufactures would
never have achieved a full measure of prosperity,
nor felt the chastening effect of local competi-
tion, if they were doomed to rely for some
indefinite time on the importation of those raw
products that are the basic forces of our en-
gineering and manufacturing trades.


THE MANAGER (MR. DAVID BAKER) AND STAFF. DRAWING ROOM. NOBBYS. NEWCASTLE.


THE IRON KNOB, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
SOURCE OF COMPANY’S ORE SUPPLY.


NATIONAL service is therefore being
|pß|irk rendered by the Company in en-
deavouring to make Australia self-
contained in the matter of steel
production, and of discharging at our very door,
as it were, a substantial supply of raw and
manufactured steel ready for every emergency,
and of avoiding the exasperating delay and
disappointment inevitable where reliance must
be placed on shipments from oversea. The
new steel-rolling mills had been operating only
a few days when the value of the works
to the Australian engineering industry was
abundantly testified. A local firm of engi-
neers was suddenly called upon to produce a
crank shaft for a marine engine. Nowhere in
Australia was there a piece of steel large enough
for the purpose. To have sent to England would
have meant a delay of five months. Application
was made to the Newcastle Steel Works, and a
bar of steel of the size required was delivered
within a few days.
A Rich Ore Deposit.
T would have been impossible to establish
steel making on a profitable basis in the
Commonwealth had it not been for the
Company’s possession of properties con-
taining valuable deposits of iron ore at the Iron
Knob and Iron Monarch in South Australia.
Iron is one of the most universal of metals.
It has been estimated that iron forms 5 P er
cent, of the total substance of the earth. But
it is unevenly distributed, the proportion of
metal varying from a minute trace to 70 per
cent., the latter being rarely found. That the
ore at Iron Knob is of phenomenal richness has
been proved by repeated assays of stone taken
from all parts of the mountain, and from actual
experience in the smelters and the blast furnace.
The metallic contents of the ore hardly vary
throughout the enormous mass. It yields on an
average 68 per cent, of metallic iron, a percentage
the value of which will be appreciated by the
layman when it is stated that ore having
more than 25 per cent, of iron—provided flux
and fuel be accessible —would in older countries
promptly engage the attention of ironmasters.


FACE OF THE IRON STONE QUARRY.


most important British ore deposit
is the Lower Cleveland, near Middles-
brough, in the north-east of York-
shire; it is from 10 to 17 feet thick, and contains
about 30 per cent, of iron. Compare that with
the 68 per cent, of Iron Knob. The Cleveland
ores are worked profitably because of their
proximity to the Durham coal fields.
In the United States are the red hematite
deposits near Lake Superior, which yield from 50
to 55 P er cent, of iron, and it pays well to rail
this rich ore 1,000 miles to the cheap coal of
Pittsburgh. Germany, prior to the war, received
about two-thirds of her total ore supply from the
great “Minette” ore deposit of Luxemburg and
Lorraine, which reaches also into France and
Belgium. In spite of its containing only 36 per
cent, of iron, this deposit is of distinct value,
because of its great size and the consequent small
cost of mining. It stretches through an area of
about eight miles wide and 40 miles long, and in
some places it is nearly 60 feet thick. Sweden,
Spain, Russia and Austria-Hungary have abun-
dant and very pure iron ores, but the best of
them do not exceed in richness the outcrop at
Iron Knob. To make a ton of. pig iron in the
United States needs within a fraction of 2 tons
of ore, 2 tons in Sweden and Russia, 2*4 tons in
Great Britain and Germany, about 27 tons in
France and Belgium, while about 3 tons of the
native British ores are required per ton of pig
iron.
The superiority of Iron Knob ore is
shown in the statement that r$ tons of
stone will produce a ton of “ pig,” which
means a considerable saving in coal and flux.
As for the quantity available, its exact extent
is unknown, but, in addition to the broad and
steep quarry face presented in the photograph
given elsewhere, the ironstone has been followed
down several hundred feet, with no sign of
exhaustion, so that there should be sufficient ore
to fulfil the iron needs of Australia for two
or three generations. Iron Knob is connected
with the coast by means of a tramway, and the
ore can be carried to the Newcastle coal beds
in the Company’s steamers at comparatively
small cost.


1. —ORIGINAL SITE OF WORKS. 2. —SITE AS IT APPEARS TO-DAY. 3.— COAL BIN OF 5,000 TONS CAPACITY.
PAST AND PRESENT—A CONTRAST.


to The Broken Hill Pro-
JlKiiC prietary Directors in June, 1912,
Mr. David Baker, the present
Manager of the Steel Works, remarked: —
“In the manufacture of steel the cost of assembling the
raw materials necessary to provide a ton of pig iron
determines whether a steel proposition is to be profitable or
not, for the production of pig iron is the first stage in the
steel process. In your case I find that you can assemble at
Newcastle the iron ore, coke, and limestone for pig iron
production at a lower cost per unit of iron produced than is
possible for the United States Steel Corporation, the largest
and cheapest producer in that country.
“ Having, therefore, suitable raw material in quality and
quantity that can be assembled at low cost near an excellent
market, it follows that your proposal to enter upon the
manufacture of steel in Australia, on a scale commensurate
with the demand, must commend itself to you, inasmuch as,
from the detailed figures I have worked out, it indicates, at a
very conservative estimate, a promise of large profits.”
Starting the Newcastle Works.
AVING one of the most valuable
pßsl i deposits of iron ore in the world,
wlj iSSSi k Directors °f The Broken Hill
B Proprietary, when the time seemed
to be ripe for their entering upon
steel manufacture, acted energeti-
cally. It was obvious that the
riches of Iron Knob could be exploited more
profitably than by using the ore for flux in the
smelters at Port Pirie. The General Manager
of the Broken Hill works (Mr. G. D. Delprat) was
commissioned to visit Europe and America for
the purpose of making himself acquainted with
the latest developments of the iron and steel
industry, the cost of production in various
localities, the best type of plant to employ, and
to secure all the information that would enable
the Company to come to a decision. Mr. Delprat
returned firmly convinced that the Company
might enter upon steel manufacture without
the slightest hesitation. He was certain that
the raw material could be delivered at the
foot of the furnaces as cheaply, if not more
cheaply than at any works he had seen during
his travels. “This,” he added, “combined with
the exceptionally good quality of the ore, should
enable us to produce steel as cheaply as any
country in the world.”


THE “GRAB” DISCHARGING SIX TONS IN A SINGLE LOAD. ORE BRIDGE.


the General Manager’s recom-
mendation, Mr. David Baker, of
Philadelphia, “a man of great ex-
perience and high qualifications, and recom-
mended by one of the leading men in the
steel industry of the United States,” was ap-
pointed manager. It was resolved to start in the
neighbourhood of Newcastle, because of the
abundant supply of coal, from which would be
obtained the coke essential to blast furnace work.
Some surprise may be felt that ore can be con-
veyed over the long sea journey from Spencer’s
Gulf to Newcastle, and there profitably trans-
muted into steel. It is, however, more feasible
to take the ore to the coal than convey coal to
the ore. The richness of the Iron Knob deposit
made the proposition sound commercial business.
Practically the whole of the Spanish ores noted
for their purity are exported to England, where
there is an abundant supply of coal; the Lake
Superior ores, not always so valuable as those of
Iron Knob, are carried long distances by rail to
the coal beds of Pittsburgh.
As long ago as 1896 the Company had ac-
quired property near Newcastle for the purpose
of establishing smelting works. Orders were
given in 1912 that the steel works should be
commenced, and on January 3rd, 1913, an actual
start was made by stripping off the iron and
pulling down the old buildings formerly used
by a copper smelting company, which had been
for some time in occupation of part of the land.
The illustrated pages of this Souvenir
present the works as they are now from
various aspects. It is curious to contrast the
busy appearance of the scene to-day the
towering blast furnace and the four satellites
who feed him with hot air, the network of
railways, the wonderful steel bridges and pon-
derous cranes, the locomotives with their trains of
ore and coke, the boiler and engine houses, the
steel mills, the electrical plant, the great stack of
pig iron, the long range of buildings where the
steel is rolled to commercial uses, and all the
massive detail and accessories of a modern steel-
making depot—it is singular to contrast all this
with other pictures showing the foreshore at
Newcastle only two years ago.


BLAST FURNACE PLANT FROM ORE BRIDGE.


of the land was then under
mmm water. The site was nothing
but a series of puddles. The
bank was marked by a ridge of mud, within which
water oozed and fell according to the state of
the tide. In order to drive the first pile for the
foundations of the blast furnace, a punt with a
pile driver and engine was floated right on to the
site of the blast furnace, and from off that punt
the piles were driven, the first one going down to
a depth of 31 ft. 5 in. The water here was about
2 ft. 6 in. deep. Piling proceeded steadily, the
ultimate location of the blast furnace being
underpinned with 225 piles in 15 rows of 15 each.
Where the heating stoves are erected 9 rows
of 38 piles were put down. Everywhere at which
it was intended to build heavy structures the
foundation was raised on piles, and the actual
base fortified with concrete strong enough to
carry the recoil of a German howitzer.
For instance, the foundation of the blast
furnace, begun in the early part of May, 1913, is a
concrete block 44 ft. square and 17 ft. thick; the
stove foundations are 132 ft. long, 29 ft. wide and
15 ft. thick. The engine that runs the “bloom-
ing” gear is laid on a concrete mass measuring
3,000 cubic yards; the engine for the rail mill is
similarly buttressed, while the remarkable steadi-
ness of the building holding the machinery
working the blowers, notwithstanding the huge
horse-power developed, is due to the solidity of
the base on which the engines are reared.
The works have been laid out on a most
convenient plan, and with an eye to the future.
As all parts of the iron and steel making plants
are inter-dependable, the material handled going
from one to the other in regular sequence, they
are in immediate proximity and easy connection
by railway. The parallel lines of the lay-out, as
will be seen from the accompanying photograph,
may be extended without destroying the sym-
metry of the design.
The works might be quadrupled in size, and
they would continue in the same orderly associa-
tion from the wharves inward, without crowding,
and using the same sources of transport, fuel and
ore supply—all working with the utmost economy,
and by a system of mutual interchange, achieving
the highest efficiency at a minimum expenditure
of power and labor.


BLAST FURNACE BLOWING ENGINES.


ESCRIBING the operations in detail,
we h ave fi rst t^ie discharging
of ore or coke, or limestone, what-
ever cargoes may occupy the berths, from the
steamers to the storage yards adjoining the blast
furnace. This work is accomplished with the
speediest expedition. Grabs worked by electri-
city from an overhead bridge, that may travel
the whole length of the wharf, plunge down into
the coke or ore in the hold of the steamer. The
wide-open jaws of the monster trap snap together
and imprison a load of material weighing nearly
six tons, which is raised in the air and moved out
to the heap; the mouth then springs apart, and
the contents descend in a clattering shower. This
work may go on for the whole 24 hours, inde-
pendently of lumpers or laborers. The bridge
moves along to each hold as required. A single
motor man works the grab, and a few men in
the hold do a little trimming with shovels, so
that the grab may always take a good bite.
There are no baskets to fill, and the steamers are
so constructed that the load at the end of the
rope moves clear without banging against the
sides of the hatchway. Here at the very outset,
in this the first stage of operations, we have an
object-lesson of the thrifty use of mechanical
power characteristic of the whole works.
The Blast Furnace and Plant.
all the materials available, the
ore, coke and limestone are conveyed
to the base of the blast furnace, and
loaded into bins or electric trolleys, whence they
are re-discharged to be conveyed by means of
skips to the top of the blast furnace, a lift of 100
ft. All this work is purely automatic. No assist-
ance is required in the loading of the bins or
trucks, and the skip that feeds the furnace goes
on working the whole 24 hours without grumb-
ling or fatigue. Alternated loads of ore, coke
and limestone are tipped into the head of the all-
consuming leviathan with the deftest precision,
and unhampered by hand labor. The system
pursued represents the latest development of
American iron manufacture.
The blast furnace itself consists of a tall,
cylindrical stack, lined with refractory brick, and
standing 98 ft. above the ground.


WATER TANKS FOR COOLING.
TAPPING THE BLAST FURNACE.


N the lower 8 ft. is the hearth or crucible,
which holds the metal and slag in a
molten state ; above that extends the
widening portion called the “bosh,” or melting
zone of the furnace, with an outside diameter
of 26 ft. 6 in.; the stack, which slightly
tapers in form, holds the cargo, which the
intense heat driven through the stack is gradually
transforming into cast iron and slag. From 900
to 1,000 tons of material are dumped into the
stack during the 24 hours, and not only is the
filling done without manual assistance, but the
charge is directed in such a way that there is
never any communication between the interior
of the blast furnace and the outer air. In one of
the big American furnaces, working at top speed
the amount of matter poured into the furnace
during 24 hours will frequently exceed 2,000 tons,
and the charging must go on for 365 days in the
year, with never a delay of more than a few
minutes at a time. If the furnace, through any
cause should be thrown out of work, air, heated
up to 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit, will still be
blown through the cylinder; for the interior
would collapse if ever it were allowed to cool.
Through the lining of the furnace, just at the
top of the hearth, into which the molten metal
descends, are the “tuyeres,” a number of pipes
through which a hot blast is driven to burn the
coke and thus smelt the ore. The air is blown
through the “tuyeres” by huge blowing engines of
3,000 horse power per pair, with a compressing
capacity of 30,000 cubic feet of free air per
minute, on a pressure of 15 lbs. to the square
inch. From four to five tons of air are required
for each ton of iron produced by the furnace.
After leaving the engines, and before arriving at
the furnace, the air is heated to a temperature
from 1,100 to 1,500 Fahrenheit, by being made to
pass through the hot blast stoves.
The four stoves at Newcastle, which are a
prominent feature of the accompanying photo-
graphs, are cylindrical tanks of steel about 90 ft.
high and 20 ft. in diameter, containing fire brick
chambers. One of these chambers is open, and
the others filled with a number of small flues.
Gas and air are passed through the stove, and
give up the greater part of their heat to the brick
work.


CLEANING SLAG POTS. BLOWING ENGINE BOILERS. CRANES LIFTING A LOCOMOTOVE.


this is done the stove is ready
to heat the blast. On the blast
from the blowing engine entering
the stove, the air takes up the heat left in the
brick work, and after passing through three
chambers is blown into the furnace. The gas
used for driving the blowing engines and heating
the stoves comes from the blast furnace. For-
merly this gas was wasted in the operation.
Now it is carefully retained and cleaned from
dust, and not only supplies the blast furnace
plant with heat and power, but leaves a residue
of fuel for use in other parts of the works.
Every four hours the furnace is tapped by
breaking through a clay hole at the bottom of
the hearth. This operation furnishes a pyro-
technic display, and distributes steam, heat and
sparks with a noise and violence that strike
terror to the beholder at his first initiation to the
ceremony. The slag floating on top of the
heavier iron is run through the “cinder notch” into
ladles, from which it is ultimately tipped on to
low-lying land, to be subsequently brought into
use. Bursting through the tapping hole with a
paralysing roar, the liquid iron, bubbling at a
white heat, careers along a channel made in the
platform, and flows over the side into a big steel
cup, lined with fire brick and mounted on a
trolly. The progress of the boiling metal,
seething, hissing, tumultuous, and looking as if it
wanted to lick up something to a fiery death, is
most fascinating, giving the spectator a thrill
that roots him to the spot. It is a terrifying
example of man’s power over nature, but it illus-
trates also those forces in nature embowelled in
the earth that, beyond man’s control, spread
death and disaster in volcanoes and earthquakes.
When one ladle is filled the molten stream is
switched off to another chute, and a second fiery
chalice hisses angry expostulation until filled to
the brim. When the hearth is empty the ladles
contain about 60 tons of cast iron, the metallic
basis of all the numerous varieties of iron and
steel, whether used for bridges, watch springs,
railways or bayonets.


DRAWING THE CHARGE FROM THE BLAST FURNACE.


Converting Cast Iron to Steel.
7££j\ANIFESTLY, one cannot approach the
subject of that valuable but indefi-
nite substance we call steel without
recalling the debt humanity owes
to the late Sir Henry Bessemer, who in-
vented the steel-making process which bears
his name. When Croesus, King of Lydia, the
archetype of the modern Rockefeller, showed
Solon, the Athenian law-giver, his gallery of
treasures, the wise man remarked that anyone
who could produce an improved kind of iron
would gain possession of all the king’s gold.
This took place 550 years before the Christian
era, showing that even in those primitive days
iron was highly esteemed, and that there was
need for producing it in a superior grade. The
world had to wait 2,400 years before Solon’s
“ improved iron ” was achieved in any quantity.
It is true that in 1740 Benjamin Huntsman intro-
duced the process of melting steel in small
crucibles, thus freeing it from the slag, or rich
iron silicate, with which it, like wrought iron,
was mechanically mixed, whether made in the
old forge or the puddling furnace. The removal
of the cinder very greatly improved the steel;
but the process was and is so' costly that it is
used only for high-grade steel for making cut-
lery, tools, and the intricate parts of machinery.
The genius of Bessemer overcame the diffi-
culty that had worried iron workers from
the time of Tubal Cain. Bessemer had in-
vented a new projectile, which would revolve
during flight. When tested in the presence
of Napoleon 111. the missile rotated all right,
but the artillery commandant told Bessemer
that, unless he could find a stronger metal
for making cannons, the projectile would be
little used. After much investigation Bessemer, a
Frenchman born in England, conceived the idea
of removing the impurities from cast iron by
introducing air, heated to a temperature hitherto
unknown in the arts. His experiments succeeded,
and in due time Bessemer steel revolutionised in-
dustry throughout the world. It was declared that
the iron obtained by the Bessemer method was
no better than the iron already in use; but it at
least had the merit of reducing the cost of
production by 90 per cent.


MOLTEN STEEL POURING INTO LADLE.
RUNNING OFF THE SLAG.


to 1770 the best steel was that of
Hindustan (on which Aristotle
wrote a treatise 370 8.C.), which
sold for £lO,OOO a ton; Huntsman
reduced the price to £100; and by the Bessemer
process it was further reduced to £6. Bessemer
steel has been largely superseded by the Open
Hearth process, as used at Newcastle, but
we must not forget the services rendered to
civilisation by the inventor, who made steel
cheap and accessible for every purpose.
The advantage of the Open Hearth method,
as developed by the Siemens-Martin furnace, and
perfected by Sydney Thomas, is the absolute
regulation of the carbon content, and the com-
plete diminution of the baneful phosphorus.
In a hand-book issued by the Harrison-Walker
Refractories Co., of Pittsburgh, U.S.A., it is
remarked: —“The Bessemer process, quantita-
tively until the year 1908 the leading process of
steel manufacture, is unquestionably giving way
to the Open Hearth, and there is comparatively
small chance that we shall in the future see any
new Bessemer plants of importance. This is due
primarily to the growing scarcity of ores, from
which can be made pig iron either sufficiently
low in phosphorus for the acid Bessemer or
sufficiently high for basic Bessemer.
“The Open Hearth now manufactures more
steel than any other process, and is destined to
make still greater strides, as the relative tonnage
of the two systems in the United States plainly
shows. For instance, in 1898, Bessemer furnaces
produced 6,909,017 tons, and Open Hearth
2,230,292; in 1910 Bessemer had increased to
9j330,783 tons, whereas Open Hearth had gone up
to 14,493,936 tons. As compared with the
Bessemer, the operations of the Open Hearth are
under greater control, samples can be taken at
frequent intervals and thoroughly tested; there
is much less danger of over-oxidisation, and as a
whole its product is more uniform and reliable.
The yield of ingots, compared with the total of
metal charged, is also higher.”
Mr. C. Hood, in “Iron and Steel,” in the
Commodities of Commerce series, thus sum-
marises the position:—“The relative merits of
the Bessemer and the Open Hearth processes are
no longer in doubt. The Bessemer, as the earlier,
has been longer established, and a great deal of
capital has been sunk in places for carrying it on.
Therefore, so long as a profit can be made in
working it the process will survive, but no one
putting down new plant in Great Britain to-day
would adopt it, so that its disappearance is only
a question of time.”


CHARGING THE OPEN HEARTH FURNACE


would be tedious and unprofitable to
jlljv describe the Open Hearth system in
detail. The charge, that is to say
the material in the furnace, is usually made
up of scrap and pig iron fed in the ratio
of the chemical contents of the metal, or
the character of the steel it is desired to
produce. In a sentence, the basic process
removes or reduces the allowable contents of
carbon, silicon, manganese, sulphur and phos-
phorus—elements the presence of which deter-
mines the durability of the steel; they differ in
quantity, according to whether hard or mild steel
be required.
The blast furnace, having ejected its metal
contents into ladles, as already described, the
latter are hauled by rail round to the Open
Hearth furnace for translation into steel, or if the
furnaces are not working, or there is a good
stock of steel in hand, the metal goes to the pig-
casting machine, a very effective instrument that
moulds the “pig,” cools and casts it forth with
business-like celerity. The cast iron required for
steel making is lodged in the neighborhood of
the open hearth, and the furnace, already
equipped with a bath of scrap, receives its ration
of hot “pig.” This is effected by means of
a powerful crane, which raises the ladle and
pours the liquid iron down a funnel into the
furnace. During the melting period, accom-
plished by the combustion of gas and air at a
high temperature, the boiling mass is carefully
observed and frequently tested to see that its
chemical elements are in due proportion, and,
when ready for tapping, the liquid steel is run off
into a big cup, mounted on wheels, in the manner
depicted in the photograph. This is another of
the startling firework effects that make a round
of the works such an eerie and hair-raising
experience.
Having produced the quality of steel re-
quired, practically the final process in the manu-
facture is to turn the steel into ingots of a size
convenient for working up into blooms, rails or
bars. The picture gives a good idea of how this
is done. Rows of ingot moulds on bogey wagons
are ranged along the opposite platform. The
ladle of molten steel is lifted by a 100 ton over-
head travelling crane, and, by means of a valve
in the bottom of the cup, and worked from
the platform by compressed air, each mould is
filled with the metal, the crane moving the ladle
along until each one is filled. We now have the
steel in ingots weighing about three tons each,
ready to enter upon their career of binding the
continent.


ELECTRIC POWER PLANT AND ENGINES.


HE next stage of the performance is
the transfer of the ingot moulds to
the soaking pits. Their jackets are
stripped, and the oblong pieces of steel,
reduced probably to a dull red heat, have a
sojourn in the soaking pit, where they go through
another fiery ordeal to make them throughout of
a level temperature, and ready for rolling-out
and flattening in the blooming mill.
In all these operations, from the blast fur-
nace to the time when the heavy log of glowing,
spluttering steel is laid upon the revolving table,
we must observe the careful preservation of
heat that takes place, and the consequent saving
of fuel. The cast iron goes into the open hearth,
or on to the pig-casting machine almost as hot as
when it left the furnace. Very little heat is lost
between the steel furnace and the soaking pit,
and the ingot finally arrives at the rolling mill
with only a minimum of energy wasted in transit.
This makes for economy in working expenses,
and is significant of the admirable thoroughness
that prevails throughout the works.
Rolling Steel into Blooms.
ffS 1 OLLOWING the daily routine, we are
about to enter upon that degree of
manufacture to which, for the
n P resent > the operations of the Com-
pany at Newcastle will be confined.
The steel ingot, having been removed
from the soaking pits and laid on the
approach platform to the blooming mill, is rolled
out to the length and thickness required. It is a
most interesting sight to watch the cylinders of
this wonderful machine grip the ingot, and, under.
an enormous pressure —varying, of course, in
intensity—gradually beat it down from podgy
corpulence to a thin, graceful wand of steel
40 or even 60 feet long -it depends for what
purpose the bloom is wanted. The mill is
worked by levers from an upper staging, con-
trolled by a foreman and four assistants, all of
whom have had American experience in handling
the same type of machine.


TAPPING THE OPEN HEARTH FURNACE.


the rolling mill is a clock, with
hands registering the pressure, and
the man in charge- keeps his eye
on the indicator, so that he may know to a nicety
what work the mill is doing. The cylinders are
of different sizes, from about 20 inches down to
8, and the bloom makes a journey through each
groove until the desired compression has been
achieved.
If the bloom gets out of line, or requires to
be moved to the next cylinder, or turned on its
side to make the stretching process equal —so
that back and sides may be treated alike —what
is called the manipulator, a contrivance almost
human in action, moves the piece of steel a foot
or two, or the particle of an inch, on one side or
the other, turns it over, and seems to keep a
watchful eye on the much-squeezed bloom, in
order that it may pay the full penalty of en-
trance to a world of boiling, crushing and hard
work. The ingot is rolled down in 15 operations
from approximately 20 inches square to a bar of
8 inches. Very powerful plant is required to
operate this machine, the engine, which is under
the most perfect control, developing up to 8,000
horse power. When the bloom is finished the
rough ends are cropped, and the shearing
machine cuts it into standard sizes. If the
bloom is to be made into a rail it escapes the
shears, and goes on to the rail mill, where a series
of powerful wheels fashion it to the required
shape.
The Rail Mill.
machine is of substantial construc-
tion. It is fed by two travelling
tables, and is driven by a twin hori-
zontal engine with cylinders 42 in. x
66 in. The engine is without a flywheel, and is of
the reversible type; but, as the mill is that
known technically as a “ three-high ” mill, the
engine is only operated in one direction, except
in the case of any trouble with the piece being
rolled, when the engine may be immediately
reversed, and the rail withdrawn. From the rail
mill the rail goes to a single hot saw of the
sliding type, where it is cut into the required
length, then on to the “cambering” machine,
and then to the hot-beds, where it is allowed to
cool.


A ROW OF STEEL INGOTS COOLING.
POURING LIQUID STEEL INTO INGOTS.


co °l e d sufficiently the rail is
removed from the hot-bed, and
delivered to the finishing mill,
where it is straightened, ended if necessary, and
fishplate holes drilled. The rail is then ready for
the market.
In addition to making rails the mill under
notice is equipped to supply structural steel. By
a slight adjustment, angles of 3 in. x 3 in. for
light-weight material, up to 24 in. beams of the
heavy girder type, together with any inter-
mediate size, may be made as ordered.
When the present plant is in full working
order it will be able to supply steel to the bloom
mill and the rail mill at the rate of about 400 tons
per working day, which could be turned into
120,000 tons of steel rails per year. The present
equipment, however, might be quadrupled, and
by working three shifts the rolling mills would
be capable of dealing with all the steel that came
from the open hearth furnaces. When we con-
sider the likely demand in Australia for railway
and structural steel, it is obvious that the time
cannot be far distant when the Company will
find it important to consider the duplication
of its steel plant and the erection of another blast
furnace.
The CoKe Ovens.
fuel is of prime importance in steel
p making, to keep the works going will
W vsbssb y require a large supply of coke. The
lll W Company does not propose to rely on
the yield of outside furnaces, which
may not burn sufficient or may be
interrupted. It is imperative that the
blast furnace be kept busy without intermission
all the year round; any failure in the fuel
arrangements would be disastrous. The Proprie-
tary, therefore, will have its own coke resources.
The installation consists of 66 Semet-Solway
recuperative by-product ovens. They will use
500 tons of coal per day (182,500 tons per annum),
the burning of which will give daily 350 tons of
coke, 6,000,000 cubic feet of gas (or 42,000,000 c. f.
per week, and over 2,000,000,000 c. f. per year); 40
tons per day of sulphate of ammonia, and 30,000
gallons of tar.


STEEL INGOTS GOING TO THE SOAKING PITS.


coal will also yield various essen-
tial oils, but the saving of these is
not at present included in the pro-
gramme. About 50 per cent, of the gas produced
is to be used as fuel for the coke furnaces; the
remainder will be available for power or fuel
throughout the works; or it may be sold to local
authorities for heating and lighting. The magni-
tude of the figures dealing with the coke ovens
offer an index of the vast scale on which opera-
tions are conducted at Newcastle.
Approaching the works by water, the visitor
will be struck by an immense bin skirting the
eastern side of the works, and capable of holding
5,000 tons of coal. This huge storage is neces-
sitated by the conditions of The Broken Hill
Proprietary Company’s business generally. The
consequences of any stoppage at the mines would
be a serious matter for the Port Pirie smelters,
consequently the Company proposes always to
have material supplies of coal on hand.
Steamers loaded with ore will have a return
cargo of coal, thus keepings the Company’s fleet
fully employed, and ensuring full loading on each
trip. The coal will be handled by means of a
travelling belt capable of filling the holds at the
rate of 800 tons per hour. Trimming will be done
by means of an adjustable boom and trimming
shoot extending over the hatch, affording an-
other instance of how invention and organisa-
tion have combined to diminish working cost.
In this connection it may be well to point out
that the waterway leading to the works has been
dredged from 5 ft. to a minimum depth of 25 ft.
at low water, and a width of 300 ft. Opposite
the ore wharf and blast furnace the channel has
been deepened to 25 ft. over a width of s°° ft.
There is ample sea room for boats to reach and
leave the works.
Cooling water for the blast furnace, coke
ovens and condensers comes from two tanks 60
ft. high, with a holding power of over 100,000
gallons each. The 16 in. pumps supplying these
reservoirs lift 7,500 gallons per minute to a height
of 65 ft. Energy for most of the engines is sup-
plied from a series of 500 K.W. generators, that
perform their work with marvellous efficiency.
The Babcock and Wilcox boilers developing
force for the power house are a splendid set,
having all the latest improvements in reduced
draught and mechanical stoking.


THE BLOOMING MILL.


The hast Word in Equipment.
of the special advantages of Mr.
Delprat’s trip round the world, and
the engagement of a highly-
experienced steel expert in Mr. Baker as
manager, is the concentration at Newcastle
of all the most modern ideas in steel con-
struction. The capital sunk in the venture is
very large, but it has been well laid out in the
most up-to-date labor-saving appliances. If, as
Mr. Baker declares, the material for pig-iron pro-
duction may be landed at a cost per unit of iron
produced cheaper than is possible for the United
States Steel Corporation, then the success of the
enterprise is assured, for the other qualifications
for the production of cheap iron are present in
the first-class implements that will undertake the
work. No other establishment in Australia
presents such an object-lesson in labor-saving
machinery. About 12 miles of railway, half-a-
dozen locomotives, and numerous trucks do all
the hauling from the wharf to the rolling mill.
There is no shovelling or filling; not even a
wheelbarrow is allowed to intrude its plebeian
presence. Everything is on the grand scale of
making a mighty grip with some mechanical
giant, and doing at a single stroke the work of a
whole gang of lumpers and ore shifters. Not
only do the works embody the cream of American
experience; that all-embracing commodity has
been improved upon, and the works stand to-day
a triumph of industrial progress, an epitome of
the peaceful arts.


BLOOM SHEARING MACHINE.


The Local Market for Steel.
cautious people who are more
impressed by the risks than the
possible success of any enterprise
may have some misgiving as to the wisdom
of the Company in laying down a plant for
the production of steel in a sparsely-populated
country. Steel works, we shall be told, are
well enough in Europe and America, where
the constructive needs for warlike material,
transport by sea and railway, agriculture
and building, may be measured in millions
of tons, but that in Australia the market is
limited, and may be soon overtaken. Such a
pessimistic regard, not merely of the im-
mediate situation, but of future prospects, will
not stand the most cursory inquiry.
The needs of steel in a new country are pro-
portionately far higher than in an old one.
Because in Australia distances are magnificent
and settlement dependent upon communication,
we use enormous quantities of steel. The crying
need of the continent is railways. East and west
are now being girdled by an iron band, hundreds
of miles of which remain to be completed. The
Commonwealth must, under the conditions of its
having accepted control of the Northern Terri-
tory, bridge the long gap between Oodnadatta
and Pine Creek. Railways connecting the Terri-
tory with Queensland lines running to the border
are freely discussed. The Prime Minister has in
view the construction of a “strategic” route
between Brisbane and Port Augusta, involving
a line that will require thousands of tons of steel
rails.
All the States are eager to bring their rich
but unsettled lands into touch with the markets
of the world, and this can be done only by means
of railways. New South Wales is pledged to an
expenditure of £10,000,000, the money for which
has been provided, mostly for railways into the
back country. The other States have schemes on
hand or in contemplation, only arrested by the
disturbed state of the money market in conse-
quence of the war.


RAIL MILL.
BLOOMING MILL ENGINES.


the drought has relaxed
its withering hand, when peace
has released the merchant navy
from, the duty of transporting troops and war
material, when the streams of commerce may
flow unimpeded, and civilization has readjusted
itself to the normal life, every part of the
Commonwealth will witness a condition of
activity in all its parts that has not been
paralleled even in the feverish expansion of
American States.
Steel rails, in ordinary circumstances, are
imported into this country at the rate of
about 150,000 tons per annum. We shall
probably double that quantity in the course
of the next few years. The “unit” for steel
making laid down at Newcastle —that is to
say, the plant so far erected, or in course of
erection —has a capacity of 400 tons of finished
steel rails for each working day, or 120,000 tons a
year. The Company might, with the fullest
confidence in the future, treble its present steel
establishment without the faintest misgiving
as to the ability of the Commonwealth railways
to absorb every ingot of steel placed in the
soaking pits.
An Unlimited Demand.
1» UT steel rails represent only about
one quarter of Commonwealth re-
quirements. There are locomotives
and bridges to build, agricultural implements
to be manufactured —let us hope to a degree
that will enormously enhance production.
Galvanised iron marches across the plain in the
track of the settler. Our consumption of corru-
gated and plain sheets touches a value of
£2,000,000 a year. The demand for bar, rod and
angle iron for every conceivable purpose of life
is incessant. We want immense quantities of
wire and wire netting.


PIG MILL.
FILLING THE MOULDS.


the latter purpose, as well as for the
production of galvanised iron, the
Company is in an unique position as a
potential manufacturer, for it owns vast quanti-
ties of raw material in its zinc ores at Broken Hill,
and already extracts large supplies of spelter in
the smelting works at Port Pirie. Then we have
a heavy consumption of iron and steel wire, steel
girders, and steel pipes and tubes. It is inevitable
that shipbuilding in the Commonwealth will be
undertaken on a considerable scale, causing more
inquiry for steel; while the larger number of
locomotives that will be wanted in consequence
of increased construction, the tendency to build
carriages and wagons of steel as more economical
and conducive to safer working—all these things
indicate the existence and premise the future
development of an unlimited market for steel in
Australia. What a future for steel in building
construction alone ! It was the boast of Marius
that he found Rome brick and left it marble.
The boast of the Australian ironmaster will be
that he changed brick to steel. The modest
warehouse or shop, equally with the skyscraper
and buildings of massive proportions, must make
steel their chief structural material. In this
direction alone, therefore, the Newcastle Steel
Works, which can be easily adapted to the output
of structural steel, has the prospect of an ever-
widening demand.
Imports of iron and steel for 1913 were valued
as follows: —
Ingots and blooms ... ... ..." £72,748
Pig iron ... ... ... ... 222,256
Plain and sheet corrugated (galvanised) 937,114
Galvanised, not corrugated ... ... 1,005,845
Plain sheets ... ... ... 483,033
Iron and steel scrap ... ... 95,434
Steel rails and fish plates ... ... 1,282,355
Iron and steel wire ... ... ... 640,000
Bar, rod and angle ... ... ... 1,180,657
Hoop iron ... ... ... 88,807
Steel girders ... ... ... 375,928
Wire netting ... ... ... 337,943
Pipes and tubes ... ... ... 870,000
Total value ... ... £7,592,120
There need not be any doubt, therefore, as to
the existence in Australia of a market for steel.
And of a market that can be supplied only from
home sources. It will be many years before the
furnaces of Belgium, Germany, eastern France,
Silesia and Austria-Hungary are again blasting
ore for export abroad. America and Great
Britain will have their hands full meeting the
home and European demand. The Common-
wealth market is necessarily reserved for such
enterprises as that the Company has established
at Newcastle.


COKE OVENS.
BULLOCK TEAM HAULING TIMBER.


The Value of Iron to Man.
more eloquent testimony to the
service iron has rendered to
humanity was ever written than
that penned by Professor H. M. Howe, Pro-
fessor of Metallurgy at the Columbia University,
and author of “The Metallurgy of Steel”: —
“Iron, the most abundant and the cheapest
of the heavy metals, the strongest and the
most magnetic of known substances, is perhaps
the most indispensable of all save the air we
breathe and the water we drink. For one
kind of meat we could substitute another; wool
could be replaced by cotton, silk or fur; were our
common silicate glass gone we could probably
perfect and cheapen some other of the trans-
parent solids; but even if the earth could be
made to yield any substitute for the forty or fifty
million tons of iron which we use each year for
rails, wire, machinery and structural purposes of
many kinds, we could not replace either the steel
of our cutting tools, or the iron of our magnets,
the basis of all commercial electricity.
“This usefulness iron owes, in part, indeed,
to its abundance, through which it has led us in
the last few thousand years to adapt our ways to
its ways; but still, in chief part, first to the
single qualities in which it excels, such as its
strength, its magnetism, and the property which
it alone has of being made at will extremely hard
by sudden cooling and soft and extremely pliable
by slow cooling ; second, to the special combina-
tions of useful qualities in which it excels, such as
its strength, with its ready welding and shaping
both hot and cold; and third, to the great variety
of its properties. It is a very Proteus extremely
hard in our files and razors and extremely soft in
our horseshoe nails, which in some countries the
smith rejects unless he can bend them on his
forehead; with iron we cut and shape iron. It is
extremely magnetic and almost non-magnetic;
as brittle as glass, and almost as pliable and
ductile as copper; extremely springy, and spring-
less and dead; wonderfully strong, and very
weak; conducting heat and electricity easily, and
again offering resistance to their passage; here
welding readily, there incapable of welding; here
very infusible, there melting with relative ease.


WORKMEN RETURNING TO NEWCASTLE.


coincidence that so indispensable
a thing should also be so abundant,
that an iron-needing man should be
set upon an iron-cored globe certainly suggests
design. The indispensableness of such abundant
things as air, water and light is readily explained
by saying that their very abundance has evolved
a creature dependent on them. But the indis-
pensable qualities of iron did not shape man’s
evolution, because its great usefulness did not
arise until historic times, or even, as in case of
magnetism, until modern times.”
Mr. Bradley Stoughton, in “The Metallurgy
of Iron and Steel,” remarks: “Iron as such by
which I mean pure iron does not exist as an
article of commerce, but appears in service, and
in the market, only in the form of cast iron, steel
or wrought iron—that is, when contaminated
with carbon or other impurities. Some of these
impurities are present because they cannot
cheaply be got rid of, and others, like carbon for
example, because they benefit the metal by giving
it strength or some other desirable property.
Pure iron is a white metal, and one of the
chemical elements. It is, with one exception, the
commonest and most abundant metal in the
earth. Almost all rocks contain it in greater or
less degree, from which we extract it if it is large
enough in amount to pay for working. It is
almost never found in nature in the form of a
metal, but is always united with oxygen to form
either a blackish, brownish, reddish or yellowish
substance. Indeed, if it should occur in metallic
form it would very soon become oxidised by the
action of air and moisture. It is the abundance
of iron in the earth which is the chief cause of its
cheapness, and, therefore, one reason why it is
used more than any other manufactured material.
The other reason is the ease with which we can
confer upon it at will some of the qualities most
useful to man, of which the most valuable is
probably its strength, and the most wonderful its
magnetism, in which it is not approached by any
other substance. What these two properties
alone mean in modern structural and electrical
engineering can scarcely be estimated.”


A.D.
TONS.
A.D.
TONS.
A.D.
TONS.
1500
60,000
1850
4,422,000
1905
53,201,008
I/OO
104,000
i860
7,180,000
1907
59,721,399
1796
l8lO
2/8,000
6l6,000
1870
II,6l6,000
1— 1
80
O
OO
47,601,731
1820
1,010,000
1880
18,254,285
1909
59,544,425
- 1830
1,585,000
1890
27,194,294
1910
65,000,000
i—i
OO
4^
O
2,680,000
1900
39,557,076 .
1912
72,000,000
World’s Production of Pig Iron.




Index to Illustrations.
PAGE.
The Newcastle Steel Works ... ... ... ... 3
A Glimpse of Newcastle ... ... ... ... ... 4
General View of the Newcastle Steel Works, 1915 ... 5
The Manager (Mr. David Baker) and Staff, and
Drawing Room ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
The Iron Knob, South Australia ... ... ... n
Face of the Iron Stone Quarry ... ... ... ... 13
Past and Present —A Contrast ... ... ... 15
Ore Bridge —The “Grab” Discharging Six Tons in a
Single Load 17
Blast Furnace Plant from Ore Bridge ... ... ... 19
Blast Furnace Blowing Engines ... ... ... ... 21
Tapping the Blast Furnace ... ... ... ... 23
Blowing Engine Boilers ... ... ... ... ... 25
PACK.
Drawing Blast Furnace ... ... ... ... ... 27
Running off the Slag ... ... ... ... ... 29
Charging the Open Hearth Furnace ... ... ... 31
Electric Power Plant and Engines ... ... ... 33
Tapping Open Hearth Furnace ... ... ... ... 35
Pouring Liquid Steel into Ingots ... ... ... 37
Steel Ingots going to Soaking Pits ... ... ... 39
The “Blooming” Mill ... ... ... ... 41
Bloom Shearing Machine ... .. ... ... 43
Rail Mill and Blooming Mill Engines ... ... ... 45
Pig Mill —Filling the Moulds ... ... ... ... 47
Coke Ovens —Bullock Team hauling Timber ... ... 49
Workmen Returning to Newcastle ... ... ... 51
Steel Bridge over the Hawkesbury River ... ... 54




WHOLLY
SET UP AND PRINTED
IN AUSTRALIA.
