

Melbourne, lit May, 1901.
OPENING OF THE COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENT
HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUKE OF CORNWALL AND YORK, K.G., K.T., K.P.,
G.C.M.G., G.C.Y.0., Etc., Etc.
9TH MAY, 1901, AT TWELVE NOON.
Route.
From Government House vid St. Kilda-road, Swanston-street, Bourke-street West, King-street,
Collins-street, Spring-street, Evelyn-street, and Nicholson-street to Parliament Building (Exhibition).
Returning vid Nicholson-street, Evelyn-street, Bourke-street East, Swanston-street, St. Kilda-road.
Guards of Honour.
(a) Y.R., R.A.A, at Government House.
(6) Victorian Naval Forces at Parliament Building (Exhibition),
(c) Senior Cadet Battalion at Parliament House.
Royal Salutes.
(а) 21 guns by the Victorian Field Artillery Brigade, at the Domain saluting Battery as His
Royal Highness’s carriage turns into Bourke-street.
(б) 21 guns, by the Victorian Field Artillery Brigade, at Carlton Gardens, when the Parliament is
opened.
Escorts.
(а) A Royal Escort, composed of troops representing the States of the Commonwealth and New
Zealand, for His Royal Highness the Duke of Cornwall and York.
(б) A Captain’s Escort of Victorian Mounted Rifles for His Excellency the Governor-General.
Troops lining the Route.
Section I. —
St. Kilda-road, from Government House gates to Flinders-street.
Western Brigade Garrison Artillery Militia.
Metropolitan Brigade Garrison Artillery, Militia.
Victorian Engineers.
Section Commander.
Maior J. H. Hanby.
Section ll.
Swanston-street, Bourke-street East, Evelyn-street, Nicholson-street, to Exhibition.
Victorian Infantry Brigade.
Section Commander.
Colonel R. Robertson.
Section 111. —-
Bourke-street from Swanston-street to King-street.
Victorian Rangers.
Victorian Scottish Regiment.
Victorian Railway Volunteer Regiment.
Section Commander.
Major G. G. H. Irving.
Section IV. —
King-street.
Victorian Rifle Clubs.
Section Commander.
Colonel J. M. Templeton, C.M.G., Y.D.
Section V. —
Collins-street, from King-street to Swanston-street.
South Australian Dismounted Troops.
West Australian „
Tasmanian „
New Zealand „
Section Commander. —Senior Officer.
Staff Officer of Section. —Captain E. Waters.
Section Vl.
Collins-street, east from Swanston-street, Spring-street.
New South Wales Dismounted Troops.
Queensland „
Section Commander. —Colonel Holborow, C.M.G., V.l).
Staff Officer of Section. —Major G. B. Appleton.
The Detachment of Fijian Native Constabulary will line the Government House Drive.
Staff Officer. —Captain Neill.


* I is
f/fyrQa Ult
The Victorian Naval Forces will line the drive at the Exhibition from Nicholaon-street Gates to
the South Entrance.
The Senior and Junior Cadets will be formed up on Parliament House Steps.
The Naval and Military Commandants will meet His Excellency the Governor-General at
Parliament Building (entrance Exhibition).
The Mounted Band of the New South Wales Lancers will parade in the square at Victoria Barracks
at 10 a.m., and at 10.30 a.m. will leave by the south gate and march vid Swanston-street, Bourke-street
East, Spring-street, and halt in Spring-street south of Collins-street.
All troops to be in position by 10.30 a.m., front rank on off side and rear rank on near side of
route, and one pace from kerbstone, or, where the route is barriered, one pace from barriers.
For the convenience of foot traffic, openings will be left in the lines of troops as long as possible at
the principal intersections of streets. An officer of the police will arrange this with the commander of
each section.
Company commanders to be one pace in front of front rank, other company officers one pace in
front of rear rank.
Mounted officers to he in line with dismounted officers.
Bands to be in rear of the line.
When troops are in position, all orders for compliments will be given by commanders of companies.
Companies will be ordered to “ shoulder ” when the head of the Escort reaches them, and to
“ present arms ” when the carriage of His Eoyal Highness arrives at 30 yards from the flank of the
company, “ shoulder ” when the Eoyal carriage has passed, and “ order arms ” when the Escort has
passed.
During the passing of His Eoyal Highness, the bands will play national airs. Each band to
commence playing as the head of the Escort reaches it.
His Excellency the Governor-General will leave Government House ten minutes before His Eoyal
Highness ; the troops will “ present ” arms to His Excellency, but bands will not play. At other
times bands will play as directed by commanding officers.
Troops will march to the positions assigned to them under regimental orders and by the shortest
route.
Troops will leave their positions as follows :
All Sections except No. 1 will march off after His Eoyal Highness has re-crossed Prince’s-
bridge, marching by the nearest street leading northwards ; and
No. 1 Section when His Eoyal Highness has entered Government House Gates.
Staff Officer for Route.
Lieut.-Colonel J. E. Ballene-er. assisted by four mounted officers, to be selected by him.
.
•• ' Officer at Exhibition.
Lieut.-Colonel F, - K -, . i.A.G., and another officer, to be selected by him.
By order,
J. C. HOAD,
Colonel,
Chief of Staff.
By Authority; Eop.t. S. Braix, Government Printer, Melbourne.
