

1908.
QUEENSLAND.
Hegtslatffie lasemhlg.
OPHTHALMIA IN THE WESTERN DISTRICTS OF THE STATE.
(Dr. TAYLOR’S REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING THE PREVALENCE OE)
Laid upon the Table of the Legislative Assembly, by Command, and Ordered to be Printed,
11 March , 1908.
Brisbane, 16tb December, 1907.
Sib, —I have the honour to report that, according to the arrangement made for my examining and
reporting on all cases of ophthalmia, especially among the State school children, in Charleville, Tambo,
Black all, Isisford, Longreach, Barcaldine, Aramac, Muttaburra, Winton, Hughenden, and Richmond, I
left Brisbane by train on the 4th October last, and arrived in Charleville on the following day, at 130
p.m. I met the Inspector of Police, Mr. ISethercote, and called on the headteacher of the State school,
Mr. Atkinson, during the afternoon, and arranged with him to send on Monday morning, at 930, all the
children attending school who had been affected with eye disease, to me at the courthouse, where,
by the kind permission of Mr. Stafford, the police magistrate, and the assistance of Mr. Lewis, the clerk
of petty sessions, a room had been prepared forme to see the eye cases in. I examined 27 State school
children on the 7th, and recorded the name, age, father’s name and occupation of each child, also the
distant vision, and the appearance of the eyes and the everted upper and lower eyelids. On the Bth, 4
adults came for examination, and the name, age and occupation, distant vision, and condition of eyelids
of each one noted. So few State school children having attended from the school, the number on the
roll of which was 271, I went to the school and examined the children standing in classes and at their
desks without, however, everting their eyelids, and with one exception failed to discover any trace of
disease. Possibly, however, had all these children been examined in the same manner as the 27 sent to
me at the courthouse, some cases of unhealthy lids would have been discovered, but, as I had arranged to
leave next morning (the 9th) for Tambo, and there would not be another coach leaving for that place
before the afternoon of the 12th, I determined to forego any further examination of the State school
children’s eyes for the present, as the delay which would be thereby occasioned would throw back con-
siderably the dates fixed for my arrival at the other towns, and, if considered necessary, would visit
Charleville for the purpose on my return to Brisbane. Of the 27 State school children examined criti-
cally all were suffering more or less from the effects of ophthalmia contracted some time pieviously, and
the four adults presented similar results. As the full notes of each ol these cases among adults and
children as well as those' of all the cases examined at the other towns, accompany this report, it is
unnecessary to enter into detail respecting them. I met Dr. Clarkson the resident medical practitioner,
and discussed with him the question of eye disease among the people living in the Western districts. JNo
case of acute disease presented itself at Charleville or elsewhere, such cases invariably occurring, I was
informed, later on in the summer, especially after rains, when as the grass grew flies became very
numerous, and acted not only as carriers of the disease, but as a source of irritation to the eyes, as well.
Left Charleville at 10 a.m. on the 9th October for Tambo, and arrived there at 5*30 p.m. on the
10th having stopped for the night at Augathella, where some eye cases presented themselves. On
arrival at Tambo, I interviewed the head teacher of the State school, Mr. Orr, Dr. Reitz and the officer
in charge of police, Mr. Murphy, who kindly accommodated me with a room in the courthouse to see the
eye cases in Was engaged during the 11th and I2th examining State school children of whom 64
presented themselves out of 84 on the roll. Of this 64, 49 suffered from unhealthy lids m different
degrees of severity, and 9, in addition to unhealthy lids, had serious complications of the cornea
rendering the vision more or less defective. Six persons other than school children attended, and all
weiv found to be suffering from unhealthy lids. The total number of persons examined at Tambo was
TO of whom 6 had healthy eyes and eyelids-8-57 per cent., or 91 43 per cent, unhealthy eyes or eyelids
14th October Left Tambo at 6 a.m. by coacb for Blackall, and arrived there at 530 p.m. Called
on the officer in charae of the police, Sergeant Aure, who kindly placed his office at my disposal, and
nLed a constable to give me clerical assistance. Met Mr. Hennessey, the police magistrate, who was
eimugh to offer me every Assistance possible, and then called with Sergeant Aure on Mr Banner-
man the head teacher, State school. Dr. Hewer kindly called on me, and gave much valuable information
A. 7—1908.


respecting the incidence of acute ophthalmia, and the difficulties encountered bj the local medical
practitioners in dealing with the cases as they arise, and subsequently, owing to the indifference of the
parents in providing medical treatment for their children, and in adopting ordinary methods of cleanliness
for them. Arranged with Mr. Bannerman to send all the children attending the school to me to be
examined. 15th and 16th October, examined 157 State school children number on roll, 211. Of
these 157 children, 121 were suffering from unhealthy lids without complications of the cornea, and 31 had
corneal opacities in addition to unhealthy lids—lss affected. Sixteen persons other than State school children
were examined, and of these 12 had unhealthy lids, and 4 had corneal opacities in addition to unhealthy
lids—-16 affected. Total number of persons examined at Blackall—l73, of whom 2 were free from
any disease of the eye or its appendages —ITS per cent, of healthy, or 98’85 per cent, unhealthy eyes or
eyelids.
19th October. Left for Isisford at 5’30 a.m. by special conveyance, the regular coach not starting
until 22nd, and arrived there at 5 p.m. Was met by Dr. Hill, the resident medical practitioner, and
afterwards called on the officer in charge of the police, Sergeant Harty, who gave me an office in the
courthouse see eye cases in. Saw Mr. Storey, the State school head teacher, and arranged with him
to send the children to me on Monday morning, at 9‘30. Nnmber on roll, 85.
On. 21st examined 85 children, a pupil from the school acting as clerical assistant. Of these
children 66 suffered from the effects of ophthalmia, and 18 had unhealthy lids with opacities of the cornea;
84 out of the 85 examined being more or less affected. Twenty-five persons other than school
children were examined, and 14 were found to be suffering from the effects of ophthalmia without corneal
opacities, and 10 had, in addition to unhealthy lids, corneal complications. One hundred and ten persons
were examined at Isisford, of whom 2 only had healthy eyes —viz., 1 school child and 1 adult—an average
of 1 8 per cent, healthy, and 98’2 unhealthy eyes. Dr. Hill showed great interest in the cases, and was
kind enough to render me valuable assistance in examining the people and in performing operations.
24th October. Left Isisford by coach at 630 a.m., and arrived at Ilfracombe at 5 p.m. Left for
Longreach by train at 10 p.m., and arrived there at 11 p.m.
25th. Met Sub-Inspector Quilter, who took me to the courthouse, in which, by the courtesy of
Mr. Burrows, police magistrate, I obtained the use of a room. Interviewed the head teacher, State
school, Mr. Macdonald, and arranged to have the children sent to the courthouse for examination at
930 a.m. Mr. Macdonald kindly assisted me in ascertaining particulars as to the children’s ages, &c., and
a constable was appointed by Sub-Inspector Quilter to do the clerical work. Called with Bev. Father
Lane on the reverend mother at the Convent, and she kindly agreed to send me her pupils on the
following day. Two hundred and ninety names were on the roll of the State school, and 152 names on
the roll of the Convent school. Two hundred and forty-eight State school children were examined, and
125 from the Convent school, and 30 others —403. Of the State school pupils, 186 suffered from the
effects of ophthalmia without corneal complications, and 46 had, in addition to lid troubles, corneal
°P!i C^eS ’ affected out of 248 examined, leaving 16 children unaffected. Of the Convent pupils, 88
suffered from the effects of ophthalmia, and 24 had, in addition to lid troubles, corneal complications—
-112 affected and 13 unaffected. Of the adults, &c., examined, 20 had lid trouble, and 10 had in addition
corneal affections. Of the 403 persons examined, 374 were more or less affected with unhealthv lids,
and 29 were unaffected, or 7T96 per cent, healthy to 92 8 per cent, unhealthy eases. Dr. Mich6d, who
is in charge of the hospital, where most of the eye cases go for treatment, supported Dr. Hewer’s
statement regarding the general apathy of the parents concerning the medical treatment of their children’s
eyes. The difficulty appears to be to get the children to attend at the hospital with sufficient regularity, and
long enough to obtain any substantial and lasting benefit. As a rule, when the eye cases under treatment as
out-patients at the hospital begin to improve, they cease attending, and as a result the eyes soon relapse
into their former state, or get into a worse condition. This goes on over and over again, the parents, in
the interval of the children’s attendance at the hospital, trying some panacea recommended by a friend
or neighbour. Dr. Michod was present for some time at the examination of the eye cases, and showed a
marked interest in them.
31st October. Left for Barcaldine by train at 6 a.m., and arrived there at 10T5 a.m. Was met
by the officer in charge of the police, Sergeant O’Sullivan, who gave me the use of a room at the court-
house, and kindly undertook to do the clerical work. Went with Sergeant O’Sullivan to the State
school and saw the head teacher, Mr. Clarson, and arranged with him to send the children to be examined
at once. Commenced examining State school children at 11‘30 a.m., and continued until 530 p.m., when
I called at the Convent with Sergeant O’Sullivan, and was introduced to the reverend mother, who
informed me that the next day, Friday, Ist November, being a holiday, she would have some difficulty in
notifying the children to attend at the courthouse to lie examined, However, she accomplished the task
tolerably satisfactorily, as 74 attended out of 90 on the roll. Of the State school children, 216 attended
and were examined out of 230 on the roll. Of the former, 165 had unhealthy lids, and 31 had in addition
corneal complications 196 affected and 20 unaffected. Of the Convent school children, 36 had
unhealthy lids, and 17 had also opacities of the cornea —53 affected and 21 unaffected. Other cases
numbered 25, of whom 5 had unhealthy lids, and 11 had also corneal complications—lB affected and 9
unaffected. In all, 315 were examined, of whom 265, or 84T27 per cent., were affected more or less with
the results of ophthalmia, and 50, or 15 873 per cent., were unaffected.
Dr. Cook made a similar statement to Drs. Hewer and Michod respecting the apathy of parents
concerning the medical treatment of their children. He kindly assisted me in an operation at the
hospital, and showed considerable interest in the eye cases examined.
3rd November. Left Barcaldine for Aramac at 230 p.m,, and arrived at the latter place at 3‘30
next afternoon, having been delayed all night on the road by rains. 1 interviewed the officer in charge of
the police, Bergeant McCormack, and obtained from him the use of a room in the courthouse to see the
eye cases in, and then saw Mr. Shea, the head teacher of the State school, who arranged to send the
school children the next morning at 9 30 to be examined.
f i 96 children out of 97 on the roll, a young ladv pupil doing the clerical work, and
tound 74 to be suffering from unhealthy lids, and 11 from corneal opacities as well—Bs in all affected
and 11 unaffected. [ also examined 13 persons other than school'children, 6 of whom had unhealthy


examined, of whom ffßC i ,ed T* I una J ? ™ ted ' 1,1 «U, 109 persons were
Dr. Patton repeated the statements Is fo’tL anX %tT f' V- r 18 ; 70 P« -»■>*.. unaffected,
the.r children’s eyes. He was present when I Lamined most oml trcatment of
the officer in arrived at Muttaburra at 615 pm. Was met by
in. Saw the head teacher State sfhool Mr T* f “ 0 r °° m '1 tlle ? ourth ? use ,0 seo the eye cases
next morning to the courthouse a " 4 t 0 I,a ’' e the children »'3O
lids. and^!^^tir^orn e d X ccunplicatton^ 1 as e r °l!' nd Reeled with unhealthy
persons, all of whom were affected with „nU uu 80 affected and 4 unaffected. Saw also four other
per cent., were pZ^u^d. 0 ™ In all. 84. or 05 455
order to get to Wmtou "('hilllTl/f ''"xr a g V , more cases ’ and as I had to return to Longreach in
of water and feed, fdecided toletehy ln ) I ? Utt T abllrra *» Wh *° a bei >'« on account of the want
llth. By so dotal T wooM „j“ “ 7 , 1, f ° r Lon g rea ch next morning, and reach Winton on Monday
before Tuesday, 12th and there woulcThelio "iV ' ,ia ‘j ' w °uld not leave Muttaburra for Longreach
so that I could only mive at W ™ZS I™™ Lon S rei ? h Hinton until Thursday, the 14th,
following Monday. Some of the leirHno- v erno . on too late to do any work before the
short time in Muttaburra but on exnlaininTto^i 1 . Wer( T, inc^ined to take exception to my staying such a
by staying over another dav 1 «hnnld hr fh f m 7 1 iat work was practically done there, and that
leaving the nextmorniLDr I gL* ba< V W<?ekat Hinton, they saw the wisdom of my
the examination of the children and otheta, bring ''S t^ta^ 11 "’ a illtereSt “
nth. WMmett T %?; f ttil» npre>C ?’.‘”.Vinton, at which place I arrived at 4 p.m. on the
Legislative Assembly of Queensland*" 6 t 7 ° ■ 6 and Mr. Corfield, a former member of the
who gave me a room in the ooimfhonleX'^lnb 0 ° ffieer “’’“'S 6 ° f the police. Sergeant Brosnan,
Stockwav to do the cleiLl wolk slw tlm bT d °ftl “j and a PP ointed First-class Constable
to have the children sent to the cm/pH f ° ad te . acer o£ Btate school, Mr. Clarke, and arranged
enuaren sent to the courthouse for examination next morning, at 930.
opacities" 1^ Attended 6 at It °r ° f 1G f 5 “A 6 roll> and found 104 with “"heaUl.y lids, and 28 with corneal
Mr Wi(i ' ‘ he rOVOrO " 4 ” othor *
13 wit^SpStarT 4 C °'"’ e “ t l >u P i ! s out of 100 o» the roll, and found 68 with unhealthy lids and
were +. j -3 ot , ““ d ’ or 84 8 P er cent., were more or less affected, and 40, or 15 2 oer cent
sh >we<t i teC f e i dlseases - Dr - Cameron, who has recently come to Winton from Cloncurrv’
sin wed great interest in the eye cases, and kindly assisted me in the performance of ©Derations at the
He was present during the greater part of my examination ofX eyeXes P * “ * he
„ m xlr /th 1' ® nt o" train at 10 30 and left at 12 13 a.m., 18th, for Hughenden, whore I arrived at 045
a.m. A\ as met by bub-Inspector Sweetman, who introduced me to Mr. Jackson, police magistrate and a
schooUnd saw T Mr°Kinff to thT} by dT \ ad j oinin g the courthouse. Went to’ State
St p saw Mr. King, the head teacher, and arranged to have children sent down to courthouse
Examkied w Wlth rev "' rend mo I J her t( > send pupils to courthouse in the afternoon.
Examined 114 State school children—number on roll, 126 ; of these 83 had unhealthy lids and 24 had also
OTA"™! Examined 83 Convent pupils—number on roll, 87 ; of these 56 had unhealthy lids, and
corneal onadties K? ’ W Exaimued dL other persons, of whom 23 had unhealthy lids, and 7 had also
oineat opacities. In all, 7 persons were examined at Hughenden, of whom 202, or 89 per cent were
made as to^thf' * ZZ U P6r f CeUt ’’ W6Fe llnafft ctccL Dr - Maxwell endorsed the statements already
made as to the apathy of the parents respecting the medical treatment of the children’s eyes.
W „ 2 th Ve w or J Mug hen den at 7 a.m. by train for Richmond, and arrived there at 11 a.m
Was met by Dr. Ward and Mr. John McDermott, chemist. Saw the officer in charge of police, Sergeant
zgerald, and arranged to have the body of courthouse to seethe children in. Called on Mr. Murray
head teacher State school, and arranged to have the children sent to courthouse for the examination of
omciHps ß ° n T 136 ~ examined > 120 Jof these 84 had unhealthy lids, and 20 had also corneal
opacities; 23 other people were examined, of whom 9 had unhealthy lids, and 11 also corneal opacities
in al , 143 persons were examined, of whom 124, or 867 per cent, were affected with unhealthy lids &c
ami IJ, or 13-288 per cent, were unaffected. Dr. Ward was kind enough to assist me in an operation at
tne nospitai, and otherwise showed great interest in the eye cases.
u v i 2s j th ' I Left l at 5 3 °. £or T° w nsville by train, and arrived at 11’30 alongside s.s. “Barcoo.”
Embarked on board for Brisbane, and arrived at 2 - 30 p.m, 30th November.
In all, I examined critically 1,932 persons, and of these 1,740, or 90 per cent, were found to
e more or Jess affected with unhealthy lids, the result of attacks of acute ophthalmia at some previous
time or tunes; and 192, or 10 per cent, were found to be free from the effects of eye disease. Of
the 1,740 more or less affected with the results of disease of the eye or eyelids, 385 are suffering
to a grater or less extent from more or less permanent impairment of vision; and others will, no doubt,
su ei nom detective vision unless means are speedily taken to remedy the present condition of their
eyelids.
\\ lu'ii examining the children, I instructed each child whose eyes or eyelids required immediate
treatment to return on the following day accompanied by the mother or father; and I also sent a list of
the names of those children requiring immediate treatment to the head teacher, so that he could
notify one or other of the parents, through the children, to attend on the following day. This I did
in response to a generally expressed, wish on the part of the parents, that they should be told what, if
anything, was wrong with the children’s eyes after being examined. As a rule, the attendance of


one or other of the parents of the children was pretty general, when X re-examined each child, and pointed
out to the parent present the condition of the eyes and eyelids, and urged the necessity for immediate
treatment either at the hospital or elsewhere. I also pointed out any marked defect of vision from errors »t
refraction, and impressed upon the parents the necessity of having proper g asses supp ie o c -
without any unnecessary delay. This, however, the great majority will be unable to do from the wai
means; and it is hardly to be expected that the resident.doctor should be called upon to do retractions
oratuitously even if fully capable as a refractionist. Special provision should, I think, be made to meet
these cases, ’as uncorrcotcd errors of refraction arc afertile source of trouble to children a * tend '“ g “V, 00 ’
and consequently obliged to use their eyes continuously for many hours during the day, as well as
in learning their lessons in the evening. I will deal with this question again under the head 0
“ Recommendations.”
NATURE OE THE EYE DISEASE.
With respect to the cause of all this eye trouble in the places visited, _ I regret being unable to
speak positively from personal experience, for not one case of acute ophthalmia came un or my no ie.
1 was informed that, it was the wrong time of the year for acute cases which became prevalent latci
in the summer, especially after rain, when, as the grass grew, the flies multiplied, and became such a
nuisance that it was necessary to wear close fitting veils of mosquito netting to insure any meas
relief from their attacks. The dryness of the air and the prevalence of dust storms cause irritation of the
conjunctiva, leading in many cases to more or less hypertrophy of the papillae of the palpebral portion, £
giving rise to so-called weak eyes, which are in a fitting condition to receive and cultivate any bacterial
organisms that may come into contact with them. In many cases of comparatively slight hypertiophy ot
papillae of the palpebral conjunction, no history of any previous attack of acute ophthalmia was oMamable
the mother asserting that the child never had blight or sore eyes, but always had weak eyes. Errors o
refraction are often associated with this condition, which would be much mitigated m many_instances, _
not altogether removed, by wearing correcting glasses. In the acute cases of ophthalmia or chi on c
cases taking on acute action, attended with discharge of pus from between the lids, flies are active carriers
of contagion from the diseased eyes to the healthy ones. lam told that they settle m swarms on
discharge issuing from the affected eyes of the children, and on being disturbed fly oft to other e>eu
healthy or otherwise, and so one child in a school, affected with purulent discharge from one or both
eyes, readily becomes a centre of infection to all the other children. The disease runs very much m
families : cases in which all the children are infected, perhaps five or six or even more, oge er wi i
mother, are not uncommon. The father more often escapes, especially if his work takes him a goo
from home, but the mother and all the children, including the baby of a few months or even weeks old,
become attacked. It is easy to understand how the disease spreads through the members of a family
housed in a confined space, all sleeping in the same room, using the same towels and often washing in ,
same water, when that commodity is scarce —which frequently happens. Overcrowding, e, £
want of cleanliness are important factors in the spread of the disease, and in ie i cu y
preventing it degenerating into chronic conditions, with their structural changes, causing more or
less permanent loss of vision. In every town visited whole families were found so affected, an
nothing can be done to successfully relieve or mitigate their condition so long as they exist m
their present insanitary surroundings. A list of those families vnl I accompany is repor .
and suggestions will be made as to how they and others similarly a ec e_ s ion i e rea ,
A virulent form of acute contagions ophthalmia, called “cattle blight,” was in former years prevalent
in some of the places visited. It left its mark in many instances by complete blindness of one eye and
much damaged vision of the other. From all accounts it runs a very rapid course, the eye affected
being often destroyed by a large perforating ulcer of the cornea in twenty-four or thirty-six
hours. No case of this disease is said to have appeared for the last five years. It occurs during periods
of prolonged drought, when there is much mortality among stock. It attacks horses and cattle, speedily
destroying the eye affected by a large perforating ulcer of the cornea. Elies are supposed to be active
carriers of the 'disease. After feeding on carrion, they fasten with great pertinacity on _ the inner
canthus or nasal side of the eye of the horse or cattle, from which a purulent discharge soon issues, and
then the cornea becoming affected a perforating ulcer follows and destroys the eye. Ihese flies in turn
affect human beings in a similar manner.
Samples of dust taken from under the school steps and from the floor of playsheds, together with
flies, were sent from each place visited to the Bacteriological Institute for examination. Mr. Found
kindly furnished me with a complete outfit of sterilised cover glasses and cultivation tubes, but t have
been "unable to make use of them, owing to the absence of any case with a discharge. While t is is a
matter for regret, from the point of view of ascertaining the nature of the specific bacterial organism or
organisms that cause this contagious ophthalmia, which is so prevalent at times in the Western districts
of this State, and which leaves such disastrous lasting effects, it is a matter for present congratulation
so far as the residents of these districts are concerned. Should the disease appear in its acute term,
however, I trust that steps will be at once taken to determine the important question ot the nature ot
the bacterial organisms which cause the disease or which are an important factor in its production,
is highly probable, however, that the majority of the cases examined are the result of primary attacks
of acute contagious conjunctivitis (acute or epidermic catarrhal conjunctivitis; muco-puruleut con-
junctivitis)—a highly contagious disease of the eyes, frequently appearing in an epidemic form, an
caused by the presence of a micro-organism, the Weeks’ or Koch-AYeeks bacillus, in the conjunctival sac.
The bacillus resembles that of mouse-septicaemia.
The following description of the symptoms of this disease, given by Dr. John E. Weeks, in An
American Textbook of Diseases of the Eye,” edited by De Schweinitz and Randall, and published in
1902, may be interesting when compared with the symptoms of “ sandy blight, the name by wnc
attacks of acute muco-purulent conjunctivitis are usually known in Queensland: —
About thirty-six hours after the inception of the contagion the patient experiences a
mild burning sensation in the lids, which are stuck together in the morning ; lachrymation is
slightly increased. On the morning of the third day the lids are glued together with a thick
layer of muco-pus. They are swollen, sometimes intensely so, and the patient suffers from a


as of a foreign body in the eye Some photophobia is experienced (intolerance of
° "V- SC a lr , e T e 18 acc ompanied by pain ; vision is blurred by the presence of the
secretion, the palpebral conjunctiva is deeply injected, the transition fold thickened, and the
ocn ar conjunctiva presents a bright red appearance, a peculiarity which has given the disease
thejopuiar name ot “pink eye.” At the end of the third day the affection is usually at its
In the greater number of cases the swelling of the lids does not become intense, but in a
tew this symptom is pronounced, and when accompanied by “ pseudo-membrane” the disease
may he taken tor diphtheria,
Ihe secretion seldom loses its ropy character, due to the presence of mucin, but in some
cases it becomes quite purulent, resembling the discharge from purulent conjunctivitis. There
is seldom any chemosis, although the ocular conjunctiva is intensely injected. Close
inspection will disclose the presence of many small transfusions of blood in the ocular
conjunctiva; this is such a common symptom that Nettleship has given the affection the name
or hemorrhagic catarrhal conjunctivitis ”
The acute stage, which is often accompanied by a slight rise of temperature and frontal
headache, lasts from four to ten days. The discharge gradually diminishes in quantity,
becomes thicker, and collects in little yellow masses in the inner canthi. The swelling of
the lids and conjunctiva and the painful symptoms gradually subside, and recovery usually
occurs in from two to three weeks. In the subacute stage the conjunctiva at the transition
folds presents a swollen, succulent condition, with enlargement of the capillary body and some
follicular hypertrophy.
Diagnosis and I roonosis. A history of the presence of the affection in all or a
number of the members of a family, or of its epidemic character in institutions, will aid much
in establishing a diagnosis. The very yellow mass of secretion at the inner canthus is quite
1 '‘jracteristic. Acute contagious conjunctivitis may be mistaken for purulent conjunctivitis,
and when a pseudo-membrane forms, as it does in about 4 per cent, of the cases, for
diphtheritic conjunctivitis. The microscope may be depended upon to make the diagnosis
clear in doubtful cases.
In the great majority of cases recovery ensues without leaving a trace of the disease;
relapses and recurrences are frequently observed. One attack does not ensure immunity.
1 hlyctenulcß may develop in the later stages, or trachoma may follow, but these conditions
must be regarded as secondary diseases grafted on the primary diseases by added infection.
The cornea is rarely affected. In adults the attack is more severe than in children. The
disease is contagious as long as the secretion is present.
The above description agrees pretty closely with the symptoms of “ sandy blight,” but there are
at least two well marked differences, for, although in the disease as described by Dr. Weeks, the cornea
is rarely affected, in the contagious conjunctivitis, w'hich is so prevalent in the Western districts of this
State, the cornea is, unfortunately, very frequently affected.
Superficial vascular keratitis, pannus, is not uncommon in the later stages of the disease, and
ulceration of the cornea is not unfrequent. The former may usually be distinguished from the pannus
occurring in granular ophthalmia (trachoma), by its being thinner, by its occurring at a comparativelv
early stage of the disease, and its tendency to spread over the cornea.
Papillary hypertrophy (papillary granulations) is a very common result of the disease in Queens-
land, and varies from a mere roughness of the palpebral conjunctiva to large exuberant granulations.
The conjunctiva does not completely recover from even a comparatively mild attack of “ blight,” for so
long as the patient remains in the West papillary granulations, however small, will persist and render
the eye liable to a fresh attack of conjunctivitis, when the “ fly season” arrives. Every case examined by
me during my visit to the West, that had had an attack of blight at some time or another, showed
evidence of some enlargement of the papillae of the palpebral conjunctiva. In these particulars, then,
acute contagious conjunctivitis in Western Queensland differs from the disease in most other parts of
world. This may probably arise from the fact that in the Queensland disease there is a mixed infection,
some other specific micro-organism as well as the Koch-Weeks bacillus taking part in its production. An
investigation of the disease during its acute form will, in all probability, settle this question.
Chronic granular conjunctivitis, trachoma, was present in a number of the children and adults
examined ; 173 cases in all, of which 72 had corneal complications. Papillary granulations were also
freely developed in most of these, excepting the cases in an advanced state of cicatrisation, and some
follicular hypertrophy also existed in a few instances.
Granular conjunctivitis (trachoma; granular ophthalmia; military ophthalmia; Egyptian
ophthalmia)
This disease of the conjunctiva presents as its distinctive feature in its early or first
stage numerous discrete, oval bodies in the tarsal conjunctiva and transition fold (trachoma
bodies). When the conjunctiva is not hypertrophied, these granules are prominent, trans-
lucent, and resemble frog spawn, to which they have been compared. Granular conjuncti-
vitis is most common in youth ; however, individuals of all ages are affected, except, perhaps,
those in the first year ot life. (Weeks.)
Cases may appear sporadically with little or no previous indication, no secretion, but with perhaps
a little thickening of the lids. The granules develop, and on everting the lid one is surprised to find
the under surface studded with granulations. These cases are slightly if at all contagious. Inflammation
may set up around the granulations when the condition is termed “follicular granulation.”
Another form in which the hypertrophied papilla? of the tarsal conjunctiva predominate to such
an extent as to obscure the trachoma bodies, if they exist, is known as “papillary granulation.” A third
form in which there is a mixture of follicular granulations and hypertrophied papilla? is known as “mixed
granulation.” The latter is the most severe form of the three, and is highly contagious.
Bad air, overcrowding, poor and scanty food, and filth contribute largely to the development of
granular ophthalmia. It becomes epidemic in residential schools, barracks, almshouses, prisons, &c The
5


small tenements in which most of the people live in the Western districts and in the country generally
are frequently overcrowded by the number of people residing in them, and in many cases it is impossible
to insure that cleanliness that is so essential to good health ; consequently whole families are often the
victims of this disease in varying degrees of seventy, from the quiescent unnoticeable condition above
mentioned to the dreaded sequelae of the graver form —viz., contracted eyelids, with the accompaniment
of entropion, or curving inwards of the edges of the lids ; trichiasis, or misplaced eyelashes, which,
rubbing on the sensitive cornea with each movement of the eyeball and lids, cause a fleshy growth, pannus,
to appear over a portion or all of it, thus obscuring vision, if not destroying it almost completely. More
or less ulceration of the cornea is frequently present with, in many cases, such intolerance of light that
the unfortunate patient will run and bury the face in a pillow, or get under the bed, if the door is
opened. I was told at one place that some young people had not been seen outside the house for seven,
eight, or even ten years. One of the cases was brought to me, that the neighbours asserted had not
been seen outside the house for ten years. Her sight was almost completely destroyed by a thick, fleshy
growth over each cornea.
But, although insanitary conditions are an important factor in rendering persons susceptible to this
as well as other diseases, a contagium must in all probability be added to produce granular conjunctivitis.
The precise nature of this contagium has not yet been definitely ascertained. Sattler and Michel describe
a small double coccus which may be cultivated from the contents of a trachoma follicle, the Trachoma
coccus , but no satisfactory results have been obtained by inoculation experiments. Mutermilch had
described a fungus which he terms “ microsporon trachomatosum,” with pure cultures of which he claims
to have produced trachoma in calves ana rabbits. Other micro-organisms have also been named as
probable factors in the causation of the disease. All who have studied the disease are of opinion that
it is microphytic in origin; but sufficient evidence is not procurable to make the belief acceptable
as a fact.
So far as is known there is no constitutional predisposition to the disease, which is very prevalent
in the East among the Egyptians and the Jews. Italians also are said to be prone to^it; but in certain
regions it is very rare, notably in the Scandinavian Peninsula and the Southern part of California. I fear
that it is fast becoming epidemic in the West, and will go on increasing in frequency and extending
to a larger area, unless vigorous means are speedily adopted to check its spread.
The distribution of this disease, and the number of cases, with and without corneal complications,
seen at each place visited, will be found on reference to the accompanying table.
EECOMMBNHATIONS.
Acute contagious conjunctivitis being, as its name implies, a contagious disease, and acute granular
coniuctivitis being also of a highly contagious nature, it is obvious that both should be treated as such,
if any control is to be exercised over them. A child suffering from either of these diseases in its acute
state, when there is a free discharge of matter from the eyes, will become a centre of infection to the
other members of its family, and, if allowed to attend school while the eye is in that condition, will rapidly
spread the disease among the other children. The flies, which are such a pest in these Western districts
during certain times of the year, are, in the great majority of instances, the carriers of the contagium
from the diseased eye or eyes to the healthy ones, and in the homes other means of infection, such as using
the same towels, washing in the same water, &c., are added. If, then, the spread of these diseases is to be
at all controlled, isolation of the affected person or persons must be rigidly enforced, and maintained until
all discharges from the diseased eyes have ceased. In order to accomplish this, compulsory notification
all cases or suspected cases of contagious ophthalmia should be insisted upon. (The term “ ophthalmia
means inflammation of the conjunctiva, so that contagious opathalmia includes both acute contagious
conjunctivitis and acute granular conjunctivitis or trachoma.) Any child appearing at either State or
Convent school with a discharge from one or both eyes should be sent home by the head teacher, and at
once notified by him to the local authority as a suspected case of contagious ophthalmia. The case
should then be reported to the doctor in charge of the hospital, who would take steps to have the child
isolated at home, if it is possible to do so effectively, or sent to the ophthalmic ward of the hospital, an
detained then until all discharge from the eyes had ceased. In cases other than school children, the same
course should be pursued as is now done with respect to other contagious diseases, such as scarlet tever,
plague, &c. The householder should be held responsible for the notification to the local authority.
Each hospital should have a suitable ward constructed for the reception of these cases, where such
does not exist, and a qualified nurse should in every instance be placed in charge of such cases. Nearly
all the hospitals visited have a qualified nurse as matron. Those that have not should appoint one, tor it
is highly necessary, not only in the interests of the patients in the ophthalmic ward, but also in the
interests of the patients in the other wards, that someone having a thorough practical knowledge ot the
details of aseptic and antiseptic treatment should have nursing control over the contagious ophthalmia
cases •
Persons resident at a distance from the towns, on becoming attacked with acute contagious
ophthalmia, could be treated, until medical assistance w as procurable, by bathing the eyes with boiled ram
water, either w r arm or cold, as the patient found most comforting, every half- hour or oftener , during the
night as well as in the daytime. By this frequent bathing the discharge would be prevented from
collecting under the eyelids, and the growth of the septic organisms much retarded, ihe boiled rain
water may have added to it a teaspoonful of common table salt and a full tablespoonful ot boracic acid to
each pint of water, or when the boracic acid is not procurable the teaspoonful of salt alone may be added
to each pint of water.
By energetically treating the acute cases of contagious ophthalmia on the spot as they arise, and
carefully isolating them, the disease would in all probability be confined to very few persons, instead or
attacking the community wholesale, as has been the case in the past; and the long list ot chronic cases,
already existing, would have fewq if any, further additions made to it, for the disease is curable in the
great majority of cases if properly treated at the outset.
Chronic cases taking on acute action and developing a discharge should be treated, so far as com-
pulsory notification is concerned, as fresh cases, for they become contagious as soon as a discharge appears.
6


at the wffTfa/foff ™ tlfic f tinn tllis disease > it may happen that the attendance o£ children
I J/lt T • 1 1 ta !‘ to BUch 311 extent as to sensibly affect the average daily attendance and
°sal S re(lu( ; e the num ber to below a certain standard entitling the head teacher to
nnrnhpl f “ n „ ln other "'ords, if the average daily attendance falls below a certain
this rule annliesTo !, .p 0 ' 1 ? 1 '° lhe bead tea fher loses a portionof his salary. lam not aware that
it apply to ensps V & non-attendance through sickness, but lam strongly of opinion that to make
Department of PnblicT f- conta j? lous opnthalmia would be unwise, and trust, therefore that the
obliged to be absent bvmsT T Wll , aee to give credit to the school, as attending, all those children
whether in their nwnT ? ?° f e 7 e disease > 80 long as the doctor certifies that they should not attend,
under treatment as w-J] eros Bor ln <he mterests of the other children. This would cover chronic cases
children and others i 8 acu , e neß- Tor the sub acute and chronic condition of so many cases among
aet h n 1 Can be done to a ]ar § e number by treatment on the spot, but many will never
beLgTttended to h vthT TT? thG d r ate ° f the coast - Comparatively I^ few of these cases were
at l he hospital or P but if more can be induced
therefore ft i 1 08 P ltal regularly for treatment good results will in many instances follow. lam of opinion
thSfSlw c se e s re n S 9 lden i doCtor f lachI ach p ! ace Bhoald be a PPointed to attend professionally to such of
cases a o and Tnasm a*l '“ves regulariy for treatment at the hospital, and to all acute
remuneratedfor rea f°™% expected to perform all this work without being
meet mv,• ■’ } 1 eeemmend that he be paid a certain amount yearly for his services by the Govern-
LtteudanceltXTi m6 -fl f if'7 ™ the P ° Wer to isolate acut ‘ e cases > and to insist upon the regular
e«ses h °* chrome cases as he considers would be benefited by treatment locally.
wm,b bJ In h Ch th e resident doctor thinks should be removed to the coast climate for treatment, he
work fi uired to send a list of to the head of the Department charged with the carrying out of this
the 1 accommodation and treatment for those people who require removal to
could not readil \ Vu ? ey ‘t 'eneht by the change of climate, and that further treatment which
be mnre ennf 7 - b f ° btained lB to which IWe given much careful consideration. It might
Brisbane bTt tIT V ' r ® B P ects lf a sanatorium were erected at Townsville, Rockhampton, and
exnertimed f ob 3 ec , tlons to three establishments are that each would require to be in charge of an
addftTon tftMr/b?’ W l'°r 6 Berviees ould onI J b e obtained by the payment of a large salaryfand in
Bittl 1 u* h 'V”* 3 e° f ruunin f tW establishments instead of one would be considerably greater.
IWusvilTe ? f •a° . m S d n the that the cban g e of climate for residents in the North to
SI ’ i^t 8 m the Gentral strict to Rockhampton, would not be sufficiently great to
Sni r ° them as the change to Brisbane would. It is true that it would cost something
to l.nn people from iownsville to Gladstone by steamer, but the short sea trip would in itself benefit
e patients, and the saving of expense in other respects would more than counterbalance any cost of sea
transit. Tor the abovenarned reasons, then, I recommend that a sanatorium for the reception of cases of
eye diseases coming from the Northern, Central, and Southern districts be erected on some part of the
shore of Moreton Bay within easy distance of Brisbane, and that such an establishment be placed under
the medical charge of one or more experienced ophthalmic surgeons.
i dbe cotlBtruct i oll °f a sanatorium need not entail much expense, as a building of wood could be
made to fully answer all requirements. Burnishing need not be an extensive item, and no elaborate set
of instruments would be necessary. A resident medical officer would hardly be required, and the nursing
staff would be much less than that of a general hospital of an equal number of beds, as, with the exception
of the eyes the patients would be in tolerably good health, and nearly all able to be up and going about,
the cost of food would be by far the most serious item of expenditure. Many of the adult patients and
hoys would be able to contribute something to their maintenance by doing light work in a vegetable
garden which could be made in their grounds, as well as attend to the planting and growth of fruit trees,
&c. Ihe enforced idleness which most eye cases have to submit to is very trying to them, especially as
t ley are unable to read ; work, therefore, to those in a condition to do it, would be helpful to them
physically, paid would promote the cure of their eyes, by inducing a happier frame of mind.
It is not intended that a sanatorium of this sort should relieve the hospitals of the class of eye
cases that they now admit. The sanatorium should be used by those principally who require a change
trorn the interior to the coast, and not for the cases requiring active treatment.
Errors of refraction were common, especially among the children, many of whom suffered from
internal strabismus (squint). It is a difficult matter to decide what should be done in these cases,
terrors of retraction predispose to eye and lid troubles, hence most of the children suffering from
impaired vision from this cause were also the subjects of chronic conjunctivitis or blepharitis marginalia,
or both, there is a constant effort on the part of the patient to overcome the defective vision, with the
result that eye-strain is produced with its attendant evils, some of which I have enumerated; but there
are others, including headache, styes, &c., which might also be mentioned. However, perhaps enough has
been said to mark the importance of having those cases of “ errors of refraction ” dealt with.
The medical practitioner as a rule does not undertake to test the patient’s vision ; consequently
in the towns visited only two gentlemen were found who professed to have had much experience in
correcting errors of refraction. A number of these cases fall into the hands of the travelling self-
constituted refractionists, who, so long as they succeed in selling their spectacles, are not very particular
as to their suitability for the person to whom they sell. It is not surprising, then, that I found children
wearing glasses totally unsuitable for them. If errors of refraction among children were confined
wholly or chiefly to those residing in the Western districts, the question of doing something for them
might be solved without much difficulty. But it is only right to assume that a large proportion of the
children residing in other localities are similarly afflicted. Many of the children that I found with
errors or refraction were, as already stated, suffering from lid or eye trouble as well, and will in all
probability come to the coast sooner or later, when their refraction can be properly estimated, and many
will no doubt also come to the coast from towns that I did not visit, so that the question of dealing with
these cases of refractive error will to a certain extent solve itself. In the meantime, however, a”large
proportion of the children attending the State and Convent schools throughout the State are in urgent need
ot having their errors of refraction corrected by suitable glasses, and whether steps should be°taken to


carry out this object or not is a matter which I respectfully submit should receive the immediate and
earnest attention of the Government. I may, however, he permitted to suggest that a qualified occulist
be appointed to estimate the refraction of the State and Convent school children in the Northern,
Central, and Southern districts. It would be advisable to appoint an oculist for each district, so that the
work may be facilitated. lam aware that this proposal will not meet with the approval of some who
may consider that they have a sort of vested interest in this matter, but the health and comfort of the
school children should be our first consideration, for, in proportion as they are cared for in this and other
hygienic respects, so will they grow up into strong and healthy men and women, both physically and
mentally.
Many of the hospitals in the West are situated at a distance from the town, and the mothers
naturally complain of having to send their children so far in hot weather, along dusty roads, to get their
eyes treated every day or two. This is such a drawback at Longreach that I strongly recommend that
a house in the town be procured to which the children can go for treatment instead of to the hospital.
Blackall is similarly situated in that respect. At these and other places where the hospital is some
considerable distance from the town, provision should, therefore, be made to treat the children who attend
as out-patients at some convenient place in the town.
Some difference of opinion exists among the head teachers respecting the efficacy of enclosing the
verandas and end windows of the school house with wire gauze. I think that it would be very useful
to do so, as the children can easily be prevented from carrying flies on their backs into the school by
having them brushed off as each child enters through the door in the gauze.
Nets made of black mosquito netting or some similar material should be worn by the children
during the prevalence of flies.
The State school buildings at Hughenden are erected on a clay-pan, the glare from which must be
very trying to the children’s eyes. The buildings should be removed to a site free from this objection.
The recommendations may be summarised as follows, viz.; —
1. That acute contagious ophthalmia be declared a contagious disease, and that the notification
of all cases be made compulsory.
2. That provision be made for the treatment of all cases of acute contagious ophthalmia on
the spot, as far as practicable.
8. That as many chronic cases be treated locally as are likely to be benefited by treatment.
4. That all cases certified to by the resident doctor as requiring removal to the coast for treat-
ment be so removed, if practicable.
5. That the resident doctor be appointed to attend all cases of ophthalmia, and that he receive
a salary for his services.
0. That the head teacher of the State school be protected against loss of salary, in consequence
of the falling off in the attendance of school children under the doctor’s treatment.
7. That a sanatorium be erected at some point on the shores of Moreton Bay, near Brisbane,
for the reception and treatment of chronic eye cases unable to pay for private treatment.
8. That a qualified ophthalmic surgeon be appointed for the Northern, Central, and Southern
districts of the State, to examine the refraction of the State and Convent school children s
eyes, and to prescribe correcting glasses where required.
9. That in places where the hospital is situated some distance from the town provision be
made to treat chronic eye cases among the children attending as out-patients at the
hospital at some central building in town.
10. That provision be made at each hospital for the isolation and treatment of cases of acute
contagious ophthalmia.
11. That a trained nurse be appointed to take nursing charge of the cases of acute contagious
ophthalmia admitted into each hospital.
12. That the verandas and end windows of the State school and Convent school buildings be
enclosed with wire gauze. *
' REMARKS.
During my visit to the Western districts I found the climate dry with hot days and comparatively
cool nights. The air was clear and stimulating, so that one could get through a good day’s work without
much fatigue. The people were genial and hospitable, and appeared to take the drawbacks incident to
Western life—such as flies, drought, and sore eyes —with considerable equanimity.
The school children that I saw were bright, intelligent, well-behaved, and well-mannered, with good
physique and considerable courage and fortitude, if one may judge from the almost stoical unconcern
with which, with very few exceptions, they sat down and submitted to have their eyes examined and
eyelids everted —a process which frequently calls forth expressions of discomfort from adults.
If eye troubles could only be abolished from among the children of the West, they would grow up
to be a fine race of men and women.
I was treated with uniform kindness by the medical practitioners, who willingly gave me every
assistance. The officer in charge of the police at each place visited was unremitting in his efforts to assist
me, and the head teachers of the State schools showed a keen interest in the work which 1 had in hand,
and gave me willing help with the examination of the children’s eyes. My thanks are due to the mother
superior of each Convent school for the willingness with which they each responded to my request to send
the children to the courthouse to have their eyes examined.
Appended to this Report is a table showing the results of the examination of the eyes of children
attending the State and Convent schools at the different places visited, and the eyes of other people
residing at or near those places, and the date of each examination.
Enclosed herewith is a list of those people who are in urgent need of being brought to the coast
for the treatment of their eye troubles.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) W. E. TAYLOR, M.D., D.P.H., Etc.
The Honourable the Home Secretary, Brisbane.
8


Table Showing the Results
OF
the Examination of
THE
Eyes of
Children
Attending the
State and
Convent Schools at the
Different
Places
Named, and
of the Eyes of Other Persons Residing
AT OB NEAR THOSE
Places, and the Date of
Each
Examination.
Date.
Place.
No. of
Children on
Roll,
State School.
No. ot
Roll, Convent
School.
No. Examined,
State School.
No. Examined
Convent
School.
No. of Other
Persons
Examined.
Total Number
Examined.
1907.
(227)
(225)
7 and 8 October
Charleville .
271
27
4
31
11 and 12 „
Tambo
,
84
64
6
70
15 and 16 „
Blackall
211
157
16
173
21 and 22 ,,
,,
Isisford
85
85
25
110
25 to 28
Longreach .
290
152
248
i25
30
403
31 Oct. and 1 and 2 Nov.
Barcaldine .
230
90
216
74
25
315
6 November
Aramac
97
96
13
109
8
Muttaburra.
90
84
4
88
12 and 13 November
Winton
165
100
157
96
10
263
18 and 19 „
Hughenden,
126
87
114
82
31
227
21
Richmond .
136
120
•
••
23
143
1,932
RESULTS.
Number of Cases of Hypertrophy
of Conjunctival Papilla?.
Number or
Casks
op Trachoma.
WITHOUT CORNUAL OPACITIES.
WITH
CORNEAL OPACITIES.
WITHOUT CORNEAL OPACITIES.
WITH
CORNEAL OPACITIES.
O ©
© s
d P
Place.
O
A
a
o
A
£
O
•P ri
s
-
O
■d
P
©■2 .
d T3
6 s
A g
o r*
m 2
S3
m P
©
Sh
a T3
© 73
r 3
U
©
U
©
d
O p
rj
O *
m *3
S3
«g
4-* U
a n
© r*
t A
©
f-
©
d
o c
&
o
CO 2=
© ?
qq 2
gs
U
S
u
©
O O
A ©
33
® g
if u
a 'c
© 73
u
©
Pi
u
©
be g p3
fi Omh
d © 5
© d g
dO
§°
o
d o
go
O
d O
-M
O
d O
O
m
2
H
0 Q
u
O
EH
cc
o
O
H
(Z2
o
o
H
PS
Charleville ..
14
14
13
4
17
Tambo
49
55
6
6
3
3
4-28
Blackall
198
12
120
22
4
26
13
13
12
12
14-45
Isisford
59
13
72
14
10
24
7
i
8
4
4
109
Longreach
164
82
16
262
43
24
10
77
22
6
4
32
3
3
8-68
Barcaldine ...
155
25
185
26
14
9
49
10
11
21
5
3
2
10
6-66
Aramac
72
78
4
4
2
2
6
4
10
110
Muttaburra ...
58
58
14
4
18
5
5
3
3
9-0
Winton
100
63
3
166
21
9
7
37
4
5
9
7
4
11
7-6
Hughenden ...
81
56
20
157
18
7
7
32
2
3
5
6
2
8
6-4
Richmond
80
87
16
7
23
4
2
6
4
4
8
978
1,254
313
101
72
Number of Persons Suffering from Imperfect Vision
Resulting
FROM
Eye Disease.
Total
Number
Per cent, of
Total
Per cent, of
J
Persons ■with
Number of
Persons
State
Affected
Persons with
with Healthy
Place.
School
School
Eyes or Eye-
Healthy Eyes
Eyes and
Children.
Children.
lids or both.
lids or both.
and Eye-lids.
Eye-lids.
Charleville
13
4
17
31
Tambo
9
9
04
9143
6
8-57
Blackall
34
4
38
171
98-85
2
115
Isisford
18
10
28
108
98-2
2
1-8
Longreach
46
24
10
80
374
92 8
29
7-2
Barcaldine
31
17
11
59
265
84-12
50
15-87
Aramac ...
11
3
14
94
86-24
15
13-76
Muttaburra
17
4
21
84
95-45
4
4-545
Winton
28
13
7
48
223
84-
40
15-2
Hughenden
24
9
7
40
202
89-0
25
110
Richmond
20 1
11
31
124
867
19
13-29
251 |
63
71
385
1,740
1
192


• 8 Wharf street,
Brisbane, 16th December, 1907.
Sir,-—I have the honour to hand you herewith a report of the eye cases examined by me during
my recent visit to the Western districts of the State.
The bacteriological report of the samples of dust sent from the playsbeds and from under the
schoolhouses, together with flies caught in the schoolrooms, has not yet reached me, but as soon as it
does I shall have much pleasure in forwarding it with my comments thereon.
I also send herewith a list of the names of those persons who stand in urgent need of a removal to
the coast climate in order to obtain some relief from their present distressing condition. I marked the
names of those children 1 think that their parents should pay something, at all events, for their passage
or railway fare to Brisbane, for I presume that this would be the best place for them to come to. The
others are too poor to pay anything.
I have, &c.,
W. F. TAYLOE, M.D,
The Honourable the Home Secretary, Brisbane.
LIST OF NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF PERSONS URGENTLY REQUIRING REMOVAL
TO THE COAST FOR TREATMENT.
Augathella —
George Brehauer, aged 40; unable to see to work ; wife and family dependent upon him
BlacJcall —
Agnes Lawrence, 13 ; care Mrs. John Lawrence I Father gets 255. per week. Seven in
Gertrude Lawrence, 15 ; care Mrs. John Lawrence ) family.
Emily Mills, 14; father, Robert, carrier. Very bad case. Think father should pay something.
Isisford —
Hannah Wilkinson, 10; father, James, labourer.
George Claude Hamilton, 17 ; father, George Claude, shearer.
Might pay something.
Longreach —
Emily Rawlins, 10; father, Charles, shearer
Winifred Rawlins, 13 ; father, Charles, shearer
Thomas Nelson, 6 ; father, John
Ethel Walsh, 9; father, Jeremiah, labourer
Annie Chambers, 12 ; stepfather, Samuel Irwin, woodcutter
Martin O’Farrell, 11, father, James, fencer
Edward Whelan, 8 ; father, Patrick, carrier
Sydney Whelan, 8; father, Patrick, carrier
May Laird, 16; father, Silas, shearer
Nellie Laird, 12 ; father, Silas, shearer
Ethel Walsh, 9 ; father, Jeremiah, horse-trainer
William Sutton, 12 ; father, W. C., carrier
Elizabeth Sutton, 10; father, W. C., carrier
Ivy Boon, 11; father, Frank, woolpresser
■ Should be able to pay.
Barcaldine —
John Bassell, 13 ; father, John, labourer.
Albert Owens, 4 ; father, Henry, labourer.
Aramac —
OsAvin Webb, 7 ; father, Joseph, labourer.
Bridie Daly, 12; father, Patrick Joseph, labourer.
Muttaburra —
George Jones, 84, station hand.
Jack Gibson, 6; father, dead; mother, Mrs. J. Gibson.
Agnes A. Wilson, 4; father, Joseph, labourer.
John Henry Doran, 62, bookkeeper.
Winton —
Frank Sale, 13 ; father, John, cook. Should be able to pay.
Laura Newell, 10 ; Jack ; away two years ; sends a pound or two at rare intervals. Mother
has to wash.
Hughenden —
Frank Sutton, 6; father, Robert, shearer. Should be able to pay.
Ernest Field, 6 ; father, Harold, labourer.
Henry Thomson, 14 ; father, John, fencer. Should be able to pay.
Richmond —
Henry Irwin ; father, Charles, labourer.
Price
By Authority : George Arthur Vaughan, Government Printer, William street, Brisbane.
10


