

I lDbD <
OPIITIOITS
OF THE
* 'gfress®*-
ON THE
LECTURES
DELIVEEED BY
Madame Lucien Henry
FRENCH LITERATURE
AND THE
INFLUENCE OF EDUCATION.
Presented by Mrs. H. H. Gill, Proprietress of
the “ Tasmanian NewsP
Hobaet, Januaey, 1894.
Printed at the “ Tasmanian News” Office, 63 Murray-st Hobar t.




ozpiisrxoitsrs
OF THE
-Tasmanian *
ON THE
JLjEOTTJ^ES
DELIVERED BY
Madame Lucien Henrv
FRENCH LITERATURE
AND THE
INFLUENCE OF EDUCATION.
Presented by Mrs. H. H. Gill, Proprietress of
the “ Tasmanian NezvsP
Hobaet, January, 1894.
Printed at the “ Tasmanian News ” Office, 63 Murray~st., Hobart.




OPIITIOITS
OF THE
-Tasmanian *
The success which has attended the system of the study of the
French language inaugurated in Hobart by Madame Lucien Henry
12 months ago, was well exemplified yesterday afternoon when the
Masonic Hall was crowded by a large and fashionable assemblage,
including Lady Hamilton, to hear an introductory address to the
proposed reunion, which is to be held weekly to hear French readings
and discussions for the purpose of exercising and accustoming the
ear to the sound of the language. It is affirmed by many eminent
men, and even by some European university professors, that it is
possible fo speak a language well by ear alone without studying
grammatical exercises at all. The lecturer quoted from the rectorial
address delivered in April last at St. Andrew’s University by the
Marquis of Dufferin and Ava, pointing out that as it is only the
minority of persons to whom it is possible to reside abroad,
instruction in one European language should be made an essential
element in education ; nor can there be any doubt that that language
should be French, for not only is its literature the most diverse and
admirable possessed by any European community except our own,
but it has long been accepted as the common channel of communication
between European nations. In the course of a very interesting
address Madame Henry’s special system of auricular instruction was
explained and warmly approved by all present. At its conclusion
Major Wylly, in an excellent speech, gave practical evidence of his
own experience, by which he had acquired a knowledge of the
languages, by ear alone, in less time than others placed in similar
circumstances, but who had studied the language previously by book
only. Lady Hamilton, as Madame’s senior pupil, exercised the
privilege of moving a vote of thanks, and in doing so emphasised
the advantage to the community in the presence in our midst of a
teacher of such thought and feeling as Madame Henry, who not only
possessed great experience, but who was so warmly interested in
educational matters. During the proceedings Mr. Tranthim-Fryer
played a ’cello solo “ Schhunmerlied ”by Linder. Mr. F. P. Bowden
sang Pontet’s “ Vanished,” and Mrs. Tranthim - Fryer’s highly
cultivated voice was heard to excellent advantage in Bishop’s “ Should,
he Upbraid.” Miss Lettie Iloper presided at the piano.— Mercury ,
14th March. 1892.
The Masonic Hall was again well filled yesterday afternoon
when Madame Henry, by special request, repeated her former lecture
with marked success, and in addition delivered a cleverly condensed
sketch of the life and works of Alfred de Musset, concluding with the
reading of one of his brilliant and witty plays, which was received


with warm acclamation by the members. Lady Hamilton was
present throughout the proceedings, which were again pleasantly
varied by Mrs. Tranthim-Fryer’s artistic vocalism, her song “ Clear
and Cool,” by Delores, being rendered with perfect taste and finish.
Mr, Tranthim-Fryer also played a romance for the ’cello by Fischer
in his usual capable manner. The enterprise has been started under
very favourable circumstances, and we trust will meet with the
success it deserves. —Tasmanian News, 21st March, 1893.
Madame Lucien Henry held her first evening conference in the
Masonic Hall last evening. There was a large attendance, and Lady
Hamilton was amongst those present. Henrik Ibsen’s much debated
book, “ A Doll’s House,” was the subject on which Madame Henry
essayed to speak, and she first dealt with it from the standpoint of a
critic. Whilst giving the writer credit for the great talent and
dramatic power displayed, she argued that the work was illogical,
unnatural, and dangerous. The heroine, Nora, being a mother, and
having been awakened to the revelation of true womanhood would
not, she thought, have been a child to the care of those whose daily
influence had made her the “doll” she felt herself to be. A
comparison was drawn between Nora in A Doll’s House, and Suzanne
in Octave Feuillet’s La chef d’or, who under a similar trial, by her
pure womanhood and dignity won and saved her husband’s and her
own happiness. Madame grew enthusiastic and eloquent over
woman’s influence in home life and her duties, and the result of it on
children who were to be men and women of the future. Applause
was frequent during the lecture. Lady Hamilton then read a short
paper —thoughtful and well written and favourable to Ibsen, but also
expressive of admiration of Feuillet’s heroine and agreeing with
Madame Henry on the philosophical and educational points. The
room was artistically decorated with flowers and evergreens by the
willing hands of madame’s many friends and pupils, and the evening’s
proceedings were agreeably diversified by the performance of the
following musical numbers, Miss Eoper presiding at the piano :
“Beauty Sleep” (L’Ardita), Mrs. J. E. Fryer; Canoe song, “ Indian
Serenade,” Mr. J. W. Gould ; duet, “ I would that the love,” Mrs.
J. E. Fryer and Mr. J. W. Gould .—Mercury, 3rd May, 1892.
Last evening a pleasant French reunion was held in the Masonic
Hall, being the first evening conference held by Madame Lucien Henry.
The room was tastefully decorated with evergreens and flowers, the
many colored varieties of chrysanthemums largely predominating. There
was a large attendance, including Lady Hamilton. Mr J. W. Gould
sang the canoe song, “ Indian Serenade, ” and Madame Henry read a
lengthy paper on Henrik Ibsen’s “ A Doll’s House.” She gave the
author every credit for his talent and dramatic power, but the book,
she contended, was not only illogical and unnatural, but actually
dangerous in the principles it enunciated. Madame Henry argued
that Nora being a mother and having been awakened to a sense of
true womanhood would not have been a child to the care of those
whose daily influence had madedier the doll she thought herself to
be. The characters of Nora in “A Doll’s House” and Suzanne in
Octave Feuillet’s “La Chef D or,” were compared, the latter in a
similar trial to that which Nora subjected to saving her own and her
husband’s happiness by her pure womanhood and dignity. In conclu-
sion, Madame Henry spoke warmly and firmly upon the influence of


woman in home life and her duties and the result of it on the children
who were to be the men and woman of the future, could not be too
highly estimated. At the close of the paper a number of bouquets
and baskets of flowers were presented to Madame Henry by her
pupils. She, in a few words, gracefully acknowledge the honor done
to her. Lady Hamilton then read a carefully prepared and short
paper on “Ibsen,” which took a somewhat favourable view of
Ibsen s writings. She was also an admirer of Feuillet’s
character Suzanne, and coincided with the views expressed
by Madame Henry on the educational and philosophical points.
Madame Henry complimented Lady Hamilton on her French, which
was marred by one fault—that it was not spoken by a native. Mrs
J. R. Tranthim-Fryer sang L’Ardita’s “ Beauty Sleep,” and with Mr.
J. W. Gould Mendelssohn’s duet, “I would that the love,” both items
bein i well received. A vote of thanks to Lady Hamilton for her
paper was carried and gracefully acknowledged, and a very pleasant
evening concluded with the National Anthem. Miss Eoper presided
at the piano in her usual excellent manner. —Tasmanian Hews, 3rd
May, 1892.
The study of the French language has lately received a great
impetus since the arrival of Madame Lucien Henry, who came to
Hobart while M. Henry was in Paris arranging for the publication
of his forthcoming work on Australian art; but the gratifying success
which has attended the formation of her French classes renders it
possible that Madame’s stay in Hobart will be of a more permanent
character. One good result is already apparent, viz., the establish-
ment of a French reunion, which meets weekly in the Masonic Hall
for reading, discussion, and conversation in the Gallic tongue. At
the evening conference on Tuesday last Madame Henry delivered a
very interesting lecture on Henric Ibsen’s “ Doll’s House,” which
was much enjoyed by the large gathering present. Lady Hamilton,
who is always vigorously energetic in the cause of education, read a
thoughtfully prepared paper dealing with the subject under dis-
cussion. The advantages to be derived from the opportunity thus
afforded for becoming familiar with the sound of the French
language “as she is spoke ” can hardly be over-estimated, and the
success which has been attained is well deserved. —Launceston Daily
Telegraph, 15th May, 1892.
Madame Lucien Henry held a French reunion in the Masonic
Hall last evening in commemoration of the closing of the first term
of her course of instruction to her pupils. There was a very large
attendance, including Lady Hamilton. The room was prettily
adorned with flowers, greenery and pot plants, and the assembly
throughout was of a most enjoyable nature. Miss Guilbert favored
the audience with two violin solos, “Gavotte” (Rameau) and
“ Andante Religioso” (Thome), which were much appreciated. Mr.
F. P. Bowden sang “ Long, long since in the springtime ” in good
style, and Miss Perkins was heard to advantage in “ Tell me my
heart.”
Madame Henry then delivered an address on “ Woman’s
Influence as Exercised by the Mother in the Education of her Child.”
Prefacing her remarks by thanking those present for their support
and constant attendance at her lectures, from which she took it that
they were with her in the general move in the direction of education,
and that they were especially drawn towards the study of French,
she went on to say that she believed that every woman had that


possibility in lier, whether developed or dormant, of educating her
influence for good. Upon the culture and wit of our women depended
the wisdom and talent of our men. The great law of Mature was
love, and in the education of youth, instead of prohibiting it, women
should endeavour to understand the real depth of its teaching, and
bring them up upon that beautiful sentiment, making the end and
reward of love to be virtue. Some might say the education of girls
was now pushed to its furthest extent, but what was the result up to
the present time? Marriage was said to be a failure, but if so, it was
the fault of the education of the girls. Remedy those faults and
marriage would of necessity right itself. A women’s education did
not consist alone in the training of her intellectual powers. The
heart governed the intellect. The social reforms that were being
clamoured for would not be obtained through women voting for
them, but through women bringing up their sons to vote for the right,
and training men who should understand those social miseries and
black spots. While to schools belonged the part of developing the
powers of a girl’s intellect, to mothers belonged the power of inspiring
her with feelings of sympathy and loving kindness for all humanity.
Oh, that each mother would work only for the true happiness of her
children, for in each special happiness there was a promise of its
becoming universal. First as young girls, then as young wives, and
afterwards as mothers, the sceptre belonged to them. It was in their
hearts far more than in laws and legislation that the power to-day was
vested. In their hands was placed the future of the world and the
destiny of the human race.
The address was listened to with close attention and was
frequently applauded. Mr. J. W. G-ould then expressly sang Cowen’s
“ Absence,” and was followed with a pianoforte solo, “ The
Nightingale and the Rose.” Mr. J. R. Fryer’s interpretation of Calcott’s
“ Friend of the Brave ” was carefully sung and applauded. Mrs.
Tranthim-Fryer and Misses R oper and Hogg shared the duties of
accompanist. —Tasmanian News, Bth June, 1892.
Despite the unfavourable aspect of the weather, the Masonic
Hall was crowded last night, with a fashionable audience, including
Lady Hamilton and party, when Madame Lucien Henry read a paper
on “ The Education of Woman by the Mother.” The question of
woman’s education has been a fruitful source of discussion from time
immemorial, and especially in this nineteenth century. A statesman
once asked a literary woman what was wanting in the up-bringing of
young people? “Mothers,” came the answer; “there, that is the
secret.” “Then, madam,” rejoined the statesman, “You must
produce mothers who know how to bring up their children.” But
virtue is not to be taught; it is an absolute inspiration, and in it alone
is a woman’s supremacy. A woman’s education does not consist
alone in the training of her intellectual powers. The heart governs
the intellect of woman, and from her heart comes her highest flights
of ambition and her lowest depths of despondency. The lecturer
laid great stress upon the importance of the study of the highest and
best literature, and strongly condemned the modern so-called realistic
school which rejoices in opening up the plague-spots of society, but at
the same time offers no remedy. What is its object? We hear the
cries of Liberty ! Liberty ! but what works can she show ? Has this
realistic literature drawn us nearer to Nature, or made us more simple
in our habits, or more truthful and earnest in our lives ? Certainly
not. The effects of it are merely physical. The body shudders, the
feelings are excited, yet the eye remains dry, the heart unmoved, and
nothing touches the soul, because nothing has been expressed by the


soul. The true science of humanity is to raise man from that dead
level of education which is not ennobling. Sheridan says:—“lt is
with a woman that Nature has written in the heart of man,” and it is
equally true that upon the culture and wit of our women depend the
wisdom and talent of our men. The address was listended to with
great attention, andtbe speaker was warmly applauded, and at the
conclusion of the lecture was literally loaded with flowers by her
pupils who had also tastefully decorated the room with flags and
flowers. A special feature of the musical programme was the
excellent vocalism of Miss Dora Perkins, whose rendition of Bishop’s
“ Tell Me My Heart ” evidenced careful and efficient training.
Mademoiselle Rose Gui Pert played a violin solo, “ Andante
Eeligioso,” by Thonie, in capital style. Mrs. Henry played a piano
solo, and songs were rendered by Messrs. J. R. Fryer, J. W. Gould,
and F. P. Bowden, the piano accompaniments being played by Mrs.
Fryer, Misses Hogg and Roper.— Mercury, Bth June, 1892.
The Academy of Music, was well filled last evening on the
occasion of Madame Henry’s Reunion. The audience was a fashion-
able one, including Lady Hamilton. The decorations were most
artistic, and reflected much credit upon those who took them in hand.
The subject chosen by Madame Henry was “ The Life of Jean
Francois Millet, the Peasant Painter,” and it proved most interesting
though somewhat painful, for the great master had to endure such
misery and privation that when fame came to him his physical nature
had succumbed to his many cares and trials, and lie was incapable of
enjoying his celebrity. Alfred Sensier, his best friend, relates how
some of his fellow artists, knowing his distress, collected and brought
him a small sum of money, and found him sitting in an empty box
frozen with cold, and he had then been without food for two days.
On another occasion he was obliged to exchange some of his drawings,
which have since become almost priceless, for the bare necessaries of
food and clothes. The lecture, which lasted an hour, was most
attentively listened to, and the speaker was frequently applauded.
The subject was one upon which Madame Henry was well qualified
to discourse, and those who were imperfectly acquainted with the
language were enabled by the sympathetic eloquence and dramatic
force of the lecturess to follow the distressed artist through his many
privations, and realise the extent of his sufferings and the greatness
of his life. During the evening musical numbers were rendered by
Miss Roper, who presided at the piano. Mrs. Logan, who possesses
a highly cultured soprano voice, sang a cavatina from “ II Trovatore”
charmingly, and Mr. F. P. Bowden contributed “ Margarita.” At
the conclusion of the lecture bouquets and baskets of flowers were
presented to Madame by her pupils and friends. —Tasmanian News,
7th September, 1892.
There was a large attendance of pupils and friends at the
Academy of Music yesterday afternoon when, by special request,
Madame Lucien Henry gave a repetition of her lecture on Jean
Francois Millet. Lady Hamilton, whose proficiency in the French
tongue is well known, and who is ever willing to aid the speed,of
education, was present and an attentive listener to the lecture. The
advanced French pupils from Officer College were also amongst those
present, and the whole formed a most intelligent audience. At the
conclusion of the lecture, which was greeted with applause,
Madame Henry mingled with those present and engaged in a
pleasant conversation for a short time. Lady Hamilton yesterday
presented Madame Henry with a basket of heliotrope and yellow
roses. —Tasmanian Neics, 20th September, 1892.


One of the healthiest signs of the times in connection with the
advancement of the higher education in our midst is the increasing
interest evinced in the French lieunion established in Hobart by
Madame Lucien Henry, who came here in the first instance for a
short time, but finding such a wide field for her labours, and so much
sympathetic help, decided to remain and extend her sphere of
operations, with the result that an influential cercle liter aim has been
formed, which meets weekly for conversation and discussion in the
Gallic tongue, and every month an evening conference is held, at
which Madame Henry reads an essay on some subject, which is after-
wards discussed by the members. The last lecture was on the life of
Jean Francois Millet, the French artist, and the story of his brave
struggle against abject poverty and privation excited so much
sj r mpathetic interest that the subject was resumed, and on Tuesday
evening Madame Henry read a very able paper on the works of the
artist, which was illustrated with some valuable engravings of his
noted pictures. Of the fifty examples, half were described and
criticised in able language by the lecturess, the remainder being
reserved for a future occasion. The work which Madame Henry has
set herself to perform is one beset with many difficulties, but the
enthusiasm with which it has been undertaken is a guarantee for its
successful issue. Comparatively few were at first sufficiently
familiar with French to fully appreciate the beauty and grace of the
eloquent language addressed to them, but thanks to the excellent
system of oral tuition which Madame Henry has introduced with such
good practical results, the number of adherents is daily increasing
and the end of the present term will show a capital year’s work,
besides leaving a permanent record of the literary history of the
colony. Lady Hamilton has in Madame Henry s literary work evinced
the warmest interest as well as in the artistic labour for Australian
art which has been performed by M. Lucien Henry, now in Europe.
In returning thanks to the lecturess “on Tuesday evening Lady
Hamilton said : —“ Madame Henry,—May Ibe the medium to-night
by which your pupils render to you their hearty thanks for your
delightful lecture. If it is true that the object of all education is
‘ to teach us to think,' you are surely guiding us in that direction by
the suggestiveness of your lectures. It is nearly ten years since I
was myself first induced to think of Millet by listening to an essay
read at our literary society in Dublin. But the only picture we had
to look at was an engraving of ‘ The Angelus.’ I thought that picture
would take us twelve months to know thoroughly, yet this evening
our kind Madame Henry has shown us no less than twenty-five of his
works, and she has explained them to us not only by the light of her
own artistic tastes, but also by the bright light of her husband’s
genius. If my words of thanks are not as scholarly as they might be,
or as you are worthy of, I feel sure you will accept them as a heartfelt
expression of our appreciation, and our gratitude for your increasing
efforts for our higher education. The proceedings were pleasantly
diversified with music, and the subject will be resumed at the next
evening conference. —Launceston Examiner , October, 1892.
Madame Henry, who was so kind in lending her room on this
occasion, gives her second lecture on Jean Francois Millet on Tuesday
evening next, when she will exhibit numerous engravings of the
works of this groat artist. Madame Henry has quite established a
French milieu in Hobart, and her lectures and readings are rapidly
becoming more and more popular among those who understand her
language. She has the great advantage of being as excellent a reader


as she is a writer, and every Monday afternoon a large number of
ladies attend her reunion to hear the pieces of Legouve, Coppee,
Victor Hugo, or other great French writers which she has lately been
reading before resuming her Shakespearian course. —Tasmanian Mail,
22nd October.
There was a full attendance at Madame Henry’s rooms, Mac-
quarie street, on Tuesday evening last, on the occasion of her lecture
on the “ Works of Jean Francois Millet.” Lady Hamilton pre-
sided. The rooms had been tastefully decorated with flowers,
etc., and' presented a most pleasing appearance. The lecture was
illustrated by a number of beautiful engravings of Millet’s works,
and was listened to most attentively throughout. At the conclusion
of the lecture, which embraced but half of the works of the
great artist (the remainder forming the subject of a future lecture),
Lady Hamilton moved a vote of thanks to Madame Henry in
the French language, of which the following is a translation:—
“ Madame Henry,—May I be the medium to-night through which
your pupils render to you their hearty thanks for your delightful
lecture. If it is true that the object of all education is ‘to teach us
to think ’ you are surely guiding us in that direction by the
suggestiveness of your lectures. It is nearly 10 years since I was
myself induced to think of Millet by listening to an essay read at
our Literary Society in Dublin, but the only picture we had to look
at was an engraving of ‘ The Angelus.’ I thought that picture would
take 12 months to know thoroughly, yet this evening our kind
Madame Henry has shown no less than 25 of his works. She has
explained them to us, not only by the light of her own artistic tastes,
but also by the bright reflected light of her husband’s genius. If
my words of thanks are not as scholarly as they ought to be or as you
are worthy of, I feel sure you will accept them as a heartfelt
expression of our appreciation and our gratitude for your increasing
efforts for our higher education.” Madame Henry was also presented
with five lovely baskets of flowers from her pupils and friends as
tokens of their love and esteem. — Mercury, 26th October, 1892.
On Tuesday evening Madame Henry’s lecture on the pictures of
J. F. Millet was well attended, and much appreciated. Her large
artistically-furnished room was ornamented with flowers, and a table
was placed in the middle, on which were placed the engravings of the
artist’s works. Most of them represented different phases of peasant
life—not the ideal arcadian life of pastoral poems, but the stern,
hard, real life, described in the first chapter of George Sand’s La
Mare au Liable ; each of these pictures told its own story of the
hard work and submission to fate which the artist himself experienced.
At the close of the lecture some of Madame’s youngest pupils pre-
sented her with bouquets of flowers, and Lady Hamilton read a short
speech in French thanking her for the very enjoyable lecture and for
the opportunity afforded of seeing copies of such famous works.
Miss Eose Guilbert played a violin solo before the lecture, and Miss
Sherwin sang after it. —Tasmanian Mail, 29th October, 1892.
There was a very large attendance at the Academy of Music last
night on the occasion of Madame Henry’s concluding lecture of the
“Life and Works of J. F. Millet.” Lady Hamilton was present,


together with the members of the Sketching Club. Madame Henry
handled her subject most skilfully, and brought out the many lessons
which were to be learnt from Millet’s works. She also read critiques
upon them from the pens of the most celebrated authorities on French
art. At the conclusion M. Jules Joubert, at the request of Lady
Hamilton, thanked Madame Henry for the valuable light thrown
upon this branch of education by means of her lectures. Personally
he expressed great appreciation of the present Conference, and
alluded to the continual support and encouragement Lady Hamilton
had always been so ready to extend to the higher education of the
Ble of Tasmania, especially in all matters relating to art.
ame Henry expressed her great regret at the approaching
departure of Lady Hamilton. She would ever remember and cherish
the hearty interest Lady Hamilton had always shown in the work of
educating the young. Madame was heartily applauded at the close,
and received many floral tributes. The proceedings were enlivened
by violin solos by Mdlle. Guilbert —Mercury, 23rd November, 1892.
Madame Lucien Henry held her final French reunion of the present
session last night, when a large and distinguished audience, which in-
cluded Mr B. S. Bird, M.H.A., Madame Blouet and her daughter,
filled the Academy of Music to overflowing. So great was the crush
that many were content to avail themselves of standing room only, and
the proceedings throughout were marked with grea t enthusiasm. Music
and dramatic performances constituted the programme. Miss Roper
played a piano solo, and with Messrs J. Dillon (violin) and J. R.
Tranthim-Fryer (’cello) took part in enjoyable rendering of Haydn's
Trio No. 6—“ A Legend by Flavelle.” Miss Tasma Sherwin delighted
her hearers by her artistic treatment of “ Nobil Signor,” from
“ Les Huguenots ” and two young pupils, Miss W. Cox and Master
Tenison displayed excellent pronunciation in a short French dialogue.
A scene from Victor Hugo’s ‘ Ruy Bias,” gave ample scope for dis-
play of dramatic and linguistic talent, of which Misses B. and L.
Hudspeth and Miss Nicholls were not slow to take advantage, and
the result was a decided success. A pleasant little comedy was
enacted by the Misses F. and E. Gill, together with Misses Spencer,
Chapman, and Clark, all of whom are making rapid progress in the
Gallic tongue. A very amusing French comedy, “La Looterie de
Francfort, ” created much diversion, being performed with great
spirit and abandon by Misses Fitzgerald, Boultbee, Perkins, Watchorn
and Miller. The artistic decorations of Madame Henry’s salon were
greatly admired, and Mr. B. S. Bird, late Minister of Education, in
proposing a vote of thanks paid a high tribute to the excellent system
of tuition which Madame Henry had introduced, and of which such
f>ractical proof had been given. Madame Henry suitably replied,
aying stress upon the fact that with the bond of loving sympathy
which existed between her pupils and herself her task was made
much easier and exceedingly pleasant.— Mercury, 20th December,
1892.
Another of Madame Henry's courses of lectures, notice of which
will be found in our advertising columns, is about to commence, and we
are happy to announce that during this year the subject of the
lectures will be strictly classical. We must point out to the honor of
Hobart that these courses were commenced here. Madame Henry
formulated the scheme for Sydney, but circumstances decreed that
she should put it into practice in Hobart, and so far, we have
benefited by them almost as much as we have appreciated them. —
Mercury,


Madame Henry delivered her first lecture of the current season
on French literature in the Academy of Music last night. There
•was a large and appreciative audience. Mrs. Henry Dobson presided,
and among those present were Messrs. B. S. Bird and A. I. Clark,
M.'sH.A., and Mesdames Bird and Clark. The room was tastefully
decorated with flowers' and evergreens. Madame Henry gave a short
but concise sketch of French literature, beginning at the 12th
century, and mentioning some of the principal writers and poets,
including Yillehardouin, 1150; Joinville, 1224; Jehan Froissart,
1533 to 1419, and as far as Malherbe, with whom the preliminary
lecture closed. All the different phases of French literature were
remarked upon, as well as the literary history of France, the literary
spirit of the French, and the importance of their literature in its
effects on all cultivated minds in all civilised nations. The subject
was most interesting, and it is hoped that all the young students, and
also those who really value the power of knowledge, will not fail to
be present at all the following lectures, which should be an intellectual
treat. At the close of the lecture Miss Florrie Gill presented the
lecturess with a pretty French cap in flowers, and Miss Ethel Gill
with a floral guitar, the arrangement of each being excellent. Miss
Spencer gave a handsome bouquet. These were the work of the
pupils themselves. Mr. B. S. Bird, in proposing a vote of thanks to
Madame Henry, said that not only students but all who listened to
these lectures received great benefit from them. He said Madame,
in common with all her compatriots, had a great love for her country,
and now that our University is just being formed, where there are
courses of English literature but no course of any modern language,
Madame fills the vacuum. He was happy to say that he had learnt
that evening many things of which he had been ignorant.— Tasmanian
News, 10th May, 1893.
Mrs. Henry Dobson presided at Madame Lucien Henry’s room
at the Academy of Music, which was, last evening, as usual, most
prettily decorated with flowers, and there was a large and appreciative
audience to hear her lecture on “ La Fontaine, his Life and Works.”
It was delivered in that pleasing way, and with that eloquence to
which we have now been accustomed for more than a year, and we are
sure that the merits of the lecture system advocated by her some time
ago are fully recognised now. Madame not only spoke of La Fontaine
himself, but of the history of the fables. The fables of the “Lion
and the Eat,” “ The Wolf and the Lamb,” “ The Miller, his Son,
and the Ass,” “ The Two Pigeons,” and “The Animals ill with the
Plague,” were each most skilfully analysed, the first one showing
how even the greatest has need of the least; others showing how
might is right, and how he who tries to please everyone pleases no
one. Then “ The Two Pigeons,” which is a very beautiful poem as
well as fable ; and we must not forget that in which the satire is so
subtle, where the King is represented by the lion, the courtier by the
fox, and the people by the donkey. Mrs. Henry presided at the
piano, and Miss Grace Hodgins played a piano solo, “ Alice, ’ by
Ascher, with much expression. Mr. A. J. Taylor thanked Madame
for her lecture, and her pupils presented her, as usual, with flowers.
Altogether the evening proved most interesting and instructive. The
lecture will be repeated in English on Monday next, at the special
request of the students. — Mercury, 31st May, 1893.
Yesterday evening Madame Lucien Henry resumed her course of
lectures on the French literature of the 17th century. After a few
words to the young people, in which she advised them to learn some*


thing of the history of the literature of all countries, Madame Henry
gave a clear and interesting sketch of the formation of the literary
spirit and of the style of the 16th and 17th centuries. She also spoke
about the formation of the French Academy and of Port Royal,
naming Charron, Francois de Sales, Cardinal Duperron, Coeffeteau,
Bishop of Marseilles, Matherbe, Balzac, Pascal, Descartes, Chateau-
briand, and Gassendi as among the first authors of the infant
academy. This system of education by lectures cannot be too highly
recommended. One can learn much in an hour, and can get a good
idea of the style of the authors who occupy so great a place in the
history of literature. Madame Henry will take as the subject of her
next lecture “ Boileau and his works.” After the lecture Mr. G.
McMillan returned thanks on behalf of the audience for the very
intellectual but all too short hour spent by those present. In the
course of Mr. McMillan’s remarks lie regretted that Madame Henry’s
lectures were not given under the auspices of the University, as at
present that institution has no French instructor.— Mercury, 26th
July, 1893.
At the Academy of Music last evening, Madame L. Henry
delivered the fourth of her series of lectures on French literature,
taking as her subject “ Boileau et L'Art Poetique.” The room was
prettily decorated with flowers and ferns, and there was a large
and appreciative audience. Madame Henry gave a clear and precise
sketch of Boileau’s works, and showed that he deserved the title,
“ Legislator of Parnassus,” which was given to him by his contem-
poraries. She spoke about his connections with Racine, Moilere, and
La Fontaine, and quoted several anecdotes relating to their friend-
ship. In speaking of Boileau’s poetry, Madame Henry gave short
extracts from Epitre Y., Epitre YIL, Dialogues sur les heros des
Romans, L’Art poetique, Satire sur les" femmens, and Le Lutrin.
She concluded her lecture by saying : —“ In the midst of the shadows
which still surrounded French literature, Boileau appeared like the
severe figure of Yirgil in Dante’s “Inferno.” He showed to his
contemporaries the way which they ought to follow, and added, with a
supreme gesture, “ C’est par ici qu’il faut marcher.”— Mercury, Bth
September, 1892.
There was a very good attendance at the Hobart Academy of
Music last evening, when Madame L. Henry gave an interesting
account of “ Corneille, his work, and part ot his life.” The lady
lecturer was at home with the lecture, touching upon the various
works of Corneille in a skilful manner, handling the subject in so
interesting a way that the interests of her hearers was sustained
throughout the evening. Corneille’s life was touched upon in part,
and greatly appreciated by the audience. At the close of the address,
Mr. G. McMillan moved a hearty vote of thanks to Madame Henry.
He regretted that the lecture just concluded was the last but one of
its series, for great pleasure and educational benefit was always
derived from the talented lady’s lectures. He paid a high tribute to
Madame Henry’s literary ability, and expressed the gratitude of him-
self and those present in being so honored in hearing such excellent
discourses. Speaking as one engaged in educational work, he con-
sidered that French and German lectures were indispensable to the
Hobart University, and he was surprised that the students at that
institution had not been present that evening in search of study that
was not taught them at the University. Mr. J. B. W. Woolnough,


briefly seconded the resolution, speaking in high terms of
Madame Henry’s powers. This was carried by acclamation.
Madame Henry replied appropriately, and the meeting closed.—
Mercury, 26th October, 1892.
MADAME HENRY’S FAREWELL LECTURE.
A crowded and select audience assembled at the Academy of
Music, Macquarie Street, last evening, the occasion being the
delivery of the last of a series of lectures by Madame Lucien Henry,
upon the subject of French literature. The large room upstairs,
where the lecture was delivered, was neatly decorated with flowers
and evergreens, and presented a very handsome appearance. This
was the work of the pupils of Madame Henry, to whom credit was
given for presenting such a display. Amongst those present was
Lady G-ormanston, who attended early in the evening, and remained
throughout the whole of the lecture. The subject of the discourse
was an interesting one, namely, Racine, one of the best known of the
poets of the 17th century, and one whose works have been greatly
admired by all classes, and have been largely translated. The
lecturer gave a skilful analysis of the play of *‘ Andromagne.” Then
she pointed out to her audience that of the 11 tragedies of Racine,
six are called by a woman’s name —“Andromagne,” “ Iphigene,”
“ Berenice,” “ Phedre,” “ Esther,” and “ Athalie.” A brief sketch
of each of those plays was also given in the course of the lecture.
Master Tenison, a lad of eight years, gave a recitation in French
from Casimir Delavigne’s “ Trois jours de Christophe Colomb,” and
Miss Evelyn Butler, a still younger pupil, recited two pieces of
poetry from Lamartine. Mrs. Tranthim-Fryer sang a romanza,
“ Com’ e Mello,” by Donizetti, in a finished style, following which
was a comedy entitled “ Trois Jeunes Filles,” Misses Ash, Lazarus
and Vaulin officiating in the different parts. Mrs. Tranthim-Fryer
next sang “You ask me, my love,” by Laurence Kellie, which was
well received. Master Lucien Lopes presented Lady Gormans ton
with a handsome basket of flowers as a token of the esteem in which
her presence was held as a patron of the higher education. Mr. B.
Stafford Bird, M.H.A., who was present amongst the audience, at the
conclusion of the entertainment, addressed a few complimentary
words to Madame Henry, in which he congratulated her upon the
success she had achieved during her stay in Hobart, and sincerely
regretted her departure. He paid her a high compliment upon the
efficiency of her course of scholastic tuition, and hoped that her
visits to Hobart would be at least annual ones, and also of lengthy
duration. —Tasmanian News, 21st December, 1892.
THE LITERATURE OF FRANCE.
Madame Henry delivered the last of her series of lectures on
French literature last night in the Academy of Music. The room was
beautifully decorated. Lady Gormanston was present. The subject
of the lecture was most interesting, for Racine is one of the best
known poets of the 17th century. Madame Henry gave a skilful
analysis of the play of Andromaque, and pointed out the
clever tragedies of Racine. Six are called by a woman s
name— Andromaque, Ipltiqenie, Berenice, Phedre, Esther and
Attalie. A brief sketch of each of these plays was given.


Master Tenison (eight years old) recited a long piece of
poetry from Casimir Delavigne, and Miss Evelyn Butler, a still
younger pupil, recited two pieces of poetry from Lamartine.
Immediately after the lecture Mrs. Tranthim-Fryer sang a romanza,
“ Com e hello,” by Donizetti, in her usual finished style. Then came
a little comedy entitled Trois Jeunes Filles, in which the parts were
taken by the Misses Ash, Lazarus and Yautin. Madame Henry is
to be congratulated, and also pupils, on the efforts they have made,
and the excellence to which they have attained. Mr. B. S. Bird,
M.H.A., in proposing a vote of thanks to the lecturer, dwelt at some
length on the laudable efforts she had made to raise the standard of
French literature and conversation in the community. He regretted
her approaching departure from Hobart, and sincerely trusted that
she would pay at least annual visits to Hobart, and those of more
than ordinary length. At the conclusion Lady Gormanston was
presented with a magnificent basket of flowers by Master Lucien
Lopes.— Mercury, December 21st, 1893.
The concluding meeting of the first session of the Hobart Shakes-
peare Society was held last evening at the Tasmanian Hall. Mr. L.
Susman was voted to the chair. An excellent paper, entitled “ Study on
Hamlet,” by Madame Lucien Henry, was read by Miss Octavia Susman.
The chairman intimated that the paper had been w ritten originally in
French, and was translated into English by Miss Ash, a pupil of
Madame Henry’s. By way of introduction, reference was made to
the fact that any particular national claim the English may have on
Shakespeare is not to exclude the claims of the rest of the world, or
to prevent the appreciation of his work by other nationalities.
Criticisms of Guizot and Victor Hugo on Shakespeare and Shake-
peare’s Hamlet were referred to, and the writer showed how truly
alive were these two distinguished Frenchmen to the genius and
worth of the English dramatist. Victor Hugo says, “ Other w'orks
of the human mind equal Hamlet, but none surpass it.” The writer
dealt very ably with the character of Hamlet, devoting attention
particularly to his mental state, the likeness of his moods to the
occasional states of feeling we ourselves experience, his incapacity
for action, and his attractiveness. Shakespeare’s general treatment
of the play w r as also very fully touched upon by the writer, and the
paper concluded with an eloquent quotation from Hugo on Shake-
speare, likening a genius to a promontory in the infinite. The paper
was listened to with great attention, the speakers referred to it very
favourably and in terms of gratitude to Madame Henry, w r ho had
made them more familiar with a school of Shakespearian criticism
too often overlooked. — Mercury, 24th November, 1893.
LADIES’ COLLEGE.
The annual prize-giving of the above institution took place last
night in the Tasmanian Hall. There was a very large attendance of
parents and others interested in the College. On the dais were Lady
Hamilton, Bishop Montgomery, Hon. J. W. Agnew, M.D., and the
chairman, Sir Lambert Dobson. His Excellency the Governor, the
Very Bev. Dean of Hobart, and many of the Anglican clergy were
seated among the audience. The proceedings opened with a chorus,
“ Spring Blossoms,” by the girls, after which a small play, La Fete
de la Directrice, written in French especially for the College by


Madame Juliette Henry. The principal characters were sustained by
Miss E. Nicholas, La Directrice ; Miss B. Proctor, Margaret; Miss
E. Clark, Miss Wise. The play went very smoothly, and the pro-
nunciation was most satisfactory, which speaks volumes for the
instruction imparted by Madame Henry. The play itself embodies
principles and maxims which are calculated to train the character of
the girls quite as much as their intelligence, What little scope there
was for dramatic action was taken advantage of by those taking part,
the whole forming a very pleasing change to the usual ending of the
Christmas term. After the play the Principal, Miss Kate Piper,
read the annual report for the scholastic year ending 1892. The
work of the pupils, taking the classes as a whole, was most satis-
factory. The singing class had made very good progress, and the
sketching and painting classes were also in a very flourishing condition.
The cricket club had been the means of developing some good players,
and matches with other schools had been played. The reports stated
that the College owed very much to the zeal and energy of Madame
Henry, and as a result the French had showed a great improvement.
The approaching departure of Mr. Maughan Barnett was regretted.
Professor Webb’s examining report was also read by Miss Piper.
Sir Lambert Dobson regretted that the whole Council was not
present, but some members of it had been detained by urgent
business. He had been a member of the Council for 15 j T ears, and
thought that it was time he retired in favor of younger men. (No,
no.) He was sure no one had been more diligent and attentive than
Lady Hamilton in her connection with the College. He congratulated
Miss Piper on the very satisfactory report. She was the last person
to paint a too rosy picture, and what had been stated, he was certain,
was a true state of the efficiency of the College. In Professor
Webb’s report it would be seen that French was a weak point.
However, he believed that since Madame Henry had taken up the
work this would be one of their strongest parts. to the
benefits of a public education as against private tuition, he stated
that his own daughters had been educated at the College, and he had
no cause to regret it.
Lady Hamilton, on rising, was received with cheers. She deeply
regretted to have to say good-bye. She referred to the kindness and
courtesy which she had always received from every member of the
Council since she had been on it, and the readiness with which they had
fallen in with suggestions which she had made, which were only
likely to occur to a woman’s mind. She thanked the Principal, Miss
Piper, for the valuable help she had always received from her. She
was also pleased with the sentiments expressed in Madame Henry s
little play, which were calculated to do a great deal of good. When
she returned to England she would let the College know what sort of
stand her daughter made when she went to one of the high schools
of the Old Country.
The prizes were then distributed; Miss Carrie Walch carried off
four, Miss Agnes Outline three, and Miss Shoobridge three. Miss
Hamilton gained Sir Lambert Dobson s prize for good conduct, and
Miss M. Hudspeth the Schultze Memorial prize for the same merit.
These prizes were awarded on the vote of the whole school. Miss
Hamilton also received a work basket from the cricket club. Misses
K. Shoobridge and B. Proctor recited a selection Cicero’s
Be Amioitia ; Miss Chancellor sang a solo, “ Spring,” and the pro-
ceedings closed with a chorus, “The coming of the flowers. The
walls were adorned with drawings from the pupils of Mr. Proctor
and the Sketching Club. In each case the work sent in was good.
The pupils of Mr. Bradford’s painting class sent in some works
which were highly creditable. — Mercury, 25th November, 1892.


WOMAN’S INFLUENCE,
Sie—l am sure I need make no apology for taking up tlie pen to
pay a tribute of praise to Madame Henry for the inspiring sentiments
which form the substance of her lecture, a translation of which appears
in your issue of the 18th ult., as I know you are ever ready to uphold
the right, exalt the good, as well as maintain the cause that is just.
JNo better answer could be found than this lecture for the query
which forms the subject of your leader of the Bth, viz , “What was
woman intended to be?” especially the third sentence from the end.
The thanks of all are due to Madame Henry for the fearless way
in which she has spoken the truth in connection with the literature of
the day, for it is a humilating fact that much of it appeals to the
basest passions, stirring a morbid excitement which is enervating and
enslaving both to body and mind, resulting in decay and misery.
While the pure, the noble, the self-denying, elevate, brace, and give
health and strength to the dual man, rendering him capable of deeds
of justice and wisdom, a lasting benefit to his species and honour to
that Being from whom they are an emanation ; and it must have been
a real labour of love to Lady Hamilton to translate those beautiful
words of which the closing sentence is simply splendid, and inasmuch
as it embodies the key to the solution of most of the troubles of the
masses oE humanity might well be written in letters of gold.
This, from one who owes what little of good there is in him to the
early training of a painstaking conscientious mother. —Yours,
G. KENISON BELL.
AN ARTISTIC SOUVENIR.
There was a large and interested gathering in Madame Henry’s
rooms at the Academy of Music, Macquarie street, on Tuesday after-
noon, when the unveiling of the bust of Lady Hamilton, recently
completed by Mr. J. Tranthim-Fryer, was performed. Mrs. Henry
Dobson presided.
Before unveiling the bust, which was on all sides acknowledged
to be an excellent piece of work and a credit to the artist,
Madame Henry said: Mrs. Dobson, Ladies and Gentlemen, —I
do not wish to abuse your patience by making a long speech, especially
in French, but I think it is my duty first of all to thank you for
having responded so kindly to my invitation to be present at the un-
veiling of Lady Hamilton’s bust. I ought also to explain to you why
I wished to have a bust of Lady Hamilton made. “ Because I loved
her,” you will say. Yes, certainly, but there was more in my thought
than the mere wish to render homage to the wife of your ex-Governor.
As a woman I think that we should all feel grateful to her who did
so much for the promotion oE higher education in Tasmania, for she
was always ready to help in any useful undertaking, giving the best
of her intellect to all questions, whether of art, of literature, or of
hygiene. We have all said that of Lady Hamilton, and we have said
it even to herself. But I think that we ought to perpetuate the
memory of her good works here, by continuing with eagerness and
enthusiasm what was so well begun by her, thus making the way easy
for her successor. At the same time it is to prove to her successor
that this little island contains great souls, who, when the way is once
opened to them, will enter into it, only asking to be allowed to go
forward, answering in that to your motto, “ Advance Tasmania.” As
I have said before, there is great talent here. We find among the
young people especially a natural disposition for all branches of art.


This talent is due, in my opinion, to the climate, and to the picturesque
beauty of the country. There is nothing wanting except cultivation;
not intellectual cultivation alone, but cultivation in all branches. But
what must we do ? We must awaken these talents, which are stdl
latent; we must encourage them and direct them, but above all we
must not make it simply a mercenary task. It must be a labour of
love, of devotion for all that is beautiful and great. Can we do this
in Hobart? Yes, if we have faith, for with faith we attempt the
impossible. A great man once said, “Ifit is possible, it is done ; if
it is impossible, it will be done.” In short, we must have enthusiasm.
And enthusiasm well applied can make a nation great. If we look at
the history of the nations do we not see that many of them ha'i e
become great by enthusiasm ? I believe Austi’alia is called to be a
great country, if we only know how to make a right use of the
treasures which she possesses. But we must not be content with
saying this, we must put it into practice. There must-be a beginning
in everything ; we say, “ Rome was not built in a day, and it is true.
We must pass through our childhood ; we are not born great, but we
become so through our own efforts. Let each one bring his stone for
the building, and the structure will be raised. I love your Tasmania.
I believe above all in the intellectual development of your young
people ; and it is for this reason, that, in rendering to her, who, like
myself, loved all the industrious youths of Hobart, I have thought
it well to make an appeal to all kinds of talent, to have a national
gallery of sculpture, since we already have the beginning of a picture
gallery. It is only a bust, it is true, but it is the first bust of a
Governor’s wife made in the colonies. As a work of art, this bust is
worthy of a place in any gallery, even in Europe. The artist has
already obtained three rewards for work sent to South Kensington.
It is the work of a son of Tasmania for his native town. May all
those who feel that they have talent do the same. And may the
wife of the coming Governor be able to see that nothing is lost here,
and encouraged by the thought that Tasmanians are not ungrateful
for what is done for their advancement, may she be tempted also to
take an active part in all questions of progress. May this bust be
only one of many words of art, which will all be an advance on those
which have preceded. (Applause.)
After vocal music by pupils of the Ladies’ College,
Dr. J. W. Agnew remarked that he had just been requested by
Madame Henry to say a few words. He was taken by surprise, and
did not know that he could add to what was so well ex-
pressed in the excellent address they had just listened to. lliey all
knew that Lady Hamilton had never confined her efforts to one object
alone, but had devoted her attention to almost everything connected
with the public good. Her interest in the great subject of education
he could speak to from personal experience. Lady Hamilton was a
member of the Council of the Ladies’ College, and there he had been
frequently struck by the great value of her suggestions and the
practical character of her remarks. In general literature great good
had been accomplished by the manner in which many of the younger
portion of the community had been induced not only to read works ot
standard value, but to think of what they had read, and put the results
into good English writing. This was real education. In art, all
knew how much had been accomplished by the great zeal and practical
knowledge of detail shown by Lady Hamilton in promoting its best
interests. Her sympathy and encouragement to beginners were never
wanting. For these and various other reasons, such as her eitorts in
in the cause of sanitation reform, etc., it had been thought well that
gome enduring memorial should be procured, and it was determined
that this should take the form of a bust, the execution of which was


placed in the very capable hands of Mr. Tranthim-Fryer. The bust
was now before them and they could all judge how good the likeness
was to the original. They must all hope that Lady Hamilton s
successor would tread as nearly as possible in her footsteps, for if so
she was certain to gain as large an amount of popularity. He would
conclude by complimenting Madame Henry on her happy selection of
the day for unveiling the bust, as it was the birthday of her former
pupil, Miss Mary Hamilton, who, like her mother, had left many
young friends behind her. He (Hr. Agnew) would probably see
Lady Hamilton in the course of a few weeks, when it would give him
much pleasure to tell her of this large meeting, as it would show that
her memory was still green amongst us. (Applause.)
Miss Marguerite Hobson and Miss Ethel Gill stepped forward
and unveiled the bust.
Mr. A. J. Taylor said he felt the same pleasure that they all
must feel in being present upon such an occasion. It afforded them
the opportunity of paying a highly-deserved compliment not only to
Lady Hamilton, but also to the artist Mr. Fryer, and to Madame
Henry. When they re-called to mind the interest Lady Hamilton
had always taken in improving the scientific, literary, and artistic
tastes of the young people, and the good work she had accomplished
with the help of other ladies, it will be admitted that it would be a
hard matter to fill her place, and that Tasmania had sustained a
great loss when Lady Hamilton had left them. He was glad to see
that Mr. Fryer had lulfilled the hopes he (Mr. Taylor) had formed of
him some 12 or 14 years ago. At that time he was particularly
struck with some crayon drawings exhibited at the Juvenile Exhibition
then being held at Hobart, and he had expressed an opinion that
whoever had done that work would be heard of in the future. He
did not know at the time that the work was from the hand of Mr.
Fryer. The bust unveiled was a clever piece of work, and it was a
fitting tribute to Lady Hamilton and Mr. Fryer that such a work of
art should be secured for the colony. (Applause).
Vocal music by members of the Orpheus Club concluded a very
pleasing ceremony.
The guests then examined the bust, which is in plaster, tinted a
pale buff, and all were unanimous in eulogising the likeness. —
Tasmanian News , 28th March, 1893.
FAREWELL TO MADAME HENRY.
There was a large and interested gathering at the Academy of
Music yesterday afternoon to bid farewell to Madame Lucien Henry,
who is leaving Hobart for Sydney. Mr. G. A. McMillan, 8.A.,
Principal of Officer College, presided, and on behalf of her many
pupils and friends presented Madame Henry with an illuminated
address and a purse of sovereigns as a slight token of the esteem and
affection in which Madame is held by them. The address, which was
handsomely engrossed by Mr. J. Tranthim-Fryer, expressed deep
regret at the severance of the ties between Madame Henry and her
pupils, and emphasised their hearty appreciation of her unvarying
patience and the simplicity and skill of her method of teaching. Mr.
McMillan, in a few well chosen words, eulogised the work which had
been done by Madame Henry in Hobart, not only as a class teacher,
but by the great interest she evinced in the spread of higher education
and in the study of literature.


Madame Henry, in reply, said: My dear pupils and friends, I
•will not begin by expressing my surprise, for I have lived among you
long enough to know your great kindness, but I am deeply moved,
and I have no words to tell you how this proof of friendship and
esteem has touched me.' lam afraid that my humble efforts have not
merited such a reward. Thanks for having judged my work so
generously. I have tried not only to teach you a language which is a
necessary brancli of modern education, but also to inspire, or rather
to develope in you, the love of humanity. Thanks, my friends, thanks.
My life among you has strengthened me morally and physically, and
and has prepared me for the great effort which I am going to make.
Whether I am conqueror or conquered in the accomplishment of my
last duty I will come among you again, for I leave many dear friends
in Hobart, and if I cannot live here permanently I will come for at
least some months in each year. I thank you again, my dear friends,
for having so nobly rewarded the work which I have tried to do, and
what reward! Dear names, framed by a design from “The .New
School of Australian Decorative Art,” the author of which is crushed
by his inability to produce his book—but the pupils continue the
work of the master. May we both be permitted some day to thank you
for your kindness.
The proceedings throughout were marked by great enthusiasm,
and the prospect of Madame Henry’s return was hailed with satis-
faction by all. —Tasmanian News, 6th January, 1894.
Printed at the “ Tasmanian News ” Office, Holart






