

f >4
OPINION OF MR. JOHN STUART MILL ON
/ rm/rnrTTTinM
COMPETITION.
FROM REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT, CHAP. XIV.
In making first appointments, little danger is to be apprehended
from want of special skill and knowledge in the choosers, but
much from partiality, and private or political mtei est. being, as
a rule, appointed at the commencement of manhood, not as having
learnt’ but in order that they may learn, their profession, the only
thing by which the best candidates can be discriminated, is
proficiency in the ordinary branches of liberal education , and
this can be ascertained without difficulty, provided there be the
requisite pains and the requisite impartiality in those who are
appointed to inquire into it, Neither the one nor the other can
reasonably be expected from a minister ; who must rely wholly on
recommendations, and however disinterested as to his personal
wishes never will be proof against the solicitations of persons
who have the power of influencing his own election, or whose
political adherence is important to the ministry to which he
belongs. These considerations have introduced the practice of
submitting all candidates for first appointments to a public
examination, conducted by persons not engaged in politics, and
of the same class and quality with the examiners for honours at
the Universities. This would probably be the best plan under
any system ; and under our parliamentary government it is the
only one which affords a chance, I do not say of honest appoint-
ment, but even of abstinence from such as are manifestly and
flagrantly profligate. •
It is also absolutely necessary that the examinations should be
competitive, and the appointments given to those who are most
successful. A mere pass examination never, in the long run, does
more than exclude absolute dunces. When the question, in the
mind of an examiner, lies between blighting the prospects of an
individual, and neglecting a duty to the public which, in the
particular instance, seldom appears of first-rate importance; and


when he is sure to be bitterly reproached for doing the first, while
in general no one will either know or care whether he has done
the latter; the balance, unless he is a man of very stamp,
inclines to the side of good nature. A relaxation in one instance
establishes a claim to it in others, which every repetition of
indulgence makes it more difficult to resist; each of these in
succession becomes a precedent for more, until the standard of
proficiency sinks gradually to something almost contemptible.
Examinations for degrees at the two great Universities have
generally been as slender in their requirements as those for
honours are trying and serious. Where there is no inducement to
exceed a certain minimum, the minimum comes to be the
maximum ; it becomes the general practice not to aim at more,
and as in everything there are some who do not attain all they aim
at, however low the standard may be pitched, there are always
several who fall short of it. When, on the contrary, the appoint-
ments are given to those, among a great number of candidates,
who most distinguish themselves, and where the successful
competitors are classed in order of merit, not only each is
stimulated to do his very utmost, but the influence is felt in every
place of liberal education throughout the country. It becomes with
every schoolmaster an object of ambition, and an avenue to
success, to have furnished pupils who have gained a high place in
these competitions; and there is hardly any other mode in which
the State can do so much to raise the quality of educational
institutions throughout the country. Though the principle of
competitive examinations for public employment is of such recent
introduction in this country, and is still so imperfectly carried out,
the Indian service being as yet nearly the only case in which it
exists in its completeness, a sensible effect has already begun to
be produced on the places of middle-class education; notwith-
standing the difficulties which the principle has encountered from
the disgracefully low existing state of education in the country,
which these very examinations have brought into strong light.
So contemptible has the standard of acquirement been found to
be, among the youths who obtain the nomination from the minister,
which entitles them to offer themselves as candidates, that the
competition of such candidates produces almost a poorer result,
than would be obtained from a mere pass examination ; for no
one would think of fixing the conditions of a pass examination so
low, as is actually found sufficient to enable a young man to
surpass his fellow-candidates. Accordingly, it is said that successive
years show on the whole a decline of attainments, less effort being
made, because the results of former examinations have proved that
the exertions then used were greater than would have been
sufficient to attain the object. Partly from this decrease of effort,
and partly because, even at the examinations which do not require
a previous nomination, conscious ignorance reduces the number of


competitors to a mere handful, it has so happened that though
there have always been a few instances of great proficiency, the
lower part of the list of successful candidates represents but a
very moderate amount of acquirement; and we have it on the
word of the Commissioners that nearly all who have been
unsuccessful have owed their failure to ignorance not of the higher
branches of instruction, but of its very humblest elements—
spelling and arithmetic.
The outcries which continue to be made against these
examinations, by some of the organs of opinion, are often, I
regret to say, as little creditable to the good faith as to the good
sense of the assailants. They proceed partly by misrepresentation
of the kind of ignorance, which, as a matter of fact, actually leads
to failure in the examinations. They quote with emphasis the
most recondite questions which can be shown to have been ever
asked, and make it appear as if unexceptionable answers to all
these were made the sine qua non of success. Yet it has been
repeated to satiety, that such questions are not put because it is
expected of everyone that he should answer them, but in order
that whoever is able to do so may have the means of proving and
availing himself of that portion of his knowledge. It is not as a
ground of rejection, but as an additional means of success, that
this opportunity is given. We are then asked whether the kind
of knowledge supposed in this, that, or the other question, is
calculated to be of any use to the candidate after he has attained
his object. People differ greatly in opinion as to what knowledge
is useful. There are persons in existence, and a late Foreign
Secretary of State is one of them, who think English spelling a
useless accomplishment in a diplomatic attache, or a clerk in a
Government office. About one thing the objectors seem to be
unanimous, that general mental cultivation is not useful in these
employments, whatever else may be so. If, however (as I
presume to think,) it is useful, or if any education at all is useful,
it must be tested by the tests most likely to show whether the
candidate possesses it or not. To ascertain whether he has been
well educated, he must be interrogated in the things'which he is
likely to know if he has been well educated, even though not
directly pertinent to the work to which he is to be appointed.
Will those who object to his being questioned in classics and
mathematics, in a country where the only things regularly taught
are classics and mathematics, tell us what they would have him
questioned in ? There seems, however, to be equal objection to
examining him in these, and to examining him in anything but
these. If the Commissioners—anxious to open a door of
admission to those who have not gone through the routine of a
grammar school, or who make up for the smallness of their
knowledge of what is there taught, by greater knowledge of
something else —allow marks to be gained by proficiency in any


‘ - nrm i?
&> fi, L. \ O
F
Fergusson and Moore, Printers, 48 Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.
other subject of real utility, they are reproached for that too.
Nothing will satisfy the objectors, but free admission of total
ignorance.
We are triumphantly told, that neither Clive nor Wellington
could have passed the test which is prescribed for an aspirant to
an engineer cadetship. As if, because Clive and Wellington did
not do what was not required of them, they could not have done
it if it had been required. If it be only meant to intorm us that
it is possible to be a great general without these things, so it is
without many other things which are very useful to great generals
Alexander the Great had never heard of Vauban’s rules, nor could
Julius Ctesar speak French. We are next informed that book-
worms, a term which seems to be held applicable to whoever has
the smallest tincture of book-knowledge, may not be good at
bodily exercises, or have the habits of gentlemen. This is a very
common line of remark with dunces of condition ; but whatever
the dunces may think, they have no monopoly of either gentle-
manly habits or bodily activity. Wherever these are needed, let
them be inquired into, and separately provided for, not to the
exclusion of mental qualifications, but in addition. Meanwhile, I
am credibly informed, that in the Military Academy at Woolwich,
the competition cadets are as superior to those admitted on the
old system of nomination in these respects as in all others ; that
they learn even their drill more quickly; as indeed might be
expected, for an intelligent person learns all things sooner than a
stupid one ; and that in general demeanour they contrast so favour-
ably with their predecessors, that the authorities of the institution are
impatient for the day to arrive when the last remains of the old
leaven shall have disappeared from the place. If this be so, and
it is easy to ascertain whether it is so, it is to be hoped we shall
soon have heard for the last time that ignorance is a better
qualification than knowledge, for the military, and d fortiori for
every other, profession ; or that any one good quality, however
little apparently connected with liberal education, is at all likely
to be promoted by going without it.
