

.j |
=ji
(
r
#rmtgenuii ii| public Stbonls,
l
/
f
AND
(
;
VOLUNTEERS PARADED
\
/
\
\
/
S
/
s
On the 12th July, 1874,
(The Glorious Memory, &e.,)
/
/
BEING CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN
*s
/
/
THE BISHOP OF SYDNEY (DR. BARKER),
/
/
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL RICHARDSON,
/
)
THE HONORABLE HENRY PARKES
/
\
}
■\
J
\
;
(COLONIAL SECRETARY),
\
(
(
s'
» AND
MAURICE REYNOLDS.
/
(
\
n(
i
1
)
/
/
s
L
*
Parramatta, December, 1874,
tek A
}
U
• * %
E
m-
\2?y-




CORRESPONDENCE.
As Captain Byrnes thought proper to read to the Volunteers
and the public assembled in the Parramatta Park, his version
of the correspondence, it is only fair that the public should
have the whole of the correspondence in extenso.
“ Parramatta, 10th August, 1874.
“ I have the honour to invite your attention to a printed
copy of Rules and Regulations, forwarded herewith, of a society
of men who call themselves Orangemen. From their jnsuiting
and overbearing manner, and the threatening attitude they
assume towards the Catholic portion of the community, their
presence in a peaceable community can only be accounted for
upon the assumption that there is some law, or some authority,
or some recognition of those Orangemen by the Government in
some way or other, that justifies them in the overbearing and
presumptuous manner in which they have put themselves forth as
the special defenders of the Queen —no ! not the Queen, but the
‘ Sovereign,’ the ‘ Protestant Religion,’ the 1 House of Bruns-
wick,’ They have united themselves also in the defence of their
own persons and properties, as well as in the maintenance of
the public peace! (This looks very much like the Quaker’s
grace— ‘ God bless me and my wife ; my son-in-law and his
wife ;we four and no more,’—Amen.) But if those Grange-
men do all they have cut out for themselves, why (like Dean
Swift’s man) they will leave nothing for the police nor volun-
teers to do. But, perhaps, they are sworn in as special
constables ? or as military men ? or as volunteers ? If not —if


they sire recognised by no law—then they are an illegal society,
and ought to be put down.
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ Your obedient Servant,
“ Maurice Ekynolds.
“ The Hon. Henry Parkes, Colonial Secretary.”
“ Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney,
“ 17th August, 1874.
“ Sir, —I am directed by the Colonial Secretary to acknow-
ledge the receipt of your letter of the 10th instant, calling
attention' to a printed copy, which accompanied it, of the Eules
and Eegulations of a society call the Loyal Orange Institution
of New South Wales.
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ Your most obedient servant,
(For the Under Secretary)
“ Wm, Goodman.
“ Maurice Eeynolds, Esq., Parramatta,”
“ Parramatta, 15th December, 1874.
“ Sir, —Your favour of the 17th of August last (acknowledg-
ing my letter to you of date the 10th of the same month) I had
the honour to receive on the afternoon of the date thereof. I
have now the honour to state, for your information, that in
consequence of St. John’s, Parramatta, having been made the
scene of certain extraordinary proceedings, on the 12th of July
last, at three o’clock in the afternoon of that day, I, as a resi-
dent of the town, addressed a letter to the Eight Eeverend
Dr. Barker (the Bishop of the Anglican sect here) touching
such proceedings; and as that functionary has thought it
advisable, for reasons best known to himself, not to reply to
that letter, I now consider it my duty to the Government and
to the public to forward you a copy of that letter and of the
acknowledgment thereof, accompanied with such observations
as may occur to me as pertinent to the whole of those most
extraordinary proceedings, as well as to the system that has
given rise thereto, so that the Government may, if they see


lit, make such inquiry and institute such proceedings thereon
as the nature of the case may require:—
“ Parramatta, 2dth July, 1874.
“My Lord, —I have the honour to inform you that the
Church of St. John, belonging to the English sect here, was
made the scene of most unprecedented proceedings on the 12th
instant. At the hour of three o’clock in the afternoon the
doors were thrown open ostensibly for the purpose of carrying
out certain religious rites under the guise of what is termed
‘ Church Parade,’ but in reality to celebrate the ‘ Bloody Battle
of the Boyne’—the anniversary of which occurs on the 12th of
July. Great numbers of people assembled to witness the
spectacle. Large bodies of men, women, and children congre-
gated not only inside the church but in the various streets that
surround it. Knots of able-bodied men in corners and nooks
and by-places watched and awaited the issue, and were no
douht well prepared and armed for any event. The service
was selected, it is reported in the Cumberland Mercury, by
your direction. To do greater honour to the day, and give
greater eclat to the proceedings, the volunteers of the town
were called out to take part, and, headed by fife and drum,
marched to and from the church to music. It has also trans-
pired that Henry Byrnes, the Captain of the Parramatta
Volunteer Rifles, the Rev. Mr. Gunther, and the ‘ ordinary,’
who, I understand, is yourself, had occupied yourselves for five
weeks previously in organizing the necessary arrangements for
carrying out the proceedings to the greatest effect, —the Rev.
Mr. Macarthur having declined, either by himself or his cadets,
to take part in proceedings of so questionable a character.
“ Now, as such exhibitions on the anniversary above alluded
to have, in other parts of Her Maj esty’s dominions, had the
effect of exciting the passions and bloodshed and mas-
sacre and destruction of property, can the object aimed at now
be the introduction of a like state of things amongst the peace-
ably disposed people of this community ? It should not be
forgotten that carrying out proceedings whereby a breach of
the peace may be occasioned is an offence punishable by statute.
That a disturbance of the peace or riot did not take place is
owing to the forbearance of a people whose opinions and feelings
such proceedings were calculated, if not intended, to outrage.


“ Hoping that the report, to the effect that the above pro-
ceedings were ‘directed by you and carried out with your
knowledge and consent,’ is unfounded,
“ I have the honour to be, my Lord,
“ Your obedient servant,
“ Maurice Reynolds.
“ Bishop Barker, Sydney.”
“ Sydney Diocesan Registry, Phillip-st.,
“ Sydney, 27th July, 1874.
« gi r> —X am directed by his Lordship the Bishop of Sydney
to acknowledge his Lordship’s receipt of your letter of 20th
instant, and to state it would have been acknowledged at an
earlier date had not his Lordship been absent from Sydney.
“ I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
“ Wm. Norton, Secretary.”
“ This much, and no more, has his Lordship vouchsafed. But
the acts and doings of men of his Lordship’s high standing are
entitled to and indeed challenge no small share of public atten-
tion ; and his Lordship might as well attempt to muffle thunder
as to expect by this (his silence) to smother the significance”of
that celebration, or stifle inquiry.
“The above church was never thrown open before the 12th
of July last at three o’clock in the afternoon for public
worship. The volunteers of Parramatta were never “ church
paraded” before the I2th of July last. Coupling the above
two facts with the fact that there exists in our very midst a
society of men who have combined together for the express
purpose (amongst other questionable things) of celebrating the
" Glorious memory of the 12th of July” (which they never
fail to do in a noisy turbulent way, and in a manner highly cal-
culated to provoke animosity between Her Majesty’s subjects
of different religious persuasions, and to the general apprehen-
sion and disgust of the community), can the public be asked
or expected to believe that the above-mentioned celebration
had no political significance? What are the facts? The
getting up of this celebration was, it appears, contrary to the
Rubrics. The people belonging to the Anglican sect can, it
would seem, only pray by Act of Parliament; and as there


was no special service in the “ Book of Common Prayer,” or
in any special Act of Parliament, for celebrating the “ Glorious
memory of the 12th of July” in the way specially required,
the “ Ordinary” cast about him, five weeks previous to the
12th of July, to see how this difficulty could be overcome, and,
in the short space of five weeks, he nobly succeeded. The
variation of time (three o’clock in the afternoon) and other
circumstances necessitated the compilation of a libretto of the
whole performance. The preparation of this cahier was under-
taken by the “ Ordinary” himself, and the little book when
printed (whether at the volunteers’ expense I know not) was,
on the “ Glorious memory of the 12th of July,” at 3 p.m.,
distributed amongst the volunteers that had marched in pro-
cession to music, as well as to the crowds, gratis. The
Ordinary, in this Libretto , called upon the multitudes,, there
assembled on the 12th of July last, to avert the “ woes” and
prepare to meet the “ dangers” that threatened them. What
woes ? What dangers did his Lordship refer to ? Did they
(it would be well, perhaps curious, to know from his Lordship)
proceed from the spirit ?' or from the flesh ? and are the bayo-
nets of volunteers the only specifics his Lordship can find for
them? You, Sir, will,. I think, agree with me that the public
are not uninterested in these inquiries. It is another instance
of the Bible and the Bayonet in conjunction, “ United they
Stand !” “ Separated they Fall!” The whole affair exhibited
that sad mixture of religion and ostentation too commonly
perceptible in all the doings of “ Anglican Utilitarianism.”
Therefore do those proceedings, held on the 12th of July last,
in St. John’s Parramatta, challenge public attention. For,
although a church service, it was decidedly to be classified
under the genus politique —partaking more of that_ character
than of any devotional peculiarities. Another significant fact
in connection with the proceedings of the “prayer-day,” held
on the 12th of July, is, that the gentleman reported to be the
Grand Secretary of the Orange Lodges here is also a Sergeant
in the Parramatta Company of Volunteers.. Of course it is not
for me to say what communications (if any) took place between
this “ Grand Secretary” and the Captain of the Parramatta
Company, or between him and the heads of the other grand
centres of Orangemen in Sydney. Perhaps he formed a sort of


“connecting link.” Be that as it may the two ringleaders of
those Orange centres—one a blacksmith the other a painter—
(if report speak true) were, on and before the 12th of July last,
the “ Glorious memory, &c.,” busying themselves running up
and down the length and breadth of the colony, deluding the
credulous and unwary; and doubtless in their wanderings
Parramatta was not left out. Now it may well be asked is their
obj ect (in running about the country in this manner) peace ?
Is their motive good-will among men ? Is their purpose good-
fellowship. brotherly love, and truth ? No! all is centred jfl
self. Without a “ cry” no impression could be made upon the
illiterate and vulgar ; without a “cry” few (if any) would join
them. Hence the old cries of “ Church and State,” of “ Royalty
and Loyalty” (although well understood by the initiated to
mean nothing), are quite sufficint for the vulgar and unwary.
For were royalty and loyalty unpopular or unprofitable to-mor-
row, the men who put forth those cries would be the first to
turn their backs on both. They also know full well that
“ religion rules the roast.” Hence have they essayed to block
up the avenues to place, patronage, position, and trust, and in
this they have of late but too well succeeded. The motto of
the French Club of Witlings, with slight alteration they adopt
—“ Nul n'aura de Vargent que nous et nos amis.”
Sir, these are no ghost stories, but substantial facts occurring
in our very midst. Now having the power, if you have the
will, the country will soon be rid of those factions.
A glance at the rules put forth by those Orangemen (which
rules I forwarded to you on the I Oth of August last) will be
sufficient to show that the object of those men is to try to fill
the minds of the illiterate and vulgar with false rumours of
fictitious dangers, by means of which they may keep up constant
alarms in the community. Whether anything is done in Orange
lodges in contravention of the Oth Victoria, No. 9, I leave for
the investigation of the Government, should they ever think it
any part of their duty to institute the necessary proceedings to
inform themselves thereon. But the interests of society not
only warrants but makes it imperative on the Government to
call upon Orangemen to negative the fact and satisfy the
Government that no oath, or other obligation in the nature of
an oath, is administered or received, or taken individually or col-
t 'V I j


lectively, whereby they bind themselves to secresy and promise
subjection to the authority and obedience to the orders of the ring-
leaders of the head centres of Orangemen in New South Wales.
By Section 1 of the Rules and Regulations of those Orange-
men, printed in 1872 by Samuel E, Lees, Metropolitan Printing
Office, 174 Pitt-street, Sydney, under the authority of S. S.
Goold, G.M., John Davies, D.G.M., and W. H. Davies, G. Sec.,
Orangemen have put themselves forward and have united and
bound themselves to defend the Protestant religion. Now it is
only reasonable to ask those head members of Orange centres
what is Protestantism according to their definition? Now
those very Orangemen, in their candid moments, will tell you
“ that Protestantism, as it at present exists, starts at Popery
—has its half-way-house in Unitarianism —and loses itself in
the multitudinous sects of infidelity.” And this is the precious
piece of religious indiarubber those Orangemen have combined
together to uphold to the death ! But in reality they profess
to uphold it because it is the “ pass-word and countersign” to
place, position,, and emolument. In the bogs of Ireland (out
of which Orange factions are said to have first sprung) Orange-
men also associate crime with religion, and slaughter in the
name of God. And even in this far-off country we have men
who, in the name of Orangeism, desecrate the holy orders they
so unworthily hold. But in this country few are found in the
ranks of Orangemen, or in Orange lodges, save the designing,
the deluded, the illiterate, the vulgar, and the vicious. Protes-
tants of respectability—Protestants of education —Protestants
of intelligence and position in the community if they do not hold
these factions in the utmost abhorrence take no part in the
dirty work. “ You cannot touch pitch &c.” ' And that those
factions were not (I speak poetically) strangled in their very
birth • that the Government should have looked over them, or
rather overlooked them, so long is unaccountable.
It may not be out of place here again to call- your attention
to the printed copy of Rules and Regulations of Orangemen in
this colony which I forwarded to you on the 10th of August
last, particularly to Rule 3, which says, “ That no candidate is
qualified to be made an Orangeman who is married to a
Papist,” And to Rule 4of Section 4 which says, “ That any
Orangeman dishonouring the Orange Institution by marrying a


Papist shall be expelled.” And to Rule 45 of Section 6, which
says, “ That it is reqiiisite that before a candidate can ,be made
an Orangeman, his proposer and seconder shall certify that the
candidate has never been married to a Papist .” So long as such
doctrines were confined to the illiterate and the vulgar they
might perhaps be allowed to have passed without much notice.
But when educated men—when gentlemen holding the dignified
position of “ Church of England Parsons” —uphold and put
forth such doctrines it is surely time for the Government to
interfere. One of those revd. parsons is reported to have
displayed great zeal some time back as an Orangeman at an
Orange procession, at Penant Hills, on a Sunday.
Now, although he forms one of the very few exceptions to
the illiterate and vulgar character of Orangemen, with what
face (I was going to say with what grace) can that revd. gen-
tleman put forth such doctrines ? Can that revd. gentleman
say how far a Papist would be honoured by marrying his
daughter or the daughter of any other Orangeman in this
colony? “Ne sutor ultra crepidem and one of those Orange
parsons, unmindful of the admonition of Horace, has gone
beyond the “ last,” or rather in the way of the “ last,” and (as
the “ cobbler’s last,” made a “ lasting” impression) will recol-
lect the “ last” to the last day he draws breath. Such men
have only to be exposed to be scouted.
To the morale of the question of the celebration on the 12th
of July already referred to, I do not intend to invite your atten-
tion at present. The desecration of the Sabbath—the profana-
tion of a Church—l pass, “My house is called a house of
prayer ; but you have made it a den of thieves.” But, Sir, in
its political aspect this question exhibits the commencement of
a fearful state of things in this country—namely, the introduc-
tion of a system calculated to produce, in this colony, all the
disturbances, riots, bloodshed, massacre, and destruction of
property, and all the other enormities to which like societies
give rise in the mother-country. For if one church can be
opened by the special license of the Ordinary for a special
service with impunity, “ on the glorious memory of the 12th of
July,” why not all the churches in the colony be opened on
that day for the like purpose ? And if one company of the
Volunteer Force can be marched through the park and streets


of the town to the tune of fife and drum on a Sunday with
impunity, on the “ Glorious memory of the 12th of July,” why
not all the companies forming the force—artillery and all—be
called out and marched in procession for the like purpose?
Why not even “ man the yards ?” And why not, instead of
the Kentish Fire of Orangemen, have a regular salute from
the batteries on the 12th of July ? With Orangemen, no
doubt, these trifles are only a matter of time. They have got
the “ thin end of the wedge in” at Parramatta, and who will
dare stop its progress ? Aye, until even the reins of Govern-
ment necessarily fall into their Orange hands.
Now, is this otherwise peaceable and happy land to be
allowed to be infested by the mephitic feuds engendered by
those Orange factions ? And will the Government quietly look
on, though forewarned that these men, in carrying out their
selfish designs, would obliterate every trace of j,nuiiiid—esteem
and good-will, and change the paths of peace into strife, bitter-
ness, andanarchy ? The peace of society requires that there
should be a good understanding among all sections of Her
Majesty’s subjects in this colony. “ I say it not in anger but in
sorrow”—there can be no community of feeling with such men.
Bishop Quinn’s conduct at Brisbane can only be likened to the
old woman who ran out, threw her arms round her husband
while his antagonist the more easily blackened his eyes and
pummelled him. “ When a snake, in the Island of Malta,
entwined itself round the arm of Paul, with intent to sting the
teacher of the Gentiles, he quietly shook the reptile from his
wrist, and was not to blame if the reptile fell into the fire.”
Have those Orange secret societies been called into existence
by the Government ? Have they been or are they authorised
by the Government ? Does the Government patronise them ?
Does the Government countenance them ? Will the Govern-
ment tolerate them ? Sir, in the answers to those question the
public peace is deeply involved. It is not impossible that those
evils may be removed by the next general election, if not
sooner. And when the day arrives—when under proper influ-
ences the political atmosphere of this beautiful country shall no
longer be polluted by the pestilential presence of those Orange
factions—every lover of peace will hail the aurora of that day
and rejoice.


Should the Government deem it necessary or advisable to
institute inquiry as to the facts and circumstances surrounding
the afternoon service performed in the church of St. John, Par-
ramatta, on the 12th of July last, as well as to the number and
position of the various individuals to whose exertions and fore-
thought the town was indebted for such an exhibition, the
following matters may perhaps (amongst others) become the
questions to be determined.
First. Has the Volunteer Force been called into existence
for the benefit and protection of all? and is the Force main-
tained at the general expense of the public ?
Secondly. May the Force, or any part of it, be lawfully used
for sectarian or party political purposes?
Thirdly. Is calling out a volunteer company on the 12th of
July, “ the Glorious memory of the Battle of the Boyne,” at
three o’clock in. the afternoon, making use of the company for
sectarian and party political purposes ?
Fourthly. Do the circumstances under which the Parramatta
Company was ordered out on the 12th of July last, at three
o’clock in the afternoon, to attend a special church service at
one particular church only, manifest a sectarian and party
political purpose ?
Fifthly. Was the Parramatta Company ordered out on that
occasion in a manner directly opposed to the express orders of
the Commandant of the Volunteer Force?
[The Commandant’s written instruction to Captain Byrnes,
dated 25th June, 1874, was as follows: —“It would, however,
be better if Captain Byrnes, in calling another Church Parade,
would signify that the members could attend their various
places of worship.”—J. R.]
Sixthly. Did Captain Byrnes order a general parade of the
whole company, consisting of Papists, Presbyterians, Wes-
leyans, Church of England and Independents, on the
12th of July last, and did he particularly request, by public
advertisement, every member to attend ? And instead of
calling the parade at the usual time—eleven o’clock in the
morning—did Captain Byrnes call the parade on the 12th of
July last for three o’clock in the afternoon (when he knew
there was no church open in Parramatta for public worship) so
that the parade might lack nothing of its sectarian and political


significance by being confined to St. John’s Cburcb only ? Does
not the company consist of at least five religious sects ?
Seventhly. Is Captain Byrnes chargeable with using the
volunteers for sectarian and party political purposes in not
calling the parade for eleven o’clock on the Sabbath morning
when all the churches of all denominations are open for public
worship, instead of three o’clock in the afternoon ?
Eighthly. Is the statement put forth by the Rev. Mr.
Gunther, the parson of St. John’s, that the volunteers could
not be allowed to attend eleven o’clock service in St. John’s,
Parramatta, for want of “ room,” founded on fact ?
The following is an approximate division of the company :
There are about seventy-five members in the company. Sup-
posing all in good health and that they all attended church
parade on the 12th of July last, the following would be a close
approximation as to how they would branch off to the various
churches supposing the parade had been called at the proper
hour—eleven o’clock in the morning: Catholics, about fifteen ;
Wesleyans, fifteen ; Church of Scotland, about fifteen ; Inde-
pendents, about fifteen ; Church of England, fifteen. But as
there are two Churches of England—St. John’s Church and
All Saints’ Church, in Parramatta, the fifteen volunteers left
to the English Church might be divided between St, John’s
Church and All Saints’ Church; that would give seven and a
half volunteers to St. John’s Church and seven and a half
volunteers to All Saints’ Church, making between them fifteen.
So that from the above rough calculation, supposing on a
general church parade of the company called for eleven o’clock
in the morning, and supposing all the members to be in good
health, and attend, St. John’s Church, would at the most only
have to find room for seven and a half volunteers j and as these
seven and a half volunteers may be supposed to be, and, no doubt,
are regular attendants at St. John’s, and pewholders in that
Church, the statement of a crowded church dwindles to
nothing.
Ninthly. Did Captain Byrnes take any and what steps to
have a special service in St. John’s Church, on the # 12th of
July last ?
Tenthly. In conjunction with whom did Captain Byrnes take
such steps ?


Eleventhly. How long previously to the 12th of July last
did those gentlemen begin to consider the matter, and to set
about making such preparations for the celebration of the 12th
of July last ?
Twelfthly. Did Captain Byrnes take any and what steps to
to have a church service at three o’clock in the afternoon on
the 12th of July, for the various members of other denomina-
tions composing the company?
Thirteenthly. If not, why not? As he particularly requested
all the members of the company to attend.
Fourteenthly. Has Captain Byrnes abused his commission
by thus holding exclusive communication with the heads of one
particular sect respecting the contemplated church service on
the 12th of July ?
Fifteenthly. Has Captain Byrnes abused his commission by
not calling the parade for 11 o’clock in the forenoon of the 12th
July, when all the churches of the various denominations are
open for public worship, when the members could file off to their
respective places of worship as mentioned in question 8 ?
Sixteenthly. When Captain Byrnes changed the parade from
the usual time—eleven o’clock in the morning, to three o’clock
in the afternoon of the 12th of July last—was it or was it not
his duty to have put himself in communication with the clergy-
men of the members of the other denominations respecting
such three o’clock service, more especially as he had called a
general muster of all the company?
Seventeen thly. Is Captain Baynes chargeable with a wilful
omission of duty, arising out of sectarian prejudices, for not
having made arrangements with the various other sects for
public worship on the 12th of July last?
Eighteenthly. As Captain Byrnes had ordered a general
muster, and had particularly requested all the members of the
company to attend on the 12th of July, at three o’clock in the
afternoon, and had only arranged for service in one church, was
it not a gratuitous insult to, and a trifling with, the religious
opinions and feelings of the members of the various other
denominations ?
Nineteen thly. Did Captain Byrnes put himself in communi-
cation with Dr. Barker, or the Incumbent of St. John’s, Parra-
matta, several weeks previous to the 12th of July last ?


Twentieth. Does the fact of his having done so negative the
allegation that the parade and prayer-day, held on the 12th of
July, were so held on that day by accident?
Twenty-first, Does the fact that Dr, Barker compiled and
printed a little “ book of the services of the prayer-day,” held
on the 12th of July last, distributed amongst the crowds
and the volunteers negative the allegation that the “ parade”
and “prayer-day,” held on the 12th of July, were so held by
mere accident?
Twenty-second. In holding communication with the heads of
the Anglican Church only, and not with the clergy of the other
denominations, has Captain Byrnes shewn a spirit and dispo-
sition to endeavour to establish a practice of carrying out
church parade of the Parramatta Company upon sectarian and
and party political principles ?
Twenty-third. Has Captain Byrnes irregularly and impro-
perly acted in allowing the company to assemble for church
parade at any but the ordinary hour of public worship on Sun-
day—namely, eleven o’clock in the forenoon, at which hour all
the churches of all the denominations are open on a Sunday,
when the various sects of the company could file off, as men-
tioned in question 8 ?
Twenty-fourth, Was the correspondence of Mr. Reynolds
publicly read out in the Parramatta Park by Captain Byrnes ?
Twenty-fifth. If so, under what circumstances and for what
purpose ?
Twenty-sixth. Had Captain Byrnes any just cause for keep-
ing back, for eighteen days, the Commandant’s memo, to Mr.
Reynolds from the 25th of June, 1874, to the 13th of July,
1874, the day after the glorious 12th of July? Also for keep-
ing back Mr. Reynolds’ letter, of date 19th November, 1874,
forwarded through Captain Byrnes to the Commandant, and
which letter the Commandant informed Mr. Reynolds he never
received from Captain Byrnes ?
It is to be hoped, Sir, that you will, in the exercise of your
public duty, see fit to cause such an inquiry to be made into
the manner, time, and place that have been hitherto adopted
in Parramatta for, and the individuals concerned in, organizing
and carrying out what is popularly and ostensibly called “ church
parade,” in Parramatta, that will for the future frustrate all


insidious attempts to organize and perpetuate an intolerant,
sectarian, and party political system of carrying out, among the
volunteers, church parade in this colony.
It may not be inopportune on the present occasion to call
your attention also to the promises, by which you secured a
large portion of the votes and interest of the constituents at
the last election, to the effect “ that you ivould take immediate
and effective measures to put down Orangeism and the societies
and meetings of Orangemen , whether secret or otherwise, in this
colony.” That constituency even now, at the eleventh hour,
calls upon you to carry out these your professions and redeem
these your promises so made. Should a mistaken notion of policy
cause you, at this juncture, to neglect to perform the above
public acts of duty—the necessity whereof has already been
acknowledged by you—l shall again, at another time and place,
have the honour perhaps of calling your attention to the above
subject in a more particular and effectual manner. In the
mean time I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Maurice Reynolds.
The Hon. Henry Parkes, Colonial Secretary.


CORRESPONDENCE
To ACCOMPANY LETTER FORWARDED TO THE COLONIAL, SEC-
RETARY on the 15th December, 1874.
—♦ —
“ Parramatta, 4th June 1874.
“ Sir, —The Parramatta Company of Volunteer Rifles fell in
for drill in the Parramatta Park at seven p.m. on Wednesdey,
the 3rd of June instant. Before the company was dismissed,
Captain Byrnes commanded the company to attend a parade on
the Sunday morning following, for the purpose of marching to
St. John’s Church, Parramatta, in order to attend religious
service in that church ; and he intimated that the Rev. Mr.
Macarthur would officiate. Now I maintain (as a lawyer) that
there is no law in this oolony authorizing Captain Byrnes to
give this command to the company; and I consider such a
command, therefore, a gratuitous insult to myself as well as to
all the other members of the company whose opinions on
religious worship do not run in the same groove as Captain
Byrnes’.
“ I therefore respectfully invite your attention to the fact
above complained of, and request that you will take such early
measures, as to you may seem meet, to have such order, as
above complained of, countermanded as being not only contrary
to religious equality and religious toleration, but subversive of
peace and good order.
“ No such order as that complained of was given at the
encampment. There every man’s religious opinions were
respected, as far as military order and discipline could extend;
and I am quite sure had Captain Byrnes been at the encamp-
ment he would not have given any such order. Had he
attended the camp, he would there have seen that such orders
are given with perfect equality to all religious sects of the force
alike.


“ j need scarcely remark that the Volunteer Force costs a
large sum annually, which the public generally are taxed to
pay. This force was called into existence for the benefit and
protection of all sections of Her Majesty’s subjects in this
colony. It is maintained at the annual cost to the general
public of upwards of twenty thousand pounds. This is a very
large sum, which the casting vote of any one member in the
House may cause to be refused.
“ No section of the community, therefore, should have any
cause to look with suspicion upon the force. It should ever
be the pride and aim of every gallant volunteer to inspire and
maintain the confidence and good-will of the public at large,
and to cause such a feeling to exist as that all sections of the
community may feel sure that their privileges, rights, and
liberties are safe in his hands. I have always taken a lively
interest in the_ success of the Volunteer Force, and it would be
a matter of deep regret that any untoward circumstances should
cause it to be disbanded.
“ In bringing this matter before my Commanding Officer, I
am simply doing my duty to the force and the public generally.
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ Your obedient servant,
“ Maurice Reynolds,
tl Private Parramatta Company Volunteer Rifles.
“ John B. Richardson, Lieutenant-Colonel
11 Commanding Volunteer Force.”
“ Parramatta, June 6th, 1874.
“ Private Reynolds,
“ gir,—l am directed by the Commandant to call upon you
to explain what you mean by the expression contained in your
letter of the 4th instant, and addressed to the Commandant,
‘ That Captain Byrnes commanded the company to attend a
parade ,’ and further, to explain in what terms the company was
commanded to do so.
“ Yours, &c.,
“ Henry Byrnes.
“ Captain No. 2 Company Western Battery
“ Volunteer Rifles.”


“ Parramatta, 9th June, 1874.
Sir, —At half-past one o’clock p.m. yesterday the above
communication was received by post at my residence; and
although I feel surprised that at this stage a call should be
made upon me for an explanation, yet, in compliance with that
call, I have the honour to state that I am not only perfectly
prepared, but perfectly willing, to make further explanation of
my letter of the 4th instant ; but before forwarding this expla-
nation, may I be allowed to ask to be furnished with a copy of
any communication, observations, or explanations from Captain
Byrnes now in your possession relative to this subject; because
I respectfully submit that my letter of the 4th instant either
contained matter that necessitated the propriety of calling
upon Captain Byrnes for a reply or an explanation thereto, or
it did not. If the former, then lam entitled, as I respectfully
submit, to be put in possession of such explanation, communi-
cation, or observations so made to you. I have also respect-
fully to observe that, according to the present mode of carrying
on the investigation, it is tantamount to reversing the order of
things and making, Captain Byrnes the complainant instead of
me. However, on receipt of a reply to this letter, I shall
immediately forward my explanation.
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ Your obedient servant,
“ Maurice Reynolds,
“ Private No. 2 Company Western Battalion
“ Volunteer Rifles.
“ Lieutenant-Colonel Richardson, Comtfiandant
“ Volunteer Force.
“ P*S-] It is to be regretted that Captain Byrnes did not
see fit, in the first instance, to request me to call upon him
with the explanation now sought for, as I would have been
most happy to have done so, when, no doubt, everything would
have been arranged amicably and to the satisfaction of all par-
ties.—M. R.”
“ Parramatta, June 14, 1874.
“ Private Reynolds,
“ Sir, —I hereby communicate to you the Commandant’s
memo., forwarded to me on your letter of the 9th instant:—


“ Private Reynolds’ statement that Captain Byrnes com-
manded the company to attend a parade is not sufficient to
enable me to judge the case. I therefore require the-informa-
tion called for in my memo., 5/6/74.
“ i ours, &c.,
“ Henry Byrnes.
“ Captain No. 2 Company Western Battalion.”
“ Parramatta, 18th June, 1874.
« gi r I n compliance with your letter to me of the sth and
15th instants, I have the honour to state, in addition to the
matter contained in my letter to you of the 4th instant, that
before the company was dismissed on Wednesday night, the
3rd instant, Captain Byrnes called the company to attention.
He then stated there would be a parade and march to St.
John’s, with the King’s School, when the Rev. Mr. Macarthur
could attend.' He had written to the Rev. Mr. Macarthur on
the subject, and had received a note in reply from Mrs. Macar-
thur to the effect that the Rev. Mr. Macarthur was not at
home, and that she could not make any promise or engagement
for her husband. Captain Byrnes added that he would put
himself again in communication with the Rev. Mr, Macarthur.
“ The parade was postponed by advertisement as follows :
‘“Volunteer Rifles.— Church Parade is Postponed for the
present. </ < Henry Byrnes,
“ ‘ Captain No. 2 Company Western Battajion.’
“ I have thought it my duty to lay those matters before you
for your consideration, in order that any irregularity that might
appear to you might be timely prevented; so that in future
church parade, if called at all, might, he called without refer-
ence to any particular clergyman or church,
“ I have the honour to be, Sir, _ , 9 j j-
“ Your obedient servant,
i d “Maurice Reynolds,
“Private Ro. 2 Company Western, Battalion.
Lieutenant-Colonel Richardson, Commandant
“ Volunteer Force.”


“ Parramatta, July 10th, 1874.
“ Private Reynolds,
“ Sir, —The following is the Commandant’s memo, on your
letters of June the 4th and 18th : —‘ It appears to me that
Captain Byrnes merely ordered a church parade in the same
way as he would have ordered any other parade, and at which
the attendance of members was optional. Under these circum-
stances I cannot see that Private Reynolds has any substantial
complaint. It would, however, be better if Captain Byrnes, in
calling another church parade, would signify that members
could attend their various places of worship.—J.R. 25/6/74,’
“ Yours obediently,
“ Henry Byrnes, .
“ Captain No. 2 Company Western Battalion.”
“Parramatta, 15th July, 1874.
“ In the Matter of Church Parade,
“ Sir, —I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of
your memo, herein, of date 25th of June last, which was only
delivered at my residence, Parramatta, by post on Monday,
13th instant (eighteen days after you wrote it), and to thank
you as well for your courtesy to me as for the prompt attention
and consideration you have given the matter.
“ I was always impressed with the idea, even before I had
the honour to receive your memo., that the term ‘ Church
Parade,' in military parlance, meant a general parade of all,
and not a parade of any particular church or sect; for, in the
latter case, it descends from the noble idea of church parade to
the parade of a particular church or sect, and then it has a
tendency not only to lead to much confusion, but is in other
respects as contemptible as it is mischievous, and therefore
highly objectionable.
“ That your memo, should take eighteen days to come from
Sydney to Parramatta (a distance of fifteen miles, there being
two posts daily) argues great want of military promptness
somewhere.
“ I have now the honour to state, for your information, that
a church parade of the company was called by public advertise-


meat for Sunday last, 12th July, at the very unusual hour of
half-past two p.m. The following is the advertisement: —
“‘ Volunteer Rifles. — Church Parade on Sunday, 12th
instant. Assemble in the Park at 2-30 p.m. Full dress and
side-arms only. All members particularly requested to attend.
“ ‘ Henry Byrnes,
“‘Captain No. 2 Company Western Battalion.’”
Gathering from the above advertisement that a general
parade of the company was signified, at which, too, all the
members were particularly requested to attend , but seeing that
the hour of day chosen was a most unusual one—no place of
public worship being ever open at that hour in town—l for-
warded a communication to the Catholic clergyman of Parra-
matta, to ascertain what arrangements (if any) the officer
commanding had made for the Catholic members. The follow-
ing is a copy of my letter and the reply thereto :
“Parramatta, 11th July, 1874.
“ Revd. Sir, —I find a religious parade of the Parramatta
Company of Volunteer Rifles has been called, by public
advertisement in the Cumberland Mercury, for Sunday, the 12th
instant, at half-past two o’clock p.m. ; and, as I am not aware
of any place of public worship being open at that hour, I shall
feel obliged if you will let me know if the officer commanding
the company has made any and what arrangements with you
for the Catholic members of the company.
“ I am, dear Sir, yours truly,
“ Maurice Reynolds.
“ Very Revd. Dean Rigney.”
“St. Patrick’s Church, Parramatta, 11th July, 1874.
“ My Dear Sir, —In reply to your note, of this morning, I
beg to inform you that I have not received any intimation of
a religious parade of the Parramatta Company of Volunteer
Rifles for to-morrow, Sunday, July 12, and I have therefore made
no arrangements for the Catholic members of the company.
“ Yours very truly,
“John Rigney.
“ Maurice Reynolds, Esq., Parramatta.”


“ Under such circumstances I objected to attend the parade,
or even fall in; because if I fell in, I need not observe, I could
not fall out; and also because, although the parade was called
at a most unusual time of the day, and all members, too, par-
ticularly requested to attend, and although every care was
taken for weeks previously to make all necessary provisions for
the public worship of one sect in one particular place only, no
provision whatever was made for the members of the other
denominations of the company— ‘ Aberent in malam crucem .’
Albeit Captain Byrnes thought it necessary to put himself in
communication with the Rev. Mr. Gunther respecting the con-
templated parade for five weeks previously to its taking place;
and under the assumption of lack of room, forsooth, the parade
could not, it is alleged, take place at the usual hour— eleven
o'clock in the morning ; —as if a man took up more room in a
red coat than in a black one.
“At the onset, as you are aware, the Rev. Mr. Macarthur
was announced to take part. When that gentleman declined
to allow his cadets or himself to be mixed up in proceedings of
such a questionable character, Mr. Gunther was, he informs
me, unconsciously induced to comply. No blame, therefore,
whatever attaches, so far as I am at present aware, to the Rev.
Mr. Gunther. ‘The day chosen—l2th of July—was an acci-
dent.’ Perhaps so. Nevertheless such proceedings in all their
bearings, especially on a Sunday, have the appearance of being
tantamount to an attempt to introduce a system of celebrating
the 12th of July—offensive and obnoxious to a large portion of
Her Majesty’s subjects—and have also a tendency not only to
trifle and tamper with the religious opinions, but are also an
outrage upon the feelings and position of men who do not con-
sider it necessary or proper to attend religious gatherings under
such circumstances.
“ I have the honour, therefore, to request that you will cause
the necessary instructions to be given that, when clmrch parade
is called, provision shall be made for public worship as far as
practicable for the various sects forming the company ; and
that the Volunteer Force shall not, nor any part of it, be called
out and headed by the band for a special exhibition on the


12th July (and on a Sunday) to the too evident gratification of
the designing and the vicious.
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ Your obedient servant,
“ Maurice Reynolds,
« “ A member No. 2 Company Western Battalion.
“ Lieutenant-Colonel Richardson, Commandant
“ Volunteer Force.”
“ Private Reynolds, ~
« The following is a copy of the Commandant s memo, result-
ing from your letter of the 15th instant: _ .
“ ‘ Major Holborrow, —Is Captain Byrnes to inform Private
Reynolds that, having perused the Rev. Mr. Gunther’s note
and Captain Byrnes’ explanation, I am of opmipn that the day
selected was the most convenient and the day without reference
to its political significance. It would, however, be better, as 1
have before observed, that in calling Church Parades notifica-
tion should be made that members are at liberty to attend their
various places of worship.—J.R. Comdt. 21/7/74.
“ Henry Byrnes,
“ Captain No. 2 Company Western Battalion.
“Parramatta, July 23, 1874.”
“Parramatta, 19th November, 1874.
“ —Your memo, of 21st of July last, in reply to a com-
munication I had the honour to address to you, of date 15th of
July last, is so clear that it seemed difficult to evade it. How-
ever the contrary has been the case. The last paragraph of
that memo, is as follows :
“ ‘ It would, however, be better, as I have before observed,
that in calling Church Parade notification should be made that
members are at liberty to attend their various places of worship.
(Signed) ‘ “ J.R.—2l/7/74.’
“ In the face of those plain and simple instructions a church
parade has been called in the irregular manner already censured
by you, and in contravention of the instruction contained in
your memo, above in part recited —namely, foi 3 30 p.m. on
Sunday, 22nd instant, which is a time of day at which there


never is any church open in Parramatta for public worship ;
and consequently the parade called for 3‘30 on Sunday, 22nd
instant, might just as well have been called for twelve o’clock
at night, save and except for the special gratification of one
sect for whose glorification the parade is called.
“ However, in order to ascertain more distinctly if by any
chance the parade was called in accordance with your instruc-
tions, I addressed a letter to the Catholic clergyman at Parra-
matta, of which the following is a copy :
“ ‘ Parramatta, 14th November, 1874.
“ ‘ Very Rev, Dear Sir, —What is popularly styled a church
parade seems to have been called, by an advertisement which
appears in the Cumberland Mercury, of this morning, as follows :
“ ‘ Volunteer Rifles.— Church Parade Sunday, 22nd inst.
Assemble in the Park 3’30 p.m. Full dress, side arms, and
puggaries. Band to attend.
“ ‘ Henry Byrnes,
“ ‘ Captain No. 2 Company Western Battalion.’
“ ‘ Now, as there never is any church service in Parramatta
at the hour mentioned, I shall feel obliged if you will let me
know if any arrangement has been made with you for church
service in the Park, or elsewhere, for the Catholic members at
that hour.
“ ‘ I am, yours faithfully,
“‘ Maurice Reynolds.
“‘ Very Rev. Dean Rigney.’
“ To which I received the following reply :
“‘Parramatta, November 16th, 1874.
“ ‘ My Dear Sir, —In reply to your kind note I beg to inform
you that no arrangement has been made with me, or proposed
to me, for a religious service for the Catholic members of the
Volunteers on Sunday next, 22nd instant.
“ ‘ My dear Sir, yours truly,
“‘John Rigney.
“ ‘ Maurice Reynolds, Esq.’
“ Therefore the same irregularity already censured by you


has been perpetrated; for a parade of the whole company has
again been called for an improper tiipe, so that church service
is again designed for one sect only—which is in direct
opposition to the instructions contained in your memo, above
referred to. But the whole thing seems to be a burlesque on
religious parade and military church service, and bears the
impress of being carried out, at a certain time and place, with a
view to Orange ascendency, so as to assist the individuals com-
posing that body in their endeavours to monopolize secular
power and civil privileges. Besides it is an insult to common-
sense to call that a church parade, which is but the parade of a
mere sect, of yesterday, not forming one-third of the commu-
nity ; and which sect was never heard of till 1500 years after
Christ, and then called into existence, and upheld at the point
of the bayonet.
“ I have no wish to charge the Rev. Mr. Gunther with a
wilful perversion of facts, however contrary the facts he stated to
you may be to the truth. In his note to you of July last, referred
to by you in your memo., I have no doubt his statements were
the same as he made to me at his personal explanation to me.
First—that he did not know it was the 12th of July ; and
secondly—that 3*30 p.m. was pitched upon because there was
no room at St. John’s Church, Parramatta, for the volunteers
in the event of their attending the morning or evening service
at that churh. But what are the facts ? The company consists
of about seventy-five members. Supposing all in good health,
and that they all attended church parade, the following would
be a close approximation as to how they would file off to the
various churches, supposing the parade had been called at the
proper hour—eleven o’clock a.m.: —
“ Catholic members, about ... 15
Wesleyan „ „ ••• 15
Church of Scotland ~ ~ ••• 15
Church of England „ „ ••• 15
Independents „ „ ••• 15
Thus making in all 75
u But as there are two Churches of England in Parramatta
—n.amely, St. John’s and All Saints’, the fifteen volun-
teers belonging to the English Chui'ch would be divided


between St. John’s Church and All Saints’ Church; that
would give seven and affialf volunteers to St. John’s Church
and seven and a-half volunteers to All Saints’ Church ; so that,
at the most, St. John’s Church would only have to find room
for seven and a-half volunteers; and as those seven and a-haif
volunteers may be supposed to be respectable members of
society, and, no doubt, are therefore regular attendants at St.
John’s, and pew-holders in that church, the argument of the
rev. gentleman becomes worse than useless. It is pitiable
indeed, to see a gentleman in his position driven to such an
extremity for an excuse.
“ Sir, I say it with regret that those church parades, if con-
tinued to be carried out in the irregular and objectionable way,
and in the spirit and manner hitherto adopted, in Parramatta,
will, at no distant day, be the fruitful means of occasioning
disturbance of the public peace and breeding disunion and dis-
content, not only among the community generally, but among
the volunteers themselves.
“‘A stitch in time saves nine’—and ‘prevention is better
than cure;’ and, therefore, it becomes the duty of every one
to counteract and avert, as much as in him lies, all insidious
attempts to use the Volunteers for sectarian or party political
purposes.
“ That such a calamity may be averted, and hoping that you
may see fit to take immediate steps to prevent such contingen-
cies, and have church parades called at a proper and regular
time—when the churches of the various sects are open for
public worship, v
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ Your obedient servant,
“ Maurice Reynolds,
“ Lieutenant-Colonel Richardson, Commandant
“ Volunteer Force.”
“ Parramatta, 28th November, 1874.
“ Sir, —On the 26th instant I had the honour to address a
letter to you through the officer commanding the Parramatta
Company (and I also, at the same time, forwarded a copy of
the same letter to you by post), as follows :


“‘Parramatta, 26th November, 1874.
“ ‘ Sir, —As a private individual, and one of the community
interested in its peace and happiness, I forwarded to you a
communication by post, on Thursday, the 19th instant, relative
to your memo, on church parade in Parramatta.
“‘ I have now the honour to invite your attention to that
communication.
“ ‘ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ ‘ Your obedient servant,
“ ‘ Maurice Reynolds.
“ ‘ Lieutenant-Colonel Richardson, Commandant
“ ‘ Volunteer Force,’
“ And on the following day, 27th instant, I was surprised to
find the copy of that letter, of 26th instant sent you by post,
returned by you by post to me with the following notification
endorsed thereon:—
“ ‘ The Commandant declines receiving any letters which do
not come through the proper official channel.
“ ‘By command, “ ‘ H. B. C.P.B.
“ ‘ Maurice Reynolds, Esq.,
“ ‘ Parramatta, 27/11/74.’
“ Now the very thing mentioned and required in the above
endorsement is precisely what I did. I sent a counterpart
(that is the original) of that letter, of 26th instant, to Captain
Byrnes’ addressed to you, just in the same way as all my other
letters have hitherto been forwarded to you. I had no motive
for introducing anything peculiar in the mode of sending that
letter of date 26th instant.
“ The subject matter referred to in that letter, apart from
the public, is no private or personal concern of mine. The
subject on which I wrote is a public one, and you and the pub-
lic, and not I, are interested in its proper settlement,
“It is, therefore, but natural to suppose that instead of
shewing a penchant to check inquiry, any assistance that would
have a tendency to check irregularities in the use or employ-
ment of the Volunteer Force, or any part thereof, would be
gladly and thankfully received.


“ Hoping I may be allowed tbe privilege of calling your
attention to my letter to you, of date 19th instant, and which
I forwarded to you through Captain Byrnes, who, I suppose, is
the ‘proper official channel,’
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ Your obedient servant,
“ Maurice Reynolds.
“ Lieutenant-Colonel Richardson, Commandant
“ Volunteer Force.”
The above letter, of the 28th of November last, was left at
Captain Byrnes’ residence, Parramatta, on the Ist December,
1874, with the following memorandum endorsed thereon :
“ The officer commanding the Parramatta Company is re-
quested to forward this letter to the Commandant of the
Volunteer Force, a copy whereof is also forwarded to that
gentleman by post.—M.R.”
On the 2nd December, 1874, I received the above letter of
28th of November last, returned by post with the following
endorsement thereon:
“ This letter returned that it may be transmitted through
the prescribed channel, vide 114 p. 38 Vol. Regulations. The
letter of 19th of November last, referred to herein, has not as
yet been received in this office from the officer commanding the
Parramatta Company.
11 By command,
“ W.B. N.C. Pro. B.
“ Maurice Reynolds, Esq., Parramatta.”


The following is a copy of Correspondence that has 1
TAKEN PLACE AS TO THE NON-ELIGIBILITY OF OrANGE-
MEN TO HOLD ANY OFFICE AS TEACHER OR OTHERWISE
UNDER THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS' Act, OR UNDER THE COUN-
CIL of Education :
“ Parramatta, 10th August, 1874.
“ Gentlemen, —I have the honour to forward you a printed
copy of Rules and Regulations of a society of men in this
colony who call themselves Orangemen, and to request your
attention thereto—especially to Rule 3, which says ‘ that no
candidate is qualified to be made an Orangeman who is married
to a Papist;’ and to Rule 4 of Section 4, which says ‘ that any
Orangeman dishonouring the Orange Institution by marrying
a Papist shall be expelledand to Rule 45 of Section 6, which
says ‘ that it is requisite that before a candidate can be made
an Orangeman, his proposer and seconder shall certify that the
candidate has never been married to a Papist.’
“ Now, gentlemen, should you be of opinion that men holding
such insulting, such rabid opinions, and imbued with and pub-
licly exhibiting such inveterate hatred and malice towards
Catholics (who form a large portion of Her Majesty’s subjects
in this colony), are unfit and improper persons to be intrusted
with the education of ‘ the children of Catholics; and if you
should be further of opinion that such Orangemen are unfit and
improper persons to be appointed teachers and instructors in
the Public Schools of the colony (composed, as those Public
Schools are of children belonging to all classes and sections of
the community), it is to be hoped that you will, in the name of
justice and right, see that no Orangeman should hold any
position whatever as teacher, instructor, or examiner under the
Public Schools Act, or under the Council of Education.
“ I have the honour to be,
“ Gentlemen,
“ Your obedient servant,
“ Maurice Reynolds.
“ The President and Members of the Council
of Education in Council Assembled.”


“ Council of Education Office, Sydney,
“22nd August, 1874.
“ Sir, —I am directed by the Council of Education to ac-
knowledge the receipt of your letter, dated the 10th instant,
forwarding a printed copy of certain rules and regulations, and
inquiring as to the propriety of Orangemen holding office under
the Council.
“ In reply I am directed to inform you that if you make any
specific complaint against an individual teacher, or point out
any case in which injurious consequences have followed from
the act of such teacher, the Council will duly investigate the
matter.
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ Your obedient servant,
“ W. Wilkins, Secretary.
“ Mr. Maurice Reynolds, Parramatta.”
“ Parramatta, 31st August, 1874.
“ Gentlemen, —I beg respectfully to acknowledge the receipt
of you letter of the 22nd instant in reply to mine of the 10th
instant.
“ I have now the honour to thank you for the prompt atten-
tion you have given the subj ect.
“ I was always of opinion, even before I had the honour to
receive your letter, that Orangemen, by subscribing to such
Rules and Regulations, as forwarded to you in my former letter,
disqualified themselves, ipso facto , from holding, or from being
eligible to hold, any position under the Public Schools Act.
The Council of Education is placed, by Act of Parliament in
loco parentis. In justice to the children of Papists, therefore,
it behooves the Council to take care that no man imbued with
the intolerance Orangemen entertain towards their Catholic
neighbours (as displayed by the Rules and Regulations I had
the honour to forward you) should be placed as teachers, in
Public Schools, over the children of Papists. Indeed if men,
holding such opinions as those set out in the Rules and Regu-
lations of Orangemen, were allowed to fill the office of teacher
in Public Schools, it would be contrary to nature to expect any
mother to send her children to receive primary training under
influences so obviously hostile to her social position and insult-


ing to her person. And no mother should be placed in a
position that would compel her to do so.
“ Society could not exist on such terms.
“ It was not, therefore, because of any isolated case, or any
mere matter of personal complaint, that I addressed to you
my letter of date the 10th instant; but because the question,
as to the eligibility of Orangemen as teachers in Public Schools,
involves the very existence of the present Public School system
in this colony.
“ If, to the homes of a hundred families, the Legislature
deputed the Council of Education to forward a hundred cases
of young and tender plants, in some of which cases it might
not be imposs'ible that one or more death-adders were located,
and I called the attention of the Council to the probable exist-
ence of the fact, I should have done my duty to you, to society,
and to God. And if it should happen that afterwards, without
due investigation, poisonous reptiles were forwarded into the
bosom of private families, there to be cherished by the unsus-
pecting as friends, the fault would not be mine.
“ It may be hard to deprive a teacher in a Public School of
his appointment as such, and thereby subject him, perhaps, to
some temporary inconvenience ; but it is harder still to tax a
a mother to feed and pay such Orangeman whose aim is to
degrade her social position, insult her person, and pollute the
minds if not the .bodies of her children.
“that you, the Council of Education, deem it not incon-
sistent with your imperative duty to rid the Schools, under the
Public Schools Act, from the presence and interference of
Orangemen is, for the sake of the permanency of that noble
system of Education, to be hoped for and hailed by every well-
wisher of the Public Schools Act.
“ I have the honour to be,
“ Gentlemen,
“ Your obedient servant,
“ Maurice Reynolds.
“ The President and Members of
the Council of Education in
Council Assembled.”


“ Council of Education Office, Sydney,
“11th September, 1874.
“ Sir, —In reply to your letter, dated 31st August, ultimo,
as to the eligibility of Orangemen to act as teachers of Public
Schools, I am directed by the Council of Education to acquaint
you that the representations made therein will not be lost sight
of by the Council. “ Your obedient servant,
“ W. Wilkins, Secretary.
“ Mr. Maurice Reynolds, Parramatta.”
“Parramatta, 19th September, 1874.
“ Gentlemen, —I have to thank you for yours, of date the
11th instant, in reply to mine of the 31st of August last.
“ I have now the honour to inform you that I have by this
day’s post forwarded to you a copy of the Cumberland Mercury ,
in which there is an Orange demonstration advertised to take
place at St. Paul’s Public School, Pennant Hills, on Tuesday,
22nd September, 1874. Hoping you will see the necessity of
preventing the Schools under the Public Schools Act from
being turned into Orange lodges,
“ I am, Gentlemen,
“ Your obedient servant,
“ Maurice Reynolds.
“ The President and Members of the Council
of Education in Council assembled.”
“ Council of Education Office, Sydney,
“ 29th September, 1874,
“ Sir, —I am directed by the Council of Education to ac-
knowledge the receipt of your letter, of the 19th September,
forwarding a copy of the Cumberland Mercury , containing an
advertisement announcing that a public tea meeting would be
held in the certified denominational Church of England School,
Pennant Hills, on Tuesday, 22nd instant, to celebrate the
anniversary of the Loyal Orange Lodge, No. 40.
“ I am further directed to state that the matter referred to
in your communication has been brought under the notice of
the Local Board, “ Your most obedient servant,
“ E. Johnson, for Secretary,
“ Mr. Maurice Reynolds, Parramatta.”


Bf6L(o
F WT
M
Sg'aiws;
CITY PRINTING OFFICE,
105 York street.
O/r
■? JANI993 i"
3 1508 00618530 5


I
•:* . •- -
*
-4T»


w ' *
*4 •
/
• -
♦
■ >
. -i..
% -
■
V
'
v
K 0
‘ -
