

Published by Jle^uest
“ #ptjsism mtd its JHawdapipt:-”
A LECTURE
DELEVERED AT THE REQUEST OF MEMBERS
OF THE ORANGJ INSTITUTION OF
NEW SOUTH WALES,
BY THE
REV. DR. M‘GrIBBON,
IN THE
MASONIC HALL, YORK ST., SYDNEY,
pN yVLoNDAY, I9TH jIuNE, ißjl
Ssbttt9 :
Published at the “ Protestant Standard ” Office,
377 Pitt Street, Sydney.




ORANGEISM AND ITS SLANDERERS.
Mr. Chairman,—l shall have to draw a little on your patience and attention
while dealing with the subject now before us. All of us, I believe, will admit
its importance and if we are able to set out the truth concerning the Institution
in whose welfare we are interested, our time this evening will not be unprofitably
spent, and my labor in preparing this lecture for the public will be amply
rewarded.
Let us clearly understand, then, what I have to do. I propose to discourse to
you on “ Orangeism and its Slanderers.” I have to deal with a system, and with
those who oppose it, I shall look at its origin and principles—its aims and spirit,
and then consider the objections of those who either oppose it, or avow that they
are its enemies. There are four things then, which we shall regard as the heads of
the following remarks :— First , the origin of this system ; secondly, its principles ;
thirdly, the objections to it ; and, fourthly, we shall conclude with an appeal to
all Orangemen who wish well to their Institution, who love it, who honor it, who
are truly embued with its spirit, who heartily concur in its aim, and who wish to
commend it to the outside public, as to what is their duty in their special
circumstances.
To proceed, then, we begin with the origin of “ Orangeism. ” In order to
trace out this we must go back to the England of 1688. At that time there was a
King upon the throne whose name is held, by all true-hearted Britons, in perpetual
abhorrence. He was James 11. It is almost enough to say of this man that he
was “one of the Stuarts,” and perhaps the worst of the detestable line. But there
is so much to be said of him, that even an outline of his baseness, intrigues, and
unfaithful undoings of the Constitution whicn he had sworn to uphold and
protect, would fill many volumes. When as yet he was only the Duke of York,
and his brother Charles was on the throne, England saw what was the struggle
which was approaching. The “Exclusion Bill,” by which the Commons sought,
in a desperate manner, to avoid the miseries most surely to be anticipated from
the ascent of a Romish King to the throne, was the proof how the people of
England were preparing for the struggle. The religion of Charles was the worthless
profession of a man whose highest virtue was hypocrisy. His morality was so low
that his profession of any religion at all was a reproach rather than an honor ; and
his Court and his policy were alike a dishonor to any church which would claim
him as a member. Fast and loose he played with everything. A Papist at heart,
he professed to be a Protestant only to wear the Crown ; and up to the last, and
especially at the last, he revealed the hollowness and falseness of character.
You all know the scandalous circumstances of the death-bed scene of this nefarious
hypocrite : how, on the night before the fatal stroke —it was a Sunday night—he sat
in his palace toying with his three titled mistresses, while the galleries were crowded
with gamblers and black-legs; how, the next day, while he lay on his bed, a dying
man, Ids favorite mistress hung over him with the fondness and familiarity v of a
wife ; how, when the Protestant Bishops urged him to repentance and preparation
for his end, the King said nothing ; how, when they offered him the sacrament,
in testimony that he died in the communion of the Protestant Church, the King
refused; how, on the suggestion of his titled concubine, a Romish priest was sent
for, to reconcile the King to the Romish Church ; how James, who was just about
to succeed to the throne, secretly admitted the priest that the King might be
shriven and mane safe for purgatory; and how, thus, when the nation of England
had been mocked and deceived, the so-called “Head of the Protestant Church,”


and defender of the liberties of a Protestant people betrayed his country, and went
down to the grave with a lie in his right hand ! You know all this ; and such
flagrant immorality, and treacherous subserviency to the will of a Church which is
the natural enemy of all England’s liberties, were enough to rouse every patriotic
heart throughout the kingdom, and join heart to heart for the coming struggle.
Charles died, and James immediately was proclaimed the King. The sudden-
ness of the event gave James the advantage of getting to the throne without
being hampered by those special securities for the civil and religious liberties
of the kingdom, about which the Commons had so long been anxious. Within a
quarter of a hour after his brother's decease, James, as King, presided at a meeting
of the Privy Council. He was now a professed Papist; had been a Papist for
several years ; and had only a few days ago assisted, in the most scandalous manner,
with a concubine and a priest, to make his brother, the dying King, a Papist too.
Yet, when he now was at the head of affairs —when the summit of his ambition
had now been reached—when all dangers as to his succession were now passed —he
pretended so well to be fair and faithful, that he deceived the councillors who
heard his first words and promises as King ; for, while he promised to “ maintain
the established Government, both in Church and State; to defend the laws and
Church of England ; and to support the just liberties of all in the kingdom,” not
very long after he attempted to explain his promises away, and to apologise for his
language as having been used “ without due consideration !”
A reign thus commenced—commenced in falsehood and deceit—commenced as
if some Jesuit priest had suggested the course—was not long in yielding some of
its legitimate fruit. Feeling that he had triumphed over those who had sought his
exclusion from the throne because of his religion—feeling that he had now the
power to crush his enemies—he no longer observed the modesty and reserve with
which he had practised his Romish worship ; and, therefore, while, as a Prince, he
had had his private chapel, where he performed his adorations out of the sight of
men, he now, as a King, and as the head of the Protestant Church of England,
went in state to his Romish oratory, threw open its doors to invite the attention
of visitors to the palace, and required his ministers to worship with him ! Not
only this, but, in an ostentatious manner, James resolved on making “Popery”
the religion of the court. When Lent came he had a pulpit erected in one of the
chief rooms of the palace, where Popish divines preached their sermons about holy
fasting ; and then, when Passion week came, James bid defiance to all the kingdom,
and publicly made false his promises to “maintain the established religion,” by
going in all the grandeur and pomp of royalty to hear mass from a priest, just as
his predecessors had gone to Protestant services ! And not only this : the designs
of James were soon made apparent in another most convincing proof of his duplicity ;
for, in view of the ceremony of his coronation, he so altered and abridged the usual
ritual that his plan to release himself, at some future time from troublesome
obligations, could scarcely be doubted by a watchful people; for example, the
Communion service was not read at the ceremony ; nor was a copy of the bible
presented to him, with the usual exhortation, that he should study it as the rule
of both faith and practice, and as the source of the rights and liberties of England!
But other movements, still more significant, and of a different kind, speedily
revealed to the real friends of the nation, that their fears about the succession of
a Popish King were too soon to be realized. Like all tyrants and despots James
had an unconquerable love of arbitrary power, and an instinctive hatred of
constitutional rule. He could not bear to be dependent upon his people. He had
a horror of the discussions and inquiries and votes of the Commons. He there-
fore commenced, from the very outset of his reign, a violent struggle for kingly
power. Basely he accepted the gold of Louis, the King of France, to help him
to degrade his own Parliament and people. That his Commons should be cor-
rupted by French money was quite acceptable to him. He wanted to have the
control of the purse. He wanted to have power to raise money without the
will of Parliament. He wanted to have unlimited power to dispense with the
laws, that his illegal objects might be accomplished under the protection of law.
And by dint of unbending pursuit of his scheme he attained to a marvellous
degree of success. The famous, or rather infamous, Jeffries was his right hand
man; and other traitors (who are never far off when baseness is purpled and seated
upon the throne) in great numbers, encouraged the king to pursue his course of


ruining the laws and liberties which he had sworn to defend. His first success
lay in the first election of a new House of Commons. By the most disgraceful
management and corruption a House was elected which removed all anxiety from
the mind of the King. He spoke of it as “ exactly the sort of House which he would
himself have appointed." It was servile enough, indeed, at its meeting ; but even
that servile House could not help protesting against the King’s most arbitrary will,
in dispensing with the laws, violating the constitution in raising money without
authority, and in setting aside those religious safeguards which the nation had
approved of to protect the constitution of both Church and State. Even the
House of Lords was more noble and manly than the House of Commons, in con-
demning the course which the King had followed ; it was impossible, thought the
patriots, to submit to such despotic power ; by such encroachments the liberties of
England were not secure for a day ; and, therefore, in rage and disappointment,
James s ought his refuge in the dissolution of the Parliament.
This check to the progress of tyranny and Popery on the part of the King did
not come too soon. The exuberant loyalty which had greeted him on the day of
his ascension to the throne was already well nigh spent. The nation had been
disposed to hope for the best. Although the dark background of the bloody reign
of the Popish Mary was still quite manifest in the nation’s remeinberauce, it
was willing to hope that the Popish James would respect the oath and promises
which he had given ; and, therefore, while there were many who feared that the
worst would happen, and that the usual curse of priests and Popery would soon
be experienced in oppressions throughout the kingdom, those “ fearers of evil ”
were not popular at first, and they were obliged to keep quietly their unpopular
views. But the worst that was feared soon began to be realized. The best judges
of the future were those who most faithfully had studied the past. The miserable
Tories who had set themselves to worship the rising sun, when James was about
to ascend the throne —the equally miserable trimmers who thought that they
could be equally loyal to aEomish and a Protestant King—and the still more sense-
less crowd, who are always in favor of something new, and whose opinions upon
questions in which principle is involved are much like the changing of fickle wind,
were found to have trusted to a broken reed ; they proved their ignorance of what
Popery is ; and they realized their folly when they saw themselves deceived ; but
the real patriots were those who had judged that a Popish King could not be bound
by oaths, and that treason and treachery were as natural to him, in reference to
everything which a Protestant nation would esteem as liberty , as that a tiger or a
lion should love the taste of blood ! What was the fact ? Why, that this Popish
James was no sooner on the throne than he set himself deliberately to undermine
and destroy the civil and religious liberties of the people. Not only did he set up
the mass in the palace, and make priests and confessors his advisers and keepers ;
but he sent to Rome an envoy to make his humble submission to the Pope, and to
“pave the way for the readmission of heretical England to the Romish Church.”
He did this immediately after he had solemnly sworn to protect the establishment
of the Protestant Church ! Then he claimed to be able to raise money for the
Government, independently of the will and vote of his Parliament. Then he
raised an army and appointed Papists to the chief command. Then he remodelled
corporations, so that they might be more subservient to his plans and purposes.
Then he sought to repeal the “ Habeas Corpus Act ” —one of the grandest
protections of our civil freedom. The Courts of Justice he corrupted or over-
awed, so that legal questions and criminal prosecutions might be decided in his favor.
Then he suspended the Test Act, by which it was required that holders of impor-
tant offices should be members of the Protestant Church ; and this suspension was
made that those important offices might be conferred upon favorites of the Romish
Church. Then, in defiance of all law most expressly laid down, he appointed a
Court of Ecclesiastical Commission, and put the infamous Jeffries at its head, for the
trial of the clergy who might dare to show their Protestant zeal against the treason
which was publicly developing ; and it is one of the glories of our country, at
that time, that that infamous and illegal court got something to do in the trial of
Bishops and other individuals, who dared to speak out on behalf of the truth, and
in defence of the Church of Protestant England!
And, truly, it was necessary that some should thus be loyal to God and te
his truth. For it was the King’s purpose, by a steady undermining of the


Protestant Establishment, and by unprincipled inroads upon the civil constitution,
to make himself an irresponsible King, and to re-establish the Romish Church as
the Church of the Kingdom. Already he had appointed some Priests of Rome to
some Protestant benefices. Already he had shown that the path to preferment
was by apostacy to Romanism. Already he had shown that the high offices of
state were the reward of zeal for the Romish religion. In Scotland, in Ireland,
and in England the same policy was pursued; Protestants were dismissed and
Romanists were appointed. Every position of power thus changed hands.
Romanists swarmed in every direction. “ A small junto of Romanists, with the
King’s confessor, at their head, took the management of all matters upon them-
selves.” And, in the insolence of the Priests and the Popish instruments of
arbitrary power, the Protestants saw, with alarm and anxiety, that their country
was on the brink of total ruin, or on the eve of miseries even greater and more
terrible than any through which it had ever passed !
Well now, let all these circumstances be brought clearly into your view. Let
us realise the sufferings and fears of our noble forefathers, as the subjects of a
traitor so base as James. They had a Church which was betrayed and mocked in
its nominal and temporal Head. They had rights and liberties which were tram-
pled under foot, and remonstrance teas the way to ensure condemnation. The prisons
were filled with the best of the people. The vilest and most insolent rose highest
in place. In Scotland, the most ferocious laws were passed against liberty. For
example, “ whoever preached in a conventicle with a roof, or should attend, as a
preacher or a hearer, a conventicle in the open air, was punished with death and
confiscation of goods.” Under this ferocious law thousands of the pious and noble
of Scotland laid down their lives. They were hunted on mountain and moor as a
sort of pastime and sport. And they were driven by the force of their sufferings,
and the galling oppressions under which they groaned, to rise in bloody and fatal
rebellion, in which the Earl of Argyle (the ancient head of that “Clan Campbell ”
now so honored by alliance with the throne of our illustrious sovereign, Queen
Victoria) was cruelly executed, with hundreds of others who had gallantly fought
with him, for their country and their religion. -In Ireland, too, the Protestants
were oppressed and goaded beyond all human endurance. It was there that James
thought he could do just as he liked. As the majority of the people were one with
him in religion, as the priests were there the rulers of a violent, ignorant, and su-
perstitious people, he counted on being able to crush out all opposition that might
come from the Protestants. Accordingly, all authority and power was transferred
from the Protestants to the hands of Romanists. Protestant officers in the army
were superseded by Romish officers. Protestant magistrates, judges, and coun-
cillors were dismissed or removed to make way for those who would serve the king.
Protestant heads of departments were sent about their business to strengthen the
cause which the king had at heart. Even common soldiers, to the number of some
thousands, known to be Protestants, were dismissed the army, and thrown out
almost naked to starve upon the streets. Protestants who were known to have
arms were ordered to deliver them up on the fals pretence that the action was
necessary for the preservation of the peace. And then, when the Protestants were
thus made helpless, they were robbed and plundered and insulted by the Popish
mobs who were ready for anything which would please the king ; and the barba-
rous conspiracy of king and priests justified the fear that plans had been laid for
the renewing of the massacres of a former period !
What, now, was to be thought of such a king? In four short years he had
reduced everv glory of Protestant England to the most desperate state. He had
made Scotland a shambles of the most deserving in the land. He had prepared
Ireland for the ravages of wild and murderous hordes. He had made every court
in the three kingdoms corrupt. He had made the army an enemy to the nation,
and had put traitors at the head of it. He bad put his Popish heel on the neck of
that loyal Church which had brought him to the throne, and raised the apostate
Church of Rome to be virtually established. He had overawed the Universities,
degraded the bishops, and made the Dissenters his tools to accomplish his own
objects. There was scarcely a law which he had not violated. There was scarcely
a principle of the constitution which he had not sacrificed. Treason against the
State he had boldly perpetrated in a thousand forms. And thus the glorious
country he had been called upon to rule—a country free and noble even in her


wrongs—a country mighty in her patience, and still more mighty when roused from
her depths—was already manacled with Popish chains, and lay bleeding at his feet!
There were some who saw the crisis had come. There were some whose hearts
heaved with indignation that a Popish despot should thus rob them of their liber-
ties, and hurry their Church and country to ruin. The trial of the bishops, which
had stirred the country to its depths, made many of the Tories in Church and
State reconsider the doctrine of “ passive resistance.” Many who had rejected the
“ Exclusion Bill,” and had made themselves officious and ridiculous in avowing their
devotion to the throne, however corrupt and however unconstitutional, now began to
feel that there were reciprocal obligations between kings and subjects, and that
“ extreme oppression ” would justify resistance. The trial of the bishops, after their
unlawful imprisonment, was an event which cast wondrous light upon this inte-
resting question. The new view spread fast through the nation. In the army, in
the navy, in the court, in the Church, and among the country nobility it spread
and was accepted almost as a revelation. And, under the influence of this view, the
eyes of the nation began to turn across the sea, in the hope that from the shores of
Holland a deliverer might come who would hurl the Popish tyrant from the throne,
and avenge at once the injured Chu ch and the trampled-down nation! The nation,
knew of one who was living there in whom the utmost confidence could be placed.
He was a prince of the royal blood, and was married to the heiress apparent of the
throne. His right was not diminished by the birth of a son in the household of
James, which the nation repudiated (& a trick of the Jesuits. He was a thorough
Protestant. He was the hero of a hundred battles—battles really in the interest
of the faith, and battles in which he had conquered the French, the cruel mur-
derers of thousands of Protestants. The little, thin, wiry Stadtholder of the Hague
was a great warrior and a great ruler. By his heroic spirit he had saved his own
country, Holland, and by the power of his arms he had rolled back its enemies
from its walls and gates when it was reduced to almost the last extremity. To this
imperturbable, unconquerable prince the English now began to look. They knew
his character ; they knew his principles ; they knew his courage; and they were
now convinced that if ever England was to rise from the disgrace in which she now
lay—if ever she was to become, what she was entitled to become, “great, glorious,
and free ” —if ever her laws, liberties, and institutions were to be vindicated and
established—-the Popish despot who was now on the throne must at last be “ex-
cluded,” and the sceptre must be put into the hands of the prince who was now
their hope—whose name, “of blessed memory,” deserves to be held, and will be
held, by all honest-hearted and intelligent Britons throughout the world in ever-
lasting remembrance—“ William of Nassau, Prince of Orange.”
This state of feeling existing in England was speedily made known to William
in Holland. When the news came to him, “ Now or never,” he said, as he formed
his resolution. Friends, in secret, immediately took up his cause. While he him-
self proceeded with consummate skill, to prepare anus and forces for a descent
upon England, a few patriots in Loudon, with equal skill, prepared to give him
suitable support and a national welcome. They formed the famous “Orange
Confederation.” They held their meetings in different places, and their pass-words
of admission were “Orange” and “Nassau.” Russell, Shrewsbury, Danby, Sid-
ney, Compton, the Bishop of London, and a few others constituted the little band of
original Orangemen. And on the very day when the Bishops were acquitted, after
a lengthened trial, to the immense disgust of the infuriated James, and when the
nation was in a ferment of holy enthusiasm for the Protestant cause, that little
“lodge of loyal Orangemen” signed and despatched an invitation to William,
assuring him that if he came to English soil, engaging to uphold the “ Protestant
religion,” and engaging “ to conserve the rights and laws and liberties of the whole
people,” the throne and crown would be instantly made his by the will and vote of the
whole nation. Noble men, who thus stood in the gap ! Noble men, who thus
spoke for the nation ! Noble men, who thus interpreted the longings and prayers
of the people ! Noble Orangemen, again we say, who thus struck the blow when
the iron was hot, and risked their lives, their estates and their all that their coun-
try might be freed from the ignominious thraldom of a Popish traitor 1
Such, then, is the undoubted beginning of the “ Orange Institution.” I have
been thus lengthened and particular so that the exact nature and circumstances of
the institution might be truly known. For, just as it had its origin in loyalty to


law, loyalty to truth, loyalty to liberty, and loyalty to England, so, in all its
movements and spread from that day until now, unwaveringly it has sought and
supported the very same objects. The first Orange confederates were England 8
most faithf ul friends. Not one of them sought else but England’s good. And who
were they who afterwards joined them? Who were they who formed sister confe-
deracies in all the chief towns to welcome William, when it was known that he was
coming ’ Who were they who rallied to his standard, when this was the glorious
motto which it unfurled, “The Protestant religion and the liberties of England I
will maintain ” ? Who were they who first drew up and signed the rules and prin-
ciples which are unchangeably the rules and principles of the Orange Institution
of Orange for the defence of the Protestant religion, and for the maintaining of the
ancient Government, laws, and liberties of England, Scotland, and Ireland, do
engage to Almighty God, to His Highness the Prince, and to one another, to stick
firm to this cause, in the defence of it, and never to depart from it till our religion,
laws, and liberties are secured by a free Parliament?” —who, I say, were all these
who thus stood up on the side of William? Were they rebels or assassins, as some
have alleged ? Were they disturbers of the peace of England, as James complained ?
Were they the enemies of God and man, as some have had the infinite baseness to
say ? No : but they were the flower of the country, and the lovers of law, and of
truth, and of righteousness —they were genuine Protestants they were loyal
Orangemen. . , ,
i need scarcely detain you to tell you how Orangeism, thus commenced, spread
like wild-fire through the three kingdoms. In Scotland, where the people had
risen up against their fiendish oppressors, the minions of James, there was a loyal
burst from one end of the country to the other in favor of William and Protestant-
ism—the whole nation became a nation of Orangemen. And in Ireland, where
thousands of Romanists were ready to fight for James and the Pope, the cause of
William found among the Protestants a unanimous support. Everywhere Orange
associations were formed “for self-defence, for-securing the Protestant religion,
lives, liberties, and properties, and the peace of the kingdom, disturbed by Popish
and illegal counsellors and abettors.” While the creatures of James attempted to
raise armies of half savage Irish to fight for James, the loyal Irish united for Wil-
liam. From the very first they suffered for the sake of William. 1 hey
were few, hut they were resolute. The Popish rulers of the country oppressed
and threatened them in every conceivable way. But they were not dis-
mayed. They stood shoulder to shoulder ; their cause was one of liberty and
truth ; they banded for law, order, and good government ; they were “ Grange-
men ” because the Prince of Orange had promised to administer law and justice
according to the Constitution of the United Kingdom ; and hence, from the walls of
their cities, where they stood to do battle on the side of right, they gave forth a
shout which struck terror into their enemies —“ For God and for William, and no
surrender.
Thus the cause of William took deep root, and spread widely. The orange
color was exhibited everywhere. Every hat and carriage had orange ribands.
The women as well as the men vied with each other in giving welcome to William.
For once, the Protestants, forgetting their divisions and jealousies, formed one
grand, compact body, and faced their common danger, and gave welcome to Wil-
liam. ' Their union was seen at Derry, at the Boyne, at Enniskillen, at Aughrim,
at Limerick, and at other places. By their strong arms and their faithful hearts
the Prince of Orange finally triumphed. By their steadfast heroism the power of
James was for ever broken. When his Popish forces and his auxiliaries from
France faced the bold front of the resolute Orangemen, it was not long doubtful
which side must prevail. And, by the splendid and decisive victories which the
God of Battles gave to the arms of the Orange leader, the glorious revolution was
virtually completed : for the Popish despot then fled to France, and Wdliam and
his people then perfected the work of settling the Grown and Constitution of
England to be for ever Protestant!
I come now to the second head or division of my subject— The Principles op
Okangeism. It will be plainly seen from the tracing which I have just given of
the origin of the Institution, what are some of the leading principles on which it is


based. When the first Orange Confederates banded together to dethrone King
James and to welcome William, their objects were to deliver their country from
tyranny and wrong, and to bring back to England the religion, the laws, and the
liberties which James had betrayed, after having sworn to defend them. When
those Orange confederates despatched their pledge and invitation to William, the
objects they avowed were still the same—“ to defend the Protestant religion, and to
maintain the ancient laws and liberties of the realm of England . ” When William
displayed his banner, as he landed his troops on the soil of England, the objects
avowed were still the same—“ The Protestant religion and the liberties of England
I will maintain." When a Free Parliament met, and William was made king, the
Acts which were passed made clear the objects of the completed revolution— 1 ' The
Protestant religion and the liberties of England.” When attempts were made by
Popish villains to assassinate William, and the Orange Institution, with greater
zeal, united for defence, the objects were still precisely the same—“ The Protestant
religion and the liberties of England.” And when at length, by the Bill of Bights
and Act of Succession, the Constitution of England was declared for ever to be
free from the intrusion of a Popish king, and to be free from the tyranny of arbi-
trary rule, the objects in view were still the same—“ The Protestant religion and
the liberties of England.” Let this, then, be accepted as a true description of the
“ Jachin and Boaz ” —the two chief pillars in the temple of Orangeism : for neither
William himself, nor any of those who took his color and fought for his cause, had
any object contrary to these two—“ The Protestant religion and the liberties of
England. ”
But we have these two fundamentals properly broken up into several
particulars. Let us take, then, the full account of the principles of Orangeism,
as given in the printed works of the Institution ;
“ Seition I.—Objects of the Orange Institution.— The Institution is composed of Protestants,
resolved to the utmost of their power to support and defend the rightful Sovereign, the Protestant
Religion, the Laws of the Country, the Legislative Union, and the Succession to the Throne in the
House of Brunswick —being Protestant; and united, further, for the defence of their own Persons
and Properties, ami the Maintenance of the Public Peace. It is exclusively an Association of
those who are attached to the Religion of the Reformation, and will not admit into its Brotherhood
persons whom an intolerant spirit leads to persecute, injure, or upbraid any man on account of his
religious opinions. They associate also in honor of King William HI, Prince of Orange, whose
name they bear, as supporters of his glorious memory.
“ Sc, lion It.—General Qualifications. —The Master and Members of every Lodge into which a
Candidate has been elected, must satisfy themselves with all due solemnity, previous to his admission,
that he possesses the following qualifications. —An Orangeman should have a sincere love and
venerati ui for his Heavenly Father: a humble and steadfast faith in Jesus Christ, the Saviour of
mankind, believing in Him as the only Mediator between God and man. He should cultivate truth
and justice, brotherly kindness and charity, devotion and piety, concord and unity, and obedience to
the laws. His deportment should bo gentle and compassionate, kind and courteous ; he should
cultivate the society of the virtuous, and avoid the company of the evil; he should honor and
diligently read the Holy Scriptures, and make them the rule of his faith and practice ; he should
love, uphold and defend the Protestant religion, and sincerely desire and endeavor to propagate its
doctrines and precepts ; he should strenuously oppose the fatal errors and doctrines of the Church
of Rome, and scrupulously avoid countenancing (by his presence or otherwise) any act or ceremony
of Popish worship. He should by all lawful means, resist the ascendancy of that Church, its
encroachments and the extension of its power; ever abstaining from all uncharitable words, actions
or sentiments towards his Roman Catholic brethren. He should remember to keep holy the
Sabbath-day, and attend the public worship of Cod, and diligently train up his offspring and all
under his control in the fear of God and in the Protestant faith. He should never take the name of
God in vain, but abstain from all cursing, swearing and profane language, and use every opportunity
of discouraging those, and all other sinful practices in others. His conduct should be guided by
wisdom and prudence, and marked by honesty, temperance, and sobriety. The glory of God and the
welfare of man, the honor of his Sovereign and the good of his country, should be the motives of
his actions.”
Now, let us gather out of this particular account the principles which make
up the entire fabric of Orangeism. Out of the two fundamentals, which ex press
very clearly the “ objects ” of the Institution, viz. ;—“To defend and support the
rightful Sovereign, being Protestant, the Protestant Religion, and the laws of the
country ; and to defend persons, properties, and the public peace,” there are these
four others which express the qualifications of a genuine Orangeman. “ First, he
must be a religious man. Secondly, he must be a moral man. Third, he must be
a loyal man; and fourth, he must be a neighborly man.” Having, then, two
glorious pillars standing in front, not pillars of brass, but pillars of gold, and
within these four walls, which are truly walls of precious stones, the Orange
Institution has taken its place. We challenge for it that these are its principles.


We deny that it has any other principles whatever. Its goodness and glory are to
he tried by these principles. Side by side with all the Institutions which appeal
to the confidence and respect of intelligent men, the Orange Institution lifts up its
appeal. Equal to any of them —nay, superior to all of them—it claims as its
friend every man whose religion is the religion of the bible— every man whose
conduct is upright and virtuous—every patriot whose loyalty and love of country
are based on truth —and every neighbour whose generous heart and open hand
will do good unto all men, “especially to those who are of the household of
Faith.”
The first of these principles has respect to “ religion." The Orange Institu-
tion knows no other religion but the Protestant Religion. Nor is there any other
true religion but the Protestant Re igion. The experieuce of the world proclaims
this fact. The history of England makes clear this fact. It is the religion of the
Bible; it is the religion of reason ; it is the religion of liberty ; and, as the
enemy of ignorance, tyranny, and vice, wherever it goes it gives enfranchise-
ment to the slave, light to the ignorant, conscious independence to the spiritually
debased, and scatters priceless blessings to all the rest of the people. There is no
question, here of sects and parties. r l he “ Protestant Religion ’ is not to be con-
founded with conflicting denominations. The Orange Institution knows no
denomination. It holds the “ common Protestantism” in which Episcopacy, and
Presbyte y, Wesleyan and Baptist are perfectly agreed. Its wide and apostolic
arms embrace all who belong to the church of Jesus Christ. Ihe church
which it disowns is the church which has been an apostate and a
persecutor from the beginning. It repudiates Anti-christ. It has nothing to do
with Infallible Popes It discards all Angels and Saints and Virgins as mediators
with God. Its creed is the Ancient and Apostolic creed which believes in Christ
as the “only way," —in his dying on the cross as the only atonement,— in his
advocacy in Heaven as the only intercession, and which gives eve>y man a personal
right to deal with his Saviour without the intervention or permission of Priests.
And hence the scriptural words of the rule which I have read : —“ An Orangeman
should have a sincere love and veneration for his Heavenly Father ; a humble and
steadfast faith in Jesus Christ, the Saviour of mankind, believing in him as the
only mediator between God and man. He should honor and diligently read the
Holy Scriptures, and make them the rule of his faith and practice. He should
love, uphold and defend the Protestant Religion, and sincerely desire and
endeavor to propagate its doctrines and precepts. He should strenuously oppose
the fatal errors and doctrines of the Church of Rome, and scrupulously avoid
giving an encouragement to Popish worship. He should remember the holy day
of the Lord, attend the public worship of God, and train up his children in God’s
fear and service. And the glory of God, as the high end of his being, should be
the motive and object of all his actions.”
The second of the principles which have now been mentioned refers to
morality. The Orange Institution, as accepting and professing the true religion
of Christ, is the friend and advocate of all sound morals. It holds that true
religion and sound morals are inseparably conjoined. Its religion and its morals
are those of the New Testament. Its strongest protests are against those morals
of Priests and Jesuits which justify and palliate the most abominable crimes, and
which sap the foundation of all truth and virtue. It has no scheme for making sin
and wickedness easy. It has no confessional where crimes are revealed aud
felonies are compounded. It has no license from Heaven to make oaths and
perjuries a mere matter of convenience. It has no license from the Devil to make
“ stealing ” for the church no “stealing ” at all— to make “ lying ” for the Church
no “lying" at all— and to purchase exception from the pains of perdition by
magnificent bequests, and masses for the soul, after a life of infamy. It has
never taught that a man may be a Christian and yet a murderer, an adulterer,
and a perjurer. Its pure morality is abundantly explicit in the rules which I have
read —“An Orangeman should cultivate truth and justice, brother'y kindness and
charity. His deportment should be gentle and compassionate, kind and courteous.
He should cultivate the society of the virtuous, and avoid that of the evil. He
should never take God’s name in vain. And his life should be guided by wisdom
and prudence, and marked by honesty, temperance, and sobriety.”


The third of the principles of the Orange Institution refers to loyalty The
Orange Institution is pre-eminently a loyal ami patriotic Religion and
loyalty, expressed in the words “ Fear God and honor the King, are never
dissociated by any true Orangeman. Yet his loyalty is not blind. It is not the
loyalty of a slave-, but that of a freeman. It is not the loyalty of superstition ,
but that of enlightened and thoughtful intelligence. It is not the loyalty winch
bends to the Tyrant King, who has arbitrary power, nor to an Infallible Pope,
who assumes to speak with the authority of God ; hut the loyalty of men who have
assented to laws, who own the supremacy and majesty of law, and whose rights to
have f ee and liberal Got eminent have been won as the price of their Forefathers
blood. Let this be noticed as the intelligent loyalty of the Orange institution.
There is, indeed, a species of loyalty which will yield to power, whatever it is
There was once the Jacobin loyalty, which would prostrate its neck to the heel ox
oppression. There is now the Popish loyalty which submits to everything
which the Priest may say, because the Priest keeps the conscience of his people in
his pocket; but the loyalty of free and intelligent men—the loyalty of reason
the loyalty of Scripture—the loyalty which makes England the county which it
is, is that which recognises that both the King and the people are subject to law
• —that the law is the free expression of the will of the people —that the King reigns
for the good of the people—and that, when the King becomes a Traitor to his
country and its laws, oppressing his people and trampling with ignominy their
liberties under his feet, then he has forfeited all claim to allegiance and the throne,
and (he people do well to hurl him to the ground ! Hence, the Orange Institution,
in this loyaity of Britons, binds itself to defend the “ rightful Sovereign, the
laws of the kingdom, and the succession to the Throne of Rulers who are Protestant.
It pledges itself to “ concord, and unity, and obedience to the laws.” It engages to
“resist, by nil lawful means, the encroachments or ascendancy” of any foreign
power. And the honor of the Sovereign, and the good of the country are
imperatively required of all who would be its members.
How, the fourth principle of the Orange Institution refers to neighborliness.
I am not afraid nor ashamed to claim for the Orange Institution this charitable
principle, that it is neighborly to Romanists. It feels towards Romanists in a very
different manner from that in which those Romanists feel towards it. It does f o '
Romanists what it is abundantly well known Romanists never have and never will
do for it. For example, the Orange Institution refuses to receive as members of its
brotherhood “ persons of an intolerant and persecuting spirit, and who would injure
and upbraid any man whatever for his religious opinions.” Again, the Orange
Institution charges its members “ to abstain from all uncharitable words, actions, or
sentiments towards their Roman Catholic brethren . ” And still again, never do
Orangemen meet in their lodges but prayer is offered, in the most charitable
benevolence, that all the members of the Church of Rome may lie delivered from the
errors by wliich they are bound, and be blessed with a purer and truer religion.
How different is all this from what obtains on theotherside ! Thereason, of course,
is very obvious. Romanism cannot but be intolerant and persecuting. It cannot
but intrigue and plot for the subversion of Protestants. It breeds riot, violence,
and cruelty, and makes the heart as hard and unfeeling as iron. And, instead of
prayer on behalf of here ics, it breathes out threatening and slaughter against
them, and fulminates the most horrible and horrifying curses !
Much has been said about Penal laws, and about the strenuous opposition of
Orangemen to Popery. But it should never be forgotten that the “ Penal laws
were the result of the teaching and doings of Popery ; and that Orangeism
distinguishes between the men and the system. What had Popery been teaching
in the world when Orangeism took its rise? What had the Jesuits been giving to
the nations? What had been the encroachments and tyranny of the Priests,
when the Reformation brought their tyranny to an end? it is well known that
the Penal laws were devised as a protection against the treason and the immorality
of a system which sets all truth at defiance to gam its end. Not one of those laws
would ever have been passed, if it had been possible to trust a pack of Priests,
which not even oaths, however solemn, could bind. And those laws have been
relaxed, or altogether abolished, just as circumstances have so changed that all
grounds for fear have given place to confidence. Not that opinion has changed as
to the nature and aim of the Romish religion. It cannot but be hostile to a


Protestant people. It cannot but seek the destruction of the Protestant cause.
It cannot but make its people unsocial and bigoted and uncharitable. Its claims
and its aspirations are in open antagonism to all that distinguishes a free people.
And its atrocious principles, “that faith should not be kept with heretics
that heretics should be “burned as worse than thieves ” —that there is “no
salvation out of the Romish Church,” cannot but give rise, wherever there is
power, to the bloody massacres which have given a hideous character to Popery
in all the world ! Hence the sufferings and disabilities of Protestants in Romish
countries up until only the other day. Hence the barbarous and persecuting
principles of the Pope’s famous encyclical letter. And hence, it has been avowed
by candid Romanists in England, only recently, that if power were again in the
hands of their Church, they would burn or persecute the Protestant heretics: at
least, they would not tolerate their religion for one moment !
Not such monstrous uncharitableuess as this will be found among the
principles of Orangeism. Were there anything like this, what would become of
the thousands of Romanists, who are fed, and clothed, and protected by Protes-
tants ? Were there strict retaliation, what would be the position of Romanists
amongst ourselves? Were there anything like this, would Orangemen, while
detestiny the system of Rome as a plague, and using all lawful means to do it aw ay,
be the friends, the neighbors, the employers, and the helpers of those very men,
who are taught by their religion to denounce them as heretics, and to hate them as
the implacable enemies of both God and man ?
We claim, then, distinctly, as essentially a part of the Orange Institution,
that is has the kindest feelings of humanity and religion towards the Catholic people.
We hate the system ; but we love the men. We are the enemies of the system ;
but the friends of the men. We resist the encroachments and ascendancy of their
Apostate Church ; but we are willing to live on the terms of good neighborhood
with all the people. By all “ lawful means ”we will resist the claims and assump-
tions and errors of that church, While feeding the Romish poor, we wdl thus
resist ; while clothing the Romish naked, we will thus resist ; while giving equal
rights and liberties to our Romish fellow citizens, we will thus resist; and yet not
in one hair of their head will Orangeism harm them ; —not one Irish landlord will
it tumble down—not one penal laiv will it revive against them —not one civil right
will it take away from them —not one moment of disquiet will it indict upon
them. Nay, in charity and kindness it will defend even them from the tyranny
which their priests love to exercise over them, provided they will be contented
to submit to the laws, and not provoke by attempts to put their unsocial and priestly
principles into practice amongst us.
Let us proceed now to the third division or head of our lecture.
I propose to deal in this division with objectors and slanderers. The objections
of some deserve kind consideration ; the slanders of others we shall try to dispose
of with all fairness.
It has been objected, then, to the Orange Institution that the principles and
rules which I have just submitted are not all the rules and principles which govern
the Society. How am Ito reply to this? How ami to certify to respectable
objectors that the book which we offer, as containing the principles and rules of
the Orange Institution, is not a fraud, but a true statement of the whole matter ?
I can do nothing more than give my word ; and I now, therefore, affirm that the
book referred to contains a true and particular account of the objects and principles
of the Orange Instution. I challenge for it on the ground of the purity and
scripturalness of its principles, from all honorable and intelligent men, and from
all good Protestants, respect and confidence; and, after this affirmation and
challenge, I denounce as a slander any insinuation, by word or action, which
implies that something is kept hack from the uninitiated.
This is the objection which I put first, because I have found, in my inter-
course with the public, that many desirable and respectable people have an hidden
suspicion that there is something more than what is avowed in our printed pamphlet.
They say— “ Oh, yes, your printed book is all very well; but there is something
more. There is something too bad for public view ; and there cannot but be
something exceedingly bad, since the ‘ Orange name has been so much spoken
against Let me assure all these, on the word of a Christian gentleman and


minister, that this is all ; and, when this is examined, lam snre that the feeling
will be strong, and the conviction will be acknowledged, that something more—
something exceedingly had—is undoubtedly needed to warrant the reproaches and
scorn, the misrepresentations and calumnies, which have been so freely cast
against the Orange Institution.
But again. It has been objected against the Orange Institution that it is a
secret society. Protestantism hates secresy. It loves the light. Its glorious
function is' “to give light." And, because of this open and candid spirit,
characteristic of ' Protestantism, secret societies , and working in the dark are
peculiarly repugnant to its genius and history. Hence, many Protestants shrink
from uniting with the Orange Institution, because have a dread of sccict
societies • and those “ secret societies ’ are ass' ciated in their minds with the
black atrocities of the “Gunpowder plot,” and the “unparalleled butcheries ’ of
St Bartholomew’s Eve. But, my answer is, that the charge is utterly and
absolutely untrue. In no sense whatever is the Orange Institution a “ secret society.
It is totally different from a “ secret society.” It has nothing in common with a
“secret society.” So far from this,—its objects are avowed; it has books in
which all its doings are entered ; and those books are open to the regular inspec-
tion of the public authorities as often as those authorities may desire to oversee them.
What “ secret society ”in all the world can say anything like this ? And if this
be true of the “ Orange Institution,” as I affirm it is, what honorable man, what
man of intelligence will accept against it the great calumny, and the wicked
reproach, that it is a “ secret society V' Of course, the Orange Institution, like
every institution, has its “private business ;” but it has no private business hut
what is entered in its books. There is an oath of fidelity to the Cause, and of loyalty
to the Crown. And, in accordance with this, it has its private signs as pass words
for the recognition of its friends. But if, on account of these things, the Orange
Institution is to have the reproachful stigma of a “ secret society , there is not a
benefit society—there is not a merchant s office— there is not a bank there is not
a department in the public service, but what is liable to the same reproach, for in
every one there is some private business, and some special way of securing that
that private business shall be, kept for those who are particularly interested in it.
But again. It has been objected that the Orange Institution is an “ illegal
society." Old Mr. Plunkett used to say so. Daniel O’Connell also said so. The
Pope says so. Archbishop Folding says so. And the notorious Father John, the
Father Confessor of convicted Fenians, is sure to say so. But what of that ?
Everything is illegal in the estimation of such interpreters which tends to check
the encroach merits of “ the Church." Everything is illegal which is contrary to
Rome, and which stands like a wall of iron and adamant against the netarxous
schemes which Rome has laid to overthrow our Protestant liberties. But it is
enough for all reasonable and candid men to know that by the highest authorities
in law and justice, in government and business, the Orange Institution has been
publicly declared to be a “ legal society.” It is true that on one occasion, by the
false reports of interested men —by the clamour and threatening of the Pope s
brass band, the House of Commons broke up the Institution, as contrary to law ;
but not long after, when the Institution again revived, and when juster views
began to prevail, the verdict given was directly the reverse. On many occasions
the legality of “ Orangeism ” has been publicly acknowledged. Orangemen have
been thanked by the British Government for their great services in Ireland ; and
the most eminent barristers, in England and in these colonies, have been asked
their “opinions” on the principles of Orangeism, and by one and all of them
testimony has been borne, in the most ample terms, to the high character and
legality of the Orange Institution. The charge of “ illegality ” is, therefore, a
slander. It was raised by men who had a purpose to serve—which was not very
legal. It is repeated by men who are not very caring for British law It is a
scarecrow to those who are thoughtles or ignorant. But, will reasonable men ask
better proof than the proof which we give them, that a more legal association of
loyal men is not to be found in all the world ? ...
Again It has been further objected that the Orange Institution is unneces-
sary Ha! Yes. “Unnecessary.” But who is to judge of what is, or what is
not necessary ? This is the rub. If we go to Romanists, they are sure to tell .13
that all Orange societies are decidedly unnecessary. If we go to the “ lovers of


ease and peace,” they are sure to reiterate that all such societies are “perfectly
unnecessary.” If we go to those who are so full of charity that they live “in a
laud of milk and honey,” and breathe out only an atmosphere of Irish shamrocks
and mosses, they will instantly tell us that all such societies are decidedly
unnecessary. And then, if we consult the man who is anxious about the customers
of his trade—or the politician who is hunting for votes and place, the thing is as
certain as that the sun is in the heavens, that the echo will be—“ decidedly
unnecessary /” But, there are many others, far more respectable than any of these,
who have hastily adopted this same objection. For example, there are many who
say that no danger is to be apprehended from Bomanisrn now. The days, they say,
of its aggressions and tyranny are past. It can never gain, say they, the
ascendancy now. And, therefore, while Orange societies were useful in the past,
they are now, in the strength of the Protestant throne, “ altogether unnecessary.”
But, is not such reasoning as this in the very teeth of astounding facts which are
patent to all men ? On this plan of “ lying down and loving to slumber ” England
has been acting for a century past. But what has she gained by it? While she
has been takng her rest, the enemy has been working. While she has been
faocying*herself secure, the enemy has been sapping the foundation of her bulwarks.
While she has been boasting of her strength, like Samson luxuriating in the lap of
Delilah, that wicked woman has been cropping his hair, and making something
very like a “Roman tonsure !” In a word, so bold and aggressive have Romanists
been, within the last forty years, that the Pope has added England, as a
“ recovered star,” to his papal firmament; —he has set up his church in the very
heart of the kingdom, in defiance of law ; —he has parcelled out the country
according to his will, and giving titles of honor, in defiance of the fumings of
British statesmen ; —he has set up his convents, and schools, and nunneries, in
open violation of the clearest statutes ; and, by the help of his subjects, as voters
and legislators, he has virtually established his Popery in Ireland ; he has covered
all England and Scotland with churches and priests ; by chaplains and teachers he
has got Ids foot in every workhouse and gaol and asylum ; and his claims have now
risen to this high degree, that the way shall agdin be open for a Romanist to hold
the highest offices in England ; —nay, for a Papist King to sit again on the throne /
Such are the doings, such the prosperity, and such the aspirations of the bishops
and priests of Rome’s church in England Their doings and prosperity are
precisely similar in all these colonies. And, as we see the numerous defections in
the English Church ; as we see the cowardly truckling of English statesmen ; as
we hear of England’s Premier promising “ guarantees for the safety and indepen-
dence of the Pope as we see the mighty strides which Romanism has taken
among the nobility and poor of the land ; as we study the demands of Cardinal
Cullen and his political tools, which a>e the Pope's brass band, is it wisdom or
folly to be wile awake? Is it true or false that combination is necessary ? Is it
our nation’s duty to accept or discard that mighty instrument which has never
failed to support and defend England’s laws and throne—“ the Orange Institu-
tion?” All loyal Orangemen will agree to this, that when Rome ceases plotting
their work will be done. But, meantime, as the work of plotting goes on, all
Orangemen believe in the wisdom of being ready “P < evention is better than cure.”
Yes, and the policy of being ready is the death blow to plotters. England would
be better and safer than she is ; this colony would be more peaceful and united
than it is, had there been less tampering, less trafficking, less dishonesty, and less
self-seeking among our public men ; but Popery has been coaxed, and fattened,
and flattered, until now it can demand, with its usual insolence, and mock at the
simpletons who have been busily caressing it!
Judge, then, all reasonable men, as to what is necessary ! The want of com-
bination is the weakness and ruin of the Protestant cause. The marvellous union
of the Romanists is the secret of their power. They are ever com bin ng. By their
church, by their guilds, by their confraternities and purgatory associations, by
their St. Patrick societies, by their “ Irish Patriot and Christian Doctrine Unions,”
they are kept by their shepherds as a separate people. In a moment they can act,
when action is needed ; with power they can make their voice to be heard, when
they want to be heard. And what, then, is wisdom, on the part of Protestants ?
Is it to be careless and indifferent until the country has been brought to the brink
of revolution? Is it to wait until encroachment has advanced so far that violence


■will be needed to drive it back ? Nay, is it not wisdom rather to foresee the
objects which the. enemy is seeking ; and, by the lawful, and open, and British means
of uniting for the defence and maintenance of our rights and liberties, to disconcert
and scare the wily enemy without resorting to violence ?
Lastly here. It has been objected to Orangeism that its existence has been
the cause of illwill and contention, and its history has been marked by violence and
bloodshed. The very same charge has been made by infidels against Christianity
itself. It is precisely the charge of Voltaire, and Hume, and Bousseau, and
Gibbon, against the religion of Jesus. When these infidels would deny the
mission of Christ—when they would refute the doctrines which Jesus taught—
when they would ridicule the Scripture as an inspired revelation, they point to the
wars and confusions and strifes which have come into the world in connection
with the Christian religion. And, harping upon the atrocity and numbers of those
wars, they have spoken eloquently against the truth and divinity of that heaven sent
religion ! But, what is the reply ? Chiishanity claims to be tried by its principles.
It demands that it be judged by the teachings of the b’ew Testament. And,
judged by this test, the decision is inevitable that this charge against it is
deliberately false ! The same justice we claim on behalf of Orangeism. Try the
system by the principles which it avows. Judge of it by its laws, and spirit, and
ordinances. Make it amenable > nly for what is its own. Spare it not in searching
its teachings. But never be so false to honor and justice as to make it accountable
for what it really repudiates ! Doubtless, there are bad Christians all over the
world-; but is religion to be accountable for those unprincipled men ? In every
church in Sydney hypocrites are to be found. Is the bible responsible for the
existence of those hypocrites ? And, because there are some bad and worthless
Orangemen—men who are unworthy of the name which they bear—men who are a
disgrace to the cause which they own—men who are really not Orangemen at all—
are these worthless men to be held up as the patterns and exponents of the Orange
cause ?
We utterly deny, therefore, and repudiate the charge. “ Illwill and conten-
tion,” no doubt, have arisen ; but these would have arisen in any case from the, very
nature of the Popery and Penianism to which Orangeism is opposed. •‘Violence
and bloodshed,” no doubt, have taken place; but these would have occurred in
any case, from the very claims and policy which the priests have maintained in
ruling their people. But, further, this may also be affirmed with all good con-
science, that Orangeism has no ill-will to Romanists. It cannot, and it will not, do
them any wrong. It will be the first to help them in the time of need. But, under
cover of charity it will not be seduced into countenancing their religion. While
tolerating and protecting them, it will keep a watchful eye on their designing
priests. And, should those designing priests rouse their poor victims to the folly
of violence, and the chance of arms, then, undoubtedly, in justifiable defence,
Orangeism will rise in the greatness of its might, and turn to flight the forces
o f the aliens !
It is a cruel slander, therefore, that Orangeism is uncharitable, or that it
delights in violence. Neither its origin nor its history will support such a charge.
It is never the aggressor; but it is mighty in defence If there have ever been
excesses, those excesses have been provoked. Amply, too, it will atone for any
excesses. But the foe which opposes it never gives quarter. It is a foe which
would burn, and massacre, and annihilate all heretics. It is a foe which prefers
treason and sedition to open warfare. And then, like every bully and coward,
when it finds that it has fallen into the grip of a lion, its bellowings are heard to
the ends of the earth, as if it were innocently suffering !
Bct I have now to dispose of some more villanous slanderers before I have
done. Those already alluded to I have dealt with as respectable ; but those who
are now to be referred to for a little are of another class, and are so vulgar and
contemptible that they hardly deserve the application of the lash.
We have all heard, then, the slander, repeated again and again, that Orange-
men take an oath to wade “ knee deep in Papist blood.” Again and again has this
been alleged by the “ White boy,” “ Yellow boy,” and Green boy ” crew. And,
what is not a little provoking, this infamous slander has been partially believed by
many who assume to be charitable and liberal! i cannot say more than that it is


utterly untrue; but, what is the secret of so foul an accusation ? Who have
invented it ? And what is the cause ? Shall Ibe charged with uncharitableness if
I venture the explanation, that as the thief who is chased repeats the cry of the police •>
man pursuing him, so as to mislead the attention of the public looking on. Papists
and Fenians, who delight in blood, have raised this slander that they themselves
may escape !
Another slander is, that Orangemen keep up their color and their days for the
purpose of provoking and insulting others. Hence, some who are never done
talking of charity, tell us to forget the sth of November, and the 12th of July.
They say that the past should all be forgotten and forgiven. They say that all party
colors and names should be given up. And, they boldly assert that, because
Papists resort to violence and blood to put down the observance of the days
referred to, the Orangemen are guilty of provoking and inciting to that hatred and.
violence ! But, what gross injustice is in this mode of reasoning ! Are Orangemen
not to have liberty to think? Are they to forget the sth of November, and the
12th of July, because the Papists choose to abhor those dags ? Are the Papists to
have St. Patrick’s days, and Saints days innumerable, without let or hindrance,
and all others are to be forbidden ? Because Papists choose to be violent, are all
others meekly to succumb? Instead of yielding to such insolent demands—
instead of basing the liberty of Orangemen on the whim of Papists—is not the
proper way to show those creatures, who delight in blood, that their riots and
violence will obtain no sympathy, and that the strong arm of the law will protect the
rights and liberties of all men ? I claiui for Orangemen the right to judge as to
whether or not they shall make famous any days. So long as they do so in accord-
ance with the law they have a right to their liberty. And if Papists take oflence,
and resort to violence, their offence is so unreasonable, and their violence so
cowardly, that, instead of slandering Orangemen for their refusal to submit to the
whims of Papists, all good men should unite in upholding them, as the true friends
of liberty. We mean no unkindness—we mean no insult—we mean no uncharit-
ableuess—when we look into history, and thank God for his mercy in preserving
our country from the devices of the enemy. We only mean to stir up ourselves to
watch the same enemy, who is still lurking at our gate to do us damage. And, if the
agents of that enemy will be offended at this—if they will resort to violence to
deny us this liberty—and, if unprincipled Protestants will join with them, in
sympathy, with their unreasonable demands, is not this only a proof that watchful-
ness is needed, and that the lessons of history ought never to be forgotten ?
We have not forgotten the infamous slander of the Sydney Morning Herald.
The Editor of tnat paper, whose Papal services have not yet been rewarded by a red
hat from the Pope, pronounced a slander, which will never be forgotten until it be
buried with him in the grave, viz.—that “Orangemen think more of the ‘ battle of
the Boyne than of the sufferings of Calvary !’ ’’ This miserable Editor acts the
part of the tailor, whose standard measure for everybody was himself. The mind
that conceived such gross impiety is the only mind which could be guilty of the
deed. The comparison is the thought of gross impiety. No Orangeman could
have ever thought of such a thing, The “sufferings of Calvary ” are too holy and
sacred, in the estimation of every Orangeman, to be brought into neighborhood
with the “battle of the Boyne.” Yet, are we to be driven from our views by the
impiety of an Editor, who dares to impute to us such frightful crime ? Are we to
think little of the “ battle of the Boyne ” because the Editor of the Herald
impiously associates it with the unparalleled agonies of the dying Christ ? No,
we shall scorn the slander, and yet make use of it. In the “ sufferings of Calvary ”
we will see the great deliverance which has been given to the world —a deliverance
which Popery would obscure and diminish; and, in the “battle of the Boyne”
we will see the great deliverance which was wrought out for our country—a
deliverance which Popery would now make in vain by the drivelling and impiety of
hireling scribes, who would sell their birthright, and the birthright of their people,
lor a mess of pottage !
What shall I now say of the slanders of the Empire and the Evening Hews,
which have accused us of every thing but what is Christian and honorable r What
shall I say of the slanders of the “rag ” which values a workman’s midnight labor
at Bd. per hour ? What shall I say of the slanders of the Freeman, which tells its
ignorant and priest-ridden readers, in its weekly issue, that Orangeism is the worst


of all wicked things ? This I will say, that when they put their slanders into a
tangible shape, I will try to refute them ; but, meantime, I appeal to all reason-
able and candid men, to set over against the unproved charges of venal news-
papers and' hirelings of the priests, the principles which form the foundation of
Orangeism, and then judge as to the side where the truth is to he found.
Last of all, 1 come to the last of all the slanders which have recently been
hurled against our glorious Orangeism. It is the slander of Mr. William Forster,
M.P. The other day he told the House—he told the world—that “ Orangeism was
just as bad, or as good as Fenianism !” Poor man ! Great allowance must be made
for the views of our friend. He has not forgotten the defeat of St. Leonard’s.
He has not fox-gotten the exposure of Kyde. It is natural, therefore, that he
should show his anger in saying “ hard things . ” The wonder, however, is, not
that he said that “ Orangeism is just as bad as Fenianism,” but that he did not
say that it is a great deal worse! For, without doubt, Orangeism is infinitely
worse than Fenianism, to all such Protestants as Mr. Forster. It never has given
him a “Sunday Morning Breakfast.” It has never honored him, in the presence
of an Archbishop, with a cup and saucer, in praise of the “ Immaculate conception
of the Virgin.” It has never believed in his being a Protestant, since he has
repudiated the very name. And it has thwarted and checked him on many
occasions, when his measures and influence have been judged to be injurious to
the liberty of the people. It is certain, therefore, that to all who will act and
speak like Mr. Forster, “Orangeism” is infinitely worse than “Fenianism.”
And worse, I trust, it will always remain. The slander, however, we scorn, that the
most loyal of all the Institutions of Britain should be compared with the one whose
sedition and treason are the horror of the world; but we are not offended. We shall
not do violence because of the insult, although it might almost warrant a little
“ tarring and feathering. ” We will only say that the difference between Orangeism,
and Fenianism will be best illustrated to Mr. Forster in this, that whereas the
Fenians would revenge themselves, if they could, by hitting Mr. burster from
behind a fence, the Orangemen will revenge themselves in the more manly way of
sending Mr. Forster a copy of their rules !
I will now conclude this lengthened lecture by offering to the friends and.
supporters of Orangeism a few friendly counsels.
Let me say, then, that the best system which was ever constructed may be
abused and ruined by bad administration and unworthy support. By this very
process Christianity degenerated, through many ages, until Popery was developed
with all its spiritual tyranny and vile abominations. I find it easy and pleasant to
defend Orangeism ; but, I confess, I cannot so easily find a defence for the conduct
and doings of all Orangemen. I find it easy and pleasant to defend the religion
which is to be found in the New Testament; but I should shrink from the task of
defending the religion which is found in all our so-called churches, and in all pro
fessing Christians. What, then, is to be done ? for good principles ought to be made
manifest in corresponding conduct. What is to be done ? for the world is justified
in judging of a system by the character of its friends. I say the world is
justified —at least to this extent: that the conduct of its friends will always be an
element to the judgment formed respecting any system. Bad Christians are truly a
disgrace to religion. They do not prove that religion is false ; nor do they prove
that the principles which they profess are bad; but, nevertheless, they damage
religion and give rise to prejudices in the minds of the people which ate not wholly
to he blamed. And so with bad Orangemen. They do not prove that Orangeism
is false : nor do they prove that the principles of the system are bad ; but, they
give a handle to the slanderer and the enemy to heap up reproach, and they give
warrant and color to some atrocious calumnies. For my part I will say that as
unfaithful Christians will never prove that Christianity is false, unfaithful
Orangemen will never shake the incorruptible principles on which the system of
“ Or<in»eism ” is built; and yet, it must be added, that the excellence of the
principles will never be an excuse for the unfaithful Christian, or the unfaithful
Let me, then, counsel all true hearted and genuine Orangemen, wisely to take
heed. Let 'me remind them that their system is essentially- a-religiommne. Let
me remind them that the religion which they accept, as the basis of their system.


is the “Protestant religion;” and the Protestant religion may he summed up
in this, “To fear God and keep his commandments.” King William 111. gave us
liberty to have, and liberty to enjoy, this reasonable religion. Our Reformation is
not worth anything if it have not made us earnest in this ennobling religion. Our
Revolution has not accomplished its work if it have not decided us on the side of
this true religion. And our Orangeisra is really nothing at all if it be not a
pledge— stronger than any which is given by others— that whatever others may
choose to do, “ we will serve the Lord.”
My advice to every Orangeman is this, “Be zealous for the honor and purity
of your cause. Lower not its standard. Forget not its object. Sacrifice not its
history. And, remember that the eyes of a thousand slanderers are ever watching
for a halt and a tripping. The only way to answer slanderers is to live them
down. Glory in your principles, brethren ; but illustrate your principles in your
daily conduct. You are not Orangemen unless you be “ good men. ” If you dishonor
God, the Institution disowns you. If you break the law of the land, or fail to
uphold it, you are not Orangemen. If you company with those who are evil doers,
you are unfaithful to your pledge. If you act or speak unjustly towards Papists,
you are forgetting the cause in which you are engaged. If you are Sunday
strollers—church forsakers— wife neglecters— leaving your children without
proper care—having bibles in your houses, but never opening them unjust in
your business—intemperate in your habits —or immoral in your conduct you are.
not Orangemen. All such the Orange Institution repudiates and disowns. It
will rather have none, than have such supporters as these. It will
rather stand alone than have such friends as these. If, therefore, all who
profess the Orange cause will consider the holiness of their solemn obligations ;
if they will study their rules, and live up to their rules; if they will faithfully use
what the Prince of Orange gave them liberty to use; if they will rise to the
freedom and glory of their privileges; if they will “fear God and honor the
King ;” if they will “love the brotherhood, and be kind to all men ’’—not only
will the slanderers be shamed in their villany, but the thousands who doubt, and
stand aloof from our cause, will have the very demonstration which they are
waiting to receive, that “ Orangeism ”is the erflbodiment of all that is loyal
in our relation as citizens, and of all that is “holy ” in regard to religion !
Hknrt Watson, Printer, Chelsea Street, Suret Hills.




