

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
SYDNEY,
NEW SOUTH WALES.
ORCHARD MANURES
lIENKY C. L. ANDERSON.
SYDNEY : CHARLES POTTER, COVERNMENT PRINTER.
Hi 50—90


T
*
■
I


Orchard Manures
By HENRY C. L. ANDERSON.
It is only fifty years since Dr. Sprcngel produced a work in which he gave
full force to the idea that certain soils were barren because of the absence
of mineral constituents required for the growth of crops. One year later
Liebig’s great work, “ Organic Chemistry in its application to Agriculture
and Physiology,” was written to show that the humus of the soil is power-
less to build up completely the various tissues of plants. His patient
researches and well-conducted experiments fully estabished these laves of
husbandry: —
1. A soil can be termed fertile only when it contains all the materials
requisite for the nutrition of plants in the required quantity and in
the proper form.
2. With every crop a portion of ihese ingredients is removed. A part
of this portion is again added from the inexhaustible store of the
atmosphere; another part, however, is lost for ever, if not replaced
by man.
3, The fertility of the soil remains unchanged if all the ingredients of
a crop are given back to the land. Such a restitution is effected
by manure.
1. The manure produced in the course of husbandry is not sufficient to
permanently maintain the fertility of the soil; it lacks the consti-
tuents which are annually removed in the shape of fruit, grain,
hay, milk and live stock.
These laws form the basis of modern scientific agriculture, and it is only
by combining the study of vegetable physiology and the composition of soils
that we can understand the rationale of manuring.
In our study of manures for fruit-trees, we must start with the axiom that
no one manure is suitable for all kinds of fruit; audit is only by considering
in detail the constituents of plants and trees, the functions of their organs,
and the conditions for their growth and development, that we can hope to
understand fully the application of different manures.
The constituents of plants and trees are grouped in two classes —organic
and inorganic.
The organic are composed of carbon (C), hydrogen (H), oxygen (0),
nitrogen (N), and sulphur (S) ; and they are subdivided into carbohydrates,
such as starch, sugar, wood, &c., which contain only C, H, and O ; amides
and alkaloids, such as asparagin, strychnia, quinine, &c., which contain N in
addition to the foregoing; and albuminoids, such as albumen, gluten, legumin,
<scc., which contain 8 in addition to the other four elements.
When a plant is burnt the organic constituents pass into the air in the
form of gases, and from I per cent., as in turnips, to 8 per cent, in lucerne
hay and clover seed, is left behind as ash or mineral or inorganic constituents.
116 50—90 (6)


The amount of water in plants varies from 42 per cent, in some fruit-trees
to 90 per cent, in cabbages.
The water, C, H, and O arc provided by nature in sufficient quantities
either in one form or another ; but the mineral constituents which are absorbed
entirely from the soil during the plant’s growth, as also the H must be
exhausted sooner or later, according to the nature of the crop and its special
requirements, and must therefore be replaced by man in the form of manure.
These mineral constituents consist of potash, soda, lime, iron, magnesia,
silica, phosphorus, sulphur, chlorine, and perhaps manganese. The first
five of these are called bases, and are generally found in nature combined
with some acid, such as sulphuric, nitric, hydrochloric, phosphoric, silicic,
carbonic, or humic acid to form sulphates, nitrates, chlorides, phosphates,
silicates, carbonates, or humates of potash, soda, lime, iron, and magnesia.
This leads to the investigation of the conditions on which the fertility of
the soil depends ;
1. A certain quantity of organic matter is beneficial, for it causes disin-
tegration of the soil, and renders it more friable. It yields Nto
the crops, and has the power of retaining certain soluble substances
in light soils. At the same time an excess of it causes excess of
organic acids which make soil sour.
2. There must be present all the mineral matters required for the special
crop grown, and in such a form that they can be readily absorbed
by the growing tree or plant. According to the “law of minimum,”
a soil destitute of any one of these ingredients may become more
or less barren, since it is the minimum of any one essential ingre-
dient, and not the maximum of others, which is the measure of
fertility.
3. A soil may contain an abundance of potash, lime, phosphoric acid,
iron, &c., and yet be almost barren, if these substances exist as
insoluble compounds—as in granite sand, &c. Before any mineral
ingredient is absorbed bj r a living plant it must be dissolved by
water, or water very slightly acid. It is impossible for the roots
of a tree to absorb solid matter.
4. A fertile soil must be of such a texture as to admit free access of
air, though at the same time not too porous, but dense and firm
enough to retain moisture and to afford proper support to the
growing tree.
5. Earth worms increase the fertility of a soil, by opening passages and
thus allowing the roots to penetrate deeper into the soil, and by
converting the humus into soluble nitrogenous food. Darwin has
shown that in good arable land about 10 tons of soil per acre are
affected by earth worms, and these earth-casts will yield 80 lb. of
N—sufficient for a wheat crop of 2 acres.
How do plants get their food ? The water, of which plants on an average
contain 70 per cent., is absorbed from the soil by the fine roots and root
hairs of the tree, and it forms the vehicle of the mineral matters which pass
directly into the microscopic-cellular structures of the roots, and are thence
diffused through the leaves, stems, and fruit, and constitute, after burning,
the ash of the plant.
N is taken up by root-action, in the form of nitrates, formed from ammonia,
or salts of ammonia, and is then absorbed to form the albuminoids.
2
Orchard Manures.


Yille, the eminent French chemist, argues, and very forcibly, that some
plants, especially the leguminous, such as peas, lucerne, vetches, &c,, can
absorb N from the air. His arguments are very strong, but are not yet
accepted by the highest English authorities.
After the roots the leaves are the next most important organs of a tree.
Their millions of small mouths or stomata drink in the carbonic acid gas
from the atmosphere, and from every 44 parts by weight of that gas get 12 of
carbon to build up the organic constituents of the plant. It seems incredible
that trees should get almost the whole of their carbon from the four parts
of carbonic acid that exist in 10,000 of air ; but it can be understood when
we calculate that there are 2,100 lb. of air overlying every square foot
of land, and in that amount about 5i ounces of carbon, which is equal to
no less than 7 tons per acre. As in a root crop of 25 tons per acre, there
is hardly 30 cwt. of C., and in a wheat crop of 2\ tons per acre not more
than 22 cwt., it can be readily seen that there is constantly floating over
every part of the earth a quantity of C in the form of carbonic acid gas five
times in excess of any crop’s ultimate total requirements.
‘ Immediately a plant or tree starts into active growth its roots absorb water
and its leaves C, and five parts of the former with four of the latter form
starch; this is further acted on by water and converted into glucose or
sugar, Avhich being dissolved in the sap or juice of the tree permeates it,
giving rise to the various carbohydrates—wood, grape-sugar, cellulose, &c.
This process of assimilation or digestion is due, in some Avonderful way, to
the influence of the green colouring matter —chlorophyll—contained in the
leaves of trees. This green pigment is only formed in the presence of sunlight,
and when the tree is supplied with some compound containing iron.
Meanwhile, in the soil, away from light, myriads of small organisms—
bacteria—are acting on the humus and vegetable constituents of the soil,
changing the ammonia into nitric acid, which unites with the lime, potash,
soda, &c., in the soil to form nitrates. This process is called nitrification, and
goes on most briskly in moist and porous soils, and in the summer time ;
also, when gypsum and other salts of lime are present, and at a depth not
greater than 3 feet.
These nitrates thus formed, or those supplied in artificial manures, supply
the N necessary to form the alkaloids and albuminoids in our fruit. By the
same intricate process the fats and acids of fruit are probably formed by the
action between the compounds of C, 11, and the nitrates and sulphates as
taken up from the soil. Besides these organic constituents there is always
found in fruit, more or less potash, phosphoric acid, and iron. Hence it will
be seen that if a soil is deficient in any of the mineral ingredients found in
the trees or fruit, or if the mineral ingredients are not in the proper form in
the soil to be taken up by root-absorption, such trees must suffer, and a full
yield of fruit is impossible.
We may, with Dr. Griffiths, use the. words of the worthy parish priest
who was called in to pray over the barren fields of his parishioners, and after
passing from one to another, and, at the same time, pronouncing his bene-
diction over each, came to a most unpromising case. He surveyed the sterile
acres in despair. “ Ah, brethren,” said he, “no use to pray here—this needs
manure! ”
Here we may inquire as to the differences in the needs of different crops.
With regard to farm crops we are well informed by the results of hundreds
of analyses. Potatoes, beans, and peas need a large amount of potash ;
wheat and maize a good supply of phosphoric acid ; while clover, turnips,
3
Orchard Manures.


cherries, olives, and vines must have a deal of lime. With fruit trees, on the
other hand, we are not well supplied with analyses ot the ashes, but we can
arrive at many safe conclusions by analogy. (See table at end.)
Every observant gardener has noticed that good potato land gives very
fine poaches, nectarines, apricots, olives, plums, and cherries. Chemical
analysis has also shown that the ashes of those plants contain a largo
amount of potash, which may, therefore, be called their dominant con-
stituent. In like manner, oranges, lemons, pears, almonds, and apples do
well in maize soil, and phosphates may be considered their dominant need.
The ashes of vines, olives, strawberries, figs, and cherries, reveal a large per-
centage of lime and potash, so that bonedust, sulphate of lime (gypsum), and
potash manures may be expected to benefit these trees.
To illustrate the words “ dominant” and “ needs ” let us take the analysis
of the ashes of peaches : If 10,000 parts of leaves and stalks be burnt they
leave 324 parts of ash. Out of 100 parts of these ashes, 30 are silica, 20
lime, II magnesia, 13 potash, 5i salt, S phosphoric acid, 5 sulphuric acid,
1 iron, with traces of carbonic acid. Hence potash, magnesia, and lime may
be called the dominant constituents of peaches; and a complete manure for
this fruit must contain some suitable form of potash and of lime with
magnesia.
The admirable work of M. Ville during the last twenty-seven years has
shown that no soil is deficient in some of the mineral constituents; but that
if potash, phosphoric acid, lime, and nitrogen, and sometimes iron in the
form of sulphate of iron, be supplied to the poorest soil, excellent crops of
all kinds may be got.
I am strongly of opinion that some soils arc also deficient in the large
amount of magnesia necessary for peaches and potatoes ; but fortunately the
manures we would use to provide the lime would almost certainly provide
also as much magnesia as would bo necessary, without making any special
provision for it.
Taking Yille’s theory as correct —and no one after studying his valuable
work on Artificial Manures can possibly doubt the soundness of his
reasoning—we must first find which of these four substances any particular
crop especially needs, then discover how our soil is provided with that par-
ticular substance, and act accordingly.
To use manure when not needed is waste; and in the same way to use a
manure that contains too much of one substance, but too little of another, :s
equally waste. Hence the importance of being able to compound manures
of these four essentials in proportions varying to suit each tree’s require-
ments, so that it will get all that it wants and no more.
It must be remembered that with a rotation of farm crops, what one crop
does not consume in one year the next crop may use up. If we have given
the wheat too much potash the succeeding potatoes will greedily take it all
up; and if we have given the potatoes more nitrogen in the form of nitrates
or ammonia salts than they need, the succeeding crop of wheat or oats will
gladly utilize it.
With fruit trees it is different; and our constant care should be to find
the exact needs of each fruit tree that our particular soil cannot supply, and
remedy that want by an appropriate manure. Let us first try to find what
our soil contains. It must be distinctly borne in mind that however valuable
chemists’ analyses may be, they are apt to be misleading. I hey show all
the constituents of the soil, whether soluble or insoluble—in other words,
whether available by the tree or not. The chemist, by means of his acids and
chemical reagents, can unlock the most stubborn compounds and make them
4
Orchard Manures.


yield up their several elements in a soluble form ; e.g., granitic sand contains
large quantities of potash and lime, and bones contain plenty of phosphoric
acid, but all in a form not available by the roots of trees, till moisture,
warmth, and air, with other subtle natural agencies, have been operating on
them for some time.
To correct and support the chemist’s deductions, I would recommend trial
crops between the young trees —say (1) potatoes, (2) peas or lucerne, (3)
oats or wheat, (4) turnips, (5) cabbages, and (0) rye. The first must have
potash and magnesia; the second potash and phosphoric acid, but do not
need nitrogen ; the third nitrogen for the green stuff, and phosphoric acid
for the seed ; the fourth and fifth need lime and potash; and the rye is particu-
larly ereedy of phosphoric acid and potash, besides a fair amount ol nitrogen.
If any one of these crops fails entirely, or fails at a certain point in its
growth, the excellent tables of analyses in any book of agricultural chemistry
will at once furnish the clue to the weak point.
'The weak spot in our soil’s composition having been found, what manure
shall we use? Let us examine the relative values of the best known natural
manures, and then try a few experiments with some artificial manures —
variously compounded to suit our different requirements.
Farmyard Manure.— This varies very much in composition, and therefore
in value, which ranges from 4s. to 10s. per ton, according to the age and food
of the animals supplying it. A ton contains 13 cwt. of water, about G| cwt.
of organic matter which is practically useless, and 45 to 50 lb. of fertilizing
substances. It is valuable for warming cold laud, and is very useful for mulch-
ing for trees. It furnishes a little of each kind of mineral food, and makes
loose soils more retentive of moisture. It should be put on the land at once,
or else a large amount of the ammonia may be lost. Most certainly, all that is
made on the place should be collected and put round the trees as mulching,
but it can never pay for carting many miles, as I have seen done, at a cost
of 12s. (>d. per ton. The great objections to it as a manure are that it brings
hosts of weeds into the orchard, and that you cannot supply in it alone the
different necessary ingredients —such as potash, phosphoric acid, &c., in pro-
portions suited to different crops. It takes 40 tons of good dung and straw
to be equal in effect to 14 up to 1G cwt. of special mineral manure. (See
Ville’s experiments.) I have seen better effects from 2 lb. of a mixture
similar to those prescribed by M. Ville than from 80 lb. of cow-dung and
horse-dung mixed. It is, however, an excellent general manure, and has a
peculiar value of its own in supplying bacteria to promote nitrification in
the soil.
Poudrette necessarily varies very much in composition, and cannot there-
fore be applied intelligently, but only haphazard. It is sold in France at
£3 j>er ton, and its price in Sydney, £3 per ton, is generally above its com-
mercial value. At the same time every orchardist who values health and
cleanliness will abolish cess-pits, and compost the night-soil with the wood
ashes and dry earth. The resulting mixture will be found worth burying
week by week in the proximity of the peach trees.
Compost. —Every cultivator of the soil should have a compost heap, con-
sisting of peat, road scrapings, ashes, weeds, leaves, old mortar and lime, fowl
manure, sawdust, burnt bones, old rags and bags, sea-weed, and salt. When
these are rotted together they form a valuable plant food ; but of course,
where there is any special need, such as potash for peaches, it must bo added
in some form. The compost heap will be much enriched by regular waterings
of liquid manure, consisting of the drainings from the stable and cowshed,
5
Orchard Manures .


household slops, and soap-suds. It is here worthy of remark that urine is a
valuable plant food on account of its phosphoric acid; and, contrary to general
belief, may be used fresh, as the urea it then contains is as available for the
supply of N as the ammonia which the urea becomes through fermentation.
Wood Ashes are very valuable for their potash, and every particle made on
the premises should be kept for the earth-closet or compost heap, and applied
to the peaches, nectarines, vines, plums, cherries, and pears.
Dried Blood is worth, as far as its N is concerned, forty times as much as
farmyard manure, and also contains all the other ingredients essential to
make a good general manure. It is most valuable when composted with
ashes and charcoal, and should be used in early spring to stimulate the young
growths. Mixed with four parts of good bone-dust it is as good a manure as
can be had for general crops and for average soil. Of course, as said before,
where there is any special need (and it may be safely said that all the County
of Cumberland has special need of potash) the necessary addition must be
made. Dr. Hermbslildt has shown that soil without manure returned three
times the seed; with cow-dung, seven times; concentrated urine, twelve;
bullocks’ blood, fourteen. It is sold at the Abattoirs at £7 per ton, and is
well worth that as a supply of N for mixing with bouedust or superphosphate
of lime. (See analyses at the end.)
Guano varies very much in composition, and is hardly procurable in Sydney.
It is certainly never worth to the orchardist the price demanded, £l4, as he
can readily make an excellent substitute by mixing 3 cwt. of bouedust, 1 of
sulphate of ammonia, 1 of salt, 20 lb. of sulphate or nitrate of potash (or 1
cwt. of wood ashes), and 20 lb. ot sulphate of soda, at a total cost of £8 per ton.
Green Manures are very valuable as they bring up plant food from the
subsoil; increase nitrogenous constituents in the surface soil; by decomposition
produce carbonic acid, which disintegrates soil and thus converts insoluble
mineral constituents into soluble; warm the land; and increase the power of
retaining moisture and ammonia. The crops most suitable for ploughing in
are ferns, vetches, oats, barley, buckwheat, rape, clover, mustard, and rye,
Dor myself I recommend oats, barley, vetches, and rye to be sown in May in
12-foot strips between the young trees, manured with a rich nitrogenous
manure at once, mowed in November and put round the trees for mulching,
and the stubble ploughed in immediately. This refers, of course, only to young
orchards where the tree roots have not spread too far.
Having now dealt with what may be called natural manures —those that
are found more or less on every homestead —let us discuss the different
artificial and mixed manures.
Artificial manures are very valuable to the intelligent fruit-grower, as he
can certainly find among them that which will act as direct plant food, make
good the soil’s deficiencies, whether natural or caused by the exhaustion
consequent on continuous cropping, will stimulate and aid digestion, improve
the soil’s texture, and attract moisture from the air.
They are, as a rule, tolerably constant in their composition, and therefore,
when one knows the weakness of his soil, or the particular need of his crop,
he can by their aid exactly remedy the weakness or surely supply the need.
They may be divided into four classes —( I) Phosphatic —such as bones and
superphosphate of lime, (2) Nitrogenous—as sulphate of ammonia and
nitrate of soda. (3) Mineral —as lime, gypsum, salt, sulphate of iron, sulphate
of potash, chloride of potash, nitrate of potash, and sulphate of magnesia.
(4) Special mixed—as those prepared by the Sugar Tiefining Company, those
formulated by that eminent investigator, M. Yille, I’ison’s, and others.
6
Orchard Manures.


1. Good crushed bones are valuable in two ways, as besides 40 to 50 per cent,
of phosphate of lime they contain 4 to 5 per cent of ammonia in the gelatinous
substance of the bone. Unfortunately the bonedust supplied to us generally
is made from boiled and burnt bones—the former having lost nearly all, and
the latter the whole of the nitrogenous matter. This bonedust also contains
carbonate of lime and sufficient carbonate of magnesia to supply the needs of
■ any crop without special additions of that mineral. From sto 15 cwt, per
acre makes an excellent dressing of bonedust, which will last in the ground
as long as ten years, the ordinary triphosphate of lime of the bones being
insoluble and only very slowly acted upon in the ground and made into the
soluble monophosphate or superphosphate.
/ Bonedust is very reasonable in price in New South Wales, ranging from
*j3 r £jfl ss. to a ton, whereas in England it varies from £6 ss. to £B. For a
” general nitrogenous and phosphatic manure for oranges, apples, lemons,
vegetables, grass, oats, and barley, or for any crop or soil that needs chiefly
nitrogen, phosphoric acid, and lime without any special addition of potash, I
know of nothing better than the article sold by the Sydney Meat Preserving
Company, which contains a fair proportion of dried blood, furnishing 5 to 10
per cent, of ammonia ; or a mixture of three-parts of the Botany Company’s
bonedust with one of the dried blood from the abattoirs, which thus costs £5
I Ocj Q fnn nn ri -nmn Irl m V n nti n
10s, a ton, and would be worth £8 in England.
Superphosphate of lime is the best source of phosphoric acid and lime, pure
and simple, for it contains 11 to 20 per cent, of soluble phosphate, 24 to 40
per cent, of gypsum (sulphate of lime), 8 to 10 per cent, of insoluble
phosphate, together with some organic matter, sand, &c. It is made by acting
on bones, bone-ash, or mineral phosphates, with sulphuric acid. It is very
valuable for any soil that needs only phosphoric acid and lime without
nitrogen. A good dressing per acre is 2.t0 0 cwt. It is worth in England
£6 ss. per ton; but here the Sugar Company, making it as a by-product, can
afford to sell it at £4 10s. I can strongly advise those whose soil, being rich
in vegetable matter and poor in phosphates, sends the oranges and other
fruit-trees too much to leaf, to try the effect of this manure on the fruit.
For those who wish to make their own superphosphates I would note that
310 lb. of bones and 190 of sulphuric acid will make 272 of gypsum and 234
of superphosphate; and also warn the experimenter that if this be mixed
with lime or chalk, or used on chalk land, the soluble phosphate will be
turned into insoluble phosphate, and all the work of the sulphuric acid undone.
2. Sulphate of ammonia is the most valuable arlitieial source of nitrogen.
It is eagerly bought up in England at £l5 to £2O per ton, while here, on
account of the small demand, the Gas Company sell it at £tt): At this price 7
the nitrogen costs about Fits, per unit, whereas the other source of that /
'/ fertilizer—nitrate of soda —at the colonial price of £pf> per ton, costs about T^-
20s. per unit. In England, at £lO per ton, it is slightly cheaper than sulphate c /
of ammonia as a source of nitrogen.
This manure must not be used in chalk or limestone country, as volatiliza-
tion takes place. It is most valuable with bones or superphosphate on clay
land. As it is very soluble, and therefore easily washed out of the soil in
very wet weather, it is best applied in two dressings of £ cwt. per acre in
spring and autumn. When applied in September it has a marvellous effect
in reviving the vitality of leaves after the winter’s rest, in stimulating healthy
green growth, and thus causing the other plant foods—potash, phosphoric
acid, and lime—to contribute to the production of fruit and seed. I have
found, however, that an excessive dose in early spring will so suddenly
develop the flow of sap in peach trees as to cause the curl, and thus retard
7
Orchard Manures.


and impair the formation of fruit. I therefore recommend the mixture of
8G per cent, superphosphate with 14 per cent, sulphate of ammonia—(say) 2
cwt. per acre —such as the Sugar Company sell at £5 ss. per ton.
Nitrate of soda is very valuable in dry seasons, and particularly for peaches,
potatoes, sugar, and vines. It makes the fruit earlier, promotes nitrification
in the ground, enables plants to resist attacks of parasites —-owing to the
rapid development of chlorophyll in the leaves ; but its price here, £LG a ton,
is prohibitory.
The same may be said of nitrate of potash, which is a valuable source of
nitrogen as well as of potash ; but its price, £24 a ton, makes us tuan to some
cheaper manure which will supply the potash and nitrogen in a cheaper form.
8. Of the mineral manures the most necessary are lime and potash. Lime
is found in the ashes of the vine to the extent of 44 per cent, in the stem,
and 10 per cent, in the fruit; in the cherry and olive, 22 and 15 per cent,
respectively in the stem, and 8 and 151 per cent, in the fruit.
M. Yille’s investigations point out that for these and most other crops
lime can be best administered in the form of sulphate of lime. This salt is
very valuable also as a secondary agent, for it fixes ammonia in the ground
by decomposition, liberates potash and magnesia from its insoluble compounds,
and makes them available. It is known to be very good for oranges, olives,
plums, and peaches. There is no need to apply it separately, as there is
generally about 1-17 lb. of it necessarily mixed with every 100 lb. of super-
phosphate ; or, in other words, about 60 per cent, of commercial super-
phosphate consists of sulphate of lime.
Quick-lime is very valuable for soils rich in organic matter, as it neutralizes
the vegetable acids which make such lands sour ; it liberates the alkalies —
potash and soda —from dormant compounds, decomposes clay, makes heavy
soils porous and friable, improves the quality of the fruit, destroys insects,
checks growth of moss, and hastens maturity. The ordinary caustic lime,
which will, of course, be slacked by the first shower of rain, is the best for
light and poor soils.; the carbonate of lime or chalk which has the same
composition as lime that has been air-slacked, i c., that has recombined with
the carbonic acid gas, is best lor heavy rich soils. The ordinary dressing is
1 to 2 tons per acre every six or eight years, to be lightly harrowed in.
Potash is a very necessary manure in nearly all but the richest volcanic
soils of New South Wales, more especially in the County of Cumberland. It
is now almost a matter of certainty that the yellows in peaches, or fungus
called Uromj/ces amygdali, and their gradual decay, together with the diseases
in potatoes, are much aggravated by the debility caused by a deficiency of
potash. One of Yille’s' experiments, in 1869, shows that with his normal
manure, containing phosphoric acid, potash, ammonia, and lime, the yield of
potatoes per acre was 128 cwt.; without the phosphates, 120 cwt.; without
lime, 108; without nitrogen, 94; without potash, 78; and without any
manure, 28.
Nitre, or saltpetre, or nitrate of potash, is a very valuable source of both
nitrogen and potash ; but its price here is absolutely prohibitory, except for
experimental purposes.
Sulphate of potash is the only source of it available here, and its price,
£lB per ton, is far too high. Chloride of potash, which is found in immense
mines in Prussia, is the cheapest form, and is the one recommended by
Yille. It ought to be sold here at £lO per ton, and its introduction at that
price would be a great benefit to all fruit-growers. I trust that, as Elliott
Bros, do not find it worth while to import it, the Sugar Company will
8
Orchard Manures.


introduce it into their most valuable manures instead of the sulphate, and
thus reduce the price of the No. 4 manure by 10s. per tor, and No. 5 by 16s.
Salt is hardly needed as a manure in New South AYales, but it is very useful
in promoting the decomposition of animal and vegetable matter. It acts as
a direct plant food in small proportions, has stimulating powers, seems to
preserve juices of fruit from sudden transitions in temperature, increases
the power of some soils of absorbing moisture, and acts as a check when too
much nitrogenous manure has been applied. It is very valuable when mixed
with lime, soot, and farmyard manure.
Sulphate of iron has been shown by Dr. Griffiths to be a very valuable
manure for increasing the chlorophyll of the leaves, and therefore the vigour
of oranges, lemons, peaches, apples, and plums. It seems to have the power
of enabling the tree to secrete more sugar, and thus enrich the fruit.
Every soil contains enough iron for any crop grown on it, but not always
in an available form; and hence this soluble salt of iron seems very valuable
in some soils, acting as a tonic, and making the plants develop greater per-
centages of albuminoids and carbohydrates. Half a hundredweight per acre
is an ample dressing, to be applied after rain, in the early spring. It is worth
trying with oranges and peaches —§ lb. each to full grown trees.
4. Mixed manures may be varied in character and composition to suit
every crop. AYhile we cannot tell, even approximately, the composition of
farmyard manure, and do not therefore know how much we should apply in
order to get a certain amount of any one of its ingredients, in mixing our
own artificial manures we can use the exact amount per acre we require, and
no more. Again, while we might have to use 40 tons of farmyard manure, or
1 ton of guano to get (say) 50 lb. of potash, we would be using far more of
the other ingredients than is necessary, and therefore wasting them: bib.
with our special mixed manures we can use the 50 lb. of potash with as
much or as little of any other fertilizer as we need.
Yille recommends for fruit trees and vines the following mixture : —6 parts
of superphosphate, 5 of chloride (or sulphate) ot potash, 3* of sulphate of
ammonia, and | gypsum, to be applied at the rate ot 1,320 lb. per acre.
This, of course, refers to an old orchard or vinery, with the trees or vines
close together and in full bearing.
In one of his experiments with this normal manure he got 95 cwt. of
grapes per acre; without the nitrogenous matter, 50 cwt.; without the
superphosphate, 58 cwt.; without the lime, 62 cwt.; without the potash, none;
without manure, a few shrivelled grapes.
In my own experience I have received great satisfaction from the mixed
manures supplied by the Sugar Company, especially No. 2 for oranges and
lemons; No. 3 for apples, apricots, and plums; and No. 4 or No. 5 for
peaches, nectarines, and grapes. All of these mixtures are reliable, they are
reasonable in price compared with corresponding values in England, they
are quick in their action, and are economical in application.
The row of twenty young peach trees to Avhich I gave No. 4 last year is
now larger in every way than the row dressed with No. 3, and the trees in
the latter are, without exception, more than twice the size of those which
received only sheep manure. The trees which I dressed with these manures
in August this year started into growth too soon, and the circulation of the
sap bemg arrested by a late frost some of the leaves curled; those which I
treated in the middle of September are much brighter in colour and more
forward in every way than the ones which received no manure.
No. 1 is a superphosphate made from the boneash used to refine the sugar,
and contains about 20 per cent, soluble phosphate and 40 per cent, sulphate
9
Orchard Manures .


Orchard Manures.
T * *
of lime. It is very valuable for soils that need only phosphoric acid and lime.
No. 2 contains, in addition to the superphosphate, 14 per cent, of sulphate
of ammonia, and is certainly quicker and more valuable than bonedust. No.
3 contains, besides the 14 per cent, of sulphate of ammonia, 4 per cent, of
potash, the balance being superphosphate —15 per cent, being soluble and 40
per cent, sulphate of lime, and is very useful for soils rather deficient in potash
and also partly exhausted of nitrogen, lime, and phosphoric acid. No. 4
contains about 12 per cent, soluble phosphate, 80 per cent, sulphate of lime,
8 per cent, of potash, with 25 per cent, of ammonia sulphate, and is most
valuable for peaches, sugar-cane, maize, and vines. No. 5 contains still more
potash —14 per cent. —with 14 per cent, of sulphate of ammonia, and is very
useful for light sandy loams that have been exhausted of their potash and
vegetable matter.
Guided by my own experience, I recommend these manures to be chosen
and used in the light of the needs of the crop and the special deficiencies of
the soil. They should be applied in two small doses —the first in the early
spring, and the second in the autumn. They should be evenly distributed
all round the tree as far as the roots extend, at the rate of 4 lb. per tree per
annum for the first year, 6 for the second, 8 for the third, 10 for the fourth,
and 12 for the fifth. This can be done at a total expense of 2s. Id. per tree
for the five years, or about £lO per acre, and is the most effective, most
reliable, and most economical system of manuring that I have been able to
devise.
I shall conclude my remarks by again asserting that each intelligent fruit-
grower must adopt a system adapted to the needs of his own pax-ticular crop
and soil, and these he can find out only by a series of comparative experiments,
always remembering that each tree or plant has a dominant mineral con-
stituent, i.e., the constituent most essential to its existence, which can be
supplied with almost mathematical precision, but without which the tree will
become the prey of inferior organisms, such as microscopic fungi, aphides,
<tc., and cannot eventually prosper.
Some
Analyses of 100 Parts
of Fruit-ashes.
{By Dr. Emil Wolff.)
Estimated amount.
Phos-
phoric
Acid.
Sul-
phuric
Acid.
Ohio- |of mineral matter
Silica. . removed fiom
i rme. | an acrc n f so ii hy
a fair crop.
Iron
Oxide.
Potash. Soda.
Almond
Orange
27'95 0-23
38-72 I 7-64
43-63
98 lb.
5-24
22-99
120 lb.
Strawberry
Olive
21-07 ! 28-48
68 lb.
91 lb.
60-07
4-
5-
Apple
Pear
54 lb.
35-68
26-09
54-69 8-52
82 lb.
1-49
5-11
Grape
Plum
Cherry
Fig
63-21 0-40
10-43
72 to 168 lb.
80 lb.
59 21 < 0-54
51-85 2-19
86 lb.
28-36 26-27
27-39 4-40
64 lb.
Quince
Lemon
42 -32
40 lb.
100 lb.
34-00 4-37
84-85


Orchard Manures.
Prices of Artificial Manures.
Manure.
England. N. S. Wales.
— 1 ;
£ s. d.
t Mineral superphosphate ...
Pure dissolved bones ...
Nitrate of soda, 95 per cent.
•Sulphate of ammonia
Kainit, 23 per cent, sulphate of potash ...
| Muriate (chloride) of potash
* Bone meal ...
Rmio flmiv onrl rli’ind UnAn
£ s. d.
3 5 0
6 0 0
4 10 0
16 0 0 /
-141—0—0
*lO 0
-Wr o o rz
8 12 6
15 0 0
2 5 0
9 0 0
6 5 0
55 0 4
Bone Hour and dried blood
Nitrate of potash ...
Sulphate of potash ...
6 10 0
6 0 0
20 0 0
24 0 0
9 0 0
18 0 0 W
4 10 0
0 18 0
Pondrette
Dried blood
Dried offal
3 0 0
3 0 0
8 0 0
7 o o <r
6 0 0
5 0 0
Dried Blood and OJTaI
Analysis of Dried Blood, by William M. Hamlet.
Manure,
F.1.C., F.C.S., Government Analyst,
Per cent.
Moisture ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11*18
matter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 78*10
+Asn (mineral matter) ... . . ... ... 10*72
100*00
Analysis of Offal.
Per cent
Moisture ... ... ~ ... 6*Bo
matter ... ... ... ... ... 77*94
§Ash (mineral matter) ... * ... ... ... 15*26
100*00
* Containing nitrogen 10*46, equal to 12 - 70 per cent, of ammonia, worth £6 12s.
t Containing phosphoric acid, ’59 per cent., equal to I*3o per cent, of phosphate of lime (bone phosphate).
f Containing nitrogen 6 - 90, equal to 8*39 per cent, of ammonia, worth £4 11s.
§ Containing phosphoric acid, 1 'B9, equal to 4 - l per cent, of phosphate of lime (bone phosphate), con-
taining also B*2 per cent, of sand.
Note. —The ash or mineral matter of dried blood contains, in addition to phosphate of lime, common salt,
phosphate of soda, phosphate of magnesia, phosphate of iron, chloride of potash, gypsum and chloride of
calcium ; value of ash in a ton of dried blood, 10s. to 15s.
Sydney : Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lB9o.


>
. i
