

ORDERS
FOR
Australian Imperial Force
By Authority : Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne.
C. 1092
* Issued with Military Order No. 93 of 1915.
Issued by the Military Board
for Units included in Personnel
Table* No. 2,
and Subsequent Tables.




ORDERS
FOR
Australian Imperial Force
By Authority : Albert J. Mollbtt, Government Printer, Melbourne.
C. 1002.
Issued by the Military Board
for Units included in Personnel
Table* No. 2,
and Subsequent Tables.
♦lssued with Military Order No. 93 of 191 S.


CONTENTS.
Paka.
A.
Absentees on embarkation .. .. .. ~ .. ~ 42a
Accoutrements, marking of .. .. .. .. .. 5g
Acquittance Rolls .. ~ .. .. .. ~ 93 )
Administration .. .. .. .. .. ~ ~ 17
Ago .. .. .. .. 18
Allotment of troops to transports, Table of .. .. .. ~ 10
Allotment of pay .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 96
Allowances and pay prior to embarkation .. .. ~ .. 84
Allowances and pay on and from date of embarkation .. .. .. 85
Appointments .. .. .. .. .. ~ ~ 18
Appointments of members of Permanent Forces will remain open .. ~ 91 (a)
Armourers, enlistment of .. .. ~ .. ~ .. 24
Armourers, instruction of .. .. .. .. .. ~ 9
Attestations .. .. .. ~ ~ .. .. _ ( 21
Australian Notes and Silver Coinage ~ ~ .. .. .. 102
B.
Base Record Office, establishment of .. .. .. .. .. 28
Beer ration .. .. ~ .. ~ .. .. .. 78
Belts for sentries .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 72
Blankets for use in the field .. .... .. .. ~ 68
Boats, Transports .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 17k
Books in possession of officers .. .. .. .. .. .. 2, 3
Books and forms .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 61
Books, Field Conduct .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 41
Books, pay for soldiers .. .. .. .. .. ~ ~ 23a, 98
Books, record of trainees enrolled .. .. .. .. .. 29
Boots, reserve supply of ~ .. .. .. .. .. 47 (xv.)
Branding horses .. ~ ~ .. .. .. .. 59
Bullets, soft nose, use of prohibited .. .. .. .. .. 70
C.
Camp equipment on arrival in England .. .. .. .. .. 69
Camping ground to be kept clean .. .. .. 43
Canteens in camp .. .. .. ~ .. ~ ~ 42
Canvas shoes .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 47 (ii.)
Cartridges, S.A. .45 ball, Webley .. .. .. .. ~ 77
Casualties .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 35
Censorship .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. 6
Chaplains, free issue of uniform and kit .. .. .. ~ .. 45 (iv.)
Chaplains, pay and allowances for .. .. ~ .. .. 95
Character .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 41
Chest measurement .. .. .. .. .. 18
Cinematographs not allowed on troopships .. .. .. .. 17a
Civilians accompanying A.I.F. .. .. .. .. .. .. 25
Chargers, private in lieu of Government remounts .. .. .. ~ 66
Clothing, kit and necessaries, scale of issue .. .. ~ .. 47
Clothing, equipment, &c., marking of .. .. .. .. 57 (x.)
Clothing, size roll of jackets .. .. .. ~ .. Appendix 2
Clothing, scale of values of articles .. ~ .. .. .. 47 (xii.)
Command and Administration .. .. .. .. .. 17
Cooking and cooking classes .. .. .. .. .. .. 74
Courts Martial .. .. .. .. 17
Clothing of unallotted men in camp .. .. .. .. * .. 47 (vi.)
D.
Deferred pay ~ ~ .. .. ~ ~ .. ~ 85
Dependents, provision of before and after embarkation .. .. .. 101 {a)
Deserters ~ ~ .. ~ ~ .. ~ ~ 42a
Diaries, War .. .. .. .. .. .... .. 7
Diseases, venereal .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 36
Discharges .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 23, 23a, 88
Discipline, application of Army Act to A.I.F. .. .. .. .. 40
A 2


Paea.
Discipline, The Field Conduct book .. .. .. .. .. 41
Discharge of members prior to embarkation .. .. .. .. 49
Dogs not admitted on transports .. ~ .. .. ~ 17b
Dross, Staff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 45
E.
Embarkation books .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 8
Embarkation, issue of passes to civilians prior to .. .. .. ~ 25
Embarkation, Staff .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 11
Embarkation, date of for pay purposes .. .. .. .. ~ 97
Embarkation of horses .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 83
Enlistment .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 20
Enlistment in excess of establishment .. .. .. .. ~ 22
Enlistment and discharge .. .. .. .. ~ .. 23
Enlistment of armourers .. .. .. .. .. .. 24
Establishment of Base Record Office .. .. .. .. .. 28
Establishment personnel .. ~ .. ~ .. .. 22
Equipment .. .. .. .. .. „. .. .. 57
Equipment, &c., scale of values of articles .. .. .. .. 47 (xii.)
F.
Field conduct sheets .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 41
Field returns .. ~ .. .. ~ .. .. ~ 32
Financial instructions .. .. .. .. .. .. 87 to 102
Flags, distinguishing .. .. ~ ~ .. .. ~ 73
Forage and rations for use on day of disembarkation .. .. ~ 63
Forage, scale of on board ship .. .. .. .. .. .. 64
Forms of “ Allotment to pay agents ” .. .. .. .. 96
Funerals .. .. .. .. ~ .. ~ ~ 99
G.
Gifts .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 76
H.
Harness and saddlery, details of .. .. .. .. Appendix 3
Height, standard of .. .. .. .. .. .. 18
Honours and Salutes .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 17 C
Horse rugs, for use abroad .. .. .. ~ .. .. 71
Horses, branding of .. ~ .. ~ .. ~ 59
Horses, embarkation and care of on transports .. .. .. . „ 83
Horses, instructions re disposal of carcases on board ship .. .. .. 82
Horses, private chargers in lieu of Government remounts .. ~ .. 66
Horses, slinging of when on board ship .. .. .. ~ .. 82 (j)
Horses, general veterinary instructions re .. .. .. ~ 81a
I.
Increments for members of permanent forces .. .. .. .. 91
Inoculation .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 38
Inquiries by relatives .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 28 (iii.)
Instructions, financial .. .. ~ .. ~ .. .. 87 to 102
Instruction, preliminary musketry .. ~ .. .. Appendix I.
Instruction of armourers .. .. .. .. .. .. 9
Instructional stores .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14
J.
Jackets, Officers’, step collar .. .. .. .. .. .. 45 (iv,)
K.
Kit, uniform, and necessaries ... .. .. .. .. .. 47
Kit, uniform, and necessaries, Mounted Officers .. .. 47 (xvii.) (a)
Kit, uniform, and necessaries, Dismounted Officers .. .. 47 (xvii.) (6)
Kit, uniform, and necessaries, W. and N.C.O.’s and men, mounted ~ 47 (xvii.) (c)
Kit, uniform, and necessaries, W. and N.C.O.’s and men, dismounted.. 47 (xvii.) (d)
L.
Lectures .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 15 (iv.)
Letters, addressing of for members of A.I.F. whilst abroad .. .. ~ 30
Liquor forbidden except for medical purposes ~ .. .. .. 42
' Contents— continued.


Para.
M.
Mails .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 17d
Maintenance of families .. .. .. .. .. .. 100
Medical .. .. .. .. .. .. 2, 38, 38a, 39, 39a
Members discharged prior to embarkation .. .. .. .. 49
Mobilization tables .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 57
Mortality of horses .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. ,83
Motor cars, gift of .. ~ ~ .. .. .. .. 67
Movements of troops by land and sea . • .. .. .. .. 12
Musketry instructions, preliminary .. .. ... .. Appendix 1
N.
Nominal Rolls.. .. .. .. .. .. 27 and Appendix 4
Numbers, Regimental .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 44
Nursing service, rank and precedence .. .. .. .. .. 19 (e)
Nursing service, pay and allowances for .. •. .. .. .. 86
O.
Officers, appointment of .. .. .. .. .. .. 17
Officers, C.M. Form A. 22 .. .. .. .. .. - .. 18
Officers —Rules, command, rank and precedence .. .. .. •. 19
Officers, veterinary .. .. .. .. .. . • .. 81
Orders .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ,1
Orders, unit .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 28
Ordnance supplies .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 79
Outfit allowance, Nursing service ~ ~ .. .. . • 47 (viii.)
Outfit allowance, Officers’ ~ .. .. .. .. .. 47 (viii.)
P.
Passes, issue of to civilians prior to embarkation .. .. •. .. 9
Pay and allowances prior to embarkation .. .. ... .. 84
Pay and allowances on and from tho date of embarkation .. .. .. 85
Pay, allotment of .. . • .. .. .. . • •. 96
Pay, allotments of to wives and others .. .. .. .. .. 191 (b)
Pay books .. .. .. .. .. .. .. •. 23a, 98
Pay books, return of surplus .. .. .. .. .... 98
Pay, date of embarkation for purposes of .. .. .. .. 97
Pay, issue of and accounting for .. .. .. .. • • 98
Pay, single men having their money paid into bank .. .. .. 101 (c)
Plain clothes store .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 48
Precedence of Officers, Command, Rank and .. .. .. .. 19
Promotion of W. and N.C.O.’s .. .. .. .. . • . • 37
Publications .. •. .. .. .. . * • • • • 3» 3
Publishing information .. .. .. .. .. .. 5
R.
Rank in Expeditionary Forces .. .. ... .. .. .. 26
Rations and forage for use on day of disembarkation .. .. , • 63
Regulations regarding movements of troops by land or sea .. .. .. 12
Reports
Returns .. .. .. .. -. .. .. 31, 31a, 32
Rubber stamps .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 36
Rugs, horse, for use abroad .. .. .. .. .. .. 71
S.
Saddlery, Officers’ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 62
Sea kit bags, articles to be carried in .. .. .. .. 47 (xviii.)
Separation allowance prior to embarkation .. .. .. .. 101 {d)
Shoes, canvas, reserve supply of .. ... .. .. • .. 47 (xv.)
Signallers, training of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4
Signallers on board transports .. .. .. .. .. .. 5
Spurs, issue of,. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 57 (ii.)
Staff dress ~ .. .. .. . • .. .. .. 45
Staff, embarkation .. .. .... .. .. •• •• 11
Stamps for branding .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 59 (ii.)
Standards for enlistment ~ .. .. . . .. .. 18
Contents— continued.


Paea.
States .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 31, 31a
Statistics .. .. .. .. .... .. .. 34
Store, plain clothes .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 48
Stores .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 75
Stores, veterinary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 80, 81
Stores, instructional .. .. ~ .. .. .. •. 14
Stores and forage, unexpended portions of at end of voyage .. .. 75a
Stowaways .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 22a
Supplies, method of issue ~ .. .. .. .. .. 79
T.
Table of allotment of troops to transports .. .. .. .. 10
Trainees, record book of enrolled .. .. .. .. .. 29
Training .. .. .. ~ .. .. ~ .. 13
Training of Field Artillery on board ship .. .. .. .. .. 16
Training of leaders .. .. ~ ~ .. .. .. 15
Training of signallers .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4
Transfers ~ ... .. .. .. ~ .. .. 55
Transports, command and administration of troops .. .. .. 17
Transports, boats .. .. .. .. .. .. 17e
Transports, signallers for communication .. .. .. .. 5
Transports, instructions to O.C. troops .. .. .. .. .. 2a
Troops at disposal of War Office .. .. .. .. .. 1
U.
Uniform, kit, and necessaries .... .. .. .. .. 47
Uniform, &c., for nursing service .. .. ~ .. .. 56
Unit orders ~ .. .. ~ ~ ~ .. ~ 28
V.
Vaccination .. ... .. .. .. .. • • 38
Vehicles, allowance for marking of .. .. .. .. .. 60 (h)
Vehicles, marking of .. .. .. .. • • .. 60
Venereal diseases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 38a
Veterinary, general instructions .. .. .. .. .. 81
Veterinary Officers, pay of .. .. .. .. .. .. 96(a)
Veterinary services, disposal of stores on disembarkation .. .. .. 80 (a)
Veterinary services, stores not to be used prior to embarkation .. .. 80 (6)
W.
W. and N.C.O.’s, Permanent Forces, clothing .. .. .. •. 46
Water, conservation of on board ship .. .. .... .. 79
I ND EX TO APPENDICES.
Page
Appendix 1. Musketry Instructions .. .. .. .. .. 15
~ 2. Size Roll, Jackets .. .. .. .. .. .. 03
~ 3. Harness and Saddlery .. .. .. .. .. 64
~ 4. Nominal Roll .. .. .. .. .. .. 73
JfOlE, —This publication contains all the orders issued as under, with certain additions and amend-
ments :
(a) Orders for A.I.F. issued with M.O. 523/1014.
(b) Supplement to above issued with M.O. 523/1914.
(c) Special Orders for troops forming the 3rd Convoy (adapted to future requirements).
Contents — continued.


A.—GENERAL STAFF.
1. Troops after embarkation are placed by the Commonwealth Govern-1. Orders,
meut at the disposal of the War Office.
They will be subject to the orders of any General Officer Commanding
the Imperial Forces, at any place at which they are.
In any emergency, or at any place where there is not a General Officer
Commanding, they will take orders from their senior officer present.
Troops are not to be allowed to land at any place, except with the
consent and subject to the restrictions imposed by the O.C. Station.
The O.C. Troops is held responsible that, on final disembarkation, all
troops are disembarked before lie himself leaves tlie ship. (See para. 1659,
page 284, K.R).
O.C. Troops on board H.M.A. Transport will furnish a general report Rep<)rts
addressed to the Secretary for Defence, Melbourne, from each port of call,
and a final report at the end of the voyage.
2. Copies of the undermentioned publications have been prepared and publication*,
will be issued in accordance with the following scale :
(i) 1 Copy to each officer.
(a) The preparation and despatch of messages in the Field.
(b) Infantry Training, 1914.
(c) Notes on the movement of troops by rail and sea, and discipline
on board ship.
(d) Notes on night operations.
(e) Notes on the French Army.
(/) Notes on the Belgian Army.
( g ) Notes on the German Arm}^.
(h) Notes on the Austro-Hungarian Army.
(i) Notes on the Military Geography of France.
(j) Notes on the Military Geography of Belgium.
(k) A survey of the provisions of the Army Act “ Offences and
Courts-Martial, and Rules of Procedure of Courts-
Martial.”
(l) Military vocabulary of English, French, and German military
terms.
(m) Map of the N.E. Frontier of France.
(n) Map of Belgium and N.E. of France.
(o) Notes on Supply in War.
(p) Orders for the Australian Imperial Force.
(ii) 1 Copy to each officer, W. 0., and Staff Sergeant.
U>) Notes on the Supply and Transport Services of an Army in the
Field.
(q) Physical exercises on board ship.


(iii) Copies to units for general reference.
(r) Army Postal Service in War.
(s) Notes on Ordnance Services in the Field.
(iv) The Field Service Manual, 1914, Army Medical Service (Expedi-
tionary Force), issued with Army Orders dated November, 1914, and re-
printed locally with 1914 War Establishments (Imperial), will be taken as
a guide for loading waggons and carts of medical units.
Medical arrangements for units for which no medical officer is provided
will also be in accordance with this Manual.
Copies will be issued to all concerned.
3. The following books are to be in the possession of the O.C. Troops
on each transport :
(i) Manual of Military Law, 1914.
(ii) King’s Regulations, 1912 (with amendments).
(iii) Regulations and Standing Orders for the Military Forces of the
Commonwealth of Australia.
(iv) Orders for Australian Imperial Force.
(v) Offences and Court Martial and Rules and Procedure of Court
Martial.
(vi) Notes on the Movements of Troops by Rail and Sea and Discipline
on board ship.
4. (i) Right Horse Regimental Signallers will comprise 1 signalling
seigeant, 5 trained signallers, and 4 despatch ridel's at regimental head-
quarters, and 3 despatch riders with each squadron. For training, the
whole should be under the signalling sergeant.
(ii) Infantry Regimental Signallers.— ln addition to the authorized
establishment, 20 men will be drawn from the ranks, and will be trained
during the voyage in semaphore and message carrying; 4of these will be
allotted to head-quarters of the battalion. In the field the normal allotment
per company will be 2 trained signallers and 2 semaphore men, but the
whole will be under the signalling officer for training.
(iii) During the voyage instruction in semaphore signalling will be <dven
to all ranks of Light Horse, Infantry, Artillery, and Engineers.
(iv) AH officers should be able to send and read the semaphore by the
time the transport reaches the port of final disembarkation.
5. (i) On board each transport three Signallers, able to send and read
semaphore and lamp, will, if possible, be placed at the disposal of the master
for communication duties. All signalling equipment for this work will bo
provided by masters of ships.
(ii) An order is to be issued on each transport prohibiting men from
flashing or making unauthorized signals from ship to ship. Such signals
interfere with official communication.
6. (a) In order to prevent the disclosure of information likely to be of
use to the enemy or to create alarm or despondency, strict censorship will be
exercised on all correspondence emanating from members of the Australian
Imperial Force.


(6) Correspondence and parcels will be stopped if they contain any
reference to the names or movements of ships, their dates of sailing, ports of
call or -destination, or to the organization, strength, state, position, or
movements of troops. The place from which correspondence is written
or despatched is not to bS mentioned.
(c) Telegrams and post-cards, written in clear English, will bo de-
spatched withont delay after being passed and signed by a censor appointed
by the O.C. Troops on board. Other correspondence is liable to be suppressed
or to be considerably delayed in reaching its destination.
(d) No direct telegraphic communication by troops between ships and
shore is permitted. r
(e) All press publications and communications will be submitted to the
censor appointed by the O.C. Troops for censorship.
(/) The circulation of newspapers published on board transports is to
be confined strictly to the ships on which they are produced.
[g) Officers commanding units should instruct all members of their com-
mands not to despatch letters, postcards, or telegrams containing reference
to places at which they are, or have been, dates of sailing, or description of
transports. r
(h) Officers and soldiers of the Australian Imperial Force are forbidden
to publish or communicate to the press any information, without special
authority, either directly or indirectly. They will be held responsible for
all statements contained in communications to their friends which may
subsequently be published in the press.
7. The guiding principles to be followed in regard to the matter to be
entered m War Dairies are that IV ar Diaries ought to serve as a record of
important facts not recorded elsewhere, and as an index of important orders
instructions, or messages received and despatched.
Officers keeping diaries should use their discretion as to the necessity
of attaching appendices; it will often be enough to quote the number of
a superior s order. Unimportant matter should be eliminated. There is
no need to make an entry every day.
8. In the event of masters of His Majesty’s transports not being iu pos-
session of copies of King’s Regulations, officers commanding troops will
make their books available for reference, if requested, by masters of trans-
ports.
9. District commandants will arrange for all armourers—and men who
will be detailed as armourers—to be instructed in their duties by the
senior armourer of the Ordnance Department, in each district.
10. A table showing the provisional allotment of troops to transports will
be issued to district commandants and officers commanding units. The
table is ‘‘for official use only,” and its contents are not to be communicated
to the Press.


11. (i) Embarkation will be effected by the orders of, and under the
superintendence of, district commandants. The Naval Transport Branch
will notify district commandants of the dates when transports .will be
available; and orders will be given to district commandants as to the time
at which the embarkation on respective transports will be completed.
(ii) The embarkation staff in each district will work in conjunction with
the officer detailed to represent the Naval transport Branch.
12. Extracts from King’s Regulations and Naval Transport Regulations
regarding movements bv rail and sea, and for the conduct of troops on board
ship, have been printed, and will be issued in book form to officers com-
manding units.
13. (i) The attention of Commanding Officers is directed to the need for
practice in packing transport vehicles—especially baggage waggons with
service loads, with a view to reducing the time spent in packing, as well as
getting loads into the smallest space (which involves rolling blankets,
waterproof sheets, Sic.}. It has been found that with experienced packers
the time can be reduced by 50 per cent, and the compactness of the load by
about 20 per cent.
(ii) Facilities for practising entraining, detraining, and embarking should
be improvised — e.g. , a shed may be used to represent a ship; men may be
marched over a gangway, rifles being passed by hand.
(iii) In placing vehicles, &c., on transports, arrangements should be
made for field and machine guns and signalling equipment to be readily
accessible for training purposes.
(iv) All farrier-sergeants and shoeing smiths will be examined during
camp by the veterinary officers of units in order to test their efficiency in
the work required of them.
(v) Officers responsible for training will ensure that no effort is spared to
make the best use of the limited time, deck-space, and appliances available
for training on board ship. This must, necessarily, chiefly take the form of
“individual training,” which is fully dealt with in Training and Manoeuvre
Regulations.
Special attention is directed to Section 39 of this book, and to the need
for impressing upon each man the individual aspect of musketry, the
individual aspect of outpost duty, patrol work, passing messages, and
similar duties, and the individual responsibility of every one to make
himself efficient.
The subjects which every man is to be taught while at “ individual
training” are laid down in the Training Manuals of the several arms.
Special*attention should be paid to forms of instruction which lend them-
selves to training on board ship ; for example, musketry, machine-gunnery,
bayonet fighting, semaphore signalling, physical training, map-reading,
writing messages, reporting, and so on.
At least two complete detachments for each machine gun are to be
trained, and efforts should be made to train three detachments per gun.
Every officer and non-commissioned officer, as well as a large proportion
of men, should understand how demolition charges (which may be
represented by blocks of wood of correct dimensions) are placed and fired.


(vi) In order to standardize instruction, early opportunity should be
taken to put regimental officers and non commissioned officers through
“ refresher ” courses in the instructional work they will have to carry out.
In this way each instructor will know beforehand exactly what is to be
done, and the younger officers and non-commissioned officers will be trained
to impart knowledge in an instructive and interesting form.
Programmes of work should be drawn up so as to provide for reasonable
variety ; the whole field of instruction should be I'eviewed, the relative
importance of each item considered, and the time allotted to the best
advantage. As an example, a suggested syllabus of musketry instruction
is appended (vide Appendix 1). The size of parties under training will
necessarily vary according to the subject, as well as the appliances and deck
space available; it must be remembered that training in small bodies will
afford subordinate leaders valuable opportunities of developing their power
of command, under proper supervision by senior officers (see Training and
Manoeuvre Regulations, Section 2).
Alertness of attitude and smartness of movement at drill should be
insisted upon.
Careful arrangements should be made in order to utilize the available
deck space to its fullest extent. Foresight and organization should be
exercised in order to prevent waste of time. For example, a portion of a
unit may be exercised in marching (with boots on), while other portions are
exercised in visual training (witli landscape targets), care of arms, fire
discipline, semaphore signalling, or machine gunnery. Useful tactical
instruction can be given by means of a short lecture, followed by a
demonstration with the help of landscape targets, or an improvised sand
table.* “ Indoor Exercises ” (Training and Manoeuvre Regulations, Section
28) may take the place of lectures; this form of instruction (the solution of
simple, tactical problems on the map or on an improvised model) is a
valuable means of teaching officers and non-commissioned officers to deal
rapidly with situations they are likely to meet in war.
Officers will always be present with their men on parade.
(vii) Officers responsible for training will make their own arrangements
for carrying out theoretical instruction in writing orders, messages, map
reading, &c. The reports on examinations for promotion contain suitable
maps and schemes ; attention is also directed to “ The Preparation and
Despatch of Messages in the Field,” which have been prepared by Major
Mack worth, Officer i/c Army Signals, and notes on musketry instruction
appended hereto. (Appendix 1.)
(viii) It is absolutely necessary that a special feature should be made of
training in bayonet fighting for all men armed with that weapon. Where
proper bayonet fighting equipment is not obtainable, suitable instruction
should be improvised. This may consist of practice with a wooden dummy
rifle of:—On guard position, points and parries, leg and feet work
(advancing, retiring, and lunging), and use of wall pads (or sack stuffed
with straw). The conditions of an assault should be simulated ; a spirit of
aggression and determination to press home should be inculcated.
• A substitute for a sand or sawdust table (as described in Training and Manoeuvre Regulations,
Section 39) may be improvised by placing books, &c., on the deck and covering these with a blanket
or tarpaulin.


14. (i) Suggested instructional stores are : —
<■ References to Musketry
Regulations.
Items Recommended, f
Estimated cost
per 1,000 men
armed with
rifle.
M.R., Part I., para. 207
Aiming discs, 4 ... \ per 100 men
£ s. d.
,, ,, II., plate 39
,, ,, II., plate 40 ...
Kneeling figure (No. 3), 4 >- armed with
Prone figure (No. 4), 4 ... I rifle
0 10 0
,, ,, II., para. 150...
Landscape targets mounted on canvas
representing different landscapes, 5 iter
1,000 men
1 15 0
,, ,, II., plate 35 ...
Printed machine gun instructional targets
(A.O., April, 1911), for units to which
machine gun sections are attached, 4 per
section
0 4 0
,, „ II., plates 26
and 27
Substitute for aiming rests—100 sandbags
for each 1,000 rifles (to be filled before
embarkation); price, Is. each
5 0 0
Wood w ork for targets and for sand or sawdust table (Training and
Mameuvro Regulations, Section 39), to be improvised on board ship
1 1 0
Total
8 10 0
(ii) Officers commanding units are responsible that the sums allotted
are expended to the best advantage and that facilities for training are
improvised where practicable. Landscape targets (price, 355. per set of
five, mounted on canvas) can be obtained in most of the State capitals, or
from Messrs. Angus and Robertson, 89-95 Castlereagh-street, Sydney.
(iii) Requisitions for dummy cartridges on the scale of 50 rounds per
machine gun and 5 rounds per man armed with the rifle should be
submitted by officers commanding units to the Ordnance Department.
All instructional stores (including articles purchased, improvised, or on
issue) will be placed on board ship under arrangements to be made by
officers commanding units, and stowed separately so that they can easily be
obtained when required,
15. (i) Trailing of Leaders. —The particular attention of Commanding
Officers is drawn to the necessity of instructing their subordinate leaders: —
(a) to train their units for war;
( b) to lead their units in the field ; and
(c) to prepare themselves, by study, for higher command.
In this connexion, it is generally recognised that military efficiency is essentially
a matter of co-operation —but Commanders sometimes lose sight of the fact
that this co-operation depends very largely upon their own ability to impress
their views upon their subordinates and upon the latter’s readiness to act
accordingly.
On service grave responsibilities are thrown upon Commanders of small
units; it is only by giving them opportunities and responsibility in peace
that they can be efficiently trained for their task in war, and encouraged to
overcome the dread of doing the wrong thing. Leaders (of all ranks, including
non-commissioned officers) must therefore be taught to cultivate the habit
of “ thinking ahead,” so as to have a plan of action ready for use before the
critical moment arrives. Practice, under sound guidance, 'in solving tactical
and administrative problems is of great value in improving rapidity of decision
on the part of leaders as well as economy of men. For example, a company
t Aim correctors may also be required; see M.R., Part 11. paras. 146, 199.


may find itself, after a tiring march in bad weather, and possibly without food
or shelter, detailed for outpost duty. Verbal orders ought to be given, and
the various duties detailed, without hesitation, within, say, a quarter of an
hour’s time. But this ideal can only be attained by knowledge and practice.
It cannot be too strongly impressed that there is no surer way of losing the
confidence of the men and destroying their physical efficiency than to keep
them waiting, or to hustle them, unnecessarily.
But in war even more than rapidity of decision is demanded of leaders —
they must be able to decide soundly, keep calm, and they must have the
determination to see their plan through in spite of what the enemy may do to
oppose it.
(ii) Theoretical Training. —The time on board ship will be used to improve
tactical knowledge, which is the foundation of leadership, by means of
theoretical training, following the methods laid down in the training manuals
of the several arms, Field Service Regulations, and Training and Manoeuvre
Regulations (particularly sections 21 and 39).
It is suggested, for example, that, for junior officers, a simple tactical
problem be described and that those under instruction be required to point
out, on a map or “ sand table,” how they would make their personal recon-
naissance and estimate the situation ; what orders, instructions, or messages
they would issue, noting the means of transmission thereof; how they would
lead their command in an attack, lead a reconnoitring patrol, place their
troops in defence, or tell off a piquet and post sentries on outpost duty. The
value of such exercises depends upon the interest being maintained; it will
often be profitable to limit their duration and to repeat the instruction.
It is further suggested that the schemes reviewed in the reports of the half-
yearly examinations, and the tactical problems worked out in the Australian
Military Journal (January, April, July, and October, 1913) will repay study,
and may be taken as examples to be followed.
(iii) Necessity for Thorough Preparation. —The value of training depends
almost entirely upon the care and time devoted to the preparation of work
by those responsible for the instruction. It is not easy to maintain the
attention of the rank and file for more than a very few hours each day;
the remedy lies with the leaders—they must provide varied and interesting
instruction, and to do this they must not only know their work and organize
systematic methods of instruction and allotment of time, but they must be
ready to spend even more time in preparing their work than in actually
imparting instruction. Should an instructor notice fatigue, inattention
or weariness of mind and body during training, he can reckon, with very
fair certainty, that the fault lies primarily with himself, and can be cured by
thorough preparation.
(iv) Lectures. —The following system of lectures has been found to produce
good results: —
(o') Each officer is detailed to prepare a lecture on a subject specified
by the Officer Commanding the unit (suitable subjects are
detailed in the training manuals of each arm),
(h) After due time has been allowed for preparation, officers are called
upon in turn to lecture for not more than ten minutes, to all
the officers of the unit,
(c) At the end of ten minutes, the. Officer Commanding the unit stops
the lecture and names officers to raise a discussion.
( d) After a short discussion, the Officer Commanding the unit sum-
marizes the important points raised and gives any necessary
decisions.


(v) (a) A great deal can be done in the way of “ individual training ”
and in “ theoretical training” of leaders ; as regards the men, energies must
be devoted chiefly to physical training, close order drill; officers must
realize the importance of musketry, and to this subject particular attention
must be given; saluting requires attention. Efforts must be made to
standardize instruction; the allotment of deck spaces requires careful
forethought,
(b) The order regarding the custody of arms on board ship, paragraph
1563 of “Notes on the Movement of Troops by Rail and Sea,” is not
intended to restrict the use of arms for training.
16. When no material is available for instruction of Field Artillery on
ship board, the following are suggested means of training; —
All Grades —
Physical Training.
Semaphore Signalling.
Gunners—
1. Fire Discipline, Battery Gun Drill, &c. This can be carried out
very well and in an interesting way by arranging detachments
in groups, sitting round the B.C. and Staff. The B.C. gives
his orders, and calls upon a number in the various detach-
ments to give a detail of the action he would take upon
receipt of the order.
2. Panoramic Sketching from Landscape Target Pictures.
3. Advanced Signalling (for Specialists).
4. Field Engineering. Tracing outlines of shelter on the deck,
telling off detachments for the work to be done, &c.
5. Lecturettes. These should not exceed, say, fifteen minutes, and
should always refer to and be in explanation of the work of a
Field Artilleryman. Officers, N.C.O’s., and even men should
be called upon, either extempore or with a short time for
preparation.
6. Musketry, if rifles can be borrowed.
Drivers—
1. Driving. Much useful instruction in the aides, &c., may be
given by using a couple of forms and pieces of rope to repre-
sent the horses and reins.
2. Lecturettes.


APPENDIX 1.
PRELIMINARY MUSKETRY INSTRUCTION.
Suggested Allocation of Time for Eight Days at li Hours each, Total 12 Hours.
Care of arms—Sec. 9, 10, 11, 12, Musketry Regs. ... ... ... $ hour
Trigger pressing—Para. 232 Musketry Regs.... ... ... ... \ „
Aiming ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 hours
Firing ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 „
Visual training—Landscape targets ... ... ... ... ... 2 „
Standard Tests—Sec. 03 and 64 Musketry Regs. ... ... ... 2 „
Indication and recognition of targets (Landscape Targets) ... ... 1 hour
Fire Discipline ... ... ... ... ... ... ... hours
Lecturettes on theory ... ... ... ... . , ... hour
Each day’s work might be arranged thus—
First day ... Trigger pressing, hour ; Care of arms, | hour ; Aiming, i hour ;
Lecturette on theory, hour.
Second day ... Firing, \ hour; Aiming, 3 hour ; Visual training, $ hour (land-
scape target).
Third day ... Firing, £ hour ; Indication and recognition of targets, hour;
Visual training, | hour (landscape targets).
Fourth day ... Aiming, | hour ; Firing, J hour; Standard Tests, \ hour.
Fifth day ... Firing, £ hour ; Aiming, £ hour ; Standard Tests, £ hour ; Firing
and aiming may be combined with miniature range grouping if
range available—theory of grouping to be explained—groups
analyzed.
Sixth day ... Fire Discipline, \ hour; Visual training, \ hour (landscape
targets); Lecturette on theory, \ hour ; care of arms, £ hour.
Seventh day ... Standard Tests, J hour ; Indication and recognition of targets,
hour (landscape targets); Fire Discipline, % hour.
Eighth day ... Visual training, hour (landscape targets); Standard Tests,
| hour ; Fire Discipline, J hour.
Notes, —1. Five minutes muscle exercises at conclusion of each Aiming and Firing
Lesson.
2. Sections should be exercised in Fire Direction and Control when
reasonable efficiency has been acquired as regards trigger release,
dexterity in loading motions, and the habit of sight adjustment, and of
quick recognition of targets.
Notes on Fire Discipline.
Fire Discipline implies correct action in handling the rifle at all times. It can only
become habitual by constant practice under very close supervision. Slovenly movements
or any incorrect action must be checked in the instructional stages, otherwise correct
action will never become habitual.
When men are being trained in the use of the rifle, slackness sometimes passes
unnoticed, and thus the decay of fighting efficiency begins. Elementary training is
necessary in order that the men may be taught to carry out “ Fire Orders ” rapidly and
accurately. For this reason the foundation of training in Fire Discipline must be drill.
This elementary training may be divided into three periods. In the first two, which
can easily be arranged on board ship, no account is taken of tactical considerations ;
aiming marks are easy, and attention is centred on quick, accurate obedience to all
orders, on correct positions being assumed, and on correct adjustment of sights, &c.
Dummy cartridges are to be freely used in the first and second stages.
In the third period the exercises should be somewhat more advanced, and further
lessons in Fire Discipline should be taught. This third period is the connecting link
between drill and tactics, which can only be taught on the ground, but sound foundations
can be laid in the barrack room or on board ship.
First Period.
May be carried out by sections in any convenient part of the ship with landscape-
targets. Squad halted, standing at ease. Procedure as in para. 285, M.R. On the
word “ Fire,” or “ Rapid Fire,” the squad will assume the position ordered, load, adjust


sights, and open fire. They will remain at ease while the Fire Orders are being given,
and will pay close attention to them. Instructor to check point of aim, sights, positions
and to correct every irregularity.
Explain use of “Rapid Fire” ; when it may be employed. Passing of orders ; all
orders repeated by each man ; differences in rates of fire, &c. Explain “Cease Fire”
(M. R., para. 284). Men never to be caught in action with rifles unloaded. Explain
“ Unload.”
Second Period.
Since lying is the normal position on service, this position will be adopted whenever
possible and always in the absence of other instructions. The squad will assume
position as above, and load. When all are loaded, “ Fire Orders” will be given, to which
hose attention will be paid. Sights will be adjusted, and on the coiftmand “Fire” or
“ Rapid Fire,” fire will be opened at landscape targets.
Supervision as in first period. Sue that all Lessons taught in First Period are
correctly carried out. Insist on quick assumption of tiring positions and readiness
to open fire.
Third Period.
(a) Training on Board Ship. —'A good deal can be accomplished by means of landscape
targets. More difficult targets may be introduced as proficiency increases. “Aiming
off” should be practised. It must be realized that intelligent habitual use of the rifle
implies very thorough training.
(b) Training after Disembarkation. —ln this period the men’s initiative comes into
play. Instructor to see that men make intelligent use of ground and cover, and act
correctly when incomplete or no orders reach them.
Each man must know (a) when to fire—this involves knowledge of limit of individual
tire and when his fire is required to assist in gaining the common object: (b) what to
fire at— i.e,, knowledge regarding selection of targets of tactical importance and not the
most visible, the importance of oblique and enfilade fire; (c) elevation to use—good
judging distance and observation of fire should be taught, and also the principles of
aiming up and down.
Movement; use of ground and cover ; initiative and judgment. Squad to advance
and, if convenient, a fatigue nun will stand up by signal and the Instructor orders fire
to be opened ;he should occasionally omit the x’ange. Example :—“ At the man—Fire,”
squad halts, and each man assumes the position to suit the ground and cover so as to
obtain “Fire effect,” adjusts sights and fires, as in para. 291, M.R.
More difficult targets may be introduced as proficiency increases, such as carts, men,
or moving objects. Select any target which affords practice. Aiming off should also
be practised, and correct distances should be ascertained from time to time, and
sighting checked.
Good “ Fire Discipline ” is the basis of effective tire.
Note.—lt is not anticipated that each period will be mastered in one lesson.


B.—ADJUTANT-GENERAL’S BRANCH.
17. (i) All units and unallotted members (Depots) of tbe Australian
Imperial Force, while in Australia, are under the command of the Military
Commandant of the District in which they are stationed. M.O. 80/1915.
(ii) The function of command of all troops on board a transport forming
a convoy will, in accordance with King’s Regulations, devolve upon the
Senior Military Officer present.
(a) This officer will be authorized to convene District Courts Martial,
and will be responsible for the discipline and good order of
all the troops, so far as it is within his power to control same.
(h) All questions of administration, &c., which cannot be decided in
the unit concerned will, during the voyage, be referred to
the O.C, Troops for decision or action.
(c) The O.C. Troops is authorized to issue such orders as he may con-
sider necessary for the good order and discipline of the troops
during the voyage.
(iii) Leave at intermediate ports will not be granted, except with the
special permission in writing of the O.C. Troops.
17a. Cinematograph apparatus is not to be taken on board transports
without the special permission of the District Commandant.
17b. No dogs will be allowed to be taken on transports.
17c. (i) On entering ports, or when approaching other transports within
saluting distance, troops on deck will fall in and stand at ease. On
passing other transports or approaching quays, bugles will sound
“ attention.”
(ii) Upon the approach of, or passing ships or boats flying an
Admiral’s or General’s flag, the above procedure will be observed, and in
addition, the guard will fall in and present arms, bugles sounding the
“ salute.”
17d. (i) Arrangements will be made to collect mails on the day of arrival
at ports of call.
(ii) The O.C. Troops will arrange with the Master of the Transport for
the despatch of the mails to their destination.
(iii) Letters are not to be given by troops to persons on launches for
posting.
(iv) The O.C. Troops will detail an officer to proceed on shore immediately
on arrival in port to arrange for the receipt and despatch of mails.
17e. (i) Transports’ boats are not to be used by troops at ports of call ■
except on duty. An officer will bo responsible for the discipline of the 1
troops in the boat, which in all other respects will be under the charge of
the boatmen detailed by the master.
(ii) Transports’ boats will not communicate with the shore or with any
vessel other than a transport except by special authority of the
Master.
18. (i) Applications for the appointment of an officer are not to be j
submitted until the officer recommended has been passed as medically fit. (
(ii) In submitting names of officers for appointment, the corps in which 1
the applicant is serving or has served should be stated.


(iii) Prior to embarkation officers commanding units will forward
C.M. Form A. 22, duly completed to the officer in charge, Base Record
Office, Melbourne, for each officer appointed to a unit. This will not be
necessary in cases where C.M, Form A. 22 has been rendered with the
recommendation for appointment. The officer’s religion is to be shown in
the form, if he is willing to state same.
(iv) Items Nos. 2,4, and 5 of C.M. Form A. 22 need not be filled in for
officers of the regular army and permanent forces and those already holding
commissions in the Commonwealth Military Forces.
19. (i) The rank to which officers are appointed or promoted shall be
substantive rank in the Australian Imperial Force unless otherwise expressly
stated,
(ii) Officers holding higher rank in the Commonwealth Military Forces-
than their substantive rank in the Australian Imperial Force shall retain
the higher rank as honorary rank.
(iii) On appointment, and until promoted, in the Australian Imperial
Force—
(a) Officers on the Active List of the Regular Army and Common
wealth Military Forces shall rank according to their dates of
appointment in that rank in the Regular Army and the
Commonwealth Military Forces respectively, unless otherwise
expressly stated.
(h) Officers on the Reserve of Officers shall take rank and precedence
in the Australian Imperial Force below all officers, of the
same rank as that to which they are appointed, of the Active
List of the Regular Army and the Commonwealth Military
Forces; and amongst themselves according to the dates of
their appointment to their respective ranks in the Active
Forces.
(c) Retired Officers and others shall take rank and precedence in the
Australian Imperial Force according to the dates of appoint-
ment in the Australian Imperial Force, but below other
officers of the same rank.
(i d ) Officers appointed to the command of brigades, regiments,,
battalions, and other units, in the Australian Imperial Force,
shall exercise command over any other officers serving therein,
irrespective of the date of their appointments.
(e) Members of the Australian Army Nursing Service and Nurses
appointed to the A.I.F. will receive all courtesies extended
to Officers, and will have following rank and precedence—•
Principal Matron.
Matron.
Sister.
Staff Nurse.
Staff Nurses will be known by title of Sister, irrespective of
rank.
20. (o) (i) The age for enlistment will be from 18 to 45 years (18 to 50
years in M.T. Units).
(ii) Youths under the age of 21 years are not to be enlisted without the
written consent of a parent, guardian, or other person acting in loco 'parentis .
(iii) Officers enlisting recruits are to be instructed that they must insist
upon the production of this certificate, which is to be attached to the
attestation form.


(6) The standard height and chest measurement for in the
Australian Imperial Force will be as laid down in Universal Training
Regulations (Part V.) for Citizen Forces.
21. All attestation forms will be prepared in duplicate. Prior to i
embarkation, the copy, certified as a “True Copy” by the commanding
officer or adjutant, will be forwarded by officers commanding units to the
officer i/c Base Record Office, Victoria Barracks, Melbourne. The original j
will be retained in the custody of officers commanding units until arrival
at port of disembarkation, when they will be disposed in accordance with
instructions which will be issued hereafter. All promotions, appointments,
reductions, transfers, &c., are to be entered on page 4 as they occur, and
the authority for such quoted.
The attestation sheets of men, both original and duplicate, who are
struck off the establishment prior to embarkation, should be completed on
pa<re 4, including full details regarding discharge, &c., with date and reasons
for same, cancelled and transmitted to the 0. i/c Base Records, Victoria
Barracks, Melbourne; a notification of the action so taken should be made
to the Brigade Commander, if unit forms part of Brigade.
22. (i) In order to ensure that units will embark at war establishment,
commanding officers may enlist rank and file in excess of the authoi ized ,
establishment, provided it is not exceeded by more than 5 per cent. ;
(ii) Men in excess of establishment at date of embarkation will be
transferred to the reinforcement which will follow.
Prior to attestation, this condition is to be made clear to personnel so
enlisted.
(iii) Men enlisted in excess of establishment are to be used tor replacing
casualties only, and must not be taken in place of any men who are fit and
were enlisted before the establishment was complete.
(iv) The personnel shown in Australian War Establishments, 1912, as
“ details left in areas ” is not to be enlisted.
22a. Any man found on a transport, who is not on the strength of anyi
unit of the Australian Imperial Force embarked for service abroad, is to
be treated as a stowaway. # . ,
Commanding Officers may, however, fill vacancies in their units o\
enlisting such men who are medically fit and otherwise suitable. 1 ar-
ticulars of all such enlistments are to bo reported to the O.C. Troops,
who will inform the Officer i/c Base Records, Melbourne.
23. Commanding Officers are empowered to discharge men who prove
unsuitable prior to embarkation, subject to the approval of the District
Commandant, except on account of illness or injury contracted on duty, in
which case action will be taken in accordance with A.A.M.S. Standing
Orders 1914, paras. 240-4.
23a. (a) The following procedure will bo followed in the case of men
discharged at ports en route :
(i) Applications, accompanied by the following lists, will be made to the
O.C. Troops for approval: —
(a) Regimental number.
(b) Rank.
(c) Name in full.
(d ) Corps.
(e) Reason for discharge.
(/) Statement of personal clothing and necessaries in his possession.


( g ) Whether all arms and equipment have been returned, and value
of discrepancies, if any.
{h) A last pay certificate, which should include details of any
stoppages on account of fines, deficiencies in kit, or other
cause, to be made in adjusting the final payment to the
member.
(ii) Upon approval of discharge being given—
(a) The O.C. Troops or his representative will make the necessary
arrangements for reception of men by the O.C. Troops,
Albany; notifying the District Commandant, sth Military
District, and the District Paymaster of the District in which
men were enlisted, to whom he will forward the last pay
certificate.
The O.C. Troops or his representative will inform the Officer
i/c Base Record Office of such discharges.
( b) The O.C. Troops concerned will, upon first opportunity, send such
men in charge of a non-commissioned officer to the O.C.
Troops, Albany, for return to the District of enlistment,
(iii) The date of discharge will be entered on nominal rolls.
(iv) The word “discharged” and the date and place will be written
across page i of the soldier’s pay book, which will be retained by him for
production to, and cancellation by, the District Paymaster of the Military
District in which he was enlisted.
(v) Each man will be issued with a discharge certificate, duly completed,
and C.O.’s will state on the notification to Officer in Charge Base Record
Office whether this has been done.
(vi) In all cases pay books must be properly entered up to date of
discharge. Certificates must be improvised if printed forms are not
available.
(6) If discharges occur, en route, at Australian ports other than
Albany, action corresponding to the above will be taken where
the men are landed.
N.B. —Numerous cases have occurred of men being discharged without
certificates of discharge, and of incomplete details having been furnished to
the officer in charge Base Records. In many instances men are kept waiting
for days for pay due to them owing to lack of authentic information relative
to their discharge. All officers concerned are therefore required to see that
all documents relative to the discharge, or return to districts for any other
reason, of members of the A.I.F. from ports en route are posted immediately
to the officer i/c Base Records, D.Cs., and D.P.Ms. as prescribed. If the
discharges occur at an Australian port duplicates are to be furnished to
District Commandants locally for information.
24. The armourers shown as “ attached ” in the war establishments of
light horse regiments and infantry battalions, and the armament artificers
shown similarly in field artillery brigades, will be enlisted by respective
officers commanding.
25. (i) Civilians who are permitted to accompany the Australian
Imperial Force must, in accordance with the provisions of Field Service
Regulations, Part 11. Section 142, be provided with a pass signed by the
Secretary, Department of Defence. They will be required to produce their
passes upon embarkation.


(ii) All civilians will be graded either as officers or soldiers, and in
applications for their attachment a recommendation should be made as to
grade.
26. It is notified for information of all ranks that any appoint- I
ments or promotions in Australian Expeditionary Forces apply only to such |
Forces, and give no claim to future rank in the Australian Military Forces.
INTERIOR ECONOMY.
27. Nominal rolls will be prepared by squadrons, batteries, and 1
companies and Medical Units. Separate rolls will, however, be prepared
by Military Districts for members of the A.A.N.S. and Nurses appointed
to A.I.F.
Such rolls will be made out in triplicate in the form given in Appendix 4
and kept up to date. Upon embarkation two certified copies will be
despatched to the District Commandant, one for the District paymaster
and one for the officer in charge Base Record Office, A.1.F., Melbourne ; the
original will be retained by the unit.
28. (i) A Base Record Office has been established at Victoria Barracks,
Melbourne, in which the records of members of the force will be retained,
and where all local questions connected with the 'personnel of the force after 1
embarkation will be dealt with.
(ii) To enable the records of service of members of the A.I.F. to be kept
posted to date, and aid the compilation of historical records, copies of
each divisional, brigade, regimental, and corps routine order, issued from
the date of the formation of the unit until the date of embarkation, will be
forwarded by the commanding officers concerned direct to the officer i/c
Base Record Office, Melbourne. Orders should be prepared on similar
lines to Imperial Army, viz., in two parts —Part I. to refer to routine
matters only, and Part 11. to contain all matters relating to personnel, such
as enlistments, promotions, transfers, &c.
(hi) Officers commanding units will forward also copies of all unit and
transport orders, issued since embarkation, to the intermediate base record
office on arrival at port of disembarkation, and to Base Record Office,
Head-Quarters, Melbourne,
(iv) It should be notified to all concerned that inquiries by relatives,
&c., regarding members of the A.I.F. after leaving Australia should be
addressed to—
The Secretary,
Department of Defence,
Melbourne,
who will be able to furnish the latest reliable information available.
Inquiries should state the full name and the corps of the individual con-
cerning whom the inquiry is made.
29. Record books of trainees enrolled in the Australian Imperial Force
will be retained at the Base Record Office, Australian Imperial Force,
during the absence of the trainees from Australia.
Officers commanding units of the Citizen Forces will forward without
delay to the Base Record Office the duplicate record Books (C.M. Form
M. 8) of all trainees of their units who have been enrolled in the Australian
Imperial Force
Officers commanding units of the Australian Imperial Force will collect
the C.M. Forms M. 7 of any trainees enrolled who have their record books
with them, and will forward them without delay to the Base Record Office.


The names of trainees enrolled who have not their C.M. Forms M. 7 with
them will also be forwarded, together with the name of the unit, company,
&c., to which the trainees belonged before enlistment in the Australian
Imperial Force.
On receipt of these lists Commanding Officers of units of Citizen Forces
will be notified by the Base Record Office, and will take the necessary
action to procure the C.M. Forms M. 7 of the men, and forward them to
the Base Record Office.
All correspondence, &c., intended for the Base Record Office will be sent
direct by commanding officers to—
The officer in charge,
Base Record Office, A.I. Force,
Victoria Barracks,
Melbourne.
Similarly the officer in charge of records will correspond direct with
commanding officers on record matters.
30. In order to facilitate prompt delivery, all letters for members of the
Australian Imperial Force, whilst abroad, should be addressed as under:—
(Number, if any) Rank Name
(Head-Quarters, Squadron, Battery, Company, &c.),
Regiment, Battalion, &c Brigade,
ENGLAND*
Example :
No. 427 Sergt. W. Brown,
‘•B” Company,
sth Battalion,
4th Australian Infantry Brigade,
ENGLAND*
These instructions are to be made known to all members of the Force,
who should notify their correspondents accordingly, as the delivery of incor-
rectly or incompletely addressed letters cannot be guaranteed.
31. (i) States and returns will be rendered as laid down in Sections 131
and 132, Field Service Regulations, Part 11.
(ii) States will be furnished daily up till date of embarkation through
officers commanding brigades and officers commanding divisional units.
After embarkation states will be called for as required. States will be
seen by the General Staff branch at District Head-quarters.
(iii) Returns will be furnished weekly to Head-quarters up till date of
embarkation. After embarkation, returns will be prepared weekly and
forwarded to the intermediate record office, High Commissioner’s office
after arrival in England. Returns on board ship will be compiled by
officers commanding units; in the case of detachments, officers com-
manding detachments will compile returns which will be transmitted to the
officer commanding unit on the first opportunity.
31a. The following returns are to be rendered by the O.C. Troops on
each Transport :
(i) Embarkation returns (see page 7, para 1506, K.R., and “Notes on
the Movements of Troops by Rail and Sea.”
• Or such other place as may be officially announced.


Personnel.
Detail.
Officers.
Other
Hanks.
Effective strength of unit
28
735
Details, by arms, attached to unit, as in war establishment —
A.M.C.
1
5
A.O.C.
••
i
Total
29
741
War Establishment
32
991
Wanting to complete
3
250
Surplus ..
Attached (not to include the details shown above)
Civilians—
Employed with the unit
Accompanying the unit
Total rationed
29
741
(ii) Disembarkation returns (see page 282, para. 1652, K.R., also
“Notes on the Movements of Troops by Rail and Sea,'"’ pages 27-28, paras.
1652 and 1659.)
(iii) Casualty returns (page 332, para. 1875 (3n), K. 11.)
32. The following information is published to assist officers in Compiling-
Field Returns, Army Form 8.213 (para. 132, Field Service Regulations,
Part II.).
(a) The effective strength of the unit is the number present with the unit,
whether fit for duty or otherwise, at the date of the return, exclusive of the
details shown, as attached in the war establishment of the unit.
(b) Details shown as attached in war establishment, and printed in Roman
characters, are entered separately under the heading “ Details, by arms,
attached to units, as in war establishments .”
(c) In the line “ Attached {not to include the details shown above) ” will be
shown 'personnel having military status, but not provided for in war estab-
lishments, such as Chaplains, and, in case of field ambulances, the number of
patients.
( d ) in the line “ Employed with the unit ” will be shown civilians, such as
interpreters and others whose employment with the unit has been author-
ized.
(e) In the line “ Accompanying the unit ” will be shown civilians authorized
to accompany but not employed with the unit, such as press correspondents,
private batmen, members of Y.M.C.A.
(/) For example, the Field Return of an infantry battalion short of three
officers and 250 men would be rendered as follows; —
33. During the voyage, when rendering Army Form 8.213, a supple-
mentary list is to be attached, showing all sick and others unfit for duty.
34. Officers commanding troops will forward to the Base Record Office
from first port of call after leaving port of embarkation a return for each unit,
and detachment in their respective sliips, giving particulars of service,
musketry qualifications, ages, religions, &c.
Printed forms will be issued for this purpose.


Rank to which Promoted.
Officer Authorized to Promote.
Light Horse.
Up to rank of Sergeant
Above rank of Sergeant
Officer Commanding Regiment.
Brigade Commander.
|
Infantry.
Up to rank of Sergeant
Above rank of Sergeant
Officer Commanding Battalion.
1 Brigade Commander.
Army Service Corps.*
Up to rank of Sergeant
Above rank of Sergeant
Army Medical Corps.
Up to rank of Sergeant .. ..
Above rank of Sergeant .. j
Veterinary Corps.
To all ranks
( Officer Commanding Company.
Officer Commanding Company, except in case of sompany
attached to a Light Horse or Infantry Brigade, in which
case promotion above the rank of Sergeant will be made
by the Brigade Commander on the recommendation of the
Officer Commanding Company.
Officer Commanding Field Ambulance, Light Horse Field
Ambulance, or Hospital.
In the case of Ambulances the Commander of the Light Horse
or Infantry Brigade to which they are attached on the
recommendation of the Officer Commanding the Field Am-
bulance. In the case of Lines of Communication Units the
Officer Commanding Hospital.
The Officer Commanding Veterinary section.
Heinforcemcnts —all arms.
To all ranks .. .. |
The District Commandant.
• For this purpose Depflt Units of Supply, Field Bakery, and Field Butchery, will be considered
independent units.
35. All deserters, sick, unfit to embark, and other casualties, will be
transferred to “ reinforcements ” from which source their places in units
will be filled.
In order that “ reinforcements ” may concentrate in full strength, Com-
mandants will arrange that all men who are unfit to proceed to the place
of concentration will be transferred to the charge of the Camp Commandant.
Their places will be filled by enlisted men in order that the reinforce-
ments embark up to strength.
Officers commanding units will provide Camp Commandants with full
particulars of such men who arc unfit to entrain or who are unfit to embark.
Action will be taken by Camp Commandants for Medical Boards to be
held and for the men concerned to be disposed of either by discharge or
transfer to another unit if fit for further service.
36. The use of rubber stamps for officers’ signatures on official docu-
ments is forbidden.
37. The following rules for the appointment and promotion, within the
authorized establishment, of members of the Australian Imperial Force to
the ranks of W arrant Officer and Non-commissioned Officer up to the date of
embarkation are approved :
Warrant Officers will be appointed by the Commandant of the District in
which the Head-Quarters of the unit to which they belong is being raised,
on the recommendation of Brigade Commanders or the Commanding Officer
of any unit not forming part of a Light Horse or Infantry Brigade.
Non-commtssioned Officers will be appointed, as set out in the folio wins
table 8
After embarkation the rules for the appointment and promotion of Warrant
and Non-commissioned Officers will be as laid down in King’s Regulations.


38. All ranks will be inoculated against typhoid fever and vaccinated I
against small-pox prior to embarkation.
(а) (i) Before enlistment in the Australian Imperial Force each
applicant is to be asked the question:—“Are you prepared to undergo
inoculation against srnall-pox and enteric fever 1”
(ii) This question is to be inserted on the attestation paper as Question
15.
(iii) The answer thereto will be recorded on the attestation paper, and
any man who does not answer same in the affirmative will not be enlisted.
(iv) The attention of the recruit should be specially directed by the
enrolling officer to the importance of this matter.
(б) The following procedure is to be carried out as far as possible :
(i) On first day of arrival in camp, the recruit should be given an inocula-
tion of 250 million anti-typhoid vaccine.
(ii) On Bth day a second dose varying from 500 to 1,000 million according
to reaction of first dose.
(iii) Each dose should be given in the afternoon and man allowed oS
duty, and to rest until the next morning.
(iv) After an interval of 14 days from second injection, recruit will be
vaccinated with calf-lymph on the left arm in four places in manner ordered
by the D.Gr.M.S. Arms are to be inspected on Bth day, and report
forwarded at once to Head-Quarters, showing—
(а) Number of men in each corps.
(б) Number vaccinated.
(c) Result in each case.
(v) Report should reach Head-quarters before embarkation.
(c) The following action is to be taken in connexion with men who
refuse to submit to inoculation or vaccination, after having answered
Question 15 {vide (a)) in the affirmative :
(i) All pay due to them is to be withheld.
(ii) They are to be ordered, in the presence of witnesses, to submit to
inoculation or vaccination as the case may be.
(iii) Should they still refuse they are to be tried by District Court-
Martial for an offence against Section 9 (2) of the Army Act.
(iv) After the conclusion of any sentences which may be imposed upon
them such men are to be discharged.
38a. Gases of venereal disease will be dealt with as follows :
(i) On report of a medical officer that a member of the Australian
Imperial Force is suffering from venereal disease. Commanding Officers
will take immediate steps to have such member isolated for treatment in
accordance with orders issued by the Director-General Medical Services,
(ii) Attention is directed to F. and A. Regulation 265, wherein it is
prescribed that the full pay of any soldiers admitted to hospital or treated
in quarters for venereal shall be stopped. This Regulation will apply to the
Australian Imperial Force at all times, including whilst on board ship,
except that in cases where portion of a member’s pay has been allotted to
dependents, payment of such abetment shall be continued during the period
the member is undergoing treatment for venereal disease or sickness caused
by misconduct. Provided that members without dependents shall be placed
under stoppage of full pay, including any suras which may have been
allotted to agents.


(iii) Cases of primary and secondary syphilis (if in an infectious state) ;
discovered after embarkation, are to be landed for treatment at the first
port of call in Australia. All other cases of venereal disease are to be
specially isolated and treated on board.
(iv) In every unit there is to be an order directing that a soldier who is
suffering from venereal disease is to report himself sick without delay.
This order will be read to the unit on parade at intervals not exceeding
three months, care being taken that it is specially brought to notice of all
recruits on joining. Concealment of venereal disease will be dealt with
under Section 11 of the Army Act.
(v) O.C. Troops on board transports are also to issue an order that men
suffering from venereal disease are to report the fact. They will draw
attention to the fact that non-compliance with this order renders the men
liable to punishment for concealment of disease. (See King’s Regulations,
para. 462.)
(vi) In all cases where men are discharged on account of venereal
disease, the Officer in Charge Base Records should be informed accordingly.
39. Men medically unfit prior to embarkation will be dealt with in
accordance with instructions contained in para. 23.
39a. {a) Medical officers in charge of transports will furnish while in port
a daily return of sick to the Senior Medical Officer at the port of call.
[h) In the case of men medically unfit, who are landed in Australia for
hospital treatment, the procedure laid down in paragraphs 23 and 23a (i) ( a)
to ( h ), and (ii) (a) regarding documents, &c., will bo followed, subject to the
following sub-paragraph:—
(i) Such men will be transferred to the Australian Imperial Force in
the Military District for which they arc landed for disposal by
the Commandant of that District. Pay books, properly
entered up, and containing a record of transfer on the page for
cash payments, should accompany the soldier.
(c) It is not desirable to land any officer or man at Colombo for treat-
ment in hospital who can be efficiently treated on board ship, unless
under very exceptional circumstances. Any case requiring operative
measures which cannot be performed on transports, will bo landed
at the first opportunity for operation.
{(I) When cases are recommended for treatment on shore, the
following action is to be taken :
(i) The Senior Medical Officer will proceed on shore by the first
available boat to make the necessary arrangements for the
reception and subsequent disposal of cases landed for medical
treatment.
(ii) An officer detailed by the O.C. Troops will accompany the Senior
Medical Officer ashore.
(iii) In the event of any case requiring a special medical report
the Senior Medical Officer will detail a medical officer to
visit and report.
(iv) The Senior Medical Officer will be the approving officer for
all invalids to be landed, and is to report to O.C. Troops
any action taken.


Page.
Paragraph or Section.
Remarks.
(i) Manual
of Military Law.
27
s.
11 (e)
Punishment on board ship.
728-733
Order in Council re discipline on board
ship, giving schedule of punishment.
426
s.
47
Regimental court martial.
446
s.
63
Custody of prisoners.
532-539
s.
s.
s.
U5 (12) ]
176 (11)
177 j
Application of the Army Act; see also
orders for A.I.F., para. 24.
552-560
s.
188, 189, 190
189 (Note 1)
Application of Act on board ship.
554
s.
Soldiers on board en route for war con-
sidered on active service.
787-796
• • • • • •
Committee of Adjustment on deaths on
(Inclusive)
board ship.
Notes at the end of Sections are of
particular value.
(v) Arrangements will be made by the Senior Medical Officer,
subject to weather conditions and the concurrence of the
hospital authorities, to land cases approved for hospital
treatment on shore.
(vi) In all cases a medical officer of the transport concerned will
accompany the patient to the hospital.
(vii) The personal kit, clothing, necessaries, and greatcoat of
each patient are to be sent on shore with him.
(viii) The following documents are to be given to the medical
officer accompanying the patient on shore to be handed
over by the former to the hospital authorities, and a
receipt obtained and forwarded to the patient’s com-
manding officer, viz.:—
Soldier’s pay book, properly entered up and containing
a record of transfer on the page for cash payments.
Last pay certificate.
List of deficiencies, if any; if not, a “nil” return.
Conduct sheet.
Medical history sheet.
(ix) The patient’s arms, equipment, and accoutrements are to
be taken into the regimental store.
DISCIPLINE.
40. (i) Members of the Australian Imperial Force are on military service
in time of war, and are therefore “on active service ” (Defence Act, Section 4).
The Australian Imperial Force is subject to the Army Act, save so far as
it is inconsistent with the Defence Act (Defence Act, Sect.on S')).
(ii) From the time of embarkation until return to Australia the
Australian Imperial Force will be subject to the Army Act without qualifi-
cation (Army Act, Section 177, and Defence Act, Section 54a).
(iii) Attention is drawn to the following sections of Manual of Military
Law and King’s Regulations :


Page.
Paragraph or Section.
.
Remarks.
(ii) King’s 1
Iegulations, 1912.
256
1490-1511 (In-
Movements by sea.
elusive)
264
1521-1544
Embarkation.
268
1554-1575
Embarkation of troops.
271
1576-1607
Duties on board ship.
276
1608-1621
Routine on board ship.
96
462 i
Concealment of venereal disease—
103
504 ... j
(i) Punishment;
(ii) Loss of pay.
278
1622-1631
Messing and Canteens.
279
1632-1638
Intermediate ports.
280
1639-1652
Disem barkations.
284
1661-1682
Mounted troops and horses.
331
1875-1876
Casualties.
349
1927 ...
Field Conduct Book.
41. On active service all entries of offences will be made in the field conduct
book, from which copies will be sent periodically to the Base Record Office.
A supply of field conduct books will be made to officers commanding units.
The book will contain a nominal list of the men of the company, cfee.,
with an assessment by the company, &c., commander of their respective
characters at the beginning of the campaign,
Held conduct sheets are not to be taken into use on board ship; in the
meanwhile improvised conduct sheets should be used.
If a man be transferred, while in the field, to another unit, it will be
sufficient if he be accompanied by a memorandum showing an assessment of
his character up to date of transfer.
If the character is not satisfactory a short explanatory note may be
added, e.g. —
“No. Pte. . Last offence, 17.3,14. Character,-
bad. Insubordination.”
42. Lniversal Training Regulations 178 and 180 and instructions
thereon will apply to the Australian Imperial Force. (Defence Act, Section
123 a.) V
42a, The following instructions are issued with regard to men who desert
from the A.1.F., and who fail to embark with their units for service abroad :
(i) Members of the A.LF. who fail to embark with their units, and who
report themselves within fourteen days, will be brought before the Camp
Commandant for investigation of the case and award. If sufficient cause or
excuse is not shown the Camp Commandant will award forfeiture of pay for
a period of 28 days, in accordance with section 46 (2) ( d ) of the Army Act, in
addition to such period of field punishment No. 2 not exceeding 28 days, as
the Camp Commandant may decide.
When sentenced to field punishment, men are not to be tied to fixed
objects for certain periods, but, in pursuance of this punishment, all leave
will be stopped, and they will be kept in custody for the period specified, and


will be employed to the fullest extent on fatigues and other laborious work,
with a view to relieving well-conducted men from same as far as possible.
Such men, except those whom it is considered, in the interests of the
service, desirable to discharge, will be despatched with the next available
steamer, and their sentence, if unexpired, will be completed on board ship.
(ii) Deserters and men who failed to embark, and do not report them-
selves within fourteen days, will, on giving themselves up, or on apprehension,
,be tried by District Court-martial. A standing District Court-martial will
be convened by Commandants to try all such cases, and the order convening
the Court should be framed so that it may assemble at such times and places
as may be appointed by the President to try such persons as may be brought
before it.
The Camp Commandant, who should be authorized to sign the charge-
sheets under C.M, Regulation 350 ( d ), should communicate with the President
whenever a trial is necessary. The trial should take place as soon as possible
thereafter.
The maximum punishment which may be awarded by a District Court-
martial is two years’ imprisonment. The attention of the President of the
Court should be directed to the fact that sentences of imprisonment should
usually be accompanied by a sentence of discharge with ignominy.
Every effort is to be made to trace deserters, and for this purpose warrants
for arrest and descriptions of the men should be given to the police.
(iii) It must be borne in mind that all absentees without leave and
deserters forfeit the pay due to them for each day they are absent, and whilst
in arrest awaiting trial at which they are convicted, as well as during any
period of detention or imprisonment which may be awarded. Pay must,
therefore, not be claimed for men in such circumstances.
43. Camping grounds now in use by the Australian Imperial Force will
be required for other units. The attention of commanding officers is
directed to sections 61 and 63 of Field Service Regulations, Part I. ; steps
should be taken to insure that—
(i) the ground is not polluted, and that the vicinity of cook houses
is kept scrupulously clean ;
(ii) tents are struck as frequently as possible;
(iii) all kits, bedding, &c., are removed daily in fine weather and
exposed to the sun.
NUMBERING.
44. (i) The following instructions are to be followed in allotting,
regimental numbers to 'personnel of the Units referred to in Personnel Table 1
No. 2 :
Brigade Head quarters —
Personnel to be allotted numbers with Units.
Light Horse Regiments —
Each Regiment to run from 1 upwards.*
Infantry Battalions —
Each Battalion to run from 1 upwards.*
*Head-quarters of regiments and battalions should respectively be added
to the establishment of squadrons and companies as determined by
Commanding Officers.
(ii) Regimental number for units other than the above and for rein-
forcements will be allotted in accordance with instructions issued bv
Head-quarters from time to time.


C.—QUARTERMASTER-GENERAL’S BRANCH.
CLOTHING.
45. (i) As daring their period of employment abroad officers will be
serving with Imperial Forces, the regulations regarding the wearing of staff
uniform will be observed. Attention is therefore directed to the following
extract from Field Service Regulations, Part 11., Section 14 ;
“ Staff officers wear distinctive marks on their uniform by which
they may be recognised, and which are not to be worn by any officer
not appointed to the staff. Officers attached to or employed under
the staff are not staff officers and do not wear staff distinctions. ’
(ii) The following officers of the Australian Imperial Force will wear the
staff gorget patch as prescribed in Dress Regulations ;
General Officer Commanding,
Brigade Commanders,
. Officers of the Genei’al Staff Branch
Officers of the Adjutant-General’s Branch L at Head-quarters,
Officei’s of the Quartermaster-General’s Branch J
and
Approved representatives of these branches insubordinate commands
who ai’e shown as “staff” in War Establishments.
Officers who provide themselves may wear trousers instead of breeches
on board ship.
(iii) Officers may have their jackets, service diess, made up of 25 oz.
cloth (the waterproof material used for greatcoats) provided that extra
expense is defrayed by them and issues to the troops are not thereby delayed.
(iv) Officers who desire to provide themselves with jackets, instead of
receiving a free issue, may wear the jacket (khaki), shirt, collar, and tie, as
authorized in M.O. 606/13 and M.O. 65/14.
(v) Chaplains will receive a free issue of uniform, kit, and necessaries as
laid down in para. 47 (i) of these Standing Orders except that they will
be allowed to wear a special jacket and badges as described in para. 33 of
Standing Orders for Dress and Clothing, 1912 (Citizen Forces), in lieu of the
Service Dress Jacket.
Chaplains may purchase any such articles privately, and claim a refund
as set out in para. 47 (xii) except for the special jacket.
The following is the amount which may be claimed for the jacket, with
buttons, collar, and stock, viz., £2 ss.


Article.
Mounted.
Dis«
i mounted.
Remarks.
Uniform.
Badge, copper, largo (for hat)
1
1
Badge, copper, small (for collar aud S.D. cap)..
3
3
Badge, copper, shoulder strap (corps letters) ..
4
4
Badge, copper, shoulder strap, “ Australia,” ..
4
4
Badge, rank
As re
quired
Boots, ankle, brown, pairs £
2
2
Breeches, cord, C.P., woollen D.S., pairs
Breeches, cord, C.P., woollen M.S., pairs
2
2
Cap, Service Dress..
i
i
Greatcoat, D.S.
i
Greatcoat, M.S.
i
, ,
Hat, felt, C.P.
i
i
Hat, white*
i
i
Jacket, cardigan ..
i
i
Jacket, dungaree*
i
i
Jacket, Service Dress
2
2
For table of sizes
Laces (spare) for boots, ankle, pairs ..
see Appendix 2
i
1
Leggings, C.P., brown, pair .. .. i
Numerals, copper .. .. .. .. >
4
4
Figures 0 to 8 as re-
!
Puttees, pairs .. .. .. ... j
1
1
quired
Straps, chin .. .. .. ..I
2
2
Trousers, dungaree, pair* ..
i
1 1
J
1
• Except Officers,
•
t Special care must be taken in fitting- boots by responsible officers. See pamphlets published separately*
46, Warrant and non-commissioned officers of the Permanent Forces
drawing consolidated pay who are enlisted in the Australian Imperial
Force will receive a free issue of clothing, equipment, kit, and necessaries as
laid down in paragraph 47 (i). Individuals who are already in possession of
specified articles, or who provide such articles privately, may claim a refund
from the Department up to the value shown in para. 47 (xii) and under the
conditions laid down in para. 47 (ix). Claims will be supported by the
following certificates :
(a) From O.C. the unit in which serving in A.I.F. —
“ I certify that is in possession'of
serviceable articles of Clothing and Equipment as set forth
in attached claim, and that a free issue of such articles from
departmental stocks has not been, and will not be, made
to the claimant.”
(b) By warrant or non-commissioned ojficer himself —
“ I certify that I am in possession of the articles claimed
for, and that I have not received a free issue of such articles.”
47. (i) The authorized scale of issue of uniform, kit, and necessaries for
the Australian Imperial Force is shown in the following table :


Scale of Issue of Uniform, See.—
-continued.
Article.
Mounted.
Dis-
mounted.
Keiaarks.
Kit and Necessaries.
Bags, kit, soa
1
1
Bag, kit, universal
1
1
Belts, abdominal ..
2
2
Braces, pair
1
1
Brush, hair
1
1
Brush, shaving
1
1
Brush, tooth
1
1
Cap, comforter
1
I
Comb
1
1
Disc, identity, with cord
1
1
Drawers, cotton, pairs
2
2
Dressing, field .. ..
1
1
Fork
1
1
Holdall ..
1
1
Housewife
1
1
Knife
I
1
Knife, clasp, with marline spike, tin opener, and
lanyard f
1
1
Razor (in case)
1
1
Shirts, flannel
2
2
Singlets ..
2
2
Soap, piece
1
1
Socks, pairs
3
3
Spoon . ..
1.
1
Towels .. ..
2
2
(ii) All troops will be allowed to take with them one pair canvas shoes,
if in personal possession, hut these are not supplied by the Department.
(iii) Spurs will be classed as equipment. (See para. 57 (ii).)
(iv) All units other than—
Infantry,
Army Ordnance Corps,
Army Pay Corps,
will wear mounted uniform.
(v) The uniform for all ranks (except officers) of Mechanical Transport
Units will be the same as for mounted soldiers with the undermentioned
exceptions :
Badge, Commonwealth, Large )
Cap, Service Dress > Not Issued.
Hat, C.P. j
Dungaree Suit—To be combination garment.
Straps, Chin—One only to be issued.
Cap, Forage, Leather—To be issued in lieu of cap, service dress.
Gauntlets and goggles will be provided for use when driving motor
vehicles.
t Clasp knives will be supplied on arrival in Kngland.


Civilians
specially
Officers
appointed
Article.
already
for the
Serving.
Voyage
only.
Badges, copper, oxydized, “ Commonwealth,”
large
small
1
4
99 99 99 ' 99
„ shoulder, “ Australia ”
sets
4
,, rank,
Boots, ankle, brown
pair
1
Breeches, woollen, M.S.
pairs
Cap, Service dress
2
Greatcoat, 25-oz., M.S.
2
Hat, C.P., fur ..
i
Jacket, Service Dress
Leggings, C.P., brown
pair
(vi) Medical and Veterinary Officers appointed, supplementary to the
establishments of units, for service on transports only, are to receive an
issue of clothing on the following scale, viz. :
(vii) Commanding officers of all units will make out requisitions in
triplicate for the articles authorized and forward them to the senior
ordnance officer with the least possible delay.
Issues to unallotted men in camps are to be restricted to—
Dungaree suit,
White hat,
Boots, ankle, brown, 1 pair,
Underclothing and necessaries (essential articles only).
The Officer in charge of unalloted men will keep accounts with the
Senior Ordnance Officer and will obtain signatures for all such articles
issued. When allotted to Units, transfer certificates showing the articles
which have been issued to each man, are to be supplied by this officer to
the C.O. of the Unit to which allotted. Officers in charge of depots will
requisition on 5.0.0.’s for the replacement of all articles taken away by men
allotted to units and drafts of reinforcements.
(viii) When preparing these requisitions care is to be taken not to demand
clothing for those members of the Citizen Forces who joined the Australian
Imperial Force in possession of suitable articles of clothing. wo copies o
the requisition will, on receipt of the articles, be signed and forwarded
to the senior ordnance officer, and the third retained by the officer
commanding Australian Imperial Force unit. ,
(ix) Authority has been given for payment to each officer, prmcipa
matron, matron, sister, and staff nurse of the Australian Impena orce o
an outfit allowance of £l5. Officers will, in addition, be allowed a free
issue of approved uniform and equipment, or, in lieu thereof, refund, a
Government rates, of cash expended by such officers in the purchase o
authorized articles of uniform and equipment.
(x) Officers may provide themselves privately with the articles
authorized, in lieu of receiving the ordinary free issue, and may be refunde
the actual cost of such articles, provided the amounts claimed do not in
instance exceed the published price of such article as shown in paragraph 4
(xiii). Claims to be supported by sub-vouchers. Such articles shall be entere
in the Issue Books of the unit as if the articles paid for had been issued in
kind, and such articles shall become the property of the Commonwealth.
C. 1092. —B


Article.
Mounted.
Dis-
mounted.
At per—
Value.
Uniform.
Badges, copper, large (for hat)
1
1
each
£ e. d.
0 0 6
Badges, copper, small (for collar)
3
3
99
0 0 3
Badges, copper, shoulder strap (Corps letter) ..
Badges, copper, “ Australia ”
4
4
99
0 0 3
4
4
99
0 0 3
Badges, rank, stars, copper
As required
99
0 0 6
Badges, rank, crown, copper
As required
99
0 0 6
Boots, ankle, brown, pairs ..
2
2
pair
0 12 0
Braces, pairs
1
1
99
0 2 0
Breeches, cord, C.P., woollen, D.S., pairs
2
99
0 10 6
Breeches, cord, C.P., woollen, M.S., pairs
2
99
0 15 9
Cap, service dress .,
1
i
each
0 4 3
Greatcoat, khaki, D.S.
1
99
1 9 10
Greatcoat, khaki, M.S.
1
9 9
1 14 2
Hat, felt, C.P.
1
i
99
0 6 3
Jacket, cardigan .. .. . . , ..
1
1
99
0 7 2
Jacket, service dress
2
2
9 9
1 5 0
Laces, spare, for boots, ankle, pairs . .
1
1
pair
0 0 3
Leggings, C.P., brown, pair
1
99
0 10 0
Puttees, pair
i
99
0 3 9
Spurs, jack, ordinary
i
99
0 3 3
Straps, chin
2
2
each
0 0 3
Kit Necessaries.
Bag, kit, universal
1
1
each
0 3 6
Belts, abdominal ..
2
2
0 1 6
Brush, hair
1
I
,,
0 2 3
Brush, shaving
1
1
99
0 0 5
Brush, tooth
I
1
,,
0 0 5
Cap, comforter
1
1
,,
0 1 3
Comb
1
1
0 0 4
Disc, identity, with cord
1
.1
0 0 1
Drawers, cotton, pairs
2
2
pair
0 3 0
Dressings, field
1
1
each
0 0 7
Fork, dinner
1
1
,,
0 0 8
Holdall ..
1
1
0 0 8
Housewife
1
1
0 1 0
Knife, dinner
1
1
,,
0 0 9
Knife, clasp, with marline spike, &c.
1
1
„
0 2 0
(xi) Claims for allowance in lieu of uniform and equipment supplied
privately, but for which vouchers cannot be produced, will be supported
in each case by the following certificates:—
(а) To be given by the officer commanding, regiment, battalion,
battery, &c., of the Australian Imperial Force:—
“ I certify that is in
possession of serviceable articles of clothing and equipment,
as set forth in the attached claim; and that a free issue of
such articles from departmental stocks has not been and will
not be made to the claimant.”
(б) To be given by the claimant: —
“ I certify that I am in possession of the articles claimed
for, and that I have not received a free issue of such articles.”
(xii) The refund at approved rates applies to articles purchased in
England, in which case certified claims, supported by vouchers, should
be submitted through the D.A.A. & Q.M.G., Head-Quarters A.1.F., to the
High Commissioner’s Office in London.
(xiii) The following is the authorized scale and values of articles of
equipment, uniform, kit, and necessaries for which a refund may be obtained
by officers of the Australian Imperial Force:—


Scale and Values of Articles of Equipment, &c. —continued
Article.
Mounted.
Dis-
mounted.
At per —
Value.
Razor, in case
1
1
each
£ s. d.
0 2 9
Shirts, flannel
2
2
0 4 3
Singlet ..
2
2
,,
0 4 1
Soap, piece
1
1
,,
0 0 0
Socks, pairs
3
3
pair
0 16
Spoon
Towels, hand
1
1
each
0 0 6
-
2
0 1 0
Equipment.
Pistols, Webley, Mark IV. ..
1
1
each
3 15 6
Pistols, Webley, rods, cleaning
Belts, shoulder, sword, “ Sam Browne,” Mark
II., pairs
1
1
,,
0 1 3
1
1
pair
0 2 6
Belts, waist, brown, sword, “ Sam Browne,”
Mark II.
1
1
each
0 15 6
Bottles, water, enamelled, Mark VI.
1
1
99
0 3 3
Carriers, water bottle, shoulder strap
1
1
99
0 2 3
Cases, brown, pistol, L.S. or “ Sam Browne ”
1
1
99
0 2 6
Haversacks, G.S. ..
1
1
99
0 1 3
Knots, sword, brown, G.S. ..
1
1
9 9
0 3 0
Frogs, brown, wire-cutter, Mark III.,.
1
9 9
0 2 9
Swords, officers
i
1
9 9
1 17 6
Scabbards, sword, officers ..
i
1
9 9
0 11 0
Lanyards, whistle .. ..
i
1
99
0 0 5
Lanyards, pistol ..
i
1
99
0 0 3
Pouches, ammn., brown, pistol, infantry, “ Sam
Browne ”
i
1
99
0 3 0
Whistles . .
i
1
99
0 0 6
Carriers, greatcoat (officers)
. .
1
99
0 2 0
Saddlery, Universal (as per Appendix 1., K.S.Gs.,
Part 1 ) sets
i
99
7 10 0
Tins, Mess, M.S. ..
i
99
0 1 9
Tins, Mess, D.S. ..
i
99
0 1 9
Straps, mess tin, M.S.
i
99
0 0 9
Compasses, magnetic, pocket
i
i
99
0 5 0
Binoculars, prismatic, No. 2, Mark I., in leather
case with shoulder strap ..
i*
i
99
5 9 3
Binoculars, prismatic, No. II., Mark II., with
graticules
it
99
5 15 0
Rugs, horse, C.P. ..
i
99
0 12 6
Bags, nose
i
99
0 3 6
Cutters, wire, pairs
i
i
pair
0 2 6
* Excepting Artillery officers.
t Artillery officers only.
(xiv) Special Issue Books have been printed for the A.T.F., viz.:—
Saddlery, Arms, and Accoutrements —Officers.
Arms and Accoutrements —Infantry.
Saddlery, Arms and Accoutrements —All Arms except Infantry.
Clothing, Kit and necessaries.
(xv) lleceipts are required in duplicate from Officers, and W. and
N.C.O’s. of the Permanent Forces on consolidated pay enlisted in the A.I.F,
Special printed forms have been provided for this purpose. These duplicate
receipts must be forwarded to the 5.0.0, of the District immediately prior
to the embarkation of the unit.
n 2


(xvi) Commanding officers will requisition on the Ordnance Department
for a reserve of boots and white canvas shoes on the following scale ;
Boots, ankle, hrown —
Pairs.
Per squadron ... ... 6
~ battery ... ... 6
„ brigade ammunition column 10 To drawn by
~ divisional ammunition column Zi , , .
” , . „ \ head-quarters
~ company or troop ot engineers 7/ -1
„ battalion ... ... 30 01
~ field ambulance ... ... 8
„ Coy. A.S.C. ... ... 10
Shoes, canvas, white —
Per battalion ... ... 50
(xvii.) Corps letters and numerals, and the word “Australia” ia
oxidised copper as described below, will be worn by warrant and non-
commissioned officers and men on the shoulder straps of the service dress
jacket and great coat.
1 1
D.H.Q. L.H.B. 1.8.
4USTRAXAV 4 4
1 I 3
INF. F.A. L.H.
4 4 frSTRAXAk‘ 4usTRAiAk-
-1 1 1
ENGRS. SIC. TR. SIG. CO.
4 frSTRAI 4 4 frSTRAIA^
1 1 1
A.S.C. L.H.F.A. A.M.C.
4 gstrali> 4^strali^-
A.V.C. M.P. P.O.C.
4 4 USTRAIA>
A.P.C. . A.O.C. A.Y.C.
4 4 G t STRALIA- 4^STRALI A '‘


No. of
Articles
Article.
How carried or where left.
1
Army Form B. 122 (cover and pad) Field
Conduct Book
In train transport j Squadron, battery,
I &c., commanders
1
Army Book 6 (cover), Army Form N.
1513 (pad), Acquittance Roll
„ „ J only
1
Army Book 155
On person
1
Field Service Pocket Book
99
On side of hat
1
Badges, copper, large (for hat)
3
7, „ small (for collar and cap)
Two on collar of jacket, S.D., and one on
forage cap
2
„ ,, shoulder (corps letters),
On person
2
„ „ shoulder(AUSTRALIA),
pairs
On shoulder-straps of jacket, S.D.
2
Belts, abdominal
One on person and one in wallets
2
Boots, ankle, brown, pairs
One pair on person and one pair in train
transport
1
Braces, pairs
On person
2
Breeches, cord, C.P., woollen, IVl.S.
One pair on person and one pair in train
transport
I
Brush, hair
In wallets
1
,, shaving
,,
1
,, tooth
Cap, S.D. ..
,,
1
On person
1
,, comforter
In pocket of greatcoat
1
Comb
In wallets
1
Disc, identity, with cord
On person —suspended from neck by
cord
2
Drawers, cotton, pairs
One pair on person and one pair in train
transport
I
Dressings, field
On person—in special pocket in skirt of
jacket, S.D.
1
Fork
In wallets
1
Greatcoat, M.S.
Rolled and strapped to back of saddle
1
Hat, felt, C.P.
In trunk at base
1
Holdall
In wallets
1
Housewife ..
1
Jacket, cardigan
On person
2
Jackets, Service dress
One on person and one in train transport
1
Knife
In wallets
1
Knife, clasp, with marlin spike, tin-
opener, and lanyard
On person
1
Laces (spare), for boots, ankle, pairs ..
In wallets
1
Leggings, pairs
On person
1
Numerals, copper, pairs
99
In wallets
I
Razor (in case)
2
Shirts, flannel
One on person and one in train transport
2
Singlets
” ” »*..»» ,
One pair on person, one pair in pocket of
greatcoat, and one pair in train trans-
port
3
Socks, worsted, pairs
1
Soap, piece of
In wallets
1
Spoon
One on hat, felt, C.P., and one on cap,
F.S.
2
Straps, chin
2
Towels
One in wallets and one in train transport
(a) Mounted Officers.
(xvii) The following table shows the articles of uniform, kit, and
necessaries taken in the field, and how they are carried : —-


(a) Mounted Officers — continued.
The following articles may also be taken, but are not supplied by the
Department:—•
No. of
Articles.
Article.
How carried or where left.
1
Bucket, canvas
In train transport
1
Grease or Vaseline (tin of)
99 99
1
Lantern, collapsible, with talc sides
99 99
1
Leggings (spare pair)
99 99
1
Portfolio, with writing materials
9 9 9 9
I
Shoes, canvas, white, pairs
99 99
1
Towel
99 99
1
Valise, Wolseley (or other pattern)
99 99
1
Watch
On person
1
Cup, enamelled
In train transport, packed in camp kettle
2
Plates, enamelled
99 99 99 99
1
Pot, pepper
,, ,, „ ,,
I
,, salt ..
” »» ” ”
Note I. —The articles carried in the train transport may be varied, but the total weight (excluding
articles in camp kettles) must not exceed 50 lbs. for a C.O. and 35 lbs. for other officers.
Note II. —Officers may leave at the base a trunk packed with 100 lbs. of personal baggage. This
reserve baggage will be forwarded only when it may be deemed convenient to the service by the 0. in C.
(h ) Dismounted Officers.
o-§
Article.
How carried or where left.
IS
1
1
Army Form B. 122 (cover and pad) Field
Conduct Book
Army Book 6 (cover), Army Form N.
1513 (pad), Acquittance Roll
In train transport *1 Company com .
j manders only
1
Army Book 153
On person
1
Field Service Pocket Book
On side of hat
1
Badges, copper, large (for hat)
3
,, „ small (collar and cap)
Two on collar of jacket, S.D., and one on
forage cap
2
,, ,, shoulder (corps letters),
On person
pairs
On shoulder-straps of jacket, S.D.
2
„ „ shoulder( AUSTRALIA),
pairs
One on person and one in train transport
2
Belts, abdominal
2
Boots, ankle, brown, pairs
One pair on person and one pair in train
transport
1
Braces, pairs
On person
2
Breeches, cord, C.P., woollen, D.S.
One pair on person and one pair in train
transport
1
Brush, hair
In holdall in train transport
1
,, shaving
99 99 99
1
,, tooth
99 99 99
In pocket of great coat
1
Cap, comforter
1
,, Service dress ..
Comb
On person
1
In holdall in train transport
1
Disc, identity, with cord
On person —suspended from neck by
cord
2
Drawers, cotton, pairs
One pair on person and one pair in train
transport


(6) Dismounted Officers— continued.
o O
Article.
How carried or where left.
ii
•
1
Dressings, field
On person —in special pocket in skirt of
jacket, S.D.
1
Fork
In camp kettle in train transport
1
Greatcoat, D.S.
Rolled on person
1
Hat, felt, C.P.
In trunk at base
1
Holdall
In train transport
1
Housewife ..
99 99
1
Jacket, cardigan
On person
2
Jackets, Service dress
One on person and one in train transport
1
Knife
In camp kettle in train transport
1
Knife, clasp, with marlin spike, tin-
opener, and lanyard
On person
1
Laces (spare), for boots, ankle, pairs ..
In holdall in train transport
1
Numerals, copper, pairs
On person
1
Puttees, pair
99
1
Razor (in case)
In holdall in train transport
2
Shirts, flannel
One on person and one in train transport
2
Singlets
3
Socks, worsted, pairs
One pair on person, and two pairs in
train transport
1
Soap, pieces
In train transport
1
Spoon
In camp kettle in train transport
2
Straps, chin
One on hat, felt, C.P., and one on cap,
forage
2
Towels
In train transport
The following articles may also be taken on the field, but are not supplied
by the Department: —
1
Bucket, canvas
In train transport
1
Grease or Vaseline (tin of)
99 9 9
1
Lantern, collapsible, with talc sides
99 99
1
Puttees (spare pair) ..
99 9 9
l
Portfolio, with writing materials
1
Shoes, canvas, white, pairs
l
Valise, Wolseley (or other pattern)
9 9 99
l
Towel
1
Watch
On person
l
Cup, enamelled
In camp kettle in train transport
2
Plates, enamelled
1
Pot, pepper
1
,, salt
99 99 99 99
Note I.—The articles carried in the train transport may be varied,but the total weight (excluding
articles in camp kettles) must not exceed 50 lbs. for a C.O. and 35 lbs. for other officers.
Note II.—Officers may leave at the base a trunk packed with 100 lbs. of personal baggage. The
reserve baggage will be forwarded only when it may be deemed convenient to the service by the C.
in C.


(c) Warrant and Non-Commissioned Officers and Men.
Mounted Personnel.
No. of
Article*.
Article.
How carried or where left.
1
Badges, copper, large (for hat)
On side of hat
3
,, ,, small (for collar and
F.S. cap)
Two on collar of jacket, S.D., and one
on cap, F.S. or S.D.
2
,, ,, shoulder-strap (corps
letters), pairs
On shoulder-straps of jacket, S.D.
2
,, ,, shoulder-strap (AUS-
TRALIA), pairs
99 99 99 99
1
Bags, kit ..
Left at base
2
Belts, abdominal
One on person and one in kit bag at base
2
Boots, ankle, brown, pairs
99 99 99 99 99 99
On person
1
Braces, pairs
2
Breeches, cord, C.P., woollen, M.S.
One pair on person and one pair in kit
bag at base
1
Brush, hair
In kit bag at base
1
,, shaving
In holdall in haversack
1
,, tooth
Cap, service dress
1
On person
1
,, comforter
Comb
In pocket of greatcoat
1
In holdall in haversack
1
Disc, identity, with cord
On person —suspended from neck by
cord
2
Drawers, cotton, pairs
One on person and one in kit bag at base
1
Dressing, field
On person—in special pocket in skirt of
jacket, S.D.
1
Fork
In holdall in haversack
1
Greatcoat, M.S.
Rolled and strapped to front of saddle
1
Hat, felt, C.P.
In kit bag at base
1
,, white
Holdall
1
In haversack
1
Housewife ..
1
Jacket, cardigan
On person ; in warm weather in folds of
greatcoat
1
Jacket, dungaree
In kit bag at base
2
,, Service dress
Knife
One on person and one in kit bag at base
1
In holdall in haversack
I
Knife, clasp, with marlin spike, tin-
opener, and lanyard
On person
1
Laces (spare), for boots, ankle, pairs ..
In holdall in haversack
1
Leggings, pairs
On person
1
Numerals, copper, pairs
On shoulder-straps of jacket, S.D.
1
Razor (in case)
In holdall in haversack
2
Shirts, flannel
One on person and one in kit bag at base
1
Shoes, canvas, white (if in possession ; not
supplied by Dept.)
In kit bag at base
2
Singlets
One on person and one in kit bag at base
3
Socks, worsted, pairs
One pair on person, one pair in pocket
of greatcoat, and one pair in kit bag
at base
1
Soap, piece of
In haversack
1
Spoon
In holdall in haversack
2
Straps, chin
One on hat, felt, C.P., and one on cap,
F.S.
2
Towels
One in haversack and one in kit bag at
base
1
Trousers, dungaree, pairs
In kit bag at base
Note.—The pair of boots left at the base in the kit bags will be tied together with the soles outwards
the regimental number of the man and the name and number of the unit beins chalked, or otherwise
legibly marked, on the soles. The boots will be placed at the top of the kit bau to admit of them h>in<r
readily withdrawn should it be necessary to forward them separately to the troops in the field.


(d) Warrant and Non-Commissioned Officers and Men.
Dismounted Personnel.
M
u_. <V
Article.
How carried or where left.
ot.
1
Badges, copper, large (for hat)
On side of hat
3
„ „ small (for collar and cap)
Two on collar of jacket, S.D., and one on
cap, F.S. or S.D.
2
„ ,, shoulder (corps letters),
pairs
On shoulder-straps of jacket, S.D.
2
,, „ shoulder (AUSTRA-
LIA), pairs
99 99 99 99 99
1
Bags, kit ..
Left at base
2
Belts, abdominal
One on person and one in pack
2
Boots, ankle, brown, pairs
One on person and one in kit bag at base
1
Braces, pairs
On person
2
Breeches, cord, C.P., woollen, D.S.
One pair on person and one pair in kit bag
at base
1
Brush, hair
In kit bag at base
1
„ shaving
In holdall in pack
1
„ tooth
Cap, comforter
1
In pack
I
„ S.D. ..
Comb
On person
1
In holdall in pack
1
Disc, identity, with cord
On person —suspended from neck by
cord
2
Drawers, cotton, pairs
One pair on person and one pair in kit
bag at base
1
Dressing, field
On person—in special pocket in skirt of
jacket, S.D.
1
Fork
In haversack
1
Greatcoat, D.S.
In pack
1
Hat, felt, C.P.
In kit bag at base
1
,, white
Holdall
I
In pack
I
Housewife ..
1
Jacket, cardigan
On person. In pack in warm weather
1
„ dungaree
In kit bag at base
„ Service dress
One on person and one in kit bag at base
1
Knife
In haversack
1
,, clasp, with marlin spike, tin-
opener, and lanyard
On person
I
Laces (spare), for boots, ankle, pairs ..
In holdall in pack
1
Numerals, copper, pairs
On shoulder-straps of jacket, S.D.
1
Puttees, pairs
On person
1
Razor (in case)
In holdall in pack
2
Shirts, flannel
Oile on person and one in kit bag at base
1
Shoes, canvas, white (if in possession; not
issued by Dept.)
In kit bag at base
2
Singlets .. ..
One on person and one in kit bag at base
3
Socks, worsted, pairs
One on person, one in pack, and one in
kit bag at base
1
Soap, piece of
In pack
1
Spoon
In haversack
2
Straps, chin
One on hat, felt, C.P., and one on cap,
F.S.
2
Towels
One in pack and one in kit bag at base
1
Trousers, dungaree, pairs
[n kit bag at base
Note.— The pair of boots left at the base in kit bag will be tied together with the soles outwards, the
regimental number of the man and the name and number of the unit being chalked, or otherwise legiblv
marked, on the soles. The boots will be placed at the top of the kit bag to admit of them being readily
withdrawn should it be necessary to forward them separately to the troops in the field.


(xviii) The following are the articles to be carried in sea kit bags for use
on the voyage : —•
Belt, abdominal. Housewife.
Brushes, hair. Jacket, cardigan.
„ shaving. „ dungaree.
„ tooth. Shirts (spare).
Cap, comforter. Singlets.
„ Service dress. Shoes, canvas, white.
Comb. Soap.
Drawers, woollen, pair. Socks, spare.
Hat, white. Towels.
Holdall, containing— Trousers, dungaree.
jr or k And small articles of personal
Knife. property.
Razor.
Spoon.
48. In all Camps of Concentration of the Australian Imperial Force
and reinforcements a plain-clothes store should be established wherein the
ordinary garments of enlisted men should be deposited, wrapped up and
properly labelled, immediately uniform is supplied to them, so that in case
of their being discharged for any reason they may be able to leave camp in
their own clothes.
49. Members of the Australian Imperial Force who are discharged prior
to embarkation will return to regimental store, for re-issue after cleaning,
all articles of uniform and necessaries except the following, which may be
retained without payment: —
Boots, ankle, brown, pairs.
Shirts, flannel.
Soap.
Brush, hair.
Brush, shaving.
Brush, tooth.
Drawers, pair.
Singlets.
Socks.
Clothing received from men unfit owing to infectious diseases will be
dealt with as directed by the Medical Officer.
50. The following articles may also be retained free in the case of dis-
charged men who are not eligible to receive a free issue of plain clothes under
paragraph 54(&), but who have worn out their plain clothes after enlistment
pending the issue of uniform; —
Jacket, dungaree.
.Trousers, dungaree.
Hat, white.
51. Articles deficient are to be paid for at the rates set out in orders for
A.1.F., para. 47 (xii).
52. Articles taken away by members under paragraphs 49 and 50 may
be replaced by fresh issues from Ordnance Stores on requisition by C.O.’s
if required for issue to men to make up their establishment.
53. It is to be distinctly understood that no articles of military uniform
are to be allowed to be taken away by discharged men, and C.O.’s are to
be held responsible for the withdrawal of all articles except as provided in
paragraphs 49 and 50.


54. In order to secure without fail the return of military uniform from
the possession of unauthorized persons, approval is given to the following :
(a) Where discharge takes place in the Home centre, i.e. —place of
enlistment, the plain clothes of the individual should be avail-
able, and no payment or order for plain clothes should be issued.
(See paragraphs 48 and 50).
( b ) Where members from country centres furnish satisfactory proof
that upon enlistment they disposed of their civilian clothing,
and therefore have none such available to wear upon giving up
the uniform, an order to a value not exceeding 205., or cash in
lieu thereof, may be issued to the member discharged, for the
purpose of providing himself with a suit of plain clothes. This
applies only to members discharged before embarkation or before
actual departure from last port of call in the Commonwealth of
the transport the member was embarked on for the over-seas
voyage.
55. In the case of transfers the C.O. of the unit from which a member
is transferred may draw from Ordnance Stores any new clothing required
for the 'personnel allotted to his unit to complete establishment.
NURSING SERVICE.
56. The following table shows the articles of uniform for members of
the Nursing Service :
Staff Nurses.
Outdoor.
1 Grey Serge Dress (without chocolate markings).
1 Grey serge Cape.
1 Bonnet and Veil.
1 Grey Cloak.
1 Commonwealth Brooch.
1 pair Grey Gloves.
Indoor.
3 Grey Zephyr Dresses.
4 Grey Zephyr Aprons.
8 white linen-face sheeting Aprons.
2 scarlet shoulder Capes.
1 pair Black Boots.
6 collars, straight pattern, to be worn inside collar of dress.
6 pairs straight Cuffs, to be worn inside of dress cuff.
4 Caps, white, French organdie muslin, 1 yard square, hemstitched by
machine.
Where necessary plain black cloth gaiters may be worn.
Sisters.
As for Staff Nurses with following distinctions—
Chocolate markings on Serge Dress (see Standing Orders 40, Dress
and Clothing, Citizen Forces, 1912).
1 Badge, A.A.N.S., removable, similar to that on out-door serge
dress.
Matrons.
As for Sisters with the following distinctions—
Chocolate Cuff on Out-door Dress (see Standing Order 39, Dress and
Clothing, Citizen Forces, 1912).
Matron’s Badge.


Principal Matron.
1 Grey Serge Dress (see Standing Order 38, Dress and Clothing
Citizen Forces, 1912).
1 Grey Serge Cape.
2 Grey Alpaca Dresses, chocolate markings and badge, as on out-door
dress.
1 Cloak.
1 Grey Bonnet without Veil, band to be of black velvet.
2 Scarlet Capes.
1 pair Boots.
6 straight Collars.
6 pairs straight Cuffs.
4 Caps, same as Matrons and Sisters.
EQUIPMENT.
57. (i) Mobilization tables showing the exact quantity of accoutrements
and mobilization stores to which units of the Australian Imperial Force are
entitled have been prepared for the following units, and issued to District
Commandants ;
Head-Quarters of Division.
Head-Quarters of Divisional Artillery.
Head-Quarters of Divisional Engineers.
Divisional Ammunition Column (personal equipment only).
Head-Quarters Light Horse Brigade.
Light Horse Regiment.
Field Company, Engineers.
Signal Troop.
Signal Company (1 Section).
Head-Quarters Infantry Brigade.
Infantry Battalion.
Light Horse Brigade Train.
Divisional Train.
Light Horse Field Ambulance.
Field Ambulance.
Divisional Ammunition Park (M.T.)
Divisional Supply Column (M.T.)
Reserve Park.
General Hospital.
Stationary Hospital.
Clearing Hospital.
Railway Supply Detachment.
Army Pay Corps Details.
Depot Unit of Supply.
Army Service Corps Company with Infantry Brigade.
Field Bakery, A.A.S.C.
Field Butchery, A.A.S.C.
Veterinary Section.
Mobile Veterinary Section.
(ii.) The following table shows the articles of equipment to be taken abroad
by A.I. Force reinforcements.
The detail, unless noted in “ Remarks ” column, is for “ all ranks,”
which does not include officers.


Articles marked “ (a)” will be issued to officers :—
'd
/
A.A.S.C.
—
09
td g
1^1
3
!»«
f.Sa
H .
o .
d
>»
h
cS .
—
sl
2 S,§
.S-ES
a
13.1
c3 tC
fgl
CO esO
P. eS
• S3
i gl
WHfl
S
<
.S s
c .2
||
t>co
Weedon Section —a.
Rifles, short, M.L.E.
1
, #
1
1
1
1
1
Except buglers and trumpeters
Sword bayonets
1
. .
l
1
1
1
Scabbards, sword bayonet
1
1
1
1
, ,
1
Pistols, Webley
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
Rods, cleaning, pistol, Webley
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
Bottles, oil
1
1
1
1
1
, ,
1
Pulltbroughs
1
1
1
1
1
1
Swords, officers’..
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
, .
(a)
Scabbards, sword, officers’
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
Section No. 1a.
Belts, shoulder, sword, Sam Browne, pairs
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
,, waist, sword, S.B.
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
Without sword frog for medical officers
Bottles, water, enamelled
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
Cases, brown, pistol
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
Carriers, water bottle, with shoulder strap ..
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (o)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
Frogs, brown, bayonet, C.P.
1
1
1
1
,, wire cutter
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
. .
,, „ straps, with buckle
la)
(a)
(a)
. .
„ „ „ „ stud
Haversacks, G.S.
(a)
(a)
(a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
Knots, sword, brown, G.S.
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
Lanyards, pistol
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
1 per whistle
,, whistle
Pouches, ammunition, brown, pistol
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
Slings, rifle, web
1
1
1
1
1
1
1 per mess tin, M.S.
Straps, mess tin, M.S.
Tins, mess, M.S. or D.S. .. ..
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
M.S. or D.S., according to unit.
Whistles (Infantry, Cavalry, or Artillery) ..
(b)
(b)
(b)
(6) 1 per officer and sergeant, also
infantry corporals
Web equipment, pattern ’08 sets, complete
1
Bandolier equipment, pattern ’03—
Bandoliers, 90 rounds
1
, ,
• •
,, 50 rounds
i
1 (c)
i
(c) For Signal units and mounted
details of Field Co’s, only
Belts, waist
1
1
1
i
1
1
1 per mess tin, D.S.
Covers, mess tin, D.S.
Pockets, cartridge —15 rounds
2
4(d)
, .
(d) Dismounted details of Field Co’s.only
,, 10 rounds
2
2
2
Straps, greatcoat
2(o)
2(a)
2 (a)
2(a)
2(a)
2(a)
2(a)
(a) Mounted officers only
N.I.V.
Carriers, greatcoat, officers
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
Dismounted officers only ; if not avail-
able, 2 greatcoat straps in lieu
Pouches, for First Aid dressings ..
1
Section No. 1b.
Bugles
..
1 per bugler and trumpeter
Trumpets
1 per trumpet
Strings, bugle and trumpet
1 per bugle and 1 per trumpet
Section No. 2a.
Kettles, camp, oval, 12 quarts
••
1 per three officers, and 1 per sixteen
other ranks
Sheets, ground .. ..
1 (a)
1(a)
1(a)
1 (a)
1(a)
1 (a)
1 (a)
1(a)
Section No. 2b.
Implements, intrenching, pattern ’08—
Heads
. .
1
• •
• •
• •
• •
Helves
1
• •
• •
• •
* *
* *
Section No. 7.
Wirecutters .. ..
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
••
••
••
••
Section No. 8d.
Compasses, magnetic, pocket, in case
(a)
(a)
••
••
••
••
Section No. 9a.
Dubbing
11b. per twenty officers and all ranks
Oil, petroleum, lubricating
Soap, yellow
4
5 pints per 100 rifles
11b. per officer and all ranks
Section No. 13a.
Blankets, G.S. ..
2(a)
2(a)
2(a)
2(a)
2(a)
2(a)
2(a)
2(a)
Section No. 13c.
Flannelette, 4 inches wide
••
1 yard per rifle
Section No. 15b.
Binoculars
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
Note I.—Six flags, signal, army, 2-ft. square, will be placed on
C.1092.—C
board each transport carrying reinforcements for signal units.


Spurs. —(iii) Spurs will be issued at the rate of one pair per saddle (except
in units of Australian Field Artillery, when spurs will not be issued for the
saddles on the off horses of vehicles) and one pair per officer, N.C.O. and
man in mounted reinforcements to mounted units.
(iv) District Commandants have been instructed to collect the stores
shown in these tables, as far as possible in unit lots, and to issue to units
in complete lots, as per tables.
(v) Officers Commanding units will submit requisitions on Senior
Ordnance Officers for all stores authorized. Only one vocabulary section of
stores will be shown on a sheet.
(vi) Complete lots will, as far as possible, be sent to Officers Commanding
units, and when checked and found correct, will be signed for in the requisi-
tion. A copy of the requisition signed by the Senior Ordnance Officer will
be retained by the officer commanding unit as a record of receipt.
(vii) When the stores cannot be assembled in unit lots, issue Will be made
to as great an extent as possible.
(viii) If articles required for issue are not available from the Ordnance
Stores Stocks, District Commandants will call in from units of the Citizen
Forces such stores as are required to complete. Articles which are not
obtainable by this means or have not been otherwise ordered will be pur-
chased by Senior Ordnance Officer under the best possible arrangements.
In cases in which District Commandants consider it more expedient to
transfer stores direct from a unit of the Citizen Forces to a unit of the
Australian Imperial Force, this course may be followed.
(ix) In these cases transfer vouchers will be made out in triplicate
in the office of the Senior Ordnance Officer, and passed direct to the Officer
Commanding Citizen Force unit selected to make the transfer to the
Australian Imperial Force unit. This transfer is to be carried out with the
utmost expedition. Two copies of the transfer requisition will be signed by
the Officer Commanding Australian Imperial Force unit, one of which is
passed to the Senior Ordnance Officer, and the other to the Officer Com-
manding Citizen Force unit. The third copy should be retained by the Officer
Commanding Australian Imperial Force unit as an office record of receipt.
(x) In order to avoid the delay which would be caused by the neces-
sity for the replacement of lost or damaged equipment, stores, &c. —a delay
which might cause the Australian Imperial Force to be detained in England
instead of proceeding to the seat of war—commanding officers will impress
upon all ranks the necessity of keeping their clothing and equipment in
complete and serviceable order.
(xi) All personal equipment, greatcoats, clothing, necessaries, and identity
discs will be marked prior to departure. Requisitions for the stamps, &c.,
referred to below will be submitted at once by officers commanding units
to the Senior Ordnance Officer of the district :
Stamps, steel, for metal, |-inch —
Single letters, sets, 1.
Figures, 0 to 8, sets, 1,
Stamps, steel, for metal, £-inch —
Letters, alphabet, sets, 1.
Figures, 0 to 8, sets, 1.
Stamps, rubber,
Single letters, sets, 1,
Figures, 0 to 8, sets, 1.
Ink, marking, 5 lbs. (per 1,000 men).


(xii) Articles which it has not been practicable to mark prior to departure
will be marked on board ship ; one set of £-inch steel stamps, and one set of
l-inch rubber stamps, will be supplied to the officer commanding troops on
each transport for the purpose by the staff officer in charge of embarkation,
who will procure them by requisition from the Ordnance Department.
57a. Members of the Citizen Forces who are approved for service in the
A.I.F. will return to Unit Store the whole of the equipment (and spurs) on
issue to them.
58. (i) (a) Accoutrements will be marked with a number to correspond with
the number of the recipient’s rifle, and with the designation of the unit, thus :
<< 432 A—1 A. 1.” ( i.e ., rifle and accoutrements, &c., No. 432
• “A” Company, Ist Australian Infantry).
Men not in possession of a rifle will have their equipment marked with
their regimental number and unit, thus :
“ 4632 —1 F. Amb. A.A.M.C.” {i.e., regimental number 4632, Ist
Australian Field Ambulance).
Accoutrements are not to be branded. In marking brown accoutre-
ments the stoutest parts should be chosen ; bandoliers should be marked on
the bodies and on the pockets on the back loops.
(6) Abbreviations will be used as follows :
Head-Quarters of a Division ... H.Q.
A.D.
Head-Quarters, Divisional Artillery ... H.Q.A.
A.D.
Head-Quarters, Divisional Engineers ... H.Q.E.
A.D.
Head-Quarters Divisional Ammunition
Column ... ... ... H.Q.D.A.C.
A.D.
Head-Quarters, Infantry Brigade ... H.Q.
1 (2 <fec.) A. 1.8,
Head-Quarters, L.H. Brigade ... H.Q.
1 (2 &c.) A.L.H.B.
Head-Quarters, F.A. Brigade ... H.Q., 1 (2 or 3)
A.F.A.
Light Horse Regiment ... ... 1(2 &c.) A.L.H.R.
Battery of Artillery ... ... 1 (2 9) Bty.
A.F.A.
Field Company ... ... ... 1(2 &c.) F. Co.
A.E.
Divisional Signal Company ... ... D.S. Co.
A.E.
Signal Troop with'Light Horse Brigade 1 (2 &c.) S.T.
A.E.


Infantry Battalion ... ... 1 (2 &c.) A.I.
Light Horse Field Ambulance .. 1(2 &c.) L.H.F. Amb.
A.A.M.C.
Field Ambulance of a Division ... 1 (2 &c.) F. Amb.
A.A.M.C.
Light Horse Brigade Train ... ... 1 (6 &c.) A.S.C.
Divisional Train ... ... ... 2 (or 3-5) A.S.C.
A.S.C. Coy. with Infantry Brigade ... 7 &c. A.A.S.C.
Divisional Ammunition Park ... 8 A.A.S.C.
Divisional Supply Column . ... 9 A.A.S.C.
Reserve Park ... ... ... 10 A.A.S.C.
Railway Supply Detachment |
Depot Units of Supply ... | 11 A.A.S.C.
Field Bakery ... .. ... 13th A.A.S.C. .
Field Butchery ... ... .. 13th A.A.S.C.
Australian General Hospital... 1 (or 2) G.H.,
A.A.M.C.
Australian Stationary Hospital ... 1 (or 2) S.H.
A.A.M.C.
Australian Clearing Hospital ... 1 C.H.
A.A.M.C.
Army Pay Corps ... ... ... A.P.C.
Mobile Yeterinary Section ... ~. 1(2 <kc.) M.Y. Sec., A. A. Y. C.
Yeterinary Section ... ... 1 (2 &c.) V. Sec., A.A.Y.C.
Australian Army Ordnance Corps ... 1 Co. A.A.O.C.
(c) Ihe method of marking personal clothing and necessaries is left'to
the discretion of commanding officers.
(d) Kit bags will be marked with the title of the unit and the regimental
number of the soldier to whom issued.
(ii) The stamps to be used for marking accoutrements will be as
follows :
Web accoutrements, greatcoats, finch rubber stamps and ink.
haversacks, and mess-tin
covers
Brown accoutrements ... finch steel stamps, care being
taken that the leather is not cut,
but merely indented.
Waterbottle covers... ... finch rubber stamps and ink.
In centre of that portion of
cover not exposed to view when
bottle is worn. (Bottles should
be worn with buff strip or chain
securing cork towards rear.)


Mess-tins... ... ... steel stamps. Tins should
be well supported by a smooth
surface during process of mark-
ing. Judgment must be used in
delivering blows so as not to cut
the metal through.
(iii) Each officer and man will carry on a cord round his neck an
identity disc showing his name, number if any, unit, and religion.
A soldier will be classified under one of the following denominations :
Church of England ... ... C.E.
Presbyterian ... ... P.
Wesleyan ... ... ... W.
Baptist or Congregationalist ... B. or C.
Other Protestant denominations (Name of denomination to be
noted).
Roman Catholic ... ... R.C.
Jew ... ... ... J.
The sketch beneath shows the manner in which identity discs will be
marked :
/ 1570 \
I J. H. GODFREY \
i 10 A.L j
(iv) In order that harness may be kept intact, commanding officers will
arrange, before embarkation, for packing each complete near and off set in a
bag or sack, securely fastened, and labelled with the name of the unit.
Before packing, harness should be thoroughly dry, and all metal parts should
be greased. For details of the various sets of harness and saddlery see
Appendix 3.
A complete set of shaft and pole draught harness (wheel and lead for
four-horse vehicles ] wheel, centre, and lead for six-horse vehicles) is to be
kept unpacked for use during tbe voyage for instructional purposes.


Unit.
Allowance.
£ s. d.
Head-quarters of a Division
0 3 0
Head-quarters of an Infantry Brigade
0 3 0
Infantry Battalion
10 0
Head-quarters of a Light Horse Brigade ...
0 3 O
Light Horse Regiment ...
1 10 0
Head-quarters Division Artillery ...
0 2 0
Head-quarters Artillery Brigade ...
0 4 0
Field Artillery Battery ...
2 10 0.
Brigade Ammunition Column
6 10 0
Divisional Ammunition Column ...
0 0 0
Head-quarters Division Engineers
0 2 0
Field Company ...
0 18 0
Signal Troop
0 3 0
Signal Company
10 0
Signal Company (1 Section)
0 3 0
Light Horse Brigade Train
2 15 0
Divisional Train
0 10 0
Army Service Company (with Infantry Brigade)
0 3 0
Reserve Park
/ 15 0
Light Horse Field Ambulance
1 10 0
Field Ambulance
2 0 0
Mobile Veterinary Section
0 3 0
Veterinary Section
0 3 0
Commanding officers are authorized to expend *the sums detailed below
in the purchase of corn or other sacks in which to pack harness. Claims
for such expenditure will be rendered on Treasury Form 9 to local District
Paymasters.
59. (i) All horses will be branded with the number and designation of
the unit to which allotted on the off hind foot, and the unit number of the
horse on the near hind foot, e.g. :
Near hind foot— Off hind foot—
-13 2 F.A.
meaning remount No. 13 of the 2nd Battery, Field Artillery.
Each remount will, before issue to units, be branded with the letter “A”
and the number in thousands on the off fore foot, and hundreds, tens, and
units, on the near fore foot, e.g. ; |
Near fore foot— Off fore foot — Meaning—
-001 A. 1 ... ... Australia 1,001
5 A. ... ... Australia 5
(ii) Officers commanding units will requisition on the Ordnance Depart-
ment for brands as under :
Head-quarters, Division ... ... ... D.H.Q.
Light Horse —
Light Horse Brigade, Head-quarters ... L.H.B.
Light Horse Regiment ... ... ... L.H.
t Horses supplied from the Temporary Remount DepOt, Muswellbrook, N.S.W., will have the
letter “ B ” on the off fore foot instead of letter “ A.”


Field Artillery —
Head-quarters, Divisional Artillery ... H.Q.A.
„ F.A. Brigade ... F.A.B.
F.A. Battery ... ... ••• ••• LA.
Divisional Ammunition Column ... ... D.A.C.
Brigade „ ~ ••• ••• F.A.B.
Engineers —
Head-quarters, Divisional Engineers ... H.Q.
Field Company (Engineers) ... ... F.C.
Signal Company (Engineers) ... ... S.C.
Signal Troop (Engineers) ... ... S.T.
Infantry —
Head-quarters, Infantry Brigade ... ... LB.
Infantry Battalions ... ... ••• I.N.F.
Army Service Carps —
Head-quarters, Divisional Train ... ... H.Q.D.T.
Company ... ... ••• ••• A.A.S.C.
Army Medical Corps —
Light Horse Field Ambulance ... ... L.H.F.A.
Field Ambulance ... ••• A.A.M.C.
Army Veterinary Corps ... ••• ••• A.A.Y.C.
60. All vehicles are to be marked so as to show the title of the
which they belong, and the formation to which the unit is allotted.
(a) These marks, called “corps marks,” generally require two lines ;
First line.—Title of unit, e.g., 1 Aust. Inf.
Second line.—Formation to which unit is allotted, e.g., 1
Aust. Inf. Bde. and are to be on the same
system for all vehicles, and for all branches
of the service.
(b) The position of the marks will be as follows :
Gun and howitzer carriages On trail, off side.
Limbers and ammunition
wagons ... ... Centre of back of ammunition
boxes.
Ammunition wagons and
limbers ... ... Back of ammunition box, off
side, close to top.
Carts, cable ... ... Off side of front box.
Carts, water tank ... Off side of tank, or down, at
front.


TABLE I.
Head-Quarters of a Division ...
Hd.-Qrs.
Aust. Div,
Head-Quarters, Divisional Artillery ...
Hd.-Qrs. Arty.
Aust. Div.
Head-Quarters, Divisional Engineers ...
Hd.-Qrs. Eng.
Aust. Div.
Head-Quarters, Divisional Ammunition Column ..
Hd.-Qrs. Div. A.C.
Aust. Div.
Head-Quarters, Infantry Brigade
Hd.-Qrs.
1 (2 &c.) Aust. Inf. Bde.
Wagons—
Cable ... ... Off side of futchel of body, and
off side of foot-board of
limber.
G.S. and other vehicles (if
construction admits) .., On body of vehicle, off side, as
far to the front as possible,
and low enough to be clear
of the cover.
Limbered vehicles will be marked
on both 'portions.
Bicycles and motor cycles Across the rear mud-guard, 4
inches above the bridge, and
on the upper side of the
bottom tube, commencing
just clear of the bottom lug
of the ball head.
Table I. gives examples of first and second lines.
(c) In addition to the above-named “corps marks,” there are a
number of details, chiefly for regimental convenience, marked
on certain vehicles, such as the nature of the gun, number or
letter of subsection, number of wagon, &c. These details are
not to be mixed up with the corps marks, and will be placed
as in Table 11. The general principles indicated in that
table should be followed in marking any vehicles for which
specific details are not given.
( d ) All vehicles in possession of medical units will be marked with
the Geneva Cross, in addition to corps marks, &c.
(e) White paint will be used for all markings, with the exception of
the Geneva Cross, which will be red on white ground, and the
lettering of bicycles enamelled orange colour, for which black
paint will be used. The size of letters and figures will be as
laid down in Table 111.


Head-Quarters, Light Horse Brigade ...
Hd.-Qrs.
1 (2 (fee.) Aust. L.H. Bde
Head-Quarters, Field Artillery Brigade
Hd.-Qrs. 1 (2 or 3) Art. Bde,
Aust. Div.
Light Horse Regiment with Division...
I L.H. Rgt.
Aust. Div.
Light Horse Regiment with Light Horse Brigade
1 (2 (fee.) L.H. Rgt.
1 (2 (fee.) Aust. L.H. Bde,
Battery of Artillery
1 (2, 3 9) Batt.
Aust. Div.
Divisional Ammunition Column (2nd Section) ...
Div. A.C. 2
Aust. Div.
Field Company
1 (2 &c.) F. Co.
Aust. Div.
Infantry Battalion with Infantry Brigade ... 1 (2, (fee.) Aust Inf.
1 Aust. Inf. Bde.
5 (6, (fee.) Aust. Inf.
2 Aust. Inf. Bde., and
similarly for other Brigades.
Light Horse Field Ambulapce with Light Horse
Brigade ... ... ... ... 1 (2, &c.) L.H. Fd. Arab.
I (2, <fec.) Aust. L.H. Bde.
Field Ambulance ... ... ... ... 1 (2, <fec.) Fd. Amb.
Aust. Div.
Signal Troop with Light Horse Brigade ... 1 (2, &c.) Sig. Troop.
1 (2, <fec.) Aust. L.H. Bde.
Australian Army Service Corps —
Light Horse Brigade Train... ... ... 1 (2, &c. ) L.H.B.T.
1 (2, &c.) Aust. L.H. Bde.
Aust. Div.
Head-quarters, Divisional Train ... ... H.Q.D.T.
Aust. Div.
Coys. Divisional Train ... ... ... 2 (3-5) D.T.
Aust. Div.
Coys, with Infantry Brigades ... ... 7, (fee. A.A.S.C.
Divisional Ammunition Park ... ... 8 A.A.S.C.
Divisional Supply Column ... ... 9 A.A.S.C.
Reserve Park ... ... ... 10 A.A.S.C.
Mobile Veterinary Section ... ... 1 (2, ifec.) M.V.Sec., A.A.Y.C.
TABLE II.
General Service Vehicles—All Units.
Description of Vehicle.
Nature and Position of Marks.
Examples.
Carts and wagons ...
Vehicle number in rear, near side, low down
Nature of contents in rear, off side, low down
2
S.A.A.


TABLE III.
Size op Letters and Numerals to be used.
Size of Letters or
Numerals on—
Marking.
Vehicles.
Bicycles.
Number’ of Division
1£ inch.
h inch.
Other numbers
ij inch.
\ inch.
Initial letter of each word
ij inch.
\ inch.
Other letter in each word
| inch.
f inch.
(/) The vehicles of an Infantry Battalion are allotted as follows, and
should be numbered accordingly :
Wagon, Limbered, G-S. —
No. 1 ... Tools.
No. 2 ... Tools.
No. 1 ... S.A.A.
No. 2 ... S.A.A.
No. 3 ... S.A.A.
No. 4 ... S.A.A.
No. 5 ... S.A.A.
Machine Gun.
Machine Gun, S.A.A.
Wagons, G.S. —
No. 1 ... Baggage ]
No. 2 ... „ I Train transport vehicles will be
No. 3 ... Supplies { issued later.
No. 4 ... „ )
Cooks.
( g ) The vehicles of a Light Horse Regiment are allotted as follows, and
should be marked accordingly :
Wagon, Limbered, G.S. —
No. 1 ... Pioneer and Signalling Equipment.*
No. 2 ... S.A.A.
No. 3 ... Pioneer and Signalling Equipment.*
No. 4 ... S.A.A.
No. 5 ... Pioneer and Signalling Equipment.*
No. 6 ... S.A.A.
No. 7 ... Machine Gun.
No. 8 ... „ „
No. 9 ... S.A.A. Machine Gun.
No. 10 ... ~ ~ ~
No. 11 ... Head-Quarters Tools.
* Not to be printed on vehicles.


Reference Number.
Subject of Book or Form.
Books.
6
Guard Book for F.S. Forms*
30
Requisition Book, Supplies
55
Indent for Rations, F.S.
66
Check Book, Supplies
129
Plain ruled foolscap, 2 quires*
153 or 155
Officers’ Field Message and Sketch Book (refill)
193
Register of Letters*
Forms.
A.
2
Proceedings of a Board
A.
3
Courts-Martial, Field General, Assembly and Proceedings
A.
6
Wounded in Action —Nominal List of
A.
28
Sick, Wounded, and Deaths, F.S., Daily Return
A.
36
Hospitals, Nominal Roll of Admissions and Discharges
A.
49
Courts-Martial, Declaration of Military Exigencies
B.
122
Field Conduct Sheets (150 in case)
B.
122
Field Conduct Sheets (extra sheets for)
B.
181
Temperature, Pulse, &c., Record
B.
213
Field Return
B.
231
Field State
B.
2069
Crime and Offence Report, F.S. (pads of 50)
C.
355
Imprisonment, Form to Accompany Order for Commitment
G.
384
Imprisonment, Order for Commitment (Abroad)
0.
385
Imprisonment, Order for Commitment
C.
386
Imprisonment to be undergone in the United Kingdom, Order
respecting
C.
398
Envelope, F.S.
0.
2121
Message Form (Signals, &c.)
F.
708
Monthly Butchering Account
F.
767
Civilians employed in A.S.C., Form of Agreement
F.
773
Rations, Strength of Corps drawing
F.
780
Demand on Civil Authorities
F.
781
Acknowledgment of Requisition Receipt Notes
F.
783
Supplies, Discrepancy Report (books)
F.
788
Billeting Demand on Civil Authorities
F.
789
Billeting Order on Inhabitants
G.
994
Indent for Stores, Clothing, and Necessaries (books)
G.
1098
Mobilization Store Tables
N.
1535
Pay Sheets of Civilians employed by Departments
* To be improvised by officers commanding units.
Wagons, G.S. —
No. 1 ... Suppty(Head-Quarters and Machine'
Gun Section)*
No. 2 ... Supply Train
No. 3 ... Baggage Transport
No. 4 ... Supply ► Vehicles
No. 5 ... Baggage to be issued
No. 6 ... Supply later.
No. 7 ... Baggage
Cooks.
* Not to be printed on vehicles.
( h ) An allowance of a sum not exceeding 2s. per vehicle for marking all
vehicles, A.I. Force, in accordance with the instructions laid down
in Equipment Standing Orders 179-187, is approved.
61. (i) Arrangements have been made for printing locally and issuing
the Army Books and Forms detailed hereunder which will be taken into
the field by units ;


Reference Number.
Subject of Book or Form.
Books.
8
Field Service Vouchers
10
Way-bill Book
14
Ready Reckoner, Field Rations
27a
Hospital Admissions and Discharges
39
Hospital Diary and Prescription Book
41
Last Pay Certificate Book, for local employes, F.8.
69
Cash Book
136
Memorandum Book
140
Section Squad Book, Local Transport, F.S.
152
Correspondence Book, F.S.
166
Specification Tallies
172
Medical Transfer Certificate Book
182
Cheque Book, Hospital Pack Stores
191
Hospital Receipt Book, Patients’ Valuables
292
Register of Civilians, F.S. Transport
293
General State Book, F.S. Transport
308
Temporary Orders on Paymaster by A.S.C.
361
Requisition Receipt Notes
383
Diary, Supply Officer’s
Forms.
F. 735
Diet Account (retained in Hospital)
F. 736
Diet Account (sent to War Office)
N. 1487
Cash, Requisition for
N. 1513
Acquittance Roll
N. 1531a
Cash Account
0. 1603
Pay List of Civilian Subordinates
0. 1628
Field Allowance, Claims for
0. 1679
Pay List, Officers’, Monthly
0. 1680
Debit Vouchers, District Accounts
0. 1779
Working Pay List
0. 1784
Indemnification Claims, Horses Lost
0. 1785
Indemnification Claims, Officers’ baggage lost
P. 1922
Contractor’s Bill, General Service
P. 1964
Contractor’s Bill, passed for payment, list of
P. 1967
Supplies Purchased, Account of
(ii) The books and forms enumerated below, not being available locally
will be procured in England and issued to units on arrival;—
61a. Typewriters are not provided for Active Service for offices below
Head-quarters of a Division. Typewriters required for official use 'prior to
embarkation only will be supplied under arrangements made by District
Head-quarters.
62. Officers of the Australian Imperial Force may obtain a set of
“ officer’s saddlery, c.p.,” on payment.
63. A day’s ration, consisting of 1 lb. of preserved meat and 1 lb. of
biscuit per man and 12 lbs. oats (in nosebag) per horse, will be shipped for
use on day of disembarkation.
63a. A grocery ration as under will be provided from ship’s stores
for use on day of disembarkation :
Tea ... ... ... oz.
Sugar ... ... ... 2 ozs.
Pepper... ... ... -fa oz.
Pickles ... ... 1 oz.
Condensed milk ... ... ozs.
At least two days’ notice of requirements must be given Masters of
Transports prior to disembarkation by officers commanding troops.


n 64. The following is the forage ration on board ship :
Water—lo galls, daily per horse.
Bran—3 lbs. daily per horse.
Oaten and Wheaten Chaff—l 2 lbs. daily per horse.
Oatmeal—l lb. daily per 100 horses.
Linseed—2 lbs. daily per 100 horses.
Rock Salt—6 lbs. daily per 100 horses.
Lucerne Chaff, 2 lbs. daily per horse (to be used in conjunction
with Bran)
Lucerne Hay—2 tons per voyage per 100 horses.
Oats—6 tons per voyage per 100 horses.
The following daily ration of the undermentioned articles of forage on
board ship is authorized for heavy draught horses of the Reserve Supply
Park, in lieu of the quantities of these items shown above, viz. :
Chaff ... ... 18 lbs.
Bran ... ... 5 lbs.
Lucerne hay ... ... 3 lbs.
Forage will be shipped on each transport for horses as follows :
From Brisbane .. 75 days
Sydney and Newcastle .. 72 „
Other Ports .. 70 ~
This includes a 25 per cent, reserve. No roots for forage are to be
shipped on account of the likelihood of fermentation.
65. The horses and saddlery of officers shown in War Establishments as
“ attached ” to units will be requisitioned for by officers commanding such
units.
66. Mounted officers, Australian Imperial Force, may take their private
chargers with them in lieu of receiving Government remounts, subject to
the following conditions: —
(i) These horses will not be returned to Australia at the expense of
the Commonwealth.
(ii) No compensation will be paid in the event of a horse becoming
a casualty.
(iii) In the event of an owner becoming a casualty his horse will be
disposed of as a Government remount.
(iv) Private chargers will be subject to veterinary examination, and
will be registered in the same manner as Government
remounts, except that they will not be branded with the
‘‘ broad arrow.”
67. The conditions under which motor cars are accepted for service with
the Australian Imperial Force are as follow ;
(a) That cars are given unconditionally and will not be replaced at
the public expense.
(b) They will be allotted to any unit and used as the interests of the
service require.
(c) No obligation rests upon the Government to return them to
Australia at the end of the war.
(d) Officers of the Automobile Corps who present cars must serve
with any unit to which they are appointed or transferred,
and in the event of an officer becoming a casualty, his car
will be used as may be directed.


(e) Cars will be maintained at the public expense while in use by the
Australian Imperial Force.
(/) Ministerial approval has been given for the purchase of stores
and spare parts for motor cars on the scale as laid down in
Imperial Regulations. Purchases will be made in England,
but in the case of officers of the Automobile Corps who have
obtained these stores locally, the authorized amounts will
be refunded through D.A.A, and Q.M.G., Australian
Imperial Force, on production of vouchers.
68. (a) Commanding officers will submit requisitions on the Ordnance
Department for two blankets for each officer and man of war establishment.
These blankets will not be used at camps of concentration, but they will
be packed in bales of 25 (except in cases where men are detached from their
units), labelled with the address of the unit, and stored in the transport
on which the unit embarks.
(6) The extra blanket mentioned in paragraph 1568 of the “ Notes on
the Movement of Troops by Rail and Sea ” will not be issued without
special authority from the O.C. Troops.
69. Camp equipment will be required immediately on arrival in England,
and commanding officers will therefore take steps to ensure that it is main-
tained in good order and packed on transports so that it will be readily
available.
70. The use of “ soft-nosed bullets ” is prohibited.
71. Horse rugs for use abroad will be drawn from the Ordnance Depart-
ment on requisition by officers commanding units, at the rate of one per
horse of establishment. They will be packed in bales labelled with the
name of the unit and nature of contents, and taken on board the transport
on which the head-quarters of the unit embarks.
72. The officer commanding troops on each transport will draw from the
“ staff officer in charge of embarkation ” twelve belts, white canvas, to be
worn by sentries on duty during the voyage.
i 3. The flags of infantry battalions will be of two colours. The lower
half designates the brigade, the upper half the battalion—For field artillery,
royal blue, with the numeral of the brigade thereon (1, 2, &c.) ; for field
companies, engineers, khaki, with the numeral of the company thereon (1, 2,
&c.); for the divisional signal company of one colour, purple; for field
ambulances, chocolate, with the numeral of the field ambulance thereon
(1, 2, &c.).
74. District commandants have been instructed to arrange for a school
of cooking to be established in each camp. Efforts should be made specially
to enlist men with knowledge and experience of cooking as cooks, and full
advantage should be taken of every opportunity of improving their
knowledge.
75. (i) All stores in possession of units which do not form part of, or are
drawn in excess of, the authorized war scales, are to be returned to
Ordnance Stores or depots prior to embarkation
Units will not, under any circumstances, take on board Transports any
equipment in excess of these scales, except the extra articles authorized in
Orders for the A.I.F.


(ii) Any deficiencies of stores found to exist prior to embarkation are to
be immediately reported to the Camp Commandant or his representative.
(iii) The C.O. of each unit is to hand to the Embarkation Officer
immediately prior to embarkation a list of equipment and clothing
authorized, but not issued to the unit from Ordnance Stores.
(iv) All surplus stores on disembarkation, and whilst on service abroad,
will be handed over to the Australian Depot.
75a, Officers commanding troops on transports will furnish statements
showing :
(i) Unexpended portion of all medical stores remaining on
charge at the end of the voyage.
(ii) Unexpended portion of all veterinary stores remaining on
charge at the end of the voyage.
(iii) Unexpended portion of forage remaining on charge at the end
of the voyage, specifying the several items mentioned in
note to paragraph 1679 of “Notes on the Movement of
Troops by Rail and Sea.”
76. Gifts intended for the use of any particular unit should be sent to
the D.A.Q.M.G. of the military district in which the head-quarters of the
unit is raised, addressed to the officer commanding the unit.
District commandants have been requested to ensure that parcels so
addressed are handed over to addressees on board ship.
77. Cartridges, S.A., *45, ball, Webley, will be drawn by officers com-
manding units and placed in ship’s magazines on embarkation.
78. Every care is to be taken to conserve the fresh water supply on
board ship. Fresh water is not to be used to wash out horse stalls. The
fresh water taps on horse decks are to be kept locked, except at the times
approved for watering horses. The taps are specially fitted with locks for
this purpose.
79. The attention of officers commanding units is directed to the neces-
sity for strict compliance with the Regulations governing the methods of
obtaining requirements.
(i) A.S.C. supplies —•
The following items of supplies are obtained through the Supply Officer
attached to divisional troops, brigades, &c.: —■
Food,
Forage,
Fuel,
Light (including oil and wick, for signalling),
Disinfectants,
in accordance with the scale of authorized issues in quarters or in the field
(to be distributed to units later), by means of an indent A.B. 55,
Supplies (on payment) in excess of the authorized scale must be
indented for separately through the supply officer attached to divisional
troops, brigades, &c., who will obtain authority for the issue from the
Senior Supply Officer of the division.
On no account may units purchase or requisition any article of supply
without authority from the supply or requisitioning officer except in cases of
emergency, when the circumstances will be reported without delay to
superior authority.


(ii) Ordnance supplies—
Indents on Army Form G. 994 will be forwarded by officers command-
ing units direct to the Deputy Assistant Director of Ordnance Services of
the Division for all stores, except those mentioned under (i) and—■
Medical stores,
Veterinary stores,
Special engineering materiel.
The purchase of all ordnance stores is dealt with by the D.A.D.O.S.
Unless incurred under the most exceptional circumstances, bills incurred by
commanding or other officers ’for the purchase or repair of stores will not
be recognised.
The method of indenting for stores by means of Army Form G. 994 is
clearly laid down in “ Notes on Ordnance Services in the Field,” page 2,
and the same form suitably amended will be used for demanding repairs.
VETERINARY SERVICES.
80. ( a) The unexpended balance of Veterinary Stores shipped for use on
transports will, on disembarkation, be forwarded to the base to form part
of the equipment of a Base Depot of Veterinary Stores.
(b) The undermentioned field veterinary equipment issued to units is
not to be used prior to embarkation or during voyage in transports, viz :
Chests, Veterinary, Officers, 84 lbs.
Chests, Veterinary, unit, 25 lbs.
Chests, Veterinary Section.
Wallets, Veterinary.
81. The following instructions will be observed by officers of the Army
Veterinary Corps, A.1.F., as far as they are affected, and other Veterinary
Officers specially appointed for duty on transports :
(i) Veterinary officers detailed for duty on horse transports are charged
with the veterinary care of all horses conveyed on transports to which they
are allotted, and they will not assume responsibility other than that relating
to veterinary matters.
(ii) Duties include attendance at embarkation and disembarkation
operations, care of all sick and injured horses, reporting to O.C. troops or
other officers commanding on transports verbally or in writing on
all matters relating to horses, forage, water, fittings, accommodation, general
management of horses, sanitation, ventilation, exercise, and of recommending
any measures which may in the opinion of the Veterinary Officer conduce
to the health and efficiency of the horses, or mitigate or prevent disease
amongst them during the voyage.
(iii) He will report at once, in writing, to the O.C. troops on transports (
any outbreak of contagious or formidable disease, and adopt energetic ]
measures for its suppression.
Copies of all such reports and measures taken will be forwarded at the
termination of the voyage to the Director of Veterinary Services, Victoria
Barracks, Melbourne, and to the Assistant Director of Veterinary Services,
A.I. Force.


(iv) He will take charge on board transports of all veterinary stores
supplied for use during the voyage, and will be held responsible for the care
and maintenance of all non-expendable articles, that due economy is observed
in the use of drugs and dressings, and that issues are only made under his
personal direction.
(For action as regards unexpended portion of all veterinary stores at the
end of the voyage see A.I.F. Orders, paras. 80 and 81.)
(v) He will ordinarily inspect all horses on transport four times daily,
viz., at morning, mid-day, and evening stables, and last thing at night. He
will also inspect them at all other times when necessary.
At these inspections all matters connected* with the health and efficiency
of the horses will be inquired into, and any representations that he may
deem it necessary to make to the O.C. troops will be made accordingly, and
a record kept of the result of such representations.
(vi) He will attend to sick horses not later than 9 a.m. daily In urgent
cases he will attend at all other hours when necessary.
(vii) He will apply to the O.C. troops on transports for a suitable N.C.0.,
preferably a Farrier-Sergeant, to attend him during his inspections, treatment
of the sick and injured and issuing of drugs and dressings, and also for
orderlies in the proportion of one to every five or less sick horses, to assist
in their treatment during the voyage.
(viii) He will keep complete records from day to day of all casualties
amongst horses from date of embarkation until termination of voyage.
Such records will be entered in C.M. Book 36 or other substituted book,
and will include name of transport, dates, full description of horses entered,
army number, and unit to which they belong. The numbers allotted to
casualties will be progressive from No. 1 onwards, and the same number will
not be used again in regard to any case which may subsequently become a
casualty.
(ix) A daily sick report will be made out in duplicate at 7 a.m. each
morning by Farrier-Sergeants and other N.C.O.’s of units with horses on
board, in accordance with form “A ” (attached). These reports will be
completed by the Veterinary Officer in the “ Remarks ” column, and signed
by him after his inspection of the horses concerned.
One copy will be forwarded by the Veterinary Officer to the O.C. troops
not later than twelve noon on the day received. The other will be retained
till the end of the voyage, and be subsequently forwarded to the Assistant
Director of Veterinary Services, A.I.F.
(x) The Veterinary Officer will make out a complete return of all casualties
on the voyage and results up to and including day of disembarkation, on
Form “B ” (attached). This return will be compiled from daily records in
C.M. Book 36, and will be forwarded to the A.D.V.S., A.1.F., within two
days of disembarkation.
(xi) He will furnish a general report to the A.D.V.S., for the information
1 of the General Officer Commanding Ist Australian Division on all veterinary
matters connected with the voyage. This report should include references
to the number of horses lost, and percentage of total number embarked,
casualties in general, the circumstances which, in his opinion, were responsible
for them, the general management of the horses from a veterinary point of
view, and any recommendations which, in his opinion, may reduce similar
losses on subsequent voyages.


Transport
.
Date
Owner.
Unit.
Army-
No.
Colour.
Sex.
Age.
Ailment or
Injury.
Hour
Reported.
Veterinary Officer’s
Remarks. (Pit or Unfit.)
(Action to be taken.)
•
(xii) In the event of the Veterinary Officer deeming it necessary to destroy
a horse for any cause he will first notify, verbally or in writing, the O.C.
troops, who will order a Board, of which the Veterinary Officer shall be a
member, to view the horse, and decide as to the necessity for such action.
In urgent cases, however, and the Veterinary Officer considers it advisable,
a horse may be summarily destroyed without a prior inspection by a Board,
but such Board will subsequently assemble, and record its opinion on the
matter in the proceedings.
(xiii) The Veterinary Officer will be in continuous attendance during
disembarkation of horses, and will accompany the last detachment of horses
to the Base Camp, A.I. Force, Remount Depot, or such other place as the
case may be, where the horses are finally handed over.
(xiv) On disembarkation and completion of veterinary duties Veterinary
Officers appointed for transport duty only will report to A.I.F. Head-Quarters
for instructions as to provision for return to Australia.
(xv) In the event of Veterinary Officers referred to in para, (xiv) accepting
employment after disembarkation in any capacity in the A.I. Force or other
service in the country of disembarkation, the terms of their existing appoint-
ments as affecting pay and return passage to Australia shall be cancelled
as from date of accepting such employment.
(xvi) All transport Veterinary Officers returning to Australia by first
available transport, in accordance with terms of appointment, will report
their arrival without delay to Head-Quarters of the Military District in
which they reside.
Form “ A.”
Daily Sick Horse Report.
To be furnished by Farrier Sergeant or other N.C.O. of unit to whom
the horses are on charge.
Note. —To be made out in duplicate, one copy to be forwarded on
completion by Veterinary Officer to O.C. troops by noon each day, one copy
to be retained till end of voyage, and forwarded to Assistant Director
Veterinary Services, A.I.F,
Veterinary Officer.
Date


Progressive
No.
O
p
Army No.
rf-
CD
Colour.
Sex.
Age.
Unit to
which
belonging.
Disease or
Injury.
Date
Admitted.
hj
Date
Discharged.
sT
o
CD
Cured.
Relieved.
Incurable.
<1
CD
ct*
Died.
CD
B'
Destroyed.
ary Officer.
Transport.
Remaining.
Remarks.
Form “ B.”
Australian Imperial Force.
To be forwarded to Assistant Director of Veterinary Services, A.1.F.,
within two days of disembarkation.
Return of sick and injured horses for voyage of transport
Date of embarkation.
Date of disembarkation.
82. In the event of mortality occurring amongst horses in transports
whilst vessels are in the Commonwealth waters, the following instructions
are to be followed :—•
(i) At Sea. —Carcasses will only be cast overboard when transports are
at a distance not less than 10 miles from the entrance to any
port. In all other circumstances disposal shall be as provided
in sub-para. (ii).
(ii) In Port or about to enter. —If deaths occur at this period, and the
vessel subsequently comes alongside a pier or wharf, arrange-
ments will be made for removal of carcasses by local knacker.
If the transport does not come alongside a pier or wharf, the carcass
before being cast overboard, must be disembowelled and dis-
membered by Veterinary Officer or Farrier.
EMBARKATION AND CARE OF HORSES ON TRANSPORTS.
83. It is of the utmost importance that the greatest care should be exer-
cised in connexion with transport of horses, and all Officers and N.C.O.’s
must use every means in their power to minimize horse casualties during
the voyage. The following points should receive careful attention by all
Officers and N.C.O.’s :
(a) Previous to embarkation all horses to be inspected as to fitness
and freedom from infectious and contagious diseases.
( b) Horses should, as far as practicable, be newly shod all round before
embarkation.
(c) Horses may be required for service soon after landing ; they should,
therefore, be embarked in good hard working condition. They
may be fed and worked as usual up to the day previous to
embarkation, when sloppy half-and-half mashes should be
given. If horses can be walked on board, they should be watered
and fed prior to embarkation and given hay immediately they
are put in the stalls. If they have to be slung they should
not be watered and ied for two hours previously.


{d) Before embarkation begins it must be ascertained that the gang-
ways to the furthest stalls are quite clear, that side bars or
parting boards are all taken down and handy for replacing,
and that the ramps or brows and decks offer secure foothold.
(e) A party consisting of, usually, an Officer and 6 men per battery
or squadron should receive the horses on the stable deck and
place them in their stalls. This party must thoroughly acquaint
themselves with the accommodation arrangements for horses in
the transports they are concerned with. A stable guard
should be told off as soon as the men have embarked.
(/) On arrival abreast the ship horses will be unsaddled or unharnessed
and the halters, which should be laid out ready beforehand,
will be put on. Farriers will inspect the shoes while saddlery,
&c., is being dubbed, oiled, and packed for carrying on board.
( g ) When horses are walked on board, each man will in the case of
the Light Horse, lead his own. Coir mats, straw (preferably
mats), or ashes from ships’ furnaces will be laid along the
gangways and decks. Horses will be led in close succession,
and without any check being allowed in such order that those
who stand together in the lines or stables will be neighbours on
the ship. Troublesome horses should be taken out of the
lines at once and kept till others have embarked. A separate
party will be told off to fasten up the horses. The far stalls
will be filled up first. The parting bars will at once be placed.
Kickers will, when possible, be put in end stalls.
(h) Horses should, if possible, be permanently allotted to individuals
prior to embarkation, and each man should look after his own
horse during the whole of the voyage. By this means the
men who land their horses in good condition will be able to
receive the credit for their work.
(i) Horses will be fastened up with pillar chains, and the squadron,
&c., commander, with the farrier, will see that all horses are secure.
(j) The hammock should hang 3 or 4 inches below the horse’s belly,
suspended from cross-bars above the stall, so that he can rest
himself on it when he likes. The use of slings, however, is
unnecessary, except for veterinary cases. A supply of empty
corn sacks will be placed on board all transports, which, when
stuffed with refuse hay or chaff, make excellent pads for the
protection of injured and exhausted horses. They should be
securely attached to the stall staunchions and parting bars ;
all breast rails are interchangeable and parting bars should be
numbered.
(Jc) At least 5 per cent, of spare stalls will be left in horse transports,
half on each side ; the horses can then be shifted, cleaned,
rubbed over, and feet washed; this will always be done
when weather permits.
Hand-rubbing legs and sponging eyes and nostrils are of
the greatest importance to the well-being of the horse,- and
must be carried out daily. Clean sea water will be freely
used for sponging the lips, nostrils, docks, and mangers.
Fine cinders will, where necessary, be sprinkled under each
horse to give him a firm hold.


[l) The strictest attention will be paid to cleanliness, dung being taken
away in the baskets provided for the purpose, and not swept
into scuppers. The “ Rose-heads ” provided to prevent
scuppers from becoming choked will not be removed.
(m) Ventilation is of the greatest importance for the maintenance
of health; attention will be paid that the machinery or wind
sails provided for the purpose are kept in good order. It
should be remembered if the atmosphere in the ’tween decks
is distressing to the troops, that it is likewise so for the horses,
who are constantly in it.
(w) When possible, horses will be brought on deck for exercise, or
exercised on their own decks. The importance of exercise,
as a means of maintaining condition and preserving health, as
well as preventing fever in the feet after landing, cannot be
over-estimated. Every effort will be made to insure it, and
every means adopted to secure the requisite exercising space
on all decks. Any exercise, be it ever so little, is better than
none at alb
(o) Every Officer, N.C.0., and man must be thoroughly acquainted
with “ fire orders,” and the Officer Commanding Troops is
responsible that sufficient men are detailed to stand to the
horses’ heads in case of fire or rough weather.
• (p) Loose-boxes are provided for sick horses, portable boxes should be
provided to enable sick horses to be taken on deck for an airing.
(q) The scale of forage is to be as prescribed in para. 64. Horses
should get from 8 to 10 gallons of water daily, and be
watered at least three times a day; more frequently in hot
weather.
Stable Duties.
(r) Raise platforms ; rake and sweep the stalls well out; sprinkle
subsequently with gypsum or lime ; water horses; sponge
nostrils, eyes, &c., then feed as ordered. All horses in the
same section of deck should be fed simultaneously. Report
any symptoms of sickness or injury amongst horses immediately
to the Veterinary Officer.
( s ) Shift horses into spare stalls and on to deck, if possible ; pick
and wash out feet; examine shoes and fasten any loose ones ;
groom body; brush and hand-rub legs ; brush out mane and
tail, and sponge nostrils and face ; clean stalls ; raise and
clean platforms, the deck underneath being dried, and gypsum
or lime used ; when horses are clean, water and feed,* as ordered ;
after dinner the horses should be fed with hay for an hour.
(t) Rake stalls well out; sweep up ; sponge nostrils, &c., as in morning
stables ; hand-rub legs ; water and then feed, as ordered.
Stablemen afterwards feed with remainder of hay ration.
Disinfectants will be used at the discretion of the Veterinary Officer.
Stable picket to be regularly posted ; special regulations for night duty
are essential.


Size,
Height.
Breast Measure.
Waist Measure.
ft. in.
in.
in.
4 1
5 3
and
35
31
6 C.
5 4
36
32
8 f
5 5
and
35
31
10 (
5 6
37
33
14 i
5 7
and
36
32
16 (
5 8
38
34
20
5 9
and
37
33
22 \
5 10
39
35
26 }
*) 1
5 11
and
39
35
28 (
6 0
41
37
32 S\
6 1
and
40
36
34 (I
6 2
42
38
Notks. —For stock sizes of other garments see printed size Rolls (C.M. Forms “ 0 ”).
In fitting service dress jackets, allowance is to be made for the wearing of the cardigan jacket
underneath.
Jackets, S.D. .. •<
' Size
No. ..
4
8
10
14
16
20-
22
26
28
32
34
1
2
9
9
20
20
13
13
5
5
I
2 = 100
1
Breeches, D.S. .. ■<
Old Size
New Size
No. ..
20
21
26
29
36
39
45
48
49
51
58
601
2
6
8
12
14
18
20
24
26
30
32
1
361
2
5
8
15
20
22
10
10
5
1
1
I—*
ii
»— *
§
0.1032.—D
APPENDIX 2.
Referred to in paragraph 47 (i). #
SIZE ROLL—JACKETS, SERVICE DRESS.
The following table shows the sizes and measurements of stock jackets :
The proportions of sizes of various garments shown below are furnished
as a guide in framing demands ;


The proportions of sizes
of various garments — continued —
Size
Breeches, M.S. .. ■<
J&o.
2 4
6 8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
13
3 8
8
10
1
8 S
0
0
8
8
5
4
1*5
1
•5
•5
•5
=100
' Old Size
2 €
9
13
V
Oreatcoats . •" New Size
L No. ..
4
0 If
22
28
3<
10
15 4£
15
3
= 100
1
r Size
Leggings j
I No. ..
14
5 15*
16
16*
17
20
15 25
15
10
5
= 100
1
' Size
Boots, Ankle,
brown <
„ No. ..
5 e
7
8
9
10
11
12
2 12
32
15
18
1
a)
(a
(a)
as requirec
= 100
ch size.
Fitting, 3-20%, 4—50%, and 5-30% of ea
- Size
Caps, S. D., and -i
Hats, C. P.
No. ..
Of 6
i 7
n
u
7«
n
20 5
0 20
5
3
1
= 100
Breeches and greatcoats made to the new size roll are marked with both
old and new sizes, thus : 20 NE2, or 6 NR16, &c.


Sets of Harness—
P.D.G.S.
Sets of Harness—
P.D.G.S.
Sets of Harness—
P.D.G.S.
Sets of Harness,
Special Pattern.
For Technical
Artillery Vehicles
(Gun Carriages and
Wagons, Ammunition).
For other Pole Draught
Vehicles not driven
from the Box.
For 4 Horse Pole
Draught Vehicles driven
from the Box.
Sets of
Harness for
Shaft Draught
Vehicles.
Sets of
Universal
Saddlery.
For 2 Horse
Pole Draught
Vehicles driven
from the Box.
Articls*.
Wheel.
Lead
or
Centre.
Wheel.
Lead
or
Centre.
Wheel.
Lead.
Wheel.
Near.
Off.
Near.
Off.
Near.
Off.
Near.
Off.
Near.
Off
Near.
Off.
Shaft
Horse.
Near.
I (fleers.
Other
Banks.
Near.
Off.
Column
I.
II.
in.
IV.
V.
VI.
VII.
VIII.
IX.
X.
XI.
XII.
XIII.
XIV.
XV.
XVI.
XVII.
XVIII.
Section 2 a.
Ropes, head, cotton, with ring
• .
1
..
,, hemp, ,,
••
i
i
i
i
i
1
i
i
i
i
i
i
1
i
i
1
1
Section 5a.
Harness, Pole Draught, G.S.—
Breechings (modified)
Breechings (modified), straps
ex-
i
i
i
1
i
i
1
1
1
tending
..
2
2
2
2
• •
2
2
Collars, breast, Mark III.
. .
i
i
i
i
1
1
i
i
1
1
i
i
1
i
1
1
Leggings, drivers’, Mark II.
..
i
i
1
i
Neck-pieces, pole bar
..
i
i
1
i
i
i
..
. .
• •
1
1
Pads, collar, Mark II. —
Large
1
i
i
i
..
• -
1
1
Small
• .
i
i
• •
•.
Rings, rein, driving
Straps —
i
2
2
2
2
2
2
• •
* *
2
2
Collar pad
pairs
i
1
i
1
1
1
1
Hip, long, wheel
99
i
i
1
i
1
1
i’
i
• •
1
1
Loin, lead
, •
i
i
i
i
i
i
• *
• •
Neck
# #
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
1
i
Staying, pole bar
..
i
i
..
••
• •
• •
Traces, wire—
Adjustable
pairs
i
i
i
i
i
i
..
..
..
• •
..
Long
99
it
it
i
i
it
it
i
i
it
it
i
i
. •
• •
• •
Short
99
i
i
i
i
i
i
• •
• •
..
. •
Tugs, neck-piece, Mark II.
. .
i
i
i
i
i
i
..
1
i
Whips, drivers’ ..
..
i
i
i
i
• •
• •
Whips, driving, long
Harness, Shaft Draught —
..
i
i
..
• •
1
• •
Bands, back, If-inch
Girths, luggage ..
i
i
, ,
* *
• *
Numnahs, felt, luggage, C.P.
i
• •
Pannels, numnah, luggage
pairs
i
• •
• •
Reins, driving, long
sets
. .
i
. -
• •
1
• •
Saddles, I.A., luggage
i
• •
•.
• •
• •
Straps, girth
4
. ■
• •
Tugs, back-band, If-inch
..
..
2
..
..
• •
• •
Harness, Special Pattern —■
Bits, snaffle (or Portmouth)
1
i
..
• •
1
i
Reins, driving, 4 horse ..
sets
i
..
..
• •
• •
. •
Traces, chain, adjustable..
pairs
1
i
••
• •
1
i
Section 6a.
Saddlery, Universal —
Bits, Portsmouth, reversible —
Large
..
• .
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
. •
• •
• •
• •
Medium
• •
i
i
i
i
1
1
'ill
• •
Blankets, saddle
• •
i
i
i
i
i
il
i
ill
ill
i|
ill
il
111
ill
1
1
HI
Cases, horse-shoe, pattern 1884
.. ■
1
1
• •
• •
Collars, head, C.P. —
Large^
..
i
i
i
i
1
1
• •
• •
Extra ,.
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
..
• •
i
i
Frogs, sword, saddle, C.P.
1
..
• •
• •
Girths, leather, C.P. —
Large**
i
i
..
. •
• •
• •
Medium**
, ,
i
i
i
i
• .
1
1
• •
. •
Heads, bridle, C.P.tt
Leathers, stirrup—
••
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
1
1
i
1
Long
..
. .
. .
..
2
2
• •
• •
Short
2
2
2
2
2
2
. .
i
• •
• •
Pannels, numnah, Mark II., pairsfj
1
1
1
1
1
1
. .
i
•.
. •
Protectors, cape or cloak, Mark II.
, ,
1
1
..
Reins, bit
, ,
1
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
• .
2
2
• •
•.
Saddles, S.A., pattern 1902 —
Largejl \\
1
i
i
i
i
i
. .
..
i
• •
• •
Medium|| ||
• .
1
• •
• •
Stirrups, steel, large
2
2
2
2
2
2
. .
2
2
• •
Straps—
1
Baggage, Mark III.
3
3
3
3
3
3
• .
..
3
• •
Cloak and wallet
• .
2
2
• •
• •
Cloak, centre ..
, ,
, ,
• .
1
• •
Shoe-case, pattern 1884
. ,
2§
i
• •
Surcingles, leather—
HI
HI
Large
1
1
1
1
1
ill
1
ill
ill
ill
ill
ill
ill
HI
..
. •
Small
1
i
• •
• •
Wallets, C. P.
pairs
1 ,,
..
1
APPENDIX 3.
Referred to in para. 58 (iv)
HARNESS AND SADDLERY.
The following particulars showing the details of sets of Harness and Saddlery are published for information. It is desired
that special care be taken that the sets of harness and saddlery authorized to be drawn from Ordnance Stores are in accordance
with the columns shown below, and that surplus articles are not retained by units. Any article found to be surplus to the
quantities shown in the correct column of the Table should be immediately returned to Ordnance Stores or Depot for issue to
other units as required :
The proportions of special articles of saddlery allowed, i.e., rifle buckets, breast-pieces, &c., are shown in Equipment Standing Orders,
Part I.—General.
The sizes given above are those ordinarily required, but Officers requisitioning will be guided by local circumstances in this regard,
t Not required when “ Traces, wire, adjustable ” are issued.
II To be carried in the vehicle.
§ One for Frog, sword, saddle, C.P.
If When stocks of “ Collars, head, Mark IV., Large ” and “ Extra large ” and local pattern bridles are exhausted
** When stocks of “ Girths, leather, Pattern 1884, Mark 11., Large ” and “ Medium ” are exhausted,
tt Or 2 straps, bit attachment in lieu, until stock is exhausted,
ft Or Mark 111., when “ Saddles, S.A., Pattern 1910, adjustable ” are Issued.
III! Or “ Saddles, S.A., Pattern 1910, adjustable.”
C.1092.—E


Bank.
Bate per Diem.
£ s. d.
Colonel or Brigadier ...
2 5 0
Lieutenant-Colonel ... ... ... ...
117 G
Major ... ... ... ... •••
1 10 0
Captain
12 6
Lieutenant, 2nd Lieutenant
0 15 0
Adjutant, at rate of corresponding rank
Quartermaster, at rate of corresponding rank
Foreman Artificer (M.T.)
0 13 0
Brigade or Regimental Sergeant-Major, Quartermaster-Seargent,
Armament Artificer, Warrant Officer
0 12 0
Staff Sergeant Major, Squadron, Battery, Troop, or Company
Sergeant-Major, Farrier Quartermaster-Sergeant, Colour-
Sergeant, Staff-Sergeant, Sergeant-Cook
0 110
Squadron, Battery, Troop, or Company Quartermaster- Sergeant,
Orderly-room-Sergeant, Farrier, Collar-maker, Wheeler,
Saddler-Sergeant or Sergeants M.T. Units ...
0 10 6
Sergeant, Pioneer, Signalling, Transport, Armourer, or Band-
Sergeant, Sergeant-Trumpeter
0 10 0
Corporal, Armourer, Band, Shoeing-smith, Signalling, or Pay and
Orderly-room Corporal ... ... ... •••
0 9 0
2nd Corporal Bombardier
0 8 6
Workshop, Fitters, Turners (M.T.), Blacksmiths (M.T.), Wheelers
(M.T.), Electricians (M.T.), Drivers (M.T.)...
0 8 0
Cleaners and Waggoninen (M.T.)
0 6 0
Shoeing-smith and Driver
0 6 0
Acting-Bombardier, Lance-Corporal, Gunner, Sapper, Private,
Bandsman, Collar-maker, Saddler, Wheeler, Trumpeter,
Bugler, Drummer, Cook, Batman, Stretcher-bearer ...
0 5 0
—
Per Diem.
Colonels and Lieutenant Colonels
•s. d.
7 6
Majors ... ' ...
5 0
3 6
1 0
Other Officers
Warrant Officers
D. —FINANCE BRANCH.
PAY AND ALLOWANCES OF THE AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCE.
84. Members of the Australian Imperial Force shall draw Pay and
Allowances in accordance with the following instructions :
(i) Prior to Embarkation.
(ii) Camp or Field Allowance at the following rates shall be paid to
members of the Australian Imperial Force for the period during which they
are actually in Camp :
Officers holding the undermentioned appointments may be paid hield
Allowance at the rate of ss. per diem, provided their rank does not entitle
them to a higher rate ;
(i) Brigade Major.
(ii) Staff Captains on Brigade Staffs.
(iii) Aides-de-Camp and Orderly Officers to Brigade and Higher
Commanders.


Rank.
Pay, including
Deferred Pay.
Field
Allowance.
Included in
column
“ Pay *' but
Deferred.
Per diem.
Per diem.
Pbr diem.
£ s. d.
s. d.
s. d.
Colonel or Brigadier
2 5 0
7 6
8 0
Lieutenant-Colonel
1 17 6
7 6
7 6
Major ..
1 10 0
5 0
5 0
Captain
1 2 6
3 6
3 6
Lieutenant, 2nd Lieutenant
0 17 6
3 6
3 0
Adjutant
According to rank
6 0
3 6
Quartermaster ..
According to rank
3 6
3 0
Brigade or Regimental Sergeant-Major, Quar-
termaster-Sergeant, Armament Artificer,
Foreman Artificer (M.T.), Warrant Officer
0 13 0
1 0
2 6
Staff-Sergeant-Major, Squadron, Battery,
Troop, or Company Sergeant-Major,
Farrier, Quartermaster-Sergeant, Colour-
Sergeant, Staff-Sergeant, Sergeant-Cook ..
0 12 0
2 O
Squadron, Battery, Troop, or Company Quar-
termaster-Sergeant, Orderly-room-Ser-
geant, Farrier, Collarmaker, Wheeler,
Saddler-Sergeant or Sergeants M.T. Units
0 11 6
2 O
Sergeant, Pioneer, Signalling, Transport, Ar-
mourer, or Band-Sergeant, Sergeant-
Trumpeter
0 10 6
2 0
Corporal, Armourer, Band, Shoeing-smith,
Signalling or Pay and Orderly-room
Corporal .. ., .. . i
0 10 0
1 0
2nd Corporal Bombardier
0 9 0
1 6
Workshop Fitters, Turners (M.T.), Black-
smiths (M.T.), Wheelers (M.T.), Elec-
tricians (M.T.), Drivers (M.T.) ..
0 8 0
1 0
Cleaners and Waggonmen (M.T.) ..
0 6 0
1 0
Shoeing Smith and Driver
0 7 0
1 0
Acting-Bombardier, Lance-Corporal, Gunner,
Sapper, Private, Bandsman, Collarmaker,
Saddler, Wheeler, Trumpeter, Bugler,
Drummer, Cook, Batman, Stretcher-bearer
0 6 0
1 0
(iv) Officers of Divisional Head-quarters and Head-quai ters of the-
Light Horse Brigade.
(v) Adjutant,
(iii) Sergeants’ Mess Allowance is not payable.
(iv) Married members of the Australian Imperial Force receiving less-
than Bs. per diem shall be paid Separation Allowance as under for each day
at Camp;—
(а) For wife (living at home), Is. 3d. per diem.
(б) For each child, per diem.
A similar allowance as in (a) shall be paid to members who are the sole-
support of a widowed mother.
The allowance under ( b ) shall be limited to each child under 14 years-
of age who is dependent upon his father for support.
85. (i) On and from the Date of Embarkation.
(ii) The field allowance for officers detailed hereunder will be ss. per diem
provided their rank does not entitle them to a higher rate:—
(i) Brigade Major.
(ii) Staff Captains on Brigade Staffs.


(iii) Aides-de-Camp and orderly officers to Brigades and Higher
Commanders.
(iv) Officers of Divisional Head-quarters and Head-quarters of the
Light Horse Brigade.
86. The following are the approved rates of pay and allowances for
nurses appointed to the Australian Imperial Force :
Matron (if included), 9s. per diem ; 3s. 6d. per diem field
allowance.
Nursing Sisters, 6s. per diem ; 3s. 6d. per diem field allowance.
Staff Nurses, 3s. 4d. per diem ; 2s. 6d. per diem field allowance.
Outfit Allowance £l5 each.
GENERAL FINANCIAL INSTRUCTIONS.
87. In the case of members of the Australian Imperial Force for whom
special rates of pay containing no stipulation regarding “ Deferred Pay ”
have been approved, the deferment of a portion of their pay shall be
optional. Provided, however, that if such members are promoted to a rank
in the Australian Imperial Force carrying a higher rate of pay, and con-
sequently are paid Expeditionary Force rates of pay for their rank, the
deduction approved for such rank shall be made from the date of drawing
such higher rates of pay.
88. Field Allowance is payable from date of joining. Mobilization Camp
on enrolment until date of return to Commonwealth, but will not be paid for
any period for which Travelling Allowance is payable. Rations, fuel, and
light, and tentage or quarters in Barracks or Cantonments, will be furnished
for all ranks, but no allowance other than Field or Travelling Allowance
will be payable. The issue of Travelling Allowance will be governed by
F. and A. Regulations, and will not be payable except when a member is
detailed for separate duty involving absence from his station, and quarters
and rations cannot be supplied.
89. Officers gazetted to the Australian Imperial Force will draw pay
from the day they go into camp or take up duty with the Staff or Unit to
which they have been allotted on the certificate of their commanding
officers. Pay will not be issuable until names have appeared in The Com-
monwealth Gazette , or until notification of their appointment has been
received from Head Quarters.
90. In cases where the pay of officers under agreement with the
Commonwealth Government exceeds that laid down for the rank of their
appointments in the Australian Imperial Force, the rate payable under
agreement will be continued during their service with the Australian
Imperial Force.
91. The appointments of members of the Permanent Military Forces
will remain open for them on their return to Australia, and if, during the
period of their service with the Australian Imperial Force, they would, in
ordinary circumstances, have been granted increased pay, such increased
pay may be granted to them on resuming duty with the Commonwealth
Military Forces. All other members of the Commonwealth Military lorces
appointed to the Australian Imperial Forces will receive the permanent pay,
ifec., of their respective ranks in the Australian Imperial Forces, and not
the pay of their respective permanent positions. The attention of prospec-
tive candidates of the Permanent Forces should be drawn to this provision.
C. 1092. —F.


92. Promotions and increments of all officers, warrant, and N.C. officers
of the Permanent Military Forces appointed to the Australian Imperial
Forces will be continued in the ordinary course as they accrue during their
absence on service with the Australian Imperial Forces.
93. The following are the arrangements regarding issue of pay:—
(i) Up to date of embarkation —
(а) All pay and allowances up to and including the day prior
to embarkation will be issued by District Paymasters
under instructions given them by the Finance Member.
(б) Upon enlistment allotment forms, which can be pro-
cured from District Paymasters, should be completed by
squadrons, companies, &c., and handed to the representative
of the District Paymaster in camp. Vide also para. 101.
Soldiers’ pay books will be furnished to unit commanders
by the District Paymaster. The necessary details in these
will be filled in by squadron, company &c. commanders,
and the books will be handed to the representative in camp
of the District Paj’master, who will check, stamp, initial,
and return them to officers commanding units.
Soldiers’ pay books will be filled in for all officers for
use as last-pay certificate and record of allotment. Page
4 should be amended to show pay and field allowance.
(c) District Paymasters have been authorized to advance to
officers, who so desire, one month’s pay, less deferred pay,
and less any amount allotted to agents. A record of such
advance will be made in the soldiers’ pay book.
( d ) Statements showing date and amount of last pay, and
amounts of allotment of pay, both of officers and men,
will be forwarded to the High Commissioner’s Office,
under arrangements made, by the Finance Member as soon
as possible after the troops have left.
(ii) During the voyage —
(a) Funds sufficient to pay each man Is. per diem for 50
days will be supplied to the officer commanding troops on
each transport by District Paymasters, who will obtain
receipts for the sums supplied. Simultaneously with the
obtaining from the Commanding Officer concerned an
acknowledgement of receipt of the amount paid to
such commanding officer the District Paymaster will give
• to the former in writing over his signature a certificate
indicating in words, as well as in figures, the amount of
the advance made to the Commanding Officer. This will
enable the High Commissioner or his representative upon
coming into touch with the Commanding Officer when the
latter is making his adjustment of such advance to be
seized of the amount which the Commanding Officer will
be responsible to adjust.
Each officer commanding troops will be supplied by the
District Paymaster with a cash book in which to record
the amount received by him, and all disbursements to
company, &c., commanders.


(b) Funds for the payment of the troops will be drawn on
imprest from the office!' commanding troops by company
&c., commanders, on whom devolves the duty of making
cash payments to individual soldiers at times approved by
officer commanding troops on transport. ?
(c) Payments to soldiers will be recorded in the soldieis pay
book, and be entered on acquittance rolls which will be
signed bv the soldier. These acquittance rolls will be
handed by company, etc., commanders to officers command-
ing troopships at such times as the latter may direct,
together with an abstract accounting for all advances
received.
(d) Each officer commanding troops will be ready on arrival in
England or at other place of disembarkation to
haifd his cash book, balanced, and the acquittance
rolls with any balance in hand, to the appointed
financial representative of the High Commissioner’s office,
who will give a receipt for same.
(e) Acquittance rolls for the balance of pay due to soldiers for
the period of the voyage are to be prepared prior to
disembarkation.
(iii) While in England, etc. —
Pay will be issued and accounted for in the mannei
arranged by the High Commissioner with the War Office.
The pay representative of the High Commissioner’s
Office will'be asked to make arrangements to ledge officers
pay in banks ; officers who so desire will inform the High
Commissioner accordingly and forward to him their
soldier’s pay books. Those officers who wish to receive
pay direct will continue to use the soldier’s pay book.
(iv) With reference to the preceding paragraphs, squadron, battery
and company commanders and officers commanding detach-
ments on transports will be responsible that a sufficient
supply of acquittance rolls are procured from District Pay-
masters before embarkation and taken on boaid ship.
94. (a) Commanding officers are to satisfy themselves that married
members of the Australian Imperial Force make due provision for the
wives and families left behind, in addition to the two-fifths of their pay as
previously provided. . . r
lb) Only one allotment of pay for each member of the Australian
Imperial Force will be accepted and given effect to by the 1 e ence
Department. ,
95. Irrespective of classification, Chaplains appointed to the Australian
Imperial Force are only to receive the pay and allowances gian e o le
combatant rank of Captain in the Australian Imperial rorce.
The date of application of the above new rates is 15th Decembei, 1.) 14,
except that those now abroad are to be informed that in theii cases sue i new
rates are to take effect on and from the Ist March, 1915. T ose w ose
financial arrangements do not admit of their acceptance of the new ra es
are to be permitted to return by the first available steamer after t a ae,
and they will continue in receipt of their existing rates until the c a e o
their disembarkation in Australia.


Chaplains appointed for the voyage only will receive the pay and
allowances as for Chaplains of the 4th Class until arrival at the first port
at which the troops disembark, from which date their pay will cease. They
will be granted a return saloon passage, and will continue to draw the field
allowance until their disembarkation in Australia.
96. Veterinary Officers, specially appointed supplementary to approved
establishment to undertake veterinary charge of A.I.F. transports for the
voyage only, will receive pay at the rate of £5OO per annum, inclusive of
all allowances for a period of six months, or until the date of return to the
Commonwealth, if the latter be earlier. Provided however that veterinary
officers performing services as above, appointed before date of promulgation
of this order, will receive pay for the first voyage only at the rate of thirty-
five shillings per diem, inclusive of all allowances for that period, and
upon termination of first voyage will receive pay at the rate of £5OO per
annum in accordance with first portion of this order.
97. For 'personnel of units and reinforcements now being, and to be
enlisted in one Military District, and concentrated in another Military District,
the date of embarkation, for pay purposes, shall be the date of final embar-
kation from the Commonwealth for overseas voyage.
98. All Soldiers’ Pay Books, in excess of actual strength of unit
are to be returned to the Paymaster; Soldiers’ Pay Books are not to
be distributed to soldiers or officers, or used prior to embarkation. All
entries, after embarkation, are to be made by the officer making payment,
and no delegation of such duty is to be made to any one not of commissioned
rank. In the cases of all soldiers discharged before embarkation, their
books are to be returned by the Commanding Officer of the unit to the
Paymaster, or his representative at Camp, who will cancel same. If dis-
charged after embarkation Soldiers’ Pay Book will be disposed of as in para.
32a.
99. Members of the Australian Imperial Force becoming deceased before
final embarkation for overseas voyage shall be treated similarly to deceased
ordinary members of the Commonwealth Military Forces, as regards
funerals, in respect of the application of the provision of F.R. 328.
100. It is notified for information that an Order in Council referring to
the Australian Imperial Force has been approved by His Excellency the
Governor-General of Australia in Council in the following terms: —
“ (a) That when any order or decree is made under any Act or at
common law for the payment by an officer or soldier of the forces above-
named either of the cost of maintenance of his wife or child, or of any
illegitimate child of whom he is the putative father, or for pre-maternity
expenses in connexion with such illegitimate child, on the production of a
certified copy of such order to any of the authorized officers named herein,
an order may be issued by such authorized officer for the deduction of a
portion of the pay of such officer or soldier, and for the payment of such
deduction towards the liquidation of the said order or decree or towards the
maintenance of such wife or child or illegitimate child, as such authorized
officer may think fit.
( h ) That the deduction so made shall not exceed in the case of a wife
and child or two or more children three-fifths of the daily rate of pay of such
officer or soldier, and in the case of an illegitimate child or pre-maternity
order one-fifth, and in the case of the wife alone two-fifths.


(c) That the authorized officers named above shall include any of the
following—
The General Officer Commanding the Australian Imperial Force;
District Commandants ;
Officers commanding brigades of Light Horse or Infantry of the
Australian Imperial Force;
The Senior Artillery Officer of the Australian Imperial Force.”
101. (a) In consequence of the great indifference and neglect by certain
Commanding Officers and members of the Ist Contingent of the Australian
Imperial Force in relation to provision for dependents, which have created
so many complaints and much hardship, it is directed that it shall be the
personal obligation and duty of Commanding Officers to see that each
individual member of his command is accounted for by an Allotment Form
and Nominal Roll, whether nil, or otherwise, and any disregard of this
instruction will be seriously dealt with.
(6) Company and other Commanding Officers are to insure, that upon
enlistment, and at the time of signing the Attestation Form, each married
man shall make proper provision for his dependents, by signing an Allotment
Form, to be filled in to allot to his wife, from the date of enlistment, and not
merely as formerly from the date of embarkation, not less than two-fifths of
his pay if there be no children, and not less than three-fifths if there be
children. In the case of an illegitimate child or a bond fide prematernity
order, one-fifth to be allotted. In all cases of allotments in favour of de-
pendents, the member is to be given clearly to understand that the allotment
is to be considered irrevocable (except in the case of death of the allottee
or like circumstances which may make a variation compulsory) or unless for
increase of amount, or in the case of a member marrying after making the
allotment, or in the case of a married man enlisting as single, in which cases
amendment in the direction of proper provision for wife, or wife and
children, may be made. Commanding Officers should insure, however,
that soldiers retain, to be drawn while abroad for their personal require-
ments, at least 6d. per diem. The spirit of the foregoing to be strictly
observed, also in cases of single men with dependents.
(c) In cases where there are no dependents, members may have a pro-
portion of their pay placed to their credit in a bank, if so desired.
{d) Company and other Commanding Officers are to insure, without fail,
that at the time of enlistment, and of signing of Attestation Form, each married
man, or widower with children, or man the sole support of a widowed mother,
or of a mother entirely dependent upon his earnings (provided that such man
is in receipt of less than Bs. per diem), shall make the prescribed statutory
declaration, and shall make a further Allotment Form for the wife, children,
or mother, as the case may require, to draw the separation allowance which
may become due.
(e) It will be the personal obligation of Company and other Commanders
to notify the D.P.M., or his representative, immediately a member is trans-
ferred to or from his Unit, or becomes non-effective, giving full particulars,
e.g., of date, reasons, Units concerned, &c., &c.
(/) Statutory declarations, allotments for the dependents to draw
Separation Allowance, and other allotments as above, are to be immediately
forwarded to the District Paymaster, such Officer to give a written receipt
for same to the Company or other Commanding Officer personally, who will
produce lists embodying the names of all the members of his Command on
account of whom he produces the forms and declarations.


( g) As the Allotment Forms are required by tbe District Paymaster,
before payment can be made to dependents before embarkation, and also
by the Commanding Officer to complete the prescribed details in the
Nominal Roll, the preparation of Nominal Rolls should be proceeding
simultaneously with the enlistment of 'personnel for the Unit, and
immediately particulars concerning allocation of portions of pay as shown
on the Nominal Rolls are checked and proved to agree with the Allotment
Form, the latter document must be forwarded to the District Paymaster as
prescribed in the preceding paragraph.
( h) The Nominal Rolls need not be handed to the District Paymaster
until called for by him, but any amendments required in consequence of pro-
motions, alterations, transfers, &c., may be suitably indorsed in the margin
thereof. It will be the duty of the District Paymaster to check finally
Nominal Rolls, Allotment Forms, and Soldiers’ Pay Books, and prove that
particulars in each relating to pay, are in agreement at such a date before
embarkation as will leave sufficient time to make any corrections or altera-
tions that may be necessary.
(i) It is further directed, with rega d to the Establishments indicated
in Personnel Table (No. 2) Reinforcements, &c., already enlisted and in
Camp, that Company and other Commanding Officers will cause the several
forms herein mentioned to be at once prepared so that they may be brought
into operation at the earliest possible date.
(J) All concerned, particularly Company and other Commanding Officers,
should be strongly impressed with the necessity for close personal attention
to the foregoing, as well as to any other means available which will obviate
hardships or complaints by or on behalf of dependents in future.
All previous orders and instructions as far as same are not in harmony
with the foregoing are hereby cancelled.
102. Commonwealth bank notes and silver coinage in possession of troops
on transports will be redeemed at full value by the High Commissioner for
Australia. Officers commanding troops on transports will, immediately on
arrival at the last port of call on the voyage, advise the O.C. Australian
Depot of the value of Australian notes and Australian silver coinage
respectively which it will be necessary to have redeemed by the High
Commissioner.
W. H. OSBORNE,
Acting Secretary, Military Board.
Head-quarters, Melbourne,
23rd February, 1915.


Australian Imperial Force.
Squadron, Battery, or Company.
Pay.
Regtl.
Name
Hank
Unit
serving
Age.
Married
or
Single.
Permanent
Next
Date
of
Joining.
Before
Embarkation.
After Embarkation
Daily Rate of
Deferred Pay,
only issuable
on completion
of Service
with
Expeditionary
Force.
Remarks
(A.M.F,
unit in
which
serving at
date of
enlistment
to be
shown).
No.
(in Full).
at date
of
enrol-
ment.
or
Calling
Address
in
Australia.
of
Kin and
Address.
Religion.
Rate
per
Diem.
Date
to
which
Paid.
Daily
Rate,
excluding
Deferred
Pay.
Allotment
in
Australia
per
Diem.
Net Rate,
not
including
Allowances
or Deferred
Pay.
*
(Place.)
(Date.)
Signature and Rank of
Commander, Squadron,
Battery, or Company.
Signature and Rank of
Officer Commanding
Regiment or Battalion.
APPENDIX 4.
NOMINAL ROLL.
By Authority : Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer. Melbourne.
