

ORDER OF SERVICE
. -C /
TO BE USED IN THE
Jlioaoe of JEelhoume
IN CELEBRATION OF
THE JUBILEE
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN.




Hymn to be sung at the commencement of Divine Service.
ALL people that on earth do dwell,
Sing to the Lord with cheerful voice;
Him serve with fear, His praise forth tell,
Come ye before Him, and rejoice.
The Lord, ye know, is God indeed ;
Without our aid He did us make ;
We are His flock, He doth us eed,
And for His sheep He doth us take.
O enter then His gates with praise,
Approach with joy His courts unto ;
Praise, laud, and bless His Name always,
For it is seemly so to do.
For why ? the Lord our God is good ;
His mercy is for ever sure ;
His truth at all times firmly stood,
And shall from age to age endure.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
The God Whom heaven and earth adore,
From men and from the Angel-host
Be praise and glory evermore.
Amen.


Then shall the Priest read this sentence.
I EXHORT that first of all, supplications, prayers, inter-
cessions and giving of thanks, be made for all men; for
kings, and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet
and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty: For this is good
and acceptable unto God our Saviour.
Then the Service shall proceed as usual to the end of the Vemte,
PROPER PSALMS XXL and CXLV.
FIRST LESSON. — Josh. /., to v. 10.
TE DEUM
SECOND LESSON. — Rom. XIII., to v. 8.
The Service to proceed as usual to the etui of the Loris Prayer.
Then the Priest standing up shall say —
O Lord, shew Thy mercy upon us.
Answer. And grant us Thy salvation.
Priest. O Lord, save the Queen.
Answer. Who putteth her trust in Thee.
Priest. Send her help from Thy holy place.
Answer. And evermore mightily defend her.
Priest. Let her enemies have no advantage against her.
Answer. Let not the wicked approach to hurt her.
Priest. Endue Thy Ministers with righteousness.
Answer. And make Thy chosen people joyful.
Priest. O Lord, save Thy people.
Answer. And bless Thine inheritance-
Priest. Give peace in our time, O Lord.
Answer. Because there is none other that fighteth for us,
but only Thou, O God.
Priest. Be unto us, O Lord, a strong tower.
Answer. From the face of our enemies.
Priest. O Lord, hear our prayer.
Answer. And let our cry come unto Thee.
Here shall follow the Collect for the day , and the two constant Collects.
4


O ALMIGHTY GOD, Who rulest over all the kingdoms of
the world, and disposest of them according to Thy good
pleasure, we yield Thee unfeigned thanks for that Thou wast
pleased to place Thy servant our Sovereign Lady, Queen Victoria,
upon the throne of this realm, and for all the mercies which
Thou hast bestowed upon her, and upon us Thy servants,
through her long and prosperous reign; We thank Thee for all
the grace which Thou hast given to her, enabling her to possess
the hearts of her people in honour and devotion to her person.
Continue, we beseech Thee, Thy mercy towards her throughout
all her days in this present life, and crown her with the blessedness
of everlasting life in the world to come : through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.
OLORD our GOD, Who upholdest and governest all
things in heaven and earth, receive our humble thanks
for the hope that Thou hast given us in our most gracious Queen
that there shall never be wanting one of her house to succeed
her in the government of her realm, in that Thou hast heard the
prayers of Thy people, and permitted her to see her children’s
children ; Let Thy blessing be upon Albert Edward, Prince of
Wales, the Princess of Wales, and all the family and descendants
of our Queen; that they all, ever trusting in Thy goodness,
protected by Thy power, and crowned with Thy gracious and
endless favour, may continue before Thee in peace, joy, and
honour upon earth, and obtain everlasting glory in Thy kingdom
in heaven, through the merits and mediation of Christ Jesus
our Saviour, Who with Thee and the Holy Ghost liveth and
reigneth ever one God world without end. Amen.
OGOD, Who hast made of one blood all nations of men
for to dwell on the face of the earth, and didst send Thy
blessed Son to preach peace to them that are afar off, and to
them that are nigh: Grant that all the people of this land may
feel after Thee and find Thee, and hasten, O Heavenly Father,
the fulfilment of Thy promise, to pour out Thy Spirit upon all
flesh : through Jesus Christ our Saviour. Amen.
5


OGOD, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, our only
Saviour, the Prince of Peace; Give us grace seriously to
lay to heart the great dangers we are in by our unhappy divisions.
Take away all hatred and prejudice, and whatsoever else may
hinder us from godly Union and that, as there is but
one Body and one Spirit, and one Hope of our Calling, one Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of us all, so we
may henceforth be all of one heart, and of one soul, united in
one holy bond of Truth and Peace, of Faith and Charity, and
may with one mind and one mouth glorify Thee: through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.
Here shall follow the General Thanksgiving , the Prayer of St. Chrysostom ,
and the Grace' mr Lord. Then shall be sung the Hymn following.
OKING OF KINGS, Thy blessings shed
On our anointed Sovereign’s head ;
And, looking from Thy holy heaven,
Protect the crown Thyself hast given.
Her may we honour and obey,
Uphold her right and lawful sway,
Rememb’ring that the powers that be
Are ministers ordained of Thee.
Her with Thy choicest mercies bless ;
To all her counsels give success;
In war, in peace, Thine aid be seen;
Thy strength command, God save the Queen.
And oh ! when earthly thrones decay,
And earthly kingdoms fade away,
Grant her a throne in worlds on high,
A crown of immortality.
Here shall Jollaw the Communion Service.
6


HYMN BEFORE SERMON.
(Hymns A. and M., No. 379)
NOW thank we all our God,
With heart, and hands, and voices,
Who wondrous things hath done,
In Whom His world rejoices;
Who from our mother’s arms
Hath blessed us on our way
With countless gifts of love,
And still is ours to-day.
O may this bounteous God
Through all our life be near us,
With ever joyful hearts
And blessed peace to cheer us ;
And keep us in His grace,
And guide us when perplexed,
And free us from all ills
In this world and the next.
All praise and thanks to God
The Father now be given,
The Son, and Him Who reigns
With Them in highest heaven,
The One Eternal God,
Whom earth and heaven adore.
For thus it was, is now,
And shall be evermore.
Amen.
After the Sermon , unless the Holy Communion is administered, the Service
shall conclude with the Offertory , the Prayer for the Church Militant ,
Collect, and Blessing.
Mason-, Firth & M'Cutcheon, Printers, Melbourne.
7


