

- 1t
v-v
AT THE
TO THE
Rev. Robert Steel, d.d.
IN THE VESTIBULE OF
St Stephen's Cftutcfj,
PHILLIP STREET, SYDJMEY,
At 4.30 p,m.
DECEMBER 7th, 1894.




OW fIFIMBPWEEBHB
AT THE
ttotht ol l^rueilin*
MEMORIAL TABLET
TO THE
Rev. Robert Steel, d.d.,
IN THE VESTIBULE OF
iSt. Cfjurdj,
PHILLIP STREET, SYDNEY,
At 4.30 p.m.
DECEMBER 7th, 1894.
BEFORE the UNVEILING, frieqds will assemble in the VESTIBULE,
but AFTERWARDS will assemble in the CHURCH.


“ A MAN
GREATLY
BELOVED.”
—Dan. x, 11.
SACRED TO
owe nDieniwißi?
The Rey. ROBERT STEEL, D.D.
Born at Pontypool, Moqnqouthshire, Wales,
15th May, 1827.
Died at Sydney, New South Wales, 9th October, 1893.
Minister of St. Stephen's Clqurclq for 31 years.
Third Moderator of the Geqeral Assembly,
Oqe of the First Councillors of St. Aqdrew’s College,
President of tRe Interim Theological Faculty of tRe Presbyteriaq
Churcl - ] of New South Wales,
An Earnest and Eloqueqt Preacher of the Gospel,
A Faithful and Warrq-hearted Pastor,
A Wise and Far-seeiqg Church Statesmaq,
A Popular and Instructive Lecturer,
An Entßusiastic Social Reformer,
And an able and volurqinous Contributor to the
Literature ot the Day.
I n his daily Life
he eqdeavoured to sßow hirqself aq exanqple to Ris flock :
Iq his iqtercourse with his Ministerial Brethreq
Re was ever a Pattern of Courtesy and Forbearaqce,
And in his dealings witß those outside his Deqomiqation
Re was a Model of Manly Frankqess aqd Christian CRarity.
“O for the touch of a vanished hand
And the sound of a voice that is still!”


SEEiETMITS iEPWT.
Right Reverend Sir; Friends.
From the day when the sad event occurred which removed our friend
from amongst us, a feeling had often been expressed that a memorial of some kind
should be erected in this building, the scene of his labours for so many years.
ous of raising this
n, a sub-committee
it consisted of the
. Storie Dixson,
r. Gregg was the
often long, rarely
of special impor-
ance, the full Committee would be summoned, or even the General Body of Subscribers.
To the circulars issued requesting donations the responses came in steadily, at
last exceeding the utmost hopes of those interested.
Tenders and specifications were called for so soon as the amount likely to be
available was known, and upon August 23rd the general meeting of after
a critical discussion, unanimously accepted the recommendation olthe Sub-Committee
to select the design by Mr. W. P. Macintosh, of Hereford Street, Forest Lodge, as
being distinctly the most suitable.
The absolute necessity of having the aid of an architect of experience for super-
vising the work of erection became now apparent, and was unexpectedly met by the
generous assistance of E. L. Drew, Esq., of the Colonial Architect’s Office. More
especially are thanks due him for certain valuable suggestions which have enhanced
the beauty of the design.
To the Rev. Dr. Gilchrist we are indebted for the noble inscription which we
were gratified in being able to employ without abbreviation ; and to Messrs. John
Sands & Co., in like manner, for expert advice as regards the arrangement of it upon
the Tablet.
Finally on behalf of the Subscribers we have much pleasure in recording our
deep gratitude to the Right Reverend the Moderator who has consented to conduct
these proceedings, and to those other distinguished divines who are here this day to
show by their presence and their aid their sympathy with our work of love.
T. STORIE DIXSON,
For the Committee.




SECRETARY'S RETORT.
Right Reverend Sir ; Friends.
From the day when the sad event occurred which removed our friend
from amongst us, a feeling had often been expressed that a memorial of some kind
should be erected in this building, the scene of his labours for so many years.
On the sth of last July, a meeting was held of those desirous of raising this
memento, and from a large and representative committee then chosen, a sub-committee
was selected to arrange for the practical working of the scheme ; it consisted of the
following gentlemen—John Campbell, George D. Dixson, Dr. T. Storie Dixson,
Alexander W. S. Gregg, Alexander Martin, and Peter Reid. Mr. Gregg was the
Chairman of both Committees and Dr. Dixson the Secretary.
Though the meetings of the Sub-Committee were many and often long, rarely
was a member absent from his place : nevertheless, in any matters of special impor-
ance, the full Committee would be summoned, or even the General Body of Subscribers.
To the circulars issued requesting donations the responses came in steadily, at
last exceeding the utmost hopes of those interested.
Tenders and specifications were called for so soon as the amount likely to be
available was known, and upon August 23rd the general meeting of subscribers, after
a critical discussion, unanimously accepted the recommendation otthe Sub-Committee
to select the design by Mr. W. P. Macintosh, of Hereford Street, Forest Lodge, as
being distinctly the most suitable.
The absolute necessity of having the aid of an architect of experience for super-
vising the work of erection became now apparent, and was unexpectedly met by the
generous assistance ofE. L. Drew, Esq., of the Colonial Architect’s Office. More
especially are thanks due him for certain valuable suggestions which have enhanced
the beauty of the design.
To the Rev. Dr. Gilchrist we are indebted for the noble inscription which we
were gratified in being able to employ without abbreviation ; and to Messrs. John
Sands & Co., in like manner, for expert advice as regards the arrangement of it upon
the Tablet.
Finally on behalf of the Subscribers we have much pleasure in recording our
deep gratitude to the Right Reverend the Moderator who has consented to conduct
these proceedings, and to those other distinguished divines who are here this day to
show by their presence and their aid their sympathy with our work of love.
T. STORIE DIXSON,
For the Committee.


©IEEE or FI®CEEWIW,
FRIENDS WILL ASSEMBLE IN THE YESTIBULE OF THE
CHURCH.
Opening Prayer by the Very Rev. Dr. KINROSS,
Principal of St. Andrew’s College.
q 1 L. ]9 Q
©fefbrrjerjf by uyL “Tor), ©ecp^fapy.
BY THE
j~\ IG HT THE Ef\ATOF\,
Voluntary (Marche Funebre)
Chopin.
By POr. HARRY CHANDLER (Organist of Si, Stephen's).
(Duriqg the Voluntary the officiatiqg and other MINISTERS will rqove
iq procession along the SOUTH AISLE to thjeir allotted places
oq the platforrq, aqd iq tlqe raised pews on each side of tlqe Pulpit.
ALL OTHERS present will take seats iq the BODY of tlqe Churcf].)


The Rev. the Moderator of the Presbytery of Sydney
to announce
l.
“ Thine eyes shall see the King in His beauty; they shall behold the land
that is very far ojff
( I f)e following Hyrqn was a favourite
aqd was writteq by f]is friend
THE sands of time are sinking ;
The dawn of heaven breaks !
The summer morn I’ve sighed for,
The fair sweet morn awakes.
Dark, dark hath been the midnight;
But dayspring is at hand,
And glory—glory dwelleth
In Immanuel’s land.
Oh ! Christ, He is the fountain,
The deep, sweet well of love ;
The streams on earth I’ve tasted,
More deep I’ll drink above ;
There to an ocean fulness
His mercy doth expand,
And glory—glory dwelleth
In Immanuel’s land.
With mercy and with
My w r eb of time H
And aye the dews
Were lustred by
I’ll bless the hand
I’ll bless the heart
te of the late Rev. Dr. Steel,
Mrs. Mary Ross Cousiq.)
Oh ! I am my Beloved’s,
And my Beloved’s mine !
He brings a poor vile sinner
Into His “ house of wine ; ”
I stand upon His merit,
I know no other stand,
Not even where glory dwelleth,
In Immanuel’s land.
The bode eyes not her garment,
But her dear bridegroom’s face:
I will not gaze at glory,
But on my King of grace ;
Not at the crown He gifteth,
But on His pierced hand :
The Lamb is all the glory
Of Immanuel's land.
th judgment
He wove,
of sorrow
His love;
that guided,
irt that planned,
When throned where glory dwelleth,
In Immanuel’s land. Amen.
— Mrs. Cousin.


SHORT ADDRESSES
BY THE
Reverend tE|e Moderator of tE|e Presbyteriaq Churcf]
New South Wales.
Reverend the Moderator of the Federal Asserqbly
Australia aqd Tasmania.
The Rev. Archibald Gilchrist, LL.D.
ifIOKT FRATER
BY THE
Rev. GEORGE GRIMM, M.A.


The Rev. R. S. PATERSON to announce
Ibpmn 2,
called the name of that place Bethel and he vowed a
O GOD of Bethel, by whose hand
Thy people still are fed,
Who through this weary pilgrimage
Hast all our fathers led :
Our vows, our prayers, we now present
Before Thy throne of grace ;
God of our fathers, be the God
Of their succeeding race.
Through each perplexing path of life
Our wandering footsteps guide ;
Give us each day our daily bread,
And raiment fit provide.
Oh ! spread Thy covering wings around,
Till all our wanderings cease,
And at our Father’s loved abode
Our souls arrive in peace.
5-
Such blessings from Thy gracious hand
Our humble prayers implore,
And Thou shalt be our chosen God
And portion evermore. Amen.
— Doddridge.


Isme6ic{ton
By the Rev. JAMES CAMERON, D.D.
THE peace of God, which passeth all understanding, keep your
hearts and minds in the knowledge and love of God, and of his
Son Jesus Christ our Lord : and the blessing of God Almighty, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be amongst you and remain with
you always. Amen.
Directory for Public Worship , Page 61.
JOHN RANDS. TVP.




