

A HANDBOOK OF
ORDERLY ROOM
--PROCEDURE.--
ANZAC PRESS
In the Field,
139 D 3 17.




Being Extracts from the King’s Regulations
and the Manual of Military law, so arranged as
to assist a Company, etc., Officer in dealing with
ordinary Orderly Room cases.
ORDERLY ROO
PROCEDURE.
Defining the Duties and
Powers of a Command-
ing Officer
Compiled for the use of Officers of “K” Am-
munition Park, by Major J. Hamilton. Not
to be taken as official or quoted as an authority.


..‘•Kookjmioi ;. Met S*|ff-Sergcant Harry
ou the Northern Tableland (N.S.W.). .
•jj( wtis he who built up the printing section
on the Western Front, under Col. W. 11.
Tunbridge, of the Motor Transport, from
second-hand and shell-shocked machinery,
salved from Ypres, Albert, Armentiferes ami
Dunkirk. He was not a printer by trade,
and his first assistant was Corporal Stan,
Randall, a farmer. The plant first con-*
sisted of a small platen machine, on which
was printed Honk, the organ of the Motor
Transport—‘‘Benzine Lancers,” they faceti-
ously termed themselves —edited by Corporal
(subsequently Lieut.) Phil Harris, who later
edited Aussie. The plant was eventually
made a war establishment, with Evans in
charge of a staff of 12, and printed Corps
Orders, etc. In addition Evans edited, set
the type, made the first stereo ever cast in
the field and machined a little paper (eight
pages), Kookaburra. The section printed
the Rising Sun, edited by Captain C. E. W.
Bean, and (50,000 copies of the first issue
of Aussie, another record. The first three-
color work ever printed in the field was from
a painting' of Pozieres by Second-Corporal
J S. Butler (“Pip”), of the printing staff.


NOTE. The authority is quoted in each
instance for reference purposes. Matters
may therefore he readily verified or am-
plified if desired.


A FEW NOTES
ON
The Duties and Powers of a Commanding
Officer in relation to Military Law
and Discipline.
DIVIDED INTO SEVEN PARTS, VIZ., —
1. THE DEFINITION AND DUTIES OF A C.O.
2. ARREST AND CUSTODY.
3. INVESTIGATION OF CHARGES & REMANDING
4. OFFENCES.
5. TRIAL AND EVIDENCE.
6. PUNISHMENTS.
7. RECORDS.
1. DEFINITION and DUTIES of a C.O.
R.P. 129. —There is no specific definition of a C.O. laid down
in the Manual of Military Law, but it is laid down that
the expression “ Commanding Officer ” as used in the
sections of the Army Act relating to “ Court Martial ”
to the “ Execution of Sentence,” and to the “Power of
Commanding Officer,” and in the provisions consequen-
tial thereon, and in these Rules, means, in relation to
any person, the Officer whose duty it is, under the pro-
visions of His Majesty’s regulations, or, in the absence
of any such provisions, under the custom of the service,
to deal with a charge against that person of having com-
mitted an offence, that is, to dispose of it on his own
authority.


Note 1. Every Officer, however temporary or casual hig
command over a person accused may be, will be wituin
this definition if the custom of the service, enables him
to tell off the accused. In all of these rules of procedure
Commanding Officer” has the meaning given to it by
this rule. J
The expression “Commanding Officer” also, so far as
relates to the summary award of any punishments for
offences being punishments for which, under the pro-
visions of His Majesty’s Regulations, an Officer com-
manding a Squadron, Company, Troop, or Btttery, is
authorised to award, and so far as relates to a summary
™l dm g;L n a case of absence without leave, includes the
nicer Commanding a Squadron, Company, Troop or
-Battery.
K.R 457. JheO.C. of a detachment is vested with the
power of awarding summary punishment to the extent
mentioned below:
the full powers awarded to a
C.O. or a Unit.
(ii) If not of Field Rank, the powers of aC O. of a
Unit as instructed by K.R. , 493, i.e., may hot award
detention ex-ceding 7 days except in the case of
absence without leave.
V\ hen the O.C. of a detachment is below the
rank of Field Officer, the C.O of the Unit, if the
detachment is serving in the same command, or the
O.C. of the Garrison or Station where the detach-
ment may he, or other superior authority, may,
having regard to the rank and experience of the O.C.
of the detachment, restrict him from the exercise of
any or all of the powers of a C.O.
(i\ 1 Nevertheless, an OC. of a detachment who is
under the rank of Field Officer, may if necessity
arises, act to tlie full extent of his powers as men'
tion in (ii) for the maintenance of discipline notwith-
standing any restricted order under (iii), but in such
cases he will immediately report his action for the
information of the superior authority by whom such
restrictive order was made.
K.R, 434. A C.O. is to use every effort to prevent crime,
and to suppress any tendency to screen its existence.


For first offences, not of an aggravated character, ad-
monition is the most suitable treatment. Other punish-
ment should only be resorted to when admonition has
failed to have effect.
K.K. 135. —An officer of any rank will adopt towards his
subordinates such methods of command and treatment,
as will not only ensure respect for authority, but also
foster the feelings of self-respect and personal honour es-
sential to military efficiency,
K.R 436.— Warrant Officers and N.C.O.’s will be guided
by the foregoing principles in dealing with each other
and with private soldiers. They willavoid intemperate
language or an offensive manner.
K.R, 437.—An officer is not to reprove an N.C.O. in the
presence or hearing of private soldiers, unless it is
necessary for the benefit of example that the reproof be
public.
K.R. 440. An officer is at all times responsible lor the
maintenance of good order and the rules and discipline
of the service ; he is to afford the utmost aid and sup-
port to the 1 C.O. It is his duty to notice, repress
and instantly report any negligence or impropriety of
conduct of N.C.O.’s and private soldiers, whether on or
off duty, and whether the offenders do oi do not belong
to his particular unit.
K.R.441. —A C.O. should impress upon all under his com-
mand the propriety of courtesy in intercourse with all
ranks and classes of Society, and should particularly
caution them to pay deference and respect to civil au-
thorities.
K.R.461 —Sections 4 to 44 inclusive of the Army Act are to
be read out once in every three months at the head of
every Unit, and also the following notice :
“Under the existing laws any person who shall ma-
liciously and advisedly endeavour to seduce any per-
son or persons serving in His Majesty’s forces by sea
or land from his or their duty and allegiance to His
Majesty, or to incite or stir Up any such person or
persons to commit any act of mutiny, or to make or
endeavour to make any mutinous assembly, or to


commit any traitorous or mutinous practice whatso-
ever, may, on being legally convicted of such offence,
be sentenced to penal servitude for the term of the
natural life of such person”
K.R.462. —In every Unit there is to be an order directing
that a soldier who is suffering from venereal disease is to
report himself sick without delay. This order will be
read to the Unit on parade at intervals not exceeding
three months, care being taken that it is specially brought
to the notice of all recruits on joining. Concealment of
venereal disease will be dealt with under Section II of
the Army Act and not under Section 18 (3) or 40.
K.R.433 —A General or other Officer commanding is respon-
sible that all persons employed under him are made ac-
quainted with the provisions of the Official Secrets Aet
(found in M. M. Law pp 799-802) and a record that this
has been done should be kept in every office.
M.M.L. Ch. IV., Sect. 37.—A C.O. will delegate to Com-
pany, etc., Commander, the power of awarding minor pun-
ishments as detailed in K.R. 501,
K.R. 501. —A Company, etc,, Commander may award a
private soldier punishment not exceeding seven days’
confinement to barracks for minor offences, extra guards
and picquets, fines for drunkeness, and he may deal with
cases of absence without leave, where pay is automat-
ically forfeited under the conditions specified in the first
pare of para 495, and may award any punishment within
his ordinary powers for such absence. In the case of an
officer of less than three years’ service, the above power
may be limited by the C.O. to an award of three days’
confinement to barracks. Any such awards will be sub-
ject to any remission the C.O. may order, but cannot be
increased.
2. ARREST and CUSTODY.
K,R. 466. —Arrest is' either close arrest or open arrest. An
officer under close arrest is not to leave his quarters or
tent except to take such exercise, under supervision, as
the Medical Officer considers necessary. When under
open arrest he may take exercise at stated neriods. within
defined limits, which will usually be the pr.c.ius


barracks or camp of his unit ; these limits may be en-
larged at the discretion of the O.C. on the spot. An
officer under open arrest may, under strict orders as to
his conduct, be directed to proceed from one station to
another, or be permitted to leave his station for a
particular purpose.
K.R. 467. —An officer under open arrest is not to use his
own or any other mess premises. He is not to appear in
any place of amusement or entertainment, or at public
assemblies, and he is never to appear outside his quarters
or tent dressed otherwise than in uniform. An officer
when under arrest will not wear sash, sword, belt, or
spurs.
K.R. 468. —It is not desirable, except where itappears that
the arrest has been made through an error, that an
officer should be released from arrest by the officer who
ordered the arrest, without the sanction of the highest
authority to whom the case may have been referred,
K.R. 469. —An officer may be placed under arrest by a
competent authority, without previous investigation,
when circumstances so require ; but a C. 0., on receiving
a complaint, or learning of circuYnstances tending to
incriminate an officer, will not ordinarily place him under
arrest until he has satisfied himself by enquiry that it
will be necessary to proceed with the case, and report it
to superior authority. He will invariably place under
arrest an officer against whom he prefers charges. When
an officer is placed under arrest, whether afterwards re-
leased or not, the C.O. will report the case without de-
lay to the General or other senior officer responsible for
discipline under whose command the unit may be.
M.M.L. Ch. IV. Sect. 2. —An officer placed under arrest
should always be informed in writing of the nature of
the arrest, which will be governed by the circumstances
of the case, and any change in the nature of the arrest
should be notified in writing to him.
K.R. 470/' —An officer has no right to demand a court mar-
tial /upon himself, or after he has been released by proper
authority, to persist in considering himself under the
restraint of arrest, or to refuse to return to his duty.


K.R. 471.—Pants 466 and 467 will also apply to a warrant
officer or N.C.O. who will, ii charged with a serious
offence, be placed under arrest forthwith, but if the
offence alleged appears not to be serious, it may be in-
vestigated and disposed of without previous arrest. In
case*, where doubt exists, whether the offence alleged
has been committed, arrest may be delayed, without
prejudice, to any subsequent proceedings. An N.C.O.
under open arrest is forbidden to enter a liquor bar or
corporal’s room.
M.M.L. Ch. 4. Sect. I.—When any person subject to Mil-
itary Law is charged with an offence, he may be taken
into military custody, which in the case of a private
soldier means open arrest or confinement. N.C.Os. are
as a rule, put in arrest and not in confinement.
K.R. 475. —A private soldier charged with a serious ofience
will be placed in arrest on the commission or discovery
of the offence. He is not to be placed in close arrest for
offences unaccompanied by drunkenness, violence, or
insubordination, unless confinement is necessary to en.
sure his safe custody or for the maintenance of dis-
cipline.
K.R. 477. —A private soldier who disobeys an order dis-
tinctly given, or resists the authority of a N.C.O. is to be
placed in close arrest without altercation, and the fact
immediately reported to his Company, &o, commander,
or to the adjutant. When a N.C.O. (this does not
apply to N.C.Os. of military mounted, or foot, police)
has to place a soldier in close arrest he will obtain the
assistance of one or more private soldiers to conduct the
offender to the Guard Room and will himself avoid coming
in contact with him except in cases of personal violence,
or when on detatched duties. A lance-corporal or
acting bombardier with less than four years service will
not place a private soldier in close arrest, but will report
the offence to the orderly-sergeant who will act as the
circumstances require.
K.R. 478. 4 private soldier who is drunk is to be placed in
close arrest alone, if possible, in a guard detention room.
He may be deprived of his boots except when the weather
is cold and he is likely to suffer in consequence. He


is to be visited and his condition ascertained at least
every two hours by a JN.G.O. of the guard and an escort,
etc,
3. INVESTIGATION OF CHARGES AND
REMANDING.
Power of Commanding Officer.
RULES of PROCEDURE 2. —Every Commanding Cffiicer
will take care that a person under his command, when
charged with an offence, is not detained in custody for
more than forty-eight hours after the committal of that
person into custody is reported to him, without the
charge being investigated, unless investigation within
that period seems to him due regard
to the public service. Every case of a person being de-
tained in custody beyond a period of forty-eight hours,
and the reason thereof, shall be reported by the Com-
manding Officer to the General or other officer to whom
application would be made to convene a Court-martial
for the trial of the person charged.
NOTE 2. —This rule applies to officers as well as soldiers.
NOTE 4. —The report should be made by letter, and should
refer specifically to the case, and state the reasons
justifying the detaining of the accused in custody and
preventing the investigation. The absence of an import-
ant witness would justify a remand; or the accused
might be ordered to return to his duty, with a distinct
intimation chat his cnse will be investigated so soon as
the absent witness can be obtained.
Rules of Procedure 3. —
(A) Every charge against a soldier will be heard in the
presence of the accused The accused will have full
liberty to cross-examine any witness against him, and to
call any witnesses and make any statement in his defence.
On the application of the accused, he and his wife may
be called as witnesses subject to the provisions of Rule 80.
(b) If the accused demands that the evidence againsthim
be taken on oath, the oath will be administered to each
witness by the investigating officer in the same form as
provided for a court-martial, or, in the case of a witness
allowed before a court-martial to make a solemn declam-
ation the like solemn declaration will be made before the
investigating officer.


The Army Act and Rules do not require the invests Hon
to be made by the commanding officer but do mil” i 11
K '^'r 4B ° l harge a S ainst a soldier will be investi
gated without delay m his presence. The case of n solrUn
in arrest is to be disposed of daily (Sundavs r„ i w a 16 1"
Christmas day excepted), and in th 7
morning before the principal parade, * “ ’ the
Every charge whether against a N.C.O or soldier will he
investigated in the first instance by thc'companv L
Commander, at his.company orderly room, which’is to
fordisposal I by'the Co" ° f & Soldier re —ve<i
the aToild time o,o, bemg to *> before him at
A C.O. is authorised to grant a large measure of discre
tionary power to company, &c„ commanders, to dispost
of any offence with which he himself may deal under
aoo ra ‘ that the limits laid down in paras
exceed 501 &C -’ -inlanders, "are^t
K.R. 485.—Charges are to be entered as follows • r
(i) For offences of N.C.O.’s and men confined in the
guard room or of N.C.O.’s and men reserved or
disposal by the C.O in the guard report by the conn
mander of the guard, or, where there is no guard bv
the N.C.O. responsible for the custody of the soldiers
in close arrest. soiaiers
(ii) For offences of N.C.O.’s and men not confined in
the guard-room on A.F.B. 281, under the orders of
the company, etc., commander.
If a charge against a N.C.O. or man, for which he has
not been in close arrest, is reserved by the comnanv
commander, for the C.O.’s award, the former oSr wiii


semi the charge (A.F. B 2,V2\ f.,,. f . • ,
iep >, t before tlie hour fixed for the , j'. *' .'l’ t . le u ard
in arrest by the C.O If on the tl ot soldiers
xv hi •!, „ wn (l I ‘ J tlic "ther liand a charge for
posedo? Z ***" n ‘ Cl °f ai is Z
will report the i J ’t that officer
“disposed of on A.F H will'l/ r °' , " , ’. and l t,,e entry
, »«. column of ‘' ,l ""‘" e - «•. punish.
S"oo ld w , i,r' 1 ,“ has
eon., conduct book
before the C.O Bold,er 13 brought
wiii b. wtwwi
by the investigating officer ‘D or A.P.B. 281,
Army FOnna.* 01 t!,,oe p *** Active Service
zsr*" - tu *• •**- i-~f^r:
R ”-m
flic evidence doe., not show" tint some olfe ,ce nnder'd,’"
Army Act lias been committed or if i?.T V tlle
r, 1 if
OUKhtto be proceeded with he S"' 1“ ol,«r K „
ary delay, either- ’ Shal1 ’ ' v,til out unneces-
(i) Dispose of the case summarily ; or
<M iutb,:Xf or C “ e •“»*«" -ilit»,.v
Tiii) Adjourn the ease for the nut-nose of i.„, •
evidence reduced to writing P hav,n£ * t,le
K.R. 400. If, on the in vestigation of a chart/e
evidence is not forthcoming as to whether The B ?° len f
has or has not committed the offence and ft cused
opportunity of carrying the investigation f fj 1616 ]S no
M...C, t„e accused, if tife


be released from arrest am&ofrleted to do duty without
prejudice to his re-arrest when fuither evidti c e is
forthcoming and the matter can be further implied
into. If, however, the offence charg >d is not serious,
and there is no probability of sufficient evidence
being obtainable within a leasonable time, the case
should be dismissed.
K.R. 490 a a soldier elects to be tried by a D.C M.
under provision of 46 Section (8) of the Army Act, his
C.O. may, if he thinks the circumstances of the case war-
rant it, release the accused from arrest pending trial.
4. OFFENCES.
K.R. 487. —A C.O. may, without reference to superior
authority, dispose summarily of, when on active service,
a soldier charged with an offence under the following
sections of the Army Act.
A. A. SECTION 10 (Except Sub-Section or using
violence to any person whether subject to military
law or not, in whose custody he is placed, and whether
he is or is not his superior officer.
Resisting an escort.
Breaking out of barracks, camp, or quarters.
SECTION 11. Neglecting to obey any general, garrison,
or other orders such as standing orders. See notes to
this section.
SECTION 14. Assisting a person subject to Military
Law’ to desert, or when cognisant of any desertion, or
intended desertion, does not inform his commander
or take steps for the apprehension of the deserter or
intending deserter.
SECTION 15. Absenting himself without leave.
Failing to appear at the place of parade. (N.B. —This
charge should never be made on active . service.)
Being found out of bounds.
SECTION 18 —Sub-Section 1. Malingering, feigning,
or producing disease or infirmity.
Sub-Section 3. Wilfully misconducting himself or
wilfully glisobeying any order by moans of which
misconduct or disobedience he produces or aggravates
disease or infirmity or delays its cure.


SECTION 19. Drunkeness whether on or off duty.
SECTION 20. When the act is not wilful —releasing or
allowing to escape a person committed to his
charge, etc.
S
SECTION 21. Unnecessarily detaininga person in arrest
or confinement, failing to deliver in writing a charge
against a soldier whom he has placed in confinement.
Being in command of a guard, does not give in
writing to the officer to whom he may be ordered to
report, an accused’s name and offence.
SECTION 22. Escaping or attempting to escape from
arrest or confinement.
SECTION 24. —Making away with, losing by neglect, or
wilfully injuring or destroying arms, ammunition,
equipment, etc., or any military decoration granted
to him.
11l treating a public horse.
SECTION 27 —Sub-Section 4. Wilfully making a false
statement in respect of the prolongation of furlough.
SECTION 38. (Except cases of enlisting from the Army
Reserve) Making a false answer on attestation.
SECTION 34. Being concerned in the enlistment in the
regular forces of any man who he knows is not eligible
to enlist.
Wilfully contravening any enactments or regulations
relating to enlistment or attestation of soldiers.
SECTION 40. Conduct to the prejudice of good ore'er
and military discipline.
Care must be taken that offences against Section 6K. 11
“being a soldier acting as sentinel leaves his post before
he is regularly relieved.” Section 9. “Disobedience of a
lawful command given by his superior officer” are not
dealt with summarily without the permission of, aftei
reference to, superior authority. The facts should be
very carefully ascertained before the charge is framed.
See notes to A.A. Sections 5, 6 and 9.


DrUNKBNESS. The definition and discussion on drunk-
eness in the M.M.L. pages 21-22 should be carefully
studied.
K.R. 478. —A private soldier who is drunk is to be placed in
close arrest alone, if possible, in a guard detention room.
He may be deprived of his boots except when the weather
is cold and he is likely to suffer in consequence. He is
to be visited and his condition ascertained at least every
two hours by a N.C.O. of the guard and an escort.
Should any symptoms of serious illness be observed, a
Medical Officer is forthwith to be sent for. A soldier
suspected of being drunk is not to be put through any
drill or tested for the purpose of ascertaining his con-
dition. A soldier charged with drunkeness is not to be
brought before an officer for investigation of the charge
until he is perfectly sober. For this purpose twenty-
four hours should usually be allowed to elapse before the
investigation.
A sentry drunk on his post is an offender under Section
6 A.A., and the case cannot be dealt with summarily.
5. TRIAL AND EVIDENCE.
K.R. 487. A.—When proposing to deal with a case summar-
ily a C.O. will satisfy himself that the evidence produced
before him is sufficient to disclose the exact nature of the
offence. If he is not so satisfied he should remand the
case for further enquiries so that the offence as entered
in the guard report may be substantially the charge upon
which the accused will be arraigned in the event of him
electing to be tried by a D.C.M. under the provisions of
Section 48 (8) of the Army Act.
When once an accused has elected to be tried upon the
charge, as read out to him from the guard report, it should
under no circumstances be added to or increased in
gravity.
In dealing with a case summarily, the accused, after
hearing the charge read out, should be asked whether he
is guilty or not guilty. If he pleads guilty, sufficient
evidence should be taken of the circumstances of the case
to enable the officer dealing with it, to determine the
sentence, and the accused should then be asked what he
has to say in mitigation of his offence.


Should he plead not guilty, the evidence for the pros-
ecution should be heard first. The accused may cross-
examine this. The evidence for the defence is then heard
which the prosecutor may cross-examine.
A.A. 46-6. —The evidence may be talren on oath if the
accused demands it.
Evidence must be first hand and revelent to the issue.
Heresay or opinion is not evidence. A witness should
usually commence with a statement as to his rank and
standing in relation to the accused, and then give the
date, place and time of the facts as to which he is giving
evidence, e.g., “I was Corporal of the Guard on the
night 12/13th October. At 10 p.m. I saw the accused,”
etc.
F.S.P. Part (ii) 110-3 states : “Charge reports signed by the
M.P. are to be accepted as evidence, unless the accused
denies the charge.”
A. A. 190,5-6. —The expression “Non Commissioned Officer”
includes an acting N.C.O. The expression “Soldier”
does not include an Officer as defined by this Act, but,
with the modifications in this Act contained in relation
to warrant officers and non commissioned officers, does
include a warrant officer not holding an honorary com-
mission and a non commissioned officer, and every per-
son subject to military law during the time that he
is so subject.
A. A. 190-7—The expression “superior officer” when used in
relation to a soldier, includes a warrant officer not
holding an honorary commission, and also includes a
non commissioned officer as above defined.
6. PUNISHMENTS.
WARRANT OFFICERS.
A. A. 182. —A Warrant Officer shall not be punished by his
Commanding Officer, nor tried by regimental court-mar-
tial, etc.
K.R. 493. —N.C.O.’s may only be admonished, reprimanded,
or severely reprimanded by a C.O. These are minor
punishments and the offender has no right to claim trial
by court martial.


K.R. 499. —An Acting or Lance N.C.O. may be ordered by
his C.O. to revert to his permanent grade, but is not
liable to a summary or minor punishment in addition.
These are the only punishments which a C. O. may inflict
on an N.C.O.
PRIVATE SOLDIERS. —On a pi ivate'soldier the follow-
ing minor punishments may be inflicted, the offender
having no right to claim trial by court martial ;
1. Confinement to barracks or quarters, etc. See K.R.
493-iv.
2. Extra guards or piequets, as puni sbmentsfor minor
offences when ot parading For these duties only.
3. Admonition.
K.R.493. —A C.O. may also, subject to the soldier’s right to
elect to be tried by a Court-Martial, inflict the following
summary punishments on a private soldier.
A. A. 46. —1. Detention not exceeding 28 days.
2. Field punishment not exceeding 28 days—when
•on Active Service only.
3. Forfeiture of all ordinary pay for a period not
exceeding 28 days, commencing from date of award,
4. In the case of drunkenness a fine not exceeding
ten shillings.
5. Any deduction from ordinary pay, allowed under
A. A. 133-4 and 6to be made by a G. 0., i.e,, to make
good loss, damage, etc.
A: A. 46-8. —In every case of punishment, except a minor
punishment, the C. 0., before awarding the punishment
.must ask the offender whether he desires to be dealt
with summarily or by a Court-Martial.
K.R. 496. Unless there are reasons to the contrary, a
soldier shall, on the following day, be given an oppor-
tunity of reconsidering his decision to be tried by Court
Martial.
A. A. 46-8. NOTE 12. —But if this question is inadvertently
omitted, .the soldier may, any time the same day,


before the hour fixed for the commitment of soldier under
sentence, claim a Court-Martial under this section of the
.Act.'
R.P. G-G. and NOTE 2. An award is complete once the sol-
dier has left tUe C.Us. presence and cannot be increased
but it may be remit tea or mitigated any time before the
completion of the punishment.
A.A. 46. Note 16. Further, if aO. 0. has inadvertently,
and with full knowledge of the facts, dealt summarily
with an offence wnich ne ought to have referred to superior
authority, the soldier cannot afterwards be tried by
Court-Martial for the same offence.
A. A. 46. ISOTE 11 -Nor can a man acquitted, or convicted,
of an offence by a Civif Court or Court-Martial be tried
by Court-Martial lor the same offence.
Where a soldier has been acquitted, or convicted, or sum-
marily punished for an offence which is substantially
the snipe as some other offence, he ought not to be sum-
marily punished or tried for such other offence. If e.g.
he has been acquitted or convicted of, or summarily pun-
ished for absence without leave, and the absence amoun-
ted to desertion, he cannot be afterwards tneu lor
desertion. Nor can a man convicted by a Court-Martial
for an offence, be afterwards sentenced by his Command-
ing Officer to stoppages for damages Caused by that
offence.
.Fv.R. 496 a- Recoveries from soldiers on account of damage
through negligence or carelesness to inechan'cally piu-
pelled vehicles will usually be limited to the equivalent
of a fortnight’s pay. Any' such recoiy will form part of
the disciplinary action taken in such cases. Idee also
A.A. 138, Note 19.
K,R. 498. Punishment drill is not to exceed one hour at
a time, and is to consist of marching in quick time only,
and not of instinotion drill. It will not be earned out
on Sunday's. In very' cold weather the double time may
be used for short periods.
It will be carried out in marching order, and will con-
sist in the Cavalry and Mounted Corps of two hours
di ill per diem. In the Infantry and dismounted Corps,
it will netfer exceed four hours altogether in one d:'


It. is to be carried out in tie barrack yard or drill ground.
When regiments or detachments are, in billets their
defaulters are to be marched out under a N.C.O. on one
of the roads for the prescribed period, and are not to
be drilled in the streets. Punishment drill is not to be
harried on after Retieat unless the Brigade Commander
is of opinion that it is expedient to do so, in which case
he may sanction exception.
A. A. 46, Note 14. —When a case of absence without leave
is dealt with summarily by a C O. he should, before
awarding any punishment, inform the soldier of the
number of day’s pay he forfeits under Royal Warrant
and ask him whether he wishes to be tiled by (District)
Court-Martial.
A.A. 138, Notes 3-6. Six hours is the minimum period of
absence which will count as a day’s absence unless (a)
the absentee was prevented from fulfilling a militaiy
duty, and (b) that the duty was thrown upon some other
person. Under these circumstances he forfeits a day’s'
pay however short the absence was, etc.
K.R. 502 —Absence without leave terminates when- the
soldjer is taken into custody, etc.
K.R. 500. —An officer is not to introduce or adoj t any
system of punishment which is in any respect at variance
with these regulations.
7. RECORDS.
Charge Sheet A.F.B. 252 contains the charge
D anon on which an offender is tried by his C.O. If
(i.H.U forwarded by an A.P.M. or Officer outside
the Unit to which the man belongs, it should
F. be returned to the sender with ail columns
ii, 110. filled in.
Offence Report A.F. 8.2069.
A separate sheet to be used for each branch of the ser-
vice (as for 8.21,3 a Acquittance Rolls, etc )
Entries of all awards in the field are to be made thereon.
In cases of absence without leave care must be taken
that the exact times of absence are entered thereon.
G. 1060 and 1318.—1 n the case of trial by F.G.O.M.
the following particulars must be entered on the A.F.B.
' 2069: —Date and place of trial, charge, finding, sentence,


confirmation and authority, Remission, if any. time in
confinement awaiting trial.
A.F.8.2069 —1n the case of members of the A.I.F. the fol-
lowing entries should be made in the Remarks Column,
when forfeitures of pay are incurred, either alone or
automatically, as in the.case of absence without leave,
or Field Punishment;—
Number of Pay Book. Number of Payment. Amount
• Forfeited in £s. d.
N.B.—-In reckoning forfeitures, etc., a day’s pay is the
full daily rate, less the deferred, vide A.I.F. Order, 558.
Field Conduct Sheet, A.F. 8.122.
See K.R5.1926 and 1927. All entries of offences are made
on this sheet. All awards severer than admonition, and
admonition for drunkenness, are to be entered thereon.
All entries to be initialled by the awarding officer. All
automatic forfeitures under R.W. are to be entered. See
K.Rs. 1919-1921. Cases of drunkenness to be entered
in red ink.
K.R. 507. —A C.O. may not alter the record after the pun-
ishment has been completed.
G.R.O. 1349. Vague entries such as “ Improper Conduct.”
' Conduct to the prejudice of good order and military
discipline” are not to be made. The exact offence must
be stated.
Memorandum re Forfeiture of Pay.
The following Memorandum on Forfeiture of Pay, under
R.W. for A.W.L., issued under Ist Anzac, A. 84/35, should
be useful in calculating the period of absence.
1. A man must be absent for six consecutive hours to
forfeit one day’s pay. The six hours may be all in one day,
or partly in one day, and partly in another.
2. In order to forfeit two day’s pay a man must be absent
over twelve hours, and the period of absence must touch
two days. For example, a man absent from 11.59 p.m. on
the 7th, until noon on the Bth, forfeits two day’s pay, as the
absence exceeds twelve hours, and one minute of the time


was on the 7th.
3. In order to forfeit three days’ pay or more, a man
must be absent over 24 hours consecutively, and the absence
must touch three or more days. For example, if a man is
absent from 11.59 p.m. on the 7th, until one minute past
midnight on the 9th, he forfeits three days’ pay, as he has
been absent over 24 hours consecutively, and has been absent
one minute on the 7th, and one minute on the 9th.
4, A man forfeits a day’s pay for any day on which, by
reason of his absence, however short, a duty that to be per-*
formed by him is thrown upon some other person e 2
Guard duty.
