

Ordination Services
CONNECTED WITH THE SETTLEMENT OF THE
REV. J. H. MITCHELL
As pastor of the Congregational Church, Castlemaine,
on 21st March, 1878.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.




Ordination Services
CONNECTED WITH THE SETTLEMENT OF THE
REV. J. H. MITCHELL
As pastor of the Congregational Church, Castlemaine,
on 21st March, 1878.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.




ORDINATION SERVICES.
The Ordination of the Rev. J. H. Mitchell took place on
Thursday, the 21st March, 1878, in the Congregational Church,
Castlemaine. Numerous ministers resident in the town were
present on the occasion, as well as from Melbourne and other
places. A large congregation was in attendance, many friends
having arrived from the country to witness the interesting
service. A spirit of fervent love and of devout piety charac-
terized the engagements of the day, and inspired the hearts of
those who were present with hopes of the most beneficial
results arising from the settlement of Mr. Mitchell amongst
them. To this circumstance must be attributed the reiterated
solicitation for the present publication, which is now sent
forth, in response to a general request for its appearance.
INTRODUCTORY SERVICE.
The proceedings commenced by the Rev. G. Falkingham,
of Chewton, giving out a hymn, which was sung by the con-
gregation. He also read the fourth chapter of St. Paul’s First
Epistle to Timothy. The Rev. W. Allen, of Maryborough
offered the Introductory Prayer, in which he supplicated the
Divine blessing to rest on the important engagements of the
day. The Rev. J. King, of Sandhurst, stated that he was
about to submit a series of questions to the new Minister, not


because any doubt existed in the minds of his brethren
respecting Mr. Mitchell’s qualifications for the sacred office,
but for the satisfaction of those who, like himself, were
unacquainted with his previous history and religious views.
He, therefore, begged to present to him the following
QUESTIONS.
i
Question I. —What reason have you to believe that you are
a Christian ?
Answer. —I beg to state that nearly nine years have elapsed
since I was brought to a knowledge of the truth as it is in
Jesus. Having been blessed with a praying mother, my early
days were carefully watched, and during that time I experi-
enced impressions which continued to deepen as years passed
by, till at last I felt I must yield to the entreaty of Jesus,
“ Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest.” When conversing with a Christian
friend on the great question of personal salvation, all my
difficulties were removed, and I unreservedly cast myself upon
Christ, and I have rejoiced ever since in the full conscious-
ness of forgiveness. Like others of God’s people, I have had
to battle hard against the world, the flesh, and the devil, and I
have oftentimes felt downcast when clouds and darkness have
gathered round me, yet I have never lost sight of the glorious
truth, “ There is therefore now no condemnation to them who
are in Christ Jesus.” In the year 1869 I joined the church
under the pastoral care of the Rev. Professor Hunter, and
during the five years I remained under his ministry I was
greatly benefited. Afterwards I connected myself with the
church of the Rev. John Wemyss, Edinburgh. Both Professor
Hunter and Mr. Wemyss, along with their congregations, urged
me to turn my attention to the ministry. After much earnest
prayer I resolved to do so. With this in view I entered the
University of Edinburgh; then I entered the Theological Hall


of the Congregational Churches of Scotland, and there I
studied under the Revs. Dr. Alexander, Dr. Gowan, and Pro-
fessor Robbie. On account of my health giving way I was
ordered by my medical advisers to proceed to Australia, in
order to have it renewed.
Question ll.—Why do you consider yourself called to exercise
your gifts as a Christian minister ?
Answer. —Because I believe that the burning desire to
become an ambassador of Christ, which arose in my heart
immediately after my conversion, was divinely implanted.
Paths of usefulness opened up on every hand, and since then
I have laboured in almost every branch of Christian work, for
the salvation of souls and the upbuilding of God’s people.
My first attempt in the mission-field was to gather in the Arab
children of Leith, Edinburgh; then I applied myself to visit-
ing those who had ceased to attend the means of grace. I
have assisted in raising and conducting prayer-meetings,
Sabbath-schools, and evangelistic services in various parts of
Scotland. When about fifteen years of age I began to
preach, and the results which have followed my labours clearly
indicate, I believe, the divine approval. I seek to enter the
ministry because of the love and gratitude I bear to the
Saviour. In doing so I know that lam unworthy to bear
His name,' but my great aim has ever been —and shall ever
be, I trust —to glorify Christ, who, I believe, has graciously
called me to the work of His church. “ Yea,” I feel, “ woe
is unto me if I preach not the Gospel.”
Question lII.—-Why do you prefer to enter the ministry of
the Congregational Church?
Answer. —Because I believe in, and accept the system
commonly known as Congregational, as being the only form of
church government taught in the New Testament Scriptures,
i.e., that each particular body of Christians assembled for the


purpose of worship has a full power of ecclesiastical jurisdiction
over its members, quite independent of any authority, save
that of Christ.
Question IV. —What are the leading points of your doctrinal
opinions ?
Answer. —l believe in the Divine inspiration of the Old and
New Testament Scriptures; that these Scriptures are of
supreme authority—the true standard of appeal in all contro-
versy ; the existence of one God, essentially holy, just, wise,
and good, eternal, infinite, and immutable in all natural and
moral perfections, sole Creator, Supporter, and supreme
Governor of all beings and of all things; that God is revealed
in the Scriptures as the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
and that each has the same divine attributes and perfections.
I believe that man w r as created after the image of God, pure
and sinless ; that by disobeying the commands of God he fell
from his original state of innocence, and that with him fell all
his posterity into a state of sin. I believe in God’s eternal
purpose to provide salvation to our fallen race, co-extensive
with the needs of man ; the absolute necessity of the new
birth; the divinity and incarnation of Christ; His death as
the atonement for sin; that a full and perfect salvation is
offered freely to all who will accept it on the sole merit of that
atonement. I believe in the doctrine of justification by faith
alone, i.e., simple trust in the efficacy of the Saviour’s sacrifice
to remove all our guilt, and free us eternally from its con-
demning power; the necessary and efficacious operation of
the Holy Spirit in regeneration • sanctification by the Spirit
(the work being gradual); also in the final perseverance of the
saints ; the perpetual obligation of the ordinances of baptism
and the Lord’s Supper; the resurrection of the just and
unjust, and the general judgment of the whole human race,
when to the righteous shall be awarded life eternal, and to the
wicked everlasting punishment.


The Rev. J. King then requested that one of the office-
bearers would state the circumstances which had led the
church to request Mr. Mitchell to become its pastor. Richard
Blackwell, Esq., in reply, said that on the retirement of the
Rev. E. Day, it was necessary that immediate steps should
be taken to obtain another minister to succeed him. The
Church communicated with Mr. Day, who recommended Mr.
Mitchell and another gentleman, both of whom were eligible
for the appointment. Mr. Mitchell visited Castlemaine first,
and officiated during three successive sabbaths. The impres-
sion produced by his ministrations were of so favourable a
character that, at a meeting of the Church duly convened, he
was unanimously invited to take its pastoral oversight.
Mr. Mitchell was then requested to state if he accepted the
call of the Church to become its pastor; to which he replied—
“l do accept it in the name of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ.”
ORDINATION PRAYER, WITH IMPOSITION
OF HANDS.
The Ordination Prayer was then presented by the late
respected pastor of the Church, the Rev. E. Day, who, with
great fervour and affection, commended his young brother to
the special protection and blessing of God, amidst all the
difficulties which would surround him in the discharge of his
important duties as a minister, a pastor, a counsellor, and a
friend; so that all the graces of the Christian character might
be possessed and exemplified by him, and that, being found
faithful unto death, he may at last receive a crown of life
which fadeth not away. During the latter portion of the Rev.
E. Day’s prayer all the ministers in attendance laid their
hands on the head of their young brother, as he knelt before
the Lord. This act was attended with such deep solemnity


that it was with difficulty the audience were able to suppress
the expression of their feelings, which appeared to struggle for
utterance.
At the close of the Ordination Prayer the right hand of
fellowship was given to Mr. Mitchell by all his ministerial
brethren present. The usual hymn followed :
“ Let Zion’s watchmen all awake
Ancl take the alarm they give!”
THE CHARGE.
This was delivered by the Rev. Richard Connebee, of Kew,
and was as follows :
My dear Mr. Mitchell, and now brother in the ministry,
—I appear here to-day, at your own request and at the request
of the people of whom you are now the pastor, to address a
few words of counsel and of caution to you and to them. In
consenting to do this, I have not the slightest wish or intention
of assuming the possession of superior intelligence or wisdom,
or of “ lording it over God’s heritage.” lam here simply as a
brother, to speak kindly and tenderly to brethren ; and lam
here because I regard your voice, and the voice of your people,
to be the call of Divine Providence to take part in the pro-
ceedings of this day. And allow me to say to you, my brother,
in the outset, that' I look upon you with feelings of special
regard and affection. You came to me at Kew when you felt
you were a stranger in a strange land. You brought with you
testimonials from some of the most distinguished professors
and ministers of Scotland, of which, both as regards their
number and the expression of high appreciation of your
character and attainments, any man might be justly proud.
You told me the story of your previous history, so touchingly


plaintive in its tones that, involuntarily, I brushed away the
tear it evoked. It is said that all the voices of Nature are in
the minor key—the murmur of the distant waterfall, the sigh-
ing of the evening wind, the hum of the bee, and the lowing of
oxen, all are plaintive. You came to me as a child of Nature,
and your utterances partook of its plaintiveness. You told me
of the happy home which was once your’s to possess. You
told me that sickness and death had entered that home. You
told me that your mother—whom Coleridge calls “ the holiest
thing alive”—around whom the tenderest and most sacred
affections of your nature were entwined, you had resolved
never to leave when sickness had laid her low; and that you
preferred to sacrifice your own health, which was failing, and
your own life, which was endangered by a longer residence
in a northern climate, than that her heart should be riven
by having to take what you both felt must be a long and
probably a last farewell of each other on earth. You told
me how she was then taken from you to be for ever with the
Lord, and how, with a sad and a well nigh broken heart, you
left your native home —those Scottish hills over which you
were wont to roam, in the boyhood of life —and sailed for this
land, in quest of health which was now gone; and in quest,
too, of another home—of one which you despaired of ever
finding like unto that which you had left. And as I listened
to your touching story, and as I had no child of my own—in
fact, had nothing in my earthly home left to love, I felt all the
yearnings of a father’s heart towards you; and all that love
could prompt I resolved to undertake on your behalf, so that,
if possible, another happy home should be your’s to enjoy, and
other friends, as numerous and as loving, if possible, as those
you had left behind, should again surround your path. And
with heartfelt gratitude I am here to-day to testify how
graciously God has crowned these efforts with success. I
mentioned your name to Mr. Day, and he introduced you, or
was the means of introducing you, to the friends at Castle-


maine; and here you now appear, in the presence of the Lord
and in our presence, with your health nearly established,
surrounded with ministerial brethren from Melbourne, Castle-
maine, Sandhurst, Maryborough, Kyneton, and elsewhere;
surrounded also with troops of friends, all of whom are here to
say, “The blessing of the Lord be upon you.” Oh ! my brother,
the Lord hath done great things for you, whereof we are glad ;
and here and now we erect our grateful Ebenezer, as we recall
the loving-kindness of the Lord to you, and we say, “ Hitherto
the Lord hath helped you.” As lam called to address both
you and the people of your charge, I shall select a passage of
Scripture for each of you—not as a text, but as a motto for
both of you to remember long after the present scene and
service have passed away. The motto-text for you, my brother,
you will find in—
Colossians iv. 17 —“ Say to Archippus, take heed to the ministry
which thou hast received in the Lord, that thou fulfil it.”
I.—Take heed to your personal character and conduct. I
have seen burning and shining lights in the Church, amidst
whose radiance multitudes rejoiced to walk, suffer a total
eclipse, and have afterwards seen the Church, with tearful eye
and bleeding heart, pensively musing, as the last fading colours
of those who once shone brightly in her spiritual horizon were
passing for ever away. Mournful, but eloquent, scenes these
in the Church’s history. God grant that they may not have
been enacted in vain ! Voices come to us to-day from the seen
and the unseen, saying to us—“ Watch and pray, lest ye also
enter into temptation.” “ Let him who thinketh he standeth
take heed lest he fall.”
I am anxious to impress your mind with the solemnly
important fact that, although these events have ever and anon
come suddenly and crushingly upon us, they have nevertheless
been the result of many years’ previous canker and decay. A
noble tree suddenly falls, but if you could have penetrated its


outward covering, and have seen its inner condition, you
would have detected a worm there, eating out its strength; and
although, on the whole, it presented to the casual passer-by an
aspect of verdure, nevertheless, on closer examination, the sere
and withered leaf may have been here and there observed;
also, that its sap had long ceased to flow healthily through
its widely-spread branches. And so, outward moral falls
have been the result of a long process of previous declen-
sion and decay of spiritual life. Not only has there been the
absence of close walking with God and of high and holy com-
munion with Him, but the heart has yielded to some easily
besetting sin or sins, the Throne of Grace has ceased to attract,
and the Word of God to profit. Outward duties have been
only mechanically performed. The form of godliness has been
retained, but its power has ceased to influence. How graphi-
cally does Mr. Binney describe the career of such characters in
his discourse, entitled “The Closet and the Church?” He
sa y S : —“ There are men in the ministry who are not destitute
either of natural gifts or of acquired ability. Their powers are
great, vigorous, and varied. These powers have been duly
trained by collegiate discipline, enriched by science, purified
by taste, brought into contact with all knowledge, and then
concentrated on subjects of sacred lore. These men may be
distinguished by lofty thought, logical acuteness, ready utter-
ance, force of words, with minds as fertile in lights and
illustrations—which the imagination supplies, as opulent in
the materials of instructive discourse. Further : their charac-
ters may be free from suspicion, and their conduct equal to the
demands of society. In spite, however, of all these excellencies,
there is one evil habit in these men which eats as doth a
canker. They are not men of frequent, earnest, private
devotion. They have great abilities, but they do not pray.
They are ministers of Christ, according to outward order ; but
they do not pray. They are good, and perhaps even great
preachers; but they do not pray. They are pungent, per-


suasive, convincing; but they do not pray. They may be
zealous and enterprising, and abundant in labour; but they
do not pray. They may be men of integrity, of purity,
and of benevolence—but they do not pray; and this one
thing—restraining prayer before God, stains the glory of
everything else. Though a minister were an Apostle, and
did not pray, he would be nothing. Though he had the
gift of prophecy, and understood all mysteries, and all
knowledge, and did not pray, he would be nothing; and
though he gave all his goods to feed the poor, and his body to
be burned, and did not pray, he would be nothing.” The
bells that were hung on Aaron’s vestments were placed in the
midst of embroidered pomegranates, to intimate, as I think,
that the sound of a minister’s voice should ever be accom-
panied with the fruits of holiness. Enter, then, upon your
duties at Castlemaine like Moses descending from the Mount
of God. You will thereby carry with you, whithersoever you
go, a portion of the celestial radiance you have derived from
communion with Him. “Be thou an example,” says St. Paul
to Timothy, “to the believers, in word, in conversation, in
charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity.” The late Mr. Roberts,
of Wales, began his ministry without being thus an example to
others in word and conversation ; and he tells us that, on one
occasion, he asked a child the way to the residence of a person
whom he was anxious to visit. “ That person,” said the child,
“is my mother, and I will walk with you to our house.” He
paid his visit and departed. The mother said to the child—
“ You have had the honour of walking with a minister to-day !”
“No, mother!” said the child; “I am sure he was not a
minister of Christ, for he never mentioned His name all the
way!” This conversation between the mother and child
reached his ears, and from that day he directed his attention
to the importance of giving a spiritual turn to his conversation ;
and so successful did he become in after-life in this respect,
that many persons attributed their conversion to his pastoral


visits. An occasional hint frequently succeeds, when an
elaborate discourse fails. “Be thou an example to the
believers in word and in spirit,” remembering that eminent
piety is essential to eminent usefulness.
ll.—ln order that you may fulfil your ministry, take heed
to your course of life as a student. The great object you
attained by attending the lectures of Dr. Alexander, and other
professors at Edinburgh, was not so much to acquire knowledge,
as to discipline your mind, and, by the formation of systematic
habits of thought, to put you in the way of becoming a good
scholar in after life. It is recorded of Sir Isaac Newton, that,
when questioned respecting the mental qualities which formed
the peculiarities of his character, he referred them exclusively
to the power he had acquired of continuous thought and atten-
tion. When asked how he had made his discoveries, he
answered, “By always thinking about them.” At another time
he declared if he had done anything it was due to his industry
and to patient thought. “ I keep,” said he, “ the subject of my
inquiry constantly before me, and wait until the first dawning
opens gradually, by little and little, into a full and perfect
light.” Just imagine how great will be your mental growth, if,
like Newton, you gird up and well discipline your mind,
selecting those subjects for study which are adapted to your
capacity, and suited to your mental bias; and how greatly will
you benefit the Church here if you continually present to it the
results of your cogitations, aided by such thoughts as you may
have been able to glean from others who have pursued the
same course and have trodden the same path.
Here I may be allowed to suggest to you the importance
of keeping, from the beginning of your course, a “Liber
Rerum," or Scrap-book on a large scale, in which you may
gather, as years roll on, an immense fund of valuable informa-
tion, which will always prove useful to you as a book of
reference. You can scarcely ever take up a public journal


without lighting on something—historical, biographical, literary,
or scientific—which is not worth preserving. Cut out, or
extract, all such articles or paragraphs, and insert them in
your book, according to the order of subjects to which they
belong—Biblical, literary, or scientific, as the case may be.
You will then seldom or ever find yourself at a loss for infor-
mation, or for illustrations, whatever may be the subject under
investigation. It is said that Hogarth acquired his proficiency
in depicting the varieties of the human countenance by sketch-
ing upon the nail of his finger every peculiar face he saw in
company, with which he afterwards enriched and illustrated his
wonderful productions. And Gainsborough transfused Nature
into his pictures, more than any contemporary artist, because
he was always studying it, and copying at the time every new
tint and form that presented itself to him. Let no day pass
without a line, not only in your Scrap-book, but—
“ Within the book and volume of your brain,
Unmixed with baser matter.”
Remember that knowledge is the fruit of patient observation
and study. The fires of genius may spontaneously blaze,
like those upon the Jewish altar, but knowledge is a flame to
be kindled only by the mind’s own exertions, and can be per-
petuated and increased only by its own efforts. Be, therefore,
daily diligent in your business as a student, fervent in spirit, in
all things serving the Lord.
111. —But it is time to direct your attention more especially
to your ministerial work; “Take heed to the ministry,
which thou hast received in the Lord, that thou fulfil it.” I
presume, from your replies to the questions which have been
submitted to you by Mr. King, that you entertain no doubt
respecting your call to the ministry. The bias of your mind
which has influenced you to select this work, as the great and
distinguishing object of your future life, you have been able to


trace to divine guidance—enough to satisfy you that the bent
or purpose of your soul has not been the offspring of vanity,
nor has it arisen from a desire to pursue a respectable and a
somewhat influential profession.
Further, your convictions of duty have been confirmed and
strengthened by the judgment of your pastor, to whom your
case was submitted, and through whose recommendation you
have obtained your present locus standi amongst us. In your
case, therefore, there has been a combination or blending of
providential events throughout, together with the monitions of
the Holy Spirit prompting you within, to enter, and go forward
in this work. Assuming that I have correctly defined your
position, I think you may scripturally cherish the belief and
hope that the choice you have made has received the divine
approval, and therefore you have the appointment of the Most
High to the office which you have chosen ; and I mention this
on the present occasion to remind you of the solemn responsi-
bility attached to your calling, for I would have you to
remember that you are accountable for the manner in which
you perform the duties of your mission to Him from whom
you have received it; and as firmly do I believe that you will
be required to render an account of the way in which you
have discharged the duties of your office, as I am that I am
now addressing you in relation thereto. Remember further, my
brother, that you are called to the ministry at a period in the
world’s history which will require all your efforts and task all your
powers to the uttermost if you purpose, by God’s help, worthily
to meet the calls and claims which will here be made upon you.
Be not insensible to the character of the times in which you
live. A crisis, as regards religious thought, has clearly come
upon us. Mind is now fully awake, and, like a stern old
alchymist, tortures everything in its crucible and weighs it in
its scales. Hence the war of opinions that rages around us,
in which you will be required to take part; hence, too, the
extremes of religious opinions with which we are almost daily


assailed—from Atheism to Pantheism, and from Secularism to
Mysticism. We have the schools of Parker and Emerson,
from America ; of Strauss and Hegel, from Germany ; and of
Maurice, Newman, Colenso, and I know not of whom beside,
from Home; the influence of which is daily felt here amongst
us, in consequence of the increased facilities of communication
between those countries and our own. Then, think of the
recent developments in the scientific wmrld ! Who could have
anticipated, in the days of my boyhood, that men were about
to arise who, by dint of diligent study, would unveil the forms
of long-extinct animals and the state of the earth as it existed
thousands of years ago ? Who would then have imagined that
in art such vast resources would have been opened to us as
those which the now familiar science of photography supplies ?
or that the instantaneous power of transmission which we
possess in the telephone and the electric telegraph would be
extended to the whole of the people who now crowd these
busy shores ? I therefore congratulate you on the advance of
human knowledge in the age in which your lot is cast. But by
as much as such facilities are presented to you for becoming
intimately acquainted with art and science, by so much are
you required to avail yourself of these facilities to keep pace
with the times in which you live and the people to whom you
now belong.
But above all things study to be an efficient, powerful
preacher. See to it that you lose none of your first, your
earliest earnestness. I have known young men enter College
soul-stirring preachers. I have known them leave it “flat,
stale, and unprofitable,” in their public ministrations, lulling
men to repose, like
“ The drowsy tinkling of the distant fold.”
God grant that this may never be the case with you, my
brother ! While I would have you to be a preacher of high
intelligence, I would at the same time have you to be a man of


intense earnestness. So study your subjects that you may be
deeply impressed yourself with their unutterable importance.
As an ambassador for God, it is your’s to persuade men to be
reconciled to Him. So expatiate on the sufferings and death
of Christ that men may feel their importance, and be led to
exclaim, “Behold, how he loved us!” Tears such as Jesus
and Paul shed, tell of the greatness of those who shed them,
and of the grandeur of the themes which evoked them.
“ When He beheld the city, He wept over it.” “By the space
of three years I ceased not to warn every one of you night and
day with tears.” “ I have told you often, and now tell you
even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ.”
I suppose there can be no doubt that Mr. Jones is the most
effective preacher in Victoria, but he seldom delivers a sermon
without tears. Some may prefer a cold and lifeless ministry,
but O ! let me listen to the preacher whose countenance tells
me that there are feelings struggling within too big for
utterance; who with tearful eye and overflowing heart implores
men to “ behold the Lamb of God, who taketh away the sins
of the world.” Let me look at him as he rivets the attention
of his auditors to the grand, the sublime doctrines of the cross
of Christ, as he unfolds to them the mysteries of the kingdom
of God, causing every countenance to brighten, every breast to
throb, and every heart to feel that the place is none other than
the house of Cod, and the gate of heaven. Think of the
mighty power which some men wield over their hearers,
amounting to a perfect spell, and see to it that an instru-
mentality capable of such potent efficacy be never through
your unskilfulness wielded in vain. It was a noble testimony
to the power of Demosthenes over his hearers, when his rival,
on reading one of his speeches to an assembly, and seeing
them greatly moved by it, exclaimed, “ But what would you
have felt if you had heard him speak it ? ” Well he knew that
the effect would have been ten times greater; and well we
knew that every speech he delivered was previously elaborated


with enormous care and skill. It must be thus with you, if
you hope ever to attain that position in the ministry which we
desire for you.
I remember just after Lord Brougham had delivered his
inaugural address as Lord Rector of the Glasgow University,
that Robert Hall, who at that time was a near neighbour of
mine, was conversing with a friend on the subject of that
discourse, and said, “ Brougham is right, sir, quite right;
preparation is everything. If I were asked, What is the chief
requisite for eloquence ? I should reply, ‘ Preparation; ’ if,
What is the second? ‘Preparation;’ if, What is the third?
* Preparation.’ Ah ! sir, if I had prepared more for the pulpit,
I should have been a much better preacher. There are
breadths, and lengths, and depths, and heights in eloquence,
yet to be attained, of which at present we know nothing.” I
have heard some men say of sermons, that those efforts of the
preacher have been the happiest and the best which have been
purely extemporaneous—thrown off without a moment’s con-
sideration. Little do such men imagine that that which to
them appeared a sudden burst of extemporaneous genius, has
been the result of years of hard study to obtain the power and
felicity which seemed to spring up at the moment.
But, above all, aim at usefulness —at the conversion of
sinners. If you fail here, you fail altogether. You may be
acceptable, and even popular, but if you are not useful your
ministry will return to you void. It does not accomplish the
chief end for which you have been sent. I have heard of one
sermon delivered by Mr. Sherman, by means of which nearly
or quite one hundred souls were born again, seventy of whom
joined his church. Set before yourself the most useful men as
models, and strive to be like them. The first student who
entered our College in Melbourne was pre-eminently successful
in this respect. Short was his career, for he was taken from
us at the early age of twenty-five, but he seldom preached
without seals being given to his ministry; and, when he died,


letters poured in upon us from all quarters, bearing testimony
from their writers to the spiritual good they had derived from
his labours. He is gone, but his works follow him. May his
mantle descend on you ! “ Live for something,” exclaimed
Dr. Chalmers, one day, to his students. “ Live for something,”
say Ito you to-day. Live to write your name on the hearts of
all your hearers in Castlemaine, and your deeds will be as
legible as the stars on the brow of evening. Remember
that
“ We live in deeds, not years ; in thoughts, not breaths ;
In feelings, not in figures on a dial.
We should count time by heart-throbs. He most lives
Who thinks most, feels the noblest, acts the best.”
ADDRESS TO THE CONGREGATION.
The Rev. Richard Connebee continued as follows :
And now, my respected friends, who are to form the pastoral
charge of your new minister, suffer the word of exhortation.
To you I also present a motto-text, which I trust you will not
only remember, but will adopt in your daily intercourse with
him as your pastor. You will find it in
Df.UT. i. 38 —“ Encourage him.”
These words, although addressed to the Israelites in connection
with Joshua, are as applicable to you as they were to them.
God has sent you a man to teach you, and to guide both you
and your children to that goodly land of which the earthly
Canaan was a type. In the discharge of his duties many
difficulties will surround him, and many obstacles will dis-
courage him; and while he will look up to God for daily
strength and guidance, to whom can he turn for encouragemen t


but to you, who have voluntarily chosen him, in preference to
•every other, to take the oversight of you in the Lord ? There-
fore, ENCOURAGE HIM
I.—By devoutly, regularly, and punctually attending his
ministry. Few things discourage a minister more than an
unsystematic, irregular, and unreliable congregation. Let all
your domestic arrangements, even the selection of your resi-
dence, be made subservient to this important end. Some
members of a church choose their home so distant from the
house of God, that attendance at the latter, more than once on
the Sabbath is almost an impossibility. See that this be not
the case with you. Instead of a solitary act of worship on the
Sabbath, drink into the spirit of the “ sweet singer of Israel,”
who said—“ I will dwell in the House of the Lord for ever.”
If friends visit you on the Lord’s day, request the favour of
their accompanying you to the sanctuary : God may meet with
them there and bless them. If you suffer from bodily indis-
position, let your arrangements respecting taking medicine be
so judicious, that no interference with your attendance on the
means of grace shall arise therefrom. Have a place in the
House of God; always be in it at the hour of worship, and be
there in good time.
11. —Encourage your minister by displaying a consistent and
holy walk and conversation. I know of nothing which wrings
and rends the heart of a pastor more than moral inconsistency
in his people. “ Let your light so shine before men, that they
may see your good works, and glorify your Father who is in
heaven.”
111. —Encourage your minister by sustaining his reputation.
It has been said that “ Ministers live in glass houses.” They
are the observed of all observers, and even their good is at
times evilly spoken of. “ Have you heard such a report
•concerning our minister?” said one church member to another.


“ No,” was the reply. “I am afraid it is true,” said the first.
“ I will go and ask him ?” replied the second. “O! do not
for the world!” exclaimed the former. “Not the whole
world shall hinder me ! ” was the noble reply of the latter, “a
man’s reputation is dearer to him than the world, for what is
all the world to him if his character be gone ? ” A good man
has nothing to conceal. If he fall amongst thieves, who seek
to rob him of his richest jewel—his character —go to him, act
the part of the good Samaritan, bind up his wounds, and send
him forth on his way rejoicing.
IV. —Encourage your minister, by co-operating with him in
his various plans of usefulness. He is here to build up the
Lord’s spiritual Temple. Not only be yourself a living stone
in that Temple, but seek to be instrumental in building in
others. Harlem Page, a young man, whose educational
advantages were extremely limited, declared on his death-bed
that he believed he had been the means of the conversion of
nearly, or quite, a hundred of his friends. Emulate him in
Christian usefulness. Do not expect your minister to perform
all the work of the church, nor allow him to preach more than
twice on the Sabbath, until his health has been fully established.
Help him in the Sunday School, at the village stations, in tract
distribution, and at meetings for prayer and praise. In short,
let every member of this community have his post of usefulness,
and let him be at his post whenever his services are required.
V. —Encourage your minister by providing a comfortable
maintenance for him. “ The labourer is worthy of his hire.
Do ye not know that they who minister about holy things, live
of the things of the temple, and they who wait at the altar are
partakers with the altar ? Even so hath the Lord ordained
that they who preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel.”
The plans you may adopt for obtaining the funds necessary for
conducting the service of God, decently and in order, are
comparatively immaterial, whether by box, plate, or sub-


scription. These are minor details which each church may
adopt at pleasure. But in every case the offering must be
voluntary, and ample to meet the requirements of the Lord’s
house. Nothing compulsory enters into the service of Jesus.
This is the Church’s motto, “ The love of Christ constrained!
us, because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were
all dead, and that He died for all that they who live should
not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto Him who died
for them, and rose again.”
Finally, pray for your minister’s success, for without the
divine blessing all his labours will be fruitless. Paul may
plant, Apollos water, but God alone can give the increase;
and saith the Most High, “For all these things will I be
inquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them.” There-
fore, pray for your minister, not only at your social gatherings,
but in the closet and in the family, that his mind may be kept
in perfect peace, stayed upon God; that his soul may be as a
well-watered garden of the Lord; and that he may prove an
eminent blessing to your families, to the church, and to the
world.
And now may the Lord abundantly bless both pastor and
people, from this day henceforth and for ever ! May the
union formed on earth be perfected in heaven ! May both be
faithful unto death, and then receive a crown of life ! Remem-
ber, my beloved brother, that you succeed a man who has left
his mark on Castlemaine, who has gathered around him the
respect and esteem, not only of this community, but of the
whole religious denomination which he adorns; and my prayer
for you is, that, at the end of a twenty years’ ministry, you
may be esteemed as highly, and be respected as universally, as
your predecessor, whose presence amongst us to-day has
greatly rejoiced us all. Amidst every difficulty and dis-
couragement may you receive solace from the thought that
you labour not for a corruptible crown. Here you may not
receive your full reward; your chief joy will be hereafter.


Instances of usefulness, wisely concealed from you here, will
be revealed to you there. Your converts then will be your
joy and your crown : you will be surrounded with them as a
cloud. Then will you present your company to the Judge ;
and while, in humble attitude, you say, “ Here am I, Lord,
and the children whom Thou hast given me,” holding forth
the crown of life, He will say to you, in accents soft as the
breath of heaven and sweeter than the melody of angels,
“ Well done, good and faithful servant; enter thou into the
joy of thy Lord.”
And now, pastor and people, the earnest prayer of all hearts
here is, “ May the Lord bless you and keep you ! May the
Lord cause His face to shine upon you and be gracious to
you ! May the Lord lift up the light of His countenance upon
you and give you peace ! ” Amen.
In the evening, after tea, a public meeting was held in the
church, at which the Rev. E. Day presided. Congratulatory
addresses were delivered by the Revs. W. Allen, S. Bryant,
A. R. B. M‘Cay, J. King, J. Teague, and other friends. The
happy engagements of the day closed with prayer and the
benediction.






