

Organising Citrus Week, 1923
PAMPHLET No. 8
N. S. W.
Country Promotion League
Citizens’ Organisation, having for its object
the advertising of the resources of the State, and
the promotion of Country Interests generally.
Typical Citrus Week Display 1922—Glenorie District Exhibit.


ORGANISING THE SECOND CITRUS WEEK
The Country Promotion League has
decided to hold the« second annual Citrus
Week in Sydney from July 30 to August
4, inclusive. Organisations in the various
citrus districts throughout the State
have been communicated with, and it is
anticipated that the window displays of
citrus fruits will include some fine ex-
hibits.
Large quantities of fruit are not re-
quired foij the displays, and it has been
suggested that, say, two or three cases
of each variety grown in the district
would be sufficient. At the conclusion of
Citrus Week the fruit in the displays
will be donated to the public hospitals
on behalf of the organisations sending
the exhibits.
COMPETITIONS.
While the district displays will be
non-competitive, and made solely with
the object of advertising the resources
of the various districts, there will be a
competition for the best case of oranges
packed for export, this fruit to be the
product of individual growers. The
League offers three handsome silver tro-
phies for this competition, the rules of
which will be issued very shortly.
It is also proposed to hold other com-
petitions, particulars of which will be
issued in the near future.
CITRUS WEEK AND C.P. WEEK.
The first annual Citrus Week, held in
July last, was a great success. Twenty-
six districts made displays, and the
various localities received fine advertise-
ments. There is, however, much to be
done to obtain the maximum trade for
the industry, and first and foremost, new
markets must be found. Roughly, the
citrus industry in New South Wales is
valued at £500,000 per annum—half the
value of the State’s whole fruit pro-
duction —and while local requirements
might be said to be fully satisfied, the
export trade must be built up, for it is
overseas that we must look for expanded
markets in the future.
In 1921, the Country Promotion
League inaugurated the annual Country
Production Week, and again in February,
1922, and February last, organised win-
dow displays in the city of Sydney of the
products of country districts. These
Country Promotion League’s Citrus
Export Competition, 1922.
First Prize Cup, won by C. McKillop & Sons,
Narromine.
The Second and Third Prize Cups were won
by Mr. R. Tiffin (Leeton) and Mr. T. H. Best
(Mangrove Mountain) respectively.


events were much appreciated by the
districts which sent displays to the
metropolis, not only for the reason that
the country was given opportunities of
showing the primary products to many
thousands of city folk, but because the
exhibits, both directly and indirectly, in-
creased land settlement and brought the
country and the city in closer touch —
the latter a most desirable and necessary
achievement in itself.
February is in many respects admir-
ably suited for Country Production Week,
but does not permit of districts which
produce citrus and other winter fruits
more or less exclusively making dis-
plays of their “wares.” Citrus Week
was, therefore, conceived.
Last year the following districts made
displays during Citrus Week: Arcadia,
Camden (including Orangeville), Dora
Creek, Dubbo, Dungog, Dural, Glenorie,
Gosford District (including Lisarow and
Mangrove Mountain), Griffith, Hawkes-
bury River (Lower Portland), Kulnura
(Wyong District), Martinsville, Narro-
mine, Nepean District (including Emu
Plains and Penrith), Somersby, St. Ives,
Wilberforce, Wingham, Wyong, Yanco,
Hawkesbury College.
EXPORT COMPETITION.
In conjunction with last year’s Citrus
Week, the Country Promotion League
conducted a competition for the best case
of citrus fruit packed for export. There
were twenty-eight competitors, and the
competition proved of great educational
value.
The Council of the League offered
three silver cups as prizes, and at the
request of the Council, Mr. F. Chilton,
of Sydney, kindly undertook to judge
the competition, being assisted by Mr.
R. Arthur (assistant judge). Messrs.
E. E. Herrod (Secretary of the Fruit-
growers’ Association of N.S.W.) and J.
W. Davison (Chairman of the Country
Committee of the Country Promotion
League) acted as stewards.
The prize-winners were: Messrs. G.
McKillop and Sons, Buddah Orchard,
Narromine, Ist; Mr. R. Tiffen, Farm
319, Leeton, 2nd; Mr. T. H. Best, Man-
grove Mountain, via Gosford, 3rd.
THIS YEAR’S CITRUS WEEK.
The Country Promotion League is
anxious to make this year’s Citrus Week,
and the competitions in connection with
it, even more successful than last year’s
event, and the Hon. General Secretary
of the League will be pleased to furnish
any information desired.
Yanco Experiment Farm Citrus Dis
play-1922.


SUBSCRIBE TO
THE COUNTRY JOURNAL
And Also Advise Your
Friends to Do So
PUBLISHED MONTHLY
The Country Journal is devoted to
Country Interests and Rural Develop-
ment, and is the Official Organ of the
Country Promotion League.
Subscription 3/6 per annum,
posted to any address in the
Commonwealth
ADDRESS
3 & 4 Imperial Arcade, SYDNEY
All Communications regarding Citrus Week should be addressed
to the Hon, General Secretary, Country Promotion League, 3 and 4
Imperial Arcade, Sydney.
GODDARD PRINTING COMPANY. 94 OXFORD STREET. SYDNEY.
