

KTH'W
Original Address
WRITTEN BY
FRANCIS H. GRUNDY, ESQ., C.E.,
ON THE OCCASION OF THE
BENEFIT OP CHAS. LASCELLES,
PRINCE OF WALES THEATRE, SYDNEY, NOV,, 1870,
INCLUDING ACCOUNT OP THE
WRECK OF THE ?LIEBELLE,?
And other Stories of Thrilling Interest connected with
his Professional Career.
. ' , Printed at the ?Times ? Steam Works, Maritzbnrg.
-- ? =


*


ORIGINAL ADDRESS.
Hushed are the clamorous voices of the Gods,
Hie Pit complacent bends approving nods,
Parquette, close filled, with silent waiting faces,
Or fidgets, nervous, settling in their places ;
Prom Boxes, too, I?m looked for now, ?tis certain,
I mark it here, peeping behind the curtain ;
Well then ! ring up ! Gods envy me the duty
Which seeks to please this galaxy of beauty ;
Why should I fear ? these boards have been my home
Since twelve years old ! when ? first I learnt to roam.?
How ? not these boards?then other ones so like them
-They look and feel the same and sound so if you strike them ;
But still, I?m troubled now, absurd though it appear,
M ith feelings I?ve been stranger to for many a year ;
Old memories, sights, and sounds flood back on me again,
The crowd confusing my bewildered brain ;
Old memories?but stay! I came here to amuse,
To recapitulate those memories, should ladies choose.
I will be brief, stay not too long before you,
Of all things hateful, I should hate to bore you ;
You?d know it well, had you a troupe to teach,
(support the timid and tone down the screech,
Tor hours perhaps be bullying a chorus ;
Boxed in atjiight with footlight glare before us,
And hear it all again ?? music hath charms ? indeed,
I often long to change them for a stroll and weed !
It?s nice for you seated in judgment here,
lo pour loud plaudits, or damnation drear,
But we ? poor players Mind each word we utter
Means more than fame, it means oar bread and butter !
The critic Pit may by approval give
To some hard-working man the means to live ;
Your frowns sweet ladies may bring tragic ends,
On you the bread of many mouths depends ;
And oh ye Gods ! you of the restless upper,
Your mood means hunger, or an oyster supper.?
Well 1 to resume, at twelve years old I ran away,
Drawing I wished to learn, they wanted me to play,
I as the weaker, hastened to depart


And earn my bread by histrionic art ;
So off to Rochester I bent my weary way
Bent on a great engagement at the Play?
Yes ! and I got it too, ?twould tire to tell the means,
I had my wish, was free, ? Behind the Scenes
Strutted my little hour upon the Stage
As liveried lackey or bedizened page.
?Twas then, so long ago that first I met
Your friend, I hope, mine surely?J. Bartlett ;
Acquaintance thus begun?He saw me there
? Protest before high heaven,? and ere
The theatre he left, he swore that he
His future on the Stage would throw, like me.
He kept his word, and ever since has been
The favoured actor whom you?ve often seen?
?Tis a coincidence, I think, you?ll all allow,
I see him ? back at Rochester ? e?en now.
Wearied at length, I sought a wider walk,
Crossed the Atlantic, went to great New York,
Found an engagement under Wallack?s care,
An understrapper long sought fortune there ;
The jade misled me, let me tell you how?
I had neglected Music long, but now
In course of time there came a special part
A walking gentleman?must have the art
To play Piano, and to Sing a Song !
Long sought the Manager, but not among
His various caste, could he cast any one
Could do this feat which haply must be done ;
Now modesty has always kept before my way
How high I?d rise without it, who can say !
My courage here I desperate tried to string:
? Please, Sir,? I said, ? I can both play and sing.?
Immortal Wallack eyed me with a start,
? Stage Manager,? he shouted, ? cast this man this part.?
I played it, brought the astonished audience down,
Gained for myself some temp?rary renown,
And gained besides my conge from the corps.
Mad jealousy was roused, as oft before ;
A great Comedian was to make a hit,
And Editors ignored him ; not a bit
Of praise got he, whilst poor inferior I
Was written up by all of them sky high !
Then in disgust, I packed up all my goods,
And started savage for the far backwoods ;
Worked my new cast with squatter?s life before me,?
And here, while sawing wood, great Anna Bishop saw mo,
Heard me, engaged me, ridiculed my fears?


I travelled with her then for full six years.
Success went with us, as indeed it must do
With such a genius as hers to trust to ;
Through the broad lands of Stars and Stripes we sang,
At length in Mexico our music rang.
Land of bright and sunny skies,
Where loves light and silken ties,
Graceful dance and sparkling mirth
To fatal feuds so soon give birth ;
Costumes gay and debonnaire
Over treach?rous hearts you wear,
Lords it with a fatal power
Every passion of the hour.
I have stories at command
Of that wild voluptuous land,
Could fill a volume, fill it well,
Leaving half my tales to tell.
Well I mind our Muleteer,
When to Brazos drawing near,
Hearing troops were out that way
Dropping on his knees to pray ;
Then with white and trembling face,
Bolting at his fastest pace,
While the Federal troops pass by
Questioning Madame and I!
Marching then o?er stream and hollow
Patiently our guards we follow,
Whilst to make our journey pleasant,
Rebel soldier, warlike peasant,
Prom distant mound and high grown grass
Pot-shot at us as we pass.
How, en route from Metamoras,
Montenay, the gaol before us,
Weather threatening, dark and drear,
Nothing like protection near,
How our ambulance upsetting,
Wearied out, and Madame fretting.
We surrounded were and mobbed
By Native Mexicans, who robbed
Each of all they could collect ;
Retiring, left us to reflect
Why our toil of voice and hands
Should but enrich these Mexicans.
How next from Monteray we go,
Straightway on to Mexico,
When as on our way we rode
We met this startling episode.


Distressed by travel, and the noonday heat,
Ourselves, our horses, scarce could keep our feet,
As lazily we lagged along our weary way,
Towards where the site of a lone village lay ;
? Muertes ? its name, we learnt, with bated breath,
A village for the living* yet named ? Death !?
Like death it lay, silent in long repose,
Till sudden rose wild wailings, cries as those
Of women broken-hearted ; then indeed
We put our jaded horses to their speed.
Nearing the village soon, we saw around
The mournful cross, raised on its little mound,
Turned with its face towards the setting sun,
Which marks the spot of recent murder done.
We entered ; from each cot came toddling babies out,
While weeping women silent stood about ;
One man there was, one man with vacant stare,
Bent grey and withered, but one man was there ;
Why he was left no reason we could gain,
The wild Comanches his brethren all had slain ;
With direst malice murdered every male
And left a town of widows to bewail
A lot so sad ; as yet we ne?er have known
The fate of those left widowed and alone.
Despoiled ourselves, we nothing here could do,
So left the village, left it gladly too ;
For if to gentle kindness we gave way,
?Tis very like we ne?er had got away.
We left, and as we crowned a neighbouring height,
Of dread Comanches two hundred came in sight;
Before, behind, around us they were seen,
They were two hundred we were but fourteen
Without a weapon ; it may well be said
That each and all resigned themselves for dead:
Shook hands in silence, silence never broken ;
Each breathed a prayer, but not one word was. spoken
A council now the Indians seemed to call,
Attended by their warriors, one and all ;
They kept us waiting there for near an hour,
I know I fast was losing every thought and power,
When by some whim or fancy, who shall say,
They left us suddenly, to go our way.
Pain would I ever varying stories tell
Which on our wandering way our camp befell ;
How at Monteray, where some time we stayed,
An intimate acquaintance I had shortly made
With Lopez, General of Imperial fame,


He who betrayed his monarch* and obtained a name
Famous or infamous, which shall I say of him,
I knew him well, so think you what you may of him ;
A handsome man was he and well I ween,
A wife he had of presence like a queen ;
And courteous too, of music fond enough,
And always pleased with poor old ?Robin Rough.?
But time progressing, all our dangers past,
In California we arrived at last ;
There we ? struck ile ? indeed, and tarried long,
Gold was so plenteous, we bought it with a song.
But gold won?t last for ever, that is sadly clear,
Our theatres don?t always pay us even here.
Off to the Sandwich Isles we next took ship,
By the first steamer on her trial trip ;
Had I but space to illustrate my lays
I have such stories of those pleasant days ;
But I must try my best to make my story short,
Already its much longer than I thought ;
Impatient, see, they grow behind the scenes,
Altho? I hav?nt finished yet by any means.
To China next, we turned our wandering faces,
And in a Bremen barque there bound, we took our places ;
That barque was worse than any bite to me,
We nearly ended our existence, out upon that sea,
We lost our all, a little all ?tis true,
But little things are precious often, e?en tho? few ;
Black night, and blowing hard with driving rain,
The Barque goes blindly on with constant groan and strain
A nasty night, a night on which to pray
For loved ones facing danger far away !
Crash on a Coral reef we?re lifted liked a feather,
Crash like the grinding of two worlds together,
Terror, astonishment ! the bravest sailor shook ;
Chaos ! of which my brain I know partook.
Oh ! vaunted bravery 1 Oh ! ? Calmness of despair ! ?
I only know I saw no calmness there ;
Bewildered all, most stupified with fear,
Ho hand at first was strong, no brain was clear,
On the black darkness no commands arise
But incoherent shouts or feeble cries ;
?Twas only nine o?clock, a long dread night,
Ah ! who could hope to see to-morrow?s light,
As on the yielding deck we blindly lay,
Blinded by tears, good friends, as much as spray,
*Haximillian.


Lashed to each other and the ship by ropes
On which now centered our enfeebled hopes ;
But Providence was kind, we saw the morning light,
The small ship?s boat was landed in a bight,
With sailors in her, aye, for now again
With hope and daylight, Cowards became men ;
These made a line fast to a log on shore,
And one by one we safely scrambled o?er ;
That shore a weary waste of rock and sand
(?Twere mockery to call that wilderness the land),
And yet it saved us from devouring waves,
Tho? only as we thought to hold our graves.
Three weeks we dwelt in that depot of dirt,
I had my browsers left, and one red shirt
For use?for ornament?Ladies I now am dressed in
The jewellery I saved?this diamond breast pin !
And it I almost lost on that confounded shore,
A land crab carried it for fifty yards or more.
A fact! I was for hours down upon hand and knee
Before my precious treasure I could once more see.
Some few provisions, fresh water from the ship
(On that wild place we found none, every lip
Drank from that one uncertain source
At any time a failing one for us of course).
And we caught fish, kiiled birds, and dried them in the sun
So when of this coarse food enough was done,
We took our boats and left that barren shore,
Which I ne?er wish to see or hear of more.
We had two boats ?the captain with nine men in all
Sailed first together in the old ship?s yawl ;
We followed fast?with us four ladies came,
Madame, the only one whom I need name.
Few words we spoke?asked but which way to steer,
Lay waiting then a moment?gave one ringing cheer,
Looked once at our prison, which gladly we parted,
One cheer more between us, and slowly we started.
We separated soon, we could not keep together
With boats so frail, at mercy of the weather ;
Only, with straining eye and aching heart
Each sadly watched their friends depart.
Drifting, as silently we past our day,
Drifting afar from us, so far away,
Till strain our eyeballs, as strain we might,
Our old friends drifted out of our sight;
Left naught but sea?s perpetual motion,
Ourselves a speck on the heaving ocean.
We never saw that yawl again,
Ne?er heard of Captain, ne?er of men?


That boat was never heard of more ;
Their tortures now have long been o?er.
But ah ! such tortures ! there they lay,
Night after night, day after day,
By cannibal thoughts their minds oppressed,
Tortured by thirst, by the want of rest,
Drinking salt-water and going mad,
Scenes of horror, crimes so bad
We shudder to think on. Death following fast,
Leaves one raving maniac, left till the last ;
Tearing his hair, glassed eyes staring wide,
The sea birds devouring his friends at his side,
While a mocking sea devil keeps tempting him down,
Till he throws himself on to her bosom to drown !
One moment, one ripple, mark the place of his fall;
The treacherous sun smiling down on it all.
I can trace it no further ! my overtaxed powers
Burn the thought to my brain. That fate might have been ours !
Fourteen days we remained at sea,
Fourteen days of misery ;
Fourteen days we remained afloat,
Fourteen days in that open boat;
Fourteen days always soaked to the skin,
Wet without?so dry within ;
Fourteen days not knowing where we might be,
Fourteen days mental agony ;
Fourteen days into one posture pressed !
Fourteen days? torture for want of rest!
Enough ! a good Providence sailed with us then,
We lost not one soul?alas ! those poor men !
One morning, before our bedazzled eyes,
A glorious island seems slowly to rise ;
In brief (I fear more than enough has been said)
The island of Guam that day we made.
We were carried on shore?how to walk we?d no notion
Our limbs had forgotten progressive motion,
And were swollen to such an extent, by the way,
We knew nothing of walking for many a day. ?
Glorious to dry, and to wash, and to dress ourselves,
Tho? never a penny wherewith we could bless ourselves.
A month like heaven here we seemed to spend,
A month too quickly coming to an end.
Lucky was I, for at my finger ends,
I held the art of pencils and of pens ;
Could take a likeness, pretty good, I think,
Or draw a funny sketch in pen and ink.
These little talents took a happy turn,


I managed thus one hundred pounds to earn,
Whilst staying there at Guam ; but our time was spent
And we must go?and whither next we went,
Ladies and gentlemen, you all, I?m sure must know.
Bounteous Australia?s hand stretched to us ; so
Melbourne beheld us next, where let me say
I have made hosts of friends, and hold them to this day ;
And Sydney next, dear Sydney, I adore you !
I ne?er have seen a place to place before you.
My story?s nearly done ; behold me here
Kind friends, hosts hospitable, ladies very dear,
My life has been adventurous, but how e?re it ends,
I never shall forget old Sydney ! nor old friends !
Too much of kindness, courteous, kindness too,
I have received good friends from all of you ! !
Ladies I?ve done?Stay, one thing more I?ll say,
(Long since I should have stopped and gone away)
Give me your voices, kindly clap your hands,
?Twill solace many a weary day in many distant lands.
Ah ! but I may not leave you yet, perhaps, I may be here,
With your old heroine Madame Bishop, in about a year,
And when you shower your honors on her breast,
Remember poor Lascelles has done his best;
Genius like hers, may not within him lurk,
Yet heart and soul at least are in his work.
Printed by Vause, Slatter & 00., at their Steam Printing Works, Maritzhurg.


r
? . hysA.
I
.


?
