

Origin
OF THE
Name of Blaxland


Origin
OF THE
Name of Blaxland
(COPIED.)
SjJ&ntE:
TURNER & H .xDERSON-
-1890.




Origin of the Name of Blaxland.
f T A HE name of Blaxland means hereditary land.
ln ancient times there were various ways
of spelling it, such as —Bocheland, Bochland,
Blokysland, Blakysland, until the modern spelling
“ Blaxland ” was retained. There are still three
manors of “ Blaxland'’ in Kent, besides an estate
still called “ Blaxland,” which was alienated by
one of the family to Henry VIII., and where he
began to build “ The Court Lodge,” which was
finished by Elizabeth, and often visited by Her
Majesty and her court. With Richard at the
Crusades, the name of Reginald de Blaxland is
among those who received honors and rewards
from the lion-hearted king. When Queen
Elizabeth was in bondage under Mary Tudor,
John Blaxland was captain of her guard. The
Eagle of Hengist was on the shield of his fathers,
and is still the ensignia of his family. The
second head, as that of the Plantagenets (hence


the royal colours), together with Gouttes de sang,
being “ the augmentation of arms ” conferred on
Reginald de Blakisland, by Richard, on the Field
of Acre, A.D. 1191 (see in the British Museum
“ Red Book of Canterbury,” or, “ Regist. Chart.
St. Angus,” and other ancient chronicles). The
lion’s gamb, in the ducal coronet, comes from
Geoffory de Sandal, Chancellor of Exchequer,
and Chancellor of England in the 4th year of
Edward 11. He was also Bishop of Winchester
(see Holingshead’s Chronicler). He married
Elizabeth Blaxland in 1660—Blaxland and
Sandwell Arms quartered ; Blaxland-dexter—
Vert, a fess between three falcons’ heads erminois.
Crest—an eagle displayed, two heads proper,
goutte de sang. Sandwell sinister— Gules, a fess,
the upper part embattled between three roses
Argent. Crest—a lion’s gamb, erect, erased
gules enfiled with ducal coronet erm.
His antecedents are unquestionable. His
family is mentioned in the most ancient histories
of England, and always with honor.
His ancestor was one of the suite of Ethelbert,
the Saxon king, when he received St. Augustine,


dftc Be*.
hJuPU#t /.wtnf
p
A.D. 597, and who stood by the king at his
baptism.
He may be said to have opened the gates of
the Church of Kent, for he (John Blaxland,
of Blaxland Towers) on the first meeting of that
grand reception presented St. Augustine with a
grant of land for the future abbey, called St.
Augustine, the first missionary home in Britain.
Part of the ruins of the abbey still remain,
which are very beautiful, and on the site stands
the present abbey of St. Augustine, still the
home from which all the missionaries are
supplied of our faith, which has filled the world
with the knowledge of God as the waters cover
the sea.
The Blaxlands were possessors of nearly all
the Isle of Thanet, in the days of King
Ethelbert and Queen Bertha, which was after-
wards subdivided by the tyranny
of William the Conqueror. In many of the old
churches there, and in other parts of Kent, their
memorials remain, and always in the chancel.
They were men and women of Kent. John
Blaxland was Captain of the Guard of Queen


Elizabeth when she was a captive princess at
Kensington, under Mary Tudor. He married
Elizabeth Lowen, daughter of John Lowen the
poet, who was with Beaumont and Fletcher (of
the intellectual coterie of Shakespeare) at the
celebrated White Heart Tavern.
The last Court Baron, held in England, was
held at Sturry Court by the grandfather of John
Blaxland, which court had the power of life and
death. John Blaxland, Esquire, of Newington,
head of the Blaxland House, who came out to
Australia in 1806, was born in 1769, at Fordwich,
Kent, his family home being a mansion restored on
the ruins which had been the summer palace of
St. Augustine. His father dying suddenly, without
a will, the possessions were therefore his, when
he had to leave college, though very young, and
enter into the management of his family affairs.
He took up his residence at Newington, called
“ The Hall ” (formerly a rectory), to which was
attached the great Tythes of St. Nicholas, an
immense possession which had been in the family
for ages. He had also a part of Hartlip, and a
valuable portion of the Romney Marshes.


The family church seat was in Canterbury
Cathedral, under the coat of mail of Edward
the Black Prince.
The Blaxlands were always more or less mixed
up in church matters, having much to do with
them in the County of Kent.
“John Blaxland,” the head of the Blaxland
house, was, as I said, born in 1769. He had
three brothers, Christopher, Samuel and Gregory,
the youngest, who was born some months after
his father’s death. Samuel, the eldest of the
three, was considered to be so like the Duke
of Wellington that the Guards often did him
the honour by mistake in the absence of the
Duke. He was a rich merchant at Antwerp, but
during Napoleon’s success was taken prisoner
by Napoleon and his property confiscated.
He was a prisoner of war for seven years,
together with a Colonel Ainsley (afterwards
Lord Valentia). The two made their escape
together at last in a fishing smack across
the English Channel to Dover. John Blaxland
was considered to be one of the handsomest men
of his day, and was known as the “ handsome


aJ ft Cr &
■Aid-


cousin John, and as they were great friends they
often went out hunting together.
The Dutch family “ Gavers,” one of the highest
families, were related to him, and always held
high positions at the Dutch Court. Field-
Marshal Von Gavers, the Ambassador of
Holland, followed the Duke of Wellington’s
funeral as the representative of that country.
His niece, Maria Blaxland, married Captain
Gillespie of the 16th Light Dragoons, whose
fatherwas John Gillespie,the “ Hereof Rangoon.”
He was also related to Baron Don op, and many
other families of good name and standing.
There were the Blaxlands of Graveny Court,
whose eagle was jessed and belled; and Henry
Blaxland had his hounds and hunters. This family
kept packs of hounds for a period of 200 years.
Luddenham Court and Fordwich were two
estates that belonged to the family. John
Blaxland, of Newington Hall, married in Kent
at the early age of twenty-one, Miss Davies, who
died after the birth of her infant, which died also.
Some years elapsed when he married Harriott
Marquet, only daughter of John de Marquet,


formerly an officer of the Guard du Corps of
Louis XVI. Her mother, Elizabeth Carter,
adopted child of Colonel and Mrs. White, who,
being in command of the staff going out with
Warren Hastings in the “ Duke of Grafton "
(she being a great favourite with the Governor
and his wife the Baroness), she lived in the
Palace of Madras after her marriage with “John
Louis de Marquet,” where she gave birth to her
daughter “ Harriott." Warren Hastings and
the Baroness were her sponsors, who often
bestowed rich presents such as a necklace of
beautiful pearls, an Indian shawl, &c., &c.
John Blaxland, of Blaxland Towers, or de
Block-is-land, a name mentioned in the old
chronicles as far back as when St. Augustine
came to England and was received by Ethelbert
and Bertha, the first Christian king and queen in
England’s history.
*lßß7.—From the news of the day:—Our cable-
grams this morning announce the death of the
Hon. Beresford Hope. From “ Men of the Time"
* Copied by A. F. Walker from the Sydney Morning Herald
of 1887, this paragraph.


we take the following account: “Hope, Alexander
James Beresford Beresford, M.P., L.L.D.,
youngest son of the late Thomas Hope, Esq.,
of Deepdene, Surrey (author of ‘Anastasius’),
by Louisa Beresford, daughter of Lord Decies,
Archbishop of Tuam, who married as her second
husband the late Viscount Beresford, G.C.8., born
in 1820, was educated at Harrow and at Trinity
College, Cambridge, where he graduated B.A. in
1841. He was one of the earliest graduates, and
president of the Cambridge Camden Society
(afterwards the Ecclesiological), and has taken
an active part in the church movement, and in
artistic and architectural questions as an avowed
partisan of the Gothic side. He purchased in
1844 the ancient buildings of St. Augustine’s
Abbey, in Canterbury, as a college for missionary
clergy, and was president of the Royal Institute
of British Architects from 1865 to 1867.”
The Blaxlands were the oldest inhabitants of
the Isle of Thanet, which was their possession
before the Norman Conquest, and in one of the
very oldest churches there (Minster Church)
several marble slabs are to be seen down the


aisle of the church with their effigies and
inscriptions.
The Blaxlands, as I said, possessed nearly the
whole of the Isle of Thanet, besides the three
manors of Blaxland, which still retain the name,
also Sturry Court and Luddenham Court; he
must have been Earldormen, or Earl, as in those
days the possession of land constituted nobility.
Barrow House, in Somersetshire, was Mrs.
Blaxland’s possession by right.
When John Blaxland (a descendent of this
family) left England for Australia, in the year
1807, he did so at the earnest entreaties of Lords
Castlereagh, Sydney, Sir Joseph Banks, and
other noblemen, after three years’ consideration,
when he sold his ancient estates in Kent,
which gave him £6,000 a year. He built two
ships at his own expense ; the first was freighted
with every necessary and comfort for his
youngest brother, “ Gregory,” who he sent two
years before his departure to his estate called
Brush Farm, on the banks of the Parramatta
River. He (Gregory) afterwards discovered,
through his intrepidity with, or in the company


of, Mr. William Wentworth and Lieutenant
Lawson, the famous pass over the Blue
Mountains, which was the saving of the colony.
When John Blaxland, Esquire, built his second
vessel, he took with him all necessaries to last
for two years, besides all kinds of grain for
cultivation, sheep and stock, &c., also his wife
and children, governess, farm servants, and set
sail under a convoy of five-and-twenty sail, and
after a voyage of nine months reached Port
Jackson.
Before leaving, he was promised (the first
moneyed gentleman of good standing in England,
would go to Australia and help to support
Government or Government measures) his pick
of any land in any part, and as much as he chose to
select, also his choice of the best servants and
artisans of all kinds. Governor Bligh, within
a few days after his arrival, seized his ship,
saying the colony was in a state of famine, and
sold his provisions above prime cost before his
eyes, which so exasperated him that he set sail
for England, and represented the treatment he
received, for which the Government made some


amends by granting and instead of
receiving the best of the servants —as he was
promised on leaving England—he was thwarted
in every way; but he was prosperous, and in
time had 90,000 sheep—lo,ooo at Gammon
Plains, 11,000 at Liverpool Plains, &c., and he
established the first saltworks, on the banks of
the Parramatta River, which was a great success ;
also, the handsome residence of Newington (his
dwelling), and, a quarter of a mile distant, the
little church of St. Augustine, where his clerk,
during leisure hours, taught the children of his
farm servants and any children in the neighbour-
hood, gratis. Thus his ancestors helped in the
commencement of England's history to plant the
Church of England, and his descendant did the
same in Australia, and it is through his large-
hearted generosity with his own private means
that he did so much good, and his example has
been carried out by the ministers of this colony
(to their praise be it said) by aid of the revenue
for public schools.
Gregory Blaxland, Esq., came to assist his
brother to carry out all kinds of industries to see


what the colony was capable of producing, and
on his way he bought vines at the Cape, thus
establishing a vineyard. He made the first wine
which was sent to England for which he received
the gold and silver medal in 1823. He also
introduced the valuable couch grass which he
also brought from the Cape.
Arthur Blaxland, the youngest son of John
Blaxland, Esq., of Newington, Parramatta River,
who resided on his estate of Fordwich, built the
little church at Broke at his own expense which
has since been rebuilt. He also gave the burial
ground belonging to the church which formed
part of Fordwich in which he now lies.
Copied and written by A. F. W. through her
aunt Louisa Australia Blaxland.


