





ORMOND;
OR
THE DEBAUCHEE .
CHAP. I.
INTRODUCTION
The writers of most modern novels have
seldom any other view than to gratify [?]
passions of their readers; they have no
idea of improving the mind, and, conse-
quently, every sentiment of that nature
is Completely out of the scope of their
consideration. Careless as to the ef-
fects which may be produced in others
VOL. I. B


by their publications, they only cal-
culate on the consequences to them-
selves ; and a little notoriety, with a
good share of profit, is esteemed a
counterbalance for the contamination
of perhaps some thousands of their
fellow creatures. It is on this account*
that novels are now-a-days so much
decried ; since, to be a novel reader
and a vicious character are becoming
daily more and more synonymous;
and this is not so much to be wondered
at when we recollect the materials
of which the novels of this day are
chiefly composed Romantic tales which
can answer no other purpose than to
awaken a curiosity of far from a laud-
able nature; and marvellous love
stories, which insinuate the subtle
poison of mental seduction, especially
into the' readers of the fair sex, slnd
thus pave the way for wantonriess and
misery. It appears a very general
rule to make the hero of the piece


even if he be a despicable character,
a being nearly allied to perfection in
external graces, and thus vice is made
to assume an amiable appearance to
the reader ; and this mode of delinea-
tion argues a great defect either in the
ability, the judgment, or the principles
of the author.
Thus it appears then that there is a
fault in the novels of the present day,
since they have a greater tendency to
Corrupt than to improve the minds of
those who read them. It is not pre-
tended, that the following pages will
be dictated by a happier talent, than
has given birth to the productions of
contemporary writers ; but it will be
the careful endeavour of the author
to depict virtue in it sprimeval loveli-
ness, vice in its native deformity. At
the same time, the pictures which will
be drawn in the course of the work
will be made as true to nature as pos-
B 2


sible; or at least to those perversions
of nature to which the fashionables of
our day have habituated themselves. A
most elegant moralist (Addisson) has de-
signated the generality of novels and ro-
mances, “ inflamers of women’s blood;”
but an attempt will be made in the
subsequent pages rather to excite in-
dignation and disgust at pieces of vi-
cious depravity, than to make them
the means of seducing others. How
far the author may succeed in his pro-
ject will be seen in the sequel ; in the
mean time he thinks it proper to inform
his readers that they must not look
for marvellous adventures, since the
scenes pourtrayed will probably favor
more of fashionable life and manners,
than of the wonderful. If, after this
friendly caution, those who peruse the
book should suffer themselves to be
disappointed, the writer intreats that
they will acquit him of any blame,
and attribute the disappointment to


I the exuberant expectations of a fancy
overheated by the perusal of mor
glowing publications; and,consequentb
less capable of relishing dispassionate
seasoning, and receiving instruction
from events which are not only within
the compass of probability, but are
actually and daily occurring.
The design of the author is to repre-
sent a youngman, naturally virtuous,
?n snared by the follies, and allurec
ie temptations of London from
he path oi rectitude, and sinking gra-
lually into all the excesses and &de-
►aucheries of fashionable life: and, if
18 s^,a ll succeed in rendering such
ices as he may pourtray odious and
ideous ; and in making the progress
f his hero a dreadful example to
thers, he will be amply satisfied with
is labours, and his novel may here-
fter be entitled to a higher place in
ie public consideration, than the <» e .


ncrality of such works are destined to
fill.
Thus much will suffice for the in-
troduction, in which, it is hoped, there
is nothing for the critic to dissect, or
the amateur in novel reading to cavil
at; and, without further ceremony,
the author begs permission to introduce
his reader to some of the characters
who \till become the principal actors
in the subsequent scenes.


CHAP. II.
A Domestic Party.
It was at the close of a winter’s
day, when the family of the Trewbys
had assembled round a cheerful fire,
with a few friends, to forget the incle-
mencies of the season, and spend a so-
cial evening together. Trewby Hall
was situated in the vicinity of Chelms-
ford, a small town within thirty
miles of the metropolis, on an emi-
nence which overlooked a considerable
extent of country ; and within about
two hundred yards of the ruins of the
once noble mansion of the Rough mays;
a dwelling which from being one of
the most elegant that can be conceived


was now desolate, forsaken, and dila-
pidated, the abode of reptiles and t|ie
night bird, deserted by its owners,
and unnatural to mankind, The
party consisted of Mr. and Mrs,
i row by, anti their two sons, Henry
and Ormond, with the Curate of
Chelmsford, Mr. Cailham, Mrs. and
Miss Moody who was the intended
bride of Ormond Trewby, But it will
fce entertaining to give the reader a
description of these characters, some
of which will be frequently introduced
into the sequel.
Mr. Trewby was a man of educa-
tion ; he had been originally a Ham-
burgh merchant; and was once ac-
counted the most opulent man in the
metropolis ; but numerous losses, and
particularly the failure of a bank in
which he had deposited about ninety
thousand pounds, had pressed upon
him, and induced him to come to a
resolution to dispose of his concern.


and retire with the remnant of his
property, which was still very con-
siderable, and his family to Trewby
Hall, which he purchased for that pur-
pose. To an accurate knowledge of
mankind, this gentleman united in
himself a considerable degree of infor-
mation in literary and scientific sub-
jects. His moments of leisure from
the arduous employments of business,
had not been spent in indolence ; but
his prudent judgment led him to im-
prove those abilities which nature and
education had given to him. His dis-
position, naturally amiable, had been
somewhat soured by the vexations and
perplexities of business, but had now
in retirement, returned to its former
goodness : his manners were attractive;
and his countenance prepossessing. In
the company of a few choice friends,
whom he had selected from a nume-
rous acquaintance, he had learnt to
u 5


appreciate, duly, the sweets of a rural
life; and, while his days were spent
in reading and rational amusements,
the return of evening brought the
pleasures of domestic intercourse and
the conversations of those he loved.
Such employments may in the opinion
of numbers, savour more of dullness
than amusement; and betray the
absence rather than the presence of
taste; but Mr. Trewby had, from
experience, learnt how 7 to place a right
value on those gratifications which are
too refined for the comprehension of
men of com mom habits and common
understanding. Ilis wife, from an
union of thirty years, had become the
very counterpart of her husband ; and
as she had formerly participated in
his troubles, and soothed him under
vexations, she was now become the
invaluable partner of his retirement.
“♦The world forgotten, by the world
forgot,” they lived happy and res-


pectecl within their private circle ;
distributing comfort to the deserving
objects of charity who surrounded
them; and thus promoting their own
happiness by bestowing consolation on
others. Their union had produced
two sons and a daughter, the latter of
whom died in her infancy. Henry,
the eldest son, was designed for a mer-
cantile life, and Ormond for the law ;
the former was now in the twenty-
first, the latter in the eighteenth, years
of their ages. Henry was active, in-
dustrious, prudent, and persevering:
he had profited by the maxims which
his father had taken considerable pains
to inculcate, and promised to reflect ho-
nor on his profession: his disposition was
the exact similitude of his father’s, and
his acquaintance was sought after by
the most respectable classes of society.
Ormond also was active, and natu-
rally of a good disposition ; but the
respect which had been >shewn to him,


as the -son of an eminent merchant,
had given rise to ideas of self-supe-
riority which diminished the native
fairness of his character. He had be-
come somewhat imperious in his man-
ners, and hasty in his temper: and the
consequence was, those who would
otherwise have felt prQ.ud~in his ac-
quaintance, now drew back and re-
ceived his advances with the coolness
of reserve. His disposition was also
much inclined to gaiety; and, in pur-
suit of his passion after pleasure, he
had formed an acquaintance with
some young men of loose character
and little principle ; but as they all
concurred to flatter Ormond, and to
promote his gratifications, they soon
ingratiated themselves into his favor
and friendship ; and by this associa-
tion that tinge was given to his senti-
ments which was never afterwards
eradicated. Henry and Ormond had
hot h been exercised in their intended


professions, and, in a few days they
were about to repair to the metropo-
lis to engage more seriously in their
respective pursuits.
Mr. Harden, the curate of Chelms-
ford, was a man of respectable ap-
pearance, and his character was in
considerable estimation in the neigh-
bourhood. He was, however, more
addicted to politics and fishing than
to the intense duties of his avocation;
and his social qualities were supposed
to be equal, if not superior, to his
ministerial abilities. Be it as it may,
his society was much sought after,
and he was generally the first at a
feast, and the last in a fray. His in-
timacy with Mr. Trewby, was in con-
sequence of the latter having visited
the church in which Mr. Harden offi-
ciated, after which the clergyman took
an early opportunity Jo introduce
himself at Trewby Hall ; his recep-
tion being polite, lie had become sub -


sequently, a regular visitor ; for al-
though Mr. Trewby felt no particular
veneration for his character, he encou-
raged his visits because he found him
a social companion, and a good part-
ner at quadrillet, a game at which he
considered himself a proficient.
The next person in the groupe was
a Mr. Cailham, a new acquaintance
made by Ormond, one of the young
men before alluded to, and now for
the first time introduced at his father’s
mansion. I his young man was the
son of a silversmith, and held a situ-
ation at the depot, which entitled
him to rank with company superior
to himself; and as lie was well versed
in all the wily arts of flattery, he
was never backward to fawn, where
he hoped to reap advantage from
servility. He had by some
such conduct as this to ingratiate him-
self into the favour of Ory ond Trew-
by, and was this evening invited to


Trewby Hall. The old gentleman
welcomed the stranger as his son’s
guest, and entertained him with his
usual politeness; whilst, at the same
time, he examined him with a scruti-
nizing eye. His appearance was far
from, prepossessing: his figure was
awkward and his gait vulgar : his
visage dark, and his features coarse—
his complexion bloated, liis sight de-
fective, his voice coarse and thick,
and his speech rapid and inelegant.
In addition to these blemishes, his
dress was filthy and slovenly; and his
tout ensemble the very reverse of any
thins attractive. Such was Mr. Cail-
ham in appearance his character
was equally forbidding; bred up un-
der a father versed in hypocrisy,
knavery, and cunning, he had re-
ceived early impressions of the vices
of his sire, and at the age of twenty-
five was a complete adept in every
criminal pursuit which could disgrace


mankind. Besides all these defects lie
had from his earliest reason entertain-
ed a high opinion of his own talents
and had accustomed himself to look
down upon those who were in the
least inferior to himself in point of
dress, for none could he inferior in
any other particular, with the utmost
contempt. His passions were uneon-
troulable, ano. many reports had been
circulated of his having committed
crimes, tor which others, who had
less money for accommodation than
himself had suffered punishment and
ignominy.
Mrs. Moody was a neighbour, and
the only visitor with whom Mr.
frewby’s family might be said to be
on terms of intimacy. She was the
w idow ot a merchant with whom Mr.
Trew by was on the most friendly foot-
ing ; and as he, on his death bed, ex-
pressed a wish for a closer union be-
tween the families, the amiable Julia


tv as destined by the parents to become
the 4 future bride of Ormond. ’ Mrs.
Moody was a woman who had seen
much trouble—she had suffered se-
verely from the stroke of misfortune ;
having lost three sons, after they had
reached the years of maturity, and
promised fair to become a honour to
their country, and a consolation to
their parent’s declining years. These
sorrows, added to the more severe one,
of the loss of her beloved partner,
weighed heavily on her spirits, and it
was feared would one day prove fatal
to her. She was a woman of amiable
disposition and manners, and looked
forward with a mother’s anxietyto the
consummation of her last hopes, in
the union of her daughter with Or-
mond Trewby. Julia was a lovely
girl; her form was elegant, her eyes
blue and full of expression, her cheeks
tinged with the roses of health, and
her deportment graceful. Her dispo-


sition was not inferior to her external
appearance, and the accomplishments
of her mind rendered her a treasure
inestimably precious. Nor was Or-
mond insensible to her charms; their
frequent intercourses had not passed
ineiFectually ; a mutual ahection was
apparently ripening in their youthful
bosoms; and the wishes of their fond
parents were thus crowned with suc-
cess.
Such was the party assembled at
Mr. Trewby’s to spend the evening.
Mr. and Mrs. Trewby, Mr. Harden,
and Mrs. Moody made up a party at
quadrille, while the younger part of
the company engaged in a similar
amusement, until the hour of separa-
tion.


CHAP. III.
A Father's Advice; and an Accident.
Early the following morning, Mi\
and Mrs. Trewby and their sons met
together at the breakfast table, and
after the meal was concluded, the old
gentleman requested the attendance of
the latter in his study, where he ad-
dressed them to the following effect:
“ My dear sons —The period of
your stay with me becomes shorter
daily, and before another week will
have elapsed, I shall be deprived of
your presence, and you w ill be removed
out of the reach of my immediate
care. It is a moment full of painful


anxiety to me, and fraught with im-
portance to yourselves ; since, on your
conduct at this your outset as it were,
into the world, depend your future
prosperity of circumstances, and con-
tentment of mind. You are about to
enter upon the great theatre of life,
and 1 trust you have well studied the
parts you are expected to perform. It
is no trifling affair for a young man to
leave the watchful eye of his parents,and
to emerge into the busy scenes of a me-
tropolis, which affords equal sources of
gratification to the industrious and
the profligate. You are as yet igno-
rant of mankind : you have to learn
that important study which must
give you an insight into human na-
ture ; and, believe me, the task which
is before you is dangerous and difficult.
Many who have gone before you have
perished for want of this knowledge ;
their fate should be a warning to you ;
and let me beseech you always to


bear this maxim in your minds—
never to act for yourselves until you
shall have learnt to think correctly,
and to discriminate justly. You will
find in the place whither you are
about to depart, a number of de-
signing persons who make it their
business to entrap the unwary stranger,
and to plunder him by a variety of
artifices. Be always on your guard
against these men, who subsist by
their depredations on their fellow-
creatures ; they are numerous and vi-
gilant, infesting every place of public
resort, the corners of streets, and the
avenues to the city. Above all things
beware of gaming; for by an attach-
ment to this single vice have 1 known
a nobleman robbed in one hour of his
property, his expectations, and his
honour: I have witnessed a person* so
infatuated with this putsuij; as to
barter his all upon a single throw, and
when lie has lost the stake, would


willingly have rushed to destruction
in order to bury the recollection of his
folly. You may easily perceive, then,
the enormity of a crime which is fol-
lowed by such baleful consequences ;
and, believe me, it is better to die
prematurely with a virtuous reputa-
tion, than to dragon a protracted ex-
istence, branded with the name and
infamy of a gamester.
“ You, my dear Henry, are in-
tended to till a situation of great trust;
where not only integrity, but the most
unremitting industry is required at
your hands. 1 shall confide you to an
old and tried friend, to one who will
watch over your private interests with
a father’s eye ; your actions will, I
have no doubt, be such as to reward
his care ; and the satisfaction will then
be mutual. He will be gratified to
perceive your attention to his advice,
and your steady course in the path of
rectitude; and you will feel that in*


expressible delight which will ever
arise from a consciousness of having
O
done your duty. Your fancy, lam
aware, has been inflated with the ideas
of the wealth which is to be acquired
in the metropolis ; but you have to
learn, that it is only to be gained by
continual and arduous exertion. In
the metropolis, there is a wider scope
lor industry than any where else, and
unless your application is proportioned
to the enlargement of the sphere in
which you will be called upon to act,
you will expect riches in vain, since
they are placed beyond the reach of the
indolent and inactive.
To you, Ormond, I must also
address myself on the subject of your
duties and expectations. You are
about to enter upon a profession which
holds out the highest honours to meri-
torious exertion, but it is industrious
application alone which can enable you
*o attain eminence in your calling. I,


have studied your disposition closely.
I see much to approve in it, and also
much to condemn: I admire your
natural goodness of heart, but 1 grieve
to see it choaked by pride. You have
learnt to value yourself upon a supe-
riority which you do not possess ; for,
believe me, in the eyes of the virtuous
and the good, whose weight in the
scale of society will always prepon-
derate, rank is only estimated by the
criterion of merit; and whilst you are
priding yourself on your fortunes and
connections, you will frequently have
to endure the mortification of behold-
ing those whom you have been accus-
tomed to account as inferior to your-
self, rising above you in honour, and
enjoying those distinctions which you
may envy, but cannot obtain. This,
my dear boy, is a serious considera-
tion, and let me intreat you to give
it its due weight; and lam sure your
good sense will predominate ultimately


over a momentary conceit; and* then,
you will learn to despise those feelings
of superiority, which you now consider
as conferring dignityon yourself. There
is another point too, on which 1 would
say to you a few words. lam fearful
that you are not so select in your as-
sociations as you ought to be. Do not
mistake me: I am not afraid of your
accompanying those who are inferior
to yourself in birth and property; for
many of them are tit companions for
men infinitely superior to you and me;
but I have reason to dread lest you may
have entered into connections with men
of loose habits and vicious dispositions,
whose examples and persuasions may
ind uee you to swerve from the path of reC
titude. I donot charge you with any
crime, but I think you have chosen
your companions rashly, without mak-
ing a due inquiry into their characters,
or studying them sufficiently yourself.
vol. i. c


I would have you hasten to correct
this error, which if suffered to con-
tinue, may one day give you much
cause for deep repentance; a great
deal of caution is necessary in the
choice of associates: it is not the spend-
ing an idle hour or two with them that
is so mischievous; but if you meet
with companions of a vicious stamp,
the infection of vice contaminates your-
self imperceptibly, perhaps, at first,
but afterwards with a rapidity which
defies every check. Let me beseech
you then, Ormond, in particular to
set a guard upon your conduct, since
your readiness to become acquainted
w ith those who will flatter your pride,
justly gives me much cause for doubt
and anxious solicitation. I trust you
have not yet been hurried into the vice
of gaming, and I hope you will ever
bear in mind, that no pursuit can be
more infatuating in its nature and rui-
nous in its consequences. If you be


come debauched in principle#, you will
never stop short of destruction .”
Mr. Trewby concluded his advice;
and Henry and Ormond faithfully
pledged themselves to a perseverance
in the pursuit of those objects alone
which could tend to produce happi-
ness and prosperity to themselves, and
to reflect honor on those with whom
they were connected.
“ Come Henry (said Ormond, after
they had quitted their father’s study,)
let us take a walk, and enquire for my
Julia, the appearance of the morning
is rather inviting.”
Henry.- —With all my heart, Or-
mond, but I really almost envy you
the possession of that lovely girl’s af-
fections, could I but find her counter-
part, methinks I should be a little
more attentive to her, than you seem
to be.
Ormond.— The truth of it is, Henry,
c 2


I have an affection for the dear girl;
and feel myself exhilerated in her pre-
sence as much as though I had taken
three bottles of claret; but then, in
such cursed cold weather as this, I
feel that potions of bare love are not
sufficient to keep up the vital
warmth without the assistance of some
good liquor; and besides, my dear
fellow, it would be too great a sacri-
fice to give up all my acquaintance, in
order that I might have the felicity of
being eternally* pinned to a girl’s pet-
ticoat.
Henry.— Oh ! Ormond, 1 fear your
affection for Julia is not equal to her
deserts. But hark, what shriek was
that I heard! good heavens ! a chariot
overturned in the snow! let us run to
the spot, and see if we can render any
assistance to the unfortunate travellers.
In a few minutes the brothers reach-
ed the spot, and found two servants
endeavouring to extricate a gentleman


and lady, whose situation appeared
somewhat alarming. At length, after
some difficulty, the travellers were
relieved, but as the gentleman had re-
ceived some bruises, and the chariot
was injured, Henry intreated them to
repair toTrewbyHall,until they should
be enabled to renew their journey.
The offer was thankfully accepted,
and while Henry acted as a guide,
Ormond ran forwards to prepare
matters for their reception. At the
Hall, the strangers were received with
the utmost politeness, and as the lady
had sustained no injury beyond the
fright, and the gentleman’s bruises
appeared less severe upon examination,
a few hours’ repose before dinner was
sufficient to restore them.
From the information of the servants,
Mr. Trewffiy learnt that his guests were
the honourable Mr. and Mrs. Bardley,
who were proceeding to London, at
c 3


the time when this unfortunate acci-
dent happened ; and as the repairs of
the chariot would be completed by
the evening, the domestics expressed
their expectation that their master and
mistress would still attempt to reach
London that night. Mr. Trewby,
however, had determined to detain
them at his house until next day, if
they could be prevailed upon by the
rhetoric of hospitality.
The accident had broken in so
much upon the morning, that Henry
and Ormond gave up their intention
of walking to Mrs. Moody’s, and oc-
cupied themselves in preparations for
dinner.
In the mean time, Mr. and Mrs,
Bardley being sufficiently refreshed,
made their appearance in the dining
parlour, and offered their grateful
acknowledgements for the kindness
which had been displayed by Mr.
Trewby and his family. This worthy


old gentleman, however, stopped them
short, by stating that he could scarce-
ly avoid calling the accident lucky
which had been the means of intro-
ducing them at his house ; an intro-
duction which he trusted, might lead
to a better acquaintance with each
other.
At dinner, Mr. Trewby turned the
conversation on the subject of the de-
parture of his sons for London; when
Mr. Bardley warmly expressed his
hope that they would become visitors
at his house in Cavendish Square, where
he might have an opportunity of re-
compensing, in some measure, the ci-
vilities he had received at their father’s
hands. The young men expressed
their gratitude for his politeness, and
promised to avail themselves of the in-
vitation.
When the cloth was removed, the
rapid circulation of the bottle pro-
ducing a corresponding animation of


spirits, the friendship between Mr.
Bardley and the Trewbys grew warm-
er, and more cemented ; and the for-
mer, at length, entreated the old gen-
tleman to confide to him the intro-
duction of his sons into fashionable
life ; a request which, although it did
not exactly square with Mr. Trewby’s
sentiments and intentions, he thought
it most prudent to comply with; and
it was accordingly agreed on, that
Henry and Ormond were to be con-
sidered as necessary appendages to Mr.
Bardley* s dinners, and Mrs. Baidley’s
routes, in order that they might the
more readily acquire that polish which
would render them fit associates for the
fashionable world. After a few soli-
citations, it was resolved that the ho-
nourable guests should remain at
Trewby Hall till the next morning,
and that Henry and Ormond should
accompany them to the metropolis.
Thus having betowed such an im«


portant office on Mr. Bardley, as to
make him the fashionable master of
our young heroes, the reader will pro-
bably wish to know a little more of
this gentleman, in order to judge the
more correctly of his fitness for the
task.
Mr. Bardley then, was the second
son of Lord Enville, and on the death
of his father, about six years previous
to his appearance at Trewby Hall, had
come into the possession of some eight
thousand pounds a year, at the age of
twenty-tw o. Being a youth of a clash-
ing appearance, and a prepossessing
countenance, he soon contrived to be-
come a man of fashion ; and as his fa-
mily was know n to be respectable, his
presence was deemed an acquisition
to most parties, and in the course of
twelve short months, he made such a
proficiency in the science of dissipa-
tion, as to be entitled the fashionable
gamester and the man of


in other words, the seducer of inno-
cence. It was about this time, that
he married the eldest daughter and
heiress of Sir John Musgrove, by
which connection, he doubled his an-
nual income ; and as Miss Musgrove
had been as close a votary of fashion
as himself, and, consequently, as lit-
tle capacitated for the duties of a mar-
ried life, matrimony neither restrained
the one, nor domesticated the other.
Mr. Bardley was still to be found as
regularly at the gaming table, and
the bagnio; and Mrs. Bardley enjoyed
the public routs, and her private par-
ties at home, without any unfashiona-
ble interference on the part of him who
went by the name of her husband.
Whether in London or Southend, amid
all the gay scenes of the metropolis, or
the more retired pleasures of a watering
place, unrestrained pleasure was the
object of pursuit to both; and if their
union produced none of that vulgar


happiness which is called domestic,
neither did it give rise to jealousies and
disputes, since each followed the path
which gratification pointed out: and
no low sentiments of virtue and moral-
ity were suffered to interfere and im-
pose a check on their desires.
This fashionable pair had been
spending a month in Norfolk, when
the accident which retarded their re-
turn and threw them into the way of
Mr. Trewby, occurred. Mr. Bardley
had been engaged in a sporting party,
in the neighbourhood of Lynn, by
way of killing the tedious interval be-
fore the fashionable season commenced
in the metropolis; and Mrs. Bardley
had condescended to seclude herself,
in the interim, with an old acquaint-
ance of her childhood.
Thus qualified, few will dispute
the pretensions of Mr. Bardley to be-
come the tuor of Henry and Ormond
T rewby in all the mysteries of fashion-
able life.


CHAP. IV.
A Separation , and an Arrival in
London .
Early the following morning, Henry
and Ormond, after having visited Mrs.
and Miss Moody, and taken an affec-
tionate leave of them; assembled with
Mr. and Mrs. Bardley, and their pa-
rents, round the breakfast table ; while
the pleasure which beamed in the
countenances of the young men disco-
vered plainly the nature of their emo-
tions in the view of the new situations
they were about to fill. Breakfast
being ended, Mr. Trewby took an op-
portunity, while his guests retired to
prepare for their departure, to recal to


the minds of his sons the advice which
he had given to them on the preceding
morning. He did not dissemble his
fears that a fashionable introduction
might be the means of leading them
in a direction from the paths of pro-
priety, ard he entreated them, by
their affect? • n for him and their mo-
ther, to have a strict guard upon their
actions, and to keep up a continual
correspondence with him, that he
might be enabled to judge of their
progress in their professional duties.
He particularly inculcated upon their
minds the necessity of a close adhe-
rence to the rules of morality; and
once more repeated w hat he had told
them before. “If you become debauch-
ed in principles, you will never stop short
of destruction f
The young men promised the closest ob.
servance of those principles which their
father had pointed out to them as ne-
cessary to their prosperity and happi-


nfess, and after taking an aflfec.tionate
leave, obeyed the summons of Mr. and
Mrs. Bardley, who repeatedly pressed
the old gentleiftan and lady to favour
them with an early visit in London,
and having ascended the carriage, a
few minutes sufficed to bear them out
of sight of their paternal mansion.
The tedioiisness of the journey was
relieved by the sprightly conversation
of Mr. and Mrs. Bardley, who took
some pains to point out to the young
men the path which they must pursue,
in order to make their society courted
by people of fashion ; and expressed
their hopes, that as Mr. Trewby had
confided them to their care, they
would, in all things submit them-
selves to their opinions. In the first
place it would be necessary to free
themselves from that rust which they
had naturally contracted from a resi-
dence in the country, before they
would be capable of receiving the po


lish of a fasionable finish; and Mrs.
Bardley intimated the great pleasure
which she should derive from moulding
them precisely according to her own
wishes,pro videdshefoundthemfree from
vulgar prejudices, and as tractable as
she hoped. She dropped a hint or two
about the perverseness of some young
men, who had been contaminated (as
she pleased to term it) by vulgar no-
tions of morality and virtue, and were
long before they could be convinced of
the absolute necessity which existed
for their discarding all such ideas,
since every sentiment of this nature had
been very properly exploded in high
life for many years.
Ormond, with pleasure sparkling
in his eyes, greedily swallowed up
every word which Mrs. Bardley ut-
tered ; and, forgetting already the
good advice of his father, inwardly
resolved to accommodate himself in
every respect to the wishes of his kind


ihstructress,andtouseeveryapplication
to qualify himself for a man of fashion.
With the natural rashness and impe-
tuosity of his disposition, he began to
anticipate a thousand delights which
had been hitherto unknown to him,
except by the reports of others, and
sketched out to hims'elf a career of
pleasure, in which lie w r ould be free
from restraint, and an object of envy
to those acquaintances, whom he con-
sidered as less favoured than himself.
Henry, on the other hand, was oc-
cupying himself in drawing a parallel
between the advice of his revered pa-
rent and the monitions of Mrs. Bardley.
He had also formed his determination
with equal promptitude and more
judgment than his brother: since he
had resolved, while he paid the utmost
deference to those under whose' guid-
ance his father had placed him, to
bear constantly in mind the parting
words of his parent, which still rang


in his ears.—“ If you become debauched
ill principles , you will never stop short
of destruction*’ He had listened with
much complacency to Mrs. Bard-
ley’s observations, until she had in-
sisted upon the necessity of discarding
all ideas of morality and virtue; and
as he perceived that this advice was in
direct opposition to that which he had
derived from a superior source, he was
not a moment in deciding which
form the basis of his conduct. At the
same time, he had beheld, with the
most painful emotions, the evident gra-
tification which his brother Ormond
felt from the inculcations of Mrs.
Bardley, and he secretly resolved to
embrace the earliest opportunity to
attempt to convince him of the false
nature, and fatal tendency of her ob-
servations. But whilst he was thus
inwardly affected, he had sufficient
prudence to conceal the nature of hi&


thoughts, and appear satisfied with
the discourse.
I he clock struck two as our travel-
lers entered Mile-End, and the new
scenes of bustle which now presented
themselves to the attention of the
young men, occasioned Sensations of
surprise and admiration. The diver-
sity of objects—the din of business—
the rattling of vehicles, and the ideas
produced by such a change of sce-
nery,were sufficient to keep their minds
in a continual state of agitation, un-
til the stopping of the carriage an-
nounced to them the termination of
their journey, when Mr. and Mrs.
Bardley informed them that they were
arrived in Cavendish Square.
The door of an elegant house flew
open on the stopping of the chariot, a
footman opened the door, and in a
few moments, the youths entered an
elegant saloon, and on being ushered
into a most splendid parlour, received


the welcomes and congratulations of
the fashionable owner of the mansion
on their safe arrival.
If the wonder and admiration of the
young pupils of fashion had been great-
ly (excited by the exterior appear-
ance of the buildings of the metropolis,
their sensations were enhanced beyond
the power of description by the asto-
nishing magnificence of the interior of
the building, in which they were seated.
In the estimation of Ormond, the sim-
ple elegance of his father’s mansion
appeared mean and poor in compari-
son with the superb grandeur which
now surrounded him, and several
times could he scarcely refrain from ex-
claiming “ surely happiness must have
made this the temple of her abode.”
Hetiry, on the other hand, had cer-
tainly noticed the difference betwixt
Mr. Bardley’s residence, and his pa-
ternal mansion, but the sensation pro


duced was rather that of pensive sad-
ness for the exchange ; and as lie view-
ed the wanton paintings on the walls,
he frequently sighed and mentally ex-
claimed in the language of our im-
mortal poet—“ Sin, death, and hell,
have set their marks upon it.”
A few moments, however, were only
allowed them for their meditation, be-
fore Mr. Bardley ushered them into
another room, still superior in elegance,
where a table was covered with deli-
cacies, and where they were invited
to refresh themselves, after the fatigue
of their journey.
After a slight re-past, their host led
the you ths through various apartments,
and in a short time brought them to
two chambers, communicating with
each other, which'he informed them
were dedicated to their use as long as
they chose before they entered on their
professional duties. Here he left them
to dress for dinner ;and a valet attended


to recfeive their orders; but Henry unac-
customed to, and embarrassed by such
attentions, dismissed the servant, when
the brothers being left alone, found
themselves, for the first time, at li-
berty to converse without restraint on
their journey, and the opinions they
had formed of their fashionable pre-
ceptors.
“ Well brother/ * said Ormond,
“ what an amiable pair have we found
ill Mr. and Mrs. Bardley. I think
we have been extremely fortunate to
arrive in London under such respect-
able patronage. What attention has
been paid to us ! and how much pains
did Mrs. Bardley take to make us ac-
quainted with her intentions concern-
ing us, and to point out to us the
proper method which we must pursue
in order to become equally respectable
with herself! Oh ! I am so gratified
with thier company-—I think they will
be such a great acquisition to us—


we shall be looked upon with so much
more complaisance by persons in high
life—that 1 really begin to think this
introduction will go a considerable
way towards making our fortunes*
What is it that Horace says upon
the subject— Dimidiofac —but I forget
my latin, and besides it is unfashion-
able I dare say, to know any thing
about it; and lam determined to be
fashionable now.
Henry. — My dear brother, I am
afraid you have forgotten the advice
which our father gave us at parting,
when he pointed out to us how neces-
sary it is for us to be strictly virtuous
and moral, as you seem so much pleas-
ed at Mrs. Bardley’s remarks, and
she observed that morality and virtue
were vulgar prejudices which are ex-
ploded in high life. 1 agree with you
that every attention is paid to us, and
that Mrs. Bardley has taken great
pains to instil her precepts into us;


but we are old enough, and from oured u-
cation we ought to be wise enough to
distinguish between what is right and
what is wrong. When our beloved fa-
ther entrusted usto Mr. and Mrs. Bard-
ley’s care, it was in the warmth of the
moment, when wine had rendered him
less eautious than usual; for I really
do not think, if he had been able to as-
certain the true characters of his visi-
tors, that he would have committed
us to such protection. lam afraid,
my brother, that you do not see this
matter in the same light with myself;
and, as I am the elder of the two, I
think it no more than my duty to give
you my plain opinion of our situation.
If we are not very guarded, we shall
be drawn into excesses which may pro-
duce bad consequences ; and I think,
indeed, that the sooner we can leave
this house, without giving offence, or
appearing to slight our friends, the
better it will be for us. Our father


too, will soon expect to hear of our
having entered upon other pursuits
than those of pleasure, and we are cer-
tainly bound in duty not to disappoint
his hopes, since we pledged ourselves
to act according to his advice.
Ormond*-- ‘Really, Henry, I must
confess I do not see what danger can
arise from our staying here a little
while; for as we have been committed
to Mr. and Mrs. Bardley’s care, the
least we can do is to accommodate
ourselves in some degree to their wishes;
and as to morality being exploded
among the higher classes, you seem
to be ignorant of the meaning of this
expression. I can explain it to you,
because Mr. Cailham lent me a book
which enlightened me very much on
the subject; and, indeed, if I had
never read that work, I should have
had the same opinions on the subject
as you have. The old system of
ethics, you must observe, has been


discovered to be wrong, and as human
nature has progressively approached
to perfection, we are now enabled to
correct those errors which have been pe-
culiar to our forefathers. The moral-
ity of the schools, therefore, which
is what Mrs. Bardley meant, has been
exploded; but there is a new system,
the most perfect in its kind, substi-
tuted in its room ; so that now instead
of being formed upon mere opinion,
the fashionable morality is founded
upon nature. Now, you know, bro-
ther, it is impossible that what nature
has implanted in us can be wrong;
and, therefore, morality founded on
nature must be much more correct and
agreeable to mankind. Now I think
I have convinced you, Mrs.- Bardley is
a philosopher: she has studied, I dare
say, the different ethical treatises, and
has decided, as all persons of refined
VOL. I. I)


understandings have done, in favour
of Professor Kant.
Henry. —Indeed, Ormond, to tell
the truth, I was ignorant of all this :
not but what I knew and had read ot
Kant’s philosophy, but you have really
confounded me with the simplicity ot
your arguments. 1 had no idea you
had studied the sy stem so closeiy.
Ormond.—\ was aware that w hen
you saw the matter stated in its pio-
per light, you would be ready to re-
tract your hasty censure of Mrs. Bard-
ley, who was certainly correct.
Henry. —1 am not yet convinced
that my censure w r as hasty, nor am 1
so willing to retard it, as you seem to
imagine. It appears to me, that this
fashionable system is defective from
its foundation, and instead of being an
improvement in ethics, seems more
intended to destroy morality altoge-
ther. It istaken for granted that what
nature prompts us to do, must be


I right. Now we who love to be con-
vinced by the strength of argument
are not in the habit of allowing things
to be granted thus, without any rea
somng on the subject.-—But tell me
on what ground you assume thisposi
tion ?
Oi mond. —Nature is a principle im-
planted in us originally, and theauthor
of this principle could only implant in
us what is good. Nature therefore, was
intended to urge us continually to the
pursuit of the ends of our being, and
)ur obedience to this impulse must be
right.
Henry.— You are a subtle logician!
t is true, that nature was implanted
n us originally, in common with the
>rute creation, but in them we have
bought proper to distinguish it by the
tame ot instinct, lour argument is
funded upon the hypothesis that we
re brutes, ancl have in conse-
d 2


quence, nothing to do but follow the
impulse of nature. You forget that
reason was also implanted in man, to
controul his natural propensities, and
keep his appetites in subjection. Now
if nature could only prompt us to
what is good, why was reason given
us to curb and direct our natural.im-
pulses.
“ Believe me, my dear Ormond,
you are not sufficiently an adept in
this new system, to attempt the de-
fence of so monstrous an absurdity.
I trust you will still have sufficient
guard over yourself to enable you to
keep on in The morality of our fathers,
and take care not to involve v ourself
in a labyrinth which may bewilder
and lead you to destruction, 1 must
tell you once more that however you
may be flattered and gratified by the
attentions which are here paid to you,
our own welfare requires that we
should stay here no longer than we


can avoid. I perceive plainly that in
the fashionable world a man is only
valued in proportion to the proficiency
which he has made in debauchery—
and remember that debauchery must
lead to destruction.
1 he conversation was here interrupt-
ed by a message informing them that
dinner was ready; and the brothers ac-
cordingly followed the servant through
a suite of rooms, into a splendid dining-
parlour, where Mr. and Mrs. Bardley
waited for them. The table displayed
every luxury which the season could
produce, and the style of magnifi-
cence in which every thing was served
dazzled and delighted the eyes of Or-
mond, and pained and confused in an
equal degree his brother Henry.
M hen the cloth was removed, wines
of the choicest flavour succeeded, and
Mrs. Bardley, after informing them
that she should require their attend-
ance at the theatre, in the evening,


withdrew. Mr. Bardley, taking the
opportunity afforded by the absence
of his wife, and after pushing the
wine freely around, informed them that
they were now embarked under his di-
rection, in fashionable life; and that
as it was his desire, to make the most
of the time they could devote to him,
previous to entering on their other en-
gagements, it was his intention to
have a dinner-party on the following
day, in order to introduce them to
some valuable companions. He re-
gretted that he could not accompany
them to the theatre, but he had made
an engagement in an hour or two
after his arrival in town to meet a
select party of his friends at Willis’s.
However, he said, they would have
no occasion to regret his absence, as
M rs. Bardley would entertain them
with a description of many of the
characters who would surround them.


At seven o’clock a footman inform-
ed them that Mrs. Bardley was ready,
and the chariot at the door, when Mr.
Bardley immediately prepared to set
out for Willis’s, and Henry and Or-
mond attended Mrs. Bardley to the
carriage, which immediately drove
oft’ to the theatre.


CHAP. V.
The Theatre and a Dinner Party,
The young men had scarcely time to
reply to a second string of remarks on
their future conduct which Mrs,
Bardley favoured them with, before
they arrived at the theatre. The
house was filled almost to suffocation,
but.as a servant had been sent to keep
the seats, our party entered their box
without much difficulty. And here
the. glittering display of beauty and
ornaments so overpowered Ormond
that his whole soul was transported as
it were, into an elysium. After a
short period of admiration, however,


he joined his ’brother in a just enco-
mium on the delivery of a performer
who was on the stage, when Mrs.
Bardley immediately informed them,
in a half whisper, that nothing was
so unfashionable as to attend to the
performance. 1 heir whole attention,
she added, must be fixed on the com-
pany, not the actors; and if they
would listen to her for a few moments,
she would inform them who were the
principal persons present.
! “ Observe,” said she, “ a party in
yonder box, where you perceive a
lady leaning against a pillar, with
one hand on the shoulder of a gentle-
man in a military uniform. The lady
is the honourable Miss Varnish, and
the gentleman Mr. L . The
former is reckoned one of the most
fashionable belles of her day she is
remarkable for her readiness at wit,
and her good luck in intrigue: her
companion, I believe, has as much


reason to be pleased with her good?
natured, yielding disposition as any
person; although he is by no means
a faithful adorer: you have heard,
most likely, of his affair with Lady
A ; it is the talk of the town
and there is every reason to expect
that it will soon become much more
public than it is; the lady sitting by
the side of Mr. L. is the Duchess of
C , one of the proudest w omen in
the metropolis, and a famous hand at
match-making ; and the person with
w hom she is tittering is Lord N ,
a self-conceited puppy who has only
recently gained his title, by the death
of his reputable and highly respected
father. This sprig of nobility is un-
derstood to have much more vanity
than brains; and 1 have seen a trades-
man threaten to kick him out of his
shop for impertinent behaviour. Close
by this coxcomb you will perceive his
mother and one of his sisters; the


former a'ccounted the greatest virago,
and the latter the best violin-player,
in their neighbourhood, two curious
qualifications, you may think, for
women of quality.
“ In the next box but one, on our
right, you will see Mr. S leaning
over the front, and looking into the
pit. You must be intimately ac-
quainted with his name, and his ge-
neral habits cannot be unknown to
you altogether. He is continually in-
volved in some intrigue or other ; and
boasts of a wider acquaintance amongst
ladies of fashion than any buck of
equal standing in the kingdom. You
will generally see him accompanied
by three or four ladies of rank; for
people in high life care so little now
for public opinion, that they have
very properly begun to act indepen-
dently, and as if there were no public
at all to notice them. Advance your-
selves a little forward, and you will


see the faces of tw o females, one on
each side of Mr. S— ■ ■ Bj their
attention to his remarks, and the plea-
sure evident in each when he ad-
dresses her, you would be almost ready
to imagine" that they are candidates
for his favour, and, in fact, I do not
know that such suspicion would be
very wide of the truth : one of them
is Lady , and the other the
Marchioness of ; both of them
ladies who have learnt to think and
act for themselves.”
“ Four boxes to our left, and you
may perceive Sir Henry L , a
man of genteel address, which he has
employed, with his winning manners,
to good purposes, since it is supposed
that he has shared the favours of more
ladies than half the puppies which
parade Bond Street, from one season
to another. It is true, his enterprising
spirit, in search of objects, has fre-
quently carried him into dangers, and


he has sometimes received favours of a
different nature to those for which he
sought; but a broken nose occasionally,
a frequent black eye, and more rarely,
a broken pericraneum, have not suffi-
cient terrors to deter him, at present,
from his favourite pursuits. By his
side sits Lord , one of his
most constant companions, but not his
equal by any means, in the annals of
gallantry. In short I have never heard
of any action of his which can entitle
him to our notice, except his marriage
with a Lady of a much gayer disposi-
tion, and more calculated to enliven
the world of fashion. Just behind
these two young gentlemen may be
seen the Hon. and Rev. Mr. .
and his lady ; although he bears no
external appearance of a spiritual
pastorj he is understood to be, in no
way, deficient in the exercise of his
functions; especially in the regularity
of his morning calls, and his long


visits, which have often induced wit-
lings to observe that he converts every
parlour he enters into a confessional.
His wife, as you may perceive, is a
fine lady, notorious for her family
pride, and her personal ignorance.
Her manners are uncommonly forbid-
ding, and her deportment very repul-
sive.
“ But see, a gentlemen and lady
entering the next box ; the former is
a honourable member of the House of
Commons, and the latter Mrs. D —.
They have lived together, on the most
affectionate footing for more than six
months, ever since she left her hus-
band ; and is esteemed one of the
most lovely and elegant women that
adorn the fashionable world. Ihe gen-
tleman too, is universally accounted
handsome, and a man of great talents.
I assure you that Mrs. D is
much envied by a great many ladies
of the first fashion. A gentleman


who is j ust entered the same box, jott
may perhaps have perceived ; that is
Lord L— and one of the most
spiritless, plodding, virtuous noble-
men in the whole metropolis r why he
is the butt of his own sex ; and there is
not a single woman of quality that
would not blush to be seen in his com-
pany.
“ But the play is ended, and as ft
would be unfashionable to stay and
hear the paltry farce which will fol-
low, we will retire, and I will intro-
duce you at home to two young gen-
tlemen, who have scarcely their equals
in nobleness of spirit, through the
whole city/’
So saying Mrs. Bardley, handed by
Ormond, and followed by Henry, tript
out of the box ; the chariot was call-
ed, and in twenty minutes they were
once more sit down in Cavendish-
square. Repairing to the drawing
loom they found two gentlemen


amusing themselves at a game of
cribbage, who were introduced to our
young heroes as Lord Linfel, and Mr.
Trimbell.
“ Dem it, madam,” said Lord
Linfel, “ we thought you had flung
us, the time of suspense seemed like
an eternity. Trimbell and myself
were driven to cribbage, which 1
damnably hate, for a refuge from
ennui”
Mrs. Bardley— Oh ! you flatterer:
why 1 am now four minutes before my
time; an instance of attention which
your lordship cannot be too thankful
lor ; but what news have you brought
me ? any thing transpired respecting
LadyW* * ?
Lord Linfel —Not a syllable, she
has not left any clue behind her to
lead to any discovery. The most com-
plete thing in my recollection. Lord
p jjas proved himself a damned


clever fellow ; and her ladyship a
woman of discernment.
Mrs. Bardley —-I am a convert to
your opinion, my lord, but apropos ,
come with me into my boudoir. I
want to consult with you. Mr. Trim-
bell entertain my friends till we re-
turn.
Finding in conversation that the
young Trewbys had never been in
town before, Mr. Trimbell expatiated
on the pleasures they had to experi-
ence, and offered his service to attend
them in an excursion round the city
on the next day, or the following ; an
invitation which Henry declined for
himself, and was about to make an
apology for his brother, when Or-
mond hastily declared his readiness to
accompany Mr. Trimbell any day
after the morrow ; and it was imme-
diately agreed on between them to
dedicate the day following to that
purpose,


i Henry sighed deeply on hearing the
appointment, and was obliged to turn
away to hide a tear which involun-
tarily trickled down his cheek, A
sudden sickness stole over him, anc
he felt a sad presentiment of approach-
ing evil. Ormond, on perceiving his
brother thus affected, blushed, and
repented, at the moment, of the rashness
rvhich induced him to form so hasty
in engagement; but the sentiment
vas obliterated almost as soon as felt,
>y a sudden question of Mr. Trim-
>ell ; who took Ormond by the arm,
nd dragged him to the other side of
he room, to examine the make of a
tew piece of furniture.
In the mean time, Henry, having
scovered himself, assumed an ap-
earance of cheerfulness which was
Itogether foreign to his feelings, and
)ined the conversation j but now and
icn would he cast a tearful eye on his


brother which would disconcert him
for a moment.
Mrs. Bardley and Lord Linfei now
returned, and the whole party went
to supper ; after which they sat
down to cards until the clock struck
two, when Henry and Ormond plead-
ing fatigue retired ; and the party
broke up.
W hen the young men reached their
apartments, Henry reasoned with
Ormond on his imprudence in entering
into an engagement to accompany a
young man, of whom he knew no-
thing ; but who from the looseness of
his conversation and manners, appear-
ed to be better calculated for any
company than that of a virtuous
young man. Ormond endeavoured to
defend his conduct, by observing that
as Mr. Trimbell was introduced to
them by Mrs. Bardley he could not be
an improper person for them to asoci-
ate with, Henry however, again ex-


pressed liis dissatisfaction, and Or-
mond his sorrow at having been so
hasty, but regretted that it was not in
his power to break the engagement
without appearing tickle.
Before they retired to their separate
apartments, Henry expressed his de-
terminraion to go to the house of Mr.
Lovell, the merchant with whom he
was engaged, on the day following
the next ; and he intreated Ormond
to adopt a similar conduct, and to com-
mence the duties of his profession
without lossof time, all which thelatter
promised faithfully to attend to, and
after shaking hands, they separated
for the night.
But the resolutions of Ormond
were unhappily as easily broken as
formed, and the scene of the dinner
party the following day proved too
fatal an initiation in the mysteries of a
4ehauch, to a mind open to every im-


impression, and seduced by appea-
rances.
The greater part of the morning
had been spent in a walk with Mr.
Bardley ; and the residue in prepara-
tions for dinner, and in advice on the
part of Henry, and promises on that
of Ormond. About five o’clock the
company began to assemble, and as
they were introduced, Ormond disco-
vered his new found friend of the for-
mer evening, and through him his
acquaintance with the greater part of
the visitors was speedily formed. He
found many kindred spirits, while
Henry saw none with whom he could
confide his friendship, but little
noticed and noticing little, he ate his
dinner with pain, and drank his wine
without enjoyment. It is true he ap-
peared to enter into the pleasures of
the table but for once he was attemp-
ting a part for which he had little ta-
lent, and was acting the hypocrite.


The fumes of the wine mounting to
his brain soon intoxicated Ormond,
who was a mere novice in these Bac-
chanalian orgies, and his voice in-
creasing in proportion as his reason
forsook him, he soon became the loud-
est in the noisy throng to the great
pain and mortitication of his brother;
who after sustaining many insults in
attempting to draw him away, pleaded
indisposition, and retired to his cham-
ber about twelve o’clock, whither in
about two hours afterwards Ormond
was conveyed in a state of absolute
insensibility.
Depressed and unhappy at the im-
proper conduct of his brother, the
little sleep which Henry obtained
was broken and unrefreshing, and in
the morning he arose with a mind dis-
tressed, and a frame of body indis-
posed. He immediately repaired to
Ormond’s bed, and finding him awake
attempted once more with fraternal


affection, to induce him to adopt a
different line of conduct. Vexed and
ashamed of himself, Ormond pro-
mised that when he had fulfilled the
engagement which he had made with
Mr.Trimbell for that day,he would im-
mediately apply himself to business ;
and Henry became once more com-
posed.
At the breakfast table Mr. Bardley
quizzed Ormond on his being so easily
intoxicated, and promised to exert
himself to the utmost to render him
more proof against the attacks of wine,
whilst Mrs. Bardley joined in the jest
and jocosely observed that he must
“ learn to drink deep ’ere he depart,”
or he would not be qualified for an
isociation with men of fashion. As
lo Henry he escaped their jeers,
as they had considered him from
the first day as an unpromising pupil,
and therefore took little notice of him,
but confined their instructions to^Or-


mond who bid fair to do credit to the
pains w hich they had taken and in-
tended to take to fit him for the com-
pany of persons of their own stamp,
and for an association with those w hom
fashion called great .
After breakfast Henry took an op-
portunity of communicating to Mr.
Bardley his intention to leave Caven-
dish Square on that day ; as it would
be proper, he informed him, to delay,
going to Mr. Lovell no longer, since
he must have been informed ot his de-
parture for town, and would probably
consider his absence for a longer time,
a censurable remissness. At the same
time he begged to express his grateful
sense of the kindnesses he had experi-
enced since his becoming a visitor with
them, and begged them to believe
that the recollection of their polite-
ness would not cease to animate his
bosom with feelings of respect.
Very few solicitations w ere used to


prevail upon Henry to prolong his
stay; both because Mr. and Mrs.
Bardley considered his presence (to
use a fashionable term) a bore, and
also because, from Henry's manner,
they were convinced that his resolu-
tion was fixed. But when Ormond,
in a low voice, expressed himself to
a similar effect, Mrs, Bardley imme-
diately exclaimed “ Surely, my
dear Ormond, if your brother finds a
longer stay inconsistent with his en-
gagement with Mr. Lovell, no such
cause exists to render your departure
necessary. It cannot be of so much
consequence whether you go to your
profession this day or two or three
days to come, since your ultimate
views can in no way be affected by
a short procrastination of the com-
mencement. Besides, you have made
an engagement with Mr. Trimbell to-
day, and 1 have resolved to take you
VOL. I. E


to Lady Mortley’s rout to-morrow
evening ; and you have more gallantry
than to disappoint me, I am confident,
or I am much mistaken in you.”
Ormond, after a little hesitation,
and without daring to encounter the
looks of his brother, promised to re-
main in Cavendish Square until after
Lady Mortley’s rout; and then said
a few words about the necessity of
attending to other duties, without a
longer delay.
Having announced his intention to
leave Mr. Bardley, Henry considered
every moment he remained as lost,
and he therefore took a polite leave of
his host and hostess, and retiring with
his brother, prepared for his depar-
ture. Vi ben alone, Henry took another
opportunity of requesting his brother
not to give way to pleasure, but to
follow his example at the time he had
mentioned ; all which Ormond pro-
mised ; and alter an affectionate adieu


Henry departed for Mr. Lovell’s: and
Ormond dressed himself to accompany
Mr. Trimbell, who arrived in about
an hour.
Freed from the restraint whichhis
brother’s presence had imposed upon
him, Ormond was left to his own dis-
cretion and prudence, in the midst o
temptation, and surrounded only by
those who would feel interested in the
furtherance of his progress in the vice
of fashion. Such a situation was
fraught with danger, and required
firmer temper of mind than our hero
possessed, to meet it. He was, how-
ever, involved in difficulty, and when
the rashness of his disposition, and its
aptitude to search after pleasure are
considered, it cannot be wondered at
that he stumbled and fell.
E 2


CHAP. VI.
A walk, and its consequences .
On leaving Cavendish Square, Mr.
Trimbell proposed to take Ormond
to Bond Street, and, thence, to all
the fashionable lounges about the
west end of the town, in order that he
might be enabled to point out to him
some of the leading charncteis in
high life. Ormond assented, and after
a promenade of two or three hours,Mr.
Trimbell conducted him to Brookes’s,
and told him he would now take him
to witness a scene of which he could
have hitherto formed but a weak con-
ception.


On entering the rooms, Ormond
perceived various parties of gamesters
occupied in their favourite pursuits,
and was astonished to see the immense
sums which were won and lost in
such rapid alternation. When he had
feasted his eyes for some time, Trimbell
drew him towards a vacant table and
invited him to play for a trifle, to
which Ormond consented without
hesitation; Game followed game in
quick succession, with various success,
until at length they agreed to adjourn
to dinner, and to return afterwards
for an hour or two’s amusement.
True to their appointment, they
returned about seven o’clock, and
continued to play until two in the
morning, when Ormond had not only
lost the whole of his cash, but even
his watch, and had incurred a debt
of honour, amounting to a hundred
pounds.
Stung almost to madness with


feelings too acute for description : the
unhappy Ormond called a coach, and
as he drave home, reflections on the
excesses that he had been guilty of
almost reduced him to a state of in-
sensibility. In a situation approach-
ing to idiotism, he reached, or was
conveyed to, his chamber ;and, throw-
ing himself upon the bed, endured
for the first time, the bitter pangs of
the deepest remorse. Unable to sleep,
he lay stretched at his length, cursing
his unhappy fate ; bewailing the per-
verse folly which induced him to slight
the advice of his father, and to turn
a deaf ear to the solicitations of a
brother; and wishing that he could
for ever close his eyes on the past as
well as the future. In a moment of
forgetfulness he put his hand to his
pocket to take out his gold repeater,
but when he missed it, his rage was
redoubled, and as he dashed himself
from the bed to the floor, he groaned


out in anguish—“ fool that lam f I
have lost that which I valued above
every thing which I have possessed:
the watch which a beloved parent
gave to me, accompanied with his
blessing, and with the hope that
I would account it as the inesti-
mable gift of the most affectionate
friend on earth ; and I have thrown
it away, regardless of its worth,
and forgetful of him that committed
it to my honor. Oh ! that I had
acted with the prudence of my
brother, then I might have gained
the esteem of mankind ; but now
the meanest reptile that crawls upon
the ground, is more worthy honor
than I am/’
Such were the pangs which har-
rowed up the feelings of this unfor-
tunate young man, as he lay sleepless
and groaning through the lingering
night. Oh ! ye spirits that watch
over youth ! where were ye at this mo-


ment? No friendly voice was at hand
to second the stings of conscience, and
to reclaim the guilty penitent. Henry
slept in peace, confiding in his bro-
ther's promise, and satislied in him-
self. The father of Ormond reposed
undisturbedly, trusting that his sons
would fulfil the promise they had
made him of attending to his instruc-
tions. All was calmness and content
with them : they had committed no
crimes the remembrance of which
could harrow up their feelings : they
had indulged in no follies which could
injure their happiness. But Ormond,
the miserable Ormond, without a
friend at hand to soothe him, racked
by the fiercest tortures of the mind.
-—Ormond knew no rest. And alas!
he was placed in the midst of temp-
tations; and those by whom he was
surrounded had leagued together to
render him as vicious as themselves.
A moment's advice, during the agony


of remorse, might have saved the un-
happy Ormond ; but no friend was
at hand, and the shaft which fate
had decreed for him was not averted.
The dawn of the morning brought
with it no relief of suffering—but at
length, wearied and worn out by his
sorrow, he dropped into a restless
slumber, which continued, with some
broken intermissions, until the hour of
breakfast. Rising from his bed, he
started from the reflection of his al-
tered visage in the glass,, and the re-
collection of his follies soon returned
with new violence. W hile in this
state of struggling and of suffering,
a servant announced that Mr. and
Mrs. Bardley waited for him at the
breakfast table. He would fain have
excused himself, but was at a loss for
an apology; and, at length, reeling
from excess of sorrow, he summoned
E 5


sufficient resolution to go down to
breakfast parlour.
On his entering the room, his me-
lancholy appearance was instantly
perceived - j and Mrs. Bardley, alarmed,
exclaimed u Good God! Ormond
“ what is the matter ? has any acci-
“ dent befallen fp ll "• Your appear-
a ance is distressing in the extreme/’
Mr. Bardley joined in the interroga-
tory ; and Ormond, unused as yet to
deal in falsehoods, recounted the story
of his loss on the preceding evening.
“ Ha, ha, ha! (exclaimed Mrs.
Bardley) and is this the mighty mis-
fortune which has so affected you t
Has this banished the roses from your
cheek, and the lustre from your eyes ?
Oh ! Ormond, you must learn to be-
come a greater philosopher. Your loss
is a mere trifle—not worth a moment’s
consideration. Mr. Bardley will sup-
ply you with a trifle to make good
your engagement, and to replenish


your purse, until you have an oppor-
tunity to retrieve your ill luck; for
fortune is a fickle jade; and your
good fortune, in the next attempt,
may be. amply sufficient to recom-
pense you for the past. Come, come,
let me see you in better spirits; re-
member you are to accompany me to
Lady Mortley’s rout this evening;
.and I must desire you will contrive
to throw off that “ wan and woe be-
gone” countenance before we set out.”
Mr. Bardley joined in his wife’s re-
quest that he would think no more
of such trifles, and putting into his
hands, a five hundred pounds’ bank-
note, desired him to use that until he
had an opportunity to regain his lost
fortune.
Ormond, with tears in his eyes, re-
turned thanks to Mr. Bardley, for his
unexpected kindness, and promised
to shake of£ that depression of spirit


which he had suffered to take posses-
sion of him.
Scarcely was the breakfast finished,
when Mr. Trimbell called to enquire
after Ormond. After an hour’s con-
versation they walked out together,
and the latter being inspired by the
bounty of Mr. Bardley, and the ad-
vice of Mrs. Bardley, determined
once more to try his luck. Trimbell as-
senting, theyagain repaired toßrookes’s.
and after playing until near 4 o’clock,
Ormond rose with five hundred pounds
in his pocket, besides having redeemed
his repeater, and the debt he had con-
tracted the evening before. Flushed
with this unlooked-for success, he
agreed to meet Trimbell on the fol-
lowing day at the same place, to re-
new the contest; and they separated,
Ormond to repair to dinner, and Trim-
bell to a neighbouring tavern, to
drown the remembrance of his loss, in
wine.


At dinner, Ormond informed him
friends of the success of his second
effort, and returned Mr. Bardley’s
note, with many acknowledgments.
Mrs. Bardlev congratulated him on
his change of fortune, and com-
mended the spirit he had displayed
on the occasion, “ a spirit,” she
said, “ which would never fail to
extricate him from difficulties infi-
nitely more serious than the one he
had j ust escaped from.” This praise
sunk deeply into Ormond’s mind, his
late penitence and the resolutions it
produced were entirely forgotten, and
his determination was adopted to re-
linquish every other profession, if
fortune should still favor him, for the
lucrative science of gaming. Full of
these ideas he went to his chamber
and prepared for the rout; and in a
few hours a summons arrived for him
to attend Mrs. Bardley.
They soon reached Lady Mortley’s,


and here a scene as novel as surprising
to the delighted fancy of Ormond
displayed itself; and after the embar-
rassment of the first moment had
passed off*, he found himself as free and
as much at home in a circle of 600
or 700 persons, as though he had been
in his own chamber. Mrs. Bardley
took occasion to point out to his notice
several leading characters in the crowd,
some of whom Ormond recollected
to have seen at the Theatre, on the
evening of their arrival in London.
I he continued egress and ingress w hich
he witnessed astonished him, until
Mrs. Bardley informed him that it
was common in fashionable life, for
persons of quality to shew themselves
at several routs in £the course of the
same evening, so that he must not be
surprised to see numbers retiring al-
most as soon as they had made their
entrance; since the appearance of
astonishment at a circumstance so


customary would only betray hi§ ig-
norance of fashionable life and man-
ners, and consequently draw upon
himself the gaze of those who sur-
rounded them. Ormond attended
closely to the instructions of his fair
guide and filled his new situation so
well as /to draw from her the most
unqualified approbation. After flirt-
ing away a few hours, they discovered
Lord Linsel and Trimbell who im-
mediately attached themselves to
them ; and, in a short time they all
left Lady Mortley’s for Cavendish
Square, where the two visitors spent
the residue of the evening.
On the following morning, Ormond,
true to his appointment, repaired, for
the third time, to Brookes’s, and, find-
ing Trimbell waiting for him, again
sat down at the gaming table. Or-
mond had now learned to cast off that
natural reluctance which he had felt
at first, to engage in deep play, and


as he had been fortunate the last even-
ing, he was now the first to propose
stakes, at which, twenty-four hours
before, he would have shuddered.
His initiation into the vice of gaming
had been rapid, and he now boldly
professed himself a proficient. After
playing for about six hours, he again
found himself the favourite of fortune,
and arose with an additional three
hundred pounds in his pocket. This
astonishing increase of wealth pro-
duced a similar proportion of self
consequence ; and Ormond, who in
the country had begun to entertain
high notions of his own importance
in society, had now assumed a degree
of hauteur , which was well calculated
to keep others at a distance. Before
he left the gaming house, Trimbell
had i n t rod u ced h i m to two of hisfriends,
who were playing at a different table;
and an engagement was made by the


whole party to assemble there again
in the evening.
The advice of a father, and the in-
treaties of a brother, had now lost
their influence on the mind of Or-
mond ; and, if remembered at all,
the recollection w as unmixed with the
secret reverence with which he baa
heretofore called these circumstances
to mind. His progress in vice, fiom
the moment of his first connection with
Trimbell was no longer slow, but
inconceivably rapid. His principles
had become debauched , and scarcely a
ray of virtue remained to shed a glim-
mer through the thickening darkness
of his .mind. Mr. Bardley had sown
in his breast the seeds of corruption,
and his new tutor took a delight in
nourishing their growth.
Mr. Trimbell’s experience amply
qualified him for the seduction of
others. Disinherited by his father,
Sir John Trimbell, for his vices, he


had acquired about three or four thou-
sands a year, by the death of an aunt;
and this income he had swelled pro-
digiously by his successes in gaming,
and was now politely received in the
highest circles, as a young man of
family and fortune, and what is still
a greater recommendation, a fashion-
able rake. About three years pre-
vious to his introduction to Ormond,
he had acquired a considerable degree
of fame in high life, by the following
circumstance. Charmed by his win-
ning address, and captivated by his
insinuating manners, the heiress of a
wealthy and distinguished family, had
permitted his addresses; and with
such art did he prosecute his inten-
tions, that, in a few months, he pre-
vailed on her to elope with him.
During this criminal intercourse, he
contrived to persuade her to assign
over to him a considerable annual
income which she was possessed of,


and then basely deserted her ; which
had such an effect upon the unhappy
and deceived girl that she was imme-
diately taken ill, a miscarriage fol-
lowed, and in a few days she resigned
an existence which her seducer had
rendered disgraceful and miserable.
Her unhappy end was conveyed to
him by a friend, whom he rewarded
for the grateful tidings with a foe hun-
dredpounds bank note.
This circumstance soon gained
wind, as Trimbell himself took an
uncommon delight in recounting
his success over the virtue of his
unfortunate victim, and, instead of
becoming the object of disgust, as he
would, probably, in vulgar life, the
ladies of fashion, who had hitherto
scarcely regarded him, began to view
him with looks of complacency : and
his appearance in a circle was gene-
rally courted by a smile of welcome,
followed by a half-whisper —‘there


comes Mr. Trimbell, the amiable and
fascinating seducer/ The first victim
of his arts being thus removed, he
grew bolder and soon acquired a pro-
ficiency in intrigue; which rendered
him not less celebrated in the annals
of gallantry, than the gaming house ;
and his subsequent conduct, to the
moment of his acquaintance with our
hero, was well calculated to keep his
fame free from diminution. In fact it
was not more than three weeks before
this period that he was engaged in an
affair of honour with the brother of
an amiable woman, whom he had
seduced, and having succeeded in
wounding his atagonist, was now bet-
ter received than ever.
Such was the friend of Ormond
Trewby—such the man to whom the
completion of our hero’s tuition, and
the establishment of his character, in
the fashionable w T orld, w r ere now to
be entrusted ; since Mr. Bardley, ob


serving their reciprocal attachment,
was perfectly satisfied that OrVnond’s
future progress could not be ac-
celerated by any interference on his
part: he had therefore, impressed
with this belief, resigned his pupil to
a new tutor.
About a week after the departure
of Henry from Cavendish Square, a
servant brought a letter to Ormond
from his brother, inclosing one for
him from his father: in which the
latter expressed the dissatisfaction he
had felt on hearing of his neglect of
those duties which he had been sent
to the metropolis to perform; and
commanded him immediately to re-
linquish a course which, if persevered
in, must be productive of the most
fatal consequences. The perusal of
the letter caused Ormond a mo-
mentary pang, but his friend Trim-
bell coming in at the moment, he


lead to liirn its contents, and request-
ed him to give him his advice.
“ Change your lodgings, and make
no reply,” was the answer of Trim-
bell ; and Ormond, although reluc-
tant at the moment, determined to
act according to the dictation of his
friend. He accordingly informed Mr.
and Mrs. Bardley of his intention, who
approved of his plan, and took a lodg-
ing, from that time, in St. Jameses
Street.
It was at this moment that Ormond
discarded fiom his mind every par-
ticle of virtuous principle that re-
mained ; and became, in practice,
and professedly, an avowed debauchee.
From this hour his days and nights
were constantly divided between the
gaming house, and the bagnio, and
his visits to his apartments were only
made when he wished to entertain
some fellow profligates, or project in
retirement, some new scheme of vil-


lany. His success in gaming was
such as to astonish even his friend
Trimbell, and his profuse display of
wealth, his fashionable appearance,
and his acquaintance with Mr. Trim-
bell, were sufficient qualifications for
his introduction into the first circles.
Ilis habits were regular, and his time
divided in the most systematic man-
ner. From his bed at mid-day he
repaired to the gaming table, and
thence reeled to the brdthel, or to
privaft haunts, inhabited by some
unhappy victims of his treachery: for
his amours were becoming little less
notorious than his abilities as a game-
ster.


CHAPTER VII.
A Disappointment , and a Duel.
In the house opposite to that in which
Ormond had taken up his lodgings,
resided a lovely girl, whom he had
frequently observed at her window ;
and glutted and satiated with other
objects, he began to meditate and
mature a plan for her seduction. As
a preparatory step he procured a ser-
vant, through whose enquiries he be-
came acquainted with her name and
connections.
Maria Jameson was the only
daughter of a half-pay colonel, who
was superannuated ; and whose only


remaining comforts were concentrated
in his wife, almost as infirm as him-
self, and this amiable girl. He loved
her most affectionately, and he had
cause to love her, for she was his com-
panion by day, and his nurse, his
physician, and his consoler under
accumulated sorrows. From the ri-
sing to the setting of the sun she was his
constant attendant, beguiling the te-
dious hours of his confinement by
reading, or the charms of her conver-
sation: and he, in return, endeavour-
ed to impress her mind (for his pa-
rental faculties were yet unimpaired)
with a love of virtue. Although un-
able to move from his chair he called
the.se hours happy, since he could
employ himself, in the absence of
every other amusement, in instilling
those precepts into the mind of his
beloved Maria, which might promote
her happiness as well as prosperity.
VOL. I. p


And she was a pupil who rewarded
his exertions, for she loved her father,
and was naturally an admirer of vir-
tue, and the precepts which hourly
fell from his lips sunk deeply into
her heart. This amiable girl had re-
ceived many offers which would have
conferred honour on her family, but
she steadily refused every proposal,
since, she said, she had determined
never to alter her situation, while her
attendance and consolation could add
to the happiness of those who gave her
being : and the motive only served to
enhance her value in the estimation of
those whom it had disappointed. Ma-
ria had a brother the very counterpart
pf herself, but he was absent in the
service of his country, and his intre-
pidity had gained him considerable
promotion, whilst his humanity had
rendered him universally beloved by
his soldiers; and now and then when a
letter was received from Charles, the


youthful ardotlr of the ancient veteran
would revive—the tear of pleasure
would glisten in the mother’s eye-
and the old attendant would clap her
hands, and cry for joy, while Maria
would read out the tender effusions of
a brother’s filial love,
This was the family whose ruin
Ormond was about to accomplish :
and the very cause which would have
induced any less unfeeling wretch to
respect such virtue, was only a sti-
mulus to induce him to fix his resolu-
tion the more unalterably. He had
observed her with an eye of desire,
but when she discovered herself to be
the object of his gaze, she would blush
deeply, and hastily retire. For a long
time was he at a loss to invent some
feasible plan for the accomplishment
of his desires ; every one which sug-
gested itself to his mind appearing on
consideration too defective.
f 2


At length lie determined to com-
mence his attack by ingratiating him-
self into the favour of the old attend-
ant, whom he had frequently seen in
Maria’s chamber; and, as he con-
ceived this the most likely method to
insure success, he resolved to put his
plan in practice without delay. Ac-
cordingly, on the following morning,
he took his station at his room win-
dow, until he perceived that he had
attracted the notice of the old lady,
when he immediately began to sigh
and assume the appearance of being
tormented with a hopeless passion ;
and, on a sudden pretending to dis-
cover her presence, he would lift up
his hands, shake his head mournfully,
and retire from the w indow. This
artifice he continued to practise daily,
and long did the old woman remain
altogether regardless of his seeming
trouble ; but at length his patience
wearied out Jier inflexibility : and she


appeared gradually to pay more at-
tention to him. Ormond, on per-
ceiving this alteration, determined to
lose no time in the further prosecution
of his designs. He accordingly called
his servant, Philip, who had been
previously let into the secret, and
ordered him to watch for an oppor-
tunity, when the old lady came out
of the house, and request her to allow
his master permission to have a few
minutes’ conversation.
After these instructions, Ormond
repaired to his usual haunts, but as
his whole soul was absorbed in the
idea of this single object, he returned
much earlier than usual; and calling
Philip to him, entered into conversa-
tion on the progress he had made.
“ Philip, (said Ormond) have
you been able to get a word or two
with the old Jezebel since I went out
this morning?”
Philip —Oh, yes, your honor; I


have not parted with her much more
than an hour ago, and a deep one she
is. When I mentioned your honor’s
desire for 311 interview with her—she
pretended to blush and simper. “With
me- —with me (said she) surely you
must be mistaken, young man, I have
no manner of acquaintance with your
master.” 1 replied, I was aware of
that, but that you wished for an in-
terview, in order to commence an
acquaintance ; and that it was in her
power to make you the happiest man
on earth; and I hoped that she would
consent to my request and your wishes,
or else you must be miserable.
Ormond. —Bravo! my good fellow 7 ,
and what reply could she make to that?
Philip. —Why, she hesitated and
coloured ; and at last she said—“well
if it will make your master so very
happy, I do not wish to stand in the
way of his happiness. To be sure I
have seen him looking very dismal for


a good many mornings, when I have
been at the window ; and when he has
seen me he has shaken his head, lifted
up his hands, and walked away very
disconsolate. But if I agree to see
your master —he must do just as I
will direct. He must dress himself
in common clothes, and come about
ten o’clock, when the other lodgers
who live in the house, will be settled
a bit for the evening; and if any body
should enquire who he js, he must
say that he is a son of a cousin of mine,
and that he is just come out of the
country.”
Ormond —Oh, admirable! and what
evening did she fix for me to go ?
Philip —This very evening, your
honour, at ten o’clock precisely.
Elated with the prospect thus held
out to him of the speedy attainment
of his wishes, Ormond immediately
sent Philip to procure him a suit of
clothes suitable for him to make his


I appearance in his new character; and
during the absence of his servant, he
employed himself in the invention O]
some plausible story to tell the old
woman. At length, after much con-
sideration, and the rejection of severa
schemes, he hit upon an expedien;
which promised very fairly to insure
him success. He recollected that
Philip had informed him of Maria
laving a brother in the army ; and he
laturally supposed that by pretend-
ngto have received a private message
rom him, through a brother of his
11 the same regiment, he could not
ail to procure an interview with the
bject of his desires, and the success
f his attempts he must leave to for-
mic and his own good management.
He had just determined on this plan,
hen Philip returned with a decent
lit of clothes, and as the wished-
r hour was hist approaching; he,
ithout delay, proceeded to equip


himself in his new garb ; in which*
his servant informed him,that he made
as rustic an appearance as though he
had been that moment imported from
the remotest part of the kingdom.
The hour of assignation being now
arrived, Philip let his master outof the
house, and he repaired immediately to
the place of rendezvous, where he
found the old lady waiting for him.
Being ushered into the kitchen, Or-
mond began to express his gratitude
to the old lady for the happiness she
had conferred upon him by granting
his request to visit her; and was about
to proceed to put his intended plan
into execution, when the old woman,
interrupting him, exclaimed —■
“ Oh ! you are pleased to flatter,
Sir, ha ! I little thought, when I per-
ceived you sighing in such distress at
your chamber window, that it was in
my power to relieve you and make
f 5


you happy. I am sure that the
richest and most beautifullest young
lady in the kingdom might be proud
to receive your addresses ; and I am
sure I should shew a great neglect of
my own interest if I was to be back-
ward in making you happy when it
is in my power.”
Ormond. —Best of women ! how can
I sufficiently express the gratitude I
feel for your kindness. Promote my
happiness, and yours shall be the care
of my future life. I never can suffi-
ciently reward you. But pray tell
me by what name I may call you ?
Old Lady. —Miss Maria Jameson—
Ormond. —Oh ! angelic name !
Old Lady. —No, sir ; Maria Jame-
son is not my name: but 1 was going
to tell you that my young mistress,
Miss Maria Jameson, calls me Mrs.
Howard ; but the old people still say
Nanny. Why, bless you, sir, 1 have
lived in this family, maid, wife, and


widow, fifty-six years, come next
Michaelmas. So you see, sir, I have
known the sweets of matrimony ; but
only to think that this piece of good
luck, the meeting with such a hand-
some gentleman as you, should have
been delayed till this time of my life.
You must know, sir, that I am not
so very old, for I came into Col. Jame-
son’s service when 1 was but sixteen
years old, so that I am not quite
seventy-two by three or four weeks;
and I assure you, sir, my master and
mistress place a high value on me.
Ormond. —(In a state of inattention ,
having only heard the last wordsJ Value!
By heavens you are above all value !
Oh ! my adorable Maria Jameson.
Mrs. Howard. —I told you, sir, my
name is Mrs. Howard, not Maria
Jameson.
Ormond: (Recollecting himself. )
Ten thousand pardons, my dear Mrs.
Howard; but pray allow me to ask


how I can ever sufficiently reward
your kindness.
Mrs. Howard. —Oh ! as to that, sir,
there need not be much difficulty;
for 1 am sure Miss Maria, when she
finds I have met with such a good
match, will readily persuade her
father and mother to part with me
immediately; so that, if you please,
I will speak to her to-morrow morn-
ing, for she is gone to bed now, and I
can make you happy the next day.
It was now, for the first time, that he
discovered the mistake of the old
lady, and perceived that she had been
induced by his behaviour to conclude
that she was the object of his affec-
tions. Disgusted, disappointed, and
indignant, as he felt at this discovery,
he determined, like an experienced
actor, to conceal his real sentiments,
and to make the old woman’s blunder
conducive to his own purposes. With
this view he made a slight excuse to


I [re old lady, for not acquiescing in
>pinion with her as to such hasty
neasures, since he had several ar-
angements to make; which would
nevent him from acceding to her
visliesjust at present. But. he added,
hat as he had now proved her senti-
nents respecting which he had been
previously ignorant, he should lose
no time in perfecting his plans. Hav-
ing thus quieted the old woman, he
began to make inquiries respecting
the family with whom she lived, and
the garrulity of the old woman very
soon put him in possession of many
anecdotes respecting it, which he
hoped shortly to turn to his own
advantage: and having ascertained
that Maria had retired tor the night,
he was convinced of the impracti-
cability of accomplishing more at
this visit, and accordingly took his
leave, and arrived at his Apartments,
cursing the vanity of the old woman,


I and his own inconsiderateness and
short sightedness, which rendered it
necessary ior him once more to go over
the ground which he had already trod-
den with so little success.
On the following morning his an-
tiquated chere amie appeared at the
window, and, by a variety of tender
glances and affectionate nods (all of
whichOrmond was obliged to reply to,
n order to keep up the deception) ex-
pressed her continuance in the same
niod respecting her engagement. Or-
nond, however, contrived to escape
from his painful situation as soon
as possible ; and, after charging Phi-
lip to tell the old woman he should
call again that evening, he repaired
to meet Tritnbell, arid to torget the
disappointments he had experienced
in other pursuits.
Fortune, which had uniformly
beamed kindly on our hero, in the
course of .this day, shed a full blaze


of her lustre upon him ; and, after
sitting the whole day at the gaming
table, with Trimbell, and two noble-
men, he and his friend left the rooms,
sharers of about thirty thousand
pounds each ; but they had scarcely
reached the street, when they were
called back, and accused by the two
noblemen, whom they had plucked,
of having played unfairly. Hie
charge was denied with mueh as-
perity, and the whole party adjourned
for the purpose of settling tin affair
by an appeal to the laws of honour*
Having, on their way, provided them-
selves with a case of pistols each, they
repaired to if remote part of St. James's
Park, where it was determined that
Ormond and Lord iVi — should tire
first; and that immediately on iheir
discharge iakirig place —Tlimbed and
the Earl of who were to be in
readiness at a short distance, should
exchange their fire.


At the first round Ormond received
the ball of his opponent in his right
shoulder ; and Mr. Trimbell wounded
his antagonist in the left side ; and
the parties, being mutually satisfied,
the wounded men were conveyed to
a neighbouring house, and medical
aid was procured. On investigation
the wounds were both pronounced
dangerous, and the removal of the
patienTs was remonstrated against by
the attending surgeons; Ormond there-
fore, was compelled, for the present,
to relinquish his designs on Maria
Jameson. Trimbell and Lord M
thinking their personal safety rather
precarious until their antagonists were
declared out of danger, thought it
most prudent to absent themselves for
a short time, and the wounded men
were left alone to their own reflections.
Ormond, on hearing that his life
was in danger, began, for the first
time, since he had become a professed


debauchee, to feel something very like
remorse for the past, and fearful ap-
prehensions for the future ; and the
consequent irritation of his mind,
rendered his case still worse than it
was originally. He began to reflect
on his conduct, and reflection gave
rise to a thousand pangs of the most
excruciating nature : his sleep was
irregular: his dreams were more ter-
rible than his waking thoughts : and
he resolved, if his situation remained
doubtful a day or two longer, to dis-
patch a messenger to intreat his bro-
ther Henry to visit him in his distress.
The resolutions which he had so fre-
quently made and broken before,
were all renewed, on the condition of
his recovery; and the terror of the mo-
ment effected that reformation which
the entreaties of his brother and the
commands of his father had failed to
bring abQut.
In the mean time the w ound of the


Earl of was rapidly healed, and
in the course of two days that noble-
man was removed to his-own house;
and Trim bell on receiving intelli-
gence of this favourable change, ven-
tured to quit his concealment, and
came to pay a visit to his wretched
friend. At this visit Ormond expressed
his intention of sending for his bro-
ther, to obtain his forgiveness and
advice ; but Triinbell laughed at the
idea, and had but little trouble to in-
duce him to alter his opinion, when
he told him he had no doubt that a
day or two longer would remove all
cause of apprehension from his wound,
provided he kept up his spirits, and
did not suffer his mind to relapse into
a state of irritation, which was more
to be dreaded than any external symp-
tom. Soothed and lightened of his
fears by the remarks of his friend,
Ormond threw off the appearance of
a penitent as quickly and as easily as


lie assumed it; and the sudden change
in his appearance and spirits aston-
ished and gratified Trimbell, who, by
his advice, effectually steeled the
breast of our wounded hero against
any fu+we attacks of remorse, and
stimulated him with new desires to
reeove himself once more, that ho
might e enabled to carry into execu-
tion it» unfinished projects.
It is not so much to be wondered at
that Ormond’s recovery, after this
period was rapid, since his f riend con-
tinually filled him with the idea of his
speedy return to his old habits ; in
short, in three days after 1 rimbell s
first visit, Ormond was able to ac-
company him in a coach to St. James s
Street, and, in a few days afterwards,
he was sufficiently restored to pay a
visit to Brookes’s, and to project new
plans for the furtherance of his de
signs on the amiable IVlaria Jameson.
He therefore charged Philip to look


I out tor the old lady, and to inform he
of the illness which had prevented
him from attending to her according
to his last appointment, and to in
treat her to allow him to pay her
visit on the same evening.
Philip was not long in executing hi
master’s commission, but returnee
witn an answer indicative of the ole
lady’s sincere sorrow for his misfor-
!une, and her happiness to hear of
ms recovery, and expressive of a wish
o see him at the house between nine
md ten o’clock that night; at the
ame tune she requested he would use
he same precaution as before.
.*0 sooner had Ormond received
his message than his friend Trimbell
ame in, and our hero, full of the
nticipation of his approaching in-
31*view, related the whole affair to his
iend, and, as he had been more ex-
erienced in adventures of this des-
nption, lie solicited his advice how


to act: and, j ust at this moment, Maria
appearing at the opposite window, Or-
mond pointed her out to Trimbell,
and a single glance was sufficient to
convince the latter that she was a
prize worth encountering some diffi-
culties and even dangers to obtain
possession of.
Let the reader imagine' to himself
two seducers, deeply versed in the
arts of villany, and experienced in in-
trigue—wretches whom no considera-
tion could restrain, no ideas of vir-
tuous innocence check, consulting
together how to compass the ruin of
one of nature's fairest ornaments: of
one in whom every mental and exter-
nal grace were combined ; of one
whose hours were occupied in the
amelioration of a parent’s woes ; and
of one whose fall from happiness and
virtue must unavoidably involve in it
the destruction of those who gave her


life. Let him imagine two monsters
in the form, and called by the name,
of man, maturing their diabolical
plans, and resolving, either by art or
force, to accomplish this object; and
if, in the picture he can find attrac-
tions, he is well adapted to associate
with similar characters; but if he
sees nothing in the view but horror
and infamy, let him rest contented to
remain a vulgar and obscure indivi-
dual, for he is not calculated to be-
come great , nor to shine in the hemis-
phere of fashion.
After some deliberation between
these heroes of fashion, only formed
to attack those whom man was created
to defend, the original plan of Or-
mond was deemed most practicable,
with a slight alteration or two, which
will be shewn in the proper place:
and Philip, having equipped his mas-
ter in the same garb as before, a*


soon as the clock had stricken nine
our hero once more sallied out in
pursuit of his object, and Trimbell
repaired to his lodgings.


CHAP. VIII.
An Introduction , and a Masquerade.
Mrs. Howard was ready in waiting
to receive oar hero: and after he had
reached the kitchen, he was compelled
to listen to a whole catalogue of
doubts and fears, of anger and affec-
tion, which had alternately occu-
pied the mind of the old lady on ac-
count of his long and altogether in-
explicable absence ; and which he
most heartily cursed, within himself,
for taking up those moments which he
wished to employ to better purpose.
At length, he found an opportunity
to interpose a word or two, and with


et well-feigned anxiety and affection,
fee enquired if she had yet, as she
had feinted to fee her intention, in-
formed Miss Maria of the approach-
ing change in her situation; and on
her replying' in the negative, he sug-
gested the propriety of 'his breaking
it to her, if he could have an oppor-
tunity of seeing her alone.
Gratified at the apparent haste of
Ormond, the old lady absented to his
proposal; and agreed to call her
young mistress down; and, under
some pretence, to go out for a while
and leave them together, in order that
he may have ample time and oppor-
tunity to break the affair to her. Af-
ter a little more conversation on the
best making the disclosure,
Mrs. Howard went up stairs, and
called Maria/while Ormond, secret-
ly exulting in the success of his
scheme, awaited the result with no
VOL. i. g


common anxiety; and as he heard a
soft female’s step trip down the stairs,
his heart beat high with expectation,
and his whole frame was convulsed
with an involuntary emotion.
Scarcely a moment, however, was
given for reflection, before the door
opened, and the lovely object of his
desires stood before, in a dress of such
simplicity, and with an appearance
so truly celestial, as would have in-
spired any one but Ormond with awe
and admiration. But he had too
firmly fixed his eyes on one object*
and nothing could avail to stagger the
deliberate purposes of villany.
With a feigned tremulousness of
speech, our hero approached Maria,
and bending one knee to the ground,
declared himself to be a man of rank
and honor who had long loved her,
but had been compelled to have re-
course to this stratagem to disclose his
passion. Seeing that she trembled


with an appearance of apprehension,
Ormond drawing tears into his eyes,
vowed that his love for her was min-
gled with the most profound respect
for her person, and veneration for
her happiness; and that, in her pre-
sence, he considered himself in the
sanctuary of virtue. He then de-
clared that his life had been a burden
to him, until he had determined on
this step, and that if she rejected his
suit he was resolved to die at her feet.
He then detailed the occurrence of his
visits to the old attendant; and, in-
treated her, if she felt a wish to grant
him life, to assist him in keeping Mrs.
Howard in an error, and allow him,
through his visits to her, sometimes to '
hear of the welfare and good wishes of
one who must be the arbiter of his
fate—since her approbation would
crown his life with bliss, and her re-
jection drive him to the grave.
0 2


All this the experienced hypocrite
followed up with a thousand protesta-
tions of the most honourable inten-
tions, and with abundance of tears
and sighs well calculated to entrap
innocence ; and he begged her to give
him a word of consolation without
delay, as Mrs. Howard would soon
return, and he should be obliged to
end this interview.
The amiable girl trembling and
with a faultering voice, summoned
courage enough to say that she should
never alter her situation while her
parents required her assistance to pro-
mote their comfort, and she therefore
hoped that he would never attempt
to change her resolution.
Ormond immediately replied, tak-
ing her hand with, apparently, the
most profound respect, and w hich she
had not the power to withdraw, and
lifting up his eyes to heaven, invoked
the blessings of providence on her for


such a filial resolution ; and added,
that as he was determined to remain
in a state of celibacy, until her ob-
jection should be removed, he flattered
himself she would allow him to see
her sometimes, to pour out his affec-
tion in her presence, and to receive
an occasional smile as the reward of
his constancy and perseverance; and
to this he added his determination to
perish rather than revoke this resolve.
He then proceeded to inform her that
he was the second son of a most res-
pectable family ; and that her refusal
would not only seal his fate, but
would be the means of hurrying to
the grave his beloved and affectionate
parents. Here the crocodile wept, and
a discharge of tears was followed by
a volley of oaths and protestations
sufficient to dislodge the resolutions of
a more inflexible' angel than Maria
Jameson.
The amiable girl still repeated her


resolve ; but Ormond so successfully
plied her with sighs and tears, and
promises of the most unalterable affec-
tion, that he at length drew from her
a reluctant consent sometimes to see
him, if he remained constant, and
was willing to wait the required term.
The joy of Ormond at having
gained this concession was with diffi-
culty kept within bounds. He
contented himself, however, with
pressing the hand of Maria to his lips,
and expressing his gratitude in lan-
guage the warmest which desire and
hypoericy suggested. Maria, how-
ever, restrained this impetuosity of
his transport, and informed him that
£he should not consent to receive any
visits from him, until the affirir had
been opened to her parents; mid their
acquiescence obtained. Ormond im-
mediately pledged himself to wait on
her father the following day, and to


open his professions to those who had
the sole right of disposing of her.
At this moment, the voice of Mrs,
Howard was heard at the door, and
Maria immediately retiring, the old
lady entered; and coming tip to Or-
mond, enqnired, in a half-whisper* if
he had succeeded in gaining Miss
Maria's consent, Ormond replied in
the affirmative, and added, that he
was now the happiest man on earth*
and he could never do enoygh to ea»|
press his obligations to her who was
the cause of his felicity. The old
woman anxiously enquired if he had
yet fixed in his mind the day for the
consummation of their wishes; for,
she said, his head was now so com-
pletely turned and dutli&ed with joy,
that she could mot find in her heart to
stick at any thing’, so that the sooner
the marriage should take place the
better. Ormond intreated her to be
patient; for that, although he was as


anxious to hasten the period as sh
could be, still he was so situated
that he could not possibly, at thi
moment, name the day when hi
should be blest in the possession o:
her, to whom all the world was as no-
thing in his estimation.
Mrs. Howard received this declara-
tion with a smile and a blush, and
declared, that atnohg all the improve-
ments of the age, she did not, on her
part, know of any greater than that
I which had been made in the art of
courting; for that, in her younger
days, she recollected as though it was
but yesterday, the men made their
advances with so much timidity, and
had so little to say for themselves, that
if you prevailed upon them to open
foeir mouths at all, five minutes’ con-
versation was sufficient to exhaust their
Judget. But now, the dea* men were
o full of impudence and had so many
GO


words and kind, pretty, tender expres-
sions at command,-and courted so mire-
sistably, that she did not wonder that
they always won the womens’ hearts
when they attacked them ; and that, as
for herself,the tw o evenings shehadspent
with her dear young gentleman were
worth her whole life besides; and she
did regret but one thing —and that
was that she was not young, rich,
handsome, and a maid for his sake*
although if he thought her handsome,,
and he seemed a gentleman of excel-
lent taste, she had no reason to com-
plain of fate, and as she said this, she*
altered the position of her cap, placed
herself upright in ker chair , and seemed
mightily pleased with the idea of her
ow r n comeliness.
Ail this, and much more was Or-
mond obliged to listen to w ith a shew
of patience and gratification ; but all
this and a thousand times more would
he have willingly heard, so that it has


fened the consummation of his wishes;
and, after remaining* a short time
longer, he took his leave, with a pro-
mise to renew his visit at the earliest
opportunity he could find ; and in a
few minutes was seated in his apart-
ment, rejoicing in his past success,
and anticipating future delight. '
And now, ye prudes, who are ready
to censure the yielding disposition of
the amiable Maria, perhaps, more
through a malignant envy, than a con-
viction of her having acted with im-
prudence, how r would you have con-
ducted yourselves in a similar situa-
tion ? Mould the unnatural flintiness of
your hearts have been proof against the
attacks of such an accumulated dis-
charge of protestations, sighs, and tears ?
Could your iron dispositions have re-
fused to yield to the energetic eloquence,
and invincible arguments of love ?
Would bended knees, wan cheeks, tear-
ful eyes, and all the sallow sadness of


melancholy, have been marshalled and
arrayed against you in vain ? If so,
you have perverted the ends of your
creation; for ye were made as help-
mates for mankind; and, conse-
quently, such unnatural resistance to
his wishes is neither becoming nor
attractive. But as I depict nature,
I have nothing to do with you ; and 1
might perhaps be allowed to add, that
although prudery without beauty
might be enabled to act with Stoical
indifference, beauty without prudery
must have acted as Maria Jameson
did.
Early the following morning, Trim-
bell called on Ormond to enquire into
the issue of his interview, and the
latter gave him a detail of his success-
ful progress with the amiable girl,
and stated his intention, conformably
with the hint of Maria to wait on her
parents that day, and endeavour to
obtain their sanction of his addresses.


Brim bell congratulated him upon his
prowess, and bade him proceed man-
tHlfy in the pursuit of his object*
which he could not fail, by proper
management, to gain the possession of;
and then took his leave, after making
an engagement to meet in the after-
noon at Brookes’s, and to inform him
of the success of his application,
Immediately after the departure of
Mr. 1 rimbell, our hero proceeded to
dress himself, and hastened to fulfil
the promise he had made of calling
on Col. Jameson. On his arrival at
the house, he was introduced into the
parlour, and received with every mark
of politeness. Yl hen Maria perceived
Ids entrance, she blushed deeply, and
hastily left the room ; while Ormond,
u ith affected indifference opened
the subject of his visit to. the old
gentleman; who, after listening at-
tentively throughout, replied in the
most polite terms, thanking him for
die honor he intended to confer on


lis family, but requiring as a previous
tep before any answer could be given,
sufficient time to enquire into his
haracter and connections, and to con-
ult his daughter on the subject, with -
>ut whose concurrence, he could never
onsent to transfer her from his pro-
ection to that of any other person.
3rmond, with an appearance of full
atisfaction at the resolution of Col.
iameson, after giving him the address
)f the Hon. Mr. Bardley as his friend,
rnd promising to call again in a few
lays, took a respectful leave, and
returned to his lodgings, only half
gratified with the progress he had
made in this visit; and secret 1 y re-
solving, whatever might be the result
of this application to her parents, no
obstacle on earth should prevent him
from obtaining possession of Maria ;
ar.dfull of this determination, he pro-
ceeded immediately to fkookes’s in
order to fulfil his engagement with:


his friend Trimbell, whom he found
already waiting, and anxious to hear
of his progress.
To him, then, Ormond communi-
cated the result of his visit; and Trim-
bell considered his success as certain,
lif he played his cards with sufficient
prudence and skill.
In about an hour, the two friends
were joined by Lord Linfel, who pro-
posed that the whole party should go
to Lady Lovedon’s masquerade in the
evening, and as the plan was relished,
it was resolved accordingly; and, at
bus Lordship’s suggestion it was de-
termined that they should be habited
is friars, with a string of white ribbon
:ied round the left arm by way of
list i notion, in order that they may know
sach other amidst the crowd. These
joints arranged, they agreed to as-
emble at Mrs. Bardley’s at nine
' clock, as Lord Linfel had com in u-
atecl to her his intended plan, and


she had appointed to attend them in
the dress of a nun. His Lordship
then left them, and Trimbell and Or-
mond joined a party at a table, in order
to kill the tedious interval by a game
at quadrille.
About eight o'clock the two friends
sallied forth; and, calling at a mas-
querade warehouse, fitted themselves
with the habits they intended to wear;
and, thence, drove to Cavendish
Square; where they were speedily
joined by Lord Linfel; and, accom-
panied by Mrs. Bardley, repaired to
Lady Lovedon's house in Berkeley
Square.
The rooms were filling apace when
our party reached the mimic scene :
and the motley groups, as they entered ,
afforded ample amusement to all.
“ Jugglers and dancers, anticks,
mummers, rnimers beggars and
ballad singers ; Turks, Jews, Indians,
Spaniards, Arabians, and Chinese;


princes and shepherds ; gypsies, milk
maids, orange girls, fruit women;
ladies of rank and courtesans —con-
stant visitors “in courtly balls and
midnight masquerades,” poured in
with such rapidity as to fill the space
allotted for their performance, at,
what is called in fashion a very early
hour. Nothing was to be heard but
the confused sounds of merriment
which emanated from a thousand vo-
taries of pleasure: who, under the
impenetrable disguise of some assumed
character, gave themselves up to an
unrestrained riot in pleasure ; bidding
defiance to the censures, as they were
concealed from the observation of the
vulgar censors, the plebeian throng.
Men of loose habits, the rakes and
enliveners of high life, and women
who, regardless of their persons,
while their characters remained un-
impeached, indulged in the most cri-
minal excesses of guilty bliss, here


held their assignations, and pursued
their intrigues, unnoticed or unknown;
concealing beneath the mask and
'semblance of innocence, the most
unhallowed desires, which vice could
give birth to, and nourish.
Such was the scene in which our
party mingled, where modesty and
virtue were set at defiance, and the
noisy riot and intemperance of mirth
predominated. Oftentimes were they
severed from each other as they twined
about the mimic labyrinth, and as
often did they rejoin,without difficulty,
by virtue of the mystic knot which
distinguished them from those around
them, and revealed their secret' to.,
none but themselves. At length*
after various windings, they mutually
agreed to separate, and to meet in a
certain time, at the place whence they
originally started, and each departed
in quest of some adventure, or, in
other words, intrigue .


In a very few minutes, Ormond at-
tached himself to a shepherdess, ar-
rayed in all the simplicity of her cha-
racter , and having a small silver crook
suspended by her side. The young
rustic was apparently not displeased
to receive his attentions, nor very back-
ward to return them; and as he as-
sailed her with all the studied elo-
quence ot love, she w r ould sometimes
seem half consenting to his wishes,
and, at others, assumed a rigid ap-
pearance of Lucretian chastity. Well
yersed, as was evident from her con-
duct, in all the mysteries of intrigue,
she would weary out our hero’s per-
severance, until he was on the point
of forsaking her ; and then by a sud-
den transformation, she would sud-
denly raise his hopes to the highest
pitch, and stimulate him to new
vigor in his pursuit.
Thus was otir hero compelled to
dance a long attendance, alternately


a prey to despair and desire, on one
who had evidently obtained even a
greater proficiency than himself in the
vices and habits of a fashionable life.
At length, after new solicitations, he
had prevailed upon his inamorata to
retire to a remote part of the roonj,
and unmask herself to him ; but, as
he was hastening with her to the ap-
pointed spot, a friar stept up hastily
to him, and seizing him by the arm,
dragged him away from the object of
his desires. Ormond was about to
resent this interference, but, perceiv-
ing the white ribbon on his arm, he
understood that it was one of his
friends who had stepped up to pre-
vent him from being entrapped into
some snare of which he was not aware.
Yet, notwithstanding this conviction,
our hero felt an involuntary trembling
as he regarded the figure of the mask
which, although in the same habit as
his friends’, appeared different in


point of size and fignre, and the
more he gazed, the more he felt con-
vinced of some deception.
Filled with this idea, he determined
to discover who was the person that
had thus interposed, and attempting
to disengage himself, he demanded,
in rather a peremptory tone, who and
what he was, and by what right he
interposed with his actions? The mask,
however, still kept fast hold upon Or-
mond's arm, and, grasping it with
Herculean force, drew him forcibly
away towards an opposite part of the
room, which was void of company;
and as he deigned to make no reply
to the interrogatory which had been
put to him, our hero felt his courage
ebbing fast, and was incapable of
making any resistance to the effort of
his unknown antagonist.
Cj
After a few minjht<£ the mysterious
stranger i»h.i forcing Or-
mond to the retired spot, where heim


mediately drew him down on a french,
out ofthe gaze and hearing of the noisy
throng; and unloosing the ribbon
from his arm, threw it from him. In
the mean time, our hero, almost de-
prived of the power of motion, sat
sullen and silent, without daring to
make the least effort to escape, so com-
pletely had the fear of the unknown,
w ho had kept his eyes fixed stedfastly
upon him, overpowered his faculties.
It was not because Ormond was defi-
cient in personal bravery that lie sub-
mitted to the impulses of terror; but
the sudden and decisive action of this
monk, when he grasped his arm, and
the force and impetuosity of his sub-
sequent movements, had stricken a
terror into the mind of this youthful
debauchee; and he awaited w ith
anxiety, mixed with an unaccount-
able and unconquerable dread, the arri-
val of the moment when the stranger
would unmask.


That hour was at hand. After re-
posing for a few seconds, the stranger
arose and directing his steady gaze
around, as if to discover whether any
one was near, or if they were still
unobserved: loosened, for the first
time, the grasp which he had re-
tained upon Ormond’s arm, he raised
his hand to his head, drew his visor
on one side, and displayed suddenly
to the view of our trembling hero, the
stern and angry features of—his fa-
ther.
Thunder-stricken, dismayed, and
sinking to the earth, with the unex-
pected view of one whom he had so
deeply insulted, the unhappy Ormond
scarcely dared to respire. His eyes
were fixed upon the ground his
whole frame appeared agonized with
an emotion too powerful to be resisted
—arid when he at length summoned
up courage to address his parent, his
voice refused to perform its functions,


find the motion of his lips was unac-
companied by any sound. In the
mean time, the gaze of his father was
fixed upon him with an unvarying
sternness, as if resolved to scrutinize
his secret thoughts, and to fathom
the mind of him who had treated his
advice and instructions with equal
disrespect and disregard. After a
few minutes* pause, however, Mr.
Trewby desired his son to follow him,
and leading him to a tavern in the
neighbourhood, began an expostula-
tion with him, which shall be detailed
in its proper place.


CHAPTER. IX.
A Retrospect.
The reader will probably be anxious
to know by what means Mr. Trewby
was enabled to trace his son to the
masquerade, and to become acquaint-
ed with his habit and the mark of
distinction which he wore. This
curiosity is natural: but in order to
have it completely gratified, he must
be contented to lose sight of our hero
for a short time, and to take a retro-
spect of the conduct of persons of very
different habits and dispositions.
In chapter the sixth, the reader
was informed of the receipt of a letter


by Ormond from his brother, inclos-
ing one from Trewby Hall. After
waiting for some time in expectation
of a reply to this letter, Mr. Trewby
once more addressed Henry on the
subject, and intreated him to call in
Cavendish Square, and make himself
acquainted with the motives which
his brother might assign for his in-
explicable conduct, as well as to urge
him to an immediate relinquishment
of a mode of life, which, in its end
might produce consequences fatal to
his own prosperity and peaceof mind,
and be the means of producing misery
in his family.
In obedience to his father’s com-
mand, Henry repaired, without delay,
to Mr. Bardley’s house, but, unfor-
tunately, the family had gone into
the country on the day following
Ormond’s departure, and he was un-
able to obtain any satisfactory in-
VOL. I. II


formation respecting the object of his
search. The servants informed him that
his brother had quitted the house
the day before the departure of Mr.
and Mrs. Bardley, but, whether, his
removal was only temporary until
they should return to town, whether
he had gone to meet them in \ork-
shire, or had shifted his lodgings for a
permanency, they had not the power
to inform him.
Disappointed and grieved most
sincerely at the ill-success of his visit,
he dispatched a letter to his father, in
which he inveighed bitterly against
the unnatural conduct of his brother,
and expressed bis determination to
devote the whole of his leisure hours,
in attempting to discover what had
become of him ; a resolution to which
he was equally urged by feelings of
filial as well as fraternal affection.
He intreated his father to bear up
against the shock which Ormond’s be-


Jhaviour must have naturally occasion-
ed, and cheered him with the hopes
that his rash and misguided brother
would return to his duty, whenever
they could procure such tidings of
him as should lead to his discovery ; a
period which he considered to be at
no great distance, since if unremitted
search and diligent inquiry could
avail, he must be speedily restored to
them.
This letter of Henry’s was a severe
stroke to the feelings of a father, since
he had confidently buoyed himself up
with the hope that the expostulations
of his brother might yet have proved
effectual in reclaiming Ormond ; but
this hope was, for the present, entirely
destroyed, by the tidings of his de-
parture from Mr. Bardley’s house,
and their entire ignorance of his pre-
sent residence. The only plausible
measure which suggested itself to Mr.
ii 2


Trewby, in this dilemma, was to write
to Mr. Bardley, and endeavour by
that method to discover what was be-
come of his undutifyl and corrupted
son.
Without loss of time the old gentle-
man communicated his intention to
Henry, accompanied by a desire that
he would once more call at Mr. Bard-
ley’s, and procure his address in
Yorkshire. This request was promptly
complied with, and Henry, having
learned the wished-for particulars,
dispatched them, without delay, to
Trewby Hall, with his fervent wishes
for the success of the project; and,
in the course of a few days a letter
was forwarded to Mr. Bardley, at
Darlington, containing the requisite
inquiries.
In about a week after the transmis-
sion of the letter from Trewby Hall,
an answer was received: but, alas! it
was such as was ill calculated to af


ford relief to the anxious feelings of a
distressed parent. It merely stated
that Ormond had removed from Ca-
vendish Square, on the day before
they left the metropolis —that they
were not at present acquainted with
the place of his residence, but that
on their return to London, which
would be in about three weeks or a
month, they should, doubtless, see
him, and would then be happy to
give any information respecting his
abode and pursuits which might be
within their power.
This inquiry having proved fruit-
less, Mr. Trewby consided that no-
thing more could be done, before Mr*
Bardley’s return, unless the result of
Henry’s search should finish more
successfully. |He, accordingly, ac-
quainted him by a letter, of the na-
ture of Mr. Bardley’s reply, and re-
quested that he would, immediately
on that gentleman’s return, endeavour


to induce him to take an interest in
the search of Ormond, and in con-
clusion, intreated him to spare no
pains nor expences, in the interim, to
discover the object of their pursuit.
And here,as a small space must neces-
sarily elapse before Mr. Bardley’s arri-
val in the metropolis, it may not be
uninteresting to the reader to make him
acquainted with the progress of Henry
in his professional pursuits; in order
that he may, if he approves of the
task, and will take the trouble, draw
a parallel between the conduct and
dispositions of the two brothers : and
make his own reflections on the re-
sult.
Immediately on leaving Mr. Bard-
ley’s house, Henry had repaired to
Mr. Lovell's ; and as that gentleman
had received a letter from Trewby
Hall, on the preceding day, inform-
ing him of the young man’s depar-
ture, he felt much gratified by his


readiness to commence the duties of
his profession. He was accordingly-
placed in the counting-house, and
being lodged and boarded in the fa-
mily, Mr. Lovell had frequent oppor-
tunities of observing his unremitted
and intense application to business*
which hesuffered to enc roachso m u ch on
his hours of leisure, as to leave himself
scarcely a moment for necessary re-
laxation. In consequence of this in-
dustry he very soon became not only
valuable, but even an essential ap-
pendage to Mr. Lovell’s business, and
attracted not only the ardent esteem
of his employer, but the admiration
of all the mercantile men who were
accustomed to visit Mr. Lovell’s
counting-house, for the transaction of
business. A few months only had
elapsed before the salary of Henry
was considerably increased; and a
promotion, in consequence of his ap-
plication, had rendered his situation


more honourable than at the com-
mencement of his clerkship.
As he advanced in his station, his
duties became less arduous, and more
confidential; and as he had, conse-
quently, a considerable leisure, he
employed it in the cultivation of his
mind in historical knowledge, the
good effects of which soon became
evident; since the nature of every
climate, and the produce of every soil,
to which British merchants were in
the habit of trading, became inti-
mately known to him ; as well as the
manners and customs, and a consider-
able part of the language of foreign
nations. It may readily be conceived
that these acquirements were calcu-
lated to increase the value of Henry
Trewby’s services, and, in fact, there
were few merchants in the metropolis,
who would not gladly purchase his
assistance by the sacrifice of a con-
siderable portion of their profits, and


this became so evident to Mr. Lovell,
that he resolved, in the course of a
short period, when his experience had
been a little more matured, to take
him into partnership in his own con-
cern, in order that Henry might thus ac-
quire a greater interest in promoting
it, and that he might be enabled to
fulfil a resolution, which he had long
since formed, to retire from the cares
and fatigues of active business, and
enjoy the remainder of his days in a
tranquil retreat.
Thus by industry, integrity, and
the improvement of his knowledge,
Henry was completing the basis of
his future happiness and prosperity,
and insuring to himself the esteem of
all those who have learned to appre-
ciate merit. Inestimably valuable to
his master as a servant, and the pride
and consolation of the authors of his
being, he in a great measure contn-
n 5


buted to enable the latter to bear up
against the continual wounds they
received from the unnatural conduct
of his brother, and promised fairly to
gild the evening of their days with
happiness.
The continual flow of tenderness*
and the uniform good sense of his
letters to his father, had made a very
considerable impression on the heart
of Julia Moody, whose rising affec-
tion for Ormond had been at first
checked, and gradually eradicated,
by his undutiful and dissipated be-
haviour. She had been, for some
time, accustomed to contrast the
conduct of the two brothers, and the
result, being constantly unfavourable
to Ormond, had determined her to
give the preference to Henry, who,
she had some reason to suppose was by
no means indifferent to her. No
sooner had she formed this resolution,
than she imparted it to her mother,


and the latter entirely concurring in
opinion with her daughter, commen-
ded her prudence, and communicated
the change in her affection to Mr.
Trewby, who received the intelligence
with delight, as affording a just tri-
bute to the merits of his eldest son.
Henry was soon informed of this cir-
cumstance, and although he regretted
that his brother’s conduct should have
deprived him of so valuable a posses-
sion as the love of Julia, his transports
predominated when he recollected to
whom she had transferred that affec-
tion which, in his opinion, would have
conferred honor and happiness upon
the most exalted of his species.
If the reader should feel himself dis-
posed either to condemn the iickleness
of Julia, or the behaviour of Henry
in feeling; delighted that lie had sun-
-0-0 1.
planted Ormond in her affections, let
him refer to former periods of tins
work and take a view of the conduct


of the latter, in refusing to listen or
reply to the injunctions of a parent,
and in treating the fraternal admoni-
tions of his brother with the coolness
of neglect. Let him picture to him-
self how he would appear in the cha-
racter of a husband, who had acquit-
ted himself so vilely in that of a son ;
and surely he will give Julia Moody
credit for exercising t that virtue,
’yclep’d prudence, which although
not peculiar to persons of her age and
sex she discovered herself to possess.
As to Henry's conduct on this occa-
sion, there really appears to be nothing
at all so unnatural in it ; and should
there be any person so incredulous as
not to credit the assertion; why let
him bring it home to himself, and
after examining minutely into the na-
ture of the case, let him speak out
candidly, and say, if he would have
acted otherwise.
But to return to the subject. Such


were the relative situations of affairs
at Trewby Hall and at Mr. Lovell’s,
at the period when Mr. Trewby
received the reply to his letter to
Mr. Bardley ; and Henry, in conse-
quence of the failure of this plan to
discover the residence of his brother,
commenced a search after him, in every
way which appeared likely to be at-
tended with the desired effect. He
employed persons, with promises of
great rewards in case of success, and
after giving them the most minute
description of his brother, he dis-
patched them to various parts of the
city ; and not satisfied lest they should
neglect their pursuit, lie regularly
visited the principal taverns and coffee-
houses himself, every evening, in the
hope of sometimes accidentally meet-
ing the object of his search. Several
of his friends too, being provided with
the requisite information, employed
themselves in a similar way, and every


engine which ingenuity could devise
or fraternal affection suggest w as set to
work to aid the prosecution of the
purpose of Henry.
Yet, notwithstanding all this vigi-
lance, and in spite of the most diligent
researches and enquiries, the weeks
rapidly rolled away, without produc-
ing any correct information respecting
Ormond. It is true, that many mes-
sengers had returned with news of
their having traced persons of this des-
cription to their lodgings, and Henry,
ever ready to catch at' the slightest
probability of a discovery, uniformly
gave himself the trouble to find out
the spots described, and to make every
enquiry at the houses to which he was
directed. Oftentimes his minute ques-
tions had led to suspicions, and he had
been once or twice in situations of
peril, owing to the extreme closeness
of his interrogatories. He had how -
ever constantly extricated himself with


honor, every rational mind being
ready to sympathise with him, when
the object of his enquiries was made
known.- Every effort failing, and
all the messengers having given up
the pursuit, the search was considered
as hopeless, and the perseverance of
Henry himself began to give way.
Letters had been regularly dis-
patched to Trewby Hall, giving an
account of the measures adopted to
discover Ormond, and the hopes of
his parents had risen accordingly; but
at length, when Henry began to des-
pair, his communications became
less frequent, and less cheering ; and
the expectation which hope had che-
rished, soon subsided.
It was about this time that Mr.
and Mrs. Bardley returned to their
house in Cavendish Square ; and on
the morning after their arrival Henry
having, by chance, called in, was in-
troduced to them, and stated the ob»


ject of his visit. He was received
with much politeness, but was unable
to obtain any information he required,
as Mr. Bardley informed him their
return having been so recent as to
render it scarcely possible that he
should yet have discovered the re-
sidence of his brother. He, however,
alluded to Mr. Trewby’s letter, and
expressed his intention of enquiring
after Ormond the first opportunity ;
and he would not fail, on receiving
any information on the subject, to
communicate it to him.
Obliged to remain satisfied with
this promise, Henry took his leave,
and returning home, dispatched a
letter to his father, acquainting him
with the arrival of Mr. and Mrs.
Bardley from the north, and with the
result of his first application : and
concluding with an assurance that he
should call again in Cavendish Square,
as soon as lie considered it as proba*


ble that Mr. Bardley might have
made enquiries upon the
subject.
When Mr. Trewby received this
letter, he resolved to repair to the me-
tropolis in person, after a few days,
and to prosecute the search himself,
in company with Henry and Mr.
Bardley ; but this interval had nearly
proved fatal to their search.
On the second day after his arrival
in town, Mr. Bardley was called upon
by Trimbell, the friend of Ormond,
and immediately beginning to ques-
tion him respecting the residence of
the latter, he at the same time stated
his reason for making the enquiry, and
informed Trimbell of the letter of
Mr. T rewby and the visit of his son,
on the subject. Trimbell, however,
making an evasive reply, flew to Or-
mond, and communicated the cir-
cumstance, and returning, at his
request, extorted a promise ft cm


Mr. Bardley, to afford no clue to any
enquiries, by which Ormond might
be discovered.
In the mean time, Mr. Trewby
arrived in London, and repaired to
Mr. Lovell’s house, where he was re-
ceived with all the warmth of friend-
ship, as well as filial affection. It
was with some difficulty that he was
restrained from going immediately to
Cavendish Square, but the advice
of Henry at length prevailed ; and it
was agreed, that the latter should on
the following morning once more visit
Mr. Bardley’s, and if he should, at
this time, obtain no satisfactory reply,
that Mr. Trewby should afterwards
call upon that gentleman, and engage
him to accompany them in their in-
tended search after Ormond.
On the following accord-
ing to the agreement of the preced-
ing evening, Henry repaired to Ca-
vendish Square ; and perceiving, on


his entrance, Mr. Bardley’s valet,
who recollected him, he applied to
him for information, and promised, if
he succeeded in throwing any light
on his brother’s retreat, that he would
handsomely reward him. The man
readily engaged to pick up any in-
telligence which he might be able to
glean on the subject, and they parted.
This visit proving as ineffectual as
the preceding ones, Henry was about
to leave the house, when the servant
to whom he had addressed himself on
his entrance, beckoned to him, and
told him that he had, by a very great
chance, heard something about Mr.
Ormond.
Transported with these good tidings,
Henry entreated him to tell him with-
out delay all that he had gleaned on
the subject; but the servant, remind-
ing him that it would be dangerous
to enter into a conversation then,
when he was liable to be seen every


moment by his master, requested that
he would proceed to a neighbouring
tavern which he named, and whither
he would follow him, without delay,
and give him the information he had
collected.
To the place appointed, Henry ac-
cordingly hastened; and, in a few
minutes after his arrival the valet
entered the room, and drawing him
aside to a remote corner made him
acquainted with what he had learnt
in the following terms :
“ Y° u must know, Sir, that just
after your honor had given me the hint,
when you entered the house, I had
occasion to go to my master’s dressing
room: and, as 1 was going there, I
passed by the door of my lady’s
boudoir, when 1 heard the name of
Ormond Trewby repeated pretty
loudly. My curiosity being’ excited,
on account of what you had previ-
ously stated to me, I stopped at the


door, and listened attentively to catch
any thing else which might be said
upon the subject; and in a few mi-
nutes I heard LordLinfel’s voice tellinsr
my mistress that Mr. Trimbell and
Ormond Trewby would call there at
nine o’clock in the evening, and that
they had all agreed to go to Lady
Lovedon’s masquerade, in Berkeley
Square, in the habits of Friars, and
that each was to wear a piece of white
ribbon round the left arm, by way
of distinction. I had no opportunity
to hear any more, tor some footsteps
approaching, I directly proceeded
about my business. But your honour
may depend upon the truth of what
I have told you, for 1 would stake my
life it is exactly correct.”
Henry immediately returned the
man many thanks for his information,
and having made him a handsome
present, returned home elated with
his good fortune in discovering by the


chance of a moment, what he had
vainly sought for so many weeks.
When he recounted his success to
his father; they immediately con-
sulted what plan was best to pursue ;
and after Henry had stated that it
was in his power to procure a ticket
for Mrs. Lovedon’s masquerade, it
was determined that Mr. Trewby
should attend the mimic scene, habited
precisely the same as the party from
Mr. Bardley’s. A dress was accord-
ingly procured, and as the evening
approached, Mr. Trewby and Henry
proceeded to a tavern in the neigh-
bourhood of Cavendish Square, and
waited impatiently until the hour
nide, when Mr. Lovell’s chariot being
in attendance, they drove into the
Square, and when Lord Linfel and his
party drove off, Mr. Trewby and
Henry gave orders to their coachman
to follow the carriage, and in a few r
minutes after Ormond, his father


entered Lady Lovedon’s rooms ; and
having singled out his son by his size
and figure, followed him closely round
the rooms, until he saw an oppor-
tunity, at the moment when he was
retiring with the shepherdess, to throw
himself in his way, and to drag him
to an obscure corner, where he un-
masked to his son’s confusion, ter-
ror, and dismay.


CHAP. X.
A Penitent Profligate.
Having been shewn into a private
room at the tavern, Mr. Trewby de-
sired his son to be seated, and address-
ed him in the following terms :
“ Undutiful wretch that you are,
is this the manner in which you fulfil
the pledge which you gave to me when
you left your home? Is it thus that
you pursue the duties of your pro-
fession, and render yourself worthy
to receive the honours due to merit ?
Are these the methods you have adopt-
ed, to glad a father's heart ? Is it by
dissipation, and an attendance at


scenes such as this where I hare dis-
covered you this evening ? Have you
so quickly forgotten my parting cau-
tions, and the words with which I
concluded ? Are you determined to
know from experience that when “you
become debauched in principles , you mil
never stop short of destruction?” Base,
unthinking youth, I should be justi-
fied in leaving you to your fate, and
in permitting you to rush headlong to
your ruin, since you have treated jme
and your brother with such cool
neglect, did not the feelings of a
father still animate my bosom, al-
though the feelings of a son have
ceased to glow in your breast. My
fears, expressed to you before you de-
parted for this metropolis, were found-
ed in truth : your choice of associates
was itself sufficient toconvince me that
the seeds of debauchery were sown
VOL. i


within you, and that it would require
watchfulness to check their growth.
Alas ! I little thought what an adept
you would soon become in the art of
dissipation ! 1 had flattered myself,
that your disposition, although na-
turally hasty, was not originally so
depraved, as subsequent and sad ex-
perience has taught me. 1 have now
proved, to my cost, that you, to whom
I had looked dor comfort in my 'de-
clining years —you whom I regarded
as one who might confer dignity on
your family, and rise to the highest
honours —you are likely to become
the poison to my happiness, the
shortener of my existence, the dis-
grace of your family, and the con-
tempt of mankind. Oh ! dismal pro-
spect, so full of horror and dismay !
Why was I permitted to see this day ?
Why Vt as I not rather allowed to des-
cend into my grave in happy igno-


ranee of what I now am doomed to
experience ? What have I done, that
I should be compelled thus to drain
off the dregs of misery, administered,
too, by one who owes to me his exis-
tence ? Or, rather why was that
existence suffered to continue? Why
was such a viper allowed to live that
he might sting and destroy him that
gave him life? Oh! sad accumulation
of grief and misery ! My grey hairs
must now descend in sorrow to the
grave, since 1 have witnessed such
depravity in the fruit of my own
body ! Oh ! that providence had cur-
tailed thy days!—Oh! that thou hadst
died in infancy, before thou hadst
known corruption ; before thou hadst
fitted thyself for hell, and an asso-
ciation with the damned !
“ Mournful hour ! and do I live,
Almighty God, to curse my own off-
i 2


spring ! Do I live to call one who has
sprung from me, damned, unnatural,
and a parricide ? Oh ! gracious Hea-
ven, stay thy wrath, and pour no fur-
ther accumulation of vengeance on
my head ? Still, still, grant that I
may, the little remnant of my days,
retain the reason with which thou hast
so mercifully blessed me.
“ Attempt not to justify yourself,
or to palliate, your criminal conduct,
your unnatural neglect of my instruc-
tions, and unpardonable absence
from your professional duties, for
every attempt at justification can only
add a deeper tint to the already un-
eradicable stain which you have in-
flicted on your name and character.
The path to honour and the esteem of
your fellow creatures was open to
you; but you have wickedly deviated
from it, and turned into the road
which leads to ruin, shame and igno


miny. I know not as yet the extent of'
your guilt: I have yet to fathom the
depth of your corruption, and to dis-
cover whether there is any virtue,
any latent principle of good still un-
discarded from your breast. But,
alas! iny hopes and expectations are
equally weak; since I consider that
one who has treated the author of his
being with the silent contempt which
you have displayed, and the effusions
of paternal affection with careless in-
difference,. must have been deeply
tainted indeed with corruption.
“ A thousand times have I repented
the committal of your future conduct
to one who has proved himself so un-
worthy the confidence I reposed in
him; and a thousand times have I
cursed the unhappy accident which
introduced to my house him to whom
I attribute your ruin. I gave him
assistance in the hour when he needed


it; I tendered him every accommoda-
tion which lay in my power, and he
has repaid me by seducing from his
duty the child of my bosom: if such
a conduct is sanctioned by the laws of
fashion ; if to repay favours with ingra-
titude, and to poison the minds of the
young and inexperienced, is the cus-
tom in high life; would to God that
you had remained in a state of com-
parative ignorance and virtue, equally
a stranger to the benefits and the vices
derivable from a city education.
“ Had you adopted the same line
of conduct which has raised your
brother to honour and high considera-
tion in his business, you had proved,
instead of a curse, a blessing to your-
self and your family ; and have spared
yourself and me the misery of a meet-
ing, in such a place, and under such
circumstances as the present, i had
remained in a state of happy and peace-
ful tranquillity, in my home of retire-


ment, and you would have been mak-
ing a progress in your profession, and
enjoying the retrospect of the past, as
well as the prospect of the future effects
of your application. But the case is,
to my sorrow,widely different: Henry is
respected, but you are despised; he
is courted by the wise, the wealthy,
and the good, but your company is
shunned by all ranks of society, ex-
cept those who are ignorant of your
real character, or who are as deeply
corrupted as yourself; and he will
obtain dignity and favour amongst
mankind, when you are reduced, by
dissipation and disease to beggary or
destruction.”
Here the old gentleman ceased;
but the exertion he had made, and the
terrible conflict in his bosom between
the feelings of an affectionate, and an
insulted parent, proved too powerful
or him : and he sank exhausted and
nsensible to the floor. The situation


of his father alarmed Ormond, and
while he eagerly called for assist-
ance, he, with the utmost anxiety,
watched his recovery. The heart-
rending exclamations which had is-
sued from the lips of his sire, accom-
panied by the bitter tears of anguish
which rushed, in quick succession,
down his cheeks, had stricken a deadly
horror into the breast of the young
debauchee; and it was not without
considerable difficulty that he retain-
ed possession of his faculties.
As soon as Mr. Trewby was in some
measure restored, he ordered a coach
to be called, and, desiring his son to
accompany him, entered it, and drove
to Mr. Lovell’s. On the road thither
the old gentleman again gave way to a
burst of sorrow little less severe than
the first, to which Ormond listened in
silence, incapable as he was of say-
ing aught in extenuation of his con


duct: and after a short pause from
the expressions of parental grief, the
coach stopped at the door of Mr.
Lovell’s house, which was immediate-
ly opened, as the family were anxiously
waiting to learn the result of Mr. Trew-
V s scheme.
And here Ormond had another se-
vere trial to go through. He had to
face that brotherwhom he had slighted,
and treated with indignity—to whose
affectionate admonitions he had turned
a deaf ear, and to whose letter h®
had not deigned to make a reply. In
addition to the angry paroxysms of an
insulted father, he had now to bear
the glances and the reproofs of an of-
fended brother ; and, besides all
this, he would have to appear in the
presence of an eminent and respect-
able family, to whom he must be at
once an object of pity, censure, and
contempt. His pride recoiled at this
idea; and, at the moment he would
j 5


have willingly rushed to anniliiliation,
to have avoided the degradation to
which he was compelled to submit.
For the first time, for a long period,
remorse harrowed up his feelings, and
he cursed in his heart those vicious
pursuits which had brought him into
this situation of indignity ; and as he
entered the room where Henry was
sitting in the midst of Mr. Lovell’s
family, his feelings overpowered him
and he fell senseless on the floor.
Every effort was made to restore the
unhappy Ormond to his senses, but
for a long time all exertions were fruit-
less, and it was not until he had been
carried to bed, and the applications
had been renewed, that he opened his
eyes. But his return to recollection
was accompanied by a raging fever:
his eyes gazed wildly round the room,
liis pulse beat high and irregularly, a
hect’c flush crimsoned his c eeks, and
his s; e c>, or he attempted to speak,
was fauliering, iaint, and incoherent.


These alarming* symptoms quickly
dissipated the anger of M r .Trewby, and
the affectionate feelings of a father
returned in their full force. Medical
assistance was immediately called in,
and the situation of Ormond was de
dared dangerous. Every recollection
of his past follies was immediately
bamshed from the minds of those af-
fectionate relatives, who attended,
with anxious solicitude, the bed of
his sickness; and endeavoured, by
the most endearing assiduities, to
sooth and restore him to happiness.
In spite of every attention, Or-
mond’s disorder continued to increase,
and the most serious apprehensions
began to be entertained for his safety.
It was at this period when, as it were,
struggling between life and death, that
his father, in order to give ease to the
distempered mind of his unhappy son,
assured him of his entire -forgiveness
for the past, and his determination to


bury the remembrance of every dis-
cretion in the deepest oblivion. Henry
also declared his willingness to forget
all that could give cause for unhappi-
ness, and again to receive to his affec-
tion his penitent brother.
One evening when the fever was at
its highest, about the third day after
his illness had commenced, the physi-
cian declared that the crisis of Or-
mond’s fate was at hand, and that life
or death hung on the present moment,
and would be the issue of that night.
With trembling solicitude, Mr. Trew-
by and Henry determined to watch
with the physician by the bedside of
'the unhappy youth, and every pre-
caution which the ingenuity of medi-
cal skill, or the affection of a parent
and brother could sHggest, was adopt-
ed to give a favourable turn to the dis-
order.
About midnight, Ormond fell into
a deep sleep, and his perspiration


weve so gentle, as scarcely to inform
those about him that he yet lived, and
on the commencement of this slumber,
the physician intimated, in a low
whisper that this sleep, if it continued,
would effect the salvation of the pa-
tient. From this moment, not a whis-
per was heard, not a step suffered to
approach the door, lest by disturbing
the slumbers of Ormond a fatal turn
should be given to the disorder : and
every hour which elapsed was hailed
with a look of grateful joy by Mr.Trew-
by, as rendering hope less precarious.
At about ten o’clock in the morning
Ormond awoke : and what a gratifying
change presented itself to the in-
quiring eye of a father ! The ap-
pearance of the fever had vanished;
the eyes of Ormond had recovered
their natural lustre, the regularity of
his pulse was restored, and the physi-
cian declared that no trace of his


disorder remained, except the weak-
ness which marked its departure.
Ye fathers, whom heaven has blessed
with sons, and preserved them to n a-
turity ; it is for you, for you only can
truly paint them, to describe the feel-
ings of Mr. Trewby, on hearing the
grateful tidings of the rescue of his
son, from the jaws of the grave.
Equally futile and absurd would be the
task to attempt the description of sen-
sations which are too mighty and com-
plicated for utterance Be it sufficient
to remark that he felt the joy of a fa-
ther over his long lost son, together with
the ecstacy w hich arises from the re-
surrection of buried hopes. It was a
happiness of no earthly origin, a bliss
which derived its existence from the
God oi Nature ; pure in its essence,,
and unalloyed in its effluence: it was
such as none but parents can feel, and
equally removed above the reach of
eloquence or description.


I The recovery of Ormond was from
lis day as rapid as can be concei\ ed,
nd what gave additional gratification
o the heart of his father was that the
epentance he displayed tor his past
lilies had every appearance of the
nost unfeigned sincerity, as lie era-
>raced every opportunity to express
lis deep contrition, and his unaiter-
ible resolution to adopt an opposite
ine of conduct in future, in order
that the shame of the past might be
eradicated from the remembrance of
those who had been the witnesses of
his follies and extravagancies.
It may readily be conceived what
satisfaction a resolution of this nature
must have imparted to the feel-
ings of Mr. Trewby and Henry ; the
former of whom immediately trans-
mitted the grateful tidings to his be-
loved partner, with his most heart-felt
congratulations on the happy tei initia-
tion of his visit to the metropolis, and


his resolution to return to Trewby
Hall as soon as he should be enabled
to witness the perfect recovery of Or-
mond, and his entrance upon the
long-neglected duties of his profes-
sion.
The weakness which Ormond’s se-
vere illness had left behind it was not
for some time sufficiently removed to
admit of any exertions on his part;
and it became the employ and delight
of his father and brother to invent
such methods of amusement as might
relieve the tediousness of his confine-
ment, as well as prevent his mind
from recurring to past events. Every
care was taken to avoid in conversation
the least hint which might have this
tendency, lest the bitter retrospect
might return with such force as to
overpower the weak nerves of the pe-
nitent youth, and occasion a relapse,
w hich would in'all human probability


be attended with the most fatal con-
sequences. With such precautions,
and under such tender management,
it is not to be wondered at that the
mind of Ormond became gradually
calmed into a sort of serene happiness,
which was likely to produce as happy
effects, as the more pungent and har-
rowing feelings of remorse.
In fact, the penitence of our hero
became now so conspicuous as to carry
with it evident marks of its genuine
nature. His near approach to death
had diffused over his mind, a sad so-
lemnity, as novel as it was beneficial
to him. He appeared to awake, as it
were, from a long dream of dissipa-
tion, and determined to set about the
work of reformation in good earnest,
and without delay. After this resolu-
tion had been formed he felt a serene
cheerfulness pervade his whole frame,
infinitely more permanent and un


alloyed than the pleasure which he
had derived from his criminal indul-
gencies; and, by degrees, as his mind
became tranquillized, his sleep was
sweeter by night, and his reflections
more gratifying by day. Fashion and
folly seemed entirely to have relin-
quished their hold upon him, and to
have resigned their empire to reason
and virtue ; the habits of indolence
and the blandishments of hisrh life
O
ceased to gratify, and his whole soul
seemed to be wrapt in a desire to en-
gage in the pursuits of honourable
industry.
Such was the situation of Ormond,
and the temper of his disposition,
after he had suffered so severely from
the last affliction. His father would
sit by his side, during a considerable
portion of the day, and join with him
in delightful and rational anticipations
of future happiness and prosperity j


and Henry would, at other times,
join in the conversation, or read aloud
some work of entertainment and in-
struction, in order to relieve the
mind of his brother.
The attention which Mr. Lovell
and his family had uniformly dis-
played during the illness of Ormond
was such as to make a "deep impres-
sion on Mr. Trewby ; and the pains
which they now tpok daily to expedite
the recovery of his son, by every
means in their power, were such as
to excite his warmest gratitude. Or-
mond likewise appeared to feel the ,
obligations they had conferred upon
him, and seemed anxious for an op-
portunity to shew, by his future con-
duct, that he was not altogether un-
worthy their solicitude. Not content
with affording the youthful invalid
every domestic accommodation, they
were continually eager to discover


sources of amusement for him; and
as soon as his strength would permit,
the chariot and servants of Mr. Lovell
were always in readiness to yield to
him the means of exercise and grati-
fication.
At length the period arrived when
the physician who had attended Or-
mond declared that there was no
longer a necessity for his visits, and
that the recovery of his patient might
from that hour be considered as com-
pleted ; and Mr. Trewby, in conse-
quence,of this declaration determined
to lose no time in placing his son in a
situation to commence his professional
duties, and finding Ormond as anxious
as himself for the furtherance of his
plans, he embraced the first oppor-
tunity to accompany him to Lincoln’s
Inn, where he was entered a student,
accordingly, and apartments were


prepared for him within a convenient
distance.
These arrangements being com-
pleted, Mr. Trewby prepared to take
his departure from the metropolis;
and on the morning of his quitting
Mr. Loveirs, he took Ormond into a
private room, and addressed him to
the following effect:—
“ My dear Ormond—You have,
from a sad experience, learned the
truth of the maxims which I laid
down for your guidance on your en-
trance into life. You have, in your
own person felt the unstable nature
of the pleasures which attend, and
the keener sensation of the miseries
which follow habits of dissipation.
Were I to enlarge with ever so much
force, or to an almost infinite extent,
on points of this description, I could
neither afford you the means of in-
formation nor improvement; for you


have studied them, and you know
full well the nature and description of
the fruits which they produce. Your
late severe illness has, I trust and am
sure, made an impression on your
mind, which will not easily nor short-
ly wear away ; and when you recol-
lect the pangs your past misconduct
has occasioned to your family : when
you consider all the misery w hich has
resulted from indiscretions which are
gone by ; and when to this you add
the vast extent of happiness which
you can bestow on those who are en-
deared to you by the ties of nature
and affection by the pursuit of right
objects ; I am confident that you will
regulate your future conduct accord-
ingly.
44 1 do not believe that your dispo-
sition is naturally depraved. I con-
sider that your past errors have re-
sulted more from a vicious intercourse


and the influence of bad advisers and
bad example, than from any innate
disposition to evil : and as you must
be well aware of the truth of this re-
mark, let me entreat you to be prudent
and select in your new associations,
since on them will depend much of
your future happiness or misery. You
have displayed a too great easiness of
disposition ; let me entreat you to
guard against such a failing hereafter,
for when once you hesitate between
right and wrong, you are in great
danger, if not inevitably lost. You
have miraculously escaped destruc-
tion from the effects of your past in-
discretion : and if you will always
resolve to bear the recollection of this
in your mind, the remembrance must
prove a sort of talisman to prevent
your falling into any new dangers. I
speak now to you with a greater con-
fidence of being attended to, because


you have purchased that knowledge
which must form the basis of convic-
tion.
“ You were formerly incredulous,
because you could not enter into
proper conceptions of the subject; but
you can no longer remain proof against
facts which must have impressed them-
selves upon your mind, beyond the
power of eradiction. Should you, in
an unconscious moment, feel yourself
tempted again to deviate from the
paths of propriety, call to mind your
reflections on a bed of sickness, when
death appeared at your elbow, ready
to make you his victim, and this will
be sufficient to open your eyes, to
awaken your vigilance and to save
you.
“ I shall not enlarge more on this
subject, since multiplicity of words
cannot avail to strengthen those im-
pressions which sad experience has


made upon you. But before I con-
clude and leave you again to yourself,
1 shall say a few words on the subject
of industry, in which you are, as yet,
perfectly a novice. By a close atten-
tion to the duties of your profession,
you may yet make up for the time you
have lost; you are still young enough,
and there is ample scope for exertion.
Apply to your profession with un-
wearied diligence —be prompt and
punctual in your exercises, and fill
up your leisure hours, by storing your
mind with that knowledge which you
must acquire before you can gain
honor, or the confidence and the es-
teem of mankind. It is by an adher-
ence to this plan, that your brother
has risen so rapidly in the favor of
those around him ; that he has en-
creased his present comforts, and laid
the basis of his future prosperity;
VOL. i. k


follow his examples and success must
attend you.
“ I shall now, for the second time,
place a confidence in your prudence
and judgment, and leave you in this
scene of bustle and temptation, with-
out a guide. If 1 have not thoroughly
mistaken your character and dispo-
sition, you will require no further
admonitions to stimulate you in the
pursuit of your duty t since you are
now fully enabled to form an accu-
rate opinion of the consequences which
invariably result from vicious prac-
tices ; and if your past sufferings are
not sufficient to impose a curb upon
your future intemperance, every ad-
monition and all the advice and in-
treaties I could give to you, must be
utterly unavailing. But 1 have better
hopes of you ; 1 have watched the
progress of your penitence, and l am


satisfied, that you are sufficiently
awakened to a sense of your past
follies, and firmly resolved to shew
your contrition by reforming your
habits, and rivetting your attention to
objects of a different and more hon-
ourable nature/ 5
Mr. Trewby concluded; and Or-
mond, with tears in his eyes, assured
his father of his deep remorse for the
past, and of his determination to ap-
ply himself to those pursuits only
which would produce honor to him-
self and happiness to those who were
connected with him.
tn a short time after this interview,
the worthy old gentleman took an
affectionate leave of his friend, and
his two sons, and sat off on his return
to Trewby Hall; and Ormond, after
bidding adieu to his brother, departed
to his lodgings in Bedford Row.


iVVhen he arrived at his apartments
his hist step was to dispatch a mes-
senger to his oid lodgings, with an
order for Philip to attend him ; anc
in about an hour, his old valet stood
before him, and expressed his joy oil
once more beholding him, after so
long an absence. After some consider-
ation as to the best 1 t od to be
adopted, Ormond determined to dis-
charge his old lodgings in James's
Street, and Philip was accordingly
dispatched for that purpose.
During the absence of his servant
>n this errand our hero began to put
n practice his new resolutions, and,
laving chalked out such a course of
tudy as he considered most calculated
o promote his future prosperity, he
mmediately commenced his new
vocation.
Unused, however, as he had been
o this kind of application, he found


that a very considerable degree of re-
solution was requisite to fix his at-
tention on a pursuit so diametrically
opposite to any thing to which he had
accustomed himself; yet, notwith-
standing all his determination, the
dryness of the task rendered it so
intolerably irksome, that the return
of Philip found him little .more ad-
vanced in his progress than when
he was dispatched on his errand to
the old lodgings.
When Philip came in, Ormond,
shutting his book, enquired if he had
done as lie had directed him :
The servant answered in the affir-
mative ; and added, that as he was
coming out of the house, after having
closed the arrangement, he met Mr.
Trimbell, who immediately asked
him if he had heard any thing of his
master; to which (having received


no orders to the contrary) he informed
him of all he knew, and gave him
the address of his lodgings in Bedford
row. He further said, that Mi**
Trimbell had desired his compli-
ments, and intimated his intention
of calling on him in the course of the
next day.
On receiving this piece of intelli-
gence, Ormond consulted in his own
mind, whether he had better receive
the intended visit of 1 rimbell or not.
At first he resolved to give orders
for his denial to him, lest an interview
might have a tendency to shake his
resolutions of amendment; but a mo-
ment's consideration determined him
not to have recourse to such a cow-
ardly resort, and he fixed within
himself to inform him personally of
his reformation, and of the different
line of conduct which he meant in
future to pursue.


After coming to this determination,
Ormond felt himself somewhat re-
lieved ; and immediately began to
call to mind all that he had suffered
in order to fix his resolution the more
firmly ; and, after having wound him-
self to a proper pitch of enthusiasm,
once more opened the volume before
him, and attempted to convince him-
self that its contents were really more
palatable than he had at first ima-
gined ; but, after reading, with much
difficulty and many interruptions,
through about three pages, a sudden
fit of yawning overcame his resolution,
and he once more closed the book.
Totally at a loss for something to
divert his mind, he devised various
plans to relieve the dullness of the
hour, but to please
him, he ordered Philip to get him his
supper ; and, after idling about an


hour over this meal, he retired to his
bed, fatigued and melancholy, where,
after having racked his brain for a
long time, to give additional strength
to his resolution, he dropped asleep.
tend of YOL. I.
London* Printed by J. Dean, 5/, \Vaidour-
Street, Soho.


ORMOND;
OR,
THE DEBAUCHEE.


ORMOND;
OR, THE
BEBAUCHEE.
COMPREHENDING
SKETCHES OF REAL CHARACTERS >
, AND ILLUSTRATIVE
' " €>tt£e Jtattet*£ atiii Customs*
OP
FASHIONABLE LIFE.
At the close of the Year 1809.
IN THREE volumes.
By SOPHIA LEE.
VOL. 11.
The pleasure of a Debauchee is that of a destroyer;
he blasts all the fruit he tastes; and where the brute has
been devouring, there is nothing left worthy the relish
of the man. —Addison. * - ’
EontwiT:
Printed by W. M. Thiselton, Goodge Street j
FOR GEORGE HUGHES, 221, TOTTEKHAM-
COURT-ROAD, NEAR STORE-STREET;
SOLD BY SHERWOOD, NEELEY, AND JONS*,
PATERNOSTER-ROW.
1810.


ORMOND;
OR,
THE DEBAUCHEE.
CHAPTER XI.
A Relapse.
Thus terminated the first day of Or-
mond’s new career, and if it produced
little happiness to our hero, it was also
free from crime, and the night which
succeeded it was not rendered more irk-
some by the reflections of a tormenting
conscience. It is true that, during the
hours of sleep, fancy would raise up
Visions of departed days, and the im-
pressions of his dreams would sometimes
occasion an involuntary sigh of regret
VOL. 11. B


to burst from his bosom* before his
slumbers were entirely dissipated; but
when reflection returned, he endeavour-
ed to banish from his, mind the remem-
brance of a delusion, which, if cherished,
might produce consequences, dangerous
if not fatal to his new made resolutions.
When he arose in the morning he
found Henry in his room waiting to take
breakfast with him, and as
their coffee the latter embraced every
opportunity to throw out remarks, hav-
ing a tendency to strengthen the deter-
mination, of his brother; very* properly
entertaining some fears lest the infant
resolution should be insufficiently strong
to resist the attacks of temptation.
Having fortified the mind of Ormond
with all the advice which he could find
time to give, Henry took his leave, and
our hero was left to pursue his studies,
and console himself with his own re-
flections.
The situation of Ormond at this period'


was certainly as fraught with danger as
any portion of his preceding life. Re-
duced by the severe attacks of sickness,
terrified at the prospect of dissolution,
and, in this weak and wavering state,
unable to resist the silent anguish of an
affectionate parent, he had no power nor
inclination to resist the attacks of re-
morse. His penitence was therefore
not So much the effect of* principle, as
terror; and being thus defective in its
foundation, was continually liable to
Suspicion. His illness and weakness,
and, consequently, the apprehensions
which had assailed him, had now left
him; and, with the return of health,
returned also the natural dispositions of
his mind, and all the impetuosity of
Sanguine youth. His passions likewise
returned; but the recollections of his
recent danger and his recent solemn* en -
gagements were yet too strong in his
mind', to suffer him to yield himself up
to his former pursuits. The flame of
B 2


dissipation had been stiffled in his bo-
som, but there was yet no certainty that
it was entirely suppressed; a latent spark
remaining might, after a short period,
suddenly burst into a flame and destroy
all the good effects which had been
produced by an unexpected accumulation
of disappointment and misfortune. It
is true that his repentance bore the ex-
ternal marks of sincerity, but that it was
not sufficiently established was evident
from the irksomeness of the preceding
evening, and its continuance even on
this morning.
Scarcely had Ormond dressed himself
after the departure of his brother, be-
fore Mr. Trim-bell entered his apart-
ments; and a more unfortunate moment
for his visit could not have been selected;
for our hero had just indulged his me-
mory with the retrospect of past plea-
sures, and in contrasting them with his
present employments, in a state of com-
parative seclusion from the world, he


had certainly so far lost sight of his
resolutions, thal his breast was open to
the attacks of his old companion; and
Ormond’s reception of his visitor was,
by no means, such as he had predeter-
mined, when under the influence of
sterner virtue. As he advanced to take
the offered hand of Triinbeli, a tear of
pleasure involuntarily started into his
eye, and this tear decided the resolution
of the latter; as he considered it a cer-
tain omen that the penitent had only half
repented, and would without difficulty
be induced to return to his old habits.
Trimbell, after congratulating our
hero on his recovery, inquired into the
particulars of his disappearance from the
masquerade, which had occasioned some
alarm to the party, (especially as Lord
Linfel had noticed his retiring with a
person, habited as a friar, without the
distinguishing ribbon) and respecting
his subsequent illness, of which he was
as yet, equally ignorant.


Ormond, in reply, went through the
whole recital of his meeting with his fa-
ther, and his consequent indisposition ;
the promises which he had been in-
duced to make subsequent to that period,
and his resolutions to reform his con-
duct, and turn his mind to the pursuits
of objects of a far different nature.
Trimbell. —Well, my dear friend, I
really am happy to find you possess such
resolution. I have frequently myself*
determined on a like conduct, but have
always found myself too weak to resist
new temptations. But now with your
company to bear me out in the expedient,
I have no doubt but I shall be able to
conquer those propensities, which are
certainly very bewitching, but which
have so often brought us both into di-
lemmas and scrapes which might have
ended seriously. So with your permis-
sion we will repent together, and seek
for amusement in some channel less dan-
gerous and more honourable.


Ormond. —And is it possible, my dear
Trirabell, that you are serious ? If so,
lam gratified indeed 'more and more
with my new resolutions. And as you
are determined to adopt a similar con*
duct, I will put -myself under your di-
rection entirely; for to tell you the truth,
I found myself so devilishly dull yester-
day in my new situation, that I could
not possibly keep myself awake. I
began to read, but being unused to such
an employ for so long a time, I found
study a horrid bore. We shall however
get over these difficulties pleasantly to-
gether, and shall no doubt make rapid
progress.
TrimbelL —Thank you most heartily
for the confidence you have reposed in
me; and as I am to be your tutor and
guide, I shall immediately resume my
new employment. And first of all, we
will, by way of taking a last farewel of
of our companions, and the houses -we
have been accustomed to visit, go to our


old club at Willis’s this evening, and bid
it a final adieu; and, in the mean time,
by way of relieving the dullness of the
day, we can just call at Brookes’s, and at
your old lodgings, to take one more peep
at the tables—and Maria Jameson . But
if you do not think you have resolution
enough to enable you to look at these
things without being tempted, why, we
will even leave it alone, until to-morrow,
and you can in the interim, fortify your
mind with good and sound resolutions.
Ormond. —l think your plan very
good ; it is. but right we should take
leave of our acquaintance; and it may
be, our example will perhaps induce some
of them to reform their conduct. I
should propose, certainly, that no time
be lost, but that we proceed immediately
to set about this task, while our reso-
lutions are warm, since there will be then
less fear of our being diverted from our
purpose by the sneers of those who have
known us act differently. We will call


at my old apartments, and as for Maria
-—oh ! forgive me for sighing—l could
wish—l cannot resolve—my affection is
so strong—We will see her, however,
and you shall perceive how firmly I can
behave—But do not let us delay.
Trimbell. —l am ready to attend you
immediately, poor Maria 1 Indeed she is
a celestial figure; such eyes, such cheeks,
such pouting lips, such lovely hair ; ohl
I am glad I have no Maria, for I feel
very clearly, that although I could aban-
don, without a sigh, gaming, drinking,
and every other amusement, yet to leave
an angel such as Maria Jameson, and
that after she has partially yielded to my
love: oh ! heaven and earth, I could
sooner turn methodist preacher, sip tea
with superannuated maids and worn out
widows, keep sheep, frighten crows, fol-
low the plough, shoulder a musket,
sweep the crossings, lackey to ladies of
quality, pander for old Q -, or in
short do any thing but hang, drown, or


shoot myself. Why, man t my very
heart and soul would be wrapt up in
such an object, and the former would
cease to palpitate, and the latter to ani-
mate my bosom, when I could make up
my mind to quit such an angelic creature.
Ormond. —l hardly know how to ma-
nage this business; for I yery much fear
that I have not resolution enough to
forsake this charming girl. I would
marry her; but you know marriage, like,
study and reformation, is such a cursed
bore, that it would be impossible to
make up my mind to submit to it. And
then the bare idea of being married car-
ries with it something so melancholy, so
Demure, and quaker-like, that it is suf-
ficient to shock one. Oh! although l
love Maria very dearly, I cannot marry
her; and if I should pursue her with
any other views, do you think there
would not be an end to all our plans of
repentance? or do you consider that I
might obtain her, and still be penitent ?


Trimbell. —Clearly so, my dear fellow!
Why let me see, Cato, you know had very
loose ideas of love j and yet, where will
you find any now-a-days so philosophic,
so moral, so studious, and so honoured:
and esteemed as Cato. This precedent
is decisive; and if any body offers to
reason you into a contrary opinion, quote
the example of this great man, and you.
will immediately silence every objection..
Believe me, all this may be done, and
not at all interfere with your new reso-
lutions.
Ormond.— Why truly, I begin to see
the subject in the same light. Oh !
how gratifying it is to have a friend at
hand, to resolve one in eases of diffi-
culty, to assist one’s resolutions, and
to give a proper direction to one’s opi-
nions. Now, if you had not been pre-
sent, I should have endeavoured to
forget Maria, or, what would have been
Worse, perhaps, I should have made up
my mind to marry her: and that, you


know, would have put an end to all
future amusements. lam very grateful
for your advice, and shall follow it care-
fully.
Trimlell. —I am convinced that you
will act prudently. But, come, let us
away, and take a peep at Brookes’s :
I am anxious to see how you will behave
on the occasion.
Saying this, Trimbell seized Ormond
by the arm, and, without waiting for a
reply, drew him out of the house ; and
they sauntered away together towards
St. James’s Street; the latter finding
himself upon his progress, if not in the
duties of his profession, at least in a line
of conduct which he flattered himself
was perfectly consonant to the deter-
mination he had formed, while the
other, exulting in the success of his
scheme to deceive Ormond, and to draw
him back to his old inbits, anticipated
the additional credit which he should


derive from the exercise of his ingenuity,
in fashionable circles.
The reader will easily perceive the
depth of our hero’s contrition: and it
may suffice to teach that the individual,
who has given himself up to dissipation,
and become a proficient in vice, is in-
curable ; and, that however casual cir-
cumstances may occasionally bring about
a momentary penitence, he, iC who be-
comes debauched in principle, ivill never
stop short of destruction Mr. Trewby
was perfectly satisfied of this truth,
when he thus expressed himself to his
sons; and although it was seldom call-
ed to mind by Ormond, it was accom-
plishing in his example daily and hourly.
The human heart appears to be naturally
biassed towards vice; and the seeds of
this disposition are evident, even before
reason has commenced her reign; and
if this native tinge be suffered to spread,
until it has discoloured every principle
in the bosom, it is scarcely possible for


a remedy to be found sufficiently potent
to counteract its deadly effects.
After a tolerable ramble, our hero
and his friend arrived in St. James’s
Street, and as Ormond’s old apartments
were nearest, they called there to see
them once more. Being ushered up into
the front room, the first sight that
struck our hero, was Maria standing
near her window, in conversation with
Mrs. Howard, and both of them in
apparent grief. Having contemplated
the features of his inamorata for a few
minutes in silent admiration, a deep
sigh burst from his bosom, and his de-
termination was instantly fixed to pursue
the possession of her by every means in
his power} and this resolve received
additional force, if it was capable of
addition, from the expressions of
Trimbell, who, as he surveyed the ami-
able girl, over Ormond’s shoulder, burst
forth into the most extatic exclama-
tions, and repeatedly envied the happi-


ness of him who should be enabled to
call such a treasure his own.
After a few minutes, Maria advanced
to the window, and Ormond immedi-
ately placing himself opposite, soon
drew her attention. The instant she
perceived our hero, a blush of modest
pleasure tinged the cheeks of the lovely
maiden, and as a smile played on her
lips, she returned with unaffected sim-
plicity, the salutation of Ormond, who
had laid his hand on his heart, and
appeared to feel all the transports of the
most pure and exalted passion. As soon
as she had returned the inclination of
our hero, Maria withdrew, and Trim-
bell, with the most cunning and wily
duplicity, endeavoured to add fuel to
the flame which he perceived kindling
in Ormond’s breast, by launching out
into all the most extravagant encomiums
on Maria’s beauty and perfections, in-
terspersed with expressions such as are
calculated to inflame the desires of


libertinism, and to give an uncontrol-
able impetus to the vilest passions.
While the two friends were still stand-
ing at the window, the attention of our
hero was suddenly arrested by the ap-
pearance of Mrs. Howard, who throw-
ing up a sash, and perceiving Ormond,
immediately signified the bliss which
suddenly transported her, by all the an-
ticks and dumb expressions of happiness
which can well be imagined. To all
these ludicrous gesticulations, our hero
thought it prudent to make a suitable
return, since it was still necessary to keep
up the fare 1 with the old lady, in order
to obtain the accomplishment of his
wishes the more easily, and Mrs. How-
ard set .ned not a little elated by his
attentions. This dumb communication
of affection, however, lasted but a short
time, us Mrs. Howard hastily left the
window/' and our hero embraced the
moment" to draw away Trim bell, to a
remote part of the room, where the in-


quisitive and penetrating eyes of the old
woman could not discover them; and
here they entered into consultation as to
the best method of pushing the intended
amour.
After some little 'discussion, it was
determined, that Ormond should call
upon Col. Jameson, in order to receive
an answer to his suit; and that, for the
more effectual operations of the cam-
paign, the old apartments should be se-
cured for a time, until success or defeat
should terminate the scheme. The bar-
gain was accordingly made* and when
this part of the arrangement was com-
pleted, Trimbell and our hero departed,
in order to see for the last time their
.old companions at the gaming table.
No sooner had they entered the room,
than Lord Linfel, who perceived them
come in, advanced to meet them, and
began his inquiries into the circum-
stances which had deprived him of the
pleasure of seeing Ormond for so long


I periods but as the latter was about to
eply, Tranbell, under pretence of spar-
ng the feelings of his friend, drew his
on one side, ih order to enter
nto the necessary explanations*
In about ten minutes their conference
;nded, when his Lordship advancing
:owards Ormond, exclaimed, “ Upon
tny soul, my dear fellow, I am very sorry
Lo hear of such a complication of mis-
fortunes, but the best way, is not to suffer
sorrow to make too deep an impression.,
‘ Begone dull care’, is my motto, and I
believe there are iew persons in the
world who take greater pains to keep
off this monster than myself, and per-
haps there is none more successful.
But, however, your coming in this
evening is very fortunate, for I was just
looking out for a couple of friends to
join at a table; and this remedy, I will
be bold enough to say, will prove more
effectual in dissipating your troubles
than any panacea of penitence which


the gravest moralist could invent,—
Come, no hesitation—Trimbell, you
will join us V*
Trimbell immediately assented; and
Ormond, half-corn plying and half-resist-
ing, but more than half inclined to try
his luck again, suffered himself to be
led to the gaming table once more, and
the moment he seated himself there, all
his resolutions forsook him, repentance
and the advice of his father and brother
were forgotten, and nothing but the
recollection of former pleasures, and the
anticipation of future good fortune,
danced before his eyes. This moment
was fatal to Ormond ; his future fate
hung suspended on his conduct on this
occasion j prudence might have saved
him, but ruin was the consequence at-
tached to an incautious step; and he
acted incautiously, for he yielded to the
solicitations of Trimbell and Lord Lh>
fel, and once more staked his property,


his character, and his future hopes, on
the chance of a precarious throw.
One game naturally let! to another,
and the hours rolled rapidly 1 away, until
at length our hero, once more the fa-
vourite of fortune, arose from the table
the winner of a very considerable sum of
money. Had his attempt terminated
unsuccessfully, it is probable, that adver-
sity might have achieved his reformation,
but this unlooked-for success sealed his
ruin. Before the company divided, an
engagement was mutually entered into
to meet in the same place on the follow-
ing evening, to renew their amusement;
and thus a single deviation, which was
professedly the last, in reality appeared
likely to lead to others which might end
in the most fatal consequences.
After the party had broken up, Trim-
bell congratulated Ormond on his suc-
cess, adding, that he thought there were
few amusements more rational, more
entertaining, or more productive, than


that of gaming ; and, however it might
he censured by those who had never en-
tered into the spirit of it, or had per-
haps been partial sufferers by it, he
could not avoid considering it as ex-
tremely attractive. Ormond, flushed
with his recent success, cordially joined
in this opinion; and, before they se-
parated, It was resolved, that to obtain
possession of Maria Jameson, in any
way but by matrimony, and to indulge
occasionally at the gaming table, would
not in any way interfere with their
plans for repentance and amendment,
nor lessen the sincerity of their reforma-
tion. This point arranged, to the mu-
tual satisfaction of both, the two friends
bid each other good night, accompanied
with exhortations to a perseverance in a
similar line of conduct, until they had
firmly established their conversion.


CHAPTER XII.
Successful Love.
On the morning after these occur-
rences, our hero was again favoured with
a visit from his brother, and he was'
obliged to rack his ingenuity to invent
sortie plausible tale as to-his conduct on
the preceding day. Notwithstanding he
wished himself to believe that he had
acted in a very proper manner, he per-
ceived that it was necessary to conceal
the real truth from Henry, lest his over-
strained 1 ideas of morality should lead him
to condemn a conduct which appeared
so little deserving of censure. He ac-
cordingly trumped up a story calculated
to deceive his brother, and succeeded so


well as to satisfy him perfectly of the
sincerity of our hero’s penitence, and
when he took his- leave, he went away
happy and full of confidence in Ormond’s
sincerity and prudence ; and the latter
took no small share of credit to himself
for his well-managed deceit.
No sooner was he freed from the pre-
sence of his brother, then our hero began
to project his plan for the seduction of
Maria Jameson, and' as he resolved to
visit her father, he was determined to
lose no more time in making the preli-
minary advance; Having dressed himself
he accordingly sallied forth, and soon
arrived at Col. Jameson’s door, but so
fully was his mind occupied with 1 ideas
of that amiable creature, that he ne-
glected to form any excuse fit for the
ears of Mrs. Howard, and the recol-
lection of his remissness did not strike
him, until after he had knocked at the
Colonel’s door ; and then not a moment’s
time was left him for consideration.


Fortunately, however, for him, the
door was opened by a young girl, who
was assisting the old lady, and as the
latter was absent, he was introduced
without having to endure the mortifica-
tion of meeting with his antiquated chere
amie; and on his entrance, Maria with-
drew, and he found himself left alone
with the venerable and respectable old
man whose destruction he was so basely
'meditating through the ruin of a daugh-
ter in whose happiness and innocence
his existence was involved.
Having opened the subject of his visit,
our hero, with an assumed diffidence of
air and manners, ventured to express
his hope that Col. Jameson had received
such satisfactory replies to his inquiries,
as to his family and connections, as
would remove his prudent scruples, and
induce him to give his sanction to ad-
dresses, which this youth vowed were
founded in the most pure, the most ar-
dent, and the most unalterable affection


for her who was the object of them
And after this commencement, Ormond
well versed in the arts of flattery and de
ceit, launched forth into such praises oi
the beauty, the filial tenderness, anc
amiable disposition of the beautifu
Maria, as were well calculated to fine
their way to the unsuspecting and sus-
ceptible heart of a father, and to pro-
duce consequences of a favourably na-
ture to our hero’s suit.
Col. Jameson seemed much affected
with Ormond’s praises, and extending
his hand, which was now, perhaps for
the first time, contaminated by the
touch of villany, he informed him that
he had written to the Hon. Mr. Bard-
ley on the subject of his family, &c.
and had received a reply congenial to
his wishes and expectations. He had
also consulted the inclinations of his
daughter, and finding that she was dis-
posed to be governed in this, as in every
other instance, by the dictates of pa-
von. ii. c


Ijntal prudence and affection, lie should
ot hesitate to admit the visits of Or-
lond, so long as he found his conduct
i consonance with his professions.
On receiving this gratifying consent
o his wishes, our hero gave way to
ransport of the most extravagant na-
ure, and entreated that he might be
mmediately introduced to the object of
ns affections, as the person whom her
•ather deemed worthy her love, and
whom he had selected for her companion
and protector through life. The old
gentleman felt no hesitation in comply-
ing with this request, and Maria being
called in, the hands of Ormond and the
lovely girl were joined by the author of
her being, and as he put up a prayer to
heaven, dictated by sincerity and truth,
the dew of pleasure stole gently down
the cheek of his daughter, and a smile
of triumphant villany lighted up the
features of our hero, as he kissed away
the tear of innocence.


The mother of Maria also, who just
now entered the room, confirmed the
blessing of her revered partner, and as
she gave a vent to her maternal feel-
ings^—
"• Sh e wept and sighed, and blessed the day,
<c And prayed, as mothers use to pray.”
How dead to every principle of virtue,
how callous to honour, and unsuscepti-
ble of all those feelings which confer
honour on mankind, must have been
that bosom, which, in a moment like
this, could have been occupied with the
anticipation of the delight it would ex-
perience in the seduction of the angelic
Maria from the paths of virtuous inno-
cence; and the accumulation of misery
and destruction on that venerable pair,
\\ho now so unconsciously cherished and
blessed the viper which was preparing
to sting them.
Ormond’s visit was protracted for a
considerable time, and when he foljow-
c 2


ed Maria, as she left the room, and
solicited her company alone in another
apartment, he began his attacks by
pouring in the most fulsome flattery;
and as the gentle Maria would some-
times venture to express her fears lest
his love should prove of short continu-
ance, he would, by the most solemn
.and repeated oaths and promises, soothe
her into confidence.
His second attempt was to discover
the state of her mind, and he imme-
diately commenced a 'conversation on
the most fashionable novels of the day,
a subject on which she appeared to have
acquired but little information, as she
candidly confessed that she had been
accustomed to a more serious and in-
structive study. Finding her, however,
disposed to make herself acquainted
with the nature of some of these pro-
ductions, our hero undertook to present
her with a continual supply for her- pri-
vate reading; and the gaining of this


point was to him a happy omen of the
success of his ultimate wishes. He
took his leave after having made such
rapid progress, and after having pro-
mised to return on the following day,
and to procure, in the mean time, some
volumes of that trash, which he had
deigned to make instrumental to her
ruin.
Ormond was well aware* that the
only method to attack the virtue of
such an image of purity as his Maria
with any prospect of success, was to un-
dermine gradually those principles of reli-
gion and morality which formed her great
security. He knew full well, that while
she retained those ideas, which a father’s
care had instilled into her bosom, it
would be absurd to make any attempt to
lead her into the paths of vice—but she
was only invulnerable so long as her
principles remained uncontaminated:
the seduction of her mind, he was cer-
tain, would make the path easy to the


Induction of her body. After canvass-
ig over every likely method to accom-
lish'this desirable end, he was satisfied
hat the introduction of fashionable
iovels was the best calculated to pro-
duce a speedy and an effectual change
n her mental conformation.
ble manners and fashionable principles
if there be such) had allured him gra-
lually from the paths of morality and
drtue; and he calculated within him-
self that similar causes would produce
similar effects on the temper and dispo-
sition of her whom he intended to make
the victim of his arts.
Elated beyond measure at the success
of his visit, Ormond was about to retire,
when he suddenly, on raising his eyes,
found himself stopped in his progress
by Mrs. Howard, who rushing hastily
towards him, took him by the arm, and
drew him into the kitchen, before he re-
covered the power of resisting her ef-
forts. His confusion the old lady inter-


preted into an effect produced by her
sudden appearance, which was in fact
strictly the truth, but she attributed to
love, what was really the consequence of
astonishment. The moment, however,
that Ormond had recovered himself, he
.determined, as there was no longer a
necessity for duplicity, and as the old
woman’s attentions were rather trouble-
some, not to say disgusting, that he
would no longer leave her in the dark,
but make her acquainted with his love
for her young mistress.
In this instance, he certainly forgot
his usual prudence, and this may proba-
bly be attributed to the elevated state of
his mind, which was such as to render
him incapable of acting, for the mo-
ment, with his customary caution. He
should have recollected, that to despise
the love of a woman, after he had given
her cause to believe herself the object of
his affections, was to raise against him-
self a more formidable opponent than


he could easily subdue. But this con-
sideration, which would have had its
due weight with him under any other
circumstances, had no power over him
at this moment, and he determined to
throw off all disguise.
Accordingly, after having listened to
a disgusting narrative of doubts, fears,
heart-burnings, affection, jealousy, an-
ger, and revenge, which had alternately
held their sway over the bosom of the
old woman, he was allowed an oppor-
tunity to interpose a word ; and he im-
mediately embraced it, and declared how
much he was flattered by the proofs of
her affection; at the same time regret-
ting that he should have been compelled
to practise on her credulity, by making
her the instrument of his introduction
to Miss Jameson. He then proceeded
to tell her of the success which had at-
tended his endeavours, and as he was
indebted to her for his happiness, he
begged her acceptance of a note of one


hundred pounds, desiring her to apply
for a similar sum annually, and this, he
trusted, would amply compensate for
her disappointment of a place in his af-
fections. He concluded, by requesting
that she would assist in the promotion
of his suit, and promised that she
should never find him ungrateful, and
disposed to act deceitfully towards her,
in pecuniary matters.
Few persons in the situation of a
servant, would have been tempted to
complain of such a recompence as our
hero tendered the old lady; but she had
fixed her mind on a possession of a dif-
ferent nature, and she was little inclined
to submit to such an imposition.
As soon, therefore, as surprise and
rage would permit her to reply, she
burst forth into a strain of invective to
which the ears of Ormond had been
totally unaccustomed; and as she tore
the note she had taken from him, and
trampled it under her feet, she exclaim-


ed, that she despised his offers as much
as his duplicity j that she had in the
course of her servitude amassed a sum
of no little importance, and there were
thousands of young men, as young,
aye, and as handsome as he was,
would be glad to receive a smile from
her, and to offer her their hands, when
there was the least probability of suc-
cess ; and that she had foolishly rejected
several very engaging youths, as much
superior to our hero as could be con-
ceived, not only in personal appearance,
but in the attraction of their manners;
and that they would never have served
her so shamefully. She however de-
clared her resolution to be revenged,
and vowed that he never should, when
she had an opportunity of interfering,
use any languishing and loving female
as he had used her. She said she was
only induced to take pity on him, be-
cause she had witnessed his distress at
his own window, and his man, who


was as bad as his master, had been so
pressing with her to admit him to an
interview. And after all her love,and
tenderness, after her faithful conduct,
and after having rejected and turned her
back on all other offers, out of pure
affection for him; to be used in this
barbarous manner was really more than
she deserved, and more than she could
endure. It would break her heart, and
then he who was the cause of her de-
struction would have to witness the dis-
solution of an unhappy victim of his
treachery, who, but for his deceit,
might have lived long and happily, in the
arms of an affectionate husband, and a
family who would have loved her.
And here Mrs. Howard burst into
tears, and gave way to such a paroxysm
of grief, as seemed likely to be of fatal
consequences. She raved, tore her hair,
cursed all mankind, especially our hero,
then suddenly changed her tone • into
tenderness, and bending forwards to-


wards him, entreated that he would
allow her the happiness of breathing
her last in his arms, and that he would
press her to his heart, while she yielded
up that soul which was only animated
by his love, and a full confidence in its
continuance.
During the continuance of this fit of
rage and disappointment, our hero
oftentimes cursed his own inconsiderate
conduct in thus hastily undeceiving one,
who, he now thought for the first time,
might be enabled to oppose an obstacle
to the.success of his scheme. It was
too late, however, now to retract what
he had said, and the only thing which
remained to be done, was to endeavour,
by every means in his power, to soothe
the old lady into a state of calm com-
pliance with his wishes. How this was
to be done, was the question to be re-
solved ; and a more difficult point had
jnever harrassed the mind of Ormond,
from the commencement of his career


of dissipation to the present moment.
She had spurned his offer of the bank
note, which he had considered as a cer-
tain remedy for her disappointment,
and her rejection of this bonus was as
unexpected as it was mortifying to his
pride. A larger sum he was not in-
clined to give, as he thought he had
acted with uncommon liberality, in
tendering her what he had. While he
was still debating what course to pursue,
the old woman fell into a real or pre-
tended fit on the floor, and our hero,
seizing the opportunity thus offered
him, gathered up the fragments of his
note, and hastily recounting the parti-
culars to Maria, who then opened the
door, and who had previously been ac-
quainted with the artifice, he ran out
of the house; and ceased not to look
behind him, until he had reached the
corner of the street, where he was met
by Trimbell, and agreed to accompany
him to dinner.


As they walked along Pall Mall, our
hero related the progress of diis designs
upon Maria, and the sudden and sad
meeting between himself and Mrs.
Howard; and Trimbcll, almost bursting
with laughter, listened to the fears and
doubts, the rage, anguish, disappoint-
ment, and fits of the old lady, until
they arrived at the tavern where they
had agreed to dine.
The tale was again repeated during
dinner, and a variety of expedients for
reconciling the old lady were suggested,
but none of them seemed efficacious
enough; and it was finally determined
to let her act as she thought proper,
and to take measures to counteract any
of her efforts which might have a ten-
dency to thwart the plans of our hero:
and an additional bottle w ? as ordered in
to drink success to his designs.
In the evening, according to the ap-
pointment of the preceding day, the
two friends repaired to Brookes’s, to


meet Lord Linfel, and, finding him
there in readiness, they onee again sat
down to tempt fickle fortune; and to
lose, in this pursuit, the recollection of
those resolations, which militated against
the practice of gaming.
Every hour which passed away served
to render weaker, and less apparent,
the impressions which had been made on
our hero’s mind by sickness and appre-
hension ; and every hour, as it lessened
the efforts of his remorse, impercepti-
bly strengthened his wicked propensities.
Study and his professional duties were
no more the objects of his pursuit, than
they were prior to his unexpected meet-
ing with his father; and his ingenuity
was continually on the stretch to dis-
cover the most plausible and effectual
methods of deceiving his father and his
brother. His first deviation from the
line of moral rectitude might have been
forgiven, as there was a possibility of
his reformation; but, after a shew of


penitence, brought about by the severity
of sickness, and other collateral circum-
stances of little less force, after seeing
him once convicted of his errors and
vices, and apparently convinced of their
destructive tendency, after this to view
him relapsing into the same line of coiy-
duct, to view him again sinking into
dissipation and debauchery, and to mark
his return with equal or greater avidity
than ever, was to contemplate the total
annihilation of every moral principle,
the dereliction of every duty, the con-
tempt of every intreaty, and the total
expunction of every filial and every fra-
ternal feeling. Ormond, at first, had
become gradually corrupted, but his
return to corruption was sudden and
instantaneous; it was no longer the pro-
gressive contamination of every good
disposition, but the precipitate bursting
out of a flame, which was unconquer-
able, and which had been only stifled,
when there was no room for its action.


Our hero was now seated at the
gaming table, at that altar of his idola-
try, on which he had sacrificed his prin-
ciples originally, and on which he was
now fully disposed to offer up that par-
tial penitence which had held its sway
over him for a moment. Again he was
the first to propose stakes of an exor-
bitant nature—again he was the earliest
to propose new games, and the last and
latest to quit the scene of ruin and de-
solation. On the former evening he
had risen from the gaming table at an
early hour, but at this time, one, two,
three, and four o’clock witnessed their
continued achievement, and the sun had
nearly risen to behold their vices.
Fortune once more propitiously smiled
upon Ormond, as though she had
leagued with vice, to give an irresistible
attraction to folly, in order to circum-
vent his ruin the more easily. When
he left the table he found his frame ex-
hausted, but his spirits exhile&ted, and


his purse swelled out to a prodigious
bulk; and as he reeled along the streets
with Trimbell, alive to every thing but
honour and decorum, their behaviour
was so intolerable, that the guardians of
the night judged it expedient to secure
the Quixotic gamesters, and to give
them a lodging in a watch-house, until
they should recover their recollections.
Indignant at this interference, and in-
disposed to submit to confinement, the
two heroes attempted to emancipate
themselves from “ durance vile,” but
their efforts were frustrated, after they
had received some severe blows over the
face and head. Subdued by numbers,
and reduced to submission, they sudden-
ly became as abject as they were pre-
viously outrageous, and, after some
slight parley, were happy to compromise
with their gaolers for their release, by
the sacrifice of a ten-pound note.
This adventure had restored the
youths if their reason, the cudgels of


the watchmen had completely dispelled
the delirium of drunkenness, and they
walked home soberly, and without at-
tempting to disturb the peace which
prevailed, and about six o’clock in the
morning they arrived at our hero’s lodg-
ings, where Trimbell was constrained,
by the persuasions of Ormond, to stay
and take a part of his bed for a few
hours. As little rhetoric was necessary
to induce the former to agree to this
proposal, it was accordingly so arranged,
and, after repairing their bruises with
as much skill as they were masters of,
with patched faces, broken heads, indis-
posed frames, and nervous head-aches,
the two heroes of the night, fatigued
and wearied, retired to their bed, to
drown, for a few hours, in sleep the re-
mefnbrance of cudgels as well as cards.


CHAPTER XIII.
The Progress of Seduction.
According to his promise tcv
Maria, Ormond called to see her on
the following day, taking with him, as
an introduction to an acquaintance with
fashionable manners and morality, the
Novel called “ Delphineand Maria,
impelled by a curiosity which has proved
fatal to thousands of her sex, received
and locked it up for her private perusal.
She entertained Ormond, for entertain-
ment it was to him, although he dis-
sembled his pleasure, and appeared
affected by the recital, with a tedious
account of the conduct of Mrs. Ho-
ward, whl, after various fits and re


lapses, was carried to her bed in a state
-of severe indisposition, and still con-
tinued incapable of leaving her room.
She, however, did not hesitate to give
ease to her burdened heart, by venting
her curses on the head of him who had
made a tool of her: and she had en-
deavoured to influence the mind of
Col. Jameson, against our hero, who
had fortunately a powerful advocate in
the beautiful Maria, by whose aid the
attempt of the disappointed old woman
was rendered entirely ineffectual.
The visits of our hero now became
more and more frequent, and as Maria,
although she had expressed some disap-
probation of the principles contained
in the first novel, had not expressed
any unwillingness to proceed, he still
kept supplying her with such as he con-
sidered most likely to operate speedily
upon her principles, and to accelerate
his wishes.
By these means, the mind of the


amiable girl became first inured to con-
template pictures of vice without hor-
ror; and then, gradually, to behold
them with a kind of complacency, the
natural consequence of habit; and she
thus became more and more exposed
daily to the insidious poison, which
Ormond constantly poured into her
bosom. The inculcations of parental
affection now, for the first time in her
life, appeared tedious and uninteresting,
and she uniformly longed for their con-
clusion, that she might be at liberty to
retire to her chamber, and suck in,
unconsciously, the poison of contami-
nation. She was no longer that close
attendant on her father which she for-
merly had been: although her atten-
tions were still, apparently, dictated by
the same principle of filial duty and ten-
derness. But instead of hailing the
return of these duties, as usual, she
was now more gratified to view their
close th*an their commencement, and'


whenever there was an opportunity of
omitting her customary offices, she felt
too often more pleased te in the breach
than the observance.” Thus her heart,
which was once the seat of virtue, and
of every virtue too, gradually admitted
the entrance of failings, then of errors,
and ultimately of vices.
Col. Jameson, who considered it ne-
cessary to keep a stricter eye over his
daughter now, than he had when no
one had access to her, had observed
these little negligencies of duty ; and,
although, like a kind parent, he could
find a thousand excuses for his daugh-
ter, yet the circumstance pained him
considerably; and he was half resolved,
on one or two opportunities, to notice
his uneasiness to Maria. He had, how-
ever, communicated his apprehensions
of her failure in these instances of af-
fection, to her mother, and the latter
had coincided with him in opinion, as
to the fact: and it was determined,


that, in case of any recurrence of such
conduct, the Colonel should hint at the
circumstance to his daughter in the
most tender terms.
The moment was not far distant when
another instance of neglect attracted the
notice of her father, and he immediate-
ly began to question her on the evident
falling off of her filial affection. Stag-
gered and confounded with the reproof
of her father, which she had scarcely
ever incurred before, Maria burst into
tears, and feeling for the first time the
truth of his remarks, stammered out a
hasty and unconnected excuse, and
promised her parent that he should
never have occasion to notice a similar
conduct.
Embracing her with the utmost love,
Col. Jameson assured his daughter of
his entire forgiveness. Erom that mo-
ment a temporary alteration took place
in her manners towards her parents, and
she once more appeared the same affec


fectionate daughter, the same indefatiga-
ble attendant, and the same tender
nurse; and the change restored the
peace and happiness of those who gave
her being.
But, alas! although this temporary
reformation took place in one part of
her conduct, the sentiments of fashion-
able vices had taken a root in her mind,
and imperceptibly unfolded themselves,
and nourished and cherished in so luxu-
riant a soil, spread themselves with
mighty rapidity, and promised to pro-
duce effects of the most fatal tendency.
Daily did Ormond relate to his friend
Trimbell the successful progress of his
arts, as they met at the gaming table;
and, in order to promote the plan, and
to escape from Henry, who had
quently called upon Ormond, while he
was absent from home, he determined
to leave his apartments in Bedford Row,
and take up his residence once more
opposite the house of his charmer.
VOL. 11. d


Trimbell greatly approved of the resolu-
tion, and encouraged our hero to perse-
vere, with the same vigour and inge-
nuity with which he had commenced,
and there could not be a doubt that
ultimate triumph must crown his exer-
tions.
While Ormond was thus successfully
pursuing Maria, Mrs. Howard, who
had recovered from her indisposition
occasioned by his duplicity, agitated in
her mind several plans for revenging
herself upon him ; and the fertile inge-
nuity of a woman was not long in
suggesting to her a project.
She had seen and understood that our
hero had returned to his lodgings in
St. James’s Street, and she formed her
plans accordingly. Having been on the
look out for a little while, she discovered
that her old friend Philip still continued
in his usual employ: she accordingly
lay in wait for him, and having met
him one evening, she invited him into


her kitchen, and after giving him some
ale, began to sound him respecting his
master’s pursuits, &:c. For some time
he was extremely reserved, but at length,
the ale with which the old lady plied
him, having thrown him off his guard,
he gave an account of his master’s daily
visits to the gaming houses, and to
other receptacles of vice; and, in a short
time, the old woman was perfectly ac-
quainted with all the particulars of his
meeting with his father, his subsequent
illness, his penitence, &c.
Philip, having also overheard some of
his master’s conversations with Trimbell
respecting Maria Jameson, hinted to
Mrs. Howard, that his master had evi-
dently no intention to marry Maria,
but that he only paid his addresses to
her in an honourable way as a cloak to
his real designs; and that he would not
scruple to throw off the disguise, when-
ever he found himself pretty certain of
his victim.
d 2


The old lady, having thus obtained
all the information she wished, and
much more than she expected, dismissed
Philip, and immediately began to con-
sider what would be the best use to
which she could convert her new dis-
coveries, so as to thwart the more
effectually the designs of our hero.
After some consideration, she determined
first of all to communicate what she had
learnt to her young mistress; and, if
that failed of success, to convey the
same information to her master.
It was on the day after this interview
between Mrs. Howard and Philip, that
Ormond entered Col. Jameson’s house,
in the same manner as usual, and was
suddenly stricken with a sad presenti-
ment of evil from the altered looks of
Maria. Assuming instantly the appear-
ance of the utmost tenderness, he drew
his chair closer to her, and took her
hand, which she immediately withdrew
with the coolness of reserve. Astonish-


ed at this unexpected behaviour, our
hero entreated that she would inform
him what action he had involuntarily
committed to give cause for this cool-
ness of behaviour. For a long time
she made no reply, until almost driven
to madness by her silent anguish, not
because he suffered so much from this
cause, as from the dread lest some dis-
covery had taken place, which would be
fatal to his projects, he declared that,
unless she would relieve his suspense,
he would perish at her feet, and instantly
seizing a hanger which hung up in the
room, he made a shew of putting his
threat in practice; when, suddenly over-
come with terror, Maria seized his arm,
and in a few words informed him of all
that Mrs. Howard had told her, previous
to his visit, as well as of the source from
which, according to her own confession,
she had derived her knowledge..
Had Ormond been less inured to
hypocrisy than he was, the shame which


must necesssarily have been produced by
this unexpected stroke,, would have over-
whelmed him, and afforded incontroverti-
ble proofs of his guilt; but, without the
least confusion or crimsoning of cheek,
he assumed a smile, and unhesitatingly
proceeded to declare his innocence of
any such conduct as that imputed to
him, and laboured to convince Maria,
that the whole story was invented by
Mrs. Howard, by way of revenging
herself upon him; and that, if his man
Philip was at all implicated in the busi-
ness, he had been either induced - by
bribes, or some other incitement, to join
in a conspiracy, which was intended to
ruin him in the estimation of her to
whom he held all the world as no-
thing.
Saying this our hero contrived to
shed a torrent of tears, and his vows
and entreaties so won the heart of
Maria, that she willingly declared her
perfect conviction of his innocence, and


of the malice of his enemies; the tears
which had bedewed her lovely cheeks
were immediately supplanted by the
dimples of happiness, and a kiss of love
sealed their reconciliation.
On his return from this visit, Ormond,
summoning Philip into his presence,
inquired sternly into the particulars of
what he had communicated to Mrs.
Howard, on the preceding day ; and,,
taking down a brace -of pistols from a
shelf, threatened him with immediate
destruction, if he prevaricated, or kept
back any part of the whole truth.
Alarmed at his threats, and almost
dead with terror, the trembling servant
besought his master to put up the pistols,
at the same time promising to divulge
every circumstance which occurred at
the time alluded to, and declaring his
innocence of any wish or intention to
injure his master.
Somewhat, pacified with these as-
surances* our hero put up the weapons


in the place whence he had taken them,
and commanded Philip to speak with-
out hesitation, as he valued his own
life.
Trembling with fear, the man pro-
ceedecfto detail the manner in which
Mrs. Howard had drawn him into her
house, and how he resisted her efforts
to draw any thing from him, until, by
supplying him continually with ale, she
had extorted from him, in a moment of
intoxication, what he never should have
revealed had he continued in his sober
senses: and he concluded with declar-
ing his perfect willingness to make any
recompence in his power,, and his de-
termination, if his master would pardon
this single forgetfulness of his duty,
never, in his life, to commit any cause
of offence again.
Our hero immediately determined
on his plan, and writing a note to
Maria, he dispatched Philip with it, at
the same time commanding him to de


clave to her the falsehood of every thing
which he had told Mrs. Howard respect-
ing his master, and that the whole was
the result of a conspiracy between the
old lady and himself, to ruin Ormond
in the estimation of his mistress; and
that he had been prevailed upon to make
this confession in consequence of the
sufferings of his master, and his pro-
mises of forgiveness, on condition that
he should confess the whole, and wait
upon Miss Jameson, to declare the
deceit to her.
Having adopted this step, our hero
felt himself considerably relieved, as he
hugged himself in the idea, that the
step he had now taken would completely
frustrate any future attempt on the part
of Mrs. Howard, to ruin him in the
opinion of Maria ; and when his servant
returned, with a note from her, ex-
pressing her firm conviction of his in-
nocence, he felt himself once more
reinstated in the road to happiness..


But he had not formed a correct
opinion of Mrs. Howard’s perseverance
when he thus congratulated himself
upon having outwitted her; for,, imme-
diately on discovering the failure of her
project, as far as regarded Maria, she
went to Col. Jameson, and divulged to
him the substance of the information
given to her by Philip; and the sus-
picions of the old gentleman being
awakened by the intelligence, he ordered
Maria to be called, and stating what he
had heard, begged her to put an end to
Ormond’s visits.
Maria, however, who had been pre-
pared for this circumstance, undertook
to plead the cause of our hero, and pro-
duced the confession of the man, that
the whole report was the result of a con-
spiracy. The old gentleman was not
able to controvert this confession, and
was, accordingly, -obliged to appear
satisfied, although his suspicions had
been but partially removed; and he


dismissed Maria with a caution to keep
a guard over her behaviour, whenever
she was in the company of Ormond
Trewby. Her father, in conclusion,’
thought it necessary, for the first time
in his life, to inform Maria, that on her
prudence and innocence depended the
existence of those who gave her being;
and Maria, with tears in her eyes, de-
clared that they should never have
cause to reproach her for want of an
adherence to those principles which had
been inculcated into her from her child-
hood.
When Ormond returned, on the fol-
lowing' day, Maria communicated the
circumstance of Mrs. Howard’s inform-
ation to her father, and the result of
her interview with him on the subject,
and of her arguments in his defence.
Our hero embraced her tenderly, called
her his guardian angel, and declared,
that if he had been unable to controvert
the falsehoods of the old lady, he would


have rather destroyed himself, than have
sat down under the obloquy of having
attempted the ruin of one without whom
the world would be nothing but a blank*
and existence itself an insupportable
burden.
From this period Col. Jameson be-
haved towards our hero with a greater
coolness than usual, and this want of
cordiality increased daily; until at
length, an anonymous letter which he
had received, detailing the conduct of
him who followed his daughter, deter-
mined him to throw off the further
appearance of respect, and to forbid any
future visits of Ormond. He had like-
wise attempted to influence Maria to
refuse his future visits; but she, faithful
to her resolution to hear no further
reports against her lover, was not to be
prevailed upon to acquiesce in her fa-
ther’s determination.
When Ormond received the letter
containing his dismissal, he was sitting


at breakfast, and on perusing its con-
tents, he suddenly leaped up, struck
the table with such violence as to overset
the whole breakfast apparatus, and at
one leap sprang across the room, and
throwing up the sash, would probably
have flung himself into the street; such
was the ungovernable frenzy of his dis-
appointment, had he not suddenly per-
ceived Maria at the window; who, as if
aware of his real intention, held up her
hands in a supplicating posture, and then
with a look of ineffable sweetness, even
such as angels give to dying men, laying
one hand upon her heart, extended the
other towards him.
The action and the manner were not
to be mistaken—they conveyed to Or-
mond’s heart that cordial which is too
precious and healing in its nature to be
bestowed upon villany—they assured
him that whatever might be the deter-
mination of her father, her love was
unalterably his—and they stopped the


mad career of dissipated desire, and
appeased his momentary wrath. Here-
turned the eloquent but dumb expres-
sions of Maria, with tokens of the most
unfeigned transport; and, before her
eyes, tore the note which had caused
his suffering, and trampled it underneath
his feet.
Debarred from the converse and com-
pany of Maria, Ormond immediately
sought for his friend Trimbell, and after
faithfully acquainting -him with all the
circumstances of the case, advised w ; ith
him what further steps would be most
likely to attain an object which appeared
to be placed now almost beyond his reach,
although it was recently within his grasp.
The plan was soon formed, and a let-
ter was written to Maria requesting that,
as they were unable to enjoy each other’s
converse and company as usual, she
would favour him with an interview in
the street, only for a few minutes, in
the dusk of the evening. When this


note was written, it was displayed to
Maria at the window, and a sign was
made for her to receive it; which was
accordingly acceded to: and in a few mi-
nutes, our hero had the pleasure to see
it delivered into Maria’s hands.
Half an hour had scarcely elapsed,
when the amiable girl again appearedr at
the window, and holding a paper in her
hand, Philip was again dispatched to re-
ceive it: and Ormond was transported
on reading her assent to his wishes, and
a request that he would be near the
door at seven o’clock.
The interval was spent in the accus-
tomed pursuits, «■ and the close of the
evening, was hailed by our hero, w T ith
unusual transport. Trimbell accompa-
nied him to his apartments, in order
that he might be in readiness to render
assistance if it should be required; and
Ormond, as the clock struck seven,
stood directly opposite the door of Coh


Jameson’s house; and, in a few minutes
the door opened, and Maria appeared.
The meeting was marked with the
sincerest affection on the one part, and
the most hypocritic appearance of ten-
derness on the other; and Maria at the
fervent intreaties of Ormond, assented
to give him a few minute’s conversation
in his apartments; whither he accord-
ingly conducted her; and Trimbell,
hdVing withdrawn, on hearing their ap-
proach, in a few minutes they were to-
gether alone.
Our hero immediately began to express
his regret that Col. Jameson should
have forbid him his house, without
giving him an opportunity to repel the
charges which had been brought against
him ; and entreated Maria to say how
they should be able to see each other,
and to comfort themselves with mutual
expressions of love. Maria confessed
herself at a loss to suggest any method j


and our hero, taking advantage of her
tenderness, ventured to suggest an elope-
ment and private marriage.
At the first mention of this project,
Maria appeared struck with an involun-
tary terror, and Ormond could scarcely
support her from falling; but, as soon
as she was somewhat recovered, he
renewed the proposal, and enforced it
with all the sophistry in his power. For
some time Maria resisted the idea, but
at length persuaded by the artful ex-
pressions of Ormond, who suggested
that her parents would, immediately on
their return, forgive the stratagem, she
agreed to meet Ormond in his apart-
ments on the following evening, by
which time he would make the necessary
arrangements for their departure.
The whole of the following day was
spent in making the preparations for the
carrying off Maria, and our hero’s
transports were such as scarcely to be
restrained } and as the appointed hour


drew near, his extacy at the near ap-
proach of the moment which woulc
crown his exertions, was literally un-
manageable. He was down in the street
when the clock struck seven,, and Maria
appearing soon afterwards, he gave her
his hand, and, while she cast a tearful,
“ longing, lingering look behind,” he
led her to his apartments.
Oh! all ye powers that watch over
innocence and virtue—ye angels that
hover around the innocent and the good
—had ye, at this important moment,
given up your charge ?. Confident of her
virtue and prudence, had ye left her for
a moment:, whilst ye flew to the assist-
ance of some less eminent in goodness ?
Alas ! why did ye leave her now ?
Now, when temptations without number
assailed her; now, in the “ very crisis
of her fatenow, when she was bid-
ding adieu to her paternal mansion;
and entrusting herself to. the protection
of one, whom she knew not sufficiently,.


Guarded by you, she would have listened
to her father’s wishes; she would have
escaped the snare which was spread for
her, and have ■ lived in the same state
of happy innocence, in which this
villain found her; but ye left her for a
moment, and she fell!
After forcing the amiable girl to
swallow a glass of wine, in which the
villain had mingled a powder of a
soporiferous quality, she was handed
into a chaise which waited at the door,
and after driving for about an hour,
Maria fell into a state of insensibility
from the effects of the powder, when
Ormond immediately directed the driver
to set down at Hounslow, and lifting
her out of the chaise, carried her into>
the house, ordered a bed to be prepared,
and the unhappy Maria only recovered
her senses, to find herself in the arms’
of the abandoned wretch who had
seduced her from her friends.


CHAPTER XIV.
A Desertion—a New Object—and an
Adventure.
The deluded victim of a villain’s arts
having awakened to a sense of her ruined
situation, relapsed into a state of insen-
sibility; and was restored, with some
difficulty by Ormond, who with the
most hypocritical tenderness, entreated
her forgiveness for the step he had taken,
and promised, with the most solemn
vows and pretensions, to fulfil his en-
gagements to marry her on the following
dav.
il
The morning dawned, but how dif-
ferent the sensations which returned
with it to the bosoms of Ormond and


Maria. To the former it was hailed as
beholding him in the complete consum-
mation of his wishes, as having brought
to him, the reward of his toil and anx-
iety : —to the latter, alas ! how different
the emotions excited by the return of
morn—it beheld her robbed of virtue,
peace, and happiness; an outcast, having
abandoned those to whom nature had
bound her, and being now liable to be
abandoned by all the world; it an-
nounced to her her fall from the pinnacle
of virtue to the depths of vice; it
brought her nothing but misery, mourn-
ing, desolation, and woe. The remem-
brance of her parents would intrude
itself frequently, and add poignancy to
her sufferings :—who was now the nurse
of her father ? who the comfort and joy
of her mother ? and who, when a bro-
ther should return, would stretch out
the arms of a sister to receive him ?
Such were the pangs—such the sor-
rows, which rent the once chaste, and


beautiful bosom of Maria. Her peace
of mind was gone, and horror and black
. despair now reigned within her. Or-
mond, by every soothing expression, by
every solemn promise, attempted to
soothe her, and he partially succeeded;
when he promised to return with her
immediately to London, and fulfil his
vows.
Accordingly, having prevailed on Ma-
ria to take some breakfast, Ormond or-
dered a chaise, and in little more than
an hour, they arrived once more in Lon-
don, and were set down at TrimbeH’s
lodgings; and while Maria reposed her-
self after the fatigue occasioned by her
mental sufferings, Trim bell-and our hero
went out, with a supposed intention of
finding a clergyman, and procuring a
licence, for the union. After a short
absence they returned, bringing with
them a fictitious licence, and a fellow
habited as a clergyman, and a ceremony
was performed which while it gave ease


to the mind of the unhappy Maria, im-
posed no bond upon the unrestrained
libertinism of her villanous seducer.
The ceremony was speedily terminated,
and the smile of pleasure once more
dimpled the cheek of the beautiful Ma-
ria, who received the embraces of her
pretended husband, and the congratula-
tions of Trimbell with a modest satis-
faction which heightened her beauty.
Maria was anxious to return without
delay, to communicate her happiness to
her parents; but her wish was over-
ruled by Ormond, who said it would be
more satisfactory to him to see her first
placed in suitable lodgings, until a house
to their taste could be taken; and in
this decision Maria most willingly con -
curred.
Apartments were taken in the course
of the day, in Bruton Street, and thi-
ther Ormond and Maria removed on
the same evening ; the former in a state
of happy ignorance as to her real situa-


Item, and the latter rejoicing in the
process of his stratagems, and the ruin
of the amiable girl.
From time to time did Ormond invent
some excuses to silence Maria, when-
ever she expressed a wish to visit her
parents, and as the latter believed every
thing he told her, she was perfectly
satisfied with his reasons. In the mean
time, Ormond refrained not from his
old habits, but indulged himself in
greater extravagancies,- and new excesses
daily; his mornings and his evenings
were spent generally at the gaming table,
and he was considered the most bold
and successful of all the company who
resorted thither. Under such circum-
stances, it is not to be wondered at that
his riches flowed in; and, in order to
silence the reproaches of Maria, who
frequently expostulated with him on his
continual absence from home, and his
habitual dissipations, he gave her a
chariot and a splendid equipage.


Thus a few months rolled away, when
our hero being tired of confining his
attentions to Maria, lovely as she was,
sought out for some new amour, and
began to devise some plausible method
of getting rid of her, • whom he had
seduced from her innocence and her
duty. The advice of his trusty friend
Trimbell was again called in, as usual,
and the result of their conferences was,
that a letter should be written by our
hero, and dispatched to the devoted
Maria, informing her of the deception
which had been practised upon her, and
enclosing her a thousand pound note,
with a recommendation to her to return
to her parents, who would doubtless
receive to their bosoms their penitent
daughter.
If any thing had been wanting to
complete the character of Ormond, the
debauchee , it was some such finishing
trait as this—if any thing worse than
habitual dissipation, and a regular and
VOL. 11. e


systematic habit of gaming—if any
thing more depraved than an unnatural
contempt of a parent and a brother—if
any thing more horrible than the seduc-
tion of an angelic girl like Maria
Jameson, it was the base, the villanous,
the unmanly desertion of an amiable
creature, who had relinquished her
friends, and set the odium which the
world might cast upon her conduct at
defiance, from a full confidence in him
who had professed an affection for her,
which could not be outdone in honour,
and sincerity. If to drag her from the
bosom of those whose existence hung
upon her happiness, and- to load her
with shame, be characteristic of a villain,
what epithet can be strong enough to
depict his character, when he cast her
from his breast, and left her to fall a
prey to new accumulations of infamy ?
Ormond concurred with the utmost
readiness in the advice of his friend
Trimbell —he felt no “ compunctious


visitings of nature,” no soui-harrowing
tortures of a guilty conscience—he dis-
covered no pity, no regret, for what he
had done, and what he was about to do
—he decided with the utmost cool
ness and apathy; and a smile of tri-
umphant self-congratulation illumined
his features, as he planted a dagger in
the heart and happiness of her for whom
he had sworn to quit the world, if she
would renounce her connections for him.
He painted to himself, horrible to tell,
what would be the surprise and con-
sternation of the unhappy Maria, on
perusing the tale of her disappointment
and deception; and what her feelings
when she should return to her parents,
and weep and tell the story of what she
would call her fufierings and her wrongs.
On the other hand, he anticipated the
new pleasures he should derive from his
being unrestrained by her presence—
the increased notoriety which would
attach to his name in the annals of gal-
e 2


lantry, and fashionable life; and he
looked forward with confidence and de-
light to new conquests, new enjoyments,
new desolations of virtue, and new vic-
tims of treachery. A letter was accord-
ingly penned by Ormond, of which
Trimbell undertook to be the bearer,
and the contents of which were as
follow—
“ Madam,
“ It is with much pain that I am com-
« pelled, by existing circumstances, to
“ suffer you no longer to remain in ig-
« norance of your real situation: and
“ however painful the information may
“ prove, I am under the necessity of
“ communicating to you that you are
“ not my wife. In order to quiet your
fears, and dispel your apprehensions,
“ on our return to London from Houns-
“ low, I was urged to commit a decep-
“ tion at which my heart recoiled. It
“ was not possible for me to domesticate


“■ myself so much as to consent to wear
“ the chains of matrimony; and I there-
“ fore had recourse to a fraud, which gave
“ you ease, and me happiness. The man
“ who officiated as a priest was, in fact*
“ a waiter at a tavern, under a clerical
“ disguise; and the pretended licence
“.was nothing more than a fictitious
“ one. Being therefore not legally
“ bound to each other, we are at liberty
“ to pursue the bent of our own incli-
“ nations }> and, if I may be permitted
“ to advise you, I would recommend
“ you to return to your parents without
“ delay, and in their society lose the
“ remembrance of
“ Ormond Trewby.”
te P.S. I have enclosed you a thousand
“ pound bank note, to prevent you from
“ feeling the pressure of want; and, as
“ I have removed my lodgings to a
“ remote part of the town, it will not
“ be possible for any reply to reach me,”


Ormond, having executed his diabo-
lical scheme, repaired to Brookes’s, to
await the return of Trimbell, who car-
ried the fatal epistle which was to anni-
hilate the happiness of an innocent but
imprudent girl, as it was judged impro-
per to entrust it to a porter, lest some
mistake should occur in the delivery,
In about half an hour Trimbell arrived,
and having satisfied our hero as to the
safety of the letter, they sat down to
gaming with renewed spirits. After
playing the whole night in company
with two noblemen of high rank, our
two heroes rose from the table winners
of above fifteen thousand pounds each.
Fatigued with the same round of
dissipation continually, our hero deter-
mined to vary his pleasures, by changing
his character. He accordingly took a
splendid house in Russell Square, hired
livery servants, and sported an equipage
Kttle inferior to any in the metropolis.
But all this was a prelude to a new


scheme, which he had for some days
been agitating in his mind.
In the neighbourhood of Russell
Square, our hero had frequently had
an opportunity of seeing Lady Augusta
Bartley, a lovely daughter of a wealthy
and honourable peer, whose recent death
had possessed her of immense wealth,
and not less respected for her virtues
than her personal qualifications. He
had frequently sighed for an introduc-
tion to this young lady, and concluded
the most likely mode of accomplishing
this end, would be by the adoption of
the measure which he had now put into
execution.
Having accordingly entered upon his
new house, he assumed the name and
character of a French Marquis, and
began to form associations amongst the
nobility which surrounded him. By
these means, he soon obtained an intro-
duction to Lady Augusta, in company
with Trimbell, who passed as his bro=


ther; 2nd at this interview he contrived,
by an assumption of the most winning
manners, and by a most profuse display
of splendid jewels, to make a consider-
able advance in the favour of her lady-
ship : and was accordingly admitted to
her public routes, and her private
parties.
Brookes’s was forsaken, as our hero
considered that it would be dangerous
for him to continue his visits in a neigh-
bourhood, where he should be con-
tinually exposed to the risk of seeing
Maria Jameson, or some of her friends,
who might recognise him ; and inde-
pendent of the unpleasantness of such
an encounter, it might lead to a dis-
covery of his present residence; in
which case, his deception would be
speedily unmasked, and his plans upon
the person and property of Lady Au-
gusta must inevitably be defeated.
But a new receptacle of ennobled
profligacy was easily found out, and as


it was necessary to have recourse to
gaming to keep up appearances, since
our hero’s expences were extravagant in
the extreme, accompanied by Trimbell,
he would regularly visit the gamester’s
haunts, and fortune still continuing pro-
pitious to his designs, he never failed to
bring away considerable sums of money.
The uniform success which attended
him, had, on his first becoming a sub-
scriber to these new rooms, excited a
suspicion, in many who attended, that
his play was not fair ; and a strict watch
was kept upon him and his companion,
but the impression gradually wore away,
as no circumstances occurred, at any
time, to establish it.
The intercourse between Ormond and
Lady Augusta became daily more and
more familiar, until, in a short time, he
had made such progress as to be ad-
mitted as a follower; and a report soon
began to obtain currency, that Lady
Augusta, and the French Marquis were


about to make a match between them.
Our hero took great care .to imprJW
every opportunity, and tfnlv a
period had elapsed, before she < v nted
to receive him as a professed lover: in
order to pass through his term of pro-
bation.
About a week after this event, as our
hero was returning rather late, in the
evening, from an assignation with some
credulous and unhappy girl, regardless
of his steps, and wrapt up in some
meditation of villany, he was suddenly
stopped in a dark and private passage
by a man whose evident intention was
to rob him. Ormond, having some
considerable sum about him, and beino-
by no means deficient in courage, im-
mediately resisted the attempt, but, after
an ineffectual conflict, he was over-
powered and knocked down, but as the
man was about to rifle his pockets,
some footsteps approached, and he ran
away without accomplishing his purpose.


Severely bruised, and fainting from loss
i blood, our hero lay, speechless and
exhausted, till some passengers raised
t ie ground, and carried him
into tu'public street, when the gather-
ing crowd attracted the notice of a gen-
tleman who had just alighted at his own
door from a chariot, and, discovering
the cause, he desired that the wounded
youth should be carried into his house.
Disfigured with blood and dirt, and
yet insensible from the violent blow
which had felled him to the ground, our
hero presented a most frightful specta-
cle. A medical gentleman in the neigh-
bourhood was immediately called in,
and, having washed away the sanguine
mask which concealed his features, and
examined bis bruises, he declared that
they were all of a trivial nature, and
that the youth would only require a
single application to his hurts, and
repose, to restore him to himself.
In the mean time Ormond had re


covered his senses, and, on opening his
eyes, and looking round the room,
which appeared somewhat familiar to
him, a sudden trembling seized him,
and he faintly inquired of the attendant,
in whose house he was ? The servant
answered— Mr. Lovell's.
Had a thunderbolt stricken Ormond,
it could not have produced a more in-
stantaneous effect. He cursed inwardly
the officious care that had conveyed him
hither, and had not rather left him to
the chance of perishing in the street.
But as he was now under the same roof
with his brother, no time was to be lost
in framing some specious excuse for
his departure from his lodgings, and his
long absence from his duties'; and he
accordingly began to revolve in his tor-
mented mind on the best method for
adoption.
In the mean time, Mr. Lovell, who,
was the gentleman who had interposed,
and ordered Ormond to be carried into


his house, and who, on the removal of
the blood and dirt which concealed his
features, had immediately recollected
him, hastened to Henry Trewby, who
had gone to bed, and informed him of
the circumstance ; on which the latter
rose, and, dressing himself without
delay, hastened to the chamber where
our hero was stretched, a prey to more
mental than bodily anguish.
Thus was Ormond, by a mere acci-
dent, once more thrown in the way of
a brother, than whom he could rather,
at such a moment, and under such cir-
cumstances, have encountered a thou-
sand footpads, and have undergone a
thousand beatings, each as severe as
the one which had thrown him into
this predicament. He had inquired of
the attendant by what means he came
into the house, and had been informed
by her of his being picked up in the
alley, and, at the instance of her
master, whose generous humanity she


loudly extolled, had been carried into
his house, until he should have re-
covered sufficiently to tell his name and
residence. She addecj, that she thought
her master recollected him, on discover-
ing his features, for he immediately left
the room in very great agitation, and
repaired to Mr. Trewby (his partner’s)
chamber. She then declared that she
never saw so great a likeness between
two people, in her life, as between Mr.
Trewby and him, and vowed she could
almost have sworn they were brothers,
if she had seen them together.
What Ormond’s feelings must have
been on hearing such observations,
may be better conceived than described,
and the reader may employ himself in
the task of depicting them, before he
enters upon the next chapter.


CHAPTER XV.
Hypocrisy .
WHEN Henry entered our hero’s
apartment, the latter, overpowered by
shame and confusion, covered his face
with his hands, and for some minutes
could not summon sufficient resolution
to meet the penetrating looks of his
brother. The latter, however, having
somewhat reassured him by inquiring,
in a voice of fraternal tenderness, how
he felt himself, he became sufficiently
restored to press the hand which was
held out to him.
Without referring to his past con-
duct, Henry inquired into the cause of
his being reduced to that bruised and


unfortunate plight: and our hero, after
declaring that he had been absent from
town, and had only returned late on
that evening, stated, that as he was
coming to a tavern in the neighbour-
hood, in order to be in readiness to call
on his brother the following morning,
he was suddenly attacked by a robber,
and, after making a vain resistance, was
overpowered and reduced to a state of
insensibility, from which he never re-
covered, until he found himself laying
where he now was. And, after this
statement, partly false and partly true,
Ormond commenced, in the most hypo-
critical strain, a long tissue of feigned
thanks to heaven, and gratitude to Mr.
Lovell, for an interposition to which he
must ever attribute his preservation
from destruction.
Whether Henry paid implicit credit
to the narrative of his brother, is some-
what doubtful; but he chose to appear
satisfied, and after supplying him with


some refreshment, he wished him a
good night, with a promise to attend
him early on the following morning;
and Ormond was once more left to
himself.
After tossing about for some time in
his bed, unable to compose his mind
to rest, and equally unsuccessful in his
attempts to produce some plausible tale
for the ear of his brother, our hero lay
in a state not the most comfortable, nor
the most enviable in the world ; and, at
length, after he had dropped into a kind
of restless slumber, his dreams dis-
turbed him much more than even his
waking thoughts. At one moment, he
beheld his fathers stern and angry
visage, upbraiding him with his in-
famous conduct—-at another, he beheld
his brother reproaching him with having
broken the heart of his parent by his
unnatural behaviour—and afterwards,
the image ©f the deserted Maria stood
before him, holding an infant in the


I one hand, and a dagger in the other,
and accusing him of the murder of her
father, her mother, her infant, anc
herself. Terrified with these accumu-
lated horrors, the phantoms raised by
a guilty conscience, his slumbers were
unrefreshing, and when morning dawn-
sd, he had to summon courage to meet
his brother.
At an early hour Henry appeared at
hs brother’s bedside; and, after in-
quiring how he felt his hurts, began to
question him jespecting his past con-
luct, with rather more affection than
>ur hero expected. He told him that
ie was surprised, on calling at his lodg-
es for the third time, to find that he
ad quitted them, without leaving be-
ind him any clue by which he could be
iscovered. The pain which had been
ccasioned by this circumstance, had
een considerably increased by the de-
ar ture of week after week, and month
fter month, without bringing any t,i-


dings which could satisfy a brother’s
anxious impatience. His father too,
who had repeatedly written, and Saily
expected answers from Ormond, had
been reduced by disappointment and
sorrow for the apostacy of his son, to
the very yerge of the grave, and was
now labouring under the most severe
indisposition, occasioned by his son s
departure from the path of rectitude.
Xo any other mind than that of Or-
mond, it might be supposed, that such
a narrative would have carried penitence
and the deepest sorrow; but to him,
although he considered it prudent to
conceal his real feelings* and to give
way to a paroxysm of feigned regret,
to him the intelligence conveyed no-
thing like a pang. When chance before
threw him in the way of his brother,
his penitence, for the moment, was
ardent and sincere ; but
relapse had completely obliterated every
trace of feeling and virtue, and harrow-*


€cl up his soul against the voice of
nature, and the calls of duty. He felt
now no compunction, no repentance, no
remorse : his whole mind was absorbed
in the invention of some method of
extricating himself from his present
troubles; and, if he could succeed in
this attempt, he cared little, so deeply
was his heart corrupted, whether his
father survived the shock of his villany,
or whether he fell a victim to his own
paternal feelings.
But Henry was deceived by his ap-
parent remorse—he considered the tears
he witnessed, as the effusions of a heart
overwhelmed with sorrow, and under
the influence of this idea, he felt him-
self, even before his brother began to
speak, already more than half disposed
to forgive him.
In the mean time, our hero, after
having givSf way to a shew of grief for
some minutes, during which period he
was perfecting himself in his tale, began


to repeat a narrative of his conduct,
since he left his lodgings in Bedford Row;
from which, he said, he was seduced by
one of his old companions, under a pre-
tence of taking him to bid a last adieu
to his old associates, and the haunts of
his former dissipation. That he was
there induced to play a single game, and
from that proceeded to another, until
at length, having been extremely for-
tunate, he entered into an engagement
to repeat the same scene of vice on the
following day. From this he was urged
to new dissipations, and, at length, was
prevailed upon to accompany his friend,
m a visit to the country, and, that having
returned on the preceding evening, he
had set out with a resolution to quit his
old habits, and to find out his brother,
and advise with him as to the best me-
thod for him to pursue.
He then began to lament, with well-
feigned regret, that the natural impe-
tuosity of his temper was such, and his


easiness of disposition so predominant,
that it was not in his power to resist
temptation, and that he therefore consi-
dered, if it met his brother’s approba-
tion, that it would be much more advisa-
ble for him to return into the country,
and by a thorough reformation of con-
duct, endeavour to heal those wounds,
which his past misbehaviour had inflicted
upon his parents. He concluded with
a violent phillippic against the vices and
follies of the metropolis, and the wick-
edness of those who were continually
prowling about to seduce young men
from the path of duty.
Henry’s pleasure and astonishment on
hearing this discourse surpassed all de-
scription ; for he had not learnt to con-
ceive so bad an opinion of his brother
as to believe that what he now uttered
was any thing but sincere; and, in the
excess of his joy, he clasped our hero to
his breast, and gave way to the most pure,
as well as the most ardent transport of


delight. He expressed his happiness
to find that he had still resolution
sufficient to put in practice a measure
so honourable to himself, and likely
to prove so consolatory to those
who, by nature and affection, were
so closely bound to him. He ap-
proved highly of Ormond’s plan of re-
turning home immediately, and urged
him to put it in practice, as soon as the
nature of his wounds would permit; and
then, full of happiness, the amiable man
ran to communicate the grateful tidings
to the family of Mr. Lovell; and, al-
though, that gentleman was not so cre-
dulous as Henry, he was convinced by
his arguments of the evident sincerity of
his brother’s penitence and intentions.
During the absence of his brother,
Ormond began to congratulate himself
on the growing success of his scheme.
He was delighted with his own ingenuity,
and took great credit to himself for his
skill in dissimulation; and once more


turned his thoughts from his present si-
tuation, to the more gratifying anticipa-
tion of future pleasures' from dissipation
and intrigue. At the same time, he se-
cretly resolved never to venture, alone,
so near the residence of his brother
again; lest by some other unfortunate
and unforeseen accident he might be
made to endure a repetition of his late
feelings, and his present mortifying si-
tuation.
While he was yet indulging in these
reflections, Henry again entered his
room, and requested, if he found himself
sufficiently recovered, that he would fa-
vour the family with his company in the
breakfast parlour; but, if he thought
the exertion would be rather too much
for his strength, he intreated him by no
means to make the attempt: and Or-
mond, happy to have the opportunity
of an excuse, begged his brother would
make an apology for his absence, and
allow him to remain where he was to


take his coffee. Henry gladly assented*
and our hero felt himself considerably
revived by the idea that he should escape
the mortification of meeting a family*
who had before witnessed his penitence,
and whom he could not bring himself
again to see* under circumstances, which
however palliated, could reflect little ho-
nour upon himself in the estimation of
those who were not biassed by fraternal
affection.
Henry took frequent occasions to
sound his brother’s intention during the
morning, in order that he might ascer-
tain whether it remained in full force;
and the latter being continually on his
guard, was cautious not to let slip a
Syllable which could betray any thing
like a fluctuation in sentiment.
At the hour of dinner, our hero
summoned up sufficient resolution to
take his meal with the family, and the
reception he met with was such as to
VOL. 11. F


render his situation not only free from
mortification, but really pleasant. Not
a look, nor a hint, escaped any person,
which could possibly remind him of the
past, and in the course of a few hours,
universal cheerfulness and good humour
reigned throughout the domestic circle.
The evening was passed in a variety of
amusement, and the easy gracefulness
which Ormond contrived to throw into
his manners, rendered him, on this
occasion, an extremely agreeable com-
panion ; so much so, indeed, that the
idea of his departure on the morrow
(for he had given out his intention of
setting out on the following morning)
dispersed a partial gloom, and Mrs.
Lovell entreated him to remain their
guest a day or two longer.
Our hero, however, thought proper
to decline the invitation, since, although
he had assumed an appearance of perfect
gaiety, his mind was ill at ease, since


his absence from Russell Square would
not fail to give uneasiness to Tfimbell,
and appear strange to his servants; and,
independent of this, if he had no friend
and domestics to be alarmed at his ab-
sence, it was not to be expected that he
could consent to remain in a family
where he played the hypocrite, until he
could make his escape.
Henry beheld with the most heartfelt
satisfaction the apparent reformation of
his brother; and the happiness which
illuminated his countenance was to him
an indication of the pleasure he expe-
rienced in his return to the path of
duty. Unaccustomed himself to the
arts of deception, he would have been
the last person on earth to imagine that
our hero, with all his apparent cheer-
fulness, was only acting the part of a
hypocrite: and if such a suspicion had
for a moment crossed his mind, frater-
nal affection would have induced him
f 2


mstantly to discard the thought, as un-
worthy his entertaining in his breast.
While Ormond was entering into the
amusements of the evening with the
utmost satisfaction, his‘brother, as he
viewed the smile which animated his
features, was anticipating the vast de-
light which his return to his duty and
his home would occasion in the hearts
of his parents, who were now suffering
under the idea that he was rushing
headlong to his destruction. He pic-
tured in his own mind the reciprocal
emotions which would be produced at
the meeting, and had almost wept with
joy at the affecting nature of the scenes
which his fancy had pourtrayed—scenes,
alas! never to be realised!
As our hero had declined Mrs.
Lovell’s invitation to protract his stay,
under a feigned apprehension that every
hour he remained from his beloved
parents, might be the source of new


uneasiness to them, it seemed to be the
wish of all present to make the most of
his company during 1 the evening; and
when the midnight hour was called
beneath their windows, the games were
yet unfinished..
About one o’clock, however, our hero,
fatigued with performing the hypocrite
so long together, pleaded a slight indis-
position, and begged he might be al-
lowed to retire; and, after he had once
more expressed his unalterable deter-
mination to take his departure after
breakfast on the morrow, he wished the
family a good night, and Henry, with
the affection of a brother, accompanied
him to his chamber ; and promised to
prepare some letters for Trewby Hall, in
the morning previous to Ormond’s de-
parture.
Once more left to himself and under
the cover of darkness, our hero, with
no little satisfaction called to his mind


the near approach of the hour when he
should be enabled to break from the
chain, which at present confined him
within the notice of his brother.
Scarcely deigning to bestow a single
thought on his father, his ideas returned
to their old channel, and he was chiefly
occupied in painting the surprise which
his return to his home would occasion,
after so long, and, to those he had left
behind, inexplicable an absence. He
had been extremely cautious, during the
day, not to drop a word which could
lead to any suspicion of his residence,
during any one period of his dissipated
career, and he therefore remained per-
fectly secure in the certainty that his
brother could never obtain the least
clue which might lead to a discovery of
his residence; and he secretly resolved
to take especial care never, if he could
possibly avoid it, to fall again into the
way of one he so much feared to meet.


The long-looked-for day at length
dawned, and Ormond, hastily dressing
himself, went into the breakfast par-
lour, where he found the family already
seated round the table, and preparing to
take their meal. In a few minutes they
were joined by Henry, who, with tears
in his eyes, put into the hands of Or-
mond, a letter which he had that
moment received from Trewby Hall,
announcing-the increasing indisposition
of his father, and his fears that he
should never have an opportunity of be-
holding his children again. The letter
then proceeded to entreat Henry would
immediately set out for Trewby Hall,
as his father felt the want of some one
to cheer his mind, and soothe- his sor-
rows; which had been evidently too
powerful for him to bear, ever since the
last deviation of Ormond from the path
of his duty.
On perusing this melancholy epistle,


our hero once more thought it expedient
to shed tears, and, after weeping for
some minutes, as he said, for the misery
he had occasioned to the author of his
being, he asked his brother what steps
he meant to adopt for he really felt an
apprehension that Henry would deter-
mine, in consequence of this letter, to
accompany him, and this would indeed
have proved a death blow to his project,
which was now on the eve of being ac-
complished, v
His fears, however, were but of short
duration, Henry expressed his determi-
to follow Ormond on the next
day, as he had several engagements on
important business, which would occupy
him during the course of the present
morning; but if his brother would de-
delay his departure until the following
morning, Henry expressed his readiness
to accompany him.
Mr and Mrs. Lovell joined in the in-


treaty, but as such an arrangement was
what our hero particularly wished to
counteract, he steadily refused, with a
great shew of politeness, every invitation;
anxiously, as he said, wishing that not
a moment should be lost, on his part,
in throwing himself at the feet of pa-
rents to whom he had given such room
for uneasiness; and to alleviate, by every
means in his power, the sorrows which
he feared had indeed overpowered them.
He then regretted with all the external
marks of sincerity, that this was the only
recompence he could now make them
for their past sufferings, and that he was
determined to devote his whole life to
the promotion of their future comfort;
and to healing the wounds which he had
given them.
The apparent earnestness of Ormond’s
manner, and the grief which seemed to
have such complete possession of him,
penetrated the heart of Henry, and


affected all who were present; and, as
his brother attempted to persuade him
that all would be well, when he had
returned to Trewby Hall, he, with the
most sincere and unaffected emotions,
returned thanks to heaven for having
instilled into our hero sentiments of so
pure and truly filial a nature. He then
wished Ormond, as he would not remain
until the next morning, for the reasons
he had mentioned, and which must
have a due weight on every one, to pre-
pare for his departure without delay;
and, in a few minutes, the latter, de-
claring himself ready to be gone, took
a very affectionate leave of the family,
and, after expressing his great sense of
their politeness to him during his stay,
left the house, and, accompanied by his
brother Henry, repaired to the Coach
Office, in Leadenhall Street.
As they proceeded along the streets,
Henry instructed his brother to state


his intention of setting out on the fol-
lowing day, without fail, and he trusted
to behold all those he loved once more
united, after a period of trouble, to
pass the remainder of their lives in
mutual endearments, and all the feli-
cities of reciprocal love. He was about
to add a word or two respecting Jul.ia,
but before he had time to express his
ideas, the coach appeared coming out
of the inn yard; and they were obliged
to run in order to overtake it, when our
hero mounted the roof, and, waving his
hand to Henry, was soon out of sight*


CHAPTER XVI.
An Escape, and a Duel.
The reader will probably begin to
suspect that Ormond has taken his de-
parture in truth, and is now on his road
to Trewby Hall; but let him have pa-
tience for a moment, and he shall be let
into the secret.
As soon as the coach arrived at an
inn in Whitechapel, where it was accus-
tomed to stop, our hero, after paying
his full fare, alighted ; and, calling a
coach, ordered it to drive to his house
in Russell Square, where, in a short
time, he was set down. As soon as he
entered, he perceived Trimbell, sitting


in a disconsolate posture, and leaning
his head on a table y but no sooner did
he hear Ormond’s voice, than, at one
leap, he sprang to the door, and, seizing
him by the hand, burst out into a volley
of execrations and other fashionable
expressions of joy, on once more be-
holding him. Unable to restrain his
feelings, he sang for happiness ;, and
asked a thousand questions, inthe most
incoherent manner, and without waiting
for a single reply. After a few minutes,
however, his emotions had subsided
sufficiently to permit him to inquire, in
a more rational manner, what had be-
come of our hero during the whole of
the day, and the two nights preceding.
After a short pause, Ormond com-
municated all that had passed, from the'
moment of his being attacked; de-
scribing his sensations on finding
himself at the residence of Mr.
Lovell, and on meeting with his


brother; with the scheme he had hit
on to escape firstly from their re-
proaches, and secondly from their com-
pany ; and concluding with an account
of the successful completion of his
scheme, and with some remarks on his
own dexterity in deception, and the
credit he deserved for his consummate
hypocrisy.
When he had finished his narrative,
Trimbell congratulated him over and
over again on his talents, and his happy
knack at counterfeiting those emotions
which he did not feel; and, in return,
began to recapitulate all the terrors and
apprehensions which had taken pos-
session of his mind alternately; and
the pains he had taken to frequent
every place whither they had been ac-
customed to resort, and to institute
every inquiry (in an indirect way, so as
not excite the suspicions of any one to
whom he had applied) which appeared


hi the least likely to lead to a favour-
able issue. He then stated, that a card
of invitation had been left, on the pre-
ceding morning, for our hero to spend
the same evening with Lady Augusta
Bartley; and that he had, in conse-
quence of Ormond’s absence, sent an
apology, stating that he had been sent
for, at a moment’s notice, to attend
the summons of a dying friend, and was
not expected to return until the next
or the following day. Various calls had
also been made, to all of which he made
a similar excuse. But he confessed that
he had been much terrified, in his own
mind, lest some unhappy disaster had
occurred, which had separated them for
ever; and this idea had so strongly
taken possession of his mind, as to
deprive him, in a great measure, of his
rest during the last night.
Our hero returned his thanks to
Trimbell for his ready invention of an


excuse, and inquired if the domestics
had expressed any surprise at his ab-
sence ; but the latter replied in the ne-
gative, as he had told them, when lie
found he did not return the first night,
-a story similar to that which he had
prepared for those who might pay their
morning visits.
And now, after the unburthening of
each other’s minds, by the recapitulation
of their mutual adventures, doubts,
fears, troubles, and dilemmas, the two
friends began to consult on the most
proper method of dividing the day :
and it was agreed that our hero should,
in the first place, wait upon Lady Au-
gusta, to remove any apprehensions
which might have taken possession of
her breast, in consequence of his ab-
sence ; after which it was agreed to
spend the remainder of the day at their
usual lucrative employment, as they had
been absent from the gaming table for


the three last days, and it became ab-
solutely necessary, in consequence of
the expences occasioned by their equi-
page and establishment, to have regular
recourse to this source of gain, in order
to prevent their purse from being ex-
hausted, or even to bear the appearance
of diminution.
On his arrival at Lady Augusta’s
house, our hero was received with the
utmost kindness and affection : and the
melancholy tale which he had prepared
for her Ladyship’s ear, while it drew the
tear of sympathy into her eye, was cal-
culated to impress her heart with exalted
ideas of Ormond’s generosity. She
knew little indeed of the character of
him whom she had admitted as her
lover; for little indeed could she ima-
gine from his winning and attractive
manners, that he was capable of that
dissimulation which he had so frequently
accustomed himself to display; and less


could she have supposed that his un-
natural conduct had pierced his father’s
heart, and reduced him to the borders
of the grave. She had given him, almost
involuntarily, a place in her affections,
won over as she was by his attractive
behaviour, and his splendid equipage
and appearance. Amiable as she was,
she was susceptible of flattery, and
Ormond, in paying homage to her
vanity, had found the way to her heart.
The idea of a French Marquis had
something in it so gratifying to her
feelings, that she had rejected a noble-
man of the first rank and most eminent
virtues, in order to secure his company
and his assiduities to herself.
During his short absence, the bosom
of Lady Augusta was racked with a
thousand contending emotions. Fears
of his safety, and doubts of his con-
stancy, alternately agitated her; and
the most lively and evident pleasure


beamed in her eyes when he entered her
boudoir. In fact, never had our here
received so flattering a reception as at
this time; never had his self-love been
so much flattered; never was his scheme
of imposition upon the fair Augusta in
so fair a train for accomplishment. He
praised her beauty, her exquisite taste,
her matchless virtues; and at every new
flattering epithet which fell from his
lips, a smile of affection, which dim-
pled her lovely cheek, was his reward.
He continued to flatter, animated as he
was by her smiles, and she continued
to reward him; and such rapid progress
had he made in her affections, in a few
hours, that she consented, before his
departure, to name, at their next meet-
ing, an earl/ period when she would
crown his wishes and her happiness, by
their union.
An event, however, which occurred
the day after this consent was given,


Bad nearly put an end to their mutual
hopes, and saved Lady Augusta from
a disappointment of the bitterest nature.
A nobleman, of distinguished rank,,
who had been dismissed in consequence
of Ormond’s visits, had ever since that
moment meditated revenge against the
cause of his mortification. He had, by
means of Lady Augusta’s footman,
whom he had gained over to his in-
terests, been informed of the regularity
of our hero’s visits, and of the evident
affection which her Ladyship evinced
towards him; and he had also heard of
his absence,, and he entertained, at that
moment,, some hopes, that either an
accident had befallen his rival, which
had removed him out of the way, or
that the neglect was occasioned by a
change in his inclinations. All his
hopes, however, were destroyed by our
hero’s return, and nothing remained to.
be done but to revenge himself..


Accordingly, when Ormond and his
friend Trimbed returned from the
gaming table, late in the evening, after
a very successful adventure, the former
found a note addressed to him, which
had been that instant brought by a gen-
tleman, who was still waiting for his
return. Breaking open the seal, his
colour changed, and he appeared to be
so suddenly and visibly agitated, as
scarcely to refrain from falling: his
emotions, however, were more the
effect of sudden surprise, than any sen-
sation of terror, and recovering himself
immediately, he put the note into the
hands of Trimbell, who read as follows—
Cavendish Square, Saturday Evening,
“ To the Marquis D’Alencon,
“ You have supplanted me in the
t<r affections of a lovely woman; you
<c have dashed the cup of happiness
from my lips, at the moment I was


t<r about to taste it; and as lam resolved
u that,, while I live, Lady Augusta
“ Bartley shall not confer upon another
a that felicity which ought to have been
“ mine, I have to request that you will
te meet me to-morrow morning, at
“ seven o’clock, at Hyde-Park Corner,
“ bringing with you a case of pistols;
and as it is my determination that
<£ one of us shall remain on the held,
“ you will make your arrangements
<€ accordingly.
<c Merton.”
No great time was necessary to deter-
mine how to act. To have declined the
meeting, would have been to shew a
want of spirit which our hero would have
scorned to display; and accordingly,
sitting down to his writing desk, in the
course of a few minutes, he produced
the following reply.


ee To Lord Merton,
u If I have supplanted you in the a£>
** fections of Lady Augusta Bartley, I
“ gained the ascendancy over you in a
<f fair and honourable way, and I rejoice
“ that my efforts have been crowned
“ with success. If you consider your-
“ self aggrieved, I have no objection to
“ meet you on your terms, and at the
specified time and place, to give you
" such satisfaction as one of us shall
<( deem necessary.
“ D’Alencon.*
Russell Square,
Having dispatched the messenger, our
hero sent a servant after his solicitor;
and, while Trimbell was examining his
pistols, he occupied himself in writing
an affectionate letter, to Lady Augusta,
to be delivered to her, in case of his
death; in which he declared that his
love for her predominated over his love


of life, and that his last moments would
be spent in blessing her, for whom he
shed his blood. By the time he had
finished this extravagant production of
hypocrisy, the footman announced the
arrival of Mr. Codicil, who was accord-
ing ushered into the room.
Having taken his -seat, Ormond in-
formed him that he had an affair of ho-
nour which would call him out early in
the morning; and, as the result of the
meeting was doubtful, and he had some
temporal affairs to arrange, he thought
it advisable to request his attendance
this evening, in order that he might
make his will; and thus be better pre-
pared to meet the issue, whatever it
might be.
After a few expressions of regret,
that such a noble gentleman should
stake his existence upon the chance of
a shot, Mr. Codicil set down to the
table, and prepared a will, according


to the dictation of our hero, in which,
after leaving Lady Augusta Bartley a
legacy of one thousand pounds, and a
few trifling tokens of remembrance to
the companions of his dissipation, he
bequeathed the residue of his property,
with his equipage, furniture, plate, jewels,
&c. to his dear friend and associate
Trimbell; after which, having given a
handsome fee to the solicitor which called
forth all his politeness, Mr. Codicil re-
tired.
Having executed this preliminary step,
Ormond found himself more composed,
and sat up a few hours longer, giving
directions to Trimbell respecting some
private matters, in case of a disastrous
result of the morning’s campaign; and
about three o’clock, these two friends
separated to partake of a partial repose,
until the arrival of the hour appointed.
But, although our hero retired to his-
bed, it was not to sleep. The agitated
VOL. 11. o


state of his mind effectually banished
repose, and the probability that the
morning’s dawn might behold his de-
struction, prevented him from closing
his eyes for a moment. It was then, if
they ever intruded themselves upon him,
that the recollections of his past conduct
stung him to the soul. It was then, in
the prospect of approaching fate, that a
retrospect, full of horror and dismay,
crowded on his mind, and harrowed up
his feelings. His reflections were ter-
rible, and the agony of his thoughts al-
most too powerful for him to support;
and the first rays of morn, which convey
pleasure to the heart of innocence and
virtue, gave an additional pang to his
breast, as it summoned him, unrefresh-
ed and unprepared, to face the soul-
dismaying front of death. Several
attempts did he make to summon suffi-
cient resolution to rise from his thorny
bed, and, as often, nerveless and appalled,


did his head sink back upon his pillow;
until the well-known, and never till now
unwelcome, voice of Trimbell, roused
him from his apathy, and compelled
him to shake off the terrors which had
nearly overwhelmed him.
The altered countenance and wretched
appearance of Ormond were too visible
to escape the notice of Trimbell, and
he was obliged to screen his fears, and
the Wretchedness which his apprehen-
sions had occasioned to him, under the
plea of a severe indisposition, which,
during the whole of the night, had tor-
tured him, and counteracted all his
efforts to obtain a moment’s rest.
At about half-past six o’clock the
coach arrived at the door; and our hero,
and Trimbell, who was to act as his
second, stepped into it, the former half
dead with terror, as he looked back at
the splendid house, and called to mind
the brilliant equipage, and all the sources
g 2


of delight, which he had, perhaps, now
quitted for the last time. His emotions
were too powerful to be concealed/ and
it required all the efforts and persuasions
of his friend to restore him to any thing
approaching, to tranquillity before they
reached the place appointed.
Lord Merton had already arrived,
and, after a few moment’s conversation,
it was agreed to adjourn to a distant
corner of the Park, to settle the busi-
ness ; whither they accordingly repaired,
attended by their respective seconds,
and a medical gentleman who attended
his Lordship.
They soon reached the spot, and as
it was of little use to attempt to bring
about a reconciliation, the ground was
measured, the parties took their stations,
and fired together; but as the shot took
no effect, it was speedily determined to
repeat the fire, which was more effec-
tual, as both the combatants instantly


fell, without uttering a single exclama-
tion.
On investigation, it appeared that
Lord Merton had received his antago-
nist’s ball iu the breast; and was, to all
appearance, in a dying state ; our
hero’s thigh had been penetrated by his
Lordship’s ball. Some persons, attracted
by the firing, having come up, a litter
was hastily constructed, and the wounded
men were conveyed to the nearest house.
Ormond, faint from excessive loss of
blood, had fallen into a state of insensi-
bility before the persons who bore him
could reach the house of a professional
gentleman, to which it was deemed
most expedient to convey him.
The surgeon, on examining his wound,
discovered that the ball had passed com-
pletely through our hero’s thigh, lace-
rating and disrupting the sinews and
tendons in its progress ; and he felt no
hesitation in declaring that the wound


was extremely dangerous; and that it
was impossible to remove him, in his
present state, without producing fatal
consequences. His wound was accord-
ingly dressed, and he was put to bed;
and, as soon as Xrimbell could leave his
friend for an hour, he departed for
Russel! Square, in order to divulge the
gloomy intelligence, and to require the
attendance of some of the domestics
upon their master. It was also thought
proper to send some apology for Or-
mond’s absence to £ady Augusta, who
was accordingly informed, that suddenly
he had been called from home by busi-
ness of the utmost importance, but was
expected to return in a day or two.
Having made these arrangements,
Trimbell returned to our hero, whose
situation appeared truly melancholy ; the
sufferings of his body being equalled, if
not outdone, by the disturbed state of
his mind, Once more compelled, in


the contemplation of a melancholy end,
to reflect on his past enormities, they
appeared to him black and terrible:
but his feelings were not the consequence
of remorse, but resulted from the ap-
prehension that he should no more
have an opportunity to emerge himself
in nqw pleasures.
The painful state of his wound was
such during the first night, as effectually
to exclude sleep, and his thoughts, du-
ring the hours of darkness, were little
less excruciating than they had been in
the night which preceded thissince, in
addition to the inward pangs he then ex-
perienced, he had now probably to accuse
himself of the murder of a fellow crea-
ture. This idea was horrible, for, not-
withstanding he endeavoured to persuade
himself that having acted in conformity
with the rules of honour, he could have
no reason to reflect upon himself, his
conscience, which would now begin to


torment and goad him, continually
sounded in his ears, that whatever palli-
ative fashion may apply to the crime of
murder, under circumstances like this,
there was a law, more august and more
terrible, which had declared that “ he
that sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall
his blood be shed.”
The efforts of Trimbell and Mr. Sil-
vester (the Surgeon) to restore ease to
Ormond, were not, however, totally in-
effectual; and, having in some measure
caimed his fears, they had the pleasure
to find, in a few days, that the wound
had assumed a more favourable appear-
ance, and that the danger which had
been originally apprehended was now
totally removed.


CHAPTER XVII.
A Wedding, and a Rencontre at Bath .
As soon as our hero was relieved from
his apprehensions of death, his thoughts
returned into their accustomed channel,
and instead of torturing his mind with
melancholy ideas, he began to consider
what measures he could adopt to ease
the anxiety which must have seized pos-
session of Lady Augusta. After a little
reflection, he resolved to write her a
letter, as if from the country, informing
her, in the most tender manner, that
he was detained by indisposition from
enjoying the pleasure of her company,
but that he trusted a few days would


so far restore him, as to enable him to
fly, upon the wings of love, to renew
his vows of affection and eternal fidelity
at her feet.
This letter was dispatched by a do-
mestic, who had been previously tutored
in the part he was expected to perform;
and he was ordered to stay and bring
back a reply; and after about an hour
had elapsed, the messenger returned
with a letter so full of tenderness and
love, that it effected a most rapid change
for the better in our hero. It was in fact
agreed, with the consent of Mr. Sil-
vester, that he should be removed on
the morrow to his house in Russell
Square. In the mean time, in order to
remove a lurking uneasiness which still
preyed on the mind of Ormond, a ser-
vant was dispatched to Cavendish Square,
to inquire into the state of Lord
Merton’s wound; and he returned with
the welcome intelligence, that, although


his Lordship’s wound ha<J been at first
eonsidered mortal, the surgeon had
reported that morning, to the messenger
sent to make the inquiry, that the
danger was removed, and that he trusted
a few days would be sufficient to com-
plete his Lordship’s recovery..
After his arrival in Russell Square,
the recovery of our hero was rapid, and,
in a few days, he was enabled to walk
to the house of Lady Augusta, and to
renew his vows, as he had promised;
where his reception was all that the
most sanguine and adoring lover could
have wished ; and before he returned to
his house, Lady Augusta had consented
to recompense him for the danger he
had undergone for her sake, by becom-
ing his wife by the expiration of the
present month. Ormond, in conse-
quence of this promise, returned to his
house, in the highest spirits ; wealth,
honours, and splendour appeared no


longer as transient and precarious pos-
sessions, but promised fairly to crown
his ingenuity with their constant smiles
during the remainder of his life.
The reader may perhaps be at a loss
to discover the motives of our hero in
paying so close and persevering an at-
tention to Lady Augusta Bartley ; but
when he is informed that she was es-
teemed one of the richest families in the
kingdom, possessing, besides landed
property to the amount of above twenty-
iive thousand pounds per annum; cash
in the funds to the tune of two hundred
thousand pounds more, he will cease to
wonder at the principle which actuated
his conduct on this occasion. To have
imagined for a moment that a heart like
his, so callous to all those finer feelings
which ornament mankind, would be
susceptible of honourable love, would be
to fall into the most egregious absurdity.
Desire often animated him, but love


|;ver: he would consider no difficulties
o great to encounter, no danger too
ighty to face, in order to accomplish
te seduction of a lovely and virtuous
A; but there must be attractions
mch more powerful in his opinion than
eauty or virtue, to induce him to enter
ito a state so opposite to his views
nd disposition, as matrimony. He had
aken especial care to make himself per-
sctly acquainted with the bulk of Lady
Augusta’s fortune, before he made up
lis mind to play off his designs upon
ler, and as soon as he found that her
possessions were sufficient to give him
wealth, honours, and what he called
happiness,' through life, he considered
her from that moment a prize worth
his looking after, and he accordingly
resolved to assume a false character, in
order to obtain possession of so desira-
ble an object; and to gain to himself
th*e stores of wealth which had been
thrown into her hands.


The interval between this period and-
the day of marriage, was spent ffi the
customary, way by Ormond and hi&
friend Trimbell, in gaming, drinkings
acting the hypocrite, and every species
of dissipated vice which the most ex-
perienced debauchee could invent, or
the most unprincipled villain carry info'
execution. The account of the duel
between the French Marquis and Lord
Merton, with its cause and result, had
spread throughout the west end of the
town with uncommon rapidity ; and our
hero, in consequence, begun to be look-
ed upon with more complacency than
ever. The gentlemen sought his com-
pany, and the ladies were eager to
attract his notice ; but no sooner was it
known that Lady Augusta Bartley was
about to bestow her hand upon him,
than the gentlemen began to envy, and
the females to slight him.
The success of our hero at the gaming


table, which had been uniformly con-
siderable,. began now to increase in a
tenfold degree; and in the space of a*
fortnight, with the assistance of Trim-
bell, he found himself possessed, by
this method of extortion, of additional
property, to the amount of above fifty
thousand pounds. This supply came
extremely fortunately, to* enable him to
make some splendid preparations for
his ensuing marriage* which had been
finally fixed to take place on the follow-
ing Saturday.
For this occasion a new chariot had
been purchased, surpassing in elegance
any thing which had been witnessed in
London; his servants had been equip-
ped in new and splendid liveries; his
house, which he had recently purchased
out of his ill-gotten gains, had been
newly painted, and furnished in the most
magnificent manner; and the whole
appearance of the residence of Ormond,


the debauchee , and the unprincipled
gamester, had the appearance rather of
the palace of a prince, than the house
of a man, who was nothing more than
the child of fortune.
Our hero, fearful lest any other acci-
dent should interfere to delay his union
with Lady Augusta, was unusually
pressing with her to fix an earlier day,
but this she declined doing, on the
score of her preparations for this event
not being yet completed. Alas! she
little thought how short-lived would be
her happiness; she little thought that
her pretended Marquis was one of the
most notorious gamesters in the metro-
polis. She had been so blinded by her
infatuation for him, that she had neg-
lected to make those inquiries respecting
him which prudence suggested. A foot-
man she would not have consented to
take into her service, had his appear-
ance been ever so prepossessing, without


first making herself acquainted with his
character and connections; but in
choosing a husband, one to whom she
was about to yield up her happiness,
her fortune, and her fame,' she had
neglected the most common precau-
tions, and had taken him with even less
consideration than she would have hired
a servant.
At length the long-expected morn
appeared: the sun had risen with un-
common splendour and beauty, to be-
hold, as it were, for the last time the
happiness of Lady Augusta. After a
sleepless night she also arose ; but her
waking thoughts had seriously oppressed
her; she had felt a sort of presentiment
of the most painful nature, and, in
spite of all her efforts, she could not
dispel the gloom which' it had occasion-
ed. Her .attendant, perceiving that she
had been in tears, attempted to cheer
her spirits, by pointing out to her the


happiness which awaited her; but, even
as she heard the remarks, a kind of
doubt hung upon her lovely counte-
nance ; and little would any one have*
imagined from her appearance, that this
was her bridal day.. After a short time,
however, she made a determined effort
to rid herself of her despondency, and
with a firm step walked: down stairs to
tile breakfast parlour.
There our hero sat waiting her ar-
rival, and inwardly rejoicing at the suc-
cessful issue of his scheme; while Trim-
bell,. and the young lady whom Augusta
had selected for her only female com-
panion on this important occasion, were
engaged in conversation at a window
in the room. As soon as Lady Au-
gusta entered the room, Ormond, with,
an assumed air of tenderness, advanced
to meet her, and having saluted her in
the most affectionate* manner, led her,
blushing like Aurora,, to. the breakfast


table. The simple elegance with which
she was attired gave additional lustre to
her beauty, and the imagination can
scarcely conceive a more perfect image
of loveliness.
When the breakfast was
Ormond gave Lady Augusta his hand,
to conduct her to his chariot, which
was in waiting j and on feeling how
much she trembled, reassured her with
a look of tenderness, which a much less
credulous female would have believed to
be the emanation of the purest and most
ardent affection. In a few minutes
they arrived at the chapel which they
had fixed on for the solemnization of
' f . ' \
the ceremony, and where the minister
was in waiting, and in a short time the
service was performed, which crowned
the hopes of our hero,, and completed
the ruin of Lady Augusta.
Yes, reader, the ceremony was per-
formed : no meagre ghost, no. warning


voice, interposed to check the progress
of villany, and save virtue from destruc-
tion. No portentous omen appeared to
alarm the cheerful party —no thunders
shook the foundation of the building—
no lightnings penetrated the concave
roof of the chapel—no figure, bearing
the antiquated marks of other times
upon it, rushed between Ormond and
the altar; but all was quiet and still as
midnight; and nothing but the voice of
the minister, and the responses of those
who received his benediction, was heard.
The service was concluded, our hero
handed his blushing bride to the chariot,
and Trimbeft the blushing Miss Delaval,
and drove to Ttussell Square without in-
terruption, without having seen any
thing to alarm their eyes, or heard any
thing to grate upon their ears.
It had been previously resolved on to
spend the honey moon at Bath; and, in
consequence, as soon as they had taken


some slight refreshment, and the travel-
ling chaise was prepared, they set off
on their road to that fashionable resort,
accompanied by Trimbell and Miss
Delaval; and Lady Augusta Trewby’s
apprehensions began to wear away very
fast.
Late the same evening our party
reached Bath, and a servant had been
sent forward to procure them a house,
they had the good fortune to find an
elegant ready-furnished residence in
Pulteney Street" prepared for their re-
ception.
Oftentimes was our hero put to his
shifts to reply to the questions of his
amiable wife respecting the manners and
customs of France, and as often did he
contrive* to extricate himself successfully;
and Lady Augusta soon found herself
completely happy in the company of
one, who, she flattered herself, returned
her love with a passion equally ardent
and sincere.


Ormond and Trimbeli soon formed
an association with a party of gentlemen
who were in the habit of frequenting
the rooms, and after a few days found
themselves as completely at their ease
at the gaming tables at Bath, as they
had previously been at those in London.
Still our hero continued to assume
the character of the French Marquis,
and was congratulated more than once
on the wonderful facility which he dis-
played in conversing in the English
language. His wish was to keep up
this character until he had possessed
himself of the greater part of his wife’s
fortune, and after that he was perfectly
indifferent about his future behaviour,
or her future happiness. Sufficient in-
stances have appeared in the of
his life, hitherto, to prove that his feel-
ings were not the most exquisite; and
the reader needs not to be told that his
principles were such as to suffer him to


commit any act, however diabolical in
its nature, and however destructive in
its effects. His conduct to Maria
Jameson was sufficient to stamp his cha-
racter, and there could not be a doubt
that he would have acted in a similar
manner to Lady Augusta Bartley, if
such a line of conduct would have
equally answered his purpose. But his
views in these two instances were very
opposite: his design was to seduce
Maria Jameson, and to rob Lady Au-
gusta ; and the way to the accomplish-
ment of these different objects being
dissimilar, he was under the necessity
of submitting to matrimonial shackles,
where, had his object been different, he
would not have hesitated at seduction.
About a fortnight after their arrival at
Bath, as our hero and Trimbell were
one day at Barrett’s, amusing themselves
with a lounge, by way of variety, a gen-
tleman entered, and inquired for a book.


The voice of the stranger was perfectly
familiar to Ormond, but while he was
endeavouring to call to mind who was
the person, Trimbell, with terror in his
looks, whispered— u Good God ! here
is Lord Linfel! We shall be ruined if
he should discover us.” Equally alarm-
ed with his friend, Ormond attempted
to escape his Lordship’s notice, by still
keeping his back towards him; but
every precaution was ineffectual, for
having occasion to come up to the part
of the shop where our hero was stand-
ing, his Lordship turned suddenly round,
and catching a glimpse of his face, gave
a sudden spring, and seizing him by the
hand, exclaimed —- <c Ormond Trewby,
by G—!”
Ormond, being everywhere known in
Bath as the Marquis D’Alencon, was
still more alarmed on hearing this salu-
tation ; and taking Lord Linfel on one
side, gave him to understand the nature


of his situation, and of the deception
he had played off, and entreated him to
oblige him so far as to know him only
by his title for the present, to which his
Lordship presently agreed ; and request-
ed, in return, that our hero and Trim-
bell,- whom he now discovered for the
first time, would favour him with their
company at his lodgings in Argyle
Street, for an hour or two, as he had
a long story to narrate to them. His
Lordship’s apartments being immediately
in the road to Pulteney Street, our hero
presently assented to his wish, and
they all three set forward, very well
pleased at a meeting, which, at the first
moment, appeared so likely to produce
Unfortunate consequences.
As they walked along, our hero en-
tered into all the particulars of his pur-
suits, adventures, &c. from the time of
his last interview with Lord Linfel; not
even omitting his villanous conduct to
VOL. 11. h


Maria Jameson, which he was aware was
more calculated to raise him in the
esteem of his Lordship, than to injure
him. He told him likewise of his as-
sumption of the character of a French
Marquis, and of the success of his
scheme to gain the affections of Lady
Augusta Bartley; of the duel which
took place between Lord Merton and
himself, of his danger in consequence of
the wound he received, of his subse-
quent marriage, and of their arrival at
Bath to spend the honey-moon. This
narrative our hero interlarded with such
remarks, in illustration, as he conceived
necessary to impress his Lordship’s mind
with a proper idea of his superior skill in
hypocrisy, and of every other art which
is necessary to complete the character of
a man of the world, or, in other words,
of a villain.
Lord Linfel, who was of the same
and disposition as Ormond,


although (as will appear in the next
chapter) less successful in his pursuits,
appeared quite transported with his
prowess and good fortune ; and, find-
ing from his Statement that he was now
a man of great property, began to pay
him the most fulsome and flattering
compliments on his noble appearance in
his new character, a character, his
Lordship observed, for which he seemed
cut out by nature.
As this kind of language from his
Lordship was a novelty, it produced a
greater effect upon ou.r hero, who felt
himself unusually elated, and began to
consider himself in reality, what he only
pretended to be, a man of quality. By
this flattery his Lordship found the way
to Ormond’s affections; indeed, he had
so far ingratiated himself into his favour
by these remarks, that the latter would
have taken him immediately into his
friendship, had he never been in his
h 2


company before; for, although he was
possessed of sufficient cunning to pro-
ject and execute any scheme of villany
or imposition upon others, he had, like
most men, his weak side, where he was
particularly vulnerable, and this was the
part in which he was now attacked.
The language of flattery too was rather
new to his ears, since Trimbell had not
been accustomed to. pay this incense to
his pride.
They had now arrived at the house in
which Lord Linfel lodged, and were
ushered into his apartments, which, to
our hero’s great surprise, were situated
in the attic story.


CHAPTER XVIII.
A Narrative.
OIJR hero was about to express his
surprise at Lord Linfel’s apartment,
which contained little more than a deal
table, three chairs, and a few pictures
about the walls, when his Lordship,
stopping him, requested that he would
suspend his amazement for a short time,
until he could explain his motives for
selecting such a lodging, which he
should sufficiently make evident, if
Ormond would have a little patience.
Our hero assenting, his Lordship thus
began;
“ When I had last the pleasure of


seeing you at Brookes’s, I was informed
of your sudden meeting with your fa-
ther, and your subsequent illness; but
I little dreamed of the change which a
few months W6uld produce in our cir-
cumstances. In a short time after this
meeting, the whole conversation at the
tables turned upon an elopement of a
beautiful girl who lived within a few
doors; and, after a few inquiries, I
found the rumour bad pointed you out
as the companion she had chosen. This
suspicion, which, at first, I confess I did
not believe, received strength daily from
yotu* absence from the tables*, until, at
length, so long an interval elapsed, as
to obliterate you almost from our me-
mories.
“ ! had constantly kept up my ac-
quaintance and intercourse with the
Bardley family, until about a month
after your absence, Mr. Bardley took it
into his head to suspect that some im-


proper familiarities' passed between his
wife and me. I know not whether any
of the domestics had ever discovered
any thing of the kind; for I will not
deny that there was some cause for his
suspicion but he sent me a challenge,
and we met in consequence. At the
first fire he felt, dangerously wounded ;
on which I left him to the care of his
medical attendant and his second, and
hastened to communicate the news to
Mrs. Bardley, who immediately chose
rather to pack up her jewels and clothes,
with all the ready money she could find,
and share my fortunes, than to repair to
her husband’s assistance.
“ In a remote corner of the town
I took lodgings for her and myself,
where there was no danger from being
discovered, and where we lived for some
time in the utmost privacy; until, at
length, finding it necessary to raise some
contributions for our genteel subsistence;,


I ventured once more to Brookes’s,
where I understood, from some inquiries
which I made, more for my own safety
than satisfaction, that my antagonist
after sustaining the most excruciating
tortures from his wound, had been de-
clared free from danger, and had been
removed on the day preceding to Caven-
dish Square. I was also informed of
the elopement of Mrs. Bardley, and of
the exertions which were making to
discover the place of her retreat, as it
Was generally understood that she had
left London, from the circumstance
of a gentleman and lady having been
seen, on the. day of her elopement,
to drive from Cavendish Square, with
the utmost rapidity, towards the Pad-
dington Hoad. My re-appearance in
public, however, led to an idea, that
our residence was in the metropolis,
and, in consequence, changed the plan
of the pursuers. I was continually dog-.


ged from place to place, and was obliged
to be continually on the alert to render
every effort to find my apartment abor-
tive. I always kept myself muffled up
in a close great coat when I walked
abroad, went out early and returned
late, in short, lived the most miserable
life, and was alarmed by every person I
met. If a man looked at me stedfastly,
I felt an involuntary shivering, and
started when I saw two or three persons
together in the street where my lodgings
were situated.
“ My efforts at the gaming, table
were for a long time crowned with suc-
cess, and we should have contrived to
have had a very respectable appearance,
could we have remained without fear of
discovery. But, after a little while,
the aspect of affairs completely changed,
and I became on a sudden as unfortu-
nate as I had been pfeviously lucky.
One unfortunate evening, I had lost


every farthing of ready money which I
possessed, and in a fit of madness I
staked my funded property, which was
far from being considerable: the effort
was vain. I was deprived of this in a
few minutes, and, in my attempts to
regain it, I staked, and progressively was
robbed of all I had on earth. With a
heart bursting with rage and disappoint-
ment, I returned to my lodgings, and,
to my utter confusion and astonishment,
found them empty, and the following
letter, addressed to me, lying on the
table:
“ Dear Linfel,
“ During your frequent absence from
“ home, in order to relieve the dulness
u of the hour, I have been in the habit
“ of associating with a gentleman,
<( exactly the counterpart of yourself;
“ and, as he has promised to indulge
V me with his company by day as Well
1*• * ' .


« as by night, I have preferred him,
.< solely on this account, to you. A -
.< though my absence may occasion you
“ a momentary uneasiness, it must u
« timately conduce to your happiness,
« as you will henceforward be able to
« walk abroad like other gentlemen,
« without apprehension. I hope you
<• will not give yourself any troub e
« about finding me, as I assure you our
« measures are too well taken to leave
« you a hope of success. As 1 broug
« you some few valuables when I con-
« sented to become yours, I have now
“ taken them with me, as well as other
« superfluities, which, to a man o your
« rank and property, will seem mere
« baubles.
« Your well-wisher,
<c Letitia Babdley.
« Thunderstruck with this unex-
pected conduct, I stood for a few mo-


ments motionless and speechless: at
length I recovered myself sufficiently to
make some inquiries about the departure
of Mrs. Bardley: in reply to which, I
was informed, that soon after my de-
parture from home in the morning, a
gentleman had called in a post-chaise,
and on his arrival, Mrs. Bardley, with
a few bundles and a trunk, had joined
, ,m ’ ® nd wi *out giving the slightest
hint of her intention, they ordered the
chaise to drive off, and were out of
sight man instant. In addition to this
the servant said, that Mrs. Bardley had
desn-ed her to borrow a hammer and
Chisel for her, which being done, she
proceeded to force open some boxes and
drawers, of which she said that she had
tost the keys; and that before she had
opened them, she had sent out the
servant on some trifling message.
" Alarmed at this news, I j mme _
diately flew to my drawers, &c. and, to


my utter grief and astonishment, dis-
covered, that I was robbed of every
valuable I possessed, except about twenty
guineas, which were in a secret drawer,
that had escaped her notice. Enraged
at this instance of perfidy, I seized my
pistols, and swore I would pursue the
fugitives through the world, and gave
orders that a chaise should be ordered
for that purpose; but a moment’s re-
flection induced me to countermand my
order, as I had neither clue to find
them out, nor means to follow them.
iC In a state of inconceivable anguish
I retired to my apartment, but sleep
avoided me, and such a night of bitter
melancholy I never experienced, and
rather would I suffer destruction than
meet such another. Poverty and ruin
stared me in the face, and the base de-
sertion of a woman to whom I was too
sincerely attached, gave additional pangs
to my harrassed mind. Vainly did I


attempt to think calmly of my situation p
my perturbation was too violent to allow
the interference of reason,, and I arose
in the morning unrefreshed and undeter-
mined what measures to adopt, Or how
to provide for the wants of futurity.
“ At length I resolved once more to
tempt fortune at the gaming table; and,
in the course of a few minutes, I had
won to the amount of a hundred pounds
of Lord N who gave me a check
on his banker for that sum. A sudden
thought struck me that I had it now in
my power to recompence myself in some
measure for my recent losses, by having
recourse to a scheme, the idea of which
at first filled me with terror and appre-
hension, but as there was not a moment
to lose, I retired to a distant corner of
the room, and, as his Lorship had writ-
ten the sum in both places, in figures,
took a pen, and with some little tremor
and hesitation, added two cyphers, to the


sum, and thus made it instead of 100
10,000 pounds. Not an instant being
to be lost, I immediately presented the
check, and having received the amount,,
returned to my apartments in a singular
state of mind. I had replenished my
purse, and that gave me pleasure; I had
done it by fraud, this gave me no pain;
I might be detected, this gave me some
apprehension; and the punishment of
such an offence would be death- —this
harrowed up my soul, and filled me with
indescribable horror. It was the first
moment* that I had thought of the pu-
nishment attached to the crime, and as
it flashed across my mind, I Sickened,
and became almost insensible. My
blood seemed to freeze in my veins; my
heart palpitated most violently; and
every faculty became instantly suspend-
ed ; as I contemplated the consequences
which would certainly result from my
conviction.


M Totally at a loss on what to resolve,
I again sallied into the street, without
knowing why I ventured abroad, or
whither I intended to proceed; and
after strolling round two or three neigh-
bouring streets, I extended my walk,
and came at length into St. James’s
Park. Quitting the public paths, I ab-
stracted myself from the crowds, and
kept on until I was nearly alone: I had
my pistols in my pocket. As soon as I
looked round and saw the last person
who passed me disappear, I drew a
pistol, and began to attempt to convince
myself that it would be better to destroy
myself than to fall into ignominy. But
I wanted the resolution to commit sui-
cide ; and, leaning against a tree, I
sighed and wept at my own rash im-
petuosity, in rendering myself amenable
to justice.
“ I had remained in this state , and
position, perhaps, for upwards of an


hour, lost to all that surrounded me,
when suddenly a voice, which was inti-
mate to my ear, exclaimed, close by my
side— f Ah! villain, have I discovered
you ?” The dreadful idea instantly
flashed upon my mind, that Lord N
had traced me to this spot, and that he
was doubtless accompanied by the myr-
midons of justice to search me, and
without giving myself a moment’s time
to look round me to reflect, I averted
my head, and fired my pistol at the
spot whence I heard the voice. A
groan followed the report, and turning
about, with horror in my mind, and
conviction in my features, I beheld,
prostrate and bleeding, not Lord N •,
but Mr. Bardley.
“ My agony was increased beyond
description by this discovery, and raising
him in my arms, I perceived that he was
shot through the head, and before I
had sufficient time to staunch the blood,


be uttered a second groan, and expired
in my arms. Frantic with horror, I
would have immediately dispatched my-
self, had I not wanted the determina-
tion. But it became necessary to act
promptly; some persons would be in
sight, most probably, in a few minutes,
and then my escape would be impossible.
Some timber was lying by the side of the
road, thither I dragged the body, and
having laid it between two trees which
had been felled, I covered it over with
branches and leaves, which were on the
spot; and, after this, having taken the
precaution to scrape some gravel over
the blood which had run from, the
wound, I quitted the dreadful spot, and
with feelings better to be conceived than
expressed, I walked precipitately towards
my lodgings.
(C As I entered the street in which
my apartments were, I perceived a crowd
about the door of the house in which I


resided; and as I came nearer, what
was my consternation to hear the voice
of Lord N loudly vociferating—
c I know the villain is in the house *
let it be thoroughly searched, for I
am resolved he shall no longer live to
infest society with his presence, and
to prey upon mankind! lam deter-
mined to make an example of him*
that his fate may be a warming to all
others who may be induced to step
from one act of villany to another, until
they are likely to fall into similar crimi-
nality !’ With scarcely sense enough
left to guide my way, I hastily turned
round, and quitting the street with
much more velocity than I entered it,
instantly formed the' resolutions, as 1
found my stay in the metropolis would
be attended with imminent danger, to
leave it withont delay. I accordingly
entered an inn yard, ordered a chaise,,
and in ten minutes more had taken,


perhaps, a last farewel of London ; and,
after travelling the whole night, reached
this city yesterday morning.
“ It is not my intention to make a
long stay here, as officers will doubtless
be dispatched in search of me, and ex-
istence is too precious to be hazarded on
a game at hide and seek: so I hope to
set out for Bristol to-morrow, and to
take ship there instantly for America, or
some port in the West Indies; when
you will never hear more of one whose
errors led him into vices, and whose
vices urged him to the commission of
crimes, which have forfeited his life to
the offended justice of his country. If
I had been successful, I might still have
been respected, and admitted to the
circles of fashion; but now I am thus
reduced by misfortune, and the rash
impetuosity of my temper, no one
would associate with me, even were I
freed from all apprehensions of the


law; and I would sooner submit to a
banishment from my native land at once,
than be compelled to become an exile
from those gay scenes, which I have so
often enlivened with my presence and
my gaiety.”
Here Lord Linfel concluded his
tale, and Trimbell and our hero joined
in commiserating his misfortunes, and
in proffering every assistance in their
power to facilitate his escape or con-
cealment : and as it was supposed that
this would be their last opportunity of
enjoying .each other’s company, it was
mutually agreed that they should take a
walk to the upper rooms, and play for
an hour, and afterwards adjourn to
Pulteney Street to dinner; and the plan
was immediately carried into execution.
As they walked towards the rooms,
each of the party fancied that several
persons on the road observed Lord Lin-
fel very closely, which excited some sus-


picions that all was not right. They
arrived, however, in a short time, at the
rooms; and our hero perceiving a paper
lying on a table, took it up, and care-
lessly began to run over it. On a sudden
his countenance betrayed marks of con-
siderable agitation, and gradually turned
pale, his eyes seemed rivetted on some-
thing which he was reading with unusual
earnestness; and when he had finished
looking eagerly round the room, and
perceiving no person near, he beckoned
Lord Linfel and Trimbell, and giving
the paper into the hands of the former,
he read with sensations of the deepest
horror the following advertisement.
(C London , March 21'.
“ Whereas William Frederick Lin-
£C fel, commonly called and known by
(c the name and title of Lord Linfel,
stands charged, on the o. th of Lord
“ N——, with having on the 17 th in


(< slant feloniously altered a check*
<( given to him in payment of a debt
“ of honour by the said Lord N 5
“ from 100 to 10,000 pounds, and the
“ said Lord Linfel having absconded,
u a reward of one hundred guineas is
“ hereby offered to any person who will
“ give such information respecting the
“ retreat of the said Lord Linfel, as
tl may lead to his discovery and appre-
u hension; and such reward will be
paid by Mr. Stanford, solicitor to the
<f said Lord N—, to whom any no-
“ tice is requested to be given. As it
“ is supposed the said Lord Linfel has
“ reached some of the sea-ports in the
* e kingdom, in order to leave the coun-
“ try, officers have been sent in all
“ directions to secure him.
“ N. B. The said Lord Linfel is a
“ man of fair complexion, blue eyes,
“ aquiline nose, graceful deportment,
“ about five feet seven inches in height,


“ bis voice melodious, talks rapidly,
and generally wears a suit of black.”
The paper dropped, from his Lord-
ship’s hands as he read this minute
description of himself, and the reward
offered for his apprehension; and his
emotions would probably have been too
powerful for him, had not our hero re-
called him to himself, by pointing out
the danger he incurred by appearing in
public a moment longer. He then pro-
ceeded to advise, that he should secrete
himself for a time, until the rumour
had subsided, in his house in Pulteney
Street; an offer which his Lordship
most gratefully accepted. A sedan chair
was immediately called, as his Lordship
could not with safety be seen in the
streets, and being placed in, and con-
cealed as closely as possible, he was car-
ried off, accompanied by Trimbell, who
was to introduce him to the pretended
Marchioness.


In the mean time, Ormond followed
the chair at a distance; and, as he passed
the lodgings of Lord Linfel in Argyle
Street, it was his intention to call and
discharge them. A crowd, however,
which had assembled at the door of the
house attracted his notice, and on in-
quiring into the cause of the tumult, he
discovered that some Bow-Street officers
had actually entered his Lordship’s apart-
ments, to search them, having by some
means, obtained information of his hav-
ing been seen there. Determined to
satisfy, nimself as to the veracity of this
statement, he entered the shop, and un-
der pretence of purchasing something,
carelessly asked a few questions concern-
ing the noise; when the woman, with-
out hesitation, confirmed the account
he had heard, and added that she had no
suspicion that such a gentlemanly look •
ing man would have been guilty of any
thing improper; for that he appeared to
VOL. 11. i


keep good company, as her daughter,
who was up stairs with the officers, had
seen him go out, about an hour before,
with two very great men who lived in
Pulteney Street.
Alarmed at this piece of news, and
fearful lest he should be recognised, so
that the officers may go to his house in
search of the fugitive, he hastily quit-
ted the shop, and with feelings of terror
and apprehension, arrived in a few mi-
nutes at his residence.


CHAPTER XIX.
A Seizure . and an old Acquaintance.
HAVING informed Lady Augusta
that his friend Lord Linfel wt mder
the necessity of concealing himself for
a short time, on account of certain diffU
culties, he proceeded to inform his
Lordship of the information he had
obtained at his lodgings, and of the
probability that every effort would be
made to trace him out, to elude which,
he must be satisfied to remain extreme-
ly close, not even shewing himself at a
window, for some time, lest he might
be seen by some of the myrmidons of
justice. To every condition his Lord


ship gladly assented, and expressed his
happiness at having been able to reach
so secure an asylum.
After a month’s longer stay, the plea-
sures of Bath began to pall upon the
mind of our hero, and it was accord-
ingly determined to return to the me-
tropolis. Such a proposition a few weeks
before would have met with Ormond’s
total opposition, as he had not gained,
a ew fla y s 5 the principal
object of his journey to Bath ; and this
being accomplished, he cared not whi-
ther he went.
The reader has been informed, that
our hero’s object in marrying Lady
Augusta, was to become possessed of
her immense property; in order to ob-
tain which, it would be necessary to
keep her in the dark as to the deception
which had been practised upon her, to
accomplish which would have been
scarcely practicable in London, but at


this watering place, where he was un-
known, the mask might be worn until
he had gained his ends. A few days
previous to this accidental meeting with
Lord Linfel, in a paroxysm of love,
Lady Augusta had presented him with
deeds containing the transfer of her
whole property to him, without the
least reduction. It is true he had the
generosity, in the heat of the moment,
to give her back five thousand a year,
and this in the end, probably, was more
valuable to this amiable woman than all
she had before possessed.
The journey to London was therefore
resolved on without delay ; and as Lord
Linfel could not dare to shew himself in
propria persona , every one’s ingenuity
was set to work to find out an effectual
disguise for him. After some consider-
ation, our hero proposed, as the most
impenetrable mask, that his Lordship
should blacken his face, and assume a


livery in common with the other ser-
vants, and in this servile character, little
doubt could be entertained of his ulti-
mate escape from detection. Although
such a character was ill suited for a man
of his Lordship’s habits and education,
he was convinced that no alternative
remained but for him to live as a ser-
vant, or die as a criminal ; and his
natural affection for his own existence
was too predominant to allow him a
moment’s hesitation. He embraced our
hero with transport, as he developed his
plan, and gratefully expressed his readi-
ness to perform in any situation which
promised him the most rational hopes
of success.
A livery was, in consequence of this
determination, prepared for his Lord-
ship, and having completely disfigured
his countenance, lie was admitted
amongst the domestics of the pretended
Marquis D’Alencon ; and, in this capa-


city, took bis departure with them for
the metropolis.
Notice having been sent of the in-
tended departure of the family from
Bath, they found, on their arrival, the
residence in Russell Square completely
prepared for their reception, and a few
days saw them once more completely
seated in their old situation; and
Ormond and Trimbell speedily re-
assumed their former characters, and
tilled again their old places at the gaming
houses, brothels, &c. On their return
from their pursuits, they nightly enter-
tained their noble negro with the details
of their pleasures, and he was compelled
to undergo the mortification of enjoying
by report only, those joys which he was
formerly the first to practise. Necessity
however had laid her iron yoke upon
his neck, and he was obliged to feign
himself contented, while his heart was
bursting with the grief of envy.


But although for about a month after
the return of our hero to London every
thing appeared to go on prosperously, a
storm was gathering, which neither his
sagacity, nor that of his friend Trimbell,
could foresee. They revelled in dissi-
pation, unconscious that any thing was
preparing for them by fate, which could
occasion any interruption to their grati-
fications. The shaft which had passed
from the bow of misfortune flew un-
noticed through the air, and unseen,
until it pierced its object.
Philip, the confidential servant of
Ormond, had, for some time past, be-
came so intolerably impertinent, that he
could not restrain his disposition even
before his master, but had oftentimes
behaved to him, during their residence
at Bath, with a degree of assurance,
which had determined our hero to dis-
charge him on his arrival in the metro-
polis. Soon after their arrival, some


words having again taken place between
them, Ormond paid him his wages, and
dismissed him on the instant. As this
was a conduct for which Philip had no
way prepared himself, he was thunder-
struck, and went away muttering some-
thing about revenge. He had consider-
ed that his master would never consent
to part with him, knowing, as he did,
so many of his secrets, and having been
privy to so many of his vices. After
he was dismissed, however, he began to
turn in his mind how he could besc
revenge himself upon his master/
When Lord Linfel was first carried to
our hero’s house in Bath, Philip had
unfortunately opened the door, and as
he was well acquainted with his Lord-
ship’s face, he immediately recognised
him; and having afterwards observed
his suspicious conduct, and being ac**
quainted with the circumstance of the
reward which had been offered for his


apprehension, he had secretly resolved,
when he left his master’s service, and
had found time to call past things to
mind, that he would in the first place
give information of his Lordship’s re-
treat. He had been well acquainted
with the disguise he had assumed, as
he was the only servant to whose con-
fidence the scheme had been imparted.
Having therefore made up his mind
on the subject, he immediately went in
search of the paper which contained the
advertisement; and, as soon as he had
ascertained what step to take, he waited
on Lord N ’s solicitor, and gave the
necessary information.
It was one evening, as Ormond and
Trimbell were sitting together, having
returned from a trivial excursion, when
a servant announced two gentlemen,
who had important business to commu-
nicate with Ormond, and who declined
to give their names. Our hero ordered


them to be shewn into the rooi#; bat,
what was his terror and astonishment
when they produced a warrant for the
apprehension of Lord Linfel, who, they
said, was concealed in his house under
the disguise of a black servant. Thus
taken by surprise, the confusion of Or-
mond and Trimbell was too evident to
escape notice, and the latter attempting
to leave the room, with intention to
urge Lord Linfel to flight, was stopped
by the officers, who suspected his de-
sign. It was in vain for our hero to
deny the fact; but just as he was about
to give a false direction to find his Lord-
ship in a different part of the house, he
unhappily entered the room, and was
instantly seized, on Trimbell’s uttering
an exclamation of terror.
Every endeavour to rescue the pri-
soner would have been absurd, and our
two friends had the mortification to per-
ceive him dragged away, to meet the


offended justice of his countiy. They
determined, however, to follow him,
and to attempt to serve him, if it lay in
their power; but when he was ex-
amined before the magistrates, not hav-
ing recovered from his astonishment, his
confusion and prevarication were so pal-
pable, and the evidence against him so
decisive, that bail was refused, even
though offered to an indefinite amount,
and he was thrown into prison.
Returning home, deeply affected by
this occurrence, Ormond vainly at-
tempted to discover by what means the
officers had found out Lord Linfel’s re-
treat, but he could not satisfy his mind
on the subject, until Trimbell recol-
lected the threat of Philip, and it was
agreed that he must have been tha
cause of this unlooked-for misfortune;
and our hero, for the first time, cursed
his own impetuosity in incurring the
hatred of one who had it in his power


to injure him so deeply; or, rather, in
confiding so many of his secret actions
to the knowledge of a servant, who, as
he might have calculated, on the slightest
cause of offence, would have it in his
power to retaliate severely on his master.
It was too late, however, to censure a
conduct which was incurable, the
friends, therefore, began to consider
what excuse could be made to Lady Au-
gusta, who had, no doubt, been ’ere
this informed of the seizure of Lord
Linfel, by the domestics, and who would
from this circumstance perhaps, be led
to excuse our hero of having acted to-
wards her with duplicity.
While they were yet discussing this
point, they arrived at the entrance into
Russell Square, when Trimbell, drawing
our hero towards him and pointing to-
wards a person who was coming in their
front, asked our hero, if he recollected
that face? Starting at the question, Or


mond lifted up his eyes, and immediately
encountered those of Mrs. Howard, who
was attentively observing him. Struck
with horror, lest she might discover his
lodgings, he would have turned round,
but whilst he was still undetermined, she
had advanced him, and dropping
a exclaimed, as she passed him,
with a triumphant smile, “ The Marquis
D’Alencon may yet regret his having
made me his enemy.” As soon as she
had said these words, she kept on her
way, without taking any further notice
of our hero, and turning round the cor-
ner of the street, disappeared in a few
minutes ; thus relieving him from one
apprehension, and most cruelly and deeply
plunging him into another.
A thousand different ideas immediately
racked the mind of Ormond. At one
moment he imagined that she had been
to Russell Square to bring him a message
from Maria-—at another, that she had


traced him into that quarter, and had
now been endeavouring to find his resi-
dence, but her incurious manner of
passing by him destroyed the idea as soon
as it had suggested itself —then he sup-
posed that she might have heard of his
marriage, and had been to make Lady
Augusta acquainted with his past con-
duct. At length, finding it impossible
to satisfy his own mind as to the cause
of her being in that neighbourhood,
which, after all, might have no reference
to him, he ceased to conjecture. But
it constantly recurred to him, as soon
as he had formed this resolution, that
she had addressed him by his new title,
and this alone was enough to convince
him that she did, in reality, know more
about him than he could have conceived.
At this moment, the idea of Philip
flashed upon his mind, and changed all
his doubts into certainty.
He immediately mentioned his suspi-


cions to Trimbell that Philip and Mrs.
Howard had been together, and that he
had no doubt that some plot was carrying
on against him, from the known malice
of both parties; an opinion in which
his friend entirely concurred with him ;
and both agreed in the probability that
the old woman’s visit had actually been
to his house, and that something was
going on, which they ought to make
themselves acquainted with, in order to
counteract any ill effects, which might
otherwise result from the intrigues of
two such enemies. Before they could
think on any method, however, to find
out the nature of the scheme, they had
reached their residence, and the subject
was for the present dropped.
Lady Augusta received our hero with
her accustomed smile, which so com-
pletely banished every suspicion from
his mind, that he instantly came to the
conclusion that Mrs. Howard had not


been to his house, and he determined*
in consequence, to give himself ncv fur-
ther trouble about her. He did not
forget, however, to apologize for the.
disturbance which had been occasioned
by the seizure of Lord Linfel, whom
with the most consummate hypocricy,
he declared to have been charged with
a crime, which he could have never have
believed him capable of, when he con-
sented to grant him an asylum in his
house. Lady Augusta seemed to pay
little attention to his apology, and con-
tented herself with simply inquring into
the nature of the offence with which
he stood charged, the particulars of
which Ormond related, with marks of
apparently the most heartfelt horror.
Before he retired after dinner, Lady Au-
gusta, with a smile upon her coun-
tenance, asked him if he could possibly
dedicate the next morning to her, as she
wished to take him into the city, in or


der to have his advice upon some intend-
ed new purchases, to which he readily
assented, and, as he went to his usual
evening haunts, felt his conviction more
and more grounded, that nothing had
been communicated to Lady Augusta
on ’the subject which he apprehended.
Trimbell, however, although he ap-
peared to coincide in opinion with Or-
mond, felt some doubts arising in his
mind on this point. He had observed
Lady Augusta’s manner more closely
than our hero had done, and had caught
her looking at him several times with
tears in her eyes, and a melancholy
look. He had also seen, when she
asked him to go with heron the morrow,
that her assumed smile was intended to
conceal grief, as a tear would, in spite
of her efforts, now and then obtrude
itself: and she had some difficulty, it
was evident, to conceal some internal e-
motion. He was, however, silent, being


resolved to wait and learn the issue of
the morrow’s engagement before he di-
vulged his own sentiments on the sub-
ject ; and afterwards to act as circum-
stances should seem to require. The
words of Mrs. Howard still rung in his
ear, and he was convinced that she had
not uttered the threat, without being
being well assured of the ground on
which she stood. She had styled Or-
mond “ the Marquisand the inform-
ation of his assumed character, seemed
to have had time to digest in her mind,
and to create some design which was
yet unknown to them. Trimbell had
no real affection for Ormond; he was
only tied to him, because he found him-
self comfortably situated in a splendid
house, without the cares or the expences
of an establishment of his own ; and he
would not have scrupled to desert our
hero in a moment, if he imagined there
could be any danger in the connection.


He reasoned with himself on this point,
and feeling convinced that our hero’had
committed no act, which could incur any
legal responsibility on him, he deter-
mined still to keep up the shew of
friendship.
When they arrived at the gaming
house, the common topic of conversa-
tion was the apprehension of Lord Lin-
fel, and speculations upon the result of
the business, most of which were un-
favourable to his Lordship; and a hint
or two which fell from a nobleman,
who was related to the Bardley family,
led our hero to believe that the murder
of Mr. Bardley was attributed to his
Lordship. He endeavoured to fish out
some particulars on this point; but the
nobleman, who seemed the only one in
the secret, was extremely cautious in
his communications, especially when a
by-stander had mentioned to him in a
whisper the name of our hero.


Fortune this evening appeared hostile
to Ormond, and he arose from the
tables some hundreds of pounds minus,
after playing for three hours. Disap-
pointed and vexed at his ill luck, he
took up a paper, and, turning it over,
the first object which attracted his eyes,
was a paragraph announcing the marri-
age of Julia Moody and his brother*
Henry, at Chelmsford, on the preceding
Wednesday. Pointing out the circum-
stance to Trimbell, he coarsely ob-
served, that she was a lovely wench,
and had been originally designed for
him, and that he should have been
proud to possess her on the same terfns
as Maria Jameson, but that such a
thing was impossible, on account of the
proximity of his father, who retained
the antiquated and old-fashioned preju-
dice, that mistress was a less honour-
able appellation than wife.
Returning home rather late in the


evening, they perceived a man and
woman, apparently in deep conversation,
at the corner of Bedford Place, who
separated on their approach, but not
before Ormond had identified in the
female the person of Mrs. Howard, and
imagination immediately suggested that
the man must have been Philip. The
circumstance rather alarmed our hero,
who was almost afraid of some plot to
way-lay him ; but his apprehension gra-
dually subsided as he approached his
own residence; and he felt himself re-
stored to his ease when he was safe in
the house.
'This occurrence too had not escaped
the notice of Trimbell who felt all his
suspicions at once confirmed that some
scheme was in agitation, and that the
visit of the following morning, into the
city, with Lady Augusta was not uncon-
nected with it; but still he forebore to
mention his opinions, as he was well


aware that our hero would, so far from
listening to them,treat them with a levity,
bordering on contempt.
When they were assembled at supper,
Trimbell observed Lady Augusta yet
more closely than at dinner; and he
easily perceived that her emotions, so far
from having subsided, had increased
since they last met. In fact, it appear-
ed extremely difficult to her to retain
a sufficient appearance of cheerfulness
to prevent suspicion in the mind of Or-
mond ; and the paleness which would
now and then steal the carnation from
her cheeks, was a sufficient indication of
much mental indisposition. She con-
trived, however, to keep the command
over herself tolerably well until after the
cloth had been removed a little while,
when she pleaded a sudden attack of
sickness, and entreating that she might
be excused from sitting up, as usual,
ordered her attendant to be called, and
retired to her chamber.


After a few hours conversation on va-
rious topics bearing no relation to the
visit nor Lady Augusta, the two friends
separated, after having made an engage-
ment for the next evening; when Trim-
bell was confident in his own mind he
should have much strange news to hear.


CHAPTER XX.
A distressing Scene .
On the following morning, Lady Au~
gusta reminded our hero of his engage-
ment, and, the latter having declared
his readiness to accompany her, they
set out on foot, as she expressed her
wish to walk rather than ride, which
was her usual .custom. She appeared to
Ormond more cheerful than usual, and
appeared to enter into conversation with
more sprightliness than she had been
accustomed to shew for some days past. •
“ How lovely the morning!” said
she: “ how well calculated is such a day
as this to excjte emotions of gratitude.
vol. ii. k'


to the author of nature, in bosoms free -
from guile; but how cheerless and lan-
guid the appearance of the orb of day,
to those who are vitiated and unable to
find a relish for such a scene !”
“ Yes, madam,” said Ormond, “ the
bosom of innocence is ever capable of
receiving delight from causes which can
have no possible operation on the guilty.
To me the appearance of the morning
is truly celestial, but, in your breast, it
must excite emotions far surpassing
mine.” ' 1
“ Alas! alas!” rejoined Lady AuV
gusta, “ how many who have formerly
beheld nature’s beauties with feelings of
enthusiastic transport, have now no
pleasures left! How many an innocent
female, seduced by the arts of villany
from the paths of virtue and happiness,
may view the rising sun this morning
with horror rather than delight, because
it serves to impress more severely on


their minds, the difference between what
they were and what they are. How
many virtuous women may mourn the
brilliant beauties of the morning, since
it diffuses happiness to thousands who
are blessed in their families and in mu-
tual affection, whilst they perhaps are
united to men of no principles—men,
who rejoice in crimes, and pride them-
selves on their proficiency in vice.”
" True, madam,” said ou* hero, al-
most trembling as he spoke; <e and how
many vile miscreants are there, who
hear the human form, and are called by
the name of man, but who in reality
have debased themselves by their vices
to a -level with, or even beneath, the
brute creation, to whom the return of
morning brings no delight, except that
which will arise from new dissipations;
who are incapable of feeling, like you
and me, those sublime-sentiments which
spring from more pure and exalted
k 2 '


sources. And how many others are
there who see this beautiful day as the
last which must shine upon them, re-
duced to destruction by the diseases
consequent upon a vicious existence, or
cut off from the living by the arm of
justice. As a dreadful example of the
truth of some of these remarks, Lord
Linfel, so lately the planet of fashion,
now cast into confinement, receives no
pleasure from returning day, and per-
haps before long, dreadful thought!
the rising sun may behold his igno-
minious exit.”
During this conversation they had
reached Holborn. Lady Augusta, trem-
bling with anxiety and terror, was at a
loss to comprehend the character, of
Ormond; while the latter, shivering
with horror, had -been compelled to
utter sentiments which he felt not, or
rather, had been obliged to condemn
himself,


They soon arrived at a low shop/ and
Lady Augusta, stooping, entered by
herself, and having said a few words to
a woman who was present, beckoned
our hero, who immediately entered. In
the mean time the woman had with-
drawn/ and returning in a few minutes,
requested they would follow her: and,
as they walked through a dismal passage
or two, and two or three gloomy and
ill-furnished rooms, her Ladyship in-
formed our hero, that she had taken the
liberty to bring him hither, in order to
behold a poor wretch whom she had
taken under her guardianship, in order
to protect her from the horrors of want;
and that she was convinced, if his sen-
timents were in unison with his ex-
pressions, that nothing uould afford him
a more durable satisfaction.
Our hero made a short reply, indi *
catittg his happiness in having been
selected to accompany her in the dis-


tribution of her blessings. But at the
same moment that he said this, he felt
himself seized by sudden apprehensions,
which were heightened by the death-
like silence (save now and then a terri-
ble groan) which pervaded a chamber,
in which they were, requested to wait a
moment, while their guide entered an
adjoining room. 11l calculated indeed
was this chamber to relieve the horrors
of a guilty and detected mind: ill cal-
culated to dissipate despondency, or
create ideas of pleasure. The only fur-
niture consisted of three broken chairs,
a table covered with dust, a carpet worn
to tatters, and a blind to the only win-
dow in the which rendered the
gloominess still more horrible.
While they waited here, Lady Au-
gusta informed our hero, that the object
he \ias about to witness, "was once an
amiable and beautiful girl, but she had
been unhappily seduced by a villain
from her father’s house, and was mow


reduced to the last extremity, having
been long since forsaken by him who
was the cause of all her unmerited suf-
ferings. u But,” said her Ladyship,
te as we have a few minutes to spare, I
will, if you will favour me with your
attention, relate this story to you : it is
indeed an affecting one; it has oft6n
lacerated my heart, and wrung the
tears of pity from my eyes.”
Ormond was obliged to appear satis-
fied to hear the narration, although he
felt himself a prey to anxiety, and an
apprehension for which he could not
account,. ncr shake off.
Seizing the moment of his compliance,
and fearful that the opportunity might
be lost, her Ladyship immediately thus
began. “ This unhappy girl Was the
daughter of respectable parents ; she
wa's the pride of her father’s eye, and
the joy of her mother’s heart; she al-
leviated the sorrows which the authors


of her being suffered, as the natural
consequence of age, she was their nurse
and their constant companion. Con-
sidering no toil too severe, no exertion
too great, to add to their little stock of
comforts, she was invariably racking her
mind, and labouring to extend the finely-
spun thread of their existence. Many
honourable offers had she refused, as'
her wish was to remain with her pa-
rents so long as her services could be of
use to them. Had she remained firm
in this resolution, she had still been
happy, this beautiful morning would 1
have found her virtuous and innocent;
but, alas! how different are her feelings
now ; her character tarnished, and a
thousand other consequences have barred
the door of her heart against every other
virtue but misery. A young man, of
prepossessing appearance, had by some
means induced this poor girl to receive
his addresses, and, having received the


sanction of heir father, he had time and
opportunity enough to work his schemes
upon her virtue. The old gentleman,
however, having some reason to suspect
the character of the youth, forbade him
his house, but, alas 1 he had previously
poisoned the mind of the daughter, and
when his visits in the house was no
longer tolerated, he prevailed on the
unhappy girl to accompany him; and
procuring some fellow, worthless as him-
self, to perform the character of a mi-
nister, a sham ceremony was performed,
in order to silence.the scruples of the
poor maid.
ee They'lived together a few months,
when the villain inhumanly left her, in
a state of pregnancy, and sending her
some money, coolly advised her to go to
her parents. Thunderstruck at the de-
ception which had been practised upon
her, the unhappy creature'was seized
with the pangs of labour, at this early


period of situation ; miraculously,
however, she survived the terrible shock,
although she had for some weeks been
in an absolute state of delirium. When
she was once more restored to her health,
she began' to contemplate the misery of
, her situation ; lost and undone, removed
from the house and the protection of
her friends, she could scarcely dare to
expect that they would again receive her,
and all the world besides presented a'
mere blank. There was no asylum on
the earth, but the house of her father,
to which she could fly, to hidp her
shame and her sufferings, and to end
her miserable existence. At one mo-
ment she indulged the thought of sui- '
cide, rather than to expose herself to
the just reproaches of those against
whose advice she had acted; but the
thought was immediately suppressed' by
the voice of reason: ‘For, shalL I,* said
she,, ‘ add to my crimes that of rushing


in to the presence of my Creator ?—No ;
let my portion of misery be never so
bitter, I will live to drink it, even to
the dregs, as the just punishment at-
tached to my black offence; and then,
who knows but I may ultimately find
mercy ?’
“ She suffered this mental agony for
some days after her recovery from ill-
ness; but after this had subsided a
little, she resolved to make an attempt
to see the authors of her being. Ac-
cordingly, one morning she left her
lodgings, and sallied out for this purpose.
It was the first time she had trod the
streets since the discovery of her wretch-
ed situation ; and she sickened as 'she
beheld the smile of happiness which
beamed on the faces of those who passed
her. After a short time, however, she
arrived at her Father’s house ; and, hav-
ing knocked with trembling hand at the
door, it was opened by an old attendant,


who, when she discovered through the
wretched visage of the visitor, the fea-
tures of her young mistress, uttered a
loud shriek, and fell on the floor.
“ Being recovered, with the help
of the unhappy girl, the servant * took
her into the kitchen, and to her eager
inquiries, gave her to understand, that
when she absented herself from her fa-
ther’s house, after they had recovered
from the stupefaction which sorrow had
occasioned, every search was made after
her, although little doubt was entertain-
ed of her elopement with the youth who
had paid his addresses to her. Inquiries,
however, were fruitless, and the grief
which attacked the aged pair, on the
discovery of their daughter’s imprudence,
increased in such an alarming degree as
to wear them away, and they were, at
that moment, laying on the bed of sick-
ness, and, most probably, of death.
“ This statement redoubled the afflict


tion of the unhappy creature, who en-
treated she might, without delay, be per-
mitted to throw herself at her parents*
feet, in order that she might obtain
their forgiveness. The old woman ac-
cordingly went up stairs to prepa're them
for the meeting; but she had been only
absent a few minutes, when, hearing a
great noise over her head, the poor girl
rushed up stairs, fearful of some acci-
dent, but before she had reached the
-f ' , ■ ■
top she met the old servant, with horror
in her looks, and her hands uplifted,
who immediately exclaimed, f Gracious
God! my old mistress is dead, and my
poor master expiring !’ Without wait-
ing to hear any more; the distressed girl
flew into the apartment where her pa-
rents were stretched, and reaching the
bedside, cast a terrified gldnce on the
features once so dear tocher, and then,
with a loud shriek, fell into a state of
insensibility.
i( When she recovered her senses, she


found herself lying on a bed, in her old
apartment; and the old servant stand-
ing with clasped hands over her, weep-
ing and moaning most bitterly; but
when she saw her young mistress revive,
she exclaimed with a slight and momen-
tary transport, ‘ Thank God ! you have
survived the wreck !’ In a few minutes
the unfortunate girl understood that her
parents had both breathed their last;
her sire having expired immediately
after she fainted away, blessing his un-
happy daughter. * If any thing could
have increased the pangs she felt, it was
her idea that her misconduct had de->
stroyed those who loved her so tenderly,
arid that all the prospects which hope,
in sorfre less painful moment than usual,
would sometimes point out to her, in
the consoling and compensating them
after the sufferings she had caused them,,
were now for ever blasted. All before
her now was a mere blank; she had no
friend but a brother who. was at a great


distance; she had no prospects but those
of misery and shame.
te After the interment of her patents,
she found herself m possession of little
more property than was sufficient to pay
the few debts which had been contracted
during a long illness ; she therefore had
every thing sold off, and having dis-
charged what was owing, retired with
the residue to this humble lodging;
where, in a short time, she found her-
self so reduced by sickness, as to be
unable to procure her livelihood. The,
consequence was, that she soon fell into
a state of indigence distressing in the
extreme, and contracted some disease
from the closeness and filthiness of her
lodging, which has brought' her to the
brink of the grave. Such was her situ-
ation when I was made acquainted with
it, and it is my wish and intention to
afford her every means of consolation in
this dreadful and trying moment, since
her claims upon human benevolence and


human sympathy will be few indeed, and
her career of indigence short in the
extreme.
“ I have .thus related the narrative to
you as it was given to me, and you will
be able to judge what must be the feel-
ings and sufferings of this, unhappy
object of compassion. She has been
more imprudent than vicious, since she
was led to suppose herself married, and
therefore made no resistance to the
wishes and designs of one, who will yefc
perhaps be doomed to suffer equal pangs
to those which he has inflicted on a poor
unthinking girl, whose chief faults have
been, that she loved him too blindly to
be induced to consider him as a deceiver.
But I will not detain you any longer, I
perceive that your patience is nearly
worn out, and as the woman is here
ready to conduct us into the chamber of
misery, I must entreat that you will
accompany me.”
• Throughout the whole of this dis-


tressing narrative, our hero had consi-
derable difficulty to conceal the various
passions which agonized his bosojn. He
shuddered, changed countenance, trem-
bled, and feared he knew not what: a
gloomy presentiment filled his mind,
and he appeared more like a convicted
culprit at the bar of justice, than a hearer
of a narrative of the sufferings of others.
Lady Augusta had noticed his. emo-
tions ; she had fixed her penetrating gaze
upon him, as she detailed the tale of suf-
ferings, and had any doubt of- his guilt
remained upon her mind, his appearance
at this moment must have banished it,
and rendered his guilt apparent.
If Ormond’s apprehensions had been
excited by the narrative he had heard,
they were not lessened by the sombre
and melancholy appearance of the apart-
ment into which he was now conducted.
A woman appeared at the furthermost
corner of the room, which was too dark
to discover her features, leaning in the


most poignant anguish over a miserable
bed, on which appeared stretched a figure
writhing in the agonies of death. Her
groans were loud and piercing, her
breathing short and quick, and the nox-
ious exhalations which filled the place
were sufficient almost of themselves to
destroy life.
Taking our hero by the hand, Lady
Augusta led him forward, and when she
had reached the bed, from which he had
averted his face with every symptom of,
terrible disgust, she bade him look upon
the creature who was then stretched be-
■ /
fore him. With some difficulty he
summoned up courage to comply with
this request, and turning his face towards
the bed, beheld —Maria Jameson !
This unhappy victim of his villany had
but few traces remaining of her former
loveliness; her eyes no longer beamed
with the sweet expression which they
were used to possess; the Vermillion hue
no longer tinged her lips; nor did the


rouge of nature smile upon her cheeks.
Nothing but a sallow hue painted her
visage; her lips were touched by the
livid hand of death ; and her eyes ema-
nated no sweetness. Her cheeks were
sunken ; and the scanty locks which still
covered her forehead were turned grey
with sorrow.
Such wai the object which presented
itself to Ormond ; a ghastly paleness
overspread his countenance as he gazed
upon the havoc of his debauchery,- and
it was with extreme difficulty that he kept
himself from falling. He had neither
inclination or resolution to speak, his
tongue was tied with astonishment, and
his faculties were suspended with horror.
At length he turned round/ to look at
Lady Augusta, but how changed was her
appearance; instead of the smile of af-
fection with which she generally hailed
him, ,her gaze was fixed upon him with
the most pointed indignation.' He would
have spoken, and attempted to apologise


for his emotions, but on looking up, he
beheld in the woman whom he had seen
on entering the room, his enemy Mrs.
Howard.
/
At this awful moment the dying Maria
lifted up her beamless eyes, and casting
them upon Ormond, uttered a faint ex-
clamation, and faintly stammered — ce See,
wretch, wretch, what havoc thou hast
made!” The effort was, however, too
much' for'her, and raising fier
feebly, she clasped them together with
as much vehemence as she could; giving
a piercing groan, she turned on her
side, and at that instant her respiration
ceased, and her soul quitted its mortal
tenement.
A deep- sob burst from the over-
flowing bosom of Lady Augusta, and an
agonizing shriek from Mrs. Howard,
when Ormond, incapable of bearing the
scene any longer, seized his hat, and
rushed out of the room.
END OP VOL. 11.
W. M. Thiselton, Printer, Goodge Street, London.


ORMOND;
OR,
THE DEBAUCHEE.




ORMOND;
OR, THE
DEBAUCHEE:
COMPREHENDING
SKETCHES OF REAL CHARACTERS
AND ILLUSTRATIVE
tije manner ana Customs*
OP
FASHIONABLE LIFE,
Jti the close of the Year 1809.
IN three volumes.
By SOPHIA LEE.
VOL. 111.
The pleasure of a Debauchee is that of a destroyer;
he blasts all the fruit he tastes; and where the brute has
been devouring, there is nothing left worthy the relish of
the man,— —'Addison.
Ston&on:
Printed by J. DEAN, 57, Wardour Street, Soho.
TOR GEORGE HUGHES, 221, TOTTENHAM*
COURT-ROAD, NEAR STORE-STREET;
COLD BY SHERWOOD, NEELY, AND JONES,
BATERNOSTER-ROW.
1810.




ORMOND;
OR
THE DEBAUCHEE.
CHAP. XXI.
New Pursuit , and a Prison Scene.
Arriving at home, in violent agita-
tion, Ormond rushed into the parlour
where he had breakfasted, and throw-
ing himself into a chair, began to
consider by what means Lady Au-
gusta had discovered his affair with
Maria Jameson, as well as her retreat,
and what would be the best method
for him to pursue. But he had not
vol. hi. R


thought upon the subject many
minutes, when his notice was attract-
ed by a letter which lay, opened,
under the table, and taking it up, he
read as follows :
“ Madam,
“ I think it a great pity that so
amiable a lady as you are, and so
good a mistress to your servants,
should remain any longer ignorant of
the imposition which has been prac-
tised upon you. I know it will affect
you to hear the truth,, but it is right
that you should know with whom you
are connected. My master is no
Marquis, no, nor ever was, he is the
son of a merchant, who lives in the
country, and, until he married you,
he lived by gaming, and possessed
not a sixpence of his own, but what
he had obtained in this way. His
disguise as a French nobleman, and


his marriage with you, was a scheme
to place himself above the reach of
want, and he has, as I have heard
him boast, succeeded too well. Oh !
Madam, you do not know half his
vices, he made love to an amiable
young lady, one Miss Maria Jameson,
and after he had poisoned her mind
with novels and such like trash, which
I used to carry backwards and for-
wards, he contrived to get her to
elope with him, and when he could
not subdue her by any other means,
he procured a waiter to perform the
part of a clergyman, and got a sham
licence, and so deceived her. And
after a few months he forsook her,
and she went home, and found her
parents dying, and she is now her-
self in no better state, in want of the
common neccessaries of life. I have
taken the liberty to send this nore by
Mrs. Howard, Miss Jameson’s old ser-
b 2


rant, who can confirm all I have
written, and can give you further
particulars about this amiable young
lady’s situation.
“ I hope, madam, you will pardon
the liberty, an old servant has taken,
for I could not bear to see so much
goodness joined to so much viilany.
I am,
Madam,
Your faithful humble servant,
Philip Sandgrave.”
. • '• ' >,
Here then was the whole mystery
unravelled at once, and our hero dis-
covered that it would be useless for
him to attempt to play the hypocrite
any longer ; and as he deemed it most
prudent not to wait for the return of
Lady Augusta, he hastily wrote the
foi sowing note, and then left his house,
lot ever*


“ Madam,
“ After the scene which I have wit-
nessed this morning*, and the perusal
of the inclosed note, further attempts
to impose upon you would be useless.
I have therefore determined, as you
are well provided for, to spare our-
selves the pain of meeting again, and
I leave you in possession of the house,
and every thing in it, except the deeds
of transfer which you so affectionately
gave to me at Bath.
“ With every wish for your future
comfort,
I am,
Madam,
Your obliged servant,
Ormond Trewby/*
On leaving Russell Square, our
hero immediately went in search of
Trimbell, and found him waiting ac-
cording to the former evening's ap-


pointment, at the gaming house. On
communicating the occurrences of the
morning to him, the latter expressed
more concern than surprise, and told
Ormond that when he saw Mrs.
Howard in the neighbourhood of his
house, he suspected from that mo-
ment, that some plot had been laid
against him, and that the proposed
walk of this morning was in some
way connected with it. He, however,
commended our hero s conduct in
quitting the house before Lady Au-
gusta’s return, and persuaded him to
change his name, in order to elude
any search which may be made after
him by her ladyship; although he
much feared that every precaution
w ould be useless to conceal himself
from the hostility of Philip, who
w/ould, doubtless, spare no effort to
trace him through every labyrinth,
until he should have satisfied his


revenge ; and how far this might carry
him, none could tell.
It was agreed on by the two friends
that the first necessary step was to
engage a new lodging, after which
they could retire to it, and deliberate
upon such conduct as should appear
most proper to be pursued in this
dilemma; and they accordingly set
out in quest of a residence, in some
quarter of the town, where their no-
toriety had not penetrated, or their
persons were unknown : when, after
a little search, they tixed upon some
rooms in the upper part of the Strand,
not far from Temple Bar, which they
agreed to enter upon without delay ;
and, accordingly, being strangers,
paid a month’s rent in advance.
After some consideration, the idea
of changing their names was given
up, and it was resolved to seek i e,v
haunts and new acquaintance, in order
more effectually to escape detec


tion, and to pursue their old employ-
ments without interruption.
The recent events had produced
no change in the disposition of our
hero; neither the detection of his im-
posture, the affair of Lord Linfel’s,
nor the death-bed scene of the unfor-
tunate Maria, had power to awaken
in him the least remorse. He had
been tot) much inured to debauchery,
to suffer himself to be worked upon
by circumstances which would have
caused a reformation in bosoms not
quite dead to every principle and
feeling of honor and humanity. Or-
mond, however, so far from feeling
any such childish sensations, and fe-
minine apprehensions as thousands
in his situation would have done, as-
sumed great credit to himself for his
indifference to every thing w hich oc-
curred, and for the stoical apathy
witli which he faced all his misfor-
tunes. His whole thoughts were di-


rented to, his soul involved in, one
single object, the pursuit of his grati-
fications, and it was not in the power
of any occurrence, short of destruc-
tion to himself, to distract his atten-
tion for longer than a momentary pe-
riod. His was no common prowess
in dissipation, he had, from the first,
delighted in the science, and it cannot
be wondered at that he became ulti-
mately a master in the art. Whilst
he was yet a learner in the school of
debauchery, he had set at defiance
the advice, the entreaties, the threats
of his father, he had played the hy-
pocrite in penitence, and proved him-
self an adept in dissimulation, and
it was not, consequently, to be ex-
pected. that he would now, after so
much experience, after such exten-
sive and increasing practice, in vice,
become a convert to any scene of dis-
B 5..


tress, however poignant and distres-
sing.
Instead of becoming reformed, lie
determined to plunge deeper into
dissipation, and to enjoy himself still
more than ever : now that lie was freed
from his restraints and was possessed
of property sufficient to bear him out
in all his extravagancies. Trimbell
applauded the resolution, and be-
stowed upon our hero, the honour-
able, the enviable, title of the hero of
dissipation, the meteor of the fashion-
able world.
A short time was sufficient for them
to discover a new haunt, a new re-
ceptacle of the vicious and depraved
part of the community, and they soon
felt themselves as much at home
here, as they had done in those which
had been the scenes of their exploits
heretofore. But an indulgence in
gaming alone, was not sufficient to
afford complete gratification to our


hero, without the additional pleasure
of an intrigue ; and Trim bell, his old
pimp and purveyor, was instructed to
look out for some new object of attrac-
tion, which he discovered, in the im-
mediate neighbourhood, after a very
little search.
In the vicinity of our hero’s lodg-
ings a printer had taken op his resi-
dence, and this man had a daughter,
his only child, amiable and lovely:
and it was to her seduction, that Trim-
bell directed Ormond’s attempts; for
like the destroying insect, he delighted
only to devour and destroy those ob-
jects which ornamented nature the
most. Accordingly, he contrived to
obtain an introduction into this man’s
house, and, representing himself as a
man of fortune and family, obtained
leave to pay his addresses to Miss Ser-
grove; and the young lady, won over by
the winning manners of our hero, gave
him as much encouragement as he could


desire or expect. Having thus paved
the way he commenced his attacks on
her virtue in the same way as he had
previously done with the unhappy
Maria; and poured in a profusion of
novels, &c. The operation of these
sources and vehicles of poison he as-
sisted by all the eloquent sophistry in
his power, and daily strove to insinuate
the seeds of mental seduction into the
mind of the young lady.
His visits to this new house were
regular and frequent, and in the pro-
gress of a short period of time, he be-
gan to be looked upon as one of the
family, and to be treated according-
ly. But amidst all this, and in the
very moments of his highest exhitera-
tion, not a word was dropped on the
subject of marriage, except what
might be gathered, or rather inferred,
from his frequent and ardent an-
tieipations of the joy he should ex-
perience when he should be able


to have the felicity of calling Mis*
Sergrove his own.
Still his real designs - were very far
from being suspected, for his beha-
viour had been uniformly modest and
respectful, and he had not ventured
to take any liberties with the young
lady, except to give the customary tri-
bute to love at meeting and parting.
He was a wily seducer, and took care
never to give room for suspicion until
the instant when he was about to at-
tempt his purposes; for his object
was to make his endeavour appear
rather the result of a paroxysm of love,
than the effect of studied design, so
that, in case of failure, he might ex-
perience no difficulty in obtaining
forgiveness.
Thus he continued to follow Miss
Sergrove for some months, continually
expressing his anxious wish Chat lie
might speedily call her his own ; and,
at length, one evening* when they


were alone, lie was resolved to make
on attempt to achieve his purpose.
At this moment she appeared more
full of tenderness to our hero than
usual, and the epoch was more full
of danger: he drew his chair close
to her, and embracing her with much
assumed affection, informed her that
all obstacles being now removed, be
trusted that their union would be
allowed to take place within a few'
days. A smile of pleasure irradi-
ated the features of the lovely girl,
and a modest blush suffused her
cheek, on hearing the tidings ; and he
determined to improve the instant.
Accordingly, he assailed her with a
torrent of sophistry, intreating her to
make him happy, for as they should
shortly have a legal right to each
other, there could be no danger
nor harm in indulging in the joys of
love, without longer procrastination.
J.his was a dangerous moment for


Miss Sergrove ; clasped in the arms
of one to whom she imagined a few
days would unite her, and solicited,
with all the tender eloquence of love,
she stood upon the brink of a preci-
pice; almost without the possibility
of escape. Taken thus by surprise,
hesitation was ruin, and Miss Sergrove
was not io-norant of this. The arts
O
which Ormond had made use of to
weaken her principles of virtue, and
which he had so successfully resorted
to on former occasions, had no effect
upon this young lady. She fortu-
nately possessed a sufficient shield to
render the productions, which had
been poured in upon her, nugatory in
their effects; for although she pe-
rused them for amusement,she was very
far from making the precepts they
contained, the rule of her actions.
As soon, therefore, as she perceived the
intentions of Our hfero, she at first at-
tempted to remonstrate affectionately


with him on the impropriety of shew-
ing such haste, now, when the period
of their union was so near, and after
he had waited, with such apparent
patience, for some months. Finding
that* this reproof failed in its effect,
or rather rendered her lover more
importunate, she assumed an alto-
gether different character, and threat-
ened, if he persevered in his intentions,
to call her friends to her assistance,
and to expose his unprincipled con-
duct,and then moving towards the bell,
with a shew of being about to ring-
it, Ormond desisted, and intrented
that she would attribute his conduct
to no other motive than excess of trans-
port at the idea of so soon possessing
her. His excuse was received, a kiss
sealed their mutual reconciliation, and
lie took his leave for the evening soon
afterwards.
But the repulse he had met with
in this attach rendered him inwardly


a prey to rage and disappointment)
revenge rankled in his bosom.) and lie
secretly swore not to sleep until lie
had formed some plan to bring down
the pride of this haughty beauty. On
his arrival at his lodgings he found
Trimbell already waiting) to whom
he communicated the result of his
first attack, and begged him to assist
in forming some specious plan, to
which the latter assented; but first
told our hero that the trial of Lord
Linfel was to come on the clay after
the following, and that he had met
an old valet ot his Lordship s who
had been in search of them for some
days, to convey a message intreating
them to visit him in his prison previ-
ously to his trial.
It was accordingly determined to
dedicate the following morning to this
purpose ; and the plotters agreed tnat
Ormond should take Miss Sergrove
out for a walk on the following Sun-


day evening in some fixed spot, and
that I rim bell should be in waiting
.with a post-eliaise, to carry her off,
and thus, by stratagem and force put
our hero in possession of what he
could not obtain by any other of his
artifices. As soon as this plan was
arranged, Ormond felt himself re-
vived, in a very extraordinary man-
ner ; his feelings of disappointment
were entirely swallowed up in the
prospect of a speedy revenge, and he
felt little less pleasure on this occa-
sion, than he did when Maria Jame-
son gave him her consent to adopt a
measure which ultimately proved her
destruction.
On the following morning, after
breakfast, they departed for Newgate,
in order to see once more their old as-
sociate in villainy, who, to all appear-
ance, was about to pay the just pe-
nalty of his complicated crimes. When
they reached the gloomy abode of


vice, they were long before they could
obtain admittance, but it was at length
granted, and they entered a cell where
Lord Lirrfel was chained and stretched
on straw. Unprepared for such a
scene as this, our hero involuntarily
shrunk with horror from tne sight,
but his Lordship, stretching out his
hand, reassured him, with a faint
smile expressive of more anguish tnan
satisfaction.
Sorrow and confinement had effect-
ed an astonishing and melancholy
alteration in this once gay and fash-
ionable youth. His eyes were sunken,
his cheeks w ere farrowed by repeated
streams of misery, his brow 7 wrinkled
with care, and his voice hollow and
monotonous, dhe irons which em-
braced his legs and arms, had eaten
their way, almost, into his flesh, and
a glimmering light was all which
was allowed to him of the beams oi
day. ~He had been weeping, not from


penitence, but apprehension: it is
true he felt some remorse, but it was
merely because he had been too rash
in his vices; and although imprison-
ment had, in some measure, broken
his spirits, it had effected, it was too
probable, little improvement jn his
disposition.
M hen he arose from his wretched
bed, the clanking of his fetters, struck
terror into the breasts of his visitors,
and when he stretched forth his hand,
the chain which galled his arm, struck
against our hero, and filled him with
a double horror. With emotions of
surprise, however, he summoned up
resolution to enquire whether it was
customary thus to iron prisoners
charged with such an offence as his
lordship's, and how it was he did
not, as he had money at command,
purchase better accommodations.
“ If you will favor me with your
attention for a little time (said his


lordship) I will unfold a tale which
will destroy for ever, as it has mine,
every hope which my friends had
cherished of my release, or the amelio-
ration of my unhappy fate. No soon-
er was I removed to this prison, than
I was compelled to submit to a strict
search, and as all the money I pos-
sessed had been taken from me, pre-
vious to my committal, every trinket
and valuable which now r remained
were stripped from me with the most
unfeeling inhumanity. I was then
asked whether I would hire a room
and a bed, and on my replying, that
they had deprived me of every means
of procuring comforts, they immedi-
ately threw me into a miserable room
crowded with wretches, the very
refuse of villainy, and the scum of
mankind. Here I was compelled to
undergo taunts of the most cruel
nature, and here was 1 also obliged to
remain until a circumstance occurred,


wiiicli relieved me from tins miseiy
only to plunge me into the impenetra-
ble gloom of despair.
“ One morning I was called from
my seat on the floor, and summoned
to attend a turnkey into a large and
gloomy apartment, where I perceived
the magistrate who committed me,
with two or three others, and several
persons whose faces 1 could not im-
mediately distinguish. But alas!
what was my surprise, when one of
the men turned towards me, to recog-
nise the valet of the late Mr. Bard-
ley. A sudden conviction of the truth
then, for the first time, flashed on my
mind, a paleness confused my fea-
tures, and a sickness seized me such
as I never had experienced before. I
was not suffered, however, to remain
long in a state of suspense, before a
magistrate proceeded to examine the
servant.
“ it was then that 1 heard my fate,


as it were pronounced, it appeared
that Mr. Bardley had left his house,
with an intention to find me, for seve-
ral days preceding the murder ; and
on that awful day, I was observed by
some one walking in the park, in a
state of apparent agitation, and in
a short time afterwards, Mr. Bardley
was seen to go in the same direct
tion. As soon as that gentleman was
missed, every enquiry was set on foot
respecting him, and news being spread
that a body had been found, amidst
some pieces of timber* in the park, and
a pistol near the spot, this servant had
gone to view it, and identified the
person of his master. The pistol
being then shewn to him, he immedi-
ately recollected it as one of a pair,
which his master had formerly pos-
sessed, but which had subsequently
been presented to me; and, unhap-
pily, the keeper produced the other,
which exactly corresponded with it,


and which had been taken from me
when I was searched, on entering the
prison.
“ My agitation on hearing this
evidence was too powerful to pass un-
noticed. Surprise and consternation
had so completely locked up nny fa-
culties, and deprived me of all pre-
sence of mind, that 1 stood the very
image bf guilt, speechless and almost
senseless. It was, however, thought
necessary to jisk me what I had to
say against this heavy charge, which
so far exceeded, in enormity, the
offence, with which 1 had been origi-
nally accused. At that moment, I
destroyed myself, curse on my folly,
equalled only by my rash impetuosity-
curse on my coward heart, which
shrunk from the passions which as-
sailed it: and curse on my babbling
tongue, which told what never can
be untold. It was in this moment of
horror, that I confessed , yes my tru


iant tongue confessed, that mine wa
that pistol, and mine the hand whic]
levelled it and tired it at Mr. Bardley
I also confessed that I drew the body
to the spot where it was found: bu
fool that I was, I flattered myself tha
I could speak my own justification
and I said, that a teinporary madness
had seized me, at the moment when
Committed the horrid crime.
But, alas ! it was in vain, I had
spoken my own damnation, and in a
few minutes the substance of my con-
fession was handed to me fbrmy sig-
nature ; and then my cursed finger
vrote and attested what my tongue
lad uttered : and I was ordered to be
arried back to my prison. But, in-
tend of being again mixed with the
illains who had been my former as-
ociates, their company was deemed
ow too honourable for such a wretch
vo&. 111. 0


lit me. They had not taken away
he lives of their fellow creatures ; they
lacl been only guilty, perhaps, of
iome crime w hich a temporary punish -
nent might atone for, but for me,
vho had murdered my friend, for
me whose days were approaching to
an end, for me who was shortly to be
banged up, a spectacle to mankind,
for me a dungeon, such as this, and
galling fetters such as these, were
deemed sufficiently comfortable and
sufficiently honourable badges of dis-
tinction.
“ From that moment I have seen
not the day, except the transient and
unsatisfactory gleam which now only
serves to heighten the gloom of my
narrow mansion, and to render “ dark-
ness visible”—from that hour I felt
no peace, no beam of happiness, no
respite from agonising misery. I
could have wished to communicate m y


condition to yOu, but I had no means
of softening the unrelenting heart of
my gaoler; and I might sti.l have
remained, without the least fasOt sa-
tisfaction, had not my old valet Jen-
kinson, by some means contrived io
gaiit access to me. This faithful
creature wept over me, he was over-
whelmed with my sorrows, and pierced
with my sufferings, and it was he
who undertook to find you out, and
deliver my message to you. Oh !
when he left my cell, what can des-
cribe my feelings ?. At that instant, I
would have given wnrlds to have been
as he was, unfettered and unconfmed,
a victim to no breach of the laws,
and a prey to no inward remorse.
■« My time grows short, and to mor-
row will behold me at a public bar,
an arraigned and convicted murderer.
My fate is certain, but while there can
c 2


be a glimpse of hope, I will catch at
it, and soothe myself into a kind of
stupid happiness; it can be but of
short continuance, and surely no one
can refuse the wretched enjoyment of
a momentary respite from excruciat-
ing agony. And when to-merrow’s
sun shall set, I shall know the dura-
tion of my existence ; a murderer’s
time, they say, is very short. This
is cruel, for having such a weighty
crime on his soul, he o_ught to be al-
lowed longer time than others, to make
his peace with God. 1 have soon run my
career out, if I had acted with com-
mon prudence and restrained my rash-
ness, I might still have continued
rich, noble, fashionable, and res-
pected; but now alas! what am I?
.—Poor, ignoble, detested, a mur-
derer, and about to be hanged up a
public spectacle.
“ And must such a fate be mine?


can I find no friend to relieve me
from such a dreadful apprehension ?
No friend to accommodate me with
the means of self-destruction, that I
may, at all events, mock and elude
the final vengeance of the law ? Yes!
surely you will grant me this last
indulgence, and give me a pistol;
that when I may find my sentence pas-
sed,and my doom irrevocable, 1 may
summon a resolution, which I have
often endeavoured to excite in vain,
and if I cannot perish nobly, I shall
at least have the satisfaction of es-
caping the ignominious grasp of a
public executioner.”
Here Lord Linfel concluded his
harrowing narrative, and Ormond and
Trimbell felt a horror apparently
almost as deep as his who was chained
before them, They, however, en-
deavoured to concert some plan of
escape, but, alas ! the prison was too


secure, an 1 the vigilance of the keepers
to an remitting to allow the least
lupp of such an occurrence, and re-
luctantly were they compelled to re-
linquish the flattering idea, almost
as soon as they had presumed to
cherish it. Our hero, therefore, con-
sented to leave a pistol behind him,
which was accordingly concealed
in a hole in the flooring, under the
prisoner’s bed.
No sooner was this done, than a
turnkey appeared to inform the vi-
sitors, that they had remained as
long as the rules of the prison would
allow, and the friends were reluc-
tantly obliged to quit the scene of
horror, without the satisfaction of
being able to give any assistance to
the miserable and degraded noble-
man. Ormond, left, however, his
new address, that if Lord Linfel
wished to convey any . message to


Mm, he might know where to find
him, and giving him some money
to render his situation less irksome,
they took, a painful leave of him, and
left a scene so well calculated to in-
spire sentiments of dismay.


CHAP. XXII.
A Letter and a disagreeable Meeting .
Returning home from this dreary
mansion, the two visitors, as they en-
tered the house in which they lodged,
were stricken w ith inconceivable alarm
on perceiving one of Lady Augusta’s
footmen in the shop; but as he ap-
peared only slightly t Q notice, them
theyflattered themselves that they had
escaped his recollection. But {he cir-
cumstance created such apprehensions
in their minds, that they resolved to
discharge their apartments on the fol-
ing Sunday, when the scheme upon,


Miss Sergrove was to be carried into
execution.
On paying his usual visit to this
young lady, our hero was received with
more tenderness than ever, as his ex-
pressions on the subject of marriage
the evening before had warmed the
hearts of all the family towards him*
In the course of his interview this day,
he fixed on the following Monday for
the day to consummate their mutual
happiness, to which the amiable girl
most readily acceded ; and when he
pressed her to accompany him to Ken-
sington on the Sunday, that they
might be enabled to talk upon their
mutual plans of future happiness, the
young lady consented to this also, with
apparent marks of the utmost satisfac-
tion. The consent of her parents to
the approaching marriage was readily
obtained, and our hero, to ingrati-
ate himself the more, pledged himself to


settle on liis wife a jointure of one
thousand pounds per annum, as soon
as the ceremony had taken place. The
remainder of his visit was spent in
mutual expressions of love, and in an-
ticipations of future years of blissful
transport; and when Ire took hi's leave,
he left the amiable girl delighted and
overjoyed with her approaching hap-
piness..
On the following morning, our hero
and Timbrell dressed themselves early,
and left their lodgings to attend the
trial of their friend Linfel. When they
arrived, the hall was crowded to ex-
cess, and it was with much difficulty
that the two friends could obtain a
f ituation where they could hear or see
any thing. At length they succeeded
in getting seats, and had soon the
mortification to behold his lordship
brought heavily ironed into the court,
and to hear his entrance marked with


groans and murmurs of indignation.
He appeared uncommonly dejected,
and his dress was slovenly, and his
countenance disfigured with filth and
the tears of sorrow. He was placed at
the bar, where he stood with a kind of
sullen resignation, while the necessary
forms were disposed of; and when he
was required to put. in his plea, he
pronounced in a hollow and almost in-
articulate voice, “ Not Guilty.” The
trial then proceeded, and after the
counsel for the prosecution had expa-
tiated largely on the enormity of the
crime, he adverted to the particu-
lar atrocity which marked the present
case, and proceeded to call his evi-
dence, who proved to the satisfaction
of the court, and in the clearest man-
ner, the charge preferred against the
prisoner, and he was found guilty,
and sentenced to die on the following
day. Another indictment was pre


ferred against the prisoner by Lord.
N for altering his check, but as
sentence of death had been already
passed, it was deemed unnecessary to
prosecute the trial for this offence.
When asked for his defence, the priso-
ner, in a low voice, said he was not pre-
pared with any ; and when th%awful
sentence of the law was pronounced,
he bowed to the court, and, with un-
altered countenance, withdrew .
w Thus every hope of preserving Lord
Linfell was banished from the mind of
our hero, and he accused himself as
having occasioned, by the dismissal of
his servant, the destruction of this un-
happy nobleman. Full of this idea, he
to his lodging, depressed and
unhappy; but, by the persuasions
and perseverance of Trimbell, he at
length recovered, in some degree, his
usual spirits, This day, how ever, they
agreed to dine at home, and not go out


until the evening ; and while they
were at dinner, a servant brought up a
letter which had been left by a man,
who departed as soon as he had given it.
Opening the note, with trembling
hands, our hero read out, in a faulter-
ing tone, as follows :
“ My dear Friend —-The result of
my trial has been such as I expected,
and the law has decreed that to-mor-
row morning I must die; but that
morrow will never shine on me ; for
ere to-morrow’s sun will illuminate the
the earth, through your kind assist-
ance I shall have escaped—yes, es-
caped from the power of justice.—
Never, never shall it be said, that I
died by the hands of the executioner,*
never, never, shall the public view
my exit in ignomy. No, I have a soul
that scorns to descend to a level with
a common malefactor ; and as I myst


die, I will die in my cell, by no other
hands than my own, and with no eye
to witness my departure. I have
nothing to leave behind me; what was
bequeathed to me I lost by gaming,
and what I gained by a fraudful
scheme, the harpies of the law have
robbed me of. What had I then to
live for ? Nothing. Was there any
attraction left for me throughout
the wide world? None. What
would have been the companions of
my future life, had the law acquitted
me?—poverty, wretchedness, and dis-
c-race. Where could I have found a
home ? with the beasts of the forest,
in some deserted den. Then I ought
to bless the interposition of the law,
which has saved me from the expe-
rience of such miseries. I ought to
rejoice that a few hours longer will
release me from a state so void of con-
solation and hope, so fruitful in infamy


and want. Let me die unheeded ; let
me sleep undisturbed ; let my grave
be in some obscure corner, where none
may find it; that the finger of scorn
may never point at it, and the voice
of indignation never cry, 4 There lies
the murderer, Linfel/
“ The retrospect of my life harrows
up my soul. 1 was rich and respect-
ed ; my father handed down to me a
noble name, unsullied by reproach;
untainted by the breath of contumely.
I might have continued honourable ;
I might have arrived at the highest
distinctions ; I might have been —but
what signifies it what I might have
been, what am I now ? Ah! what am I
now ! a wretch with whom the filthiest
beggar scraping on the dunghill for a
mouldered crust, would not conde-
scend to change situations : a w retch
who has but one more misery to en-
counter—the misery of death. A few


hours ; a few hours did I say—a few
minutes longer, and I will cut the
thread of my ill-fated being, and
cease to torture myself with vain re-
proaches.
“ Farewell, world! farewell, Or-
mond and Trimbell, the only friends
left to me amidst the desolation which
surrounds me ! Think of me, some-
times, but not with horror; and as
you read this parting scroll, drop a
tear for the untimely fate of one, who,
although a felon and a murderer, was
ever faithful in his esteem for you.
“ The unfortunate— Linfjsl/*
When our hero had concluded the
letter, a deep sigh burst from his bo-
som, and Trimbell felt an unusual sen-
fation, but the emotion was but tran-
sient ; for after a moment’s considera-
tion, seizing a glass of wine, he pushed


the bottle to his friend, and exclaimed,
“ Come, come ; to drive away melan-
choly, fill a bumper, and let us drink
—Peace to the ashes of our friend Lin-
feb’’ Trimbell readily obeyed the call,
and glass succeeded glass, until the
memory of the unfortunate criminal
was obliterated from the minds of his
piuch valued and much vaiuingfriends;
and, about nine o’clock our hero reeled
out of his room in search of an ad-
venture.
Nor was he disappointed, for sooner
than he expected, he met with an ad-
venture for which he was by no means
prepared, and which promised to af-
ford him very little gratification. No
sooner had he stepped out of the house,
than he felt himself rudely seized by
two men, with their faces concealed,
who immediately gagged Ids mouth,
pinioned his hands behind him, tied a
close bandage over his face and eyes,


and dragging him to a coach which
stood at hand, thrust him into it, and
jumping in after him, the vehicle drove
away with great rapidity.
Ormond, astonished by the sudden
assault, lost the power of his recol-
lection, and it was not until he
was seated in the carriage, that he
began to think of making a resistance,
But it was too late for him to con-
tend ; and he was soon obliged to
submit with reluctance to a situation
from which he found it impossible to
extricate himself., A thousand fears
harrassed his mind as he was being car--
ried along, but still he could not pos--
sibly conceive for what purpose this
seizure of his person was made. Alarm-
ed, beyond all conception, and being
in a state of half intoxication, he was
unable to collect his thoughts, so as to
enable him to form a rational concep-
tion of his destination ; but before lie


had much time to reflect, the coach
stopped, and he was suddenly lifted
out, and carried into a house, where
being unbound and unbandaged, he
found himself in the middle of a large
room, in the presence,of Lady Au-
gusta, his father , and Ins brother..
But in this unenviable situation it
may be as well to leave our hero for
a while to recover from his confusion,
while the reader is made acquainted
with the circumstances which led to
this event.
After Lady Augusta had given some
money to Mrs. Howard to defray the
expence of the unhappy Marias fu-
neral, she left the scene with an aching
heart, and bent her way homewards,
where, on her arrival, she found our
hero’s note, and its. inclosure. The
contents, although they did not sur-
prize her much, uijected her consi
derably, as she considered that she had


been the dupe of a villain, and that her
future happiness, if not destroyed, was
at least materially injured by this un-
happy connection. No alternative,
however, was left her but to continue
the irreproachable conduct which had
characterized her past life, and if she
could tf&t command her future wel-
fare, she resolved to endeavour, by
every means in her power, to deserve it.
Her first step was to send for Philip,
in order to o btain all the information
in her power respecting the parents
and connections of her husband ; but,
on his arrival, she unfortunately found
him ignorant of the residence of his
father ; but, after a short recollection,
ne called to mind the house where his
brother resided, in the family of Mr.
Lovell. On discovering* this,
Augusta resolved to see him. and to
communicate to him the imposition
which had neebpractised on her ; but


whether to call upon him, or to send
for him to her residence, she could
not for some time resolve; at length
she fixed upon the latter plan, and a
note was accordingly dispatched by
Philip, intreating that Mr. Henry
Trewby would visit Lady Augusta,
on a business of much importance,
implicating, in some degree, the happi-
ness of his family.
Having reached the house, the ser-
vant delivered his note ; and Henry,
immediately suspecting that he should
receive some tidings of his unhappy
brother, expressed his intention of fol-
lowing Philip without delay ; and the
latter immediately set out to commu-
nicate the welcome news to Lady Au-
gusta, who was impatiently waiting
his return, and received his message
with the greatest satisfaction.
Philip had not been longed returned
before a chariot stopped at the door,


and in a few minutes a gentleman
alighted, and Mr. Henry Trewby was
announced. At the mention of his
name, Lady Augusta felt herself con-
siderably confused and embarrassed at
the part she had now to perform. Her
emotions, however, were but transient,
as she soon convinced herself that she
was about to discharge a duty which
would be acknowledged by his friends,
and would relieve her of a great share
of unhappiness. She, threfore, ordered
him to be admitted ; and, in a few
seconds, he entered the room ; and her
Ladyship, after apologizing for the
liberty she had taken in sending for
him, and requesting him to be seated,
thus addressed him :
u If I mistake not, Sir, you have a
brother, Ormond Trewby, who has
long estranged himself from his family,
'and has plunged into scenes of dissipa-


tion and debauchery of the most dis-
tressing nature.”
; Henry immediately answered in the
affirmative, and flattered himself that
her Ladyship had something to com-
municate of a more gratifying com-
plexion than they had been accus-
tomed to hear. He then entreated her
to proceed, for although Ormond had
grossly abused and deceived both him
and his parents, still he entertained for
him the affection of a brother.
Lady Augusta then, without further
preamble, commenced the narrative of
her first becoming acquainted with
him, under the name and character of
the Marquis D’Alencon ; of their sub-
sequent marriage ; of the discovery of
his connection with, and desertion of,
Maria Jameson, and her unhappy
death ; and of his subsequent for-
saking of her, after having obtain-
ed the bulk of her property into


iiis possession; and the note which he
had left behind him as an apology for
his conduct. After this, her Ladyship
entered into a sketch of her own life*
for the satifaction of her brother-in-
law, and concluded wifh stating, that
she had sent for him to assist her con-
sultations as to what methods would
be best to pursue.
During the recital of the various acts
of his brother’s criminal conduct,
Henry experienced the most violent
emotions ; and the tears trickled down
his cheeks, and many an involuntary
sigh burst from his bosom before Lady
Augusta had reached the end. He
had, however, noticed the modesty of
her Ladyship when speaking of her-
self; and having conceived a very
high opinion of her, he soon resolved
how to act. After expressing his most
poignant grief, that one whom he was
compelled to call brother, should have


turned out such a villain, he avowed
his determination, and he took upon
himself to speak for all the residue of
his family, to endeavour by every
kindness and attention in their power,
to compensate for the trouble which
had been occasioned her by her un-
principled husband ; and he flattered
himself that, although his family were
graced by no titles of honour, she would
find them such as she could wish for
her friends. He also trusted, that she
would accompany him back in his
chariot, that he might have the plea-
sure to introduce her to one whose
w hole business it would be to restore
to her the happiness of which she had
been so basely robbed.
Lady Augusta would gladly have
excused herself at this moment, but
Henry was too pressing to receive a.
denial; and, after desiring Philip and
a footman to be continually on the
VOL. in. and


alert to discover the retreat of our hero,
they departed for Henry’s residence in
Fenchurch-street.
Here Lady Augusta was introduced
to the amiable and lovely wife of
Henry Trewby, once the accomplished
Julia Moody, the intended bride of
our hero, who received her with the
utmost affection, wept when she heard
her interesting but sad story, and de-
clared that she would endeavour to
wipe away the tear from her cheek,
and to remove the regret she must feel
in having entered into such a connec-
tion.
In the mean time, Henry sat down
and wrote a narrative of Lady Au-
gusta’s tale to his father, at the same
time entreating him to come to the
metropolis, and visit his amiable
daughter-in law, and to assist once
more in the recovery of, and attempt for
the last time to reclaim the lost Or-


mond. After having dispatched this
letter, he gave Lady Augusta a detail
of his brother’s conduct from his quit-
ting home, until the last deception he
played off, when Henry saw him
mount the coach, under the specious
pretence of repairing to his father, to
endeavour, by his future attention to
him, to compensate for the numerous
and severe sorrows which his repeated
misconduct had occasioned him.
“ l saw him, (continued Henry),
mount the coach and drive off, and,
had I entertained any doubts of his
sincerity before this, that moment
would have removed them all; and I
anticipated, with the proudest and
most confident delight, the felicity I
should experience (as I intended to
follow him the next day) in beholding
the prodigal restored to the arms of
his parents, and in once more seeing
the whole family united in the bonds
and 2


of natural affection. Judge, then, of
my surprise, my indignation, when, on
my arrival at Trewby Hall, 1 disco-
vered the hypocrisy of my brother;
and when I related the tale to my fa-
ther, how were his feelings distressed
in the discovery of the villainy of which
his own son was capable! Incensed
by this unnatural conduct, my father’s
indisposition rapidly gained ground,
and threatened a fatal termination; but
providentially at the moment when
hope was about to leave us, his illness
took a favourable turn, and he was once
more restored to the bosom of a trans-
ported family. From that hour we have
heard nothing of this ungrateful youth,
until you related your sad story, and
1 much fear that we shall never be able
to estrange him from the pursuit of
vices which, from his long experience
in them, must have become natural to
him”


When the letter of Henry arrived at
Trewby Hall, its contents diffused a
general melancholy, and the worthy
old gentleman regretted that he was
cursed with a son so void of every prin-
ciple of honour and humanity. When
his feelings, however, had somewhat
subsided, he determined to comply
with Henry’s request, as he considered
it a duty incumbent on him to lose
not a single moment in commitnicating
every consolation in his power to one
who had become the undeserving vic-
tim of that duplicity which he him-
self had been a sufferer by. He ac-
cordingly left Trewby Hall the follow-
ing day, and in a few hours reached
the metropolis and was set down at
his son’s house, where he was received
with a sincerity and candour of affec-
tion which had nothing of deceit about
it.
When the old gentleman was intro-
d 3


duced to Lady Augusta, whom from
Henry’s flattering account he was aL
ready disposed to love as his daughter,
his emotions were powerful, indeed,
and as the amiable creature knelt to
receive his blessing, he almdst par-
doned Ormond for using a deceit in
order to obtain her. He tenderly raised
her, and embracing her with the ut-
most a flection, declared that he from
that moment looked upon her as his
own daughter, and as one whom it was
his duty to love and protect through
life as such.
With a sweetness of manners pecu-
liar to herself, Lady Augusta returned
her fervent acknowledgments for Mr.
Trewby’s kindness, and regretted that
OrmOnd had not possessed his share
of Hose virtues which appeared so
eminently to distinguish the other
branches of his family, in which case
he would have been capable of ren-
dering her the happiest of her sex.—


Her sorrows, however, were greatly
alleviated by the consoling reflection,
that, although she had lost a husband,
she had found such amiable and va-
luable friends.
Every measure was now adopted
which promised the least probability
of success, to discover the retreat of
our hero, since Mr. Trewby and Henry
were of opinion that if he was not cor-
rupted beyond the possibility of re-
formation, their reproofs, backed by
the tender remonstrances of such a
woman as Lady Augusta, must be ef-
fectual to reclaim him. Even Lady
Augusta herself had declared her rea-
diness to forgive the deception he had
practised upon her, and to forget every
thing which was past, if Ormond could
be prevailed upon to renounce his,de-
bauched principles, and his dissipated
course of life, and to become a domestic


character and such a husband as she
could wish.
It was in tliis stage of the business,
that one of Lady Augusta’s footmen,
being in the shop where our hero
lodged, saw him and Trimbell enter,
but had prudence enough not to take
particular notice of them, and this
precaution soothed, in a great degree,
their apprehensions. He had, how-
ever, inquired of the shopman if these
gentlemen lodged in the house, and
having received an answer in the affir-
mative, he returned to communicate
the wished-for tidings to his mistress.
Transported at the discovery, Henry
resolved that two men sfiould be pro-
cured to lay in wait for him as he en-
tered his lodging, and to bring him
away silently and by force to Lady
Augusta’s house, in Russell-square;
and as she was well acquainted with
the hours he usually kept, she ordered


the men to he in waiting for his coming
home, from eight o’clock until two or
three in the morning, as it was ten to
one but he came in that interval of
time.
During the whole evening, from the
departure of the men, Lady Augusta
was a prey to the most violent emo-
tions, being on the eve of once more
beholding a husband, whom, notwith-
standing his deceitful conduct, she
loved with unabated tenderness, and
with whom, she yet flattered herself,
she should enjoy years of mutual hap-
piness ; her sensations were most acute,
and her suspense most painful. With
all the affection of the most fond pa-
rent, Mr. Trewby soothed her, and en-
deavoured to convince her that all
would yet be well, and that Ormond
could never resist the entreaties of such
an amiable wife, when strengthened


by the commands of a parent and the
advice of a brother. Still her Lady-
ship could not restore herself to com-
posure: she was fearful lest her design
should be suspected, and he had
changed his lodgings ; or it was pos-
sible he might not return to-night, or
he might not have gone out, and a
thousand other apprehensions of a simi-
lar nature arose in her breast, and be-
came the continual sources of new
uneasiness. Mr. Trewby himself, al-
though he attempted to conceal his
feelings, found he had undertaken a
difficult task, since the idea of again
meeting a son who had so often slighted
his advice and his reproofs, and had
acted towards him with the most con-
summate hypocrisy, was attended with
emotions of the most painful nature.
And such was the situation of the
party when the coach stopped at the


door, and the footman who ran to the
vehicle, having announced the success
of the scheme, the principal fears
which had agitated them were re-
moved.


CHAP. XXIII.
A Scene of Difficulty.
Impossible would it be for any pert
to describe the sensations of Ormond
on bfeing unbandaged, and finding
himself in the presence of these three
persons, either of whom would have
been sufficient to strike terror and con-
fusion into his guilty bosom. Such a
complication of emotions had never
before assailed him ; his usual inge-
nuity in deceit forsook him ; and he
stood lost and unable to determine
what character he should assume. At
one moment, indignation atthe manik -
in which he had been brought hither,


prevailed, and at another, shame on
beholding those whom he had so vilely
wronged. How long the silence might
have continued is doubtful, had not
Mr. Trewby at length summoned up
resolution, and thus addressed him :
“ Oh ! hypocritical wretch, is this
the situation, and are these the circum-
stances, under which we are doomed
to meet again ? Was it not enough to
pierce the hearts of those whom nature
had connected with you, but must
you seek to contaminate and destroy
those amiable beings whom we were
intended to protect and cherish ? Little
did I think, when you lay stretched
apparently on the bed of death from
the consequences of your dissipation;
that I should ever again have to re-
proach you with your crimes, or I
should have probably have been temp-
ted rather to pray for your decease
than your recovery. Soon, indeed,


have you forgotten the anguish which
lacerated my paternal bosom, when
you lay writhing under the lash of af-
fliction, and stings of remorse, express-
ing your deep abhorrence of your past
conduct, and your determination to
pursue anew course. And this is the
new course which you have chosen.
Not content with procuring an infa-
mous livelihood by gaming, you must
assume characters for which you have
no pretensions, in order to prey upon the
credulity of others : and not satisfied
with plunging yourself into misery, you
must attempt to drag others into the
same abyss, who so far from having given
you cause to hate them, have only to
accuse themselves of having loved you,
and been too anxious to promote your
happiness. But why should I attempt
to reclaim one who has so often proved
himself callous to my intreaties, when
this fair pleader (taking Lady Augusta


by the hand) stands here ready to for-
give you all that is past, if you will, in
sincerity, become the character jou
have so often promised to be; but
should you again attempt to act the
hypocrite, in vain will you hope for
any future interference on our part
in vain will you hope to escape the
fate you will so justly merit/ *
Here Mr. Trewby ceased, and Lady
Augusta, in a voice of the most be-
witching tenderness, and her hand
stretched forth to our hero, assured
him that she was disposed to forget
the deception he had practised on her,
and all his past conduct, if he would
consent to reform himself, and become
what she could wish him to be. She
then pointed out the happiness which
would result from such a change, and
the more gratifying nature of his enjoy-
ments, under such circumstances, than
in the pursuits of dissipation, and the


service of vice. She refrained from
every thing like reproach, and in-
treated him to believe that she loved
him with the truest affection, for the
proof of which he had only to recal
to mind her past conduct from the
moment of their first acquaintance
even to this instance ; and she declared
her readiness to share every care and
every anxiety with him, to the latest
hour of her existence. Saying this,
she advanced to Ormond, and taking
his hand, which he suffered her to do,
without any resistance, led him to his
father’s chair, and bending him down,
as she kneeled on the ground, begged
of the worthy old gentleman to give
them both his blessing, and to trust
his son for once more, and that she
would take upon herself to answer for
his fidelity and reformation.
During this scene, our hero remain-
ed sullen and silent; not a single emo


tion marked his countenance; not once
did he raise his eyes to his father or his
wife; not once did he give the least symp-
tom “of a wish to be forgiven, except
when he permitted himself to be led to
his parent by Lady Augusta, and this
was rather the effect of a want of re-
solution, than of penitence. His dark
mind was employed in brooding on his
situation, and on the best method of
escaping from it; and so immerged
was he in this reflection, that he
seemed to pay little attention to any
thing which passed around him. When
Lady Augusta knelt before Mr. Trew-
by, she endeavoured to bring Ormond
into a similar situation, but he was not
so flexible as she could have wished ;
and, although he bent under her ami-
able effort, he knelt not. He was at
a loss what character, and what kind
of behaviour would suit him : he had
already acted the hypocrite too fre


quently, and it would be useless, if he
attempted it again, to carry it to the
pitch which he had formerly done.
To escape at this moment was impos-
sible, therefore he must conceal his
real sentiments, until he could find
some fit opportunity to get away. He
resolved then to unbend no more than
he could well avoid, and rather to
suffer something like repentance to be
extorted from him, than to discover,
voluntarily, any symptom of an un-
bending disposition.
On Lady Augusta’s reaching Mr.
Trewby’s chair, with Ormond, and
soliciting a parental blessing, the wor-
thy man replied Yes, madam, you
I will bless, for angels themselves would
not be degraded in assuming the form
and disposition of such as you. You
are too amiable for such a wretch
him, who knows not how to appre-
ciate your value : you are a fit compa


nionfor those only, who have been ex-
alted by their virtues, and on whom
earthly honors can confer no dignity,
I will bless you with an old mans
blessing, and would that it was any
thing of worth, or any thing that could
add to your happiness. But you are
deceived in the character of him, for
whose reformation you would pledge
yourself: he stands unmoved, and I
fear insensible even to affections such
as yours. 1 would bless you, together,
but I am fearful to class excellence like
yours, with depravity like his, until
1 have proofs that he will become
such as he ought; and when I see that
happy day, I would gladly resign my
existence in blessing you both/’ And
here the old man wept, and Lady Au-
gusta and Henry wept, and Ormond
thought fit to relax the sullenness of
his features a little, but he did not
weep.


Yet the change in his countenance
was sufficient to attract the notice,
and raise the hopes of the amiable wo-
man, and she hailed it as the dawn of
returning virtue ; and immediately in
a voice of tenderness, she once more
requested he would Kneel with her, and
tell his father that he would deserve
his blessing. On this, Ormond con-
descended to bend his knee to the
ground, but the spell of taciturnity
with which he was bound, was not to
be so easily broken ; and every effort
to draw a word from him proved
fruitless. At length, worn out by the
continued intreaties and tears of Lady
Au gusta, he attempted to assume a
look indicative of something like sor-
row, and permitted a tear or two to
start from his eyes; and these symp-
toms, as they appeared involuntarily
drawn from him, excited some hopes
in the bosoms of Mr. Trewby and


Henry, that, by a perseverance in their
efforts, they should ultimately pro-
duce the desired change in him.
Henry, therefore, who had as yet re-
remained in a state of thoughtless
silence, approached his brother, who
pretended to hide the tears which fell
scantily down his cheek, by covering
his face with his hand, and addressed
him:
“My dear Ormond, —It is impossi-
ble that your heart can be so corrupted,
and so steeled against nature and af-
fection, as to resist the efforts which
are now made to draw you from the
pursuits which could lead you to no
other, than a destructive end. You
have obtained, it is true, in a disho-
norable manner, a partner, whose
amiable qualities are sufficient to en-
sure your future happiness; and if you
are animated, as you once pretended


to her, by the most sincere love to her,
what occasion can there be for you to
seek for pleasure any where else. The
bliss you must experience in the com-
pany and conversation of such a wo-
man, must vastly exceed every gratifi-
cation which can result from a dissi-
pated career. You will then have no
feelings of remorse to torture your bo-
som ; no apprehensions can arise from
the thought of meeting those who love
you ; since their presence, instead of
being a terror, would then become a
source of happiness to you. You are
not required to yield up what you
may call pleasure; and to submit your-
self to the drudgery of business as was
formerly the case ; but you are only
desired to forsake the pursuit of an un-
real phantom, which will ultimately
disappoint your hopes and expecta-
tions, and to return to the bosom of a
family which mourns your absence;


and where every rational pleasure
awaits you. Consider how much
greater pleasure will result, now you
are in possession of affluence, from the
communication of happiness to those
who surround you, than from spend-
ing your days and nights in gaming
and vice. Our object in thus intreat-
ing you to return to us, is not self-in-
terested. Our wishes are dictated by
the purest affection, and the most dis-
interested desire to promote your hap-
piness ; and 1 hope that we shall not
have again to mourn the frustration of
our hopes, and to regret that we have
thrown away our exertions on one who
repays us only with contempt and hy-
pocrisy. Join with your amiable wife,
my dear Ormond, and solicit the for-
giveness and blessing of him wiiogave
you birth, and who, notwithstanding
your past conduct, is ready to stretch
out to you the hand of paternal af-


fection and to receive his penitent son
to his bosom.”
Henry concluded, and taking the
hands of Ormond and Lady Augusta,
he united therti, and besought his father
to bless them together ; and our hero,
for the first time, moved his lips, and,
almost inarticulately, muttered out a
hope that his father would again forgive
him, and bless his wife, who was de-
serving of every good which this world
could bestow. On hearing this, she
fell upon his neck, and embracing him,
endeavoured to give utterance to her
transports, but they were too great to
find a vent, and overpowered by her
feelings, she fainted. A few minutes,
however, were sufficient to restore her ;
and Mr. Trewby, with tears in his
eyes, laid his hands upon both, and
blessed them.
“ If the blessing of an aged father/*


I said he, can add any thing to your
mutual affection, take it, it is yours,
and the expression of it gives an incon-
ceivable relief to my overcharged heart,
lou, madam, cannot fail to deserve
: I would that it were more valua-
ble for j our sake. But you, Ormond ;
you, who have so often despised me,
l may surely be pardoned if I still en-
tertain some fears and apprehensions as
to your future behaviour. But 1 have
blessed you, in the full hope of yom
nuendment, and if you again act the
iypocrite, I here solemnly retract my
dessing. If you again plunge into
lissipation and debauchery; if JOU
L g am forsake her whom you have
worn to love and cherish : if you
gain contemn my advice, and despise
Jy reproofs, instead of my blessing,
ie curse of an aged father will attend
ou to your grave ; and the latter part
[ your life will be fraught with sor-
VOL. 111, E


rows a thousand times greater than
any you have witnessed yet. But I
hope the tender attentions of your
amiable spouse will effectually wean
you from the pursuit of vice : If you
are not irreclaimable, this will be the
case, and then happiness will be your
portion through the remainder of your
life.”
The blessing being given, upon con-
dition of our hero's reformation, the
amiable Lady Augusta took upon her-
self to guarantee the future good con-
duct of her husband ; and a compa-
rative degree of happiness began to
reign throughout the party. But still
Ormond maintained a sullenness and
reserve which he very careful ly avoided
to cast off beyond a certain degiee,
and his friends considered them as ra-
ther a more promising proof of his
good behaviour, than if a rapid al


teration had taken place in him; as
there was much less room now to sus-
pect the sincerity of liis conduct.
Supper being brought in, the con-
versation took gradually a more cheer-
ful turn, and every one except out*
hero evinced a great degree of satis-
faction. Lady Augusta several times,
in the most affectionate manner, ral-
lied him upon his pensiveness, and
although, now and then, he appeared
to reward her exertions with a faint
smile, the general turn of his conduct,
conversation, and appearance, still
maintained its original cast. He ate
his supper, apparently, without appe-
tite or inclination; he drank his liquor
with a degree of indifference and apa-
thy, which was by no means peculiar
to him, and when he thought proper
to mingle at all in the conversation :
his remarks seldom extended beyond
the limits of half a dozen monosylla-
e2


bles. It followed, as a natural con-
sequence, that, although every one
else was disposed to display a degree
of cheerful happiness, the taciturnity
of our hero was such, as to throw a
damp upon liveliness, and to check
the progress of every thing like con-
vivial delight.
This scene was kept up for an hour
or two after supper, when it was
agreed that Mr.Trewby should sleep in
Russel-square, and that Henr y, who w as
anxious to return home that night,
should come back on the following
day, at as early an hour as he could
escape from his indispensable engage-
ments, and he was desned to bung
Julia with him to participate in the
pleasures which had resulted from Or-
mond's return, and which would re-
ceive such additions by the gradual
progress of his reformation. Soon af-
ter Henry's departure, Mr.Trewby re


tired for the evening, but not until he
had once more given his advice to his
son, as holding him by the hand, he
affectionately bade him good night.
As soon as his father had gone to rest,
our hero, who appeared to dread the
idea of being left alone with Lady Au-
gusta,lovely and affectionate as she w as,
embraced her with the utmost seeming
transport, and intreated she would al-
low him to go to his chamber, as he
felt himself too indisposed in mind and
body, to enter into any further ex-
planations before the following morn-
ing ; to which her ladyship, w ith tear-
ful eyes, assented, and kissing him
with great tenderness, once more as-
sured him, that she was confident his
future behaviour towards her would
be such as to give her no cause to re-
gret having bestowed her love upon
him.
Once more alone, and in his chain-
e 3


ber, Ormond began to consider how
he should act. The following day
would be Saturday and on Sunday
evening he had proposed to carry oil
Miss Sergrove, and this was a point
which he said to himself could not be
let slip on any consideration whatever.
By day, he felt conscious that his es-
cape would be utterly impracticable,
as every one about him was naturally
devoted to Lady Augusta, and would
therefore be ready to render his at-
tempts to get away completely abortive.
Since, therefore, he could not escape
by day, he must chuse the night for his
endeavour ; and, as this was night, and
the return of day, if he remained here,
would only bring a return of scenes
which to him were totally disgusting, it
would be better to lose not the present
opportunity. Having resolved thus
within himself, he determined, when
every one should be at rest, and about
V


an hour before day-break, he would
attempt to get out.
The interval until this anxiously
expected hour, he determined to spend
without laying on his bed, for it was
now near one o’clock, and day would
break in a few hours: he should, in
case he went to bed, run the risk of
oversleeping himself, and might thus
lose the golden opportunity. He be*
gan, therefore, to consider how he
should escape, and having arranged,
his plan, to his own satisfaction, he
proceeded to trace out the pursuits of
the follow ing two days, which he con-
sidered as teeming with events of im-
portance to his happiness. He re-
solved to reach some distant tavern
before day light, to procure as early
an admittance as he could, and then
to dispatch a note toTrimbell, to de-
sire his attendance, and to concert
with him about taking new lodgings,
£ 4


as well as fabricating a plausible apo-
logy for his unusual absence from
Miss Sergrove.
The watchman called the hour of
two, and Ormond began to curse the
lingering minutes, and to calculate
how much longer he had to endure his
confinement; and, just at this mo-
ment, footstep in the adjoining room
awakened all his terrors; but as it
soon died away, and was succeed-
ed by an unbroken silence; his ap-
prehensions gradually subsided. He
had at first imagined that some person
was on the watch to prevent his es-
cape, in case of his making the at-
tempt ; but he soon dispelled this fear,
and convinced himself that the noise
was occasioned by some person step-
ping out of bed for something. De-
termined to make his escape, he was
resolved that any one endeavouring to
prevent him, should suffer severely for


his rashness. He had pistols about
him; for ever since he had been at-
tacked in the passage, and was carried
into Mr. Lovell’s house, he had never
gone abroad in the evenings, without
providing himself with the means of
defence ; and it was, perhaps, fortu-
nate for those persons who seized him
on the preceding evening, that the act
was so sudden, as to deprive him of his
presence of mind, and, consequently #
of his ability to make use of these
deadly w eapons.
The time was now arrived which
our hero had fixed on for his attempt,
and as he was well acquainted with
the passages of the house, and the
fastenings upon the door, he felt con-
fident of success. Taking off his
shoes, and extinguishing his light, as
the moon shone sufficiently bright for
his purpose, he took a pistol in his
other hand, and softly opening his


door, crept out of his room, with the
most careful caution, and began to
descend the stairs. When he had
reached about half way down the
flight, the creaking of one of the steps
created a considerable alarm in his
breast, and it was not for some mo-
ments, that he felt himself reassured
so as to proceed. It seemed, however,
to have passed unheard, and he reach-
ed the hall in safety; when rejoicing
in his success hitherto, he began to
unfasten the street door. His troubles
were now approaching to a close, and
only one bolt remained to be with-
drawn, but this seemed to resist his
efforts too powerfully, and he was
compelled to make a sudden and
strong exertion, which was attended
with success, but he had, unfortu-
nately, touched the wire of the bell,
which instantly rang, and as quickly
another bell was heard in the house


when, trembling with terror, lie
flung open the door, and with his
shoes in his hand, rushed into the
square, and thence through several
streets with the utmost rapidity, be-
fore he had courage to stop and put
on his shoes.


CHAP. XXIV.
Villainy Frustrated.
After running for some time, fearing
every moment he should be seized by
a watchman, and at another that he
was pursued by some servant from
Russel-square, and, looking continu-
ally behind him, with undiminished
anxiety, he, at length, reached a cof-
fee house in Sdmer’s-town, which was
fortunately open, or he would have
kept on ad infinitum , and which he
immediately entered, and enqui ring for
a chamber, under a pretence of wash-
ing himself, kept looking out at the


window for an hour, with terror in Iris
looks, and suspecting every passenger
of a design to secure him. Having*
after a while, summoned up resolu-
tion to descend into the coffee-room,
he breakfasted, and then writing a
note to Trim-bell, dispatched it by the
porter ; after which he went out into
the fields about Pancrass, where he
considered himself safe from discovery,
as it was not in the least probablte that
any person would imagine he had
gone in this direction.
Soon after his return to the coffee-
room, the messenger returned with a
note from r l rimbell, merely stating,
that he would follow the porter imme-
diately, and in less than an hour he
himself arrived. After hearing the ad-
venture of our hero, he informed him
that just before he left the lodgings,
he heard the voice of Philip in con-
versation with the owner of the house,


and as be listened to catch the drift of
their discourse, he plainly distinguish-
ed sufficient to convince him, that
Ormond had been taken away to
Russel-square, and that he had made
his escape early in the morning. The
master of the house, however, having
assured the servant that he had not
returned to his lodgings, and won over
by Philip’s tale, having promised to
inform him as soon as he returned, the
latter took his leave and left the
house.
It was determined that Trimbell
should return and discharge the old
apartments, and also make a visit to
Miss Sergrove, to express our hero’s
regret at not being enabled to wait on
her as usual, which was to be attri-
buted to a sudden indisposition which
had seized him, and from which he was
now recovering; but that be would
not fail to see her on the following day


(Sunday) and hoped she would not
forget her engagement with him. Al-
ter having learned his lesson, 1 rimbell
departed, and Ormond went out with
intention to seek for a lodging in some
private part of the neighbourhood,
where he should be free from disco-
very, and where he could bring Miss
Ser«:rove, after he had reconciled her
to the new situation which he intended
her to fill. After a short search, he
pitched upon apartments exactly suit-
ed to his wishes, and agreed to enter
upon them in the course of that day,
and having made this arrangement to
his mind, he returned to the coffee-
house to wait for Trimbell. He had
not been long here, before he saw one
of Lady Augusta’s footmen pass the
window, from which he withdrew in
the most evident trepidation, but for-
tunately for himself undiscovered; but
this occurrence determined him not to


leave the tavern, until he went to his
new apartments in the dusk of the
evening, when he should run little
risk of being known or traced.
In a few hours Trimbell returned,
having executed his missions. When
he discharged the lodgings, the owner,
with a significant look, hoped that their
next retreat would not so soon be dis-
covered, as he suspected they were
o-entlemen, who, for some reasons or
another, wished to remain private ;
and as he was about to reply to this
impertinence, who should enter the
shop but Philip, who recognising him,
hoped he was well, and inquired, with
much shew of respect, after his old
master, Mr. Tre why. Trimbell, how-
ever, replied that he had not seen him
for some days ; and as it was an unur
sual thing for him to be absent so long,
he feared that he was not well, or that
he had met with some unforeseen ot.-


curence to delay him out ot town,
Philip smiled at this remark; the
master of the shop winked very know -
ingly ; and Trimbell walked off, as
he had no wish to remain to be
subject to any impertinent interroga-
tories. When he had gotten a few
yards from the door, he looked back,
and saw the servant coming out of the
shop, evidently w 7 ith an intention to
follow him ; bat as he instantly turn-
ed into Mr. Sergrove’s, he hoped he
had baulked him in his designs. Mr.
Sergrove did not receive him with
much cordiality, and the lady seemed
somewhat reserved ; but Trimbell, in
the best way he could* endeavoured
to do away every cause of suspicion
which might be lurking in her breast,
by expatiating on the ardency of Or-
mond’s affection for her, and the pain
he suffered at not being able to come
himself, at that time, to pour out his


love at her feet. All this she received
with some slight appearance of cool-
ness ; and when Trimbell told her
that our hero would come himself on
the following day, if he continued to
improve, to fulfil the engagement he
had made with her, when he would
fully prove, to her satisfaction, that
his affection for her was not less ar-
dent and sincere than it ever had been ;
her reply was, she hoped he could.
On leaving Mr. Sergrove’s house,
what was his astonishment to find
Philip still looking about the street,
walking very leisurely up and down.
This circumstance rather confounded
Trimbell, as he much feared that he
should not be able to elude the vigi-
lance of this fellow. He determined,
however, to try what he could do,
and, accordingly, without seeming to
notice the servant, he walked away,
with great rapidity, towards the west


end of the town, and coming into Pic-
cadilly, he still perceived him at his
heels, on which he made directly for
St; James’s-street, and entered the
house where they had formerly lodg-
ed. The scheme took effect, and,
when Trimbell came to the door, in
a few minutes, he saw Philip hastening
up the street, apparently very well
satisfied with the result of his watch-
fulness. No sooner did Trimbell see
this* than he called a coach, and,
jumping into it, drew up the win-
dows, so as effectually to screen him-
self from the observation of any one,
and was speedily set down in Somer’s-
town.
Ormond paid his friend many com-
pliments on his ingenuity on this oc-
casion, and they determined to devote
the evening to conviviality, as it was
not prudent for them, under present


circumstances, to venture abroad any
more that day.
To this coffee-house a party of gen-
tlemen resorted every evening, to drink
away their senses, and drown the little
reason which nature or education had
given them. At the head of this set
of jolly companions, was Sir Philip
Wrong, whose name was perhaps
never heard of beyond the circle over
which he nightly presided. This ba-
ronet’s only virtue was drinking ; his
only vice drinking ; his only pursuit
drinking; in fine, he could drink
with any body and every body ; but
he could talk with nobody : not that
he was tongue-tied, reader, but that
he really had so drenched himself
with drink, that if he had sense to
have supplied him with ideas, they
were all lost before they could reach
his tongue. This worthy sprig of a Pa


trician-trunk, was formed for Baccha-
nalian exploits : after drinking down
every one who daredto enter the list
with him, from a one-bottle to a
twelve-bottle man, his constant cus-
tom was to stride over his vanquished
antagonists, severally and distinctly,
and to exclaim, as he re-filled his
bumper —“ Behold, here lietli Da-
gon!
When the waiter informed our hero
of this party, and described the charac-
ter and virtues of this wonderful baro-
net,who was his master’s best customer,
he felt his heart w armwith affection for
a man of such transcendant worth, and
immediately conceived a friendship
for him, and desired he might be in-
troduced with his friend, as gentlemen
who had come to reside in the neigh-
bourhood; for, although Ormond had
not studied the science of drinking
deeply, so much as some other of the


fashionable systems, he had no objec-
tion to vary his pursuits occasionally.
In this select party, then, our hero
and Trimbell were admitted, and if the
orgies of drunkenness possess gratifica-
tion for men of fashion and dissipation,
they were completely blest; for long
before midnight, most of the gentlemen
gloriously bit the dust, and terminated
their career for the night. Our two
friends, however, seemed invulnerable;
and rose, in proportion to their tough-
ness, in the good graces of the worthy
baronet who presided; until, at length,
they held it out to such a degree, that
he could no longer restrain himself,
but, embracing them, vowed eternal
friendship to men so well qualified to
fulfil their parts in society; and this
new bond was cemented by an addi-
tional bumper of Madeira; after w hich
the baronet and our two friends, re-
mained masters of the field of battle.


It was not long after midnight, that
our two drunken heroes reeled out of
the coffee-house, to go to their new
apartments; but their recollections
had so far failed them, that they
mJ
knocked up almost every family in the
street, and after this appeared as far
off the mark as at first. They, at
length, became so intolerably noisy,
that it was thought most expedient,'
by men who were better capable of
judging than themselves, to give them
a night’s lodging in the watch-house.
Here they slept and enjoyed them-
selves as well as though they had
been in their apartment, nor, indeed,
were they at all acquainted with their
situation, until the owner of the man-
sion most completely awakened them,
and informed them, they could no
longer sleep there, but were at liberty
to depart in quest of a more comfort-
able habitation, as soon as they had


satisfied them for their temporary ac-
commodation, and the great trouble
they had given them. After some he-
sitation, and much murmuring to no
purpose, the two Bacchanals were
obliged to part with a pretty tolerable
sum, to satisfy the harpies which had
assembled to divide the spoil, and by
whom they were completely sur-
rounded.
*< The morn was overcast, and heavily
in clouds came on the day, big with
the fate of the devoted and amiable
Miss Ser°TOve. The morning was spent
in recovering from the effects of the
previous night’s intoxication, and our
hero thought it most prudent to keep
close at home, until the hour of ap-
pointment was nearly arrived, lest any
danger might be incurred by a hasty
re-appearance after the escape of the
preceding morning. At length, the
w ished for hour was nearly arrived,


and the two friends, muffled up, took
their departure from Somers Town ;
and after proceeding some distance
together they separated, Tiimbell to
procure a chaise and bring it to the
appointed spot, and Ormond to visit
Miss Sergrove, and prevail upon her
to accompany him to Kensington Gar-
dens, according to agreement.
Now it had happened rather unfor-
tunately for our hero, that Philip had
discovered, when he called at the
lodgings in the Strand, to learn if he
had returned thither after he had freed
himself from his confinement in Rus-
sell-square, that Ormond had been in
the habit of paying his addresses to
Miss Sergrove, and having instantly
made himself acquainted with the
particulars, he considered it likely
that he might have taken refuge in the
house of his beloved, and accordingly
resolved to go there without delay, and
VOL. Il£ f


ascertain whether his suspicions were
founded in truth. He went, there-
fore, and having ashed for Mr. Ser-
gro ve, instituted the necessary in-
quiry ; and on that gentleman answer-
ing in the negative, and appearing sur-
prised that such/e question should be
ashed, Philip entered into a detail ot
all our hero’s past conduct, of his
vices, of his manner of existence, his
seductive arts, his marriage and de-
sertion of his wife, and his subsequent
conduct, which render such search
necessary.
Thunderstruch at this narrative,
Mr. Sergrove desired Philip would
accompany him into his house, and
repeat the tale in the presence of his
wife and daughter, a request which
the latter gladly complied with, as an
opportunity was thus afforded him of
revenging himself on his old master,
of serving his new mistress, (for he was


received into LadyAugusta*s service in
consequence of his discoveries), and
of preventing the further viltanous
schemes of Ormond. The females
were stricken with horror at the scenes
which Philip revealed to them, and
the unhappy girl, who had been des-
tined to fall a new victim to villany,
thanked Heaven most devoutly for this
interposition to save her. Philip of-
fered to verify his statement On oath, if
it were necessary, and, after stating
that he was now in the service of Lady
Augusta, our hero’s present wife, he
received a handsome reward for his
information, and departed.
Mr. Sergrove and his daughter now
consulted as to the best method of get-
ting rid of such a villain as this, who
had attempted to deceive and ruin
their happiness, and as Miss Sergrove
had promised to accompany Ormond
for a walk on the Sunday evening, it


determined that she should pre-
serve her engagement, and should take
that opportunity to strike him dumb
with the discovery of his past conduct,
while her father and brothers should
be at hand to second her reproaches,
and to prevent him from making use
of any attempt to injure or insult her.
It was soon after this resolution was
adopted that Trimbell called, and
this explanation will doubtless satisfy
the reader as to the cause of Miss Ser-
grove’s coolness to this agent and ac-
complice of a villanous seducer. The
poor girl, however, after his departure
gave way to her feelings, and had she
not called up her pride and a conside-
rable degree of determination to her
aid, it is probable she might have
suffered very severely in her endea-
vours to repress the agonizing conflict
between duty and affection. She,
however, repressed the violence of her


I emotions, and soon recovered, in a
great degree, her accustomed calm-
ness and cheerfulness.
Such was the state of affairs, when
Ormond called on the Sunday, but
on advancing to salute Miss Sergrave
with his usual appearance of affection,
the young lady drew back from his
embrace, and desired him to restrain
himself until he could give satisfac-
ory explanations of some circumstan-
:es which had very recently come to
ter knowledge. She then declared
serself ready to accompany him, as
he had promised, in order to give him
n opportunity of clearing up his con
uct.
Surprised and confused at Miss Ser-
!'ove s manner, our hero felt himself
fceedmgly nervous, and agitated by
vast contrariety of sensations. In
; H1 dld he endeavour to pick out
hat she had to alledge against him,


she evaded all his inquiries,, until they
had set out on their walk, when she
said he should hear the whole.
The amiable girl being soon prepar-
ed for her walk, they departed toge-
ther, and she began to converse on in-
different topics with an apparent ease,
which almost induced Ormond to ima-
gine that she was only tormenting
him, and he, accordingly, began to
teaze her anew on the subject of her
accusation. But the moment was not
yet arrived for the discovery, and she
ingeniously combatted his impatience
until they reached the park, where she
immediately began to reproach him
with his duplicity, and to remind him
of several parts of his past life, which
tended little to his honour, and to re-
proach him with entertaining base de-
signs upon her.
For some moments our hero could
not recover from the consternation


which lie had been thrown into by this
sudden attack ; but as soon as he
could get rid of a little of his embar-
rassment, he declared that she had
been made the dupe of some designer,
and as the idea ox Philip immediately
suggested itself to him, he said he had
no doubt that the tale was invented by
the malice oi an old servant, whom he
had discharged from his service for
his insolence, whose attempts to de-
preciate his character had not been
confined to this instance. He then be-
gan to declare his innocence of every
charge imputed to him, in the most
solemn manner, and declared that on
the next morning he would produce
such testimonies as must convince her
how badly be had been treated.
r l his plausible tale had some weight
whh Miss Sergrove, who secretly whit-
ed it might prove true ; and she began
to unbend herself gradually, and to


shake off a little of her reserve. Hav-
ing- taken our hero’s arm, he by de-
grees drew her to that part where he
had appointed for Trimbell to be in
waiting, and requested her to take a
ride with him in his chaise which w as
near at hand. The young lady, how-
ever, positively refused, and having
tried every method to prevail upon
her without effect; and perceiving
Trimbell at hand, he made a signal,
and in a moment Miss Sergrove was
lifted up between the two villains, Or-
mond at the same time covering her
mouth with his hand, but as they ap-
proached the chaise w ith their prize,
the friends of the young lady rushed
upon them, and after rescuing her
from their grasp, seized the two
friends, and demanded the reasons of
such conduct. Before they had time
to reply, a crowd had assembled, and,
on being informed of the cireumstan-


ces, insisted upon taking the two of-
fenders to a neighbouring pond, and
inflicting a summary chastisement on
them for their brutal conduct ; to
which Mr.Sergrove and his sons were
obliged to agree.
Mainly did our hero supplicate for
mercy, and protest that his intentions
were strictly honourable; and equally
in vain did the trembling Trimbell
sigh and weep, and join the intreaties
of his friend; the mob was not to be
deceived with such equivocations ; and
having reached the spot agreed on for
the exhibition, the two friends were
speedily made to fill a character as
novel as disagreeable to them, and af-
ter having afforded infinite diversion
to hundreds for the space of an hour,
by playing antics in the water, they
were released by their unfeeling per-
secutors,, and suffered to run, half


drowned, and followed by the shouts
of the crowd, from the scene of their
punishment to their apartments in So-
mers town.


CHAPTER XXV.
The Retrospect.
WiiENOrmond was escaping from Rus-
sel Square, the ringing of the door-bell
had awakened Mr. Trewby and Lady
Augusta,the latter of whom immediate-
ly rang her bell, and the porter was call-
ed, who on perceiving the door open,was
extremely alarmed, butcouldobtain no
satisfactory information from the watch-
men, who had been absent on their
rounds when it was opened. He was
therefore about to conclude that some
persons in attempting to break into the
house had rung the bell by accident,
and relinquished their design, when


it struck him, for the first time, that
the bolts had been regularly drawn
back, and the person must conse-
quently have been in the house, who
had unfastened them. Still no idea
of the real truth was entertained, and,
as the day was breaking, the domes-
tics arose, in order to render any new
attempt abortive.
In the mean time, Lady Augusta
was perfectly composed, and enjoying
a sweet and undisturbed sleep, little
dreaming of the new apostacy of her
husband. She felt confident of future
happiness in the society and affection
of one, who, she flattered herself,
could make no other than a grateful
recompence for her love, and every
baleful recollection was lulled into
sweet oblivion.
At length the hour of breakfast ar-
rived, and Lady A ugusta was already
in the parlour, where, in a few minutes
she was joined by Mr. Trewby ; and


*hey waited some time in expectation
of our hero* until their patience being
exhausted, they sent a servant to re-
mind him of the lateness of the hour.
But language could do no justice to
their looks and emotions when the man
returned with the terrible intelligence
that Ormond was not in his room,
and that Ins bed had not been lam
upon.
1 hunderstruck, arid unwilling to
believe this account, her ladyship hew
to the chamber, followed by Mr.
Tiewby, and, as she entered the room
a note on the table attracted her atten-
tion, and the thought of Ormondes-
escape instantly hashing upon her
mind, she fell senseless on the bed.
Before she had recovered herself, Mr.
Trewby had taken the writing from
her hand, and read as follows :
Madam, M hen this note will be
perused by you, the writer will have


escaped from a scene, to have remained
hi which would have been impossible,
without a sacrifice of other pursuits
and gratifications w hich are necessary
to his happiness. lam aware that I
shall be accused of having again acted
the hypocrite, but I found it impossi-
ble to act otherwise, without laying
myself open to reproaches which I
wished to avoid. I shall in future
obey .the dictates of my ow r n inclina-
tion, and I w ould advise you to do the
same ; in which case we may both
find that happiness which w e should
vainly seek for in each other. We have
the means of happiness, and it is sure-
ly our ow n faults if we cannot find
it, by some path or other. My father
and brother will, 1 dare say, loudly
condemn my conduct, but habit has
so accustomed me to my old pursuits,
that I should not be enabled to drag
on existence, if I were abridged of


the enjoyments which are congenial*
• t
with my disposition. With every sin-
cere wish for your happiness, I am,.
“ Madam^
“ Yours, Sec.
“ Ormond Trewby,”
iNot without much difficulty did
the worthy old gentleman reach the
end of this insultiug.note, and as soon
as he had concluded it, a deep sigh
burst from his bosom, and betrayed
the internal anguish he endured. To
comfort the unhappy Lady Augusta
was not in the power of one who him-
self had need of a comforter ; the only
consolation they were either of them
capable of administering or receiving
was that which arises from mutual
sympathy, and mingling their sor-
rows together. After the first gust of
passion, however, had gone*by, Mr.
Irewby summoned up his resolution,


and taking the hand of his distressed
and abused daughter-in-law, led her
from the fatal apartment, once more,
into the breakfast parlour, and in-
treated her to throw aside hei giief,
and bestow no more thought on one
who had acted towards her with such
consummate villarry ; and at the same
time he declared his solemn resolution,,
from that moment to tear asunder tne
bonds of nature, and no longer to
consider Ormond as his son.
The sorrow, however, which afflict-
ed the lovely bosom of 'Lady Augusta,
was too acute to be thus easily remov-
ed ; her hopes had been more san-
quine than those of Mr. Trewby,
and her disappointment was, in eon-
sequence, the more bitter. She pro-
mised, notwithstanding, thatshe would
exert herself to drive from her the re-
membrance of one, who had thus for
ihe second time basely deserted her;


and to regain that composure which his
conduct had banished. But, alas ! she
promised more than slie had resolution
to fulfil; her heart was pierced deeply,
and the big drops of anguish which
incessantly chased each other down her
cheeks, were but faint expressions of
a sorrow which was rooted and des*
structive.
The breakfast passed most sorrow-
fully, without enjoyment, and with-
out refreshment; and when Henry ar-
rived shortly afterwards, what a melan-
choly contrast of the happiness of the
last night presented itself to him. The
moment he alighted a footman commu-
nicated the sad narrative, and when
the worthy young man entered the
room, he was stricken speechless with
the uncommon change in the appear-
ance of his father and Lady Augusta.
He endeavoured, however, to address
them in the language of consolation,


and mt rented them to dispel ji sorrow
which, if cherished, would destroy
their happiness as well as undermine
their constitutions.
The solicitations of Henry produced
some effect upon both the moumeis ,
it soothed Mr. Trewby, and raised the
pride of Lady Augusta to her aid,
and in compliance with his request,
she resolved to leave Russell Square,
and accompany Mr. Trewby to Trew-
by Hall, for a while, until the impress
sion of her sorrows, should be, in some
degree, weakened by time. In pur-
suance of this determination, she pro-
ceeded to prepare for her departure ;
but, no sooner had she reached her
chamber than her pride forsook her,,
and the tide of her sorrows leturning
in full force, she relapsed into a state
of insensibility, and it was with con-
siderable difficulty that she was restor-
ed to her senses. Rut, alas ! her res-


toration to reason discovered that a
racing fever had seized her, and she
was obliged to be immediately con-
veyed to her bed, and medical assist-
ance called in. The operation of her
conflicting emotions had produced ei-
fects of the most sudden and danger-
ous nature.
When a physician had examined her
pulse, and made himself acquainted
with the cause and seat of her disor-
der, he hesitated not to pronounce her
situation extremely critical, and as
requiring the utmost care and atten-
tion of all who surrounded her. The
result justified his apprehensions, and
the following day found this amiable
woman reduced apparently to the low-
est ebb, and struggling to baffle the
efforts of death.
Mr. Trewby, who was almost in-
cessantly in her chamber, marked the
destructive progress of her disorder
with an anxiety of mind that could


scarcely have parallel. He kept the
physician continually at hand, and in
his paroxysms of fear and affection,
would fainly have bribed him to save
Lady Augusta. He would not retire
to his bed at night, nor attempt to
take repose by day, although Henry,
and Julia, who was her ladyship’s
tender nurse, intreated him to spare
himself, and to leave the lovely pa-
tient to their care. His mind, how-
ever, was incapable of rest, and he
asserted that he would not attempt to
find a relief, which, in his present
state of agonised feeling, it would be
absurd for him to expect to attain.
Could our hero, at this awful mo-
ment, have beheld the ravages occa-
sioned by his duplicity and villamy,
surely even his callous heart must have
been susceptible of some remorse. If
he could have contemplated La-
dy Augusta stretched on a bed of
sickness, and perhaps of death, ago-


liized with the torturing reflection of
his insulting conduct, and repeated
hyprocrisy; and his father w atch-
ing* through the live long night,
at the couch of the amiable suf-
ferer ; surely he would have, at that
moment, renounced his follies, and
terminated a career of dissipation and
dishonour. But he was, ■ unhappily,
distant from the scene of suffering:
he was plunging in new debaucheries,
and running headlong towards the pre-
cipice before him, thoughtless of every
thing but gratification, and careless
of every thing but the best methods
of satisfying his appetites. He had
plained a dagger in the bosoms of those
who loved him, but he had done it
with the coolness and apathy of a
bravo who immolates for hire; he
felt no pang, no emotion, except
that ot triumph in the ingenuity
he had displayed in soothing their
fears, while he meditated their
truction.


The crisis of Lady Augusta’s disor-
der was rapidly approaching, as every
attempt to avert its progress had been
found ineffectual, and every one
around her, from Mr. Trewby to the
meanest domestic, remained in the
most anxious state ofsuspence for the
decision of her fate, since every one
loved her with the truest affection,
every one lamented her illness with
the most sincere sorrow, and everyone
cursed the villain who had caused this
affliction.
At length the awful hour had passed,
the constitution of Lady Augusta
triumphed over the malignity of the
disorder. The lamentations of grief
were immediately changed into the
most joyous expressions of affection ;
and the house of mourning suddenly
became transformed into the residence
of mirth. But, although the violence
of the disease had abated , there remain


td a considerable weakness, whick
time only could remove. After some
days, however, the recovery of the
amiable woman began to be extremely
rapid, and she was very shortly ena-
bled once more to descend from her
room, and to gratify by her presence,
her faithful servants.
Still, notwithstanding Lady Au-
gusta had recovered her illness, sorrow
had by no means relinquished his hold
upon her ; but a pensive sadness gave
an uncommon degree of interest to her
fine features, which had not yet re-
ceived back the roses which had been
plundered from them. Every effort
was made by her amiable companions
to chase the clouds which overspread
her countenance, but she would thank
them for their exertions, aud tell them
that as they had never felt an affliction
like hers, they could not perfectly
comprehend its nature.


It was proposed by Mr. Trewbv, as
her Ladyship was so well recovered
from her illness, that their intended
journey to Trewby Hall should be de-
layed no longer than was absolutely
necessary to complete her prepara-
tions ; and, at the suggestion of
Henry, Julia consented to accompany
them, in order that she might assist
in rendering Lady Augusta’s visit plea-
sant and conducive to the complete
return of her former cheerfulness. The
latter, in the most affectionate man-
ner, returned her thanks for the atten-
tions and tender anxiety which her
friends were continually displaying to
promote her happiness ; and promised
that she-would endeavour, by every
method iu her power, to deserve their
friendship.
A few days afterwards, the party
left tire metropolis, and proceeded


ceived her daughter-in-law with the
utmost affection, although the tear
which glistened in her eye, as she em-
braced her, proved that her satisfac-
tion was not un mingled with the regret
which the recollection of Ormond’s
ifiisconduct was so well calculated to
excite. She felt, nevertheless, a secret
pride and gratification in beholding
the amiable manner as well as the
lovely appearance of Lady Augusta;
and derived an almost unallayed hap-
piness from the truly filial attentions
which the latter evinced towards her.
Henry had accompanied his friends
into the country, and intended to re-
main a day or two, and, during this
short period, he took a great delight
in making Lady Augusta acquainted
■with the scenery of the country which
surrounded them. Every morning be-
fore breakfast, accompanied by Julia,
they would rove around the desolated
VOL. in. * a


shrubberies, and delapidatedmansion,
once inhabited by the Rough mays, but
now, either through the whims or the
necessities of their owner, reduced and
forsaken, and displaying a sad me-
mento of the versatility of human af-
fairs. Henry took a real pleasure in
pointing out where such a temple
stood, where in such a spot a grove
spread its umbrageous influence, and
sweetly varied the scene, and where
the aviary, well stocked and selected,
awakened the curiosity of the traveller,
and gratified the taste of the amateur.
But these delightful improvements of
nature no longer existed, and the only
traces which remained, were to be seen
in the heap of rubbish which pointed
out the situation of the building, and
the fallen timber which marked the
boundaries of the shrubberies and the
groves. The reflections excited by
these scenes were congenial with the


pensive state of Lady Augusta’s feel-
ings, and, in consequence of this sym-
pathy, she felt an unusual anxiety to
visit them frequently, and to indulge
herself in the luxury of pensive grief.
The period which Henry had pre-
scribed for his visit having now elapsed
he took his leave of a Scene and of
friends so dear to him, and, recom-
mending his fair sister-in-law to the
particular care and attention of his
wife and parents, once more departed
for the metropolis.
After he had left Trewby Hall, Mr.
Trewby substituted himself as the at-
tendant on the ladies in their morning:
walks ; and in a short time he had the
happiness to perceive that Lady Au-
gusta’s pensiveness gradually dimi-
nished, and her felicity seemed to be
unimpaired; and she, on the other
hand, was so gratified by the affection
which was constantly shown to her,
g 2


and so happy in her present company
and pursuits, that she felt but little
disposition to return to the gayer but
less gratifying scenes of London. The
bustle and follies of the fashionable
world seemed quite forgotten by her,
or had lost their power to please, and
nature possessed more attractions to her
mind than the crowded rout, the
amusements of the theatre, or the mid-
night masquerade.
After about a month had elapsed,
a slight interruption to this domestic
happiness was occasioned by the de-
parture of Julia, who had several times
expressed an anxiety to return to her
husband, but had consented to pro-
long her visit at the pressing solicita-
tions of Lady Augusta. The moment,
however, at length arrived, and after
a painful parting, she left TrewbyHall,
to the sincere regret of her ladyship,
who for some days severely felt the


loss of her bosom friend and compa-
nion. This impression was, neverthe-
less, soon eradicated by the unceasing
assiduities of the worthy pair who re-
mained behind, their sole endeavours
being directed to the complete esta-
blishment of her happiness; and it
was shortly agreed that she should re-
main at Trewby Hall, during the next
six months.
G 3


CHAPTER XXVI
A trip to BrightON, and a new Ac-
quaintance.
After the ungracious handling which
our hero and his friend had received
from the mob, they remained close in
their apartments for some time, during
the day, and only went to the neigh-
bouring coffee-house enwrapped in
their great coats, and under cover of
the darkness. Here, in the society of
their new friend, the bacchanalian ba-
ronet, and his crew of debauchees,


they soon drowned the remembrance
of their recent disappointment and the
subsequent mortification they had been
compelled to endure; and became short-
ly by regular practice, as complete
proficients in the science of drunken-
ness, as they had previously been in
all the other qualifications of fashion-
able gentlemen.
Yet, notwithstanding this new as-
sociation, Ormond soon began to grow
dissatisfied with the insipidity of this
new way of life. He wanted more va-
riety in dissipation, and was discon-
tented with passing away day after day
without starting any new game, or
obtaining the prospect of any new in-
trigue, which by its successful issue,
might, in some measure recompence
him for the sad disasters he had met
with in his last unhappy amorous
campaign, and obliterate the recollec-
tion of his unsuccessful pursuits.


I o ente£ again into the gay and
public amusements of the metropolis,
appeared rather too tralight with dan-
ger at this moment, as it was extreme-
ly probable that persons may still be
on the watch for Ormond, in which
case his pursuits would be in continu-
al danger of interruption. It was, ac-
cordingly resolved on to take a trip to
Brighton for a month or two, until the
cause of apprehension was pretty well
removed; and to endeavour to find
amidst the lively scenes of a watering
place, those gratifications, which, for
the present, they were prevented from
pursuing in the city. 1
A day of two after this determina-
tion, our hero and his friend left town,
in a handsome curricle, in order to
dash away for a'time amidst a scene,
and in new associations, where they
incurred little risk of discovery, and
might lay their designs without suspi-


cion or interruption. The next moru-
ing they arrived at Brighton, and
having secured themselves apartments
of the first style of fashionable ele-
gance, they began to make a figure
upon the promenades and the rides.
Their first step was to look out for the
gaminghouses, and having introduced
themselves here, they found no difficul-
ty in forming acquaintance, as their
appearance was calculated to make the
most favourable impressions as to their
rank and property. Ormond now found
himself once more contented, as he
had the opportunity afforded him of
again mingling with that description
of society in whose company he was
alone capable of tasting enjoyments,
which had become from continual
practice so habitual to him, as to be
essential to his happiness. In Bac-
chanalian orgies, he had found a tem-
porary variety, and had accordingly
g 5


resorted to them as the substitutes for
those gratifications which adverse cir-
cumstances had for the moment re-
moved from his grasp ; but they had
not long the power to satisfy, they
wanted the charm to please, and when
their novelty was worn away, they
appeared burdensome rather than
pleasing.
But now, when removed from the
seat of apprehension, there was no
reason to fear detection ; now, when
he had once again the power of ming-
ling with the depraved of his own
stamp, his whole soul seemed engross-
ed in his favourite employment; and
the rattling of the dice, and the shuf-
fling of the cards was music sweeter
to his ear than aught on earth besides.
At the tables of gaming his days were
spent, and oftentimes his nights; and
when he arose early in the evening,
and ceased to play for “ lack of argu


ment,” his practice was to resort to
the brothel, or proceed in search of
some intrigue.
From constant meetings at tire gam-
ing tables, our hero soon formed an
intimacy with the Hon. and Bev. Mr.
Birdlove, who was as complete an
adept in infamy as himself, and was
introduced at his house; and from
this period their friendship increased,
until it had attained the highest pitch,
and they became, in the course of a
fortnight, sworn and bosom compa-
nions.
Mr. Birdlove was the son of a no-
bleman more celebrated for his wealth
and influence, than his virtues and
abilities ; and as his sole attention was
directed to the aggrandizement of him-
self, and the keeping up of his family-
consequence and dignity, he gave very
little heed to the progress of his chil-


idren in any other accomplishment
than what as he thought would pro
mote his views, by rendering them
most likely to contract honourable al
fiances. Under such a hopeful father
no wonder that the offspring contract
ed the worst habits whiph disgrace
humanity; no wonder that they be-
came debauchees, that the temple of
Bacchus and the gaming table were
he only scenes of their youthful ex-
ploits. They improved, as was natu-
aJ to expect, in every vice, and De-
jected the practice of every virtue ;
hey bartered their principles for fa-
hionabJe sentiments, and laughed at
irtue and morality as chimeras in-
ented merely for the government of
le ignorant vulgar. Three days after
e had attained his twenty-first year,
fr. Birdlove (the friend of our hero)
as united at the wish of his father to


the youngest daughter of Lord Lin
venson, a young lady of most beauti-
ful person, and about nineteen.
As this union was founded merely
on interested motives, and as the de-
termination of the parents had left no
room for the young pair to exercise
their own inclinations, it cannot be
matter of surprise that they found
themselves married, without the least
disposition to love each other; and,
in fact, considering their engagement
as nothing more than a connection
formed for the aggrandizement of
their respective families. Mrs. Bird-
love was young and beautiful, and of
course, made a very tolerable compa-
nion for one winter ; but the return of
spring had found them satiated with
the society of each other, and, ac-
cordingly, they began to search for
other friends, without interfering with,
each other’s’ p ursuits.


It may not be altogether out of place
here, to make, by the way, a remark or
two on this customof forming matrimo-
nial connections, which is too common
in fashionable life. It is never consi-
dered at all necessary that there should
be any love between the parties, as
the etiquette of the haut ton is far
from requiring that they should con-
tent themselves with each other’s com-
pany ; since nothing is esteemed more
vulgar than the display of mutual af-
fection in married people, or the be-
traying a disposition to become a do-
mestic character. These laws have
produced this effect They have
made married women of rank a kind
of common property, or at least dis-
poseable commodity, and many in-
stances have occurred in high life, of
men who were above the prejudices of
the vulgar, making considerable pro-
perty by the transfer of their connu-


bial rights, or by recovering damages
in a court of justice for a violation *
which has been the result of their own
contrivance, or what is little less cul-
pable, their criminal neglect.
Mr. and Mrs. Birdlove, although
not precisely persons of this stamp,
were sufficiently qualified to become
such by their educations and associa-
tions. They were as yet too young,
and too recently married, to have
made such rapid progress in fashiona-
ble manners; but the foundation of
such a line of conduct had been laid
in their breasts, and it required only
time and opportunity to bring the su-
perstructure to maturity.
When our hero was introduced to
Mrs. Birdlove, she cast a favourable
eye upon him, and as she perceived
that he was by no means indifferent to
her, but would gaze on her sometimes
with looks of affection, she deter-


mined to play offher artillery against
him, and to place him in the yet slen-
der list of her admirers. She would,*
accordingly, frequently bless him with
a smile, and would honour
him with a pat on the face with her
fan, and a side leer, expressive of some-
thing more th an met the eye. At other
times she would allow him to take her
hand to press it gently, and once or
twice to place it on his heart, at which
liberties she would pretend to blush,
hide her face with her fan, or encou-
rage him to proceed with an unforbid-
ding frown.
Ormond was not insensible to her
behaviour to him, and as he had de-
termined in his own mind to carry on
an intrigue with her, he cultivated the
friendship of her husband with the
utmost assiduity, and succeeded in his
progress with him, even beyond his
most sanguine expectations. In the


mean time, Mr. Birdlove perceived the
growing intimacy between our hero
and his wife, but so far from disap-
proving of it, or expressing a desire to
check it, he seemed disposed to give
every encouragement to it, and for
this purpose left them repeatedly toge-
ther, smiled at their occasional fami-
liarities, and seemed perfectly happy
to perceive their mutual attentions.
Mr. Birdlove had for some days had
a run of ill luck, and had lost an im-
mense sum,nearly the whole of the pro-
perty which he could dispose of; and,
mentioning his unfortunate losses to
Ormond, the latter, rather with a de-
sign to promote his views on his wife,
than from motives of friendship, im-
mediately offered him the loan of ten
thousand pounds to retrieve his ill for-
tune, an offer which Mr. Birdlove
accepted with the most extravagant
expressions of gratitude; and from


this moment their connection became
more closely cemented ; and our hero
obtained more frequent opportunities
of improving his intercourse with the
wife of the man he had assisted, and
who seemed disposed to allow him the
full freedom of remunerating himself
for his liberality, by making his at-
tacks upon her honour.
During the progress of his intimacy
with Mr. Birdlove, Ormond had been
much less at his lodgings than ever,
and had by degrees appeared to with-
draw his friendship from his old friend
and companion, Trimbelk This
change of conduct the latter had no-
ticed, and had once or twice slightly
mentioned it to our hero, who had
always an excuse ready for his beha-
viour, and had thus contrived for
some time to keep him in good hu-
mour. One day, however, when Or-
mond entered his lodgings, Trimbell


had not reached home, but in about
half an hour, he entered bloody and
much bruised ; and, on the former
inquiring into the reason of such ap-
pearance, he replied in a very surly
tone, that he was the cause of this new
disgrace, as well as of the ducking
he had received but a little while be-:
fore, and he was resolved to leave him
rather than submit to any new morti-
fications.
Our hero, startled at this speech,
expressed his sorrow that any miscon-
duct of his should have reduced him
to such a plight, and intreated him
to moderate his anger, and inform him
of the circumstance of which he com-
plained ; and declared he would spend
half his fortune, rather than see his
friend so abused and disfigured, with-
out punishing those who had commit-
ted such an assault.
Somewhat pacified with this speech.


Trimbell proceeded to state, that as
lie had attended the gaming house that
morning, he perceived a gentleman
whispering to two or three others by
iiis side, and looking earnestly on him,
and that immediately all the party
directed their attention towards him.
He had some confused recollection of
the person who had first drawn his no-
tice, but could not say when or where
he had seen him. In a few minutes*
however, these gentlemen moved from
their seats, and went from table to ta-
ble, round the room, whispering to
the persons they approached, until at
length, they had gone completely
through the whole circle, and Trim-
bell on a sudden found that every man
had assumed a striking coolness to-
wards him, and shunned his ad-
vances.
v Astonished at this conduct, he at-
tempted to learn the reason of it, but


no one thought proper to pay much
attention to him ; when he determined
to ask of these gentlemen who had so
particularly noticed him, what were
the motives which induced them to fix
their attention so particularly on him,
but on turning about to carry his reso-
lution into effect, he found, to his com-
plete mortification and astonishment,
that they had left the place ; and as he
found the general reserve increasing,
rather than the contrary, he deter-
mined to follow their example, and
w alked off.
All the morning, he endeavoured to
call to mind the features of the person
whom he had some idea of, but he
could not possibly recollect when
or where he had seen him. He re-
solved, however, to find out, by some
means, what had been said respect-
ing him to cause such a sudden altera-
tion in the conduct of those toward


him, who had uniformly, until now,
been on terms of familiarity.
Accordingly, he went to take a
walk on the Steyne, hoping to meet
someone of his acquaintance alone,
and to prevail on him to communicate
what had been said ; but he had been
only a few minutes on the promenade,
when he perceived the same party of
gentlemen within a little distance of
him. Somewhat startled at this cir-
cumstance, he began to consider what
measure to adopt; but he resolved,
without much hesitation, as he saw a
friend approaching him who had not
yet been informed on the subject, to
prevail on him to accompany him,
and ask the strangers what they meant
by their conduct. Having, therefore,
divulged the nature of the occurrence
to his friend, they went up to the
party, and Triinbell, addressing him-
self to the gentleman, whom he sup-


posed he knew, begged to be informed
of'his name, and his motives in mak-
ing him the subject of his remarks in
the rooms. No sooner had he propos-
ed this question, than all the gentle-
men burst into a horse laugh, and the
one who had been addressed, replied :
—“ Why my good fellow, have you so
soon forgot the ducking you received
a little while since, for attempting to
carry off my sister,” and then, looking
at Trimbell’s friend, he added, “ I
suppose, Sir, by your appearing in
company with this man, that you are
not aware of his being a wretch who
only subsists by gaming, and preying
on other people.”
Thunderstricken at this sudden
meeting, Trimbell slunk away, but
a crowd having assembled, and the
gentlemen hallooing after him as he
ran, 64 a sharper, a sharper,” he was
immediately assailed by a shower of


stones, which had reduced him to this
terrible situation, and he was fearful
that the mob had discovered his lodg-
ings, as some of them were not very
distant when he entered.
Language can but feebly describe
the sensations of Ormond, on hearing
this account. When he considered
himself so far removed from all danger
of discovery, when he supposed him-
self out of the reach of all those whom
he had injured or insulted, to learn
that one of his most bitter enemies
was at hand, and would probably
soon discover his residence. This was
mortifying in the extreme, not only as
operating to prevent his re-appearance
in public for some time, but as likely
to throw an obstacle of a serious na-
ture in the way of his designs upon
Mrs, Birdlove ; since her husband be-
ing in the habit of attending regularly
at the rooms, would of course be-


come acquainted with tho disgrace
which Trimbell had endured, and of
the share which he himself had borne
in the punishment alluded to.
These considerations preyed much
on our hero’s mind ; and a thousand
times did he inwardly curse Miss Ser-
grove, and every one who belonged to
her. Totally at a loss what method
to pursue, whether to absent himself
from Mr. Birdlove’s altogether, and
under cover of the night to take his
flight back to London, or whether
boldly to venture to his usual haunts,
and to turn, off the whole as a mere
effect of unsuccessful gallantry, he
was long unable to determine. At
length, however, he considered that
the latter would be most in character,
and that, as Birdlove was under con-
siderable obligations to him, he would
be the more ready to pass over the
occurrence in the way he wished.
VOL. 111, i


But it was necessary also to pacify
poor Trimbell, who sat overwhelmed
with spleen and mortification; and as
Ormond found him an extremely con-
venient companion, not unwilling to
assist him in any of his diabolical
schemes, he was ill disposed to lose
him, especially on such an emergency
as this. He, therefore began to com-
miserate his situation, and to vow
that his faithful adherence to him
should be liberally rewarded ; and as
he was aware that his recent ill suc-
cesses at play, had completely reduced
him, he begged his immediate accept-
ance of a thousand pound note, and
agreed to enter into a bond on the
next day, to settle a similar sum on
him annually.
Trimbell who had previously de-
clared his intention to go directly to
London, became soothed by this libe-
rality ; and forgetting his injuries and


shame, embraced Ormond, and de-
clared, that in spite of every mortifi-
cation he would follow his fortunes as
long as he was able to render him ser-
vice. And on this compliance and re-
conciliation, the two friends deter-
mined to enjoy themselves, and, ac-
cordingly, remained at home for the
rest of the evening, and stuck to the
bottle with such spirit and perse-
verance, that they soon lost sight of
their awkward situations, and in a
few hours became as completely in-
toxicated. as ever they had been in
company with Sir Philip Wrong, at
their old house in Somers-town. Hav-
ing at length drank themselves into
that state of happiness which arises
from the total forgetfulness of care,
they retired to their separate apart-
ments, although their egress was not
made without some serious difficulties,
and the danger of overturning every
i 2


thing they passed by, as well as of
precipitating themselves in an opposite
direction to that which they wished
and endeavoured to take.


CHAP. XXIV.
A Conquest and its Consequence .
On the following morning Trimbell
agreed to remain in their apartment
throughout the day, in order to avoid
a repetition of the mortifications of
the preceding day ; and our hero, who
had explained his views with respect
to Mrs. Birdlove, and his progress
with her, as well as his loan to her hus-
band, promised to return to dinner,
and to keep his friend company dui>
ing the whole evening.
* 8


Ormond thought it necessary to be
thus accommodating to Trimbell, as
he had discovered in him the preced-
ing day, a disposition to leave him,
which had never before this period
been evinced, and the symptoms had
much alarmed him, as he was attach-
ed to his friend, not from the disin-
terested motives of pure friendship,
but because he esteemed both his
active services and his advice. If
Trimbell were to quit him at this mo-
ment, he would in all probability be
obliged to relinquish his designs on
Mrs. Birdlove, as the former having
become acquainted with her husband,
was extremely serviceable in detain-
ing him at the rooms, or drawing him
away to other engagements, in order
to afford our hero the more time, and
the greater opportunity of prosecut-
ing his villainous designs. He had
considered this well, and he resolved


rather to make any concessions than
to allow himself to be deprived of his
friend, under present circumstances 4
when his assistance had almost be-
come indispensable.
Having therefore made this mutual
agreement, our hero wrapped himself
up closely, so as to completely dis-
guise himself, slunk away from his
lodgings, and soon reached the house
©f rßirdlove, whom he found still at
home. As soon as he entered, the
latter accosted him, and asked, in
a tone of surprise, what it was that
he had heard buzzed about respecting
him in the rooms. Our hero being
prepared for the question, without
hesitation, dressed up the narrative of
Trimbell to suit his purpose, and
added, that the whole originated in
a trivial affair of gallantry, with a
vulgar tradesman’s daughter, and
that he merited the mortification he
i 4


had been obliged to submit to, for
having so far debased himself as to
make honourable proposals to a girl in
her situation* although it was merely
intended to pave the way for the more
complete accomplishment of his de-
signs.
As soon as he had made this expla-
nation, Birdlove thanked him for re-
lieving his mind from an apprehension
that he had been guilty of some
crime, but as it was nothing more
than such a trifling affair, he should
make a point of explaining the cir-
cumstances to his friends, and of point-
ing out to them the situation of the
person, who, under the disguise of a
gentleman, had thus officiously in-
truded himself on their notice, and
attempted to interrupt their enjoy-
ments.
Soon after this conversation Mr.
Birdlove went out, and Ormond en-
tering Mrs. Birdlove’s boudoir, im


mediately proceeded to inquire it she
had heard of the ridiculous occur-
rence of the preceding day, and when
she replied in the affirmative ; he en-
tered into a story similar to that w hich
he had palmed upon her husband,
and treated the whole affair with the
utmost nonchalance. When she had
heard the narrative, she burst into a
fit of laughter, and wondered people
in vulgar situations could presume to
interfere in the pursuits of men so
much superior to themselves ; and
dare to attempt to stigmatize then-
characters, who were so far above the
reach of their unjust and impotent
malice. When she said this, she paid
some compliments to Ormond on the
o-allantry of his disposition, which, she
said, notwithstanding their close inti-
macy, she had never discovered to
have such a preponderances his com*
position.
I 5


Orifiond was not insensible to this
hint, and in the coarse of the morn-
ing’s visit, he made such rapid pro-
gress, that when he took his leave,
they parted much better satisfied with
each other than they had ever been
before, from the first moment of their
acquaintance; and our hero, on his
return to his apartments, soon, by
his ungovernable transports, revealed
to Trimbell the complete success which
had crow ned his designs, and the com-
pensation lie had thus received for the
unlucky termination of his last adven-
ture.
From this time, the intimacy be-
tween our hero and Mrs. Birdlove as*
sumed an aspect altogether different
to that w hich originally distinguished
it. Their intrigues were frequent*
and so little care taken to conceal their
predilection for each other, that a
much less vigilant husband than Bird


love must have been blind indeed not
to have discovered it. It did not,
however, exactly square with his
views to say much in the present state
of the business, and he, therefore,
contented himself with giving direc-
tions to two of his domestics in whom
he could confide, to watch the mo-
tions of the happy couple, and to in-
form him when they should have ob-
tained any certain information on the
subject.
While this scheme was ripening for
the entrapment of our hero, he still
continued cautiously to avoid being
seen in public, taking care to go out
and return home under the cover of
night or of some disguise, while Trim-
bell was compelled to remain at their
apartments, and amuse himself with
his own reflections, or in any other
Way he thought proper; and owing
to these precautions, and the endea


vours of Mr. Birdlove, who studied
to represent the whole to his friends as
a mere affair of gallantry, the impres-
sion which had been made, and the
clamour excited by it at the first, gra-
dually began to susbsidc.
In a very short time, the intrigues
of Mrs. Birdlove and Ormond be-
came so notorious that every one was
conversing on the subject, in all pub-
lic, as well as private parties. Des-
pising every appearance of even com-
mon delicacy, they went together for
excursions, remaining nights and days
absent from their residence, and ap-
peared in every respect as husband
and wife. Mr. Birdlove was neither
blind nor inattentive to this conduct,
but he had vigilant persons on the
watch, and as soon as he could gain
possession of sufficient facts for his
purpose, he had resolved upon the
manner in which he should act. Be


ing however, under pecuniary obli-
gations to our hero, he did not chuse
to alter his behaviour to him in any
respect, but continued to behave to-
wards him with the utmost apparent
cordiality of friendship.
Thus passed the residue of the sea-
son, until the period arrived, when
the whole circle of friends determined
to quit the lessening attractions of this
fashionable resort, and to return once
more to the scenes of the metropolis,
and to mingle again amongst “ the
busy haunts of man.” Our hero felt
something like apprehension at the
prospect of his future career, he knew
well the danger to which he should be
continually exposed, while in the city,
of being discovered ; and he had not
less dread of the affection of Lady
Augusta and his relatives, than of the
evidently rooted enmity of the Ser-
grove family, to whom he had given


too much just cause for pursuing him
with the most rancorous hostility. The
idea, therefore, of being found out by
any of these persons,, greatly diminish-
ed the satisfaction he would otherwise
have experienced, from a reappear-
ance in the circles of fashionable dis-
sipation ; and a fit of uneasy presenti-
ment took possession of his mind, that
the future scenes of his life would be
more chequered with trouble and dis-
appointment, and less productive of
gratification than any of those which,
he had witnessed heretofore.
Trimbell’s conversation and gloomy
manners, too, did not tend to dimi-
nish this prepossession, as he was con-
tinually harping on the dangers which
might await them in London, on ac-
count of the notoriety they had gain-
ed ; not that the fashionables of high
life would look on them with a less fa-
vourable eye, on account of their


vices, since in their estimation, those
vices would have only added an ho-
nourable sort of celebrity to their
names, and have qualified them more
perfectly for associations with persons
of rank, but Trimbell dreaded lest
Ormond should again be seized,
through the vigilance of his friends,
and carried away from the metropolis-
entirely ; or that the Sergroves might
again find them out, and they should
perhaps once more be condemned to
undergo the painful and ignominious
punishment, the remembraneeofwhich
still festered and rankled in their bo-
soms.
But the hour for shaking off these
doubts and fears had arrived, and,
as it was impossible for either Ormond
or his friend to drag on a miserable
existence; remote from the noise and
vices of London, it was determined, let
the cost be what it would, to return


thither, and to act with as much cau-
tion as possible, without abridging
their enjoyments.
A day or two after this final resolu-
tion was adopted, the friends were
once more in London, and as some
little seclusion was necessary, they en-
tered again on their old apartments in
Somers town, until they could with
greater safety mix in a more busy and
fashionable part of the city. Here,
for a time their amusements were ex-
tremely limited, Ormond frequenting
no place but Mr. Birdlove’s house in
Tichfield street, and poor Trimbell,
in sad and moping melancholy, re-
maining at home, or solacing himself
with a gloomy solitary ramble through
fields, where nothing but nature was
to be seen.
In the mean time, the domestics, who
had received their cue from Mr. Bird-
love, witnessed such familiarities on


the part of Ormond towards their
mistress, and such evident returns of
love from her, as left no doubt on their
minds as to the-extent of their con-
nection, and they accordingly com-
municated their information to their
master, who received it with addi-
tional pleasure, as on that morning,
our hero had for the remind-
ed him of the loan with which he had
accommodated him, purely, as he
expressed himself, on the score ot
friendship, and of his wish that the
liquidation might be as soon as possi-
ble. This request came like a thun-
derbolt on Birdlove, who so far from
having retrieved his former losses by
his new adventures, had plunged him-
self into a more difficult and inextrica-
ble dilemma, and, instead of being
able to repay the loan, bad only a few
hundreds of it remaining, and was


without any other resource in the
world.
It was not to be wondered at, there-
fore, that he immediately formed his
determination to pursue his revenge
upon our hero for making such a de-
mand ; and when his servants brought
him the grateful intelligence of the
proofs of his criminal connection with
Mrs. Birdlove, he could ill conceal the
satisfaction which the information con-
veyed to his mind. He deemed it
prudent, however, to suppress his feel-
ings, and having written down the
substance of the narrative of his ser-
vants, he set off, without delay, in
search of his attorney, to take mea-
sures with him for the punishment of
a man whom he considered as having
grossly insulted him, not by the se-
duction of his wife, but by his de-
mand of this repayment of the loan


with which he had accommodated
him on a former occasion.
In a day or two afterwards our hern
received the appalling information of
an action being laid against him by
Birdlove, for criminal conversation
with his wife. Without a moment s
delay he proceeded to consult his at-
torney on the occasion, and learned
with regret, that if Birdlove could
bring forth such proofs of the com-
mission of the crime, as could not be
rebutted, it was extremely probable
that he could recover damages to the
amount of the sum which he had bor-
rowed of Ormond.
For the first time the idea of this
action being merely a scheme to evade
the payment of a first debt, flashed
on the mind of our hero, but, alas!
he had no proofs to bear him out in
this suspicion, and although he felt a
perfect confidence of the justice of his
i


apprehension, he should for want of
evidence be compelled to relinquish
the thought. Being unable to obtain
any consolation from this interview
with his legal friend and adviser, he
returned to Trimbell, muttering ven-
geance in his heart, and cursing his
own short-sighted folly, in having
commenced an intrigue for which he
should probably be obliged to pay so
dearly. Trimbell joined him in his
curses, and swore that he believed
they were doomed to feel nothing, in
tuture, but disappointments and mor-
tifications, as a set oil to their past
pleasures.
When Mrs. Birdlove was informed
ot her husband's conduct in institut-
ing the action against Ormond, she
burst out into a strain of bitter re-
proach against him for his base con-
duct, and hinted, as our hero was the
cause of her ruin, for so she pleased


to call it, and as she should be com-
pelled to leave her present home, it
was incumbent on him to provide for
her future support, and that she was
ready to accompany him that moment,
and live with him on the same foot-
ing as she had hitherto done. Our
hero, unused to resist temptation, im-
mediately complied with her request,
and, after ordering her cloaths to be
packed, and sent to his lodgings, she
entered a coach with him, and they
soon arrived at those apartments which
she had chosen for the scene of her
future depravity.


CHAPTER XXVIII.
A Separation and a Disaster.
At one moment of fury, Ormond
would determine to arrest Birdlove,
and to throw him into prison, but
the construction which the world
might put upon this transaction was
so uncertain, that he could not bring
himself to agree to such a measure;
and when the heat of his vexation
had a little subsided, he determined
patiently to await the issue of the
trial; which, fortunately, would come
on in the course of a week. In the
mean time, he sought to drown every


unpleasant reflection, by resorting to
drinking, and to the enjoyments af-
forded by a private gaming-table,
which was not more than halt an
hour’s walk from his lodgings.
Here he and Trimbell gradually
found a recompence for their past res-
traints, and soon formed a connection
with a party who regularly attended
the house, although by no means of
the first respectability; since it soon
became evident from the nature of
the play, that this was merely a school
for sharpers. At the first discovery of
this fact, Ormond secretly resolved to
absent himself from such a scene, but
Trimbell speedily prevailed upon him
to relinquish his design, by stating,
“ that it appeared in his situation ex-
tremely desirable to become acquaint-
ed with a secret, which in case of any
sudden shifting ef fortune, might
prove invaluable to them.” As our


hero was not very squeamish in his
notions of honour and integrity, he
suffered himself to be prevailed upon
by this argument, and in the course
of a few days, with the sacrifice of
about a thousand pounds he became
as complete an adept in the mystery
of cheating by play, as any one about
him.
The trial which was now at hand,
for a time occupied our hero s atten-
tion, and he w r as obliged to sacrifice a
portion of his time to his counsel and
attorney, who patched up the best
defence which the state of circumstan-
ces and the shortness of the time
would allow, but neither of them
gave him any hopes of escaping, with-
out the loss of at least* the ten thou-
sand pounds he had lent to Mr. Bird-
love.
The morning at length arrived which
was to determine a question that had


auitated the breast of Ormond much,
but he had completely prepared him-
self for the event, by consoling him-
self with the idea, that what he should
lose in money, he should amply make
up for in the great acquisition which
w ould thus be gained to his celebrity
in the eyes of the fashionable world,
although he had some fears, lest it
might also operate as a clue to his dis-
covery, for those, who he was con-
vinced, w ere continually on the watch
for him.
When the trial commenced, our hero
felt a revival of his agitation, and as
the evidence was gradually examined
which divulged the criminality of his
conduct, his inward emotions increas-
ed. He had, however, the prudence
and the pow er to suppress them, and
listened to the different depositions
with apparent calmness. W hen the
whole of the witnesses had been called,
vol. hi h


Ormond’s counsel endeavoured to im-
press the mind of the court that the
whole trial was the result of a scheme
on the part of the plaintiff to defraud
his client out of the loan he had fa-
voured him with, under circumstan-
ces of extreme distress : and that this
action would probably never have been
laid, had not our hero demanded the
liquidation of that debt. He also ad-
verted to the conduct of Birdlove, in
leaving the parties together continu-
ally, even after he was aware of their
guilty conduct, and, after setting this
trap, ordering his domestics to be on
the watch, in order that they might
catch the defendant unawares, so as
to have sufficient proofs of his guilt.
He contended, from these circumstan-
ces, that there ought to be a verdict
for the defendant. .
Ormond had felt himself progres-
sively animated with hopes of thwart


ing the intentions of his antagonist, as
he iistened to the persuasive eloquence
of him on whom he relied for his de-
fence. He found himself convinced
upon every point which his counsel
had advanced, and he flattered him-
self that every person who had to de-
cide upon the merits of the case be-
fore them, could not avoid entertain-
ing* a similar conviction. When his
counsel had concluded his speech, our
hero returned him thanks in a low
voice, for the ability which he had
displayed in his behalf, and said he
was satisfied what must be the result.
After the case had been concluded,
the jury withdrew to consider their
verdict, which Ormond confidently
predicted would be favourable to his
wishes; and, after being absent about
ten minutes, they returned a verdict,
in spite of the eloquence unsupported
by evidence, which had beendisplay-
ii 2


ed on the other side, for the plaintiff,
damages, ten thousand pounds.
Words are altogether inadequate to
describe the feelings of disappoint-
ment which overwhelmed Ormond,
on hearing this unexpected decision.
Tor some moments he was disposed to
doubt the evidence of his senses ; and,
turning to his counsel, with the expec-
tation of seeing him similarly affected,
his surprise was not a little increased,
on perceiving his learned advocate
turning over with the utmost coolness
the leaves of anew brief, on the sub-
ject of the next trial, and too much
engaged to listen to the murmurings
of our hero, who, maddened with rage
and fury, left his seat, and hastily de-
parted for his lodgings, cursing in his
own heart, judge, jury, counsel and
Birdlove, who had thus completely
laid him under the lash for his intrigu-
ing disposition.


Arrived at his lodgings, he threw
himself into a chair, and Mrs. .Bird-
love and Trimbell soon gathered from
his incoherencies, the information
which he was not sufficiently collected
to give them in a more proper and
connected form. They immediately
began to console him for his disap-
pointment, but their efforts were long
vain, at length, however, he consent-
ed to become more composed, and re-
covered himself sufficiently to cell
the whole of the trial, as well as its
uufortunate results. By degrees he
gradually became restored to cheer-
fulness, but his pride was deeply mor-
tified by his recent defeat, and he re-
solved as the most effectual method of
driving it from his recollection, to
plunge into a thousand times greater
excesses than ever.
The same evening, with a view to
carry this resolution into effect, he
u 3


took Trimbell, and resorted to their
old toffee house, where their old friend
the baronet, presided; and, a few
hours’exercise at the bottle, so com-
pletely dissipated every unpleasant re-
collection, that they reeled home
again, as happy as it is possible to
conceive, scarcely sensible of present,
much less of the past circumstances.
This plan of drinking was kept up
with great spirit and Vegulaiity, to the
great disgust and mortification of Mrs.
Birdlove, who was compelled to en-
dure the most galling hints and insi-
nuations from Ormond, as lie never
failed to remind her frequently of the
great sum she had cost him, and taunt-
ed her incessantly on her conduct in
proving unfaithful to her husband,
and the probability that she would
serve him one day a similar trick.
Mrs. Birdlove, who was not deficient
in spirit, would reply to these remarks


in a most revengeful manner, until,
after a time, the contests became so
constant and acrimonious, that a se-
paration was mutually agreed on, and
Ormond promised to allow her three
hundred pounds per annum ; ana to
leave her the possession oi the apart-
ments which they then occupied.
Ever since the mortifying punish-
ment which the mob had
our hero, he had wound up his mind
to a desperate pitch oi frenzy, and
this disposition had been confirmed
irrevocably by his recent defeat, in
the case of Birdlove. x He resolved
now, no longer to remain half a rake,
as he expressed himself occasionally,
but to plunge at once into the most
extreme habits of debauchery; lie de-
termined once more to associate with
the gamester, the infidel, the debau-
chee of fashion, to prey upon all man-
kind, and to make womankind tk?
h 4


victims of his brutal prey, and to
shine at once, with unprecedented no-
toriety, the prince of villains. He
was aware that the. present moment
was highly favourable to his re-ap-
pearance in fashionable life, since the
recent trial, and the elopement of
Mrs. Birdlove with him, had given
him a great degree of celebrity and
attraction in those circles to which he
intended to return. He had learnt
from the sharpers with whom lie had
recently associated, the art of defraud-
ing his fellow-gamesters, and urged
by his own frenzied disposition, as
well as the advice of Trim bell, lie
determined without delay to put his
lessons in practice, and to accumulate
by knavery, a sum sufficient to reim-
burse him for what he had so foolishly
and lavishly expended in amorous
pursuits, which from the first would
have teemed w ith danger, in the esti-


Hiation of men who were not less dis-
posed to intrigue, but more wary in
the mode of proceeding.
Accordingly, .on the morning after
the separation had been resolved on 9
our hero and Trimbell took their leave
of Mrs. Birdlove, a parting which
was not altogether unattended by some
symptoms of regret' in both parties.
The sensation was, however, but mo-
mentary, and the two friends set out
from Somers town, fuliy determined
to procure a lodging as near the future
scene of action as possible. After
rambling a short time through St.
James's street, they discovered some
apartments to let in the house where
Col. Jameson had once lived, (Or-
mond’s old residence being full) and
on enquiring they soon agreed for
them, and on entering upon them,
found themselves in the very rooms
where the scene of Ormond’s seduc-
n 5


tion of the once amiable and now de-
parted Maria, had taken place ; and
so unsusceptible was he of any pnag,
that he began to jest on the singu-
larity of the circumstances.
Having thus taken possession of
their new residence, Ormond and
Trimbell soon entered ini o their haunts
and found out the companions which
were so natural to them. They were
received with great cordiality, and in
a day or two had shaken off the little
apprehension which had accompanied
them into these associations. They
speedily filled again those seats at the
gaming-table which they had former-
ly occupied with so much eclat, and
found themselv es restored to that hap-
piness which had so long been banish-
ed from their breasts.
For some time our hero practiced
his schemes upon the credulity of those
who played with him, with uninter


rupted success, and in the course of a
short period became indeed a most
dexterous sharper. His luck was con-
sequently unvarying, and he never
left the tables without having pre-
viously levied heavy contributions
upon every purse, which he had the
opportunity to touch. Trimbell, at a
different table played off the same
scheme, and with a success little in-
ferior to that which crowned the
efforts of his friend. Being known to
all who frequented this scene of dissi-
pation, they passed unsuspected ; and
indeed, had they been unknown, the
fact of their being persons of acknow-
ledged property would have excul-
pated them, in a great measure, from
any charge of having played unfairly,
It is true, the deceptions which he had
practised were known, but they were
looked upon as merely innocent stra-
tagems to deceive that part of crea


tion, which, according to the fashion-
able creed, it is highly honourable to
seduce from the paths of virtue, and
afterw ards to desert.
One unfortunate morning, however,
as Trimbell was engaged in deep play
with a person of quality, whom he
had already stripped of very large
sums of money, the latter rendered
extremely petulant and suspicious by
his repeated ill-luck, kept a strict
w atch upon his antagonist, and actu-
'illy, at length discovered him in the
very act of practicing his unfair de-
ceptions. The manoeuvre was also
witnessed by another gentleman, who
was standing at the back of the in-
jured persons, and Trimbell was ac-
cordingly, accused of being a sharper.
On this charge, he felt himself ex-
tremely confused, but recollecting
himself, he assumed an air of conse-
quence, and asked how any one dared


to bring forward such an accusation
against him; but when the second
gentleman came forward to confirm
the fact, he was compelled to be silent,
and to return the ill-gotten treasure he
had plundered from his antagonist,
and to submit to be kicked out of the
room.
In the mean time, Ormond, stupi-
fied with confusion on hearing the
term sharper applied to his friend, at
first evinced a determination to defend
him from the imputation; but finding
the charge was too clearly established
to be resisted, he prudently held his
peace, and silently agreed to the sen-
tence which was immediately executed
upon him. But ill could he conceal
the impression this circumstance had
made upon his mind, and it had so
affected him that he w ould have left
the room, but being, at the moment
•f the interruption, engaged with


gaged with a gentleman in play, on a
considerable risk, he was not able to
secede from the game; he therefore re-
turnedto the table, but his feelings hav-
ing rendered him less attentive to his
actions, and the behaviour of Trimbell
making every one suspicious of him,
it was long before the conclusion of
of the game that he was detected in
precisely the same attempt to cheat as
Trimbell had been before him. In
consequence of this discovery the same
sentence of excommunication was
passed upon him, and in a few minutes
lie also was turned with the utmost in-
dignity into the street.
Returning home, maddened again
with mortification, and frenzied with
the magnitude of his own feelings, he
joined Trimbell in the most terrible
imprecation against fate, and each
other. Ormond accused his friend of
being the proximate cause of thisdis


grace, and cursed his awkward stu-
pidity, which had led to the detection
and punishment of both ; while the
latter charged our hero with a derelic-
tion of the duty he owed to a friend,
in deserting him the moment when he
was about to be used with such un-
precedented ignominy. After, how-
ever, about an hour had passed in mu-
tual accusations and recrimination,
the two friends determined to waive
their personal disputes, and having
come to a reconciliation, they began to
consider what course was best to pur-
sue, under this new accumulation of
ignominy and mortification. The cri-
sis was not altogether novel in its na-
ture, since they had been recently
accustomed to endure disgrace ; but
this case was of much more import-
ance than any which had preceded it,
since it would be the cause of their
complete expulsion from fashionable


society, and a blow so severe as this
they had never before met with, and
sullen and sad, they parted and re-
tired to their chambers, w ithout be-
ing able in the least degree to console
themselves.


CHAPTER XXVIII.
The End of Debauchery.
After this discovery of their nefa-
rious conduct, our hero and Trimbell
once more attempted to emerge into
fashionable life. They went together
to a route, where they had been usual-
ly received with cordiality ; but, in a
few minutes after their entrance, a
whisper ran through the room, every
eye was turned on them, and present-
ly an intimation was given to them,
that as only persons of honour were


admitted there, they were requested
to absent themselves, since it had ap-
peared from some recent occurrences,
that they were merely sharpers.
Thus driven from their last resource,
their final hope being dashed from
their grasp, they reluctantly consent-
ed to quit for ever a society in which
they could no longer be permitted to
mingle ; and as they were compelled
to leave the more refined paths of dis-
sipation, nothing remained for them
but to fly to those pursuits which had
for some time past become gradually
more pleasant to them.
From this moment, therefore, they
bade adieu to fashionable life, and
agonized with the reflections of their
past conduct and situation, they flew
to drinking, as the grand and unfail-
ing panacea, and sought by drowning
recollection, to restore their‘former
happiness. But, alas! they had mis


taken the path, and in seeking to
escape from one evil plunged them-
selves headlong into another of a
much more fatal tendency ; the mo-
ments of insensibility were perhaps
such as they called happy, because
then they felt no stings of remorse,
—no biting remembrances of the rank
they once held in society, they forgot
the past, and thought not of the fu-
ture, But when the fumes of wine
had evaporated, when reason had re-
sumed* her throne, and the return of
sobriety had brought with it a return
of memory, of painful sensations, and
of misery ; thin they were both torn
with the fury of contending emotions,,
and every symptom of peace and
consolation was banished from them.
Our hero particularly felt himself a
prey to w retchedness; in vain, he ex-
changed the tavern for the brothel,
the variety of his gratifications brought


very little ease to his excruciating
agony ; and at length, it became evi-
dent that his health had .been under-
mined by the repeated attacks of de-
bauchery. His eyes had now lost
their fire, his cheeks their colour, his
flesh had wasted away, and he ap-
peared nothing more than the mere
shadow of his former self. Nervous
disorders had long agitated him, and
these had now given way to others of
a more mortal complexion ; his sleep
was little, and that little iMidisturbed
and unrefreshing; his appetite had
completely left him ; his voice became
hollow, and his gait feeble. Yet, so,
far from being sensible of his situa-
tion, he plunged into still greater ex-
cesses; and when at length every
voice around him was loud in com-
misseration of his wretched and ghast-
ly appearance, he buoyed himself up
in the hope that they were mistaken in


their opinions of his situation, that
thousands around appeared much
worse than himself, and that having
recourse to the bottle, would certain-
ly restore the brilliance to his eye,
the glow of health to his cheeks, and
his accustomed vivacity to his manner
and conversation.
Thus did Ormond deceive himself
into an idea that his health was not in
a state of decay, but that his consti-
tution remained in the same unim-
paired state, in which it was at his
departure from the country ; but yet
thoughts would sometimes cross his
mind, of the possibility of his days
being approaching their termination,
but the agony produced by the reflec-
tion was so excessive and intoleiable,
that he could not entertain it for a
moment, but chose rather to drown
his senses altogether, than to give way
to what he would call at all other


times, a childish apprehension, and
unworthy one who so intrepidly fol*
lowed the bent of his own inclinations,
and who had a soul not to be terrified
at such foolish notions.
But the moment was fast approach-
ing when those delusions would lose
their influence, and the dreadful re-
ality burst in all its horrors on his
guilty mind. He had long continued
to fill himself up with empty notions
of his speedy recovery, and unwilling
to believe himself really ill, exerted
himself far beyond his ability, in
order to keep up an appearance of
health, by being regular in his at-
tendance at the taverns which he fre-
quented. At length, however, not-
withstanding all his efforts, he found
himself one morning after a dreadful
debauch the night before, unable to
rise from his bed, although he made
the attempt several times. Alarmed


at this symptom, he called Trimbell,
and with a trembling voice, informed
him that he feared he was not very
well, as he found he had not sufficient
strength to rise from his bed ; and he
should wish to have some medical
man called in, to check and remove
his indisposition, before it could have
time to become rooted and difficult to
be eradicated.
The dreadful appearance of our
hero had stricken terror and appre-
hension into the mind of Trimbell, as
soon as he had entered the room, and
the moment he had heard of his ex-
cessive weakness, his fears increased
to the highest pitch. He immediately
felt an involuntary shivering, and as
he thought of the danger of his friend,
he began to imagine, that as he had
followed so closely in his steps, it was
probable that he also might expe-
rience an attack of a similar nature.


This idea had so forcible an effect
upon him, that he determined at the
instant, never to get intoxicated again ;
but in case of Ormond’s death, which
he considered as certain, to reform
himself and for ever quit a course of
life, which he now felt assured, could
only lead to such consequences.
When the medical man had exa-
mined the state of our hero’s consfitu-
tution, he found him in a most dan-
gerous situation, and felt a confidence
that he was already beyond the reach
of a remedy. When he perceived,
however, from his levity and con-
strained spirits that he was' by no
means sensible of the least danger, he
took care to avoid exciting his ap-
prehensions, and flattered him with
false hopes of a speedy recovery. To
Trimbell he was more candid, and in
a few words, banished any hope which
he might still have been induced to


entertain, candidly confessing to him,
that the recovery of Ormond was an
event altogether beyond the bounds of
possibility, as liis constitution was
completely undermined, and a few
days at the most must terminate his
existence. He advised Trimbell to
warn his friend of liis danger, which
the latter promised to do.
As soon as he had determined on
this step, he entered the bed-room of
Ormond, and affectionately taking
him by the hand, enquired of him
what the physician had said of his
situation. The latter immediately re-
plied with a careless cheerfulness,
that he had told him he would soon be
completely restored to his health, on
which Trimbell proceeded to state to
him, with a tremulous voice, and
tearful eyes, the real opinion w hich he
had received as to his disorder, and
the certainty of its ending fatally.
vol. hi. k


On hearing this awful intelligence,
our hero’s courage entirely forsook
him. He knew his friend too well to
suppose he would thus alarm him, if
he had not sufficient grounds for his
communication ; and the idea that he
must never again expect to mingle in
the scenes which had afforded him so
much gr a t ification —-Ihat he must ne-
ver again behold those companions
who had been the witnesses of his
gaiety and dissipation ; but that he
must fulfil all their gloomy predic-
tions, and, in all probability, never
quit the bed on Which he lay, until
he should be borne from it; this idea
was too mueh for him to bear, and lie
sunk into a state of insensibility, and
lay, to all appearance lifeless, for an
hour or longer. When he revived
from this stroke, he enquired of his
friend, if it were true that he was
about to die, and on the latter shak-


ing his bead with all the marks of the
bitterest sorrow, a sudden delirium
seized the unhappy man’s brain, and
he became outrageously mad.
Trimbell having called some persons
to his assistance, left his miserable
friend in the care of a nurse, and two
men servants, and being acquainted
with the residence of his brother Hen-*
ry, delayed not a moment to set out,
and make him acquainted with Or-
mond’s dreadful state. He soon reach-
ed the bouse, and finding Henry at
home) immediately opened his sor-
rowful errand, and intreated that he
would hasten to give every assistance
in bis power to the Wretched invalid,
who would require aid only for a short
period.
On hearing this dreadful tale, all
the dormant feelings of fraternal affec-
tion were once more roused, and not-
withstanding the recollection of the


many insults he had received from our
hero, Henry resolved to lose no time
in rendering the latter part of his un-
happy brother’s time as comfortable
as it was possible. Taking Trimbell,
therefore, in his chariot, he drove to
the lodgings in St. James’s street, and
on being introduced into Ormond’s
apartment, he beheld the poor wretch
lying fatigued and overpowered by his
frantic exertions, on his bed ; and, as
he viewed his melancholy alteration,
deep sighs burst from his affectionate
breast, and streams of tears rushed
down his cheeks.
In about half an hour, Ormond
opened his eyes, and gazing with asto-
nishment round the room, beheld his
brother seated by his side. Hidinghis
face with his hands, he murmured
something in an unintelligible manner,
and with disjointed accents, about
terrible moments, injured friends,


abused wife, devils, hell, &e. After
a few moments, Henry took his hand,
and tenderly asked if there was any
thing he could like, and what advice
he had received, but Ormond was
scarcely capable of answering him,
apd the few 7 words which he attempt-
ed to utter, were not intelligible. Over-
powered by the dreadful scene, Henry
covered his face, and wept bitterly at
his unhappy brother’s terrific situ-
ation.
After some time, our hero recovered
himself sufficiently to enter into a ra-
tional conversation with his brother,
but now and then his emotions would
become too powerful for him, and he
would sink into a state of almost in-
sensibility, or assume a frenzied de-
portment. It was suggested by Hen-
ry, that their father and mother and
Lady Augusta should be sent for to
assure him of their forgiveness, and to
k 3 .


administer consolation to his dying’
moments; and Henry immediately
withdrew into another room, and writ-
ing the letters which were necessary,
dispatched a messenger instantly to
Trewby Hall, with directions to has-
ten back with every possible speed.
The residue of this melancholy day
was spent in applying all remedies
which medical ingenuity could suggest
for his bodily, and all which fraternal
affection could imagine for his mental,
ills ; and, towards the evening, our
hero fell into a deep slumber, which
continued great part of the night.
About midnight, the messenger who
had been dispatched to Trewby Hall
returned, and with him came Lady
Augusta, whose feelings would not
allow her to delay a moment, in has-
tening to execute a last sad duty for
one whom she had ever loved sincerely,
and whose image was still uncommon


monly dear to her. Mr. and Mrs.
I re why were to follow the next morn-
ing-
As soon as the amiable Lady Au-
gusta was somewhat recovered, Henry
led her into the chamber of her peni-
tent and dying husband, and when
she saw the havoc which dissipation
and disease had made in his features
and his appearanoe, she wept as
though her heart would break ; and,
it was not without great difficulty,
that Henry prevailed upon her to
leave the room without embracing
him. When she was informed, how-
ever, that there would be danger in
disturbing him, she anxiously left the
room on tip-toe, scarcely daring to
breathe, lest she might thereby be the
cause of increasing the danger of him
she loved, in spite of his ill-usage of
her.
Her wish to go into his apartment


again to watch him, was resisted by
Henry, who insisted on her taking
repose after the fatigues of her sudden
journey ; and she was at length reluc-
tantly prevailed upon, to go into a
bed-room, which was prepared for
her, where she lay down, but w ithout
inclination or power to take rest. In
order, however, to satisfy her brother
inlaw, she remained there until day
break, and then left her chamber,
and suddenly hastening into her hus-
band’s room, rushed to his side, and
in the attempt to embrace him, as
he faintly stretched out his withered
arms, swooned, and fell upon the
bed.
When she recovered, a scene took
place which language can never des-
cribe ; a scene of tenderness on the
one part, and bitter remorse on the
other; when agony and love, hope
and dismay, alternately predomi-


Rated. In a few minutes, Lady
Augusta had sincerely forgiven her
wretched husband, and expressed her
hopes, that her attentions would be
efficacious in restoring him again to
health, and the bosoms of those who
loved him. But Ormond was not
now to be flattered by any such idea,
he had received an indelible impression
On his mind, that death would be the
termination of his present illness ; and
while she addressed him in the lan-
guage of trembling hope, he fixed on
her, for the first time in his life, a look
of unutterable tenderness, and mourn-
fully shook his head, as he faiteringly
replied—“ Dearest, and most injured
woman, your hopes and affections
will be equally vain. I feel the hand
of death freezing my blood, and press-
ing down my spirits. A few hours
longer, and 1 shall cease to con-
taminate mankind by my presence


and my debaucheries, and be laid
in the horrible, chill, and gloomy
grave.”
Here his senses forsook him, and for
some time it was feared that he had
expired ; but he at length revived, just
in time to behold his much injured
parents, who had arrived, and wjere
weeping most bitterly over his dying
bed. Here another scene took place
scarcely less affecting than that which
occurred between the poor invalid and
Lady Augusta; and here again he was
assu red of the entire pardon of all he
had injured, and again he spoke in
almost unintelligible language, hi£
conviction that the moment of his dis-
solution was drawing near.
The physician w ho had hitherto at-
tended him, came in at this moment,
accompanied by another, and they
proceeded to examine the situation of
the unhappy man, not from any idea


that it could be attended with, benefit,
but merely with a view to the satis-
faction of the friends who surrounded
the bed. Their consultation was short,
and they pronounced, that it was im-
possible to say how short his sufferings
and existence might be, but that it
could not, at most exceed twenty-four
hours.
This intelligence completely extin-
guished the last spark of hope from
the bosoms of every one, and over-
whelmed with sorrow and despair,
they wept loudly round the dying Or-
mond’s bed; when, suddenly, the
gaze which he had fixed upon Lady
Augusta with unusual earnestness, had
attracted her particular notice, and
she was about to enquire tenderly
what assistance she could give him,
when, uttering a loud shriek of agony,
he leaped up from the bed, and utter-
ing an imperfect expression, while


he violently gnashed his teeth, he
struck his hand violently against the
head of his bed, and closed his eyes
for ever.


CHAP. XXX.
The Conclusion .
The sudden and terrible death of
Ormond, diffused a sad melancholy
through all his friends. Lady Augus-
ta fell into a dangerous illness, and
for some months, her life was despair-
ed of; but, at length, to the inex-
pressible joy of her friends, she -was
again restored to them.


During lier illness, the remains of
her unhappy husband had been con-
veyed to Trewby Hall, where they
"were interred with decent solemnity,
amidst the sorrow ful mournings of sur-
rounding friends. Trimbell, whose
grief was more deep than loud, could
not for a long time recover the shock
occasioned by the death of his friend,
and w hen he became restored, he pur-
sued the resolution he had before
formed, and reforming his life, be-
came, in course of time, an orna-
ment and benefit to that society
which he had once injured and preyed
upon.
By the will of Ormond, which had
been made but a few hours before the
arrival of Lady Augusta, he had left
the whole of his property to his amia-
ble w ife, w ith the exception of a con-
siderable legacy to his friend Trimbell,,


and some other very trifling bequests,
as tokens of remembrance.
Mr. and Mrs. Trewby were both
bitterly affected by the untimely fate
of a son, who had once, in the early
part of his youth, and before his in-
troduction into fashionable life, pro-
mised fairly to confer happiness in
their aged years. The shock had
stricken deeply into their hearts ; and
it required the long and most affec-
tionate efforts of Henry and Julia, to
enable them to bear against so afflict-
ing and unexpected a stroke. Time,
however, which never fails to heal the
wounds of sorrow, found an effectual
remedy for this affliction, and in the
lapse of a few months, the recollec-
tions of Ormond gradually faded, and
the pungent smart of recent sorrrows
subsided into a pensive sadness, and
then was entirely forgotten.


When Lady Augusta had recovered
from her illness, she resolved to dis-
pose of her house and furniture in Lon-
don, and to remain at Trewby Hall
during the residue of her life, as she
was determined to pass her days in no
other employment than attempting to
promote the happiness, and ease the
waning years of the aged pair, which
had so just a claim on her affection,
and towards whom she felt all the
tenderness of filial affection. Often-
times would she visit the grave of her
- H*V*v
deceased husband, and pour out the
stream of her sorrows there ; and often-
times would she sit in her chamber,
and trace from faithful memory the
scenes of days when he came to woo
her, under the mask of hypocrisy, and
when she, with joyful readiness, con- ,
signed her happiness to his keeping,
little dreaming of the sorrows which
futurity had in store for her.


Henry and Julia lived together, with
mutual and daily increasing affection,
and had the felicity to see a numerous
offspring rising to bless their riper
years, and being in a short time ena-
bled to retire from business with a very
considerable property. They retired
into Essex, and having purchased an
elegant spot in the neighbourhood of
their parent’s residence, tasted those
pleasures which spring from an inter-
course founded in the purest affection
of nature. Henry still mindful of
the fate of his unhappy brother, con-
stantly endeavoured to inculcate into
his children the necessity of the strict-
est attention to all mpjKpl and religious
duties, and to impress on them the
danger which will always attend that
laxity of principle, which is charac-
teristic of fashionable life and man-
ners ; and every piece of advice which
he gave to his sons, he concluded with


the ever-memorable words of his fa-
ther,^ —■** If you become debauched'in
principle , you will never slop short of
destruction
END.
London:
Printed by J. Dean, 57, Wardour Street.




