

ORPHÈE AUX ENFERS.
jk jDoyvnc JDpera
IN
THREE TABLEAUX AND A LAST SCENE.
BY
J. OFFENBACH.
Produced for the first time in Australia
BY
LYSTEP'S COMIC OPERA COMPANY,
On Easter Monday, April 1, 1872.
UNDER THE DIRECTION OF MR. R. STEWART,
ENTIRELY NEW SCENERY BY MR. JOHN HENNINGS.
MELBOURNE
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.


PASEE & SIMONSEN,
BILLIARD TABLE MANUFACTURERS,
125 Russell Street,
MELBOURNE.
Awarded Prize Medal Intercolonial Exhibition 1867.
ROFF, KEMP, & CO.
(of i. and j. roff)
PARLIAMENTARY COAL YARD,
CORNER OK
ALBERT AND NICHOLSON STREETS,
MELBOURNE.
WOOD, CHARCOAL, frc., SUPPLIED.


ORPHÈE AUX ENFERS.
JDpERA jSuFFE
IN
THREE TABLEAUX AND A LAST SCENE.
BY
J. OFFENBACH.
PRODUCED FOR THE FIRST TIME IN AUSTRALIA
BY
LYSTER'S OPERA BUFFE COMPANY ,
On Easter Monday, April 1, 1872.
UNDER THE DIRECTION OF MR. R. STEWART.
ENTIRELY NEW SCENERY BY MR. JOHN HENNINGS.
MELBOURNE
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.


ORPHÈE AUX ENFERS.
(The Curtain rises, discovering the Act Drop.)
Enter Public Opinion, l.
Public O. Who am I ? One to whose supreme dominion
E’en monarchs sometimes bow—Public Opinion!
Therefore, Pm—what 1 well may boast aloud of—
Your own Opinion—which, of course, you’re proud of.
Every one thinks his own opinion best;
I’m every one’s—so never mind the rest.
At once, then, to the business before us.
On this occasion I enact the Chorus.
There is not an urchin, in this learned age,
But knows that on the old Hellenic stage
The Chorus told the audience all the plot,
Whether there was one in the play—or not.
And explained what, with common observation,
They’d understand without an explanation.
But in these days of progress, I admit,
Dramas there are might puzzle folks a bit.
Plots which are twisted with such sleight of hand,
They’re things “ which no fellah can understand.”
But as the piece imported is from France,
Morality demands my surveillance.
So let the wife who would her spouse aggrieve,
Beware ! And let the husband who’d deceive
His better half, tremble ! Don’t move, sir, pray—
Pm speaking of the people in the play,
Not those who come to see it. Heaven forbid
I should do so—and help me if I did ! (hell rings)
But there’s the bell that bids the curtain rise,
(curtain rises)
And show a Grecian landscape to your eyes.
Tableau First. —A Com Field. The House of Orpheus,
E.; over the door a large board on which is written
“ Orpheus, Doctor of Music and Professor of Poetry,
Director of the Grecian Philharmonic Society. Ladies’


Schools attended. Orchestras provided for Public Balls or
Private Parties.” The Cottage of Aristceus, l. ; over the door
a hoard on which is written —“ Aristseus, Dealer in Honey,
wholesale and retail. Here and at the principal manu-
factory, Mount Hymettus. N.B. —The Trade supplied.
Honeymoons made to order at the shortest notice.” Behind
the standing corn, view of a Grecian temple and the sea-
shore.
Enter Eueydice, f. 3 e.
Public 0. And here advances fair Eurydice,
As unlike Virgil’s as she well can be ;
But that is not the fault of the adapter.
He’s ta’en the envelope in which they’ve wrapt her,
And sticking pretty closely to the letter,
Hopes he’s not made her worse, if not much better.
The music—heard so oft in music halls,
Where, naturally, one looks out for squalls—
Will take the town by storm, his hope and trust is.
No words of his, he feels, can do it justice ;
And flying in the face of all mythology,
Not e’en Apollo could make his apolo-gy.
(to Eueydice) Now, madam, without fear, approach and
quaver,
Public Opinion’s always in your favour.
I go —but not a step beyond yon wing—
“ Deus ex machine,” thenceforth to spring. Exit, l.
Eueydice advances with basket of flowers.
Air, Eueydice.
Since love has set my heart‘a-dreaming,
No rest can I take ;
When Sol is on the hills first beaming,
My couch I forsake ;
For ’tis then the meads and bowers
All their beauty display :
But for whom seek I the flowers,
Must I truly say ?
Must I ?
Then mind you tell it not again—
I cull them for a charming swain,
Who dwells hard by.


The fairest blossoms that Aurora
Bespangles each mom,
I gather from the lap of Flora,
His porch to adorn ;
My poor heart, I feel, is fleeting
Too quickly away :
For whom it is so wildly beating
Must I truly say 1
Must U
Then mind you tell it not again :
’ Tis beating for a charming swain,
Who dwells hard by.
Euryd. ( opening door of the cottage of Aristceus, and
finding no one within) Not in! He must be
somewhere here about.
How sad it is to find one’s lover out!
Sweet flowrets, be my witness that I came
And called—alas, how vainly! on his name.
My Aristeus, o’er thy floor I strew
These gifts of Flora ! {flings the flowers into cottage)
Enter Orpheus, from his house, R.
Orpheus, {aside) Gods ! what meets my view ?
The lovely nymph whom I’ve so long adored !
Alone, too. Let me touch a tender chord.
{plays on his violin)
Euryd. My husband!
Orpheus, {aside) Fiends! my wife ! at me she’ll fly out;
The only way’s to be the first to cry out 1
The injured husband I must grandly act.
{aloud) So, madam, I have caught you in the fact.
Euryd. Caught met In what fact, sir, I beg you’ll say?
Orpheus. To whom that floral tribute did you pay 1
Euryd. To whom 1 The winds! and . you, sweet spouse
explain,
To whom did you address that dying strain ?
Orpheus. The moon !
Euryd. At sunrise ? to the dear departed !
All moonshine, I’ve no doubt—ugh! you false-
Orpheus. Eurydice ! [hearted


Eueyd. Oh ! come, no more of this !
I’ve seen you running after every miss,
Who’ll listen to your scraping.
ORPHEtrs. Scraping—mine!
Eueyd. You think your fiddling, don’t you, mighty fine;
It’s execrable—there !
Oepheus. The woman’s mad !
Eueyd. And what you call your poetry’s as bad.
Oepheus. My Argonautics that all Greece enchant!
Eueyd. You didn’t write ’em.
Oepheus. Didn’t!
Eueyd. Couldn’t—can’t!
Ask Aristotle.
Oepheus. Why, the man’s not born!
Eueyd. Well, ask him when he is the then. I should scorn
Such mean invasions.
Oepheus. She is quite demented !
And the hexameters that I’ve invented ?
Eueyd. Six feet of stuff! that’s just two yards of fustian.
Oepheus. I shall expire of spontaneous combustion !
Six feet —two yards ! Madam you’ll please to measure
Your language and not mine.
Eueyd. ’Tis not my pleasure.
And since extremities you drive me to,
I hate your verse—your violin —and you !
Another sun together shall not see us—
I’ll be divorced, and marry Aristaeus !
Duo. —Oepheus and Euetdice.
Oehheus. Ah, say you so ?
Eueyd. I don’t say no.
Oepheus. You prefer him your husband to 1
Eueyd. Yes, sir, I do—it is quite true !
Oepheus. My violin’s your detestation 1
Eueyd. Exactly so ! exactly so!
Oepheus. I have no genius in your estimation 1
Eueyd. No, surely, no ! no, surely no !
Your fiddle playing
Is most distressing;
A donkey braying
Is not so bad !
6
OEPHEE AUX ENFEES.


Your violin
Not worth a pin ;
The sound’s enough to drive me mad.
Oepheus. For this offence flagitious,
FI! vengence take delicious.
Eubyd. In what way 1
Tell me pray!
In what way, I pray you t
Oepheus. I now intend to play you,
My dear Eurydice,
My latest composition,
My concerto in E.
Eubyd. Mercy ! Mercy! I implore
Oepheus. No ; vainly you petition.
A treat you have in store;
It lasts an hour and more.
Eueyd. Oh, grant me patience ! An hour or'more ?
Not a note will I hear !
Oepheus, Indeed you shall, my dear, {plays)
Eueyd. It is too frightful!
Of horrors quite full;
It is too bad !
It drives me mad.
Oepheus. It is delightful!
Of genius quite full;
Expression fine,
And tone divine!
To this movement listen now;
“Linked sweetness” ’tis, I vow. {playing)
Eueyd. Like a saw upon a fender!
Oepheus. Oh, so sweet! Oh, so tender
Now tremolo—pizzicato—
Presto, presto ! —agitato ! {playing)
Eueyd. Oh, torture past enduring ;
I can hear no more ! — Oh, pity me !
Love and Fate in vain conjuring
To set me free! to set me free!
Eueyd. O, Jove ! relieve me from this spouse of mine.
And doubly wilt thou seem to me divine.
Oepheus. Great Jove ! unwife me in a quiet way,
And your petitioner will ever pray.


Eueyd. What should prevent our instant separation ?
OEPHEUS.’-For me, one serious consideration.
From our United States, such bold secession
Would greatly injure me in my profession.
Parents and guardians would at me be preaching;
At ladies’ schools I should lose all my teaching;
The Philharmonic would no more elect me;
The Wandering Minstrels even would eject me.
An artist can’t afford the world to brave,
Appearances we must contrive to save.
TUI death do part us I with you must bear,
But let your precious bee-master beware!
He’s been a serpent in my path long known.
Perchance he soon may find one in his own !
Eueyd. What do you mean 1
Oepheus. No matter ! Just you warn
Hips not to tread too hard upon my corn. Exit Oepheus.
Eueyd. Upon his corn ? I seize his double sense !
The monster’s malice is no doubt prepense.
He’s found out that the field he grows his wheat in
Is one my love and I are wont to meet in.
Some man-trap or spring gun, no doubt, he’s put in it,
In hopes my charming swain may put his foot in it.
Quick ! Let me Aristaeus fly to find.
He must be somewhere yonder scenes behind.
Enter Public Opinion, l.
Public 0. Of course ; but now to see him would be wrong,
He has to enter first and sing a song.
This way, and patiently await your cue.
Eueyd. I’d quite forgot—l’m much obliged to you.
Public Opinion leads Eueydice to wing k. u. e.,
they how, curtsey, and exeunt separately — she,
E. u. E. — he, L. 1 E.
Enter Aeisileus, l. u. b.
Recitative.
Aristaeus is my name—for my honey combs noted,
A bee-master of fame—to melody devoted.
Contented hear I dwell, exempt from rent and tax.
By the nymphs all esteemed, a lad of wax. (beeswax)


Air.
’Neath the J>road shade of trees
To sit in gardens sunny,
Watching my pretty bees,
So busy gathering honey.
Or mark the morning,
O’er earth and sky disperse her treasures,
With gold the clouds adorning,
With diamonds the plain.
Oh, these are the pleasures
Of an innocent swain.
In the green fields to gaze
On snow-white ewe and wether,
Watching them gravely graze,
Or gaily frisk together;
Or in the clover
The shepherdess, reclined, who measures
The moments till her lover
Will greet her sight again.
Oh, these are the pleasures
Of an innocent swain.
Artht. Before the world thus innocent I seem,
But who I really am you little dream ;
Or what infernal mischief Fm projecting
If Orpheous but acts as I’m expecting,
To night I fancy we shall make a coup,
And some one I won’t name will get his due.
But mum, for hither hastes my charming fair.
Enter Eueydice, behind the com field, from, n. u. e.
Eueyd. In vain I seek ! Ah, no! Behold him there!
Arist. ' Eurydice!
Eueyd. My Aristmus—stay !
Not one step further if you love me, pray !
Akist. Wherefore!
Eueyd. Your life’s in danger!
Aeist. Danger ! Nay !
You don’t say so !
Eueyd. Ido ! My jealous spouse
On you the most terrific vengeance vows.


Within this wheat he’s set some horrid snare,
And bade me bid you of it to beware;
Aeist. That’s generous of him, I must admit,
And so—l don’t believe a word of it!
In proof of which
Eueyd. Advance not, I implore —
Go round
Aeist. ’Twould go against the grain much more—
Thus to my sweet Eurydice I fly !
{enters corn fieUd, from L.)
Eueyd. Nay, then, with Aristaeus let me die !—Ah !
{enters cornfield from c., at hack, and suddenly stops)
Aeist. What’s the matter ?
Eueyd. Something’s bitten me !
There’s a snake in the grass ! {he leads her forward —
she sinking on rocky seat by house, e.)
Aeist. *And I am he !
Pluto ! become thy godlike self again !
One ! Two! Three ! Presto ! Pass! {changes to
Pluto) Now for my train—
The down express!—and come’thou “black bat, Night,”
As by a son of song thou hast been bight,
In language more poetic than polite,
Ely in the face of Day and hide her flight!
{the stage becomes dark, excepting a circle of lime-
light around her)
Eueyd. What ails me : lam losing all sensation!
Pluto. Then for the modern stage you’ve no vocation !
Air. — Eueydice.
Farewell! beloved Aristaeus,
Across the Styx I’m doomed to row;
The cruel Fates will further see us.
Than I alone now wish to go.
Yet I should think myself their debtor,
If they would only take you too —
I feel I should be a shade better,
If to the Shades I went with you.
Eueyd. Adieu ! lam no more ! {dies)
Pluto, (l. c.) No more you are!
But ere I pack you in my funeral car,


You must a last word for your husband leave —
You liked to have the last word I conceive ?
And you shall write it, as you’ve lost your breath,
And show the ruling passion strong in death ;
Although not quite consistent with chronology,
I’ll try a little electro-biology.
(a fiery car rises, as a row of corn sinks, c.— he extends
his bident over her ; she rises as under a spell, and
moves according to his direction round to the door of
Orpheus’s house)
Fancy a pen—for characters ethereal
Writing materials are not material.
(she writes on door with her finger the following lines,
which appear in letters of fire)
“ I’m dead ; but my loss
You will scarce think an evil;
Aristseus was Pluto—
I’m gone to the ”
Enter Public Opinion, l.
Public 0. Stop ! The word’s neither classic nor correct,
And there’s the Licenser, who might object.
There can be no doubt of your destination,
And kind friends will accept this intimation.
Sad doggerel! But she’s dead, you know, and I’ve
Seen quite as bad by folks who are alive.
Pluto. ( singing to Eueydice) Now for the realms below.
The short cut there
Is vid Paris! Barriers D'Enfer I
Pluto lifting her to car, sinks with Eueydice, c.
Public Q. Now the fun of all this, if there’s any fun in it.
Consists in the fact you may leam in a minute,
Which is simply, that neither in fiction nor fact
Can be found any grounds for the plot we enact.
Neither husband nor wife ever gave the least handle,
As far as we know, to so open a scandal.
To her spouse fair Eurydice lived most devoted,
And Orpheus on his Eurydice doated ;
And went for his own wife as quickly the deuce to,
As though she’d been somebody else’s. But truce to
These comments, for here comes our man, and you’ll see
What a job I shall have to make him follow me ;


But he must! for I’m here to control every action,
And Public Opinion will have satisfaction.
(stands aside)
Enter Orpheus, e. 3. e.
Orpheus. Who has turned off the gas in the sky borders ?
Can Jupiter have given Nox new orders ?
It can’t be noon, and yet day has shut up.
I haven’t dined, and it is time to sup !
This is a very early closing movement,
And only for one reason an improvement.
I with my wife, shall take but one repast
Instead of two, and it will be the last.
(approaches his door and sees ike fiery inscription)
What have we here 1 What demon has been scrawling
Upon my door these characters appalling ?
My wife’s handwriting! dead—and gone to.—Well
If ever ! Pooh! Pshaw! this must be a sell!
The news is too good to be true —yet no—
She must be dead, or else she couldn’t go—
No master —she has gone somewhere —and I
Am free. Somebody coming—let me fly
These unexpected tidings to impart
To the divine possessor of my heart ! {going, l. —
Public Opinion advances and stops him)
Public 0. Stop ! I can’t suffer this to pass—or you.
Orpheus. Public Opinion! What wouldst have me do ?
My wife is gone—whither you here may learn,
If not from “ thoughts that breathe,” from “ words that
bum.”
Public 0. Follow me to Olympus, and implore
Great Jove your bosom’s partner to restore.
Orpheus. Restore ! —my partner ! —after dissolution
Has been gazetted thus! Of elocution,
Though a professor, I should language lack
In such a cause. Why should I take her back ?
Public 0. To edify posterity—to show
There was at least one husband who would go
So far his cara-sposa to recover.
Orpheus. But she is not iny cdra —l don’t love her—
Nay, if the plain truth must be told, I hate her.
Public 0. That will but make the great example greater.
Posterity will


Orpheus. Hang Posterity!
What has Posterity e’er done for me,
That I should such consideration show it 1
Public 0. Despise Posterity—and you a poet!
Orpheus.—A poet! if there be a soul on earth
To whom Posterity is nothing worth
It is the poet. Left ’mongst fellow-men
To live —that is, to starve upon his pen ;
And when in death his glorious eyes are dim,
Leaving Posterity to feast on him!
To crown with laurel his unconscious bust,
To raise a pompous marble o’er his dust,
Out of the harvest by his genius sown,
Giving to him who wanted bread, a stone.
Thanks to Apollo, I the fiddle play ;
And, 1A me tell you, that’s the thing to pay !
Public O. All very fine—and may be, very true,
But with our business it has nought to do.
Will you to Jupiter with your petition 1
Orpheus. No—l will hear my fate with due submission.
Public 0. Then you defy Public Opinion t
Orpheus. Nay;
I but
Public O. No buts—but instantly obey: ( shaking scourge)
Or of my fury dread the flagellation !
I’ll ruin you in purse and reputation.
Orpheus. Mercy!
Public 0. No mercy—yield upon the spot,
Assume a virtue, if you have it not.
Public Opinion has sufficient gumption
To comprehend the homage of assumption,
And in all suits which claim its interference,
Insists that you shall put in an appearance.
Decide!
Orpheus. ’Twixt Scylla and Charybdis. How 1 (aside)
Well, to the world’s opinion I must bow.
(aloud) Sir, to be led by you I am content,
And my petition humbly will present
To the Upper House as soon as I am able,
Praying it may be — (aside) laid upon the table.
(aloud) But how ascend Olympus 1 that’s the rub ;
I’m not a member of the Alpine Club.


Public 0. Public Opinion will give you lift ;
The rise of those whom I take up is swift.
Duet.
Public 0. Come, come, come, ’tis honour that calls you,
and honour must be obeyed,
So follow your leader and don’t be afraid ;
I will be your companion, protector, and guide,
Wherever you go you’ll have me on your side.
Orpheus. (aside) The honour that calls me, no way can I
see to evade;
So follow my leader, I must I’m afraid ;
My companion he will be, whatever betide ;
Public Opinion must not be defied !
(Public Opinion leading off, 1., Orpheus following,
turns hack, hut is overtaken hy Public Opinion—
they both go off, L. 1 E.)
END OP TABLEAU (OR ACT) FIEST.
Tableau (or Act) Second. —The Stage represents the
summit of Olympus, hut covered with clouds, in which
Jupiter and other Deities are discovered asleep —
Morpheus is pacing the stage and scattering poppies
over them—a tripod, r., with fire.
Chorus of Deities in their sleep.
Strew on! strew on! His poppies o’er us,
Would Morpheus might for ever strew;
For here to sleep and snore in chorus,
Appears the best thing we can do.
Enter Cupid, l. — Solo.
Cupid. I’m Cupid, you sep, God of Love,
Adored in every clime and nation ;
I’ve flown back to the realms above,
To ’scape from Psyche’s observation.
Soundly here they slumber,
All Olympus through !
Why should not Love
Sometimes sleep too ?
(lies down and sleeps)


Enter Venus, e. — Solo.
Venus. I,'Venus am—Beauty’s Queen!
To Paphos, where my earthly throne is,
Upon an errand I have been,
Which veiled in mystery, I own, is.
Soundly here they slumber,
All Olympus through!
Some beauty sleep,
Let me take too.
(lies down and sleeps—hunting horns heard in the distance —
Jupiter awakes, rises, and advances)
Solo.
Jupit. What is all that noise that I hear 1
Who is making that uproar below 1
Tis Diana, my daughter dear,
With her horns in very full blow.
Up, deities !—arise!—what ho !
(all the Gods and Goddesses awake, arise, and come
forward, stretching and yawning')
And don’t stand idly gaping there !
With cheerful voice prepare
To bid the huntress queen good morrow,
The goddess of the silver bow!
(throne descends—clouds dear off and shew the peak of the
mountain by sunrise)
Enter Diana, 1., attended by Nymphs.
Chorus.
All hail, Diana! chaste as charming,
Goddess of the silver bow !
But what means these looks of sorrow 1
What mean these symptoms alarming ?
Diana. Oh, nothing can exceed my woe!
Air.
Diana. Whene’er Diana left the mountain,
Tan, tan, tantivity, tan tan,
Actaeon came Diana to see,
Tan tan, tantivy, tivy.


Close hid in a bush beside a fountain,
Tan tan, tantivy, tan tan,
There was Actaeon sure to be,
Tan tan, tantivy, tivy.
Chorus. There was Actaeon sure to be !
But when this mom I left the mountain,
Tan, tan, tantivy, tan, tan!
Hoping Actaeon I should see,
Tan, tan, tantivy, tivy !
Close hid in the bush beside the fountain,
Tan, tan, tantivy, tan tan,
No Actaeon was there to see me,
Tantivy, tantivy, tivy !
Chorus. No Actaeon was there to see.
Diana. My poor Actaeon ! I can’t sleep a wink !
What has become of him I cannot think!
He who each day behind the bushes hid.
He thought I didn’t see him—but I did.
Jupit. What has become of him d’ye wish to know?
His conduct was by no means comme*ilfault
And would have compromised you soon, Diana.
So I’ve relieved you of him.
Diana. In what manner ?
Jupit. Into a stag transformed him—nothing more.
He was, you know, a smart young buck before.
And to preserve on earth your reputation,
I’ve said ’twas done at your solicitation.
Diana. At mine!
Jupit. At yours. The whole world has been told
You thought his. curiosity too bold.
Diana. Why?
Jupit. For the honor of Mythology.
Mortals begin into our acts to pry.
If we would put a check on their impiety,
We must pay some attention to propriety.
Diana. You pay it great attention—don’t you?
Juno. Eh?
Has he again been gallivanting ?
Jupit. Nay!


Juno, my dear ! indeed, mere circulations
Of the old stories in cheap publications.
It’s those vile poets! Hot ’em ! Ton my yvord it is !
Who sing about me allsorts of absurdities!
Juno. No—no! I’m sure there must be something new.
If you know tell me, dear Diana, do ?
Jupit. Madam, no scenes in public I desire.
And silence all! I now have to enquire
Into a matter delicate to mention.
But justice must be done. Mars !
Maes. (saluting) Here !
Jupit. Attention!
You’re charged by Vulcan with
Venus. It is not true!
Jupit. Hah! then you know you’re inculpated too ?
But true or not, henceforward I expect
Your conduct, Venus, will be more correct.
Nor yours alone—as the sky’s censor morum,
I charge you all to observe more decorum.
Venus. Tyrant! ( murmurs)
Jupit. Where’s Cupid ? him this much concerns.
Juno. There, kissing Hebe, (at the fire-tripod, e.)
Jupit. While the ambrosia bums!
(brings Cupid forward by the ear )
You graceless scamp ! if here you play your tricks.
I’ll beat you black and blue ! I will, by Styx !
Cupid. Let go my ear! See if I don’t tell mother !
Jupit. There’s six of one and half a dozen of t’other!
Am't you content with driving mortals mad,
That you must try to make the gods as bad ?
Cupid, (to Venus) Mamma, I won’t put up with this much
longer,
I’ll let him know winch of the two is stronger,
Maes. That’s right!, let’s all rebel! Sound love’s alarms,
And every deity will fly to arms.
Diana. ’Pa Titer’s really getting too despotic !
Venus. To talk of beating Love is idiotic.
Jupit. Murmurs! Begone! and s6e you’re all more steady.
Ganymede, tell me when my nectar’s ready.
All the Deities exeunt, grumbling, e.
C


Now by myself! They’re actually grumbling'!
I must begin to set my thunder rumbling.
I’ve been tpo easy with these brats of mine—
They’ll be disputing soon my right divine.
And in addition I have got to bear
That jealous termagant’s
Re-enter Juno, e.
Ahem ! she’s there!
Sticks to me like a leech ! (aloud) Ah, dearest wife!
Anything new ?
Juno. I’m tired of my life !
Jupit. -That is a pity, as you cannot end it.
But what’s amiss, my dear ? and can I mend it ?
Juno. “A miss, my dear !” There always is a miss,
Or else a mistress—as I hear, is this.
Jupit. This what ? I swear that causeless are your fears.
Juno. From earth a fresh report has reached my ears;
By some licentious god, a female —married,
Off from her husband yesterday was carried.
Beautiful
Jupit. “As a butterfly, and proud
' “As
Juno. Silence! For justice my wrongs cry too loud.
I’ve all the facts—l know the woman’s name !
Jupit. Polly?
Juno. Ah, try to hide your little game
By this indifference ; but it won’t do.
Her name’s Eurydice —the god was you!
Jupit. Me 1 Come, that’s capital!
Juno. Who else would dare ?
Jupit. Of this abduction I was quite aware.
Juno. Of course 1
Jupit. And have sent Mercury to learn
The truth, and am expecting his return.
For your suspicions there is no foundation,
But mine, I think, will meet with confirmation.
He comes ! I hear the rustle of his wings ;
Now we shall know the real state of things.
Enter Mercury, l.
Merc. Hail to the mighty king of gods and


Jupit. Use
No ceremony. Briefly, what’s your news ?
Merc. Back at full speed from Tartarus I come.
Jupit. Where you found Pluto 1
Merc. He was not at home!
Jupit. Out for the day 1
Merc. For fourteen days
Juno. And nights.
Jupit. You didn’t see him then ?
Merc. Between the lights
An hour ago he came back to his throne.
Jupit. From whence?
Merc. The earth.
Jupit. Alone ?
Merc. No, not alone.
He brought a lady with him, a fair dame
He’d taken from her husband.
Jupit. And her name ?
Merc. Eurydice.
Jupit. {to Juno) I hope you’re satisfied ?
Juno. I am; this time it cannot be denied.
But what says Plut6’s wife to this affair ?
Will Proserpine this insult tamely bear ?
Merc. She’s with her mother, Ceres, gone to stay
Six months as usual.
Jupit. (aside) What a holiday
For Pluto ! would my wife would do the same.
Juno. What are you saying ?
Jupit. I say what a shame
That Pluto should advantage take so base
Of his wife’s absence.
Juno. Say it to his face !
Jupit. I will! (to Mercury) You called the lady fair—
Really—she’s handsome ? [d’ye mean
Merc. Sire, a beauty’s queen.
Jupit. (aside) Lucky dog, Pluto !
Juno. What d’ye say, my dear ?
Jupit. I say ’tis lucky Pluto isn’t here.
Just at this moment my wrath so intense is
I wouldn’t answer for the consequences !
Merc. I told him you required his presence.
C 2


Jopit. Good.
Juno. And will he come 1
Meec. He promised that he would.
I think I hear the wheels now of his carriage !
JcriT. I’ll teach him to respect the bonds of marriage !
Juno. By setting him a good example, Jove 1
Jdpit. Of course ; but go and get your breakfast, love—
I’ll punish him, if you’ll to me just leave him.
He comes ! Fly, Mercury —do you receive him.
Exeunt Juno, r. and Mercury, e.
And so this woman really is a beauty !
Then, as a Judge, ’twill be my painful duty
To see her.
Enter Mercury, preceding Pluto, who is followed by two
Demons bearing a large hamper , l.
Merc. ( announcing) His Infernal Majesty!
Exit Mercury.
Pluto. Hail, Jupiter, great king of earth and sky ;
Father of gods and men
Jupit. . That’s quite enough !
We’ll spare you more preamble.
Pluto. (aside) Bather gruff!
And looks at me askance. Does he suspect 1
To find his palace splendid I’ll affect.
(aloud) Oh, happy Jove ! Upon Olympus fair
To live above the clouds, in the pure air !
While I am doom’d my dark abode to fix
Upon the gloomy banks of stagnant Styx.
Here all is light and melody, and bloom.
Of everlasting flowers the perfume
Each zephyr bears. Nor not alone of flowers
The perfume of the Graces, and the Hours,
The perfume of the
.Jupit. Cease this flowery flummery !
Talk sense, if possible, and not perfumery !
Pluto. Why, that is scents !
Jupit. Pluto ! Don’t incense me !
I’m sent for you, and "if I chance to be


Upon the right scent, such is your offence,
You’ll have hard work to prove your innocence !
But first one question, if I’m free to ask it,
Who are those ugly beggars with a basket ?
Pluto. My cook and butler, with my usual fare.
I cannot live on food so light and rare
As nectar and ambrosia ; I require
Something that has more strength in it and fire.
(to Ist Demon) Hand the “ menu.” (to Jupitee)
There, tell me what you think.
Jupit. ( looking at a bill of fare) Think! that you well know
what to eat and drink.
Pluto. And what to avoid, most potent grand papa !
Jupit. Why, zooks! you live like a three-tailed bashaw !
If thus you banquet in the realms below,
It’s almost an inducement there to go.
That is exactly what the earth complains of;
That rogues, when sent a jail to feel the pains of,
Lead jolly idle lives, and cut their jokes,
And fare much better than poor honest folks.
Pluto. But I’m the governor, and in my station
Are you surprised I seek some consolation 1
Jupit. Seek consolation ! yes, and find it too
In fruit forbidden, worse than this I view.
Where have you been this fortnight ?
Pluto. Frying on
The sulph’rous shores of fiery Phlegethon.
Jupit. Not so ! By the report of my police,
You have been frying other fish--in Greece !
Not far from Thebes —in a suburban cottage.
Pluto. Sire, I
Jupit. Oh, spare your breath to cool your pottage!
You with a fiddler’s wife have run away.
And swingeing damages will have to pay.
Pluto. ’Tis false ! the scandal soon can be refuted.
Jupit. Silence ! my word is not to be disputed.
When Jove speaks, heaven and earth obedient bow !
(uproar within) Hollo ! what mean those shouts ?
Pluto. They mean a row.


Enter Juno, alarmed, e., followed by all the Deities,
tumultuously.
Chorus of the Revolt.
To arms ! each god and demi-god !
Endure no longer this subjection !
Break at once the tyrant’s rod!
Jupit, (on throne) A revolution—an insurrection !
Olympus Jove defies!
Pluto. An insurrection in the skies !
Out of Jove this is taking a rise !
Cupid. No more nectar, no more ambrosia !
Chorus. Nectar we hate!
Diana. It is a liqupr makes me sick !
Chorus. Yes, makes us sick !
Venus. Ambrosia, too, I abominate !
Chorus. No more ambrosia !
Pluto. You're right enough ;
’Tis mawkish stuff.
Ambrosia
Is not for gods the fare.
Come and share
My symposia!
Chorus. To arms ! each god and demi-god, &c.
Jupit. What do I hear ! This is downright sedition !
To my commands do you refuse submission 1
All. We do!
Venus. We mean to act just as we choose !
Mineev. This everlasting sky gives me the blues !
All. Were starved!
Jupit. On nectar and ambrosia ?
Maes. Pho!
Were sick of them !
Pluto. You are right! Bravo! Bravo !
Here —share my prog—there’s plenty of it—see !
A boar’s head ! (Demons open basket and take out
provisions and urine)
Venus. Oh ! give some of that to me !
Cupid. In memory of Adonis ?
Venus Hold your tongue !
How dare you twit your ma ! you saucy—young


Pluto. A venison pasty !
Diana. Oh, Actaeon dear!
If you have been cut up, and put in here,
I couldn’t touch a bit—and yet I must —
Give me a small piece of the kissing crust!
Pluto. Wine and Liqueurs ! To help yourselves you’re free
Venus. Champagne !
Cupid. Parfait amour !
Maes. And Eau de Vie !
Jdpit. Revolt! Rebellion ! And to be your chief
You do not blush to take that sensual thief!
All. Thief!
Pluto. I am not a thief!
Jupit. You are—you stole
The wife of Orpheus —poor pretty soul!
Venus. Is that all ?
Jupit. All! Is it not verhum sat ?
Pluto. And what have you done, if you come to that 1
Juno. There —there ! I was too sure
Pluto. Before you tax
Others with beipg in their morals lax,
Just look at home. I know a thing or two,
Good Master Jove, that I could tell of you.
Diana. And I.
Venus. And L
All. And all!
Cupid. We’ve made a song
About you. You shall hear it; it’s not long.
Jupit. I’ve an appointment with my lawyer. ( crosses, E.)
Juno. ( 'turning him lack to e. c.) Nay ;
You stir not till I’ve heard all they’ve to say.
Couplets.
Mineev. (c.) To captivate the proud Alcmena,
Her husband’s form you took one day ;
With some wives that would not have been a
Successful game at all to play.
Ha, ha, ha ! Ha, ha, ha I
These fine airs with us wont do ;
We know you better, Mr. Ju! (goes up, c.)
Chorus. Ha, ha, ha, &c.


DIANi. (c.) It must Lave been the same disguise, sir,
Which you assumed, of mischief full,
When fair Europa to surprise, sir,
The horns you sported of a bull.
Ha, ha, ha, &c. {goes up)
Cupid. (c.) To Danae, from love defended
By brazen walls about her built,
You in a shower of gold descended,
Which proved your gold was only guilt.
Ha, ha, ha, <fcc. (goes up)
Venus, (c.) The swan, who from an eagle flying,
In Leda’s arms sweet refuge took—
That swan was you, there’s no denying,
Though now more like a goose you look.
Ha, Ijp,,- ha, «feo. (goes up)
Pluto, (c.) ”Tis clear from all this transformation,
You are so ugly that you know
Your only chance of fascination
Is in some other shape to go.
Ha, ha, ha, &c. (goes up)
Chorus. Ha, ha,, ha, <kc.
Juno. Then ’twas all true. O, traitor—o, deceiver !
I’ve been by far too easy a believer.
Somebody catch me ; I am going to faint!
(falls in Pluto’s arms, c.)
J upit. Don’t be alarmed ! it is her old complaint.
She’ll come to presently.
Pluto. Take your wife, do!
Juno. Oh!
Jupit. (e) This was all before I married you.
Juno. Oh!
Pluto. Take your wife.
Jupit. A little if I’ve roved.
You are the only one I ever loved.
These scandel-mongers
Pluto. Will you take your wife ?
Jupit. These arch disturbers of connubial
Venus. Strife!
Pluto. If you don’t take your wife, I’ll drop her!
24
OEPHEE AUX ENFEES.


Enter Meecuey, l.
Meec. Sire!
Jupt. What now 1
Meec. Two strangers for great Jove inquire.
Jupit. Their names!
Meec. One —Orpheus.
(Juno jumps up and arranges her hair and drapery)
Pluto, {aside) Orpheus ! It grows hotter.
{aloud) Will you take {missing Juno) Hollo !
Why, I haven’t got her !
JnpiT. (to Pluto) Now, infidel, I have thee on the hip !
Meec. The other’s a young fellow with a whip,
He calls himself Public Opinion.
Jupit. Zounds!
Public Opinion seems to set no bounds’
To his audacity. My friends, {to Deities) you know
Of this I warned you not an hour ago.
Public Opinion is progressing fast,
And as you see has reached our doors at last.
Pluto. Don’t let him in—the prying, meddling scout!
Jupit. Don’t let him in ? Who is to shut him out 1
Our policy’s to pay him all attention
And sink before him family dissension.
Hither he comes on public grounds alone,
Bring my best thunder and set out my throne.
When mortals plead, Jove justice out must deal ’em.
Ahem ! Fiat justitia t liuat Caelum !
Pluto. Admit him ! who’s afraid 1
Jupit. Hah, so defiant!
Go! {to Meecuey) Introduce Opinion and his client.
Exit Meecuey, 1., throne'and seats brought an to
e. 3 e.
Now let him nothing see about our court
Which may discredit us in his report
To men below. Take all your godlike stand
About my throne—Wisdom on my right hand.
• {to Mineeva)
Juno. And I i
Jupit. My wife—my queen ? Beside me seated.
{leads Juno to throne)
(aside) Public Opinion has been oft so cheated.


You, Venus, on my left, in smiles arrayed ;
Opinion by good looks is vastly swayed.
Pluto. And where am I to stand 1
Jupit. Why, where you are!
To take your trial! prisoner at the bar !
Yon others, where you please ; but for effect,
In attitude most classic and correct.
They come ! (Ganymede hands Jupiter a thunderbolt)
What’s this ?—a dingy every day bolt!
Quick ! my best thunder, didn’t you hear me say, dolt t
(Ganymede gives him another)
Ha ! so ! —( looking round him) Well grouped !
To mortal eyes disclosing
Nothing beyond a tableau, most— imposing I
•Finale to Second Tableau.
Enter Mercury, introducing Public Opinion and Orpheus, l-
Pluto. He approaches—he advances !
Yes, no doubt ’tis he ! ’tis he !
Plague upon him ! Now the chances
May be turning against me.
Diana, 'j He approaches—he advances!
Venus ( Yes, no doubt ’tis he ! ’tis he !
and | Pluto looks as though the chances
Chorus, j Were against him very like to be.
Jupit. He approaches —he advances !
Yes, no doubt ’tis he ! ’tis he!
Much against him were the chances,
But a friend he now shall find in me !
Public 0. With reluctance he advances,
But obedient he must be ;
(to Orpheus) Jove awaits you ; all the chance is
In your favour I can plainly see !
Orpheus, (aside) ’Gainst my will each foot advances ;
But my fate I cannot flee !
To escape there now no chance is.
I’m in for it, I can plainly see !
Chorus Let us hear ! let us see !
Public O. (to Orpheus) Go on—go on ! your course pursue.
I will see justice done to you.
Orpheus. Ah'! this is too—
Too kind of you !


Public. 0. Obedient be. These scourges view.
My anger dread ; my vengeance fear.
Remember who
Has eyes on you !
Jupit. {to Orpheus) Mortal, what is to Jove thy prayer?
Public 0. {to Orpheus) The moment is come for you now
In tones, would melt the hardest hearted,
To implore great Jove will allow
You down to the Shades to repair
And recover your dear departed !
Orpheus. What must be, must —heigho!
{to Jupiter) My Eurydice is stolen from me.
( plays on his violin, L. c.)
Diana, Venus, and Cupid. Well that charming air I know !
Oh, how touching is his woe !
Orpheus. And the robber’s name ?
Jupit. Is
Orpheus. Is Pluto ! (Pluto is up c.)
Chorus. ’Tis Pluto !
Jupit. To punish lam bound,
Whoe’er be the offender.
Pluto guilty if found
Shall Eurydice surrender.
Orpheus, (aside) Alas ! alas! he grants my prayer!
Pluto, {aside) Alas ! alas! I lose my fair !
Jupit. And to see my decree
Is obeyed as it should be ;
To the regions below,
Pluto, with thee I go.
Chorus. Oh, Jupiter, pray do
Let us all go with you.
Oh do ! pray do !
Good Ju ! dear Ju!
Jupit. Agreed ! It will be something new
For us to do.
Chorus, All hail to mighty Jove !
To the monarch kind and gay !
Who all petty revenge above,
Gives us this glorious holiday.
Away ! away ! Hurrah I hurrah !


Awhile adieu dull vaults of blue,
Fresh spirit vault, with spirts new,
We seek with you, most jovial'Ju !
La! la ! la ! la ! la ! la ! &c.
END OF TABLEAU (oE ACT) SECOND.
Tableau (or Act) Third.— The Palace of Pluto. In the
centre his throne; on either sides grated gates of bronze,
through which is seen at a distance, e., the Infernal Regions
and the river Styx and the Elysian Fields, L.
Enter Cerberus, l. u. e.
Gerber. Did you call, madam 1
Eueyd. Call I —Good gracious ! no !
You ugly dog ! what do you want here—go ?
Cerbee. I thought I heard you call.
Eueyd. Then you thought wrong.
Cerbee. (aside) She sets my heart a-beating like a gong.
She is so lovely ! I ne’er saw a shade
With such a colour, nor so sweetly made !
(aloud) I’m very sorry that you didn’t call.
Eueyd. Wherefore 1
Cerbee. Because you want nothing at all!
If you-did—oh ! ’twould give me such great pleasure
To come—to go—to fetch—to carry
Eueyd. Eh! Sure
The dog’s gone mad !
Cebee. He has, with love for you!
You’ve turned my three heads, until what to do
I know not!
Eueyd. Turn out, instantly ! or you
Shall have your three heads knocked against each other
Soon as your master comes.
Ceeber. My master! Smother
My master in his own dun smoke. I weary
Of being porter in this palace dreary.
I who once had a palace of my own !
Aye, madam ! and who sat upon a throne
Compared to which this is a shabby stool!


Yes ! I! This mongrel hound !—Let me be cool,
If it be possible in such a place—
Was once a king !
Eueyd. Really! Is that the case 1
Ceebee. King of Bceotia! Hear what me befel;
No dog had ever such a tale to tell.
Song. —Ceebeecs.
When I was monarch of Boeotia,
I’d slaves and soldiers at my call;
But ’gainst a stronger having striven,
I lost my life, and so lost all ;
And by stem Fate down here was driven,
To keep dog-watches in this hall,
Where these three heads were to me given.
Because I had no head at all,
When I was monarch of Boeotia.
Were I still monarch of Boeotia,
My hand I’d offer on my knee,
But as I’ve neither crown or coffer,
Your lap-dog I but crave to be.
The prettiest dog can only proffer,
As the French song says, “ ce quil-d,”
So as I have no hand to offer,
I humbly beg you’ll take the paw
Of an ex-monarch of 'Boeotia.
Eueyd. ’Tis strange; but no doubt true! I’ve a strong notion
There’s much about you yet that is Boeotian.
Out of respect, sir, for your former state,
I beg on me you will no longer wait. [madam!
Ceebee. (aside) She treats me like a dog! ( aloud) Oh,
Eueyd. Hark! (Pluto and Jupitee appear at gate)
There’s some one at the gate ! and you don’t bark ?
Ceebee. No ! ’Tis my master, and though full of spite,
I’m not the dog to bark when I can’t bite.
Eueyd. Pluto! And who seeks with him this dark clime ?
Ceebee. Jupiter.
Eueyd. Oh, by Jupiter how prime !
I’ve always heard he is so fond of ladies ;
Perhaps he’ll kindly take one out of Hades.
29
TABLEAU THIRD.


Enter Jupiter and Pluto, l. u. e.
Euryd. ■)
and > Hail, mighty Jove.
Ceber. )
Pluto, (i to Cerberus) What do you here about?
Jdpit. Rise, fair Eurydice.
Pluto, (to Cerberus) And you—get out! Exit Cerberus, l.
Jdpit. (aside) Faith! she is positively quite bewitching!
To think of such a gem this rogue enriching.
Pluto, (l. c.) How ask her ; let her say it if she can,
That I ran off with her from any man.
She trod upon an adder, ’twas her fate ;
She must have walked down here at any rate.
For Tartarus I happened to be bound,
And was just starting by the Underground,
So took compassion on her pretty feet,
And in my carriage offered her a seat;
Now, I should like to know how I’m to blame,
I ask you—would’nt you have done the same 1
Jdpit. All very specious, sir, but to arrive at
The truth, I must examine her in private.
Pluto. In private ?
Jupit. Yes ; she may say that to me,
She would’nt say to you. '
Pluto, (aside) Zounds ! that may be.
(to Eurydice) Eurydice, I’m very ill at ease
Jupit. No tampering with the witness, if you please.
Go play the host to each Olympic visitor,
And leave me here to play the Grand Inquisitor.
Pluto (aside) Inquisitor indeed ! I’m on the rack 1
(aloud) Igo ! (aside) But, trust me—l will soon be
back ! Exit Pluto, l. u. e.
Jupit. Now, madam ! freely make to Jove your prayer.
Euryd. I’m sighing for a little change of air.
Jupit. You would not longer here with Pluto stay 1
Erdyd. Oh, no, indeed—not for a single day !
Pluto re-enters behind and listens,
Jdpit. You do not love him, then ?
Euryd. Love Pluto ? No !
Jupit. Delightful! Who on earth then was your beau 1


Eueyd. Aristseus, he with honeyed tongue,
Won ray poor heart —for he was handsome—young.
How could I fancy one so sweet and civil
Would turn out, when at home—the very devil!
Jupit. The case is much too common—l could name
Hundreds of women, who’ve said just the same!
Not that it mends his case the least, in life—
The vile impostor ! And with such a wife!
Eueyd. A wife ! And is he married too ! The wretch!
Jupit. My grand-daughter—whom he’d the luck to catch
Much as he did you, and down here to carry her.
But, faith, I punished him—l made him marry her !
I’m glad I cannot make him marry you.
Eueyd. I’m very glad of it, I’m sure, sir, too !
Jupit. But Jove will do you justice—never fear !
You shall not tarry in these regions drear ;
Up to Olympus I will bear thee, sweet,
And lap thee in Elysium!
Eueyd. What a treat!
Let’s fly this minute ! Mercy ! Who are these ?
Pluto flings open door of banquet chamber l. 2 E., and
enter Juno and all the Gods and G. ddesses, crowned with
flowers and bearing goblets.
Jupit. My wife, with all the rout of Deities !
Chorus.
Fill bumpers up—pour bumpers down!
Here’s to our royal host,
1 The King who wears the iron crown.
Do honour to the toast!
Instead of melancholy,
He makes us awful jolly!
His spicy wines inspire us,
His ardent spirits fire us !
’Tis he rules the roast.
Fill bumpers up !—pour bumpers down, &c.
The realm where he obeyed is
For us exactly made is.
All care in Lethe drown,
And drink the King of Hades,
Who wears the iron crown !


(Jupitee introduces Eueydice to Juno and the principal
Deities, who enter, e. 3. e.)
Jupit. (to Juno) My dear—the lady you have heard so much
of.
Juno, (drawing herself up) She’s no great sight. Here there
are plenty such of !
Eoeyd. Madam !
Jupit. (aside to Eueydice) Don’t mind her; she means
nothing wrong ;
But Pluto’s coffee’s evidently strong.
Pluto, (aside) It’s strong enough to keep me wide awake,
As you shall both find out, and no mistake!
Recitative.
Jupit. Now by way of change, with the fair Eurydice
A minuet I’ll dance, like the great King Louis.
(Jupitee leads out Eueydice, and Meecuey, Hebe.)
Minuet.
Diana, Venus, Mineeva, and Cupid.
With what an easy air he bows and glides ;
Really, when you see him dance-a,
Had he but the wig besides,
You take him for the King of France-a !
None can surely walk a minuet
With such perfect elegance-a !
Of the ballet he’s the pet;
Jupiter is the vrai Dieu de la danse-a!
Vestris, in her greatest day,
Never moved with more grace ;
E’en Terpsichore might say,
“ I, to Jove give place.”
With what an easy air, &c.
Chorus.
This ball now to finish, let us all,
Both great and small, dance-in this hall
A galopade fantastical!
This ball now to finish, let us all,
Both great and small, dance in this hall
A “ Galop Infernal! ”
La, la, la, &c.


(galop—at the end of which, all except Jupiter,
Eueydice, and Pluto, who icatches them, appear
completely exhausted, and out of breath)'
Jupit. This favourable moment let me seize,
And gallop off.
Pluto. (advancing) No further if you please.
Jupit. Plague take him ! Pluto ! If Jove pleases, who
Shall stop him ?
Pluto. Jove himself! Come master Ju,
No swaggering. I’m up to all your tricks.
Have you forgotten what jou swore by Styx 1
Her husband’s coming, to whom you .are bound
To give her up, if guilty I was found.
Eueyd. My husband!
Jupit. Burn the Styx !
Eueyd. Coming for me 1
Oh no, he never would !
Pluto. Well, we shall see. (violin heard in distance)
Hark!
Eueyd. Yes, that is the sound of his cremona,
Of which he is so proud to be the owner.
He must be mad!
Pluto. If not, you’ll make him so.
Eueyd. Great Jupiter ! and will you let me go 1
Pluto. He can’t avoid it. It is now, false shade,
My turn to triumph !
Jupit. (to Eueydice) Don’t you be afraid.
I’ve hit upon a plan.— (aloud) Ho ! all ye deities !
Assume your gravities, and leave your gaieties.
The plaintiff in this case now comes to pray
The Court for judgment on an early day.
Behold him yonder with my learned brother;
“ Call, Orpheus versus Pluto and another.”
(Oepheus and Public Opinion are seen arriving in
the boat of Charon, on the River Styx, L. gate- —
Jupiter takes his seat on Pluto’s throne —Oepheus
and Public Opinion land and advance)
Great King of ( addressing Jupitee,
Jupit. That will do ! The case we’ve heard.
And judgment longer shall not be deferred.
D
33
TABLEAU THIRD.


Pluto, the Court now orders to restore
To your fond arms the wife whom you adoite.
Orpheus. My joy o’erwhelms me. Jove is far too good.
Jupit. On one condition, he it understood.
For reasons perfectly inexplicable,
And which no mortal ever will be able
To comprehend. It is our high decree—
To earth you must precede Eurydice,
Who in your steps will follow close ; but mind you
Whate’er may hap you must not look behind you.
Though you have now evinced most rare affection,
Your antecedents won’t bear retrospection.
So take fair warning—ere you reach yon shore
Look once behind, you’re where you were before !
Pluto. Hut I don’t understand !
Jupit. (r. c.) Who said you did ?
Orpheus, forward ! March as you are bid !
Concerted Piece.
Public 0. (1.c., to Orpheus) Not one glance must you cast
behind you.
Upon the ground your eyes now fix.
The stakes are not won, mind you,
Till you have gained the Styx.
(Public Opinion turns Orpheus round with his face
to the gate , and precedes him slowly. Eurydice
follows Orpheus reluctantly at the command if
Jupiter)
p. (Poor husband ! What will be his lot ?
iana. w j[j j oo k jj ac k ! He will not!
: r ENUS jHe will! He will not!
i iner. qj co fp ee j w jh bet a pot!
r? n He will look back ! He will not!
L/UFID. (He will! He will not!
Jupit. Upon his curiosity, have I in vain relied ?
Public O. ( massing the gate ) We triumph ! Oh, what joy !
What pride!
Jupit. (a* Orpheus approaches the gate) He will not look
back! Then thunder-bolt
Fly! Crush the dolt!


(brandishes his thunder-bolt, and at the same moment
flings out his right foot energetically, a stream of
electric light issues from it, and strikes Orpheus just
as he is passing the gate, l. u. E. — he turns suddenly
—Edrydick disappears).
All. Ah!
Public. 0. Wretched man! A look behind, you’ve cast one.
Orpheus. ’Twas such a kick ! I thought it was my last one.
Pluto, (to Orpheus) You’ve lost her now, for good and all,
She’s mine beyond recall!
Jupit. No—no—not yours.
Pluto. How so ?
Jupit. No ! for I made her a Bacchante !
All. A Bacchante!
Pluto. But there’s no sense in
Jupit. Pm of that quite sensible.
• I told you it was quite incomprehensible.
Pluto. I say in Hades she must stay with me.
Jupit. No, she to Bacchus shall high priestess be.
Public 0. Peace and attention ! It is now the hour
For me to exercise my boundless power.
Eurydice to earth I shall restore,
The wife of Orpheus to be once more,
To live in love and perfect harmony ;
His music shall again enchanting be—
Throughout the world assert its old dominion,
Stamped by the verdict of Public Opinion !
Jupit. What shall he neither lose his wife nor wits 1
Pluto. Nor be by Thracian women torn to bits J
Jupit. Mythology that’s not according to.
Public O. It is my theology, and quite as true.
When history is being all re-made,
Can Fable hope the movement to evade ?
Ye silly, sensual, sham deities !
Ye’d ne’er been gods if mortals had been wise ;
They’re growing wiser daily, and soon I
Shall have to sweep ye all out of the sky.
Cupid. All! you forget this little fellow here.
35
TABLEAU THIRD.


Public 0. I beg your pardon, so I did, my dear.
Cupid will never be without a shrine ;
But would you honours really own divine,
Use your power but for good, and not for evil—
Be a great god, and not a little devil!
When off his'fickle pinions he shall shake,
Win hearts to make them happy —not to break,
Yield less to passion—never stoop to greed,
Then love will be a deity indeed!
Venus. Strip Cupid of his pinions ! Well! I’m sure
He’d make of my poor boy a perfect cure !
Oepheus. And what about the piece, sir, if you please 1
Public. Ah, there I pause ! In matters such as these
Public Opinion is, I must confess,
Very much guided by the public press—
So as the Judge says when his wig he’s shook at ’em,
I’ll take the papers home with me and look at ’em.
Jupit. And what is to become of the last scene 1
Public 0. Shew it exactly as it would have been
If you had had your way instead of me ;
And I’ll request the fair Eurydice,
As Offenbach has done, without more parley,
To sing, as a Bacchante, the finale ! ( scene changes to)
THE TEMPLE OF BACCHUS.
Bacchus enters in a car drawn by Panthers, and attended by
Nymphs, Fairies, Satyes, Sc, — Eueydice as a Bacchante.
Air, “ E ary dice."
I see the god of wine!
Ever fair and ever young !
Beneath a golden vine
With purple grapes hung !
The Fawns with cloven feet,
The Nymphs with their flowing hair.
His praises repeat—
Evoe! Evoe!
36
ORPHEE AUX ENFER3.


Glory to Bacchus ! king of the vine!
Glory to Bacchus ! god of wine !
Filled is my soul with his frenzy divine !
Glory to Bacchus ! god of wine !
“ 0 leave !” he gaily cries,
“ Sorrow, suffering, and despair,
“ To those whom Fate denies
“ My bounty to share,
“ And quaff this juice divine,
“ And own that for every care
“ The true Lethe is wine !”
Evoe! Evoe ! •
Glory to Bacchus ! king of the vine !
Glory to Bacchus! god of wine!
Filled is my soul with his frenzy divine !
Glory to Bacchus ! god of wine!
(advancing to the front and to audience)
In France, I as a Bacchante
Took to drinking—sad result of sorrow, as you often see ;
But here as a merry Offenbach-ante,
I hope you will often back repair to sing with me !
La ! la! la ! la ! &c.
Chorus, La! la! la! la! &c. ( picture )
Curtafn.


DISTRIBUTION.
PUBLIC OPINION;
ORPHEUS.
EURYDICE.
PLUTO.
JUPITER
JUNO.
VENUS.
cum.
DIANA.
MEIICURY.
MINERVA.
HEBE.
MARS.
MORPHEUS.
APOLLO.
TERPSICHORE.
NEPTUNE.
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, PRINTERS, COLLINS-STRBET EAST


Wheeler & Wilson’s
SILENT LOOK-STITCH SEWING-MACHINES,
WITH IMPORTANT NEW IMPROVEMENTS, AT REDUCED PRICE
A
CAUTION.
The great success of the Wheeler and Wilson machine has produced
numerous worthless imitations. To guard the public the American
Medallion Trade Mark is now placed on every genuine machine.
Offices and Sale Rooms: 64 ELIZABETH STREET.
LONG and Co. Agents.


Robert Bell,
MECHANICAL
srbwssr are epiiMi sbito.
(Printers’ Machinist and Broker),
97 LITTLE COLLINS STREET EAST ,
MELBOURNE,
Respectfully intimates that he has on hand a considerable plant of
Serviceable Second-hand Printing Material.
In the Smith and Engineering Business, competent practical
men are constantly employed on the premises.
Alterations or Repairs to any Description of Machinery
Promptly attended to.
NEW INVENTIONS CONFIDENTIALLY TREATED.
Messrs. J. POWELL & Co.
WATCH AND CLOCK MANUFACTURERS,
COLONIAL JEWELLERS, &c.
113 Bourke Street East.
In returning thanks to their numerous friends and customers for
the liberal support they have received during the nineteen years they
have been in business, beg to inform them that they have received
A CHOICE ASSORTMENT 6f JEWELLERY,
direct from the manufactories in England and France, which they
are prepared to sell at prices much below many houses in town.
Persons purchasing presents for the Easter Holidays will find it
to their advantage to visit our establishment. *
A FINE ASSORTMENT OF
GOLD AND SILVER WATCHES
always in stock, from the House of Thos. Russell and Son, of
Thavies Inn, London, and Slaters Street, Liverpool, Watchmakers
to the Queen and Prince Alfred.


OLD WHITE HART HOTEL,
OPPOSITE PARLIAMENT HOUSES.
The Oldest and Best
FAMILY HOME
Ft possesses extensive accommodation, and is in a central and
healthy situation, and commands abeautful view of the
surrounding distiicts.
The patronage of visitors from the cnuntry'and neighbouring colonies
respectfully solicited.
is
M
R N E.
Henry Edwards,
Proprietor.
THE CITY
FISHING-TACKLE WAREHOUSE,
47 Little Collins Street East,
Opposite Burnt’ Exchange Hotel.
EYEEY ARTICLE REQUIRED FOR FISHING PURPOSES
Mag be had at this establishment
AT EXCEEDINGLY LOW PRICES.
Fresh Shrimps for Bait mat be had Evert Morning.


THE LARGEST AND CHEAPEST
FURNITURE AND IRON BEDSTEAD
WAREHOUSE IN MELBOURNE.
:
U
0
C/5
o
X
LJ
LsJ
o:
cu X
<
\tn
*0
I*l
O X
K
St
3
V)
!
X
2
o:
§
k.
S 3
W. H. ROCKE & CO.
40 and 42 Collins Street East,
NEAR NEW TOWN HALL, MELBOURE.
Orders by post carefully attended to. Estimates given, and where
possible, drawings sent.
