

OSTRICH ES
AND
OSTRICH FARMING
IN
AUSTRALIA,
BEING AN ACCOUNT OF THE ORIGIN OF OSTRICH FARMING ; ITS INTRO-
DUCTION INTO AUSTRALIA; THE BREEDING, REARING, AND
GENERAL MANAGEMENT OF OSTRICHES; AND THE
TREATMENT OF THEIR DISEASES.
BY
THOS. WILLIAMS
Manager to the “South Australian Ostrich Company, Limited."
Adelaide:
W. K. THOMAS & CO., PRINTERS, GRENFELL STREET.
1887.




PREFACE.
In response to numerous enquiries for information regarding -
Ostriches and their management, and for the benefit of those
who contemplate embarking in the feather-growing industry, I
have written the following chapters, in which I have
endeavoured to set forth as simply as possible what is required
in the breeding, rearing, and general management of these
birds, and, at the same time, to draw attention to the
importance of this new and remunerative field of labour.
In South Australia, Ostrich Farming is at present in its
infancy, while at the Cape of Good Hope, which is similar
in climate, this industry has, in a comparatively short space
of time, assumed a position as one of the foremost and
best paying colonial enterprises.




THE OSTRICH.
The Ostrich is a bird indigenous to Africa, being found in most
parts of this continent. It belongs to the same family as the
Emu, the Rhea, or South American Ostrich, and the Cassowary,,
but differs from these in the following particulars :
(1) By having only two toes.
(2) By the head and neck being bare of feathers.
(3) By being twice the size of any of the others, and its eggs
averaging upwards of three pounds in weight.
(4) By the beauty of its plumage, the feathers of the others
being of little commercial value.
(5) By the male and female differing in colour; the male
ostrich being black and the female grey.
The ostrich differs from most other birds by its wings being
unadapted to flight, and the barb of the feather being of equal
length on each side of the quill. Like the emu, rhea, and casso-
wary, they are noted in their wild state for extreme shyness and
timidity, and these characteristics apply in a less degree to the
domesticated ostrich. The age to which an ostrich can live is a
matter of conjecture —possibly 100 years, as some assert; but
calculated by the usual method with animals, that of six times the
period they take to reach maturity, would give the ostrich 24
years, but it lives to a far greater age than this.
It was in the year 1867 that the first attempt at keeping
ostriches in a state of domestication, and breeding from them in
enclosures, was made at the Cape. Previous to this date the birds
ran wild over the greater portion of the colony, and were hunted
for their feathers, to obtain which the birds were killed ; and,
probably, had the breeding of ostriches in a state of domestication
not been successfully established the ostrich would by this time
have become nearly extinct.
The originators of ostrich farming did not receive much encour-
agement at first, it was thought by most people a ridiculous idea to
attempt to farm with a bird of so timid a nature, and few expected
that they would breed in confinement, or that their progeny could
ever be yarded, handled, and driven in mobs to market like other


stock. It was asserted that the feathers from tame birds would not
■curl; this was even believed by feather dealers, and for some time
a strong prejudice was maintained against tame feathers. Success,
however, attended the efforts to domesticate the birds ; they laid
•eggs hatched them, and the young ostriches it was found could be
reared as tame as barn-door fowls. People began to see that a
new industry was being established which was decidedly a money-
making one, and forthwith a rage sprang up for ostriches, and the
industry spread so that in a few years there were few parts of the
Cape Colony where ostriches in a state of domestication were not
to be seen. The value of ostrich feathers exported from the Cape
in 1867 was £70,000 —these being all from wild birds. The
exports for 1880 was £888,632, principally tame birds’ feathers,
and at this time it was estimated that a capital of £8,000,000
was employed in the industry ; since then the export of feathers
has continued to increase.
For a number of years ostrich farming was confined to Cape Colony
with the exception of an attempt by the French to establish it at
Algiers; later on people of other countries began to turn their atten-
tion to the ostrich, and a number of birds were taken to North and
South America, India, and Australia. The Cape farmers became
alarmed at the prospect of so much competition from other coun-
tries, and a Bill was introduced and passed by the Cape Parlia-
ment imposing an export duty of £IOO on each ostrich taken
from the Colony, and £5 on each ostrich egg. Only a few days
after the passing of the Act, an American gentleman arrived
prepared to purchase and take away 300 birds, but the sum of
£30,000 which would be required by the Customs authorities
deterred him from carrying his project into execution.
OSTRICH FARMING IN AUSTRALIA.
The presence of the Emu (a bird of precisely similar habits to
the ostrich) in such numbers throughout Australia, is suggestive
of the country being well adapted for the latter, and doubtless at
no distant date the industry will spread here, and ostrich feathers
figure largely in the colonial exports.
Several lots of birds have from time to time been imported into
Australia. In 1873 the Melbourne Acclimatization Society
imported some, and later, in 1881, Mr. W. Malcolm set about
establishing ostrich farming in South Australia, and imported a
number of birds. A farm was started at Gawler, and a large
number of young ostriches were successfully hatched and reared.
About this time an Act was passed by the South Australian
Parliament intended to encourage the establishment of ostrich
farming in the country by offering the fee simple of 5,000 acres of


land to the party who first placed upon the land 250 ostriches
over one year old; Mr. Malcolm’s venture was formed into a
Company, and ultimately the required number of ostriches were
reared and placed upon the land near Port Augusta; the condi-
tions of the Act having been complied with the fee simple of the
5,000 acres was obtained from the Government.
The country lying north of Port Augusta cannot by any means
be considered the pick of the pastoral lands of South Australia,
and it was at first doubtful if the birds would thrive there, the
rainfall being so scanty and uncertain, the yearly average being
only eight inches, still the birds have thriven well and increased
in numbers, there being at present over 400 on the farm, they
feed upon nearly every kind of herbage and bush growing upon
the farm, saltbush being the great standby, and when this becomes
parched in severe droughts the wattles, mulga, acacia, cotton and
blue bush help to tide them over the drought until rain has again
aused the herbage to start into growth.
In ordinary seasons the breeding ostriches lay freely without
any feeding whatever except what they can find in the paddocks
in which they are kept, and the young ostriches are reared with-
out difficulty, those hatched previous to or during the winter
being reared without any artificial feeding whatever, living on
what they can find in the paddocks and these chicks grow into far
more robust and valuable birds than the summer hatched ones,
which are on account of the dryness of the feed at this time of
the year fed on lucerne, rape, sorghum, &c. Although these chicks
get as much of this feed as they can eat, they are inferior in
size and stamina to those that feed on the natural herbage; no
better proof than this could be adduced of the adaptability of
this country for ostriches
There are thousands of square miles of similar and far superior
land in Australia in the hands of squatters already fenced and
subdivided where ostriches could be kept for feather growing with-
out entailing much, if any, extra expense for their management,
which as will be seen from the following chapters is exceedingly
simple.
The more room the birds have to roam the better, and for the
the six months during which their feathers are growing, nothing is
necessary except to see occasionally that the fences are in order
and rounding up the birds about once in a fortnight for a count,
and to keep them tame, as if left for a long time without muster-
ing they are apt to get wild, but ostriches which have been kept
properly tame when young never give any trouble afterwards ; on
the other hand if allowed to grow up wild until they are six or nine
months old it is not an easy matter to tame them afterwards.


TRAVELLING WITH OSTRICHES.
Travelling ostriches from place to place is (if the precaution o
thoroughly taming them while young has been attended to) a very
easv matter, especially after they have been two days on the road.
Young beginners often experience great trouble in removing the
birds from want of knowledge how to proceed. In all cases one
man should walk or ride in front —if they are inclined to be wild
two would be better, and they should endeavour to prevent the
birds passing them ) this as a rule they will seldom attempt to do.
One of the men in front should carry a small bag with grain and
scatter a handful occasionally along the road which will attract
the birds.
On long journeys a dray should be taken to carry grain for an
occasional feed for the birds, and after the first day or two on the
road they will follow the dray anywhere and camp round it at
night perfectly quiet unless disturbed by dogs; this plan is much
better than putting them in a small enclosure at night as they are
liable to take fright and rush into the fences. In the event of a
panic among them at night it is best to leave them alone, and at
daylight they will be found camped at no great distance away.
Should they bolt while travelling during the day, galloping after
them will only intensify the evil, the best plan is to keep still and
in most cases they will settle down quietly feeding along the track
when they can easily be headed by taking a slight detour round
them. Birds going long journeys will do twenty-five to thirty
miles a day without feeling it, but they should not be taken out
of a walk.
When the journey is not more than forty or fifty miles, this can
be accomplished in one day and the birds can be taken at a good
pace, but only on level ground or down hill, if hard pushed up
hill they soon knock up.
Birds that have been long confined in one paddock away from
the sight of strange objects should never be travelled straight
away but be taken to a smaller paddock near the homestead for a
few days, and be driven about as much as possible before attempt-
ing to travel with them.
Hobbling wild birds should never be attempted.
MANAGEMENT OF BREEDING OSTRICHES.
The ostrich reaches maturity at the age of four years, and it is
seldom they breed at an earlier age; three year old birds will
sometimes breed, but it is not advisable to let them, as weakly
progeny is generally the result. They will continue breeding to a
great age, in fact the older they are the more steadily do they
sit and hatch out a larger percentage of chicks. In selecting


ostriches for breeding choose well developed muscular birds of
good feather, the hens if possible to be white feathered or as light
and of good quality as possible, avoid hens with very dark
feathers.
Breeding birds are generally confined in paddocks of from ten
to twenty acres in extent, the larger the better if there is no pro-
vision made for feeding them artificially with lucerne, rape,
cabbage, &c.
In paddocks of the above extent they will lay and hatch out
their chicks without any feeding except in very dry seasons when
about three pounds of wheat, barley, or maize daily will keep them
in good condition. They will breed equally well in small paddocks
of from half an acre to one acre, but in this case they must have
feed given them daily of a succulent nature and grain, but the
health of the birds is not likely to remain so good when confined
in small paddocks. A pair of birds are usually put in each pad-
dock, but two hens may be put with the cock and an increased
number of chicks obtained, but in this case it will be necessary to
have an incubator as more eggs will be laid than they can cover.
They should be freely supplied with crushed bones and also lime-
stone if there is none in the paddocks. The fences dividing the
breeding paddocks should have bushes interlaced in the wires as
this will prevent the birds fighting with their neighbours which is
a frequent occurrence when there is nothing but the bare wires
separating them.
The best position for the paddocks is where there are no public
roads near, and where the birds can remain as little distnrbed as
possible. When they commence pairing, the cock becomes very
vicious and great care must be exercised in entering the paddock,
but the most savage bird can always be kept at a distance by
o-oing armed with a stout stick with a bushy forked end, which
must be held up to the bird’s head, taking care not to let the
bird get his head past the bush.
The nest will generally be found in the open, and if made at a
spot where it is likely to be swamped during heavy rain the eggs
should be taken out and the level of the nest raised, so that water
from the surrounding ground will not flow into it, A shallow
trench dug round the nest will effectually prevent this; the birds
often throw up this protection round the nest themselves, they
generally lay from twelve to fifteen eggs.
When they are about to commence sitting, the cock will be
noticed to take to the nest for a few hours during the daytime,
and soon the task will be set about in earnest; the hen sitting
during the day, the cock going on the nest shortly before sundown
and remaining until about 9or 10 o’clock next day. The
occupied in incubation is from thirty-eight to forty-two days, lhe


date when they commence sitting should be noted, so that the
time when the chicks should appear be known, as sometimes they
will leave the nest with what chicks are out, and the remaining
eggs, in this case, should be brought away and placed between
several thicknesses of blankets, or between feather pillows when
they will generally hatch out all right, and the chicks, after being
kept warm for two days, may be returned to the remainder of the
brood with the parent birds, if they are not to be brought up by
hand. This subject of rearing will be dealt with in a future
chapter.
Some breeders never take the feathers from breeding birds, but
this is a loss of valuable feathers. The birds should not be
plucked to such an extent as the ordinary feather birds ; the quill
feathers and a few of the longest blacks or drabs, as the case may
be, and the tail, all the feathers under the wing being left, as
these are necessary for covering the eggs. They should never be
plucked after they have commenced sitting. When the birds hear
the chicks squeak in the shell shortly before hatching, they become
very savage, especially the hen, and in entering the paddock it is
necessary to go well armed.
Where a number of plucking birds are kept, these, when they
reach maturity, will in good seasons be laying in the large pad-
docks in which they are kept; and it will be necessary to keep a
good look out for the nests, as if the chicks hatch out and get
about a week old before they are found, it is rather a difficult
matter to catch them and if allowed to grow up with the old birds
they become so wild as to be almost unmanageable. The best plan
is to bring in the eggs laid in this way and hatch them in the
incubator.
ARTIFICIAL HATCHING.
To the breeder of ostriches an incubator is an article which can-
not well be dispensed with, as sometimes with young breeding
birds the cocks will often refuse to sit, and if no incubator is at
hand the nest of eggs will be useless, also sometimes during severe
weather such as hail, or thunderstorms, birds which are sitting
may leave their nests and refuse to take to them again, in which
case if the eggs are removed to the incubator before they get
nold, the chicks will hatch out. By the use of the machine a largely
increased number of chicks can be reared by taking away the eggs
from the nest as fast as they are laid and leaving three or four
dummies in their place, they will lay as many as thirty or forty
eggs without stopping, whereas if the eggs are left in the nest
they will lay from twelve to fifteen, sometimes as many as twenty
•and then commence sitting.


It is not advisable to force the birds laying in this manner too
much or weakly chicks will be the result; a far better plan is to
let them lay a nest of eggs and sit on them for about foui’teen days,
then remove the eggs to the incubator, and in this way the birds
are not brought into low condition by long sitting, and will soon
have another nest. Incubators have of late years been brought
to a high state of perfection, many of them being automatic in
their action, and when once started, the proper degree of heat is
maintained to a nicety without any attention. The proper tem-
perature for ostrich eggs is 102° and the period of incubation
from thirty-eight to forty-two days. This temperature should be
steadily maintained during the first fortnight, after this no harm
will be done should it get as low as 98° or up to 104° provided
the heat is not kept long at these extremes.
The eggs required to be turned twice a day, and at mid-
day the drawers should be open for about ten to fifteen minutes
to give the eggs an airing ; during the last week the tempera-
ture should be kept at 100° if possible, but often when the
eggs contain strong chicks it is not easy to keep the temperature
down.
The progress of incubation can always be determined by hold-
ing the egg against a strong light in a darkened room, a dark
spot will be at first noticed floating on the side of the egg, it will
gradually extend until the egg becomes perfectly opaque with
the exception of the airspace at one end, when properly incu-
bated the airspace should be clearly defined by a dense perfectly
opaque outline, if semi-transparent below the outline it is not
likely to be good. In about twenty days the egg will be quite
opaque except at the airspace. When eggs are put in the incubator
the end where the airspace is should be marked also the egg
marked with the date of putting in.
A day or two before hatching, that is about the thirty-sixth to
the thirty-eighth day, the chick will be observed to fall in the
shell the airspace becoming considerably enlarged, it will soon rise
again until the egg is quite full, when at this stage it should be
marked and if in twenty-four hours the chick has not broken the
shell it should be released by cracking it at the airspace end and
breaking away some of the shell when the chick will generally
manage to extricate itself without further assistance. It is exceed-
ingly interesting to watch the care with which the ostrich performs
this operation, selecting the egg in which it knows there is a chick
unable to break the shell it will gently roll it over until it is in
the proper position under the hard horny substance of the bird’s
chest when the necessary force is exerted sufficient to shatter the
shell without injuring the chick.


REARING THE CHICKS.
To rear young ostriches hatched in the natural way nothing can
be better than to leave them with the parent birds and an attend-
ant going into the paddock two or three times a day taking with
him a little grain or green feed and scattering it about, remaining
a short time at each visit until the chicks and old birds come and
feed near him, in this way they will keep tame and in a few days
had better be removed to a small paddock near the house where
there is good feed or where they can be supplied with chopped
lucerne or cabbage.
Where several broods are hatched at the same time two broods
can be given to one pair of birds they can easily take care of and
cover as many as twenty-five or thirty and take to the strangers
as kindly as their own offspring. They should be supplied with
plenty of gravel and crushed bones, and also be worked amongst
as much as possible, driven about the paddock and occasionally
out of it, never left too long without someone going into the pad-
dock to them; in this way they will grow up perfectly tame, can
be at all times easily mustered and driven anywhere, on the other
hand if neglected when young lively times are in store for those
who may have to manage them. Mustering half wild ostriches is
exasperating work for the men and killing work for horses.
The birds become very savage just when the chicks hatch out,
and the attendant on going into the paddock for the first time
should be armed with a stout bush to hold up the bird’s head when
charged ; this will only occur for the first two or three visits, after
which they will become perfectly quiet.
To rear chicks hatched in the incubator, more care and atten-
tion will be necessary. When they are out of the shell the broken
eggshells should be removed, and the chicks left in the drawer of
the incubator until next day, when they should be put out in the
sunshine, unless it is very hot, in which case the shade will be
better, a small space being enclosed with boards to prevent them
roaming away. Place plenty of gravel for them, and collect some
of the soft dung from the old birds, or if this is not procurable
then fresh cowdung ; they will eat a considerable quantity of this.
In their natural state the droppings from the parent birds is the
first thing they swallow. Return them to the incubator drawer
at night for the first month, or place them in a box with an empty
sack at the bottom and a blanket over the box, taking care to
leave access for fresh air. On the fourth day they will commence
eating any soft green food such as lucerne, rape, cabbage, &c.,
and will require a plentiful supply of bones crushed small. If
the weather is wet or very cold they should be kept in a light
room. After the first week they can be taken out by a boy
where there is any picking of the natural herbage, and, if this is


plentiful, they will require no artificial feeding except a little
wheat, barley, or maize when they are brought in to be housed for
the night. After the first month they can be housed in a warm
shed, and at three months old left out in the paddock unless the
weather be wet and cold, when they should be put in the shed
at night.
Where a number of breeding birds are kept, the eggs in the
incubators can be put in at the same time that some of the birds
begin to sit, so the naturally and artificially hatched chicks will
come out the same time, and can be all put with the pair of birds
which have just hatched out their eggs, thus saving the necessity
of some one being constantly with them. After they are four
months old, they will require little attention if feed is plentiful,
except frequent roundings up and driving about to keep them
tame until they are nine months old, when they may be turned
into a large paddock and left to shift for themselves, mustering
them about once a fortnight being sufficient. Their future manage-
ment is exceedingly simple and easy provided if due care has been
taken in keeping them tame while young.
The age of the birds can be determined as follows : —Seven
months old—The first crop of feathers will be quite ripe ; that is,
the drab feathers can be pulled out without bleeding and the long
white or quill feathers can be cut. Twelve months—The second
growth of feathers will be well forward and some of the cocks begin
to get their black plumage and show white on the front of their
legs and along the edge of their beaks. Two years old —The cocks
will be quite black, none of the narrow pointed chicken feathers
being visible except where the neck joins the body ; the hens will
similarly have lost all their chicken feathers, which will be replaced
by drabs. Three years old—At this age the plumage has reached
perfection ; the cocks show red on front of the legs and beak, no
traces of the chicken feathers being discernable. At four years they
have reached maturity, and there is no further guide to their age.
They can be branded on the thigh. The brand should be not
less than two-inch letters or figures ; the burning edge of the brand
being one-eighth of an inch thick and applied red hot and removed
instantly afterwards, smearing the place with oil.
TAKING THE FEATHERS.
In the early days of osti’ich-farming at the Cape it was usual to
pluck the feathers from the birds every six months, but it was soon
found that this practice in a few years rendered the birds of little
value ; the feathers at each succeeding plucking becoming shorter
and stiffer until they were of little use. After six months’ growth
the feathers are at their best, and in the case of the quill feathers,


or long white ones, if left 6n the birds even for a week longer they
begin to deteriorate —the tips go and with them a deal of the value
of the feather. After six months’ growth the blood vein in the quill
has dried up to the point where it enters the wing, and the quill can
be cut through close to the wing without drawing blood and without
pain to the bird, and this plan of cutting the quill feathers is now
invariably adopted. The short feathers —the blacks of the male and
drabs of the female, are pulled, but they are allowed to have eight
months growth, and are consequently quite dry and pulling them
does not injure the bird in any way, and they do not damage like
the quill feathers by being left so much longer. When the quill
feathers are cut the blacks or drabs, as the case may be, are pulled
out; the stumps of the quill feathers are pulled out in two months
time, and in another six months another plucking of feathers is
ready —the short feathers having been growing eight months, and
the quill feathers six; thus a full plucking is obtained from each
bird every eight months. The best implement for cutting the
feathers is a strong pair of pruning shears, and for pulling the quill
stumps, a small pair of pincers.
For taking the feathers a plucking yard is required which
should be erected in a position where access can be had to it from
all the paddocks where the birds are running. The best form of
yard is constructed as follows: —Fence in an enclosure of about
half an acre with a strong five wired fence, the wires being inter-
laced with scrub, and a wide gateway for entrance of the birds ;
at one corner of the enclosure put up a small yard about 12 feet
by 18, made of hard wood posts with strong planks nailed across
them, boarding it up to a height of five feet leaving the bottom
open for eighteen inches from the ground; at one end leave a wide
gateway to admit the birds being driven in from the larger en-
closure, and at the other end a door about two feet wide opening
outwards for passing the bird out after the plucking has been
accomplished ; opposite this door inside the yard erect a box, two
feet wide, three feet deep, and three feet from front to back, for
the bird to stand in while being operated upon. Old birds long accus-
tomed to plucking will stand in the open yard and quietly submit to be
denuded of their finery, but with young ones the above arrangement
is necessary, as it gives the person taking the feathers a better chance
of doing his work properly, as the bird has no room to move about.
For birds inclined to kick about a good deal, it is a good plan to
have a cap in readiness, made of some thick cloth something of
the shape of a stocking, large enough to slip over the bird’s head
so that he is completely blindfold, the bird’s beak being in the
part of the cap corresponding to the foot of a stocking, a small
opening being left at the end of it to admit air, with this on the
wildest bird will stand perfectly still.


When the time for plucking arrives the mob are driven into the
large enclosure, and from there the smaller yard is filled, two
pluckers then enter the yard and one of them seizes the near-
est ostrich by the neck, and slips the cap over its head,
it is then pushed into the small box facing the door of exit
and one man standing on each side it is soon divested of its
feathers, entered on the tally sheet, and let out to meditate on the
wonderful change in his appearance, which has been effected in a
few minutes. For the purpose of illustrating the mode of taking
the feathers, we will suppose the mob of birds to be young ones
which have reached the age of seven months,, at which age the
first crop of feathers are ready \ the bird having been placed in
the box, the first to be taken are three rows of the brown feathers
growing along the wing and partly covering the long whites, these
are to be pulled the whole length of the wing to its junction with
the body, next pull three rows of the flossy feathers from the lower
part of the wing, afterwards the white feathers are cut leaving
about half an inch of the quill protruding from the wing, never
pull or cut the long flossy feathers growing next the bird’s body
behind the quill feathers, these add greatly to the warmth of the
bird and are of little value. The tail feathers are next pulled, and
the operation is complete. As each bird is plucked an entry is
made on a tally sheet, and when the plucking of the lot is com-
pleted, an entry is made in a diary of the number, and an entry
also in the diary two months forward notifying that at that date
this lot of birds are ready to have their stumps pulled ; they are
then again brought into the yard as for plucking and each bird
passed through the box, the operators this time having a small
pair of pincers, and standing well behind the bird, pull out one at
a time the quills left in the wing two months previous at the time
of plucking. Care must be taken to pull the quills out straight
without twisting, or the future feathers may be injured. The
quilling of the mob completed an entry in the diary is made of the
number and date of quilling and six months forward an entry that
on that date this mob is again ready for plucking. It is necessary
to keep these entries carefully made at each operation so as to
prevent any of the birds being left with their feathers on ovei the
period of six months as they soon get damaged.
There is no fixed time of the year for taking the feathers, and
where a large number of birds are kept and young ones are con-
stantly hatched there will be feathers ready to be taken almost
every month through the year, for at whatever time of the year
the chick is hatched, in seven months afterwards the first feathers
are ripe and at every recurring period of eight months another
crop is ready for taking off. The ostrich in its natural state has
no proper moulting season, but sheds a few feathers at intervals


through the year, this accounts for the feathers of the wild birds
being so much longer and heavier than the tame ones; the wild
bird being able to devote the whole growing strength to a few
feathers at one time whereas the domesticated ostrich owing to-
the artificial process of moulting to which he is subjected is obliged
to grow the whole crop at once.
In plucking the feathers, care should be taken to tie up the
different sorts in bunches as they are taken from the birds, this
greatly facilitates the next operation, that of sorting.
PREPARING THE FEATHERS FOR MARKET.
After the plucking of the birds is completed, the next operation
will be sorting the feathers into the different classes and qualities
and packing for the London market, where feather sales are held
bi-monthly, at which there are usually upwards of two thousand
cases offered, realising from £90,000 to £IOO,OOO.
The cases are open for inspection by the intending buyers for
some days prior to the day of sale, and when the sale day arrives
are sold at per case as catalogued, the biddings advancing £2 per
bid.
It is not advisable to wash any of the feathers unless clogged
with mud as is sometimes the case with tail feathers. The manu-
facturers prefer having the feathers unwashed.
In plucking the birds the wing feathers of the cocks and hens
will have been tied in separate bunches, also the blacks, drabs, and
tails of the respective sexes, and these having been taken to the
feather room, the sorter sitting at a long table will proceed first
with the cocks’ white feathers and sort them into heaps of four
qualities. Primes, firsts, seconds, and thirds, and one heap for
tipped, that is white feathers with a black spot at the tip, then sort
each of these heaps into lengths having the feathers in each lot as
nearly as possible of the same length and quality; they should
then be tied into bunches about twenty or thirty feathers of the
longer ones in each bunch and more of the shorter ones.
The fancy black and white feathers called byocks should be
sorted into two qualities, first and second. The hens’ wing feathers
are sorted into four heaps—white, light, and two shades of dark,
these again being sorted into lengths as with the whites. All
broken or damaged feathers should be tied in bunches as a separate
lot as nothing tends more to depreciate a lot of feathers in the
eyes of a buyer than to find inferior or damaged feathers stowed
away in the bunches.
Hens’ tails should be sorted into four lots—white, light, dark,
and broken or damaged.
Cocks’ tails are sorted into three lengths with a heap for the
coloured tails or whites with black butts. Blacks and drabs are


sorted into long, medium, and short, with two qualities for each,
the floss feathers being made up in one lot for each colour.
Chicken feathers are sorted into whites, light, and dark, and the
drabs into two lots of long and short.
The different lots are then weighed and entered on a sheet, each
lot of feathers bearing a ticket on which is shown the number of
bunches comprising the lot and the weight, they are then packed
in a strong zinc-lined case such as drapery is imported in, the cover
being securely soldered down, the case nailed up, and as an extra
precaution against pilferage it should be sewn up in canvas, then
bound with hoop iron, and is ready for shipment.
DISEASES OF OSTRICHES.
Ostriches up to the present have not been subject to any disease
which can be called infectious or contagious, the principal trouble
being with internal parasites with which they become infested in
times of severe drought or scarcity of feed from any cause. As
soon as the birds get into low condition these parasites seem to get
the upper hand of them, and unless they are given a dose of
medicine will quickly die. These parasites (the Strongylus) infest
the stomach of the bird in countless thousands, burying themselves
in the mucous membrane, principally in the region of the gastric
glands. They are so small as to be almost invisible to the naked
eye, and upon a post-mortem examination of the stomach it shows
the appearance of being much inflamed, and if examined through
a microscope or even a strong magnifying-glass, these worms, having
having the appearance of fine red hairs, will be seen in myriads.
The bird when it becomes infested with them rapidly falls off in
condition and the droppings resemble those of sheep, coming away
in small pellets. For a long time these worms defied all efforts to
extirpate them, and they were rapidly conveyed to whole mobs of
birds through the ova of the worm, which passed from the bird
with the dung, being picked up by other birds in feeding. Tobacco
juice, sulphur and lime, sulphuric acid, and other remedies were
tried, but with no effect, until the matter became so serious that
the Government Veterinary at the Cape was directed to investigate
the disease and endeavour to discover a remedy, which he eventu-
ally did finding carbolic acid to be the only effectual remedy. This
disease —called the Strongylus Douglassi —is the only serious one to
which the ostrich has been subject to so far; the doses and mode
of administering the remedies are given at the end of this chapter.
Tapeworm. —At the Cape all young ostriches suffer from this
worm, and unless taken in hand early they soon die from it. So
far, I have not seen or heard of a single case of tapeworm among
the birds in Australia. Should tapeworm make its appearance


(which can be easily detected by noticing white spots on the dung
of the birds), a dose of the vermifuges mentioned at the end of the
chapter will soon effect a cure; but they will most likely keep on
re-appearing at intervals until the birds are two years old, after
which they seem to be free from them.
In seasons of extreme dryness, when feed is parched, stoppage of
the intestines is often very troublesome.
Wounds.—The ostriches, from their timid nature, are very
liable to wounds, caused by running into fences or fighting among
themselves, but, fortunately, their flesh heals with wonderful
rapidity. Severe wounds if carefully sewn up and dressed with
carbolic oil to keep the flies off (one of carbolic acid to two of oil)
heal in a few days ; often the lower parts of the legs get badly
injured through becoming entangled in the wires of fences, and the
skin so cut as to be iupossible to unite again ; in this case it is
best to bind the injured part Avith rags steeped in carbolic oil and
left for the flesh to grow again. If the muscles are cut of course
nothing can be done.
Broken Wings. —Young birds often get their wings put out at
the first joint, this will be noticed by the wing hanging down;
it can be easily pulled into place again, and should then be tied
over the back to the other wing.
The birds will sometimes through attempting to swallow large
jagged bones get them stuck in their necks, if with gentle pressure
the bone cannot be forced up and extracted, the skin of the neck
should be slit open and another opening made in the gullet, and
after extracting the bone, a few stitches put in each of the inci-
sions will set the bird right again.
In administering medicine to an ostrich a long-necked bottle
should be used, and the bird’s beak being held open, the neck of
the bottle is pushed as far as possible down the throat of the
bird to prevent any of the mixture entering the windpipe.
Remedy for Strongylus Douglassi : Dose the bird the first day
with the following mixture :
Turpentine one ounce,
Pepper one dessert spoonful,
Raw linseed oil half-a-pint.
Next day give the following :
Carbolic acid 3 drachms,
Glycerine 6 drachms,
Water 8 ounces.
First mix the acid with the glycerine and then add the water.
This treatment continued for three doses each, the oil one day and
the acid the next will effectually rid the birds of these parasites.
For Tapeworm in young ostriches, give Extract of Male Fern
made into pills with flour, in the following quantities—the birds to


fast twelve hours before dosing. For two months’ old, one ounce
of the Oil makes thirty-two pills; for three months’ the same
quantity makes twelve to sixteen pills ; four months’ ten pills ;
six months’ and over, one ounce made into eight pills.
In cases of stoppage of the intestines, nothing is better than
one pound of Epsom salts, one and a-half ounces of turpentine
mixed in warm water.
A good tonic dose to improve the appetite of sick birds which
are recovering:—
Salt one table-spoonful,
Sulphate of iron one tea-spoonful,
Pepper one dessert-spoonful.
W. K. Thomas & Co., Prmteis, Grenfell Street, Adelaide.


