

«
*
fcr
/


.
' . . i
.
■ ■ * \ %1
.
■ *
■
■
* i
. ■ < . #
■ _


OTAGO,
AND THE
MIDDLE ISLAND OF NEW ZEALAND.
A WARNING TO EMIGRANTS.
ALIQUIS.
“ Man, vain man!
Dressed in a little brief authority,
Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven,
As make the angels weep.”
SHAKSPEABE.
MELBOURNE:
GEORGE ROBERTSON, 69, ELIZABETH STREET.
DUNEDIN: LIVINGSTON BROTHEES, GEORGE STREET ; AND
WILLIAM HAY, PRINCE AND MANSE STREETS.
1866.
Price Sixpence.


"


OTAGO,
AND THE
MIDDLE ISLAND OF NEW ZEALAND.
CHAPTER I.
The state of society in Dunedin Assaults and demoralisation
—History of John Jones and his father—Venality of the
bench—Constant miscarriage of justice—Description of Jones’s
assaults—History of John Gillies the late Sheriff—His extraor-
dinary conduct. —Judge Chapman—His wonderful charge to a
jury, &c.
So much trouble has been taken to puff Otago, both
by means of pamphlets, and hired lecturing agents,
that I deem it a public service to publish a few obser-
vations I jotted down while there. I fear I shall not
paint the province in such glowing colours as its petty
government and the land speculators could wish;
nevertheless, although my views may be considered by
them to be somewhat adverse, I believe they will find
nothing set down which is not capable of proof.
I propose to advert, in the first place, in these pages,
to the social and political state of Otago, (a subject
which should be of the first interest to those who in-
tend emigrating); and afterwards, to glance at the


capabilities, prospects, climate, appearance, produc-
tions, &c., of the province.
When I arrived in the colony, in 1861, I found the
capital, Dunedin, to be a little township, something
like a small fishing village at home; and inhabited by
a population consisting chiefly of very needy, “ rigidly
righteous,” but whisky-loving, unprincipled Scotch-
men. With these were mixed a few of the worst
specimens from England and the neighbouring colonies ;
not omitting a sprinkling of the convict element from
New South Wales.
Of course, in a community of this description, life
and property were by no means safe. Swindling was
rampant, and assaults of almost daily occurrence; though
by far the greater number of these were committed by
one man, of whom I shall treat hereafter, and who, on
account of his wealth, almost always escaped punish-
ment, nearly every individual in the place being in his
debt. This man, a son of Tom Jones, a notorious con-
vict of Botany Bay, ruled the town of Dunedin, the
capital of Otago, by dint of money bags and fisticuffs.
A skipper from Sierra Leone being asked to describe
it, said, <e It was a place where a naked nigger walked
down the Bazaar, bought a water-melon for a couple of
cowry shells, cut it in two, scooped out one half and
sat in it, scooped out the other half and put it on his
headand this was thought to give a very good idea
of the place. In like manner I may say, that Dunedin
was, in 1861, a place where the beggarly community,
if it displeased John Jones, (an old Sydney waterman
and slop-seller, who had settled in Otago as a whaler,)
could be punished by having its whisky raised sixpence
a bottle, or its sugar twopence a pound. This latter, I


was assured, actually occurred in a very comical way.
An auction took place, and the tyrant of this petty
Syracuse was there, determined to purchase an easy
chair in which to repose his squat gorilla-like frame
after the labours of the day, which had probably con-
sisted in either punching the heads of some of the
community, or calculating mentally , (for the pen was
beyond his powers,) the profits he had made on the
goods supplied to them. At this auction, a few jokers,
not having sufficiently the terror of Jones’s fists or his
money before their eyes, for amusement, bid him up,
and carried off the prize. But old Jones had his re-
venge. “This will cost you twopence a pound on
your sugar,” cried he ; and immediately he went round
to all the shops and ordered twopence a pound to be
put on the sugar ! This he was enabled to do, because
he was the only importer of any goods into the colony.
He was also the only rich man, and every trader, and
almost every person was in his debt; and there being
no bank in the province, he monopolised the benefits
and power which such an establishment would have
acquired. This man’s wealth had been made by whal-
ing, trading, and the purchase of land on the usual
ridiculous terms (a few blankets or muskets), from the
natives: and when, some fifteen years ago, a colony
was founded at Otago by a party of poor Scotch emi-
grants under Captain Cargill, Jones, who had settled
there as a whaler ten or twelve years before, had them
completely at his mercy; absorbing all the money of
the settlers, and then obtaining mortgages over their
property. The history of this man is a curious one,
and though, from prudential motives, I cannot give it
very fully, yet, as I believe the character and position


of Otago to have been very much influenced by his
example, it may not be inappropriate to give a brief
sketch of him. Before doing so, however, I must add
a few words on the state of society in Dunedin. In
the biography of Peter Cartwright, the American
backwoods’ preacher, I stumbled on a description of the
place where his father settled in Kentucky, which is
exactly applicable to Dunedin. He says, “ When my
father settled in Logan County, it was called Rogue’s
Harbour. Here many refugees from all parts of the
Union fled to escape justice or punishment, for although
there was law, it could not be executed, and it was a
desperate state of society. Murderers, horse-thieves,
highway robbers, and counterfeiters fled here(as
applied to Dunedin, there must be added, bankrupts ,
smugglers, convicts, and convict’s sons, runaway whalers
and pimps.) “ These villains combined and formed the
majority. The honest and civil part of the community
would prosecute these wretched banditti, but they would
swear each other clear; and they really put all law at
defiance, and carried on such desperate violence and
outrage, that the honest part of the citizens seemed to
be driven to the necessity of uniting and combining
together, and taking the law into their own hands.
This was a very desperate state of things.”
To the list of blackguards found in “ Rogue’s Har-
bour,” there might be added in the case of Dunedin,
as I am in a position to prove, pimps, convicts, and con-
vict’s sons; which latter, if their fathers deserved
transportation commonly (as witness the state of New
South Wales), deserve the road gang in irons, if not
hanging.
In June, 1861, some gold fields (which, however,


have proved insignificant,) were discovered, and a con-
siderable rush of diggers took place from Melbourne,
followed by a large number of shopkeepers, merchants,
speculators, &c. The town of Dunedin immediately
became a busy place, instead’of a “sleepy hollow/’ as
formerly; and it is now of considerable size, and to
some extent, improved, though still a dirty, muddy
slough.
I had expected that a great social improvement
would consequently have taken place; this, how-
ever, is unfortunately not the case. About the begin-
ning of this year even, assaults, some of them of a
murderous description, would seem to have been com-
mon. A Mr. McCombe, feeling aggrieved by the gossips,
wrote an article in a newspaper, entitled “ The School
for Scandal.” For this he was twice assaulted in the
streets, and once in the theatre. On this last occasion,
he was attacked by a Mr. R. B. Martin, one of the
churchwardens of the English Church, who conceived
that he was alluded to in a paragraph which spoke of
one of the gentlemen who carried blue bags round in
church after service ; though I understood, that in fact,
it was a Mr. Strode, the police magistrate, that was re-
ferred to! Thus, Mr. McCombe was nearly losing
his life through Mr. Martin’s mistake ; not that I
suppose he actually had murderous intentions, or
would have been able to put such, had they existed, in
execution, being but a little man, of no very warlike
appearance. Indeed, he would appear to have come
off with a black eye, and to have had much the worst
of the fight, till he raised the hue and cry against Mr.
McCombe, who was then attacked by the partisans of
the former, and whose life was nearly sacrificed by the


mob. It appears he was seized and carried out of the
theatre, being beaten all the way, and at last was left
in a state of insensibility in the hands of the police,
who, notwithstanding the superintendent and several of
the men were in the theatre at the time, appear to have
been very tardy in performing their duty.
An action was afterwards brought by Mr. McCombe
against Mr. Martin, when the jury found for the com-
plainant, with one farthing damages! I may here remark
that such a commodity as justice is quite unattainable
in Dunedin. The general feeling was with Martin, and
hence the verdict; but anyone who was present at the
trial, must have been satisfied, (notwithstanding the
rather hard swearing to support him,) that Martin had
been guilty of an assault, from which had resulted
grievous damage to the plaintiff both in person and
pocket.
It might have been supposed that these assaults would
have been sufficient for this one case. But no ! the
editor of the paper which published the alleged libel,
(which was described as scurrilous, but which I never
saw), was also assaulted in the theatre, which appears
to have been considered the fittest place for these gla-
diatorial displays.
This editor, Mr. Grant of the Saturday Review, I
will let speak for himself. With great clearness, and
sturdy independence, he appears to combine consider-
able eccentricity. Nevertheless his statements of facts
appear to be correct; and I am hardly prepared to say
that he exaggerates, albeit, he pourtrays a state of
things, of which Kentucky or Arkansas even, in their
most rowdy times, furnish only a feeble reflex. He says,
“ Dunedin, the capital, and chief centre of population.


is socially and morally rotten at the core. Every
honourable feeling is either dormant from fear, or
actually crushed out by evil practices and example.
Dunedin bids fair to eclipse in infamy all other towns,
whether in Spain, Portugal, or Italy ; whether in Tip-
perary, Mexico, California, or Peru. Her citizens are
becoming more than Americanised. Ruffianism now
stalks abroad on the chief promenade of Dunedin, with
visage unabashed, under the protection of the Press
and the police, smashing open men’s heads with ham-
mer-headed whips. It is dangerous to utter a word
against c the powers that be.’ It is instantly called
libellous, and one obscure print incites the public to such
blackguardly actions. It wishes that such whips should
be placed in the hands of all men, to be used whenever
they or their actions are touched upon.
“ About two months ago the Editor of this journal
was nearly strangled in one of the front boxes of the
theatre, in the presence of the judges of the land, and
violent efforts were used to drag him out of the theatre,
so that he might be effectually waylaid, and yet the
police did not take the dastardly cowards in charge.
When these were allowed to escape, they escorted him
home; that was all. Next morning the most illiterate
paper in New Zealand had an infamous article on the
matter —an article indirectly justifying assassination,
and scarcely concealing its displeasure that the Editor
was not killed!
“ The Editor summoned one of the assailants to the
Police Court. He also summoned as witnesses, the
two judges of the Supreme Court. The Resident Ma-
gistrate, when the case came on, left the bench, and
the Sheriff came on and adjourned the trial for a week;


by that time, witnesses were off, and when the case
came on again, the conduct of the Sheriff was such,
that it was clear justice was not to be had, and, there-
fore, the Editor threw up the charge in disgust.
“On the 3rd instant, two articles appeared in the
Review: One on the Auckland and Otago police, and
the other on Inspector Morton.
‘ “In the first article it was shown that the Auckland
force cost annually, ten thousand pounds sterling,
whereas, the Otago force cost One Hundred Thousand
Pounds; that there were more people in Auckland
than in Otago, and that rents and provisions were
cheaper in Otago than in Auckland.
“ The other article on Inspector Morton pointed the
argument. He took fire at it, and in the course of the
day, he thrice threatened the Editor with a weapon
having a large block on one end —not the end in his
hand. Parties muttered throughout the day their
apprehensions that the Editor would be assaulted, but
as they would not disclose, from fear or cowardice, the
secret, the Editor declined to leave his post till his
work was done.
“ As the evening advanced, Inspector Morton came
up, and menacingly held over the head of the Editor
the block end of the stick, in the presence of one of
the police. Why did not that officer take him in
charge ? When going away, the Editor told him he
had no ill-will to him as an individual—that he was at
war only with the expensive system. ‘ But I have an
ill-will to you/ rejoined Inspector Morton. Next
time he came round there were no police, (for he was
seen previously taking one of the police aside, and
from that moment the station was abandoned; and he


raised his hand, and with the block end of his weapon,
struck a murderous blow in the forehead over the brain
of the Editor of the Saturday Review,
“He was forthwith carried home in a cab, and has
lingered in great pain ever since. These lines are
written in great torture. Dr. Crawford promptly at-
tended, and enjoined strict quietness, for fear of com-
pression of the brain.
“ The Press was silent as the grave. Letters from
indignant parties were refused insertion. Next morning,
a Dr. Hocken and three policemen from the Barracks
called at the residence of the Editor, and were told
that the doctor had ordered deep silence, and that they
could not come in. However, Dr. Hocken went in,
and said that ‘ Mr. Morton had a duty to perform to
himself/ and went down to town and told that it was
only a slight abrasion.
“ The Editor had been previously summoned as a
witness in a case then impending in the Supreme Court,
and on the strength of Hocken’s report, he was daily an-
noyed with parties wishing to force him, under penalty
of committal, to attend court. However, the Judge
adjourned the case, on receipt of Dr. Crawford’s cer-
tificate, and the Editor, when it again came on, was
conveyed in a half-conscious state to the room of the
Grand Jury. The people seeing how weak he was, did
not annoy him with questions, when they saw him in the
car outside. But Inspector Morton, ere the car started
back again, came up and thus accosted him —‘ Grant,
if you ever write anything about me, I will smash you
down within an inch of your life/ The Editor took no
notice of that.
“ Such is Dunedin, and such is the fate of the man


who will dare to speak out the truth—the very truth,
most pure. The noise of that blow sounds yet, in his
left ear, and the noise of it in his brain, is like the
dropping of a marble in a tin vessel. Justice in Otago,
is out of the question. Revenge, the editor hates; but
an indelible stain is fastened on the community that
tolerates such outrages.
“ The city where life is not sacred all men will shun
as they would avoid a plague. The city where crime
is connived at, and the murderous ruffian sympathised
with, and the public conscience darkened and deadened
to silence; and the Press either gagged, or inciting to
deeds of blood, is an Aceldama on God's earth. But
God's eye seeth it, and the Most High regardeth it.
“As for the life of the Editor of the Saturday Re-
view, that is in the hands of God. He can take it or
preserve it, when the appointed mission is fulfilled.
* Living or dying, we are the Lord’s.' Fighting the
people’s battle, in the leading thoroughfare of Dunedin,
the Editor of the Saturday Review received a mortal
wound that will follow him to his grave, from the head
Inspector of Police. And the people is silent! !!
But the stones from out of the walls shall yet cry out
to Heaven for Justice, and shall upbraid the silent
instigators of such murderous actions. Man's laws, as
at Dunedin, may wink at crime ; but God's laws, like
the Eumenides, never sleep ."
I think, after reading the foregoing, it will be
admitted that every one who goes to Dunedin, should
be careful not to venture out of doors without being
well armed.
In the case of Morton, the Inspector of police, Grant
brought an action before the resident magistrate, a


Mr. Cheethim Strode (rather a suggestive name), who,
not to belie his name, gave a very brilliant decision, and
fined the chief Inspector one shilling.
It is hardly possible to stigmatise too strongly the
degraded state of a community where all this could
occur. Here we have a chief Inspector, who is ap •
pointed and paid to watch over the peace of the town,
setting the worst example to the people, taking the
law into his own hands, and either for a real or imagin-
ary offence, attacking one of those he is paid for pro-
tecting, and inflicting what he considers a “ slight tap
but what Mr. Grant and his medical attendant describes
as a “ murderous blow.” There can be no doubt that
a severe assault was committed; and there can be as
little doubt that an article in a paper, such as this one
has been described, chiefly exposing the inefficiency
of the police, and advocating their reduction, affords
not the slightest palliation for so wanton an outrage.
If Grant were giving any offence to Morton (in offering
him his paper as alleged for sale), which he thought
himself justified in noticing, it was his duty to give him
in charge to another policeman, or to remove him
quietly to the lock-up. But if Morton’s conduct was a
disgrace to his cloth, what shall be said of Strode’s ?
His decision that “ Morton’s conduct was justifiable,”
is simply like most of his decisions, beyond, or, rather,
beneath criticism. Apropos of Strode, I may mention
that I was informed that the lawyers of the place were
about to petition for his removal, on account of the
absurd decisions he was daily in the habit of giving.*
But to return to Morton—he remained in the full
* One of the newspapers says he is “ as fit for the bench as for
a chair in a university !”


enjoyment of his inspectorship, neither the head of the
police nor any of the authorities, taking any notice of his
delinquency!
Such a case I fancy it would be difficult to find a
a parallel to in any civilized community.
" Perhaps an account of Captain Henderson’s case
will show the lawlessness that prevailed in Dunedin,
and the impossibility of obtaining justice there,
especially against any of the old hands, or “the clique,”
(as they were called), better than anything else.
I must first, however, give the history of John
Jones, the autocrat of Dunedin, and the principal
actor in this affair ; premising, that for reasons which
can be easily guessed, it must be to some extent im-
perfect. Having heard Jones say on oath before the
Dunedin Bench, that he was not a convict, and that
“as far as he knew his father was not a convict,” I
made it my business to inquire into the matter, when in
Sydney; for in Dunedin it was universally said and
believed that he was the son of a convict; and I felt
satisfied that if he were so, he must know it perfectly
well. That he could be ignorant of it seemed utterly
impossible.
In Sydney I found plenty of people who knew Jones
well, and remembered his somewhat sudden disap-
pearance on his failing in his slop-shop, while some of
these had been over in New Zealand, and had identified
him there. Of his father it was equally easy to obtain
information, as a record is kept in the office of the
superintendent of police, of all convicts who have
arrived in the colony, stating their crimes, dates of
arrival, and subsequent career.
The information furnished to me, and especially tho


depositions of John Phillips, a fellow waterman of the
two Jones’s, father and son, are very full. This
Phillips obtained his licence as a waterman on the same
day that Tom Jones the convict obtained his; and he
sa y S —“ J knew Tom Jones, the father of John Jones
of Dunedin, well. He was an old transport or convict.
He was for some time a policeman. He afterwards
became a waterman, at the same time I did. Every-
one knew he was an old transport, there was no con-
cealment about it, and his son John, who pulled in the
boat with him, knew it as well as the rest of us. Tom
Jones’ daughter. Bet, married Moore, the publican,
and had no family by him, but” * * * * &c. &c.
“He (Jones), was the lowest lived wretch that ever
lived. He used, whenever he quarrelled with any
one” ******* here follows matter too
revolting to publish, describing his peculiarly cowardly
mode of attack by kicking. "He was too great a
brute to speak about.” With difficulty I obtained the
remainder of the deposition from my informant, who
said he was ashamed to speak even of what he knew.
Of course I cannot stain these pages with a recital of
the facts. Suffice it to say that old Jones is stated to
have been guilty of, and brought up at the police
court, for one of the most revolting and unnatural
crimes that are known to fallen humanity; and that,
even among the scourings of the British jails, collected
at Botany Bay, he was pre-eminent.
The history of the members of his family, whether
they kept crimping houses for sailors, or public houses,
was also given.
With regard to John Jones of Dunedin, he is stated
to have pulled an oar in his father’s boat for many


years, till a certain traffic carried on with the frigates
“ War spite/’ £< Rainbow,” and “Volage,” and another
kind of traffic carried on with the merchantman “ Lar-
kins,” put him in possession of some £7OO. He then
opened a slop-shop, in which he failed, when he went to
New Zealand rather suddenly, and never returned.
I am precluded from saying more, though the depo-
sitions do not end here. I was informed in Dunedin,
that John Jones was quite the notorious bully of the
place. Every one who offended him was immediately
assaulted. Sometimes he got a thrashing, though
generally, being of great strength, and accustomed to
fighting, he inflicted serious injury. He had assaulted
the magistrate, Mr. Harris, and the commissioner of
Crown Lands, Mr. Cutten. He had assaulted his
groom in the presence of a clergyman at Waikawaite,
and been thrashed by him. Ditto as to Gaily the black-
smith. He had assaulted Mr. Johnston, the tutor of
his children, for wiping his mouth with the table-cloth
at dinner, it is said, and been knocked down in return.
This was the solitary instance in which redress was
obtained, the assault costing Jones a thousand pounds;
but this redress never could have been had in Dunedin.
Mr. Johnston only obtained justice by carrying the
case to Canterbury, the adjoining province. But it
would be tedious to repeat the names of all the persons,
captains of ships, labourers, clerks, &c., who have
been mentioned to me, as having been assaulted by him.
Their name is legion. Suffice it to say that the clerk
who cleared my baggage at the wharf, told me he had
frequently run away from Jones on the wharf, to escape
his assaults, and the very first carter who brought me
* Which must be nameless.


a load of wood, stated that he also had been assaulted
by him. I shall only further mention one of the more
recent cases. Jones's son Alfred (of whom more anon),
having displeased him, was, I am informed, savagely
attacked by his father, and narrowly escaped with his
life, having been left with several of his ribs broken !*
I will now pass on to Captain Henderson's case, as
it has been fully reported to me, giving it for the most
part in his own words. He unfortunately sailed from
London in the ship “ Chile," bound for Otago. And
here I may pause to recommend any one proceeding to
New Zealand, to avoid the ships sailing direct to Otago,
on account of the very inferior class of passengers to
be met with in them. It will be better always, to choose
a vessel bound for Lyttleton, Canterbury, or, for Mel-
bourne, in Australia, in which ports, steamers can be
readily found plying to Otago.
In the f Chil6,’ Captain Henderson says, I found
the company in the saloon of a very inferior de-
scription ; and the captain, though a very good-natured,
obliging man, appeared to be quite unable to keep
order among them.
Among the passengers was Alfred Jones, (who is
mentioned above as having been recently assaulted by
his father,) a young man of a most unpleasant,
bloated, animalised countenance, addicted to drinking,
and of thorough colonial manners.
The disturbances created in the saloon at night, by
the orgies of this young man and his companions,
reached such a pitch, that I and another gentleman.
* I should mention, that Jones had been a magistrate though
he could not write, but had been struck off the list on account of
his frequent assaults.


finding the Captain (Turnbull) unable or unwilling to
put a stop to them, threatened him with legal proceed-
ings, on landing.* In consequence of this, young
Jones conceived a dislike to me, and endeavoured to
annoy me as much as he thought he safely could; and
at last, after sitting in the saloon nearly all night in
company with one of his companions, a Mr. Logan,
and making a great disturbance, he proceeded to jump
on the deck over my cabin, to the great annoyance of
my wife and child. He then, about daylight, entered
the saloon quite drunk; threw coffee against the door
and Venetians of my cabin, and shouted at the top of
his voice, using the most disgusting and filthy language;
when the Captain at last entered, and taking a bottle of
brandy from him, hauled him|by the collar to his cabin,
and shut him in. For this he richly deserved a caning;
I, however, knowing he was born in Sydney, hazarded
the remark in his hearing, but addressed to another
person, that it was a pity there were not cells in the
ship to confine young convicts in. The cap fitted to
a nicety, and he immediately put it on, asking me “if
I referred to him;” upon which I threatened to horse-
whip him if he spoke to me, whereupon he thought it
advisable to sneak away quietly, without making any
reply.
After this he remained crestfallen for the rest of the
voyage, and peace and order were restored in the ship.
On arriving in Dunedin he informed his father that I
had called him (Alfred Jones) “the son of a convict,” a
statement which was utterly untrue. The father then
laid a plan to inveigle me into his office and assault
jne.
* Jones tbe elder was agent for the ship,


For about a fortnight he failed to find a sufficiently
private opportunity to effect his purpose. During this
fortnight I constantly met him walking with his son
Alfred, who could not have failed to point me out to
him, but as on these occasions I was always walking
with Mr. E. B. Cargill, he took care not to address me,
or rather, I should say, to assault me, for that was his
object, and not to obtain satisfaction.
During this fortnight also, I called at his office for a
letter from England, which I heard had arrived, ad-
dressed to his care, as agent for the “ Chile.” He was
not in; and on looking over the letters for the pas-
sengers, I found that it had been removed from among
them . Mr. Ticehurst, one of our passengers, informed
me, a day or two after, that Alfred Jones had told him,
his father (old Jones) “was carrying about a letter for
me in his pocket, in order to have an opportunity of
giving me a bit of his mind.” Happening, about a
fortnight after our arrival, to have a note for Captain
Turnbull of the “ Chile,” I left it at Jones’s office.
Jones was then sitting at his desk, with a clerk opposite
him. I laid the note on the desk, and left the office to
join Mr. E. B. Cargill, who was waiting some twenty
or thirty yards off for me.
When I had gone a few paces, a clerk came after me
to say that Mr. Jones wished to see me in the office,
as he had a letter for me. Supposing this was the
missing English letter, and forgetting the quarrel with
Jones’s son, and the character I had heard of him, as
well as the threat conveyed by Alfred Jones to Mr.
Ticehurst, and also being ignorant of the falsehood
told by young Jones to his father, I returned to the
b 2


office, quite unsuspectingly. As I entered, I met the
clerks leaving the office, but this circumstance did not
strike me at the time as of any import.
Having asked Jones if he had a letter for me, he
took a letter from his desk, and said, (taking his tone I
suppose from his usual style of associates,) “ I am
credibly informed the person this letter is for, is a
cattle stealer, a swindler, and a bastard !”
There is some choice Botany Bay language, which
only his antecedents could have supplied him with.
This language was so extraordinary, and so ridiculous,
as applied to me, that I thought he meant to say that
the letter was for some other person.
However, on reflection, in case it should be meant
for me, I said, “ whoever told you, that, if he applied
it to me, is a liar.”
Meanwhile, Jones, instead of handing the letter
across the desk to me, had been quietly walking round
the end of the desk, holding the letter out, and, as I
held my hand out for it, he suddenly dropped it, and
struck me a shower of heavy blows on the head.
I was knocked down senseless, and on coming to
myself, found I was on the floor in a reclining position
against the wall, the cowardly ruffian pressing me down
and showering blows on my head and face. By strik-
ing upwards, I drove him off, and regained my feet,
and after exchanging some blows, attempted to leave
the office, when he dragged me into it and knocked me
down a second time. 1, however, again drove him off,
and on regaining my feet, I was enabled to defend my-
self with effect, having, in spite of his very great
strength and noted pugilistic powers, in a few minutes


given him, according to his own account and my ob-
servation, a black eye and a bloody nose.
I have little doubt, that notwithstanding my feeble
state at the time, from long illness, and from having
just come off a very protracted sea voyage, I should
have punished the ruffian severely, without much de-
triment to myself, had I not been taken by surprise in
the cunning and cowardly manner before mentioned,
as, after recovering my senses, I was enabled to stop
almost every blow he made, and succeeded in planting
many on his ugly countenance.
On stepping outside the office, after we had by
mutual consent separated, I, in a moment of exasper-
ation, promised the ruffian a thrashing if he would come
out of his den, which, however he declined to do; and
I k mention this solely because it was thought much
against me to have done so (though! I cannot perceive
it) ; and I do not wish any part of the affair to be con.
cealed.
At a little distance outside, I found Mr. E. B. Cargill
waiting for me, and to him I related the events exactly
as I have told them here. He accompanied me to the
police station where I found a policeman, one Outram,
before whom I laid a charge against Jones, of assault,
and I added that I also charged him with robbery, in
so far as that he had snapped my watch chain, and my
seals remained in his office.
Outram refused to apprehend him, but went to his
office and found my seals. Mr. Cargill then accom-
panied me to a lawyer's, to whom as well as to some
seven or eight gentlemen, I the same evening, in Mr.
C.'s presence related the particulars of the assault as
above.


Next morning, the resident magistrate being absent,
Mr. Cargill took me to Mr. Gillies, the sheriff, in order
to apply for a summons ; and to him I related, on oath,
the history of the assault, in the same manner as I had
done the previous evening to Mr. Cargill and the
others.
It was clearly Mr. Gillies’ duty to have at once issued
a summons, on my sworn testimony, that an aggravated
assault had been committed. Instead of this, he pro-
ceeded to cross-question me, as if he had been Jones’s
advocate. He expressed great surprise that I had not
struck Jones, on his using such foul language—and not
only surprise, but I may say disappointment, returning
again and again to the subject, and saying, “ surely
you would strike a man who used such languageand
on my reiterating that I was taken by surprise, and had
no time to strike, even if inclined; and, further, that I
did not know if the gross terms were applied to me,
or if Jones meant to say the letter was for some other
person of bad character, such as he described, Mr.
Gillies put the strange question, “ Might you not have
struck Jones with your umbrella while falling ?”
Considering this a supremely silly question, I merely
replied, “ How can I tell what happened when I was
senseless.”
The summons was then granted, and, as I was going
out at the door, Mr. Gillies followed me, and said,
“ Might you not have made some involuntary motion
or start when Jones used the foul language ?”
I replied carelessly, and thinking it possible I might
have turned my head in a surprised manner, though
on reflection I am certain I did not, “ Perhaps I
might.”


Gillies then smiled in a very peculiar manner, and
said, “ Oh! I thought so.”
This I solemnly declare to have been all that passed.
Gillies’s manner and conduct struck me as strange. He
appeared to have already heard one version of the as-
sault, and to be cross-examining me on Jones’s behalf
as if he were counsel for him on his trial. Especially
1 distrusted the look of intelligence and satisfaction he
put on, when he had extracted from me the careless
because immaterial admission that I might have given
a start on hearing such unusual and brutal language.
My surprise at Gillies’s conduct considerably diminished
when I found, a few days after, that his son was Jones’s
standing attorney and counsel (as they style themselves
there), and that father and son resided in the same
house!
I should here mention that old Gillies, the
had been an attorney in the little town of Rothsay, in
Bute, before emigrating; and that he practised for a
considerable time in Dunedin, where the cases he took
up were not always of the purest nature, as, for in-
stance, when he pursued a Mr. Miller for wages said
to be due for a couple of years to a helpless, friendless
boy, whom, out of charity, he, Mr. M. had taken into
his house, and brought up with his own children.
I personally found the sheriff to be a man of a coarse,
forbidding aspect, with an oily, insinuating, yet self-
sufficient manner, which impressed me with the idea of
great —well, I will call it depth—but decidedly, not
depth of intellect. I did not think that either “ Esto
quod esse videris,” or “ animo non astutia,” would do
for his motto.
The next move in Jones’s game was my being served


by him (of course through Gillies’s son) with a cross
summons for assault. This was served several days
after I had obtained the summons against him, and
only the night before the case was to be heard ! Mean-
while, he had secured the attendance of a considerable
number of his creatures on the Bench. On the day of
trial, having sworn to the facts of the case, as I have
previously stated them, I called Mr. E. B. Cargill, who
proved my going to Jones's office to leave a letter, my
coming out of the office with marks of an assault on
my person, and my proceeding at once to the police
station, and charging Jones with the assault.
Policeman Outram proved my charging Jones with
assault, and also his finding my watch seals in his
office.
Mills, a clerk in Jones’s office, proved having called
me into the office by Jones’s orders, and William
Johnstone, another clerk, proved that he and the other
clerks had received orders, some days previously, from
Jones, to leave the office , (t at any time when Captain
Henderson might come in !” Finally, Jones himself
admitted having given that order. He further admit-
ted having abstracted my letter from among the others,
and used it as a decoy, to obtain an opportunity of
seeing me in private. He also admitted having used
the foul language imputed to him, “ for the purpose of
creating a row, and in the expectation that it would
lead to a breach of the peace.” He further admitted
that, after having a scuffle with me, he dragged me
back into the office when 1 was leaving it, and half out
of it, and renewed the fight.
After this evidence, the bench decided on hearing
Jones's counter summons before giving their decision.


Jones now swore that on using the foul language, I
made a blow at him with my umbrella,* but missed him,
whereupon he struck me; he also brought his son Al-
fred to swear that I had called him the “ son of a con-
a month or two previously—a statement not only
untrue, but irrelevant to the inquiry; and damaging to
himself, as showing he entertained a feeling of anger
and revenge against me.
During the hearing of both cases, Gillies, (whose
son appeared for Jones, in conjunction with Howarth,
the provincial solicitor) cross-examined me, took notes,
and altogether acted as if he were there to assist Jones.f
The bench having heard both cases, decided that
there was “no evidence to show who committed the
first assault,” and bound us both over to keep the peace
for six months—Jones in fifteen hundred pounds, and
myself in one hundred and fifty; pretty plainly show-
ing how much confidence they had in Jones’s peaceable
habits.
The majority, which came to this decision, con-
sisted of Messrs, Gillies, McAndrew, Young, Lloyd,
Hogue, Strode, and a “ Captain” Fraser, Of Gillies I
need say nothing at present. McAndrew, whose face
must have been of “ triple brass” to sit on the bench,
was Superintendent of the Province, and he was at the
time under suspension, on a charge of embezzling some
sixty thousand pounds of the public money, for which
he was shortly after dismissed. He had also had many
transactions with Jones.
Young was a storekeeper and auctioneer, who had
also much to do with Jones. On the night of the
* Was tnis the defence suggested by Gillies senior or junior?
f I could obtain no lesral assistance myself!


assault he expressed to me his disgust at the constant
ruffianism of Jones, in committing assaults. He had,
however, been fined for committing an assault himself,
in the streets of Dunedin.
Lloyd and Hogue were two farmers from the
country both, I was informed, deeply indebted to
Jones. Strode was a magistrate, whose decisions, I have
previously mentioned, gave general dissatisfaction.
With his connection with Jones I am not so well ac-
quainted ; but there was not one of the residents in
Dunedin who was not more or less connected with him,
or in his power.
Captain Fraser, like Young, had, previous to the
trial, expressed to me his disgust at Jones’s conduct.
He was a client of Jones’s, who supplied him with
stores, gave him advances, and shipped his wool—
though of course I hope he was not influenced by that.
So much for the majority.
The minority, one of whom, Mr. Cutten, gave a
decision, (adhered to by all the others, except Mr.
Harris, who merely found Jones guilty,) to the effect
that Jones had been proved guilty of a deliberate
and aggravated assault; that he had admitted com-
mitting a second assault by dragging me back into the
office when I had left it, and that he should be com-
mitted for trial before the Supreme Court; the mino-
rity, I repeat, consisted of Messrs. Harris, Cutten,
Kettle, Reynolds, and Dr. Purdie.
“ Mr. Harris was the Resident Magistrate accustomed
to try cases every day, educated as a lawyer, and of in-
dependent property. Mr. Cutten was Commissioner
of Waste Lands, an University man, and totally inde-
pendent of Jones. Mr, Kettle was a surveyor, a man


of education and property, though he had had deal-
ings with Jones, which I shall afterwards explain. Mr.
Reynolds was a merchant, bearing a high character and
independent of the ex-whaler, waterman, and slop-
seller autocrat of Dunedin. Lastly Dr. Purdie,
formerly in the Navy, and a practitioner in Edinburgh
was one of the most highly respected and oldest in-
habitants of Dunedin.
It is almost needless to point out that on the side of
the minority lay all the character, experience, and,
education, whether general or professional, of the
bench. I may also add, that, there lay also all the
probability of impartiality, between an utter stranger
and the wealthiest and best known man in the place.
It is equally needless, I presume, to point out to the
general reader, that with such a termination to so
aggravated an assault, planned with all the cunning and
deliberation of an Italian assassin, and so fully proved
and to a great extent admitted, such as the reason for
revenge, the opportunity long waited for, and at last
made, the coast carefully cleared of all witnesses, &c.
I say it is needless to point out, that in Dunedin, justice
is practically unattainable. The bench knew as well
as I did, that the cross - summons, obtained days
after the assault and the issuing of the first sum-
mons, is the transparent ruse of the guilty party who
finds no other way out of his dilemma but counter
swearing ; a proceeding that experienced magistrates
have declared, deserves no credit. Immediately after
the hearing, some of the most respectable of the in-
habitants waited on me and expressed their disgust at
the proceedings of the Bench.
No wonder, that after there was an influx of Victo-
rians, one should see in the papers of Australia, send-


meats like the following from the Newcastle Chronicle,
of March sth, 1862, and originally from the Geelong
Chronicle, regarding the original inhabitants, or “ old
identity,” as they are now called.
“ The old inhabitants here are a strange race, and it
is quite time they were smothered by the new arrivals.
They are for the most part, cringing, mean, and selfish,
to the last degree. The Victorians and others are fast
elbowing and snubbing them into that retirement which
their sentiments and habits particularly qualify them
for; out of sight and mind they are very inoffensive,
like the pigs on a model farm.”
The fact is, they were the lowest and most selfish
specimens of the genus “ money grubber,” and
“golden calf worshipper.”
I said that Mr. Kettle had had some transactions
with Jones. The latter had a mortgage for five hun-
dred pounds over Mr. Kettle’s house. This Jones im-
mediately foreclosed by way of inflicting punishment
on Mr. Kettle for having dared to respect his oath, and
give a just decision.
Mr. Kettle, however, knew his man, and had ex-
pected this, and, fortunately, was able to tender a
cheque for the amount; whereupon Jones gratified his
spite by refusing the cheque as not being a legal tender ,
and compelled Mr. Kettle to procure and hand to him
the whole in sovereigns !
People in the old world will hardly believe in all
these despicable doings. They were, however, well
known in Dunedin ; moreover, I had the facts direct
from Mr. Kettle himself.
Soon after the decision of the packed bench, I ap-
plied to Mr. Howarth, as Provincial Solicitor and pub-


lie prosecutor, to prosecute Jones for the assault. He
declined, and wrote me a foolish rigmarole letter (on
what ground I know not) about his rank, a commodity
I should not think a petty attorney like him possessed
much of.
As he was one of Jones’s lawyers at the trial, and,
moreover, was stone blind, I never expected much good
to arise from any application to him; his legal, or equi-
table, and physical vision being on a par.
Soon after I made an attempt to obtain redress from
the Supreme Court. Here, again, however, Jones’s
jistical and pecuniary influence met me at every turn.
Several of the lawyers were engaged by him, and not
One of the others had the courage to take up my case.
Every one to whom I applied refused on one plea or
other. One of them plainly said it would injure his
business.
Under these circumstances I addressed myself to the
judge, Mr. Gresson, who, seeing the hardship of the
case, directed the registrar of the Supreme Court to
prepare a form of indictment against Jones for assault.
The grand jury was composed chiefly of men under
Jones’ influence, and he himself, though he can hardly
write his own name, was a member of it until he was
struck out in consequence of being indicted before it!
Worst of all, however, the foreman of this grand jury
was the same Mr. Young, the auctioneer, who sat on
the Bench when the case was heard and voted with the
majority.*
* It is said that at one of his auctions he pressed one of the
Classics (“ Horatii Opera ”) on a gentleman, as being an excellent
opera, not to be missed by the musical! and the “ History of Bri -
tish Guiana” was offered by him as the “History of British
Guano, very important to all farmers I”


The first step he took was to come into court and
object to Mr. E. B. Cargill as a grand juror, because he
was a witness in the case. As they were not going to
try the case, the objection was not legally valid. Mr.
E. B. Cargill, was, however, too honest a man for their
purpose, and he was accordingly struck off. His (Mr.
Young’s) next step was to harangue me, on entering to
give my evidence, and to say that he had “ formed his
opinion long ago, and he saw no cause to alter it!”
His third and last step was to come into court, after
hearing the evidence I brought forward, and to ask the
judge if he might call witnesses for the defence, parti-
cularly mentioning old Gillies, the sheriff, as one he
required! This sapient storekeeper (shopkeeper we
should call him at home, but in the colonies they as-
sume high titles), though he had been on many juries,
then learned for the first time what his duties were ;
the judge telling him that the grand jury was there not
to try the case, but to see whether a prima facie case
could be made out, or any probable case, deserving of
being inquired into by a jury.
Baffled in this, they then, to the eternal disgrace of
the majority (for even in that sink of iniquity they
could not get a unanimous jury) simply threw out the
bill; and it should be noted that they did this, not only
in the face of the evidence which was laid before the
bench, but of that of additional witnesses, one of whom,
David Brunton, swore that, passing the office, the
evening of the assault, he looked in at the window, and
saw Jones striking some one on the floor, and that, on
entering the store, he found the clerks assembled there,
confused, and conscious-looking, and refusing to tell
him what was going on !


Mr. Duncan, the Provincial Solicitor of Canterbury,
had arrived shortly before on business; and he, as a
stranger, not having the fear or favour of the ex-
waterman before his eyes, had, at the last moment,
undertaken to manage my case.
Leaving Dunedin soon after this, I saw Mr. Duncan
at Canterbury, and was informed by him that Gillies,
the lawyer, had told him that the reason the Bench
and Grand Jury both refused me redress was because
his father, the sheriff, had stated privately to the Bench
that I, on applying for a summons against Jones, ad-
mitted I had first struck Jones with my umbrella!
There being no doubt about the authority on which
I had this, 1 immediately wrote to Gillies, denying
emphatically the truth of his statement, pointing out
his disgraceful conduct in not making such statement
(if he believed it) publicly at the hearing before the
Bench, instead of privately, then or afterwards; and
assuring him that if he did not at once retract the
statement, I should “brand him throughout New
Zealand as guilty of an infamous falsehood, whereby
he had caused justice to be perverted, and the Bench
and Grand Jury to become a bye-word among the
people. 5 ’
To this I received a reply in which, after a few quo-
tations from scripture, and some puritanical cant about
forgiveness, (Mr. Gillies is an elder of the Kirk—and.
like “ Holy Willie” loves a text as well as a glass of
whiskey) he says, “ I know not, nor do I wish to know,
who is your informant”—l had told him distinctly it
was his son, through Mr. Duncan; “ but this I know,
that he must be mistaken; for, previous to your case
coming before the Grand Jury, I never had any con-


versation whatever with any one of the jury, on the
subject of your case V 7
This was a denial of the truth of his son’s statement;
yet we shall see that the denial was a falsehood; that
it was also in more than one respect a cunning quibble,
devised to deceive me, and throw me off the scent.
To prove this, I have only to mention that he after-
wards, in the Supreme Court, swore that I admitted to
him that I first struck at Jones with my umbrella!
What will be thought of a Jesuit in the shape of an
elder and a magistrate, denying he had said I admit-
ted striking Jones, but carefully hiding that he had said
I admitted striking at him ? What, too, will be thought
of the same elder and magistrate denying he had
spoken of my case to any of the Grand Jury —(a thing
he had never been accused of,) but refraining from
alluding to what he had said to the Bench or general
public, and yet, after all this, coming forward and
swearing that he had told the Bench privately that I
had admitted striking at Jones first with my umbrella ?
Even his denial with regard to the Grand Jury, he
thus proves to be a falsehood—for Mr. Young most un-
justly was a member, both of the grand jury and the
Bench ; how then could Gillies, who swore he spoke to
the members of the Bench of the statement complained
of, “never have had conversation whatever with any
one of the jury on the subject of your (my) case?”
What too will be thought of his keeping silence on
the Bench, when he heard me deny on oath that I
either struck at, or struck Jones first? So this is the
way an upright magistrate acts when he hears a witness
perjure himself, (as he pretends to believe), to hold his
peace and let it pass, and then quietly stab him in the


dark, in the private room to which the Bench retired
to consult ? Will the most ignorant not see that an
honest man would have gone into the witness box and
given his evidence ? But he dared not make the false
statement publicly at that time. Indeed it is a moot
point whether he did make that statement to the Bench
as he had sworn he did. None of the magistrates re-
collect it. They recollect his haranguing them for
half an hour in Jones's behalf, and Mr. Harris remem-
bers his having said that my evidence before the Bench
did not agree in all particulars with that given before
him. That too is false. The evidence perfectly agreed
—and I will show from his own letter, what he referred
to. In the same letter of denial he says, “ I attended
the court under a strong impression that tbe case should
be sent for trial to a jury, &c., &c., but I became cer-
tain no jury would convict Mr. Jones on such evi-
dence," &c., &c.* He then goes on to say, “ that I, on
obtaining the summons had stated that I struck and
bled Jones in self-defence, but before the Bench I
omitted to allude to the bleeding, till examined by him,
Gillies ! This then was the dreadful discrepancy al-
leged. in my evidence, and not anything regarding
my alleged admission of having struck at Jones.
The statement of Gillies, that I ever made such an
admission, I solemnly declare to be an infamous and
unmitigated falsehood, without tbe very smallest found-
ation to rest upon ; and I now proceed to the last act
* So this Solon, when he heard me admit (according to his false
account), that I began the assault, “ had a strong impression that
Jones should be committed,” but when he heard me swear that
Jones began the assault, he thought Jones should not be com-
mitted !


in this drama, which might be entitled “ All for Gold, or
the (next) World well lost.”
Although I had been denied even an inquiry or a
hearing, by a grand jury of Dunedin shopkeepers, not-
withstanding that I had sworn to the assault, and had
been supported by the evidence of Messrs. Cargill,
Brunton, Johnston, &c., still it was open to me to bring
an action against the cowardly, ruffianly, and assassin-
like assaulter, provided I could, at a future period, find
a lawyer courageous enough to take up the case; for
though I could have conducted the case myself in
court, I could hardly have gone through all those pre-
liminary forms, which seem invented merely for the
benefit of lawyers.
Such a lawyer I found, a considerable time after-
wards in Mr. J. Smith, and as the same current of im-
migration from Victoria, caused by the gold-fields,
which had brought him over, had also effected a con-
siderable infusion of new blood into the diseased and
unwholesome body of Dunedin, I had some hope that
the ex-bargee’s influence would be no longer para-
mount. I accordingly brought a civil action against
him, in the Supreme Court.
Having sworn to the assault as above described, Mr.
E. B. Cargill proved his recommending me to leave a
letter for Captain TurnKull, at Jones’s office, his wait-
ing a considerable time for me, and his finding me on
my coming out, with marks of a severe encounter on
my person; his accompanying me at once to the police
station, and afterwards to a lawyer’s, at both of which
places I described the assault, as mentioned above.
Police-constable Outram, who gave his evidence evi-
dently in Jones’s favour, proved my charging Jones


with the assault, and calling on him to apprehend him.
He also most unnecessarily swore to two false state-
ments, both of which Mr. E. B. Cargill and I contra-
dicted on oath. One was that Mr. Cargill was not
■with me at the police-station ; the other, that I was so
excited, that he ordered me out of the police-station, a
statement without the shadow of foundation, and one
very unlikely to be true, however insolent a policeman
the fellow might have been.
David Brunton corroborated my evidence to a great
extent. He swore that on the evening of the assault
when passing Jones's office he looked in at the window,
and saw Jones “pounding some one on the ground,"
and that he soon after saw me come out of the office
bleeding and much marked. He further deposed that
he went into the store while the “pounding" was
going on, and found the clerks assembled there, looking
conscious and mysterious, and that when he asked them
what was going on in the office, they pretended not
to know, though he saw by their manner that they
did.
William Johnston was called to prove as he had
done before the Bench, that Jones ordered him and the
other clerks to leave the office at any time that I might
enter it, but the miserable creature did not answer to
his subpoena. No doubt he was bribed by some one
to stay away. Though I did not see him when I
called, (his wife not knowing me, and informing me
that he had gone to see Mr. McLean of the Bank of
New Zealand, an intimate friend of Jones,) yet he was
duly subpoenaed by my lawyer ; there can, therefore, be
no doubt as to the cause of his absence.
His evidence was material, and ray lawyer should


have stopped the case till he could be brought up under
a warrant.
Mr. Cutten, however, was called, and swore to
hearing Jones admit to the Bench that he ordered his
clerks to keep out of the way purposely, whenever I
went to his office.
Mr. Harris seemed anxious to avoid going against
anybody, and remembered very little.
The minutes of evidence before the Bench had un-
fortunately been taken down by an utterly incompetent
person, as was seen at the time, and were quite useless,
not half having been entered. Jones took advantage
of this to deny all his former sworn admissions. Jones
then, in his defence deposed that he had kept back a
letter for me in order to have an opportunity of demand-
ing an apology for what I had said to his son on board
ship, that though he had met me frequently, walking
with Mr. Cargill, while he (Jones) was with his son,
yet he did not know me by sight, and his son did not
point me out; but seeing me pass his office window the
day he “ attacked ” me, (that was the expression he
twice used, “ the day I attacked him”) he thought from
my chains and fine dress that it might be me, and sent
a clerk after me to call me in, (I may here observe, that
I was dressed in a very rough suit of tweed). He then
went on to give an account of a long speech he
said he made to me, stating what he had heard from his
son and other passengers of the “ Chile,” apologising
and expressing great regret for keeping back ray letter;
assuring me he was not a convict, nor his son the son of
a convict, but that he was an Australian; pointing out
that if I had complained of his son to him he would
have corrected him ; and winding up by “ repeatedly


asking me for an apology.” According to his statement
he must have spent ten minutes at least, in endeavouring
to persuade me that an apology was due. He then
went on to swear that I refused an apology, whereupon
he used the foul language I have imputed to him. All
this time, he says, he was seated at his desk. I then,
be asserts, made a blow at him with my umbrella but
missed him, and then "slewed round and struck him
on the nose with my fist.”* He then said, “ two can play
at this game, and we had a stand up fight.” He then
says, “ I never struck him whilst he was down, in fact,
he was never off his legs. I could not strike a man
when he was down/’ (laughter in the court). He’then
made the most extraordinary statement of all. He
said, " I never used any influence with any of the
magistrates ; in fact they decided against me. I have never
spoken to any of the magistrates that were in my favour ,
since the case was heard ; and those that were against me
are all indebted to me since, for their prosperity this day 11”
In commenting on the foregoing evidence, I have to
observe that even in the most trivial portions there is
not one word of truth.
For instance, I did not pass his window, and could
not have done so going from the post office, where I
left Mr. Cargill, to Jones’s office door, or returning.
Again, I was dressed in a rough tweed suit, such as
every one in Dunedin wore, and with one plain Albert
chain attached to my watch. Jones could, therefore,
neither having seen me pass his window, nor have sus-
pected me from my dress to be, as Judge Chapman
elegantly (he is a Victorian lawyer) phrased it, “ a new
* Before the Bench he swore that I missed him and he then
l "'ick me with hie fist!


chum.” These are simply parts of the lengthened and
utterly false story he invented.
His long explanation, apology, and repeated request
for an apology, conveyed in terms which would lead us
to believe him to be a perfect Chesterfield, will hardly
be believed by the Dunedin community, who know
him to be a passionate man, given to violent language,
and more notorious for committing assaults on the
slightest provocation, than any man in the colonies, and
I should say, in England and the colonies put together.
Next, I presume, no one will believe him when he says
that notwithstanding my making a blow at him and
missing him, he sat still and quietly took a blow from
my fist on the nose. Then his story about my “ slew-
ing round ” is evidently false, as there could be no
need to turn. Then it seems he “ could not strike a
man when he is down,” at which there was great
laughter in the court. Probably the laughers had heard
the same story I had, for which, however, I do not
vouch, but it is commonly received, of his going be-
hind a man and striking him so severe a blow behind
the ear, that he lost his reason and never recovered it
again. Or, perhaps, they had heard the story of the
men seduced to go into the bush and look at a bit of
fencing. They, perhaps, also remembered the evidence
of David Burton, a perfectly respectable witness, who
swore to seeing him, (Jones) “pounding some person on
the ground ” “ his head and arms bobbing up and down
with the exertion.”
Lastly, Mr. Jones says he has never spoken to any
of the magistrates who decided in his favour since the
case was heard ; but all those who decided against him
owe their prosperity to him. What a curious fact —so


opposite to all analogy in human nature. Jones evi-
dently remembers the injunction to love his enemies,
but he carries out the idea in his own original manner,
and hates his friends.
Imagine how such Christian charity must vex the
ghost of his worthy father, once celebrated for his
assaults on his enemies, and for kicking them in
* * -:s- * ant | no y;r hovering over the felon’s haunts
in Botauv Bav.
How ashamed and surprised must Messrs. Harris
and Calien (then in court) have felt, to have their eyes
opened to the fact that their prosperity was due to
John Jones, no longer a bully and an assaulter, but the
helper of the needy, especially if they have been ad-
verse to him.
How Mr. Kettle, shrewd and honourable man as he
was, would have wondered, had he lived, to learn that
the first step in his prosperity was Jones’s calling up —
the money lent on mortgage of his house and refusing
everything but gold.
What a mistake to think this a piece of malignant,
Botany Bay spite, while it was all the time the first
kind help on the road to fortune tendered by this
“ mildest mannered man that ever cut a throat.”
One omission must be corrected. Jones was asked
if he were not a notorious assaulter, and constantly up
at the Police Office for assault, when he replied, “ I
may have been up at the Police Office once or twice
for assault, but not more frequently.” The amount of
truth in the “ may have been,” and in the “ once or
twice ” and “not more frequently,” could be estimated
to a fraction by every one in court or in Dunedin.
So also could be estimated the likelihood of Alfred


Jones, in company with his father, constantly meeting
me, yet never pointing out to his father the man who
he said had called him the son of a convict. And if
Jones lied in all these particulars, the just inference if
that he lied as to the assault.
John Gillies, ex-Sheriff (he had resigned the sheriff-
ship lately, though whether on account of the gross
mistakes he was constantly making, or of my having
reported him for falsehood and disgraceful conduct to
the Governor and the Duke of Newcastle, I cannot
tell), was then called for the defence and sworn. His
evidence was as follows :
iC I distinctly swear that Captain Henderson told me
he struck at Jones with his umbrella. As a magistrate
I knew that legally that was an assault, as much as if
a blow had been struck. I granted the summons
nevertheless, and I sat upon the bench during the case.
I don’t feel that it was my duty to inform the court then
that Captain Henderson had admitted being the aggres-
sor, but I did, during the investigation, put questions
to draw forth the facts, which is all I considered it to
be my duty to do ! Ido not remember having written
or said anything contrary to what I have now said. I
remember receiving a letter from Captain Henderson ;
I have not that letter, nor could I remember that Cap-
tain Henderson wrote that if I had said he admitted
first striking a blow with his umbrella, I had stated
what was not the fact. I never wrote to Captain Hen-
derson denying that I had said he had made such an
admission. The letter you have handed to me is my
reply. I have written in it, ( I know not, nor do I
wish to know, who is your informant, bat this I know,
that he most be mistaken.’ Ido not remember what


that refers to. Ido not remember that it was in an-
swer to a letter from Captain Henderson threatening
to brand me as a liar, if I did not retract the statement
I had made. Ido not admit that there is in my reply
any evasive answer to a direct question put in Captain
Henderson’s letter. I do not know whether it was
my duty, while on the bench, to state what Captain
Henderson had said to me when he took out the sum-
mons. I did not express my opinion to the Bench till
they had retired to consider the case. I did not men-
tion what I had heard until the magistrates had retired.
The judge; “ And you did not give evidence on
oath ?”
“ No, sir.”
So we see this worthy elder of the kirk granted a
summons for assault to a man who, he says, admitted
being the assaulter. He, also, does not know that
when he, sitting on the Bench, hears what he must
consider to be a perjury (and he says he heard me
deny ever striking at Jones) it is his duty as a magis-
trate to take any notice of it.
Further —he received a letter threatening to brand
him as a liar—and he cannot remember at all what the
letter was about!
He answers that letter and denies having made the
statement for which he is threatened with exposure;
but again his memory is at fault. He does not remem-
ber —nay, he denies ever giving the foresaid denial.
His letter is then put in his hands, and he is compelled
to read out his formal denial; and when asked to what
it refers, “ Non me recordo,” is still the reply.
Wonderful memory ! It retains for a much longer
period the admission he says I made, which had no


connection with him, but entirely forgets more recent
letters, threatening him with exposure, and the meaning
of the replies, written with his own hand! Driven into
a corner, the elder at bay, does not admit there is any-
thing evasive in his reply to a direct question put by
me —not seeing—poor man —that it is either evasive, or
a distinct non-evasive denial. Finally, this fine speci-
men of an elder and magistrate reiterates that he does
not know whether or not it was his duty while on the
Bench, to notice what he considers false statements,
made on oath by a witness, rather than give the
witness a stab in the dark by privately accusing him
to the magistrates of perjury.
Such a tissue of evasion, quibble, prevarication, and
falsehood as this old man’s evidence, it never fell to
my lot before to hear.
Of course I cannot take upon myself to assert that
he deliberately perjured himself to support Jones.*
It is his business, and not mine, to account for his con-
duct ; but I feel certain no just person who considers
his evidence impartially, will believe him worthy of
credit in any one particular; and I am equally con-
vinced that it will not be believed, that out of all the
many persons to whom I recounted the particulars of
the assault, (from Mr. Cargill and the constable within
a few seconds of the occurrence, to the hosts of indif-
ferent people during many months residence in Dune-
din) I should have given to Mr. Gillies alone an
account diametrically opposite to that given to all the
others.
Mr. Harris, the resident magistrate, had given Jones
Perhaps, as rny lawyer said, he may be in his dotage.


a certificate that the case, when brought before the
Bench, had been dismissed. This was obtained and
put in, in order to stop all proceedings; the judge,
however, considered that the case had not been dis-
missed ; the Bench having said merely that there
was no evidence to prove who committed the assault.
The judge (Mr. Chapman*) now proceeded to sura
up, and, I must say, handled the subject in a very
strange manner, scarcely noticing any of the strong
points of the case. He never once referred to the
deliberate inveigling into his office, by the defendant,
of the person to whom he confessed he had an animo-
sity ; to the admissions by Jones of his outrageous and
beastly language; to the evidence of Cargill, Brunton,
&c.; or to that of Mr. Cutten, to the effect that he had
heard Jones admit his having cleared the office of all
the clerks, on purpose to see me in private. He did not
allude to Jones's keeping back my letter for a fort-
night ; to his not addressing me on any of the many
occasions when he met me in Mr. Cargill's company,
nor to his twice on that day, before the judge and jury,
having spoken of the day on which he “ attacked " me.
He made no allusion to Jones's never applying for a
summons for assault till several days after he had himself
been summoned, and only the night before the hearing
of the case, when, of course, there had been ample time to
concoct a story with his lawyer, Mr. Gillies' son ! He,
however, made the extraordinary statement {extraor-
* The same judge has given much dissatisfaction by his conduct
on the Bench. Complaints have been made that, in a recent trial
for murder, he suggested that strychnine might be evolved natu-
rally in the decomposition of a body, and spent a whole day in ad-
vocating the prisoner’s cause.


dinary after Jones’s admissions that he had been up
once or twice for assault, and that he had a spite
against me, &c.) that there was “ about an equal an-
tecedent improbability that either of the parties would
commit an assault within a minute or two of their
first meeting.” He also made the still more extraor-
dinary speech—that “ from the nature of the case, it
was impossible to get evidence to decide whether the
defendant was justified in putting the plaintiff to the
question, and if he did not get a satisfactory answer , in
committing an assault or giving provocation.”
This seems new law for an English judge to lay
down, —that the assault may have been justified, because
a question was not answered ! He further laid it down,
that if the plaintiff made a gesture with his umbrella,
as described by Gillies, the defendant had a right to
assault the plaintiff, and he did not consider any gross
excess had been committed; and he threw in a remark
in Jones’s favour, quite irrelevant to the case, and con-
tradicted by all Jones’s antecedents, and his admissions
on the trial, and in itself a mere vulgar error—that
men of “gigantic strength,” as Jones was described to
be, were generally very good-natured. The only re-
mark really to the point, and bearing on the evidence,
was what he said of Gillies. This man had made such
a pitiable spectacle of himself in the witness box, that
the judge could not possibly avoid adverting to it.
He accordingly told the jury they were not to think
anything of what Gillies’ conduct actually was, as a
magistrate; but they would rightly think a great deal
of it, as a test of Jus veracity , as to the umbrella.”
If they did not believe him, then the question was left
to be decided upon the bare evidence of the nlaintiff


and the defendant. There he (the judge) could n t
help them.”
Indeed ! then all the preparation and delay, the cun-
ning device to entrap, the orders to the clerks to leave
in order to insure secresy, the immediate accusation
and evidence by the plaintiff, the threats, the admitted
cause of animosity, and admitted foul language of the
defendant, go for nothing. It was evident that the
judge, like everyone else, disbelieved Gillies—there
remained, therefore, all the above corroborative cir-
cumstances in my favour, and on Jones’s part nothing
but his own word—the word of a notorious assaulter.
Yet Mr. Justice Chapman, after as much as telling the
jury not to believe Gillies, says that beside him, there is
no evidence on either side.
The moment the jury retired, Mr. E. B. Cargill ap-
proached my lawyer, and said, “Why did you not
recall me to contradict Gillies? I was with Captain
Henderson when he got the summons, and he never
said a word that could give Gillies the shadow of an
excuse for saying what he has.”
I afterwards said to Mr. Cargill, “ I did not see
you —I thought you had left the court, and I sent to
your office for you. Why did you not come forward
sooner.”
To this he made some unintelligible reply about not
knowing if it was right to interfere; and I never could
understand his reason for so acting. As for myself,
not supposing for a moment that Gillies would have
the unparalleled effrontery to come forward and swear,
as he did, after having denied his statement in writ-
ing, 1 had made no preparation to confute the false-
hood.


The jury having retired, consulted for half-an-hour,
when they found a verdict for the defend an
It thus appeared that, notwithstanding the influx of
Victorians, the old element and old influences had not
yet been overcome.
The jury further stultified themselves, adding a
rider to the verdict, in the vain hope of clearing Mr.
Gillies, at least in his magisterial capacity. They
said;—
“We beg to say that we don’t believe that any of
the magistrates who tried the case kept any thing back
that ought to have been brought before the public!”
That is to say, they think Gillies quite right in sit-
ting on the Bench, and hearing a witness, as he be-
lieves, give false evidence, without taking any notice
of it; and they think him right, after this, in quietly
stabbing such witness in the dark, and overthrowing
his case by a secret accvsaiioii.
I hope the good character given to Mr. Gillies by
the jury will do him much good. One thing, however,
is certain, the judge, and the community at large, do
not agree with them. For my part, the thing is such
a piece of stupidity, that I should only have looked for
it, at the hands of that other jury that had Mr. Young
for its foreman, and not from one with Mr. Alderson,
(who is, I believe, a Victorian,) at its head. I learned
afterwards that four members of the jury were inclined
to stand out against the verdict, but being only one
fourth of the jury, they were compelled to give way.
Notwithstanding this verdict, I do not hesitate to
say, that, taking into consideration Jones's deliberate
plot to inveigle me into his office, had I been killed,
(and men often are killed by less violent assaults).


nothing would have saved Jones from being hanged for
the assassination, at least, in any other place than Dune-
din.
I had no sooner left the court, than strangers on all
hands accosted me, and said they were sorry to see justice
could not be got.
And so ends the farce of attempting to obtain justice
in Dunedin. There is some satisfaction in thinking
that it is to some extent obtained at last against all villany,
when the case becomes known to the better portion of
the public.


CHAPTER 11.
The political state of Otago—Follies of the Government—McAn-
drew the Superintendent—Town of Dunedin—lts state, climate,
&c.—The country—The gold-fields—Wages.
The political is as bad as the social state of Otago.
Though subject in some degree to the General Govern-
ment at Auckland, (now removed to Wellington,) it is
practically governed by a Superintendent and a Pro-
vincial Council. These have the control of the funds,
and the framing of all internal regulations ; and con-
sisting as they do, chiefly of shopkeepers, .auctioneers,
and others equally unacquainted with the art and
science of governing, it is not to be wondered at if they
have made a sad mess of it.
Recently they missed a golden opportunity when the
discovery of the gold-fields brought large sums into their
coffers. Instead, however, of opening up the country
by means of good roads, they have squandered all their
means on a futile and useless attempt to cut down a
hill in the town, known as Bell Hill, and throw it into
the harbour. Having only succeeded in making a big
hole in the side of the hill, they have been compelled
to stop for want of funds. The hill, formerly a most
picturesque object, dotted with houses, is now, an eye-
sore with its hideous and dangerous chasm. The ad-


vantage gained, consists of a few building sites on the
artificial soil by the side of the harbour.
Another foolish undertaking was the “ Great Exhi-
bition,” (“ heaven save the mark ”), in which Dunedin
thought she must ape the mother country. The re-
sult is, a huge building useless for anything else ; and
which, empty save for a few crude specimens from the
adjoining provinces, proved an utter failure. Indeed,
the thing was such a farce, that the Governor would
not open it; and it was the subject, consequently, of
a grand midnight hoax, when all the inhabitants were
summoned by fire of cannon, and by bugle call, to
escort His Excellency (who was quietly asleep in his
bed at Canterbury) up from the jetty !
The colony had had a severe struggle for existence in
its first years, under its excellent Superintendent, Cap-
tain Cargill, an old Peninsular Officer; but with
honesty at the helm it had weathered the storm.
After his death, however, the choice of the people,
(worthy of themselves,) fell on a person of the name of
McAndrew. This man, who began life as office boy,
in the service of Mr. Pirie, a paper manufacturer in
Aberdeen, had been in business in London, in partner-
ship with a Mr. Garden, where they had failed. He
then emigrated to Otago, and being a smooth-spoken
man, he was intrusted with large sums of money by
private individuals. He also, on becoming Superin-
tendent, had the fingering of the public funds. Doubts
having arisen as to his conduct, the Provincial Council
made an investigation into it, and a commissioner was
sent from Auckland to examine his accounts. It hav-
ing been decided that some sixty thousand pounds were


deficient, (though his partisans deny it,) he was sus-
pended by the Provincial Council, and finally dismissed
by the General Government at Auckland.
Previous to this he was incarcerated in the common
jail, for debt, but he cleverly proclaimed his own house
in the country a jail, and removed to it! A good many
other curious and similar stories are told of him. After
his dismissal, he was restored to the common jail, and
while there, he stood for the Superintendentship again,
and actually addressed the electors from behind the
bars of the prison! A large number of the electors
voted for him ! He was said to be very popular with
the mob, and universal suffrage is the order of the day
there.
The government of Otago is now endeavouring to
obtain total separation from the other provinces, and to
free itself entirely from the General Government.
Some other provinces are endeavouring to do the same,
and if they succeed, we shall have the ridiculous spec-
tacle of a number of petty independent governments
ruling over states the size of an English county, with
populations equal to those of a small English town.
The town of Dunedin consists of a large number of
wooden houses scattered over a piece of very hilly broken
ground on the edge of the bay, and over an adjoining
swamp. There are also a few stone houses here and
there, and one compact mass of wooden buildings in
the centre of the town. One long street (with a few
short branches), has been formed and partially paved.
Still it is a fearfully muddy place ; and when not
muddy, it is swept by hurricanes and clouds of dust.
The climate is detestable. It is generally raining and


blowing, sometimes for months together. A lady told
me she had been prevented from going to church by
the rain for seventeen Sundays in succession. One is
never sure for half an hour that it will remain fair,
however fine it may look. The high hills attract the
clouds; and the somewhat funnel shaped bay at the
head of which Dunedin lies, nearly meeting the sea as
it does, and skirted on both sides by lofty hills, entices
the winds to rave along its windings. If by accident
it does not blow a gale during the day, the wind never
fails to rise suddenly about four or five in the afternoon,
blowing from the sea.
It used to be said in Australia, of New Zealand, that
it rained nine months in the year, and blew a hurricane
the other three; and a capital description it is. Alto-
gether a more unpleasant place to live in than Dunedin,
cannot be conceived, with its rain and its mud, its
wind and [its dust; its ricketty wooden houses, with
the wind howling, and the rain pouring through them;
its close packed blocks of houses, hotbeds of fever, and
devoid of all water supply ; its frequent fires, its dul-
ness, its low tone of morality, its insecurity, and the
impossibility of obtaining justice, its want of good
society, and its generally low style of population.
The climate in the country is much better, though
also blowy and wet. There is very little land in the
province fit for agriculture, and nearly the whole of it has
been sold. AVlien a little is put up to auction, it fetches
absurdly high prices—frequently five or six pounds, or
more per acre.
The province is fit only for pasture, and for this it is
well adapted. The whole of it has however been long
d 2


ago taken up, and when it changes hands it fetches ex-
tremely high prices—usually not less than one hundred
pounds per thousand acres for the mere goodwill of the
lease of it, for a few years, say for eight or ten.
Nevertheless, sheep farming pays even at these ex-
orbitant rates, provided it is conducted with care and
judgment.
Most of the leases will expire in from six to eight
years, and it is supposed that the Local Government
will then put the renewed leases up to auction. As,
however, the government is bankrupt, and its deben-
tures, recently advertised to a large amount, are quite
unsaleable, it would be wiser if it allowed the run-
holders to purchase their runs as they are able, at a
moderate rate, (say five shillings an acre,) as has been
done in the province of Nelson. The treasure chest
would thus be filled, and a great spur given to the im-
provement of the country.
The gold-fields, which for a time looked rather pro-
mising, have, as I prophesied at the time of their dis-
covery, proved to be neither extensive nor lasting. The
hardships encountered in Otago in the search for gold,
are extreme, owing to the rigour of the climate, the
ruggedness of the country, and the excessive scarcity
and fabulous high price of provisions. The gold-fields
are nearly wolrked out now, some which I visited not
yielding above three or four shillings to each man per
diem.
There is, however, a good opening for shepherds,
labourers, and servants, male and female, who are in
great demand, and whose wages are three times as high
as at home.


CHAPTER 111.
The Middle Island—lts various provinces—Their adaptability for
settling—Special advantages of Canterbury and Southland.
Before laying down my pen, it seems desirable that I
should say something regarding the other provinces of
New Zealand, and in doing so I shall confine myself to
a few remarks upon the Middle (or as it is frequently
called the South) Island.
So much has been written on the Northern Island,
that it would seem a work of supererogation to say
anything about it. I shall only remark, that the native
war, and the general character and numbers of the
natives, together with the almost universally rugged,
heavily timbered character of the country, render the
North Island an undesirable place to settle in. There
is little country fit for pasturage, and clearing the land
for agriculture is very expensive, and does not pay.
The Middle Island embraces three large provinces,
Nelson, Canterbury, and Otago, and two smaller ones,
Marlborough, and Southland.
Nelson, which occupies the Northern end of the
island, is a fine pastoral country, with a mild, yet
healthy and bracing climate. Nearly the whole of the
pastoral country is freehold, having been sold to the
settlers at five shillings to ten shillings an acre.


The capital (also called Nelson) is the prettiest and
most picturesquely situate town in New Zealand.
There is not, on the whole, much opportunity for set-
tling either in town or country. Marlborough being
merely a corner of Nelson, erected into a separate
province, requires no special notice to itself.
The large province of Canterbury, occupying the
centre of the island from sea to sea, offers an excellent
field for settlers, both on account of its possessing a
large tract "of rich arable land, open to purchase, and
also owing to its numerous fine squatting stations,
which are constantly changing hands.
Pastoral pursuits are extremely profitable here.
The colony being a settlement of the Church of
England, and the original colonists having been chosen
with great care, offers great inducements to a gentle-
man intending to emigrate. Here is none of that
ruffianism, violence, perjury, subversion }of justice,
coarseness, ignorance, mercenary spirit, and servile
meanness, that have too long abounded in Dunedin.
Good society is to be found in the capital, Christ-
church, and a large number of educated gentlemen are
scattered over the province.
The chief features of Canterbury are, an immense
plain of arable land some seventy or eighty miles long,
by forty or fifty broad, backed by beautiful pastoral
hills; and*|beyond these a magnificent range of Alps,
crowned with everlasting snow, and rivalling, if not
surpassing, those of Switzerland, as I have often gazed
on them from Berne, or Interlachen.
Christchurch stands on the plain, at the distance of
ten or twelve miles from Port Lyttleton. A lofty


mountain lies between, but it has now been nearly
pierced for a railway, which will soon connect the
capital and its port.
Of Otago, coming next in order as we proceed
southwards, I need say nothing, haying already treated
fully of it.
The last and most southern province of this island
and New Zealand, is Southland. Like Otago, it pos-
sesses many fine sheep and cattle stations, and has this
further advantage, that there is a large quantity of
splendid arable land, still unsold by the government.
A period of great depression has overtaken it, as
well as the other provinces, but, when that has passed
away, it will, probably, be the most flourishing of them
all. Its capital, Invercargill, is admirably situated
upon level ground, on the banks of a river up which
vessels sail ; while at its mouth, some eighteen miles
distant, is the Bluff harbour, the nearest port to Mel-
bourne, in Australia, and where steamers passing to
and fro are constantly calling.
The government of Southland has been the most
enterprising of all, and has constructed a railway (the
first in the whole of New Zealand) from the harbour
to the capital, and thence twenty miles further into the
interior, through a rich undulating and arable country,
only waiting for the plough. There is no timber to be
felled, merely fencing or ditches to be made. Yet
there is no want of wood, as in Otago, the country
being dotted over with beautiful and compact patches
or islands of timber.
Some miscalculation, and haste to go ahead, has
brought the province to the same bankrupt state as


Otago; but with plenty of fine farm land to dispose of,
a railway to open up the country, and the wise system
of economy introduced by the new superintendent, Mr.
J. P. Taylor, there is little doubt that when the present
crisis is over, Southland will rise “ like-a phoenix from
its ashes,” whatever that may be, and be one of the
most prosperous of our colonies.
Meanwhile, owing to the present great depression,
both it and Otago offer splendid opportunities for in-
vestment.
THE END.
BILLING, PRINTRR AND STRKROTYPKB, GUILDFORD, SURREY,


3 1508 0182222^


y
'
. V; ■ ■ . ■ .; ; > V
* " ' *
t
' .
. . , • ■ 1 . . ' ’ ‘ *' ’' ' l
■
'J,
■
.
• ’
r
-
i - '
• -»
i '
/
'' - " \ ’ ■ ’ ' V • .■
* ■ V
* *■
'V’ - •
