

Our Outy in War ciime.
A Sermon
Preached in St Francis Xavier’s Cathedral, Adelaide,
THE DAY OF INTERCESSION,
3rd January, 1915,
- x xl-taiftt(dctu6 9/1. Jfajan, (19
Sold for the Benefit
of the
Belgian Relief Fund
PRICE—SIXPENCE


N £ Z £ TT £^^/7 £
*(lll J'erguson Coixectioh\|?
u| oMatioxab Library" jjjj


Our Duty in War tfttnc.
A SERMON
Preached in St. Francis Xavier’s Cathedral, Adelaide,
on the Day of Intercession,
January 3rd, 1915,
by
FATHER STANISLAUS M. HOGAN, O.P.
Sold for the Benefit of the Belgian Relief Fund.
Price - - - Sixpence.
“Thou shalt pray to Him, and He will hear
thee.” —Job xxii. 27.
It is no exaggeration to say that, for five dragging
months, the minds and the hearts of men have been
centred upon a battlefield, which, at one period of the
world’s history, was regarded as almost the entire
world itself. For five weary months we have watched
the greatest conflict the world has ever witnessed, and
many have asked themselves: Is this the beginning of
the end? For it seems as if the prophesies of our
Divine Lord were being fulfilled in these, our days, and
that the events which He foretold should usher in the
final catastrophe were even now taking place. Nation
has risen up against nation, and kingdom against king-
dom, while peoples to whom the liberty of the Gospel
has been preached, and who have knelt in adoration


before Him who died that men might be free, have
sought, and still seek, the blood of their brothers in
Jesus Christ. It is not for us to speak harsh words—
we who are sealed with the priesthood of Jesus Christ,
the Judge of the living and the dead, and who stand
even now in His presence. But oh! my beloved, we
can pray and make intercession to Him. We can plead
and make supplication to Him. Aye, we can even unite
with Him “who in the days of his flesh, with a strong
cry and tears, offering up prayers and supplications,
. . was heard for his reverence,” and crave that
He who is Counsellor may enlighten those who need
counsel from on high; that He who is merciful and
the Comforter may show everlasting mercy to those
who have fallen in the fight, and bring solace to those
who weep for their dead; and, above all, that He who
is the Prince of Peace may speedily make all strife to
cease, and give “peace on earth” once more.
I do not need to tell you that those who hold high
office, those especially who are in a position of supreme
authority, bear the burden of great responsibilities, and
that the greater such authority is, and the more abso-
lute, the greater are the responsibilities. When we
penetrate beneath the pomp and pageantry to consider
even in a passing way the responsibilities of kings and
rulers of nations, their very magnitude affrights us. It
is the welfare of their people which must hold the first
place in the thoughts of kings, and they must so carry
themselves, so act, as will always make for the good
of the people entrusted to their care; not for their mere
material prosperity, but for their moral and spiritual
prosperity and progress. No merely private, personal
ambition may dictate their policy. No merely personal


resentments may shape their government or warp their
judgment. Kings and rulers must be sufficiently broad-
minded and large-hearted to sacrifice their own personal
views when the common good of their people demands
such sacrifice. Yet kings and rulers are but human
after all, subject to all the limitations and weaknesses
to which every human being is subject, and hampered
by the additional drawback of being in a position where
it is easy to gratify almost every whim, to impose their
personal views with an almost despotic power, and to
find few who are courageous enough to withstand them.
If the consequences of yielding to passion are disas-
trous to the individual, who will attempt to say how
deeply disastrous such yielding is in one who rules
and guides a nation? If kings allow themselves to be
blinded by anger or ambition, or to be swayed by un-
worthy motives, or to act for their own personal satis-
faction, instead of for the common good of their people,
who can dare foretell to what such action will lead?
A false step may cause untold evil. A hasty word may
cause a cataclysm, and impatience may mean bloodshed
—the bloodshedding, not of one nation, but of many,
and war’s inevitable aftermath of famine and disease,
of ruined homes and broken hearts, and misery so wide-
spread that it will take years to alleviate it.
Do not kings and rulers, then, need guidance? Do
they not require to be enligtened—yes, and strength-
ened, too —to see the right, and to do it, come what
may? To turn aside from the flattering tongue which
panders to their personal desires? To remember that,
as rulers of a people, they hold their power in trust, and
must one day give an account of how they have wielded
fh.s sceptre to Him who is the King of kings? Do we


not need to pray for them, that they will prove strong
enough to thrust back the sword into its scabbard, aud
let it rust there, rather than continue to use it for the
upholding of injustice?
And while we pray for all who are in high station,
it is but fitting, as it is most natural, that our Sovereign
Lord, the King, should hold the first place in our prayers.
We beg that God may strengthen him to use his kingly
power wisely and well; that He may teach him how to
temper justice with mercy, and severity with kindness;
and that He may enlighten him, and aid him to continue
to act nobly and manfully in a righteous cause until
the sheathing of the sword.
We who are far away from the scenes of strife and
carnage cannot realise the full horror of war; yet we
can realise something of it when we read the lists of
the dead. There is no denying the fact that the words
“died on the field of honour” send a thrill through us,
even while they make our eyes grow dim. Deeds oh
heroism have been performed in this war which have
never, and shall never be surpassed. Brave men have
gone to certain death at their country’s call, and I con-
fess to a feeling of pride when I think of the heroism
of the Irish soldiers, and to a still nobler sentiment when
1 think of their magnificent proof of Catholic piety in
kneeling down on the battlefield to commend themselves
to God before they rushed to the charge. Such heroism
can never be forgotten. May it be remembered by those
whose duty it is to remember.
“Died on the field of honour!” Yes and men
look on and applaud the shattered remnants of regi-


merits when they come back from the front., but
after a passing thought, how many will ever think
again of the men who have fallen in the fight,
whose souls went forth into eternal silence, torn from
their agonising bodies by shattering shell or bayonet
thrust? How many will think of themf and —How
many will pray for them? This is our duty and our
privilege—to pray for the souls of those who have
fought, and “died on the field of honour.” And, my
beloved, in our charity we must leave out none, we must
include all. Yet, again, it is only natural and to be
expected that we should pray for our own in a very
special manner, for “greater love than this no man hath
than that he should lay down his life for his friend,”
and that is what every soldier and every sailor of ours
has done in dying—they have died for their king, their
country, and for our liberties. Honour the dead. Revere
the memory of those who have fallen. But beyond all
else, pray for their souls, that they may receive a merci-
ful and a kindly judgment, and a welcome from Him
who died for us all.
There are others, too, for whom we must pray—the
even-increasing number of those “who stand and wait.”
Christmas has but passed, but alas! for many it was a
weary, saddened Christmas, and its joy-bells rang the
knell of death. How many mothers, how many wives
there are to whom last Christmas brought nothing but
deep, deep sorrow. How many mothers, how many
wives, and oh! the pity of it, how many little children
there are to-day “who stand and wait” —for what? For
the sound of a voice that is still! For the fall of a
footstep that shall never come again! For the sight
of the face of a father, a brother, a husband, or a son


who lies to-day in some unknown grave away from those
who loved him. O compassionate Christ! who dried
the widow’s tears when she wept for her boy who was
dead, have pity on the widows, the sonless mothers, and
the orphans of the world to-day. Comfort them as Thou
alone canst comfort the broken-hearted. Uphold them
as Thou alone canst do, to face the lonely days to come.
In Thy sympathy, so human, yet withal divine, pour into
their wounded souls that balm of Gilead which brings
healing to the sore-distressed, and for the sake of the
Mother who wept for Thee, dry the tears of those who
mourn for their dead to-day, and bring us peace once
more.
If you have ever prayed for anything, my beloved,
pray for this. If ever in your life you have knocked
with daring importunity at the very gates of God, do
so now, that those gates may be opened unto you, and
that the Prince of Peace may “incline Plis ear, and
hearken to your prayer, and hasten to your assistance.”
We have the infallible word of Jesus Christ for it, that
“whatsoever we ask the Father in His name, it shall be
done to us,” and surely there was never a request so
urgent, never a boon to be prayed for with greater insist-
ence, than this, that the days of strife shall be quickly
shortened, and that peace shall speedily reign in the land
once again. And the peace we pray for is not any kind
of peace, not the mere cessation from hostilities which
after half a century more will be renewed, neither do we
pray for an armed peace, which has been fitly named an
economic warfare. We do not ask for this. We ask
for a peace which shall make for solid Christian charity,
which knows no frontiers, and is not confined within a
nation’s boundaries, but which, in recognising the Father-


hood of God, shall make all :men brothers, and in that
brotherhood shall bring the peoples of the earth to kneel
at the feet of their Lord amd their Redeemer, Jesus
Christ. We ask for such a peace as will know no par-
tisanship, in which Might will not be Right, and in
which the strong shall never llord it over the weak. We
pray for a peace that shall Ibe universal, when liberty
shall not be trampled on, and a nation’s word shall be
indeed a nation’s bond. We pray, too, and with all the
fervour of our soul, that whern peace shall be given unto
us at last, our Holy Mother the Church may reign
throughout the world in the full possession of her free-
dom, and that she may not be enslaved, as has so often
happened in the past, by those who wear the laurel
leaves of victory.
And so, with fullest faith and confidence in God, we
beseech Him to-day that He will guide and control those
who have the government of the nations in their hands,
to deal justly, and to fear Him. That He will accept
the self-sacrifice of those fighting men in satisfaction for
their sins, and give to their souls eternal rest. That He
will comfort the sorrow-stricken, and be a Father to the
fatherless. And that He will give speedily unto us that
which the world canyot give—a lasting peace, “peace
with honour,” yes—but peace; with honour to God I


*
'Cli.l “O-D'W 9NX
