

I OVA LAND laws!
THEIR imtTEHCE OH OHR PROSPERITY,
—AND -
SOME SHOGESTIONS FOB REMEDYIIE Til EVILS
V/hich ihey have Enfailed on ihe Colony.
W. B. CHRISTIE, LICENSED SURVEYOR,
-M.RS., Ac-
Author of “The Forest Vegetation of Central and Northern New England, in
Connection with its Geological Alliances,” etc., etc.
£tcU)castlc :
“HERALD” STEAM AND GAS MACHINE PRINTING WORKS, BOLTON STREET
SIXPENCE. J
PRICE


} STOG.
I
| CITY.'
t
lA6EHTS 1
w.
I
GENTS |
i
i
I
VALUED I
I GOLONIES. I
[EX-
J
<m-4
|Wm. BEDE CHRISTIE,
| L.S., M.R.S.- M. 1.5., &c.,
0 • [Real Property Act], A
1 wi |
Suh-divisions undertaken in any part of the colony on the ?
Shortest JSotice. t
I Inspections and Reports on Mining Properties made a Speciality* I
HIGHEST REFERENCES AND TESTIMONIALS. |
No. 1, WENTWORTH COURT, SYDNEY |


™ww Tpai|
Their Influence on Our Prosperity,
—AND—
SOME StTGGESTIOKS for the REUEDE of the ETItS
Which they have Entailed on the Colony.
W. B. CHRISTIE, LICENSED SURVEYOR,
PRICE,
—M.R-S.; &c.
- - SIXPENCE.
cas tie:
“HEEALD” STEAM AND GAS MACHINE FEINTING WOEKS, BOLTON STREET
1882.
5000-30-9-82


INTXvODXJ CTIO N.
Tit© following article? -were -written for the Newcastle Morning Herald, in which
■journal t hey recently appeared; but, at the request of several gentlemen, amongst whom
are some members of the Legislature, who consider that the facts and statistics would
he useful for reference if put into a more convenient form than as newspaper articles, I
venture to place them before the public in this pamphlet.
My experience in the worHng of our Land Laws commenced in 1864, when I began
the study of my profession in the Liverpool Plains District, at that time the most active
scene of the operation of the then new Free Selecting Act.
In the following year T entered upon station pursuits, and in common with all others
on the station, from the proprietor to the cow-boy, became a Dummy in the earliest stages
of Dummyism, when the system was looked upon as the only means of having Crown
Lands brought to auction, and in this capacity contributed “two” to the long list of
forfeitures which marked the next few years.
Having gained considerable experiencein bush life, I became one of those hona fide
■yoemanry which the Act intended to settle on the soil, a position which I only occupied
for twelve months in consequence of the lessee of the run surrounding me with Dummies,
and Improvement purchases, so that as soon as the law allowed, I sold my almost fully
improved selection for about 11s. GA, per acre, and thus became one of the army of
€7,635 transferers who have handed over to the squatters more than seven and a hall
millions of acres of conditionally purchased land.
The sudden discovery of the latent virtue in the Bth, or Improvement Purchase,
clause of the Act gave a fresh impetus to surveying, of which I at once took advantage,
and 1869 and 1870 were spent in completing my studies* in the camp of a surveyor who
was in the thickest of the frauds which the operation of that clause brought about, and
there I became acquainted with the practical application of “ Moveable Improvements/
and first studied the true Hydrostatic principle regulating the action of " Artesian
Wells ” —besides adding something to my general knowledge of “ Portable Engines
and “ Threshing Machines/’
Having passed my examination as a Licensed Surveyor in 1871,1 was shortly after-
wards appointed to the charge, under the Government, of one of the largest and most
important Free Selecting and Mining Districts of New England, and on the formation of
the “Central New England Free Selectors’ Association” in 1875, was unani-
mously elected its President, a position from which I was compelled to retire by the then
Minister for Lands, Mr. Thomas Garrett, who considered that a Surveyor in the Govern-
ment Service* holding such a position, might open the way te “ Possible Corruption ”
in the aelministration of Crown Lands.
I remained in charge of the Glen Limes District till the middle of 1880, and although
my connection with the Government Service terminated somewhat abruptly in that year,
L have had more than ordinary opportunities for observing, not only every fresh develope-
ment of the various systems of acquiring Land from the Crown, but also the manner in
which those systems were dealt with by the Lands and Survey Departments.
At a time like the present, however, when so many of our embryo Legislators, pose
before the public as *• Land Eeformers, ” notwithstanding that they may never have been
beyond the limits ©four large towns and cities, except when on the hurried tours- in which
they glibly talked a gullible constituency into giving them seats in Parliament, I feel that
in even stating my actual experiences, I run some risk of being placed in the same category
as these political agitators, who are ever on the alert to seize upon any new phase in
our Land Laws, and make it the scapegoat for dragging the views of a small section of
the community before the public, and the vehicle for' thrusting some fresh nostrum ol
the “ Protection and Political Deform League” down the throats of the people; and,
while repudiating any connection with this Society, I cannot help expressing my opinion
that these “ Protection and Political Deform Leag-uers,” by making the Land Question a
question so peculiarly their own, as they did at their meeting in the Temperance Hall on
the 4th August last, have kept bund reels of good and desirable men from joining in the-
formation of a Land Deform Association, which would now be doing good service in
redressing those evils which our Land Legislation has brought upon the colony—instead
of allowing their memory to find & temporary oblivion in Sir John’s rippling laughter as
he politely closed the door the retiring Leaguers’ deputation-
The people want Land Deform, but they want ife unmixed, with Protection.
Wentworth Goner:, Sydney, Jvh September 1883


No. I.—IBEY HAVE NOT BEEN CONDUCIVE
DEVELOPMENT.
It is now about twenfy-one years since
the country was appealed to at a general
election on the then popular cry of “ Free
Selection before survey,” which, it was
fondly hoped, would prove a panacea for
all the evils which had previously existed
in the administration of our waste Crown
Lands ; and, although at various periods
since 1861 doubts have been raised as to
the wisdom of the policy which was
initiated under the Crown Lands’ Aliena-
tion Act of that year, there has certainly
never since been so general an agitation
of the public mind on the subject as that
which pervades the colony at the present
time.
“A tree is known by its fruit ” is a
pithy proverb which tas held good since
long before the day on which Solomon
first gave utterance to it; and an examina-
tion into the fruit of our Land Laws will
give us a clearer conception of this great
Legislative Tree, whose branches and
ramifications have spread their blighting
influence over the whole colony, than all
the sophistries of a Cobden, a Mill, or
even a Robertson, can do.
This Act was passed with the intention
of settling a yeomanry on our soil, who
would develop our great natural re-
OUR LAND LAWS
W ussjjr g 1 77
5'5 - 77
TO OUR AGRICULTURA
sources, and mate New South Wales
unsurpassed by any British possession, as
a productive country. It found us in
1861 with about seven and a half millions
of acres alienated, and divided for the
most part among the so-called squatting
monopolists of that period, but of this
area they had 297,575 acres under culti-
vation, or at the rate of one acre culti-
vated out of every 26 acres alienated.
The population of the colony in that year
was 358,278, so that our rate of cultivated
lands per head of population under the
squatting monopoly, which had existed
since 1846 was -83 of an acre.
At the end of 1880, after eighteen
years of the great Robertson panacea for
our agricultural depression, we find that
we have parted with 38,222,658* acres of
our best land, while we have only culti-
vated 706,498 acres, or at the rate of one
acre cultivated to every 47 acres alienated.
Our population had increased to 770,524,
while our cultivated lands gave only a rate
of 91 of an acre per head.
I regret that I have not the latest
* This 33,222,658 acres includes 4,015,012 acres of
conditional purchases, which have been cancelled,
forfeited or lapsed, and which have reverted to
the Crown, -v


statistics of our neighbouring colonies by
me, but the following comparative view of
them, compiled from the statistics of
1376-7 will afford a good general idea of
our own agricu’tural position with regard
to them, and be exceedingly suggestive to
the thoughtful reader :
wits wiougntim reader :
'o ~ 7~ ‘
g s
B g $
■■E ® 3 cs «
o 3 • o, a,
•z £• o S 2 rl JS 10 t>
200 ® O, OO
•** rH o O CO r-( CO t—< rH
C CS «*,
M O
•o | 2T - —5
31
fig
> S «S _ _
£jd * %s. 22.22 S 2 2 2
gB2g 8 s S i.'
si lr *SSI* SS S d a*
w a .
o o
r . A-i ■**
c CL
® S -
c3’s
C
-2 'S "S uo o ai co co 00 uo
3g- | SSSg S 8 I g
£BSBS 5 U' d
’CtM 10 IO CO i> Jo
g o J-T r-T TjT
cs
r< Q
"S r-j
>S |
aT ®* cm J 5 JS it! 2 10
® § .2® £ s s 3 s s g rt
§» & g g s gf d d S-
g co TO o Ah S e S 00
es ■gis SB’ cf t-‘ rn' vto £
s’S ee *“
«0 i-i
Jc ' ~~ "
Is i
“S ce *r* o^oixcj'^oc
"*d j>- ci ci co i-'- ci rd
ce GO Cl O C»;- MO (M CO
I fdBd & 8 S' |
S 3 §• rH x
> ~ Cl n
(Dr;
« O
■** s cc
«♦-. <n o
C ft o
9 £* O O O O O O C-1
£<3
00 01 o co' o
>- -2 0 § £• o i- co 2S
ce .f- O. l> 1-H C<^
>,l fl c o cc IT)' o' C N co~
yo c 8 CI
o> r-' MO CO Cl
> <
<D*C
P FTT” r X~ : i *1 I
:>:I g : i i
2| w :C „ g « I-g
§ id'g-gp jg «
1 S -g £ | &| |
Eh I S | -S g * g
r b® 53 g $> S ® 2
? ai & h S 5 O
From this it will be seen that while
Queensland, our youngest co’ony, is the
on y one which shows a lower rate of
cultivation per head of population than
we do. New South'Wales shews a worse
average than any of the Australian
colonies in its proportion of cultivated
lands to those alienated; while, in every
respect, South Australia shews a higher
agricultural position than any of them.
But, comparing our position with that
of Victoria, we will, perhaps, shew ourselves
in even a worse light in agriculture. If
we compare our respective rates of in-
crease of-persons engaged in agricultural
pursuits with our increase in population
we cannot but come to the conclusion that
our Land Laws have failed lamentably in
their avowed object of fostering our
agricultural development :
Comparative view of N.S. Wales and Victoria with
regard to agriculture for the years 1871 and
1881, shewing the number of persons em-
ployed, and population.
1881
N.S.W. Victoria .V. 8. W. Victoria
Persons
employed... 61,929 84,911 76,792 124,155
Population .. 503,081 731,528 751,468 862,346
According to these figures, which are
taken from the census returns for last
year, just pub ished, it will be seen that
although New South Wales has increased
in population very nearly 50 per cent, her
increase in the number of persons em-
ployed in agricultural pursuits is only 18
per cent. While Victoria, with an in-
crease of popu’ation of less than 18 per
cent, has added no less than 46 per cent,
to her agrarian inhabitants during the
past ten years.
It cannot be said that we owe the
lamentable failure of our Land Laws, to
settle an agricultural population on our
territory, to any natural cause, either in
the poverty of > our soil, or to precarious
seasons which might render our yield in-
sufficient to for the labour expended
on its production. In New South Wales,
as in South Australia, wheat occupies by
far the largest portion of the cultivated
lands. Our,yield of wheat in 1881 was
at the rate of 14| bushels to the acre,
-while in South Australia it was only about
6J bushels to the acre, but still we con


sume a greater quantity of Adelaide flour
than we do of our own production.
Our soil throughout will compare favour-
ably with the best of the Australian
colonies, while our geographical position
is in favour of our having better seasons
than any of them. There can be no
natural reason, therefore, for our agri-
cultural development being the worst of
them all; and, in the absence of any
natural reason, w r e must endeavour to
trace out the political cause of the disas-
trous effects which the above figures
exhibit.
No. lI.—SELECTION BEFORE SURVEY-A DISAPPOINTMENT TO THE
POOR MAN
It must be confessed that to the general
reader figures are somewhat dry and
tedious ; but we have arrived at a stage
in the history of our colony, in which it
becomes a duty of every man who has a
voice in the administration of its affairs—
either by the exercise of his own franchise,
or by his influence in directing the exer-
cise of that privilege by others—to make
himself acquainted with the details of the
greatest of all questions that can occupy
public attention—“ What shall we do with
our public lands V’
The figures adduced in the last paper
show that so far from our present law
placing us in the foremost rank in agri-
cultural pursuits among the colonies, it
has resulted in placing us in absolutely
the worst position of them al. The pro-
vision in the 13th clause of the Act for
the selection of an area not exceeding 320
acres, shows at once most clearly that its
intention was to settle agriculturalists on
the land : for a man possessing the exten-
sive colonial experience, which Sir John
Robertson had, long before he entered
Parliament at all, must have been fully
aware that 320 acres as a pastoral property
was simply an absurdity. The great pro-
vision, however, in this • clause, was for
free selection before survey, and while it
was intended to afford every facility to
the man of small means to take his ’and in
any part of the colony which might suit
him best, it was also aimed directly at the
breaking up of the monopoly so long en-
joyed by the squatters. Indeed it was
this second consideration which secured
the return of a majority in favour of the
clause, when the country was appealed to
after the defeat of the Ministry on Sir
John Hay’s amendment to make selection
after survey.
Having considered the primary question
of our agricultural position, and found the
operation of the Act to have resulted in
failure, we may now consider the two
points raised on the main principle of the
Bill—“ Free selection before survey.”
That the Act has not aff rdedthe facili-
ties intended for conditional purchasers
to take up land, may be gathered from
some statistics in the first “Annual Re-
port of the Lands Department,” published
last year. From these it will be seen that
although 141,329 conditional purchases
had applied for up to the end of
1880, no* less than 36,844 of them had
been either cancelled, lapsed, or for-
feited. These cancellations arose from
descriptions being tenlered, which the
Government will not accept on account of the
land encroaching on previously measured
portions, clashing with previous selections,
for land situated within a reserve. The
forfeitures and 'apsings are generally the
resu't of the applicant himself finding
that when the survey comes to be made,
it does not embrace the land he intended
to take up, and they consequently
abandon it. We thus have no less than
26 per cent, of the whole of the lands
applied for under the Act, proving a
source of disappointment to ihose who
have taken advantage of its facilities for
selection before survey. But this is not
by any means the worst aspect of these
forfeitures, &c. The enormous extent to.
which dtjmmyism has been carried on is
well-known, and will be treated on here-


after ; bat the employment of dummies,
especially since 1870, has been almost en-
tirely by squatters, who were not only
well acquainted with their runs, but being
generally at least fairly educated men,
were not nearly so liable to make a mistake
in their descriptions as the bona fide
selectors, who have not the same advan-
tages in these respects, so that the
majority of the cancellations, forfeitures,
and lapsings fall upon those who really
desire to become our most valuable colo-
nists.
The deposits paid on selections, which
afterwards become forfeited or lapsed,
owing to their abandonment by the selector
are retained by the government, as a species
of penalty for the abandonment, but on
those which are canceled by the Crown the
deposits are returned to the applicants. It
will be interesting to consider some of the
figures with regard to the amount of de-
posits returned on account of cancellations,
as illustrative of the increasing difficulties
experienced by selectors in obtaining the
land they require, as selection and settle-
ment goes on throughout the country.
Out of £3,937,283 10s sd, which have
been received as deposits on conditional
purchases from 1862 to 1880 inclusive,
the refunds on account of cancellations
during that period amount to £551,983
15s 9d, or about 14 per cent, of the whole.
Before conditional purchases became so
numerous, as to give rise to complications
anl uncertainties on the part of selectors,
the amount of refunds however was very
much less than at this rate generally;
but as settlement progressed the percen-
No. lII.—THEY HAVE FAILED
We have seen from the figures adduced in
the last arti ;le that the 13th clause of the
Act has not offered the facilities for
taking up free selections which Sir John
Robertson intended, and the people who
were instrumental in the passing of the
Bill anticipated. But those figures show r
only about half the inconvenience to
£sd £ s d
187,396 11 6 * 9,386 4 2
347,929 13 7 14,345 411
396,570 9 10 32,712 0 6
439,169 11 ] 36,325 0 3
496,053 8 2 74,369 13 0
424,953 19 3 95,412 17 4
399,436 13 11 80,289 15 5
231,116 6 2 83,193 7 6
290,587 5 1 1 57,403 17 4
MONOPOLY
tage of refunds rapidly increased, as will
be seen from the following table :
Table showing amount of deposits on
conditional purchases, the amount of re-
funds and percentage of refunds for each
year, from 1872 to 1880 inclusive :
Te„. | D «'°““p, on Refunds.
of Refund,
5 per cent,
I I li
22i „ „
2« >, „
36 „ „
20
From these figures it will be seen that
the percentages of refunds have gone on
rapidly increasing from 1872 to 1879,
while there is a marked decrease in the
refund for 1880. This decrease is fully
accounted for in an incidental remark
made by the Surveyor-General in the
Annual Report of the Lands Depart-
ment,” published last year, in which he
says (page 86): The district surveyors
have had their attention called to the
growing preference for measured lands by
selectors.”
The figures prove, I think, conclusively
that ‘ ‘ free selection b fore survey” has
not afforded the facilities to selectors
which the 13th clause of the Act intended,
while we can have no stronger evidence
that the system is no longer required
than the figures for 1880 taken in con-
junction with the Surveyor General’s
remark on the “growing preference for
measured lands by selectors. ”
BREAKDOWN THE SQUATTING
applicants which really exists. I have
already exp’ained that cancelled selections
are the only ones on which deposits are
refunded. These refunds are made be-
cause the Government—when the land is
surveyed—decline to let the applicant
have it for any of the reasons previously
explained. But it frequently happens


X«ssthan 50 acres
12,926
212,592
50,985
From 50 to 700 ,,
22,829
4.842,229
376,591
„ 701 to 40,000 „
4,141
12,271,624
124,886
40,000 and upwards
96
8,074,641
3,992
that the applicant will not himself accept
dhe land because the survey does not em-
brace it as he anticipated, or other reasons
may influence him in abandoning it.
These cases come under the head of for-
feitures and lapsings ; and while the
figures quoted in the last paper refer only
to the fund of deposits on “ cancelled”
selections, of which there are 17,718 in all
—the number of forfeited and lapsed selec-
tions is 19,126 —so that the difficulties
experienced by the bona fide selector are
actually more than double what the re-
funds exhibit.
The breaking up of the tnonopo'y en-
joyed by the squatters was a consideration
which operated largely with the general
public in returning members for the Par-
liament of 1861 who were in favour of
passing the 13th clause in its entirety,
and was the second great object which
that clause was intended to effect.
The so-called “ squatting” districts of
the colony are divided into 4329 runs or
squattages.
By a reference to the agricultural re-
turns, as given in the statistics for 1880,
it will be found that there are 4237 large
landholders holding from 700 to 40,000
acres and upwards. The great bulk of
these 4237 persons are the squatters hold-
ing the 4329 runs above mentioned and
their united holdings amount to 20,346,264
acres of freehold land. The holders of
land in fee-simple throughout the colony
may be divided as follows. We may
consider the bona fide selectors as men
holding areas of from 50 to 700 acres ;
Table of Holdings of various Sizes, with Extent
of Cultivation.
Number Ex s nt Area
Size of Holding. of Holding, cultivated
versons. AcreS- Acres.
Totals...
39,992 (25,401,086 1 556,454
It may be mentioned here, in order
to obviate any doubt that may
arise with regard to this 25,401,086
acres of freehold land and the 32,222,658
acres mentioned in the first article
•of this series as alienated from the
Crown, that this latter area ®mbracesr
about 4,000.000 acres selected since 1877,
on which the declarations as to three
years’ residence could not have been made,
and consequently the land could not be
held to be freehold. It also embraces
a further area of 4,015,012 acres, which
have been forfeited or cancelled, and
which have been erroneously included in
the official returns as land alienated by
conditional purchase. Then, as to the
apparent discrepancy in the extent of
land cultivated. In addition to the
556,454 acres cultivated as mentioned
above there are 150,044 acres cultivated
on leasehold lands, in which are embraced
the cultivation on imcomplete conditional
purchases taken up since 1877. These
two sums make up the 706,498 acres
originally mentioned as cultivated.
This table of holdings shows that while
the great bulk of the landholders of the
colony, numbering 35,755, hold only
5,054,821 acres, there are 4237 holders
possessing the enormous quantity of
20,346,264 acres, of which there are
8,074,641 acres held by only 96 persons.
A comparison of these figures with the
returns of conditional purchases will
afford much food for reflection, and show
pretty clearly how this enormous area has
fallen into the hands of the squatters.
After deducting cancelled, forfeited,
and lapsed selections, we have (at the
end of 1880) 104,485 conditional purchases
which hold good. Of these 67,535 have
been transferred, so that there are only
36,950 in the names of the persons wh©
originally took them up.
Table showing Conditional Purchases, Transfers,
and Areas from 1862 to 1880, inclusive,
Conditional 11.662,058 acres
Purchase .. 104,485 7,530.000 acres
Transfers— -• 67,535 (apprcx
Balance
now in
hands of
(approximately J
origin a 1 I
applicants 36,950 I 4,132,058 acres
The amount of this balance agrees pretty
nearly with the area held fey holders of


less than TOO acres, and we may now
consider the transferred selections :
Few hona fide selectors have the means
to buy out previous selectors, and even if
they had, fewer still would purchase at
an increased price for cash, when they
can select by paying a deposit of only 25
per cent, cash, and have three years
credit, without interest, for the balance,
the payment of which may be even then
postponed indefinitely on payment of
5 per cent, interest. So that practically
the whole of the transfers have been made
to those who not only had the means to
purchase, but were unable to comply with
the conditions of a three years’ residence,
which the Act requires. These persons
were the squatters, and under the pro-
visions of selection before survey they
have amassed about 7,580,000 acres. In
addition to this, 9,851,679 acres have been
sold, otherwise than conditionally that
is to say, by auction, and in virtue of im-
provements. This has also gone a’most
entirely to the squatter for the same
reason that hona fide selectors have not
the means to purchase at auction, and
No. IV.—DUMMY SELECTIONS,
AND
When we consider that 4237 persons in
he colony have amassed an area of
upwards of twenty millions of acres
between them, or an average of nearly
20,000 acres each, and that more than
seventeen millions of those acres have
been accumulated under the Lands’ Act
of 1861, the provision of the 13th clause
limiting the maximum area of a selection
to 320 acres is shewn out in all its absur-
dity—and this absurdity is not lessened
by a consideration of the 29th clause of
the Lands’ Amendment Act of 1875,
which increased the maximum area to
640 acres, after fourteen years’ experience
of the evasion to which the original Act
had been submitted.
There can be no doubt that the system
of dummying was first initiated by selec-
tors themselves, in order to secure suffi-
cient land on which to maintain their
these two items account for 17,381,673
acres out of the 20,401,086 acres held by
the 4237 persons heforementioned.
The whole of this vast area has gone
into their hands under the operation of
the Act of 1861, while the balance of some
three millions of acres is accounted for
by the share the squatters would have
had out of the 7,000,000 acres which were
alienated prior to the passing of that
Act.
We have now fully considered the 13th
clause of the Act providing for free selec-
tion before survey, and find that it has
failed to accomplish either of the great
objects for which it was intended :
1. It has not afforded faci ities for
taking up land because it has resulted in
the cancellation and forfeiture of 26 per
cent, of the whole number of applications
madeunder it.
2. So far from having broken down the
land monopoly previously enjoyed by
the sqatters, it has handed over to them
in fee-simple more than four-fifths of the
who’e of the alienated lands of the
colony.
THEIR INFLUENCE ON CRIME,
families by pastoral pursuits, which was,
the only occupation open to them. In;,
the then and present state of the colony,
agriculture was impossible, owing to the
want of a market for their produce. But.
these selections were all for the hona fide
settlement of the colony, and made only to
secure an area which a judicious con-
sideration of the actual requirements of
the people by the Legislature, would have*
granted in the first instance.
The principal of the system resorted to
by the selectors was at once seen and!
adopted by the squatters, and thus was,
established a direct antagonism between,
those two classes, which has continued to
increase ever since.
The early adoption of dummies by
squatters was in reliance on the 20th.
clause of the Act which provides that,
“ Crown lands conditionally purchased


-and abandoned by the purchaserthereof
before the expiration of three years shall
be declared forfeited and may then be
sold at auction and, in this expec ation
the employes were used as a means o
selection without any other intention than
that of immediately abandoning their
purchases, so that the land might be
secured for the three years and then
brought to auction. During the years
from 1867 to 1869, the number of forfeited
selections rapidly increased in consequence
of this. In 1866 there were only 29 for-
feitures ; in 1867, the number rose to 366 ;
in 1868, there were 357 , and in 1869,
no less than 631 forfeitures were gazetted.
Much disappointment among the squatters,
however ensued, when the Minister for
Lands, relying on the phrase, “ May then
be sold at auction ” in the clause—exer-
cised his discretion and allowed some of
those lands to be re-selected by hona fide
selectors. In consequence of this defeat
of the objects of the squatters, the forfei-
tures suddenly dropped off from 631 in
1869 to only 180 in 1870, and the fight
between squatter and selector became
more determined than it had ever been
before. Sham residences and improve-
ments were resorted to all over the
cokny ; dummies who were employed
about the stations were sent to sleep on
their holdings one or two nights in a
month, so that they might make a
statutory declaration that the land was
their hona fide residence during the three
years prescribed by the 18th clause of the
Act,
What constitutes a hona fide residence
has always been a very vexed question, so
much so, that although it has cropped up
on several occasions in the Supreme Court,
and has been discussed at considerable
length in Parliament, no better definition
has yet been arrived at than that ihe resi
dence must be hona fide ; and the dummy
who claims that his residence is hona fide
because his ordinary calling keeps him
from home for 29 days out of every month,
or 364 days out of every year, does so
with a show of right which Judges and
Ministers have found exceeding'y difficult
to get over ; and, in point of fact, the
hona fides of a residence are left almost
entirely to the personal opinion of the
■Commissioner or the Minister who is
called upon to decide it, and that opinion
is liable to be successfully questioned at
any time by an appeal to the Supreme
Court. Although more than one-third of
the declarations which have been made on.
conditional purchases, have been refused
by the Government, still many hundreds
of thousands of acres have been sold on
which no more residence was made than
occasionally sleeping on the selection,
frequently in a tent, as the only dwelling
place.
Who’e families have been employed in
this nomadic way of scraping selections
into the possession of their employers ; and
in my own experience, I knew of a case in
which a father and four sons each had
320 acre selections as dummies. One of
these sons preceded the surveyor at each
selection, and removed the same tent in
which he performed the show of hona fide
residence on his own selection to each of
the others, and stated to the surveyor
that the applicants (whom he represented)
for the several selections were “resident.”
The surveyor’s report was that this young
man “stated that applicant resides.” All
these selections now stand as completed
purchases in the name of the squatter who
employed the family. Cases of this kind
are by no means rare, and are well known
to every surveyor of experience in tho
squatting districts.
That families brought up in this atmos-
phere of evasion of the law, be-
come necessarily ignorant and de-
moralized, so that they lose all respect for
its observance, is, I think, clearly shown,
by oiir criminal statistics. Our number
of convictions is rapidly increasing, far
beyond what our increase of population,
can account for—and this increase is still,
more rapid in such crimes as can only
take place in country districts—such,
crimes as horse, cattle, and sheep stealing.
The most numerous of our crimes is
larceny—but although the whole popula-
tion of nearly 800,000 is equally liable to
its share of this crime, we only had 248
convictions in 1880, of which the metro-
politan district contributed 121 cases l .-
But horse-stealing and similar crimes are'
confined almost exclusively to the agrarian
portion of the population ; and notwith-
standing that we only have 39,000 land-
holders, who, for the most part, represent


that portion of the population, we had no
less than 142 convictions during 1880 for
those crimes. A comparison of our total
convictions for several years will clearly
illustrate their rate of increase. In 1859
we had one conviction to every 829 of the
population ; in 1869 it increased to one
to every 712 ; in 1879 we showed a still
further increase to one in every 674 ; and
in 1880 our convictions were at the rate
of one in every 669 of the population.
The direct influence, however, which
the operation of this law has in producing
deceit and falsehood among our agrarian
population is very strikingly exhibited in
some returns from the Lands Department
itself.
From August, 1875, to December, 1880,
€6,890 declarations on conditional pur-
chase had been made. Of these the de-
partment has refused to accept no less
than 23,000. The only reason there could
be for refusing these declarations is that
there exists prima facie evidence that
No. Y.—ADDITIONAL PURCHASES.
tINDER the 21st clause of the Act of 1861,
and the 29th clause of the Amendment
Act of 1875, provision is made by which
a selector of less than the maximum area
allowed by law may make additional
conditional purchases adjoining their
first selection, of portions containing not
less than forty acres each and limited to
such number, that their aggregate area
does not exceed 640 acres. These addi-
tional purchases are all dependent on the
original one in virtue of which they are
taken up—and the first purchase, together
with all subsequent additional selections,
are treated as though they were the one
holding—so that any failure to comply
with the conditions on the first, effects all
the other purchases made in virtue of it—
but these clauses only affect persons who
obtained the whole of their holdings by
Free Selection, and any evasion of the law
which they make either as dummies or as
*bonafide selectors might be as well made
binder the 13th clause as under the 21st.
they were false, and the Government must
necessarily hold that 35 per cent, of the
whole number of persons working under
the land law are liars.
Probably there is no Act on the Statute
Books of any civilized nation of the world,
which has been so productive of moral
mischief, or whose provisions have been
so systematically evaded, as our own Land
Act of 1861.
If the £360,000 which we are spending
annually in education is to do any good, it
should be in improving the moral tone of
the peop'e, but the beneficial effects of
education appear to be much more than,
counteracted by the baneful influence
which this almost uoiversal system of
dummying has upon the rising generation
of our country population ; and if on no
other grounds, the redssion of a law under
which effects so injurious to our future
welfare can arise, becomes a matter of im-
perative necessity.
AND VOLUNTEER LAND ORDERS.
The 22nd clause, however, was intended
to enable those who had made their homes
on small areas of Freehold land obtained
otherwise than by conditional purchase,
to increase the size of their property to
the maximum area, without any further
conditions of residence than what they had
already carried out on their Freehold.
This clause is as follows:—“Holders
in fee simp’e of lands granted by the
Crown in areas not exceeding two hundred
and eighty acres who may reside on such,
lands , may make conditional purchases
adjoining such lands, the areas of which
shall not with that of the lands held in
fee simple exceed three hundred and
twenty acres and which shall not be
subject to the conditions of residence
applicable to conditional purchases in
other cases.”
Probably when the difficulty of defining
a bona fide residence came to be under-
stood, no clause in the whole Act was so
systematically prostituted for the benefit


of the squatter as this one was. There
were few who had not a number of small
b’ocks, secured either by auction or im-
provement purchase and held in fee
simple. Most of these blocks became the
scene of a one night’s residence, and
applications were then made in virtue of
such residence for a sufficient area to
make up with the previous block—32o
acres. The Land Office day is Thursday
of each week, and shooting parties orga-
nised on a Friday could shift their camp-
ing place daily, so as to spend a night on
six freehold purchases, and thus, in one
week, complete the provisions of residence
required to enable the owner to secure an
area of 1720 acres by additional purchase.
The applications for these areas being
made at the Land office on the following
day, left the squatter at liberty to re-
commence his profitable and pleasurable
work of accumulation which the law had so
generously provided for him—and which
was only limited either by the number of
freehold b ocks he had, or the extent of
credit he could command at the bank.
Under these circumstances, volunteer
land orders became exceedingly useful as
a means of operating on the 22nd clause.
These orders, intended as a reward for
service in the volunteer force, were a
transferable authority to secure a grant
of 50 acres of freehold land in any part of
the colony, and as soon as the value of the
.22nd danse was seen, a competition for
the transferable rights contained in them,
set in, and they rapidly increased in price
to such an extent that, although they only
represented a value of £5O, as much as
£l4O or £l5O was frequently given for
them. Their value consisted, not in the
actual amount of land they represented,
but in the right to secure additional pur-
chases in virtue of them to the extent of
270 acres without any more than a bona
Jide residence consisting of one night’s
sleep.
The operation of this right was greatly
tto hamper bona fide selectors. By having
a few of these orders in reserve, the
squatter had the power of surrounding an
obnoxious selector with them the moment
he settled on the run, and thus cut him
off from his pre-emptive lease on which
he depended for the support of his stock.
Hence the selector was, in the long run,
compelled to come to terms with the
squatter, and sell out to him for almost
whatever the latter chose to give. From
personal observation, I believe that nearly
half of the whole number of transfers of
conditional purchases throughout the
colony have been forced upon the unfor-
tunate selector by these nefarious volun-
teer land orders, and the operation of the
22nd clause.
The injurious working of this clause
has, however, received some attention in
the 21st clause of the Amendment Act of
1875, which provides that “No holder in
fee simple shall be entitled to a grant of
the adjoining lands unless he shall ac the
time of making application have been
resident for three years on the land so
held in fee simple, or shall before the
expiration of three years from the date of
application have resided for three years
on the said land or on the land condition-
ally purchased in right therof.”
The “annual” report of the Lands
Department (of which, by the way, there
has only been one during the past twenty-
one years) is very incomplete in its returns,
and only gives information in this respect
with regard to the lands applied for
during the year for which it is compiled,
viz., 1880 ; so that I am unable to
exhibit, from actual statistics, a com-
parative view of the working of this clause
for the years in which it was most exten-
sively resorted to, but even in the face of
the difficulties thrown in the way of its
operation by the “three years’ residence’*
amendment of 1875, I find that no less
than 37,443 acres were secured under its
provisions in 1880.
Independent of dummies, the influence
which this clause has had in transferring
bona fide selections to the hands of the
squatter must have been enormous. In.
my own experience, I have seen numbers
of fully improved selections, on which,
the three years’ residence had been com-
pleted, sold to the squatter for £1 per
acre, and in some cases for even less,
because they had become so hemmed in
by squatting purchases that they were
actually starved out of their holdings.
Of the whole 104,485 selections which
remained in force at the end of 1880,


there had been 67.535 transfers effected.
As I have already shewn in a previous
paper, the vast majority of these transfers
must have been made to the squatter, and
out of these 67,535 so made, there can be
No, VI.—THE OPERATION OF
In consequence of certain difficulties
which came to be experienced in dealing
with the selections of those who might
die before the conditions of residence and
improvements were comp'eted, or who
from adverse circumstances were compelled
to seek so’ace in the Inso’vent Court,
for which the original Act had made no
provision, the 18th clause was inserted
in the Amendment Act of 1875, as fol-
lows :
“In the event of land conditionaTy pur-
chased, devolving on, or becoming vested in
any person by testamentary disposition or
operation of Law, the same shall be he 1 d
and enjoyed by such person as a Con-
ditional purchase subject to the conditions
of the Crown Lands A'ienation Act of
1861, and this Act save and except the
conditions as to residence, anything in
the said or this Act, to the contrary not-
withstanding. ”
This provision was of course intended for
the relief of thd*families of deceased bona
fide se'ectors, and the creditors of those
who were unable to meet their pecuniary
engagements. Our experience of the
intelligent Crown Lessee, the squatter, is
that he is remarkably quick in availing
himself of any advantage which may be
offered to enable him to scrape land into
his possession, and a reference to the
insolvency records will shew that it was
certainly not kng before the “Operation
of Law” operated very materially in his
favour.
In 1871 there were 544 insolvencies in
the colony; in 1872 they had decreased
to 492 ; in 1875 the number was 600, and
in 1876, 502 insolvencies were recorded.
At the end of 1875 the Lands Amendment
Act came into operation, and its effect
-could not be felt till 1877. The number
little doubt that nearly half of them were
made under the influence of this starving-
out system placed in the hands of the
squatter by the 22nd clause of the Crown
Lands’ Alienation Act of 1861.
LAW.
,—TESTAMENTARY DEVISE.
of insolvencies for the years quoted show
an ordinary fluctuation, but in 1877 they
increased to 588, in Rj7B there w r as a fur-
ther increase to 716, while in 1879 the
numbers totted up to 863, but in 1880,
when the 28rd clause of the Lands Act
Further Amendment Act repealed the
“ Operation of Law” portion of this clause
the insolvencies at once responded by
shewing a decrease to 834, although,
only a few months of that year were
affected by that amendment. Shortly
before the passing of the Amended Act of
1875, the squatters began to be a little
shaky in their emp’oyment of dummies.
The case of Barton v. Muir and some
otters cropped up with regard to the
validity of agreements by dummies to-
transfer to the squatter, and although the
case mentioned terminated in favour of
the squatter (Barton), after an appeal to
the Privy Council, yet the length of time
it was before the public, and the great
expense involved in its settlement, showed
dummies that they had the whip hand of
their employers, and in many cases
they used it by exacting a handsome
bonus before carrying out their agreement
to transfer.
Under the “Operation of Law” clause
of 1875, however, it became unnecessary
to employ dummies in the old way with
the'r attendant risk of breach of agree-
ment, The squatter generously “ lent’’ the
money to take up the land with, and
advanced wages and rations, besides lend-
ing bullocks to enable the deserving
selector (not the dummy now) to improve
his holding. This money was secured by
the selectors’ prom ssory notes, with his
selection referred to as colatteral security.
In the dvent of any disagreement arising
between the parties, these notes were
handed over in the way of business to


some one who would immediately obtain
payment by forcing the selector into the
Insolvent Court, and then purchase the
selection from the official assignee in satis-
faction of his claim, thatjhe squatter,
in most cases, did not appear in the matter
at all, or in the event of no dispute arising
between the parties, the lessee might
desire to obtain early possession of the
laml, so that the selector could repeat the
process. In this case a Supreme Court
writ was issued for the total amount
advanced ; a verdict obtained by defen-
dants default to appear. Execution and
sheriffs sale followed within a few weeks,
and the squatter became the fortunate
purchaser. I know of one case in which
an original selection and three additional
made in virtue of it, having an aggregate
area of 250 acres, all fully improved, were
thus sold to the squatter for i;25. Another
case in which 250 acres taken up in three
blocks were similarly sold to him for LTO.
Although there can be no doubt that
these “Sheriffs’ Titles” are perfectly
legal and in strict accordance with the pro-
visions of the 18th clause, still, now that
an outcry has been made, the Government
is endeavouring to disallow some such
transfers which were ma le prior to the
passing of the Further Amendment Act of
1880, by that very system of repudiation
which, a few years ago, received so much
vehement abuse from every number of
the Government Benches, and, I might
add, from every right-thinking person in
the colony, when the selectors were
agitating for “ Remission of Interest.”
Of course it was not < by any means
every case in which it became necessary
to thus force the tacit agreement entered
into, but the cases were quite numerous
enough to make a marked increase in the
number of insolvencies during the three
years in which this clause was in force,
and in the Further Amendment Act of
1880, the mistake of 1875 was remedied so
as to prevent the “Operation of Law”
havihg any effect on conditional purchases
unless they were bequeathed by “ Testa-
mentary Devise.”
It was a comparatively easy matter to
obtain the services of men who were will-
ing even to go the length of insolvency for
the benefit of a literal squatting employer
but to get dummies who were willing to die
and leave by Testamentary Disposition all
their worldly possessions to him, presented
difficulties which only the ingenuity of a
Crown Lessee could overcome.
The Erysipelas patients of Parramatta
Asylum have in their old age left on
record a flattering compliment to the deli-
cate attentions paid by squatters to the
grey hairs of septigenarians ; and although
Mr. McCulloch, M.P. for Central Cum-
berland, has not yet explained the nature
of the agreements he drew up in March
last between the two aged patients dis-
charged from Liverpool Asylum and the
Bank of New South Wales, as lessee of the
Pentagon Run, nor how those patients
happened to find their way on to that run
and become the conditional purchasers of
640 acres each on it; still he, in common
with many others, both in and out of the
Legislature, is alarmed for the safety of
the Public Estate, and in a recent eloquent
address to his constituents, described,
with a pathos which drew forth continued
rounds of applause, the new and nefarious
system by which the squatters were rob-
bing the country of its estate, and
posterity of its inheritance; but he kept
within the sacred precincts of his own
bosom the interesting fact that to his
legal knowledge and acumen the Bank
was indebted for those last Wills and
Testaments which were to convey to it
for ever the very selections which had
aroused so much of his just and honest
indignation.


The gradual development of the various
systems which were resorted to in aliena-
ting the immense areas of our public
estates, which have so far exceeded what
was ever anticipated by the framers of the
Land Act of 1861, is marked by the suc-
cessive “eras” in which it became
fashionable to operate upon certain distinct
sets ot c'auses—and the result of each of
these eras has been to convey very con-
siderable tracts of land into the hands of
the few monopolists who were fortunate
enough to be the lessees of Crown lands.
The eras of dummy selection, addidonal
selection, volunteer land orders, improve-
ment purchase, insolvency, and auction
sales, although merging into each other,
are as distinctly marked in the fashion-
able annals of land speculation, as crino-
lines and pull-back skirts are in those of
the embellishment of female beauty— and
although some remnants of each of these
systems still remain, any one wishing to
carve his name on the imperishab'e monu-
ment of the new and historical literature
of our land legislation must now resort to
the most recent fashion of “ Testamen-
tary Devise.” Whether indeed, the
tablet of that fashion will ever be em-
blazoned with more illustrious names than
those of a Taylor or a McCulloch is a
question which time alone can solve.
The provision made in the Bth clause of
the Act, and subsequent regulations may
be put shortly, thus —“ That any Crown
lessee who had erected improvements on
any part of his run to the extent of A‘4o
or upwards, might claim in right thereof
a block of land embracing the improve-
ments and containing 1 acre for evtry A'l
value expended thereon.”
The rights contained in this clause
do not appear to have been fully under-
stood till a- out the jear 1872, but when
they began to be appreciated, it is astonish-
ing how rapidly they deve'oped and grew
to I e a huge abuse of the privilege which
was only intended as a protection to the
squatter who might require to erect im-
provements for the efficient working of
Lis run.
Iron houses having portable frames
sprang up all over the country, and men
No. VII.—IMPROVEMENT PURCHASES—SURVEYORS’ REPORTS.
In my own professional experience
under the Government all these things
have come under ray personal observation,
and if it should ever be required I can.
give references to official documents and
surveyors’ r ports which will establish the
identity of instances in which every one
of the foregoing claims were made.
possessing two or three of these structures
have frequently secured twenty or thirty-
blocks on their runs in virtue of them by-
removing them from place to place as soon
as the surveyor made his survey and
report.
Artesian wells, consisting of a length of
2-inch iron piping driven a few feet into
the ground, and a set of sapling shear
legs erected over it- probably as a beacon
by which the proprietor con'd find the
place again were unblushingly made the
medium for asserting a claim under the
Bth clause for blocks of from 40 to 320
acres.
Dams and tanks, which by no possi-
bility could ever catch or retain a drop of
water were sunk, and became the success-
ful means of securing land in virtue of
improvements.
Bullocks were kept in readiness to
hook on to a steam engine as soon as the
surveyor had valued it on one improve-
ment purchase, so that it might be re-
moved and got ready for revaluation on
the next.
Sheep were folded for a few months in
one spot, and the land was then claimed in
virtue of the improved herbage which,
their droppings had produced.
As illustrative of the unblushing
effrontery with which those improve-
ments were foisted on the country as a
means of securing land, —on a run in.
Riverina a surveyor was instructed to>
measure a number of Improvement Pur-
chases. On the first he was struck with
the neat design of the iron cottage in
virtue of which the land was claimed ; on
the second he noticed a great similarity to
the previous structure ; and on the third
he complimented the superinte dent on
the chaste architecture of the improve-
ments —a compliment which that gentle-
man acknowledged by explaining that


all the houses had been built by the same
man and from the same patterns. When
he came to the fourth, the remarkable
similarity to the other houses struck him
again, and when he went inside to value
it, he exclaimed—“ Why, this is the same
house that was on the last selection !”
“Not at all, I assure you,” said the
superintendent, “why do you think
that?” —“Because,” replied the surveyor,
I wrote a memo on the door of the last
house for one of my men to bring me
half a pound of tobacco, and here it is.”
This was a poser that would have
knocked most men off their pins, but the
superintendent laughed as he explained
that, being short of a door to finish this
house with, and anxious to have it com-
pleted before the surveyor’s arrival he had
taken a door off the last house to enable
him to do so.
I do not know whether those purchases
were allowed or not, but I do know that
the surveyor was shortly afterwards
removed to another district, and before
he left, the squatters presented him with
a handsomely inscribed gold watch.
Considerable assistance was sometimes
given to squatters by officers of the Sur-
vey Department or district surveyors in
securing land under bogus improvements.
One case in point may be mentioned.
Instructions were sent to a surveyor to
survey and report on an application for
40 acres in virtue of what was said to be
£4O worth of improvements. The sur-
veyor valued the improvements at only
£l6, and returned the application to his
district surveyor, who happened to be
himself a large squatter in possession of
four runs, and recommended the cancella-
tion of the application.
Thk 20th clause of the Act of 1861, which
was quoted fully in the article on Dummy
Selections, provides that abandoned
Conditional Purchases shall be declared
forfei ed and may he sold at auction, and
con ains the first reference to auction
in the Act.
With the exception of the 24ih clause,
ihah provides for the sate by auction of
N VIII.—AUCTION SALES-OFFICIOUS OFFICIALISM.
The district surveyor, however, refused*
to accept this recommendation, and
directed the surveyor to take into con-
sideration the improved herbage caused
by the sheep droppings, also to value the
droppings themselves as a fertilizer. Irt
consequence of his declining to do ibis,
his 11 contumacious disobedience ” was
brought under the notice of the Surveyor-
General.
Whether it is wise to have squatters
occupying high positions of trust in the
Survey Department, where they have to
adjudicate upon the claims of their
brother squatter, or their mutual enemy,
the selector, is a question which might
fairly occupy the attention of the Legis-
lature in settling the future of our Land
Policy.
The abuses which were carried on
under this section became so great that
in the Lands Acts Further Amendment
Act of 1880, the subsequent number of
blocks which could be taken up under im-
provements was limited to four, containing
an aggregate area of not more than one
twenty fifth part of the whole run on which
thej are situated.
This has had the effect of stopping
those sales considerably, although in 1880
applications for no less than 412,859 acres
were approved in virtue of improve-
ments.
It would have been interesting to pro-
duce the statistics of the areas which were
parted with under this clause as illustrative
of the extent to which it had been worked
during the years from 1872 to 1880, but
those items form one of those profound
State secrets which the annual report of
the Lands Department will not divulge.
town and suburban lands, the 23rd clause
contains the only other reference to auc-
tion sales. This clause is as follows :
“ Crown lands intended to be sold with-
out conditions of residence and improve-
ment shall be put up for public auction
in lots not exceeding 320 acres,” etc,
This appears to i»fer to the lands
mentioned in clause 20, and that it was


generally understood to do so will be
gathered by a comparison between the
areas of selections forfeited and declared
void, and the amount of land sold other-
wise than conditionally between the years
1862 to 1870. The incompleteness of the
returns in the annual report of the Lands
Department make them almost worthless
as references. They give no decennial
returns of land sales, nor do they afford
any means of separating land sold in
virtue of improvements from those sold
by auction, so that, after an almost
incredible amount of searching and pick-
ing out, and adding and subtracting, and
making all sorts of allowance for the
stupidity of the officials who compiled
them, we are still left very much
in the dark as to the actual and
relative amounts of land sold by auction,
and those sold in virtue of improvements.
Possibly, this is what was intended ; for,
although the Lands Department has been
established on its present basis for twenty-
one, years, and has passed through its
hands something more than twenty
millions of pounds sterling, it has only as
yet published one annual report, which
came out about eighteen months ago ; and
it would be almost a pity to give the
public too much information at once with
regard to the trifl ng details of the system
which has raked this inconsiderable
amount into the State coffers.
Be this as it may, however, up to 1870
there was a total of about 543,000 acres of
conditional purchases forfeited, cancelled,
or lapsed, while (thanks to information
contained in the general statistics of the
colony), there were 1,031,158 acres sold
otherwise than conditionally. This
area embraces nearly 200 000 acres of
town and suburban lands, and in all
probability there were at least 300,000
acres sold in virtue of improvements, which
are also included m the land sold otherwise
than conditionally. This would leave
about 500,000 acres sold at auction, as
against 543,000 acres of forfeited selec-
tions, and goes far to shew that, up to
that time (that is, 1870) the pubic im-
pression was that the 23rd clause only
referred to the sale by auction of aban-
doned conditional purchases.
About that period, the number of sur-
veyors in the colony increased to such an
extent that the Survey Department could
not find employment for them, and early
in 1871 the Surveyor-General issued a
book of regulations for their guidance, in
which he gave them permission to
measure not more than six portions for
auction on a “ personal application.”
These regulations received no Parliamen-
tary sanction or approval, and this per-
mission was given solely on the Surveyor-
General’s own responsibility, for the
purpose of making employment for
the number of surplus surveyors
whom he had passed. From this
time auction sales rapidly incresed;
in fact, this regulation from the Surveyor-
General was as good as adding another
clause, which had the effect of robbing
the Act of much of its sting to squatters,
and frustrating the great object which
induced the people to support it in 1861—
the breaking up of the squatting monopoly.
In consequence of the numerous appli-
cations made for the survey of land for
auction, the Minister issued a regulation
requiring a deposit of sixpence per acre as
a guarantee that the applicant would at
least hid for the land. If the land was
sold, the deposit was returned; if not, it
was kept as part payment for survey
expenses. The demand for this deposit
was soon found to be illegal, and it was
not till the Amendment Act of 1875
became law that there was any legal
authority either for the collection of this
fee or for making applications (personal
or otherwise) for the survey of Crown
lands for auction sale. The whole system
of auction sales, which has grown to such
gigantic proportions, and worked so much
real injury to the welfare of the country,
arose entirely from the unauthorised per-
mission given to surveyors to measure
lands for sale by auction.
Dummyism alone would ultimately
have worked its own cure by the
expecsiveness of the system, and
the risks of breaches ot agreement
by the dummies. But this regulation,
opening the way to the indiscriminate
survey and purchase of the land, com-
bined with the power given under the
22ad clause, to make additional purchases
in virtue of freeholds and volunteer
orders, placed a lever in the hands of the
squatter, by which he could force from his


1870
1871,
1872
1873
1874
1875
1876
1877
1878
1879
1880
position almost any selector, and compel
the bona fide settler to become an unwilling
dummy, who must ultimately add his
name to the long list of transferrors who
have handed over 'more than two-thirds
of all the lands taken up under the great
provision of that Act, which was intended
to plant a valuable class of yeomanry on
the soil.
The wonderful impetus which this
regulation gave to auction sales will be
seen from the following :
Table showing amount of land sold otherwise
than conditionally during the years 1870 to
1880, inclusive.
Year Land sold.
In 1871 the land sales were only 88,638
acres, but, under the operation of this
questionable regulation they almost
doubled in each successive year, and
reached their maximum of 2,230,883
acres in 1877.
If any squatter should happen to
peruse this paper, the sudden falling-off in
the years 1878 and 1879 will awaken
painful reminiscences of dunning and
imperative demands for a reduction of the
overdraft with which his banker had
allowed him to so materially augment the
auction sales of the previous few years ;
No. IX.—AS AFFECTING
OUR
We have*now considered, at some length,
the several clauses of our Land Laws,
most materially affecting that rapid
alienation of the Public Estate, which has
marked the various epochs of their history
as the construction of which they were
capable came to be understood and ap-
preciated.
The great object of the law was to
settle our people on the soil, and develop
and many gentlemen who are only
station managers now, were squatters
then, grateful to the Surveyor-General’s
Regulation for having enabled them at
last to secure their runs from the ravages
of the natural free-selecting enemy which
the law of 1861 had raised up against
them.
What matter is it that those runs, of
which they then stood in the proud
consciousness of ownership, have passed
away from them, and now stand in the
names of the Banking Institutions of th©
colony!
What matter is it, that in the indis-
criminate scramble of the public estate,
which this regulation brought about, the
Government has parted w’th nearly ten
millions of acres of our choicest lands.
What matter is it that under the opera-
tion of our Land Laws, we have pitted
two great classes of industrial colonists in
a warfare in which they have fought out
their mutual and irretrievable ruin !
What matter is it, that under these
laws the best securities in our lands have
been wrested from the hands of the people
and transferred to a few financial com-
panies.
Or what matter can it be whether those
companies obtain through their securi-
ties over the landed interests of the
country so great a control over our
Government that the freedom of our in-
stitutions becomes jeopardised, and we
ourselves become the subjects of the great
landed aristocracy whose foundations
are being laid in the Grown Lands
Alienation Act of 1861..
AGRARIAN INDUSTRIES.
its resources; but we have seen that our
position in agricultural pursuits is actually
not so good as it was in 1862, when the
law came into force, and that so far from
settling the people on the soil, the
operation of the law has been
the means of making them the
vehicle for the transference of more than
four-fifths of the whole of our alienated
lands into the hands of 4237 men, who*


for tbs most part, were oh lbs soil before
as the leaseholders of their too a—the
very men against whose monopoly the
great cry had been raised, through which
the Alienation Act of 1861 became law*
It is true that we have made rapid and
enormous strides in our wool producing
industry, and become now almost the
greatest producing country in the World
in that particular ; but this is not due to
our Land Law, it is due to a com
bination of natural causes which would
have brought about the sash© results
if that law had never corns into
existence. The suitability of the soil
for wool growing the extensive
explorations of the colony made during
the gold mania of the ten years preceding
1861 revealed enormous tracts of suitable
land, which were previously unknown,
and the natural increase of the sheep
themselves—are all sufficient reasons to
account for the 6,119*16$ sheep there
were in the colony in 1861, breeding up
to the 35*398,121 of last year. Even yet
our land is capable of carrying mx im-
mense addition to the present Socks, and
they must inevitably gc» on increasing
tor many years to come. But the in-
crease would accumulate in spite of our
present Land Law, by the simple asser-
tion of the power of tbs “fittest’’’ to
survive;” 1 and the fittest would have
survived and accumulated Just as well in
the hands of the 423Tpersons to whom
we have alienated mote than 20 millions
of our acres of freehold land, if w© had
allowed them to go on under the old
sy&tem of leasehold monopoly, as it has
done under the present system* of so-
called settlement; so that our land law
cannot claim any share is ov pastoral
advancement.
But our whole pastoral Las
been confined to sheep. We have scarcely
an appreciable diSertfna® is the number
of horned cattle now ovesr th® nsrsher we
had in 1861. In that year wo had
2,271,923- cattle ia the colony ” now we
have only 2,580,94$ ©r as increase of
about 300,000 in twsatj-ea®- years—
while we have only ao iner®»»® of about
160,000 horses during iha same period.
With the exception oS wool and its
necessary Concomitants, taUMP and sldnm,
we have not mads a ifttp is Mhtaswst, or
developed a single pastoral 'industry
during the whole of that time ; bnt I ven-
ture to say that if that industry bad been
in the bands of the large number of
persons whom we have a right to see
settled on the soil by the Act of 1861, not
only would very considerable advances
have been made in all its branches, bnt
manufactories would have been estab-
lished for the working up oi the raw-
material which is being produced in such
large quantities. Much has been said
about the flourishing condition of our
meat industry, but what are the facts on
which this gratnlation is based. Simply
that a few—very few - enterprising men
have been experimentalizing with frozen
meat, but very little'has come of it so far.
In 1871 our meat export was valued at
£l2O 819, while in 1880 it had only risen
to £171,162 —a rate of increase incom-
parable with either our increase of popu-
lation, or our increase in other branches
of general trade with the world. The
value of our wool exports during that
period has risen from £4,748,160 in 1871,
to £8 040 625 in 1880 ; but that increase
would have come about just as certainly
without the Act of 1861, as with it, for its
production is now confined to very few
more persons than it-was before the Act
came into force.
Of the 39,992 holders of land in the
colony, 34,567 hold less than 70 acres
each, so that those persons could not,
from the very nature ©f the pursuit*,
be contributors to our wool produc-
tion. In 1861 there were 3758
runs under lease in the colony,—
now there are 4329; bnt we have
only 5425 persons holding more than 70
acres ol land, while the number bolding
more than 700 acres is 4237, and they
have more than 20 millions of acres
between them; so that it is impossible
that the number of wool producers now
exceeds the number there were in 1861
by any considerable amount.
Then as to our agricultural industry. I
bav® already shewn by statistics, not only
that w© are absolutely in a worse position
now than we were m 1861, but that we
are in the worst positron cf all the Aus-
tralian colonies. Although we have
50,000,OOt) acres of excellent agricultural
land,, w© hAVB anlj cultivated 706,496


OUR
LAUD
ucres, and do sot grow produce enough
to keep the colony in food. The mcst
necessary article, and the one we produce
most largely, is wheat, of which last year
we grew 8,708,737 bushels. The rate of
consumption of wheat is about eight
bushels per head of population, and as we
have a population of 770,524 persons,
it follows that they require about
6,164,192 bushels, while we only grow
little more than half that quantity.
%
Now, if it is admitted that our Land
Laws have had no share in bringing
about the increase of our wool production,
No- X— OUR FINANCIAL
After considering the Pastoral and Agri-
cultural position of the colony, in con-
nection with our Land Law, and the
failure of that law to carry out any one of
the objects for which it was intended, the
last paper left us considering whether it
had been of any use at all to the colony, or
whether its whole operation had not been
to retard our national progress rather
than to facilitate it. With a view to
arriving at a satisfactory reply to these
questions, we may advantageously com-
pare the position of the colony now with
what it was in 1862. But before doing so
I will quote from Mr. Watson’s financial
statement made in the House on the 15th
November last;—
"The quarterly statements of revenue
and expenditure published during the pre-
sent year will no doubt have prepared the
committee for an exposition on this occa-
sion of financial prosperity as yet un e qn all ed
in this, or indeed any colony of the British
Crown. This prosperity ia not, as many
suppose, the result merely of land sales
for there ia hardly a source of our public
income that has not exhibited an elasticity
and expansiveness that are indy marvel-
lous.’*
It is true that our balance sheet shewed
a much larger revenue than it did in
1861, and it w a>lss> true that osar trade, as
asrared $y expats imycvie, had
LAWS.
and I think I have shewn pretty clearly
that they have not, and that neither have
they done anything to improve our agri-
cultural position ; and further, that so far
from settling the people on the soil, they
have handed over more than four fifths of
the alienated land to those who were
settled on it before. Then the questions
arise : What use have those laws been
at all ? and have they not actually been
retarding the progress of the colony
during the whole period of their existence,
while they have failed in effecting-one
of the objects for which they were in-
tended ?
POSITION
i. —SURVEY EXPENSES.
nearly doubled what is was in that year
But the wealth and prosperity of a
community is not measured by the amount
of money it has in band, or the amount
of trade it is doing; but by the number
of persons whom that money and trade is
to be divided amongst. Thus, a commu-
nity of ten persons, having a capital of
-61000, and doing a trade of .£2OOO a year,
is more wealthy and prosperous than a com-
munity of one hundred persons with a
capital of £‘sooo, and doing a trade of
£lO,OOO a year; and it is in this view
that I propose to compare the position of
the colony before the Act came into oper-
ation with its position now, so that we
may see how “truly marvellous” this
“ elasticity and expansiveness ” have
been, which have rendered our “financia
prosperity hitherto unequalled.”
It must be borne in mind that our woe
trade has increased from £1,283,818, or
at the rate of £3 11s 7d per head of popu-
lation in 1861, to £8,040,625, or at the
rate of £lO 8s 8d in 1880.
Comparative View of Colony in the years 1861.
and 1880.
Year | Population 1 Trade ) Kate per Head
1861 1 358,278 I £ 16,437,207 I £45 17s 6?d
1880 | 770,524 I £29,475,213 | £4O 38s Bsd
Now, if there is any virtue in figures,
these appear to show that the colony is


not only not in the state of “ unequalled
prosperity ’’ which Mr. Watson claims
for us, but that we were really in a much
more prosperous state before the Land
Act became law than we are now by
the extent of nearly £5 per head, notwith-
standing our enormous increase in the
wool trade, which has been £7 17s Id per
head. Suppose our trade in other respects
to have remained the same, then our total
trade for 1880 should have been £7 17s Id
more per head than it was in 1861; or,
in other words, for us to have remained
in the same condition of prosperity as we
were in 1861 with regard to our general
trade; our trade for 1880 should have
been £53 14s 7|d per head, instead
of only £4O 18s B|d, or to put it
still more clearly, our commercial pros-
perity has fallen off at the rate of £l2 15s
per head during the operation of our
Land Law. But this is not the worst
aspect of our position. In the meantime
we have parted with 25 millions of acres
of our best lands, and spent more than
the whole of the proceeds derived there-
from.
Our total revenue from the Lands since
1861 has been £20,802.845 19s lid, and
our expenditure (which the treasurer’s
statement says is fairly chargeable
thereon) has been £22,204,02217s lid, or
£1,401,176 18s more than we have re-
ceived ; while we have contracted a
public debt of £17,000,000, besides
authorizing further loans amounting to
£8,762,500.
Of our total Land revenue under the
present Act, we have received £3,385,299
as deposits on conditional purchases, but
the cost of Survey and Land Departments
have amounted to £8,700,758.
The proceeds of land sold by auction
have amounted to £8,674,624, and the in-
terest on our public debt during that time
has amounted to £8,484,713, so that we
are selling our public estate just fast
enough to pay the interest on a public
debt of £14,903,919, which it was before
raising the loan of £2,000,000 last year ;
and if we continue at this rate for another
hundred years, we will have sold the whole
balance of our public estate to enable us
to pay interest on a debt, the whole prin-
cipal of which does not amount to what
would be less than ten years' rental of th<
land, if its system of administration wai
placed on a judicious and equitable foot-
rug.
The annual land revenue for 188(
was .£469,049, but the Survey and Land*
Department cost during that yea]
£349,899. and the Mines Department oosi
a further sum of £77,011, or a total o
£426,910 for the collection of a revenue ol
£469,049, which includes total lane
revenue and all revenue derived from th<
mining industry of the colony.
During the same year the actual e;
penses of the Survey Department wei
£283,597, and the quantity of land mei
eured was 1,498,672 acres. Of this sun
however, only £92,039 was paid t
licensed surveyors for actual survey ; an
it was they who measured the whole <
this land (vide “ First and Only Annul
Report of the Lands Department,” pa|
58, return G).
The Surveyor-General, in quoting his
average cost of survey per acre, treats only
with the amount so paid, viz., £92,089
and states that the cost per acre is nearly
ls2|d, but it must be evident, that, as we are
paying £223,597 for survey expenses, and wt
only measure 1,498,672 acres, our average
cost must be 3s 9jd per acre, or more
than three times what the Surveyor-Gene
ral says it is.
In America, where survey precedes sal
the whole cost is about 4d per acre, or lei
than an eleventh part of what it is here.
But apart from the necessarily expensfvi
system which selection before survey
must entail, our Survey Departmen
appears to be worked on a system o
wasteful extravagance which would no
be tolerated for a moment in the manage
ment of any business firm. Thers
appear to be 143 licensed surveyors em
ployed. These gentlemen are contractor]
and do the whole of the surveys coming
under the Act —such as eonditiona
purchases, measurements for auc
tion, improvement purchases, etc.
etc. Besides this they have t<
keep records of all instruction]
passing through their hands; reply tc
and record all memoranda and letters
sent to them —draw the plans of theii
surveys—write a letter reporting on eacl


case—and render and make out triplicate
accounts for all surveys made by them.
For the whole of this service, they earn
an aggregate of £92.039, or, as the Sur-
veyor-General puts it, licensed surveyors
©am an average of £540 per annum, out
of which they pay their camp expenses.
As supervisors of the field portion of
this work, there are 12 district and 25
salaried surveyors costing £34,351, whose
chief duties are m checking work occa-
sionally, and what they are pleased to
term “administrating.” In addition to
this, tire professional branch is employed
imerciali stability depends on freedom
n sudden fluctuations in the money
rket ; and this, in its turn, is depen-
it on the control the banks have over
deposits in hand. Thus, if there are
d deposits to the extent of £20,000,000
band, the banks can lend to that ex-
t, and under ordinary circumstances
p a uniform rate of interest; but if the
d deposits are only £10,000,000, and
other £10,000,000 consist of current
counts, liable to be withdrawn at any
iment, then, if the banks lend up to the
mle £20,000,000 and any considerable
rtion of the current accounts happens to
withdrawn, it creates an immediate
issnre, which spreads itself over the
lole borrowing community in the shape
an increased rate of interest and the
eclosnre on all the least secure mort-
This is precisely what brought about
ie commercial crisis of 1878-9, and put
• sudden a stop to the auction sales of
rown lands. The Government withdrew
in the office at a cost of £71,343.
The duties of this branch are dealing
with the plans transmitted by the sur-
veyor, checking their calculations, and
compiling them on maps, The compiling
and publishing portion of this branch
co“ts £16,439, so that the balance of
£54,904 is expended in the supervision of
the plans and official work performed by
the licensed survejmr, Thus the cost of
supervising work costing £92,039 is
£89,255, to which must be added at least
half the cost of the Accounts Branch, or
about £2,800 —making a total of £92,055.
a large portion of its deposits to enable it
to carry on public works. The banks at
once came down upon the borrowers for a
reduction of their overdrafts, so that the
requirements of the Government might be
met. The rate of interest was raised, and
a large number of pastoral and landed
securities were taken over by them.
Of course the amount of coin and bul-
lion which the the banks have in stock,
regulates to a certain extent their ability
to meet sudden pressures of this kind, but
if the specie decreases while the current
accounts and amounts of discounts and
debts due to them increase it betokens an
insecurity which may be taken as a pretty
sure index to a coming commercial depres-
sion.
A view of the banking position ot the
colony now in comparison with what it
was in 1880, just after its recovery from
the crisis of the proceeding two years will
shew that we are rapidly approaching
another severe financial trial. Up to the
third quarter of 1880 the position of


amount of bills discounted and other moneys
lent, the number of insolvencies, population-
and rate of insolvencies to population, for
each year from 1860 to 1880 Inclusive :—
Year.
Deposits,
1
Bills discounted
and other moneys
lent.
Insolvencies.
Population.
Pate of Insol-
vencies.
I860
£
5,164,011
£ 1
5,780,699 511
■348,546
1
n 682
1861
5,029,691
5,764,059 463
358,278
]
n 774
186a
5,544,780
6,602,297 314
367,495
l
n 1170
1863
5,631.097
6,968,274 408
378,931
l
n 928
1864
5.562,885
7,299,108 485
392,589
1
n 809
1865
5,827,098
7,100,361 528
411,388
l
n 778
1866
6,004,013
7,458,099 591
431,412
l
n 726
1867
6,121,835
6,679,101 684
147,620
1
n 654
1868
6,550,433
7,226,882 531
466,765
]
n 874
1869
6,626,308
8.085,102 530
485,356
l
n 916
1870
6,107,999
7,814,116 176
502,861
l
n 1056
1871
7,043,886
7,668,022 544
519,182
l
n 954
1872
7 043,886
7,668,022 492
539,190
l
n 1098
1873
10,279,324
9,712,894 426
560,275
l
n 1318
1874
14,884,960
10,685,250 427
584,278
l
n 136S
1875
13,650,891
12,483,713 500
606,652
1
n 1213
1876
14,859,505
16,325,043
13,627,5511502
629.776
1
n 1254
XS77
16,069,166 588
662,212
l
n 1126
1878
16,722,452
17,030,2271716
593,743
l
u 969
1879
17,861,840
17,110,9971863
734.282
l
n 851
1880
17,883,024 17,210,205;834
770,524
1
n g23
Daring the
first twelve years of this
period the amount of bills discounted and
money lent
invariably
exceeded fcha
amount of deposits; and during that
period the rate of insolvencies was high
throughout, fluctuating according to the
excess
of discounts (with one or two ex-
ceptions, which are accounted for by more
than n
isuallv favourable seasons.)
But in
■borrowers had been improving
respects, and reached its cul
point in that quarter:
in these
culminating
VIEW OP THE
BANKING
POSITION,
1,260,771
5,934,641
11,948,383
17,883,024
3,563,550
1,595,502
.8,560,266
13,384,806
21,945,072
3,182,717
Notes in circulation
Deposits not bearing In-
terest
Deposits bearing Interest
Total Deposits
Coin and Bullion
Bills discounted and other
debts due to the Bank
17,210,205
22,890,098
From this it will be seen that while the
notes in circulation in 1880 were little
more than a third of the value of the
specie: they had increased to more than
half in June, 1882, while the amount of
specie had decreased during that period to
the extent of nearly £400,000, and that
while the current accounts not bearing
interest were rather less than half the
amount of fixed deposits in 1880;
they have increased to nearly two-
thirds in 1882. The amount lent
by the banks in 1880 by dis-
counts mortgages, etc., was ,£072,819
less than the total amount of deposits in
hand ; now, however, they have increased
to be £945,026 more than the deposits—
and, at the same time, the ratio of current
accounts has considerably increased.
These floating deposits cannot now be
operated upon to any considerable extent
without at once materially affecting the
current rate of interest, and bringing
about a crisis in the money market, which
must injuriously affect the prosperity of
the colony.
The financial history of the colony
during the past twenty years will illus-
trate very clearly the effects which the
lending out of money greatly in excess of
the amount of deposits by the banks has
upon the community, and how it appears
to regulate the number of insolvencies.
Up to 1875 all deposits were treated in
the sworn quarterly returns of the banks
simply as “ deposits,” without distinguish-
between “ fixed deposits” and “current
accounts;” so that in the following table
we can treat both together only as such.
It may be mentioned that daring th®
years from 1875 to 1880 the current ac-
counts were less than half the amount of
the fixed deposits ; but, as previously
observed, they had increased to nearly
two-thirds in June 1882.
>!e showing amount of deposits in the banks,
amount of bills discounted and other money*
Table
During the first twelve years of this
period the amount of bills discounted and
money lent invariably exceeded tha
amount of deposits; and during that
period the rate of insolvencies was high,
throughout, fluctuating according to the
excess of discounts (with one or two ex-
ceptions, which are accounted for by more
than usually favourable seasons.) But in
1878 the discounts first began to be less
than the deposits, and the rate of insol-
vencies at once decreased, and remained
at the decreased rate during the years of
the decreased discounts, notwithstanding
the unusual impetus given to insolvency
by the 18th clause of the Lands Amend-
ment Act of 1875. But as the discounts
began again to exceed the deposits, the
effect was at once marked by an aug-


mented rate of insolvency during tbe
years 1878 9, while they again decreased
in 1880.
Tuere are no general statistics available
yet for 1881 and 1882, but judging from
the banking returns of June, 1882, there
pan be hide doubt that tbe insolvencies of
this year and. next will show a consider-
able increase over those of any year since
1873.
In this state of things the banks are
perfectly safe because they have their
securities to fall back upon ; but the pros-
perity of tbe colony scarcely depends so
much on the safety of the “ banks ” as it
does on the safety of the “ borrowers ”
and as the general excess of discounts over
deposits exhibits a desire on the part of
the banks, simply to make money without
any regard for the welfare of the com-
munity, it becomes a matter worthy of
serious consideration whether tbe Govern-
ment should not step in and protect the
interests of the people by the establish-
ment of a ‘-National Bank” which, by
taking over the landed securities of the
colony, and lowering the rate of interest,
would set a large amount of capital free
which is now contributing to the profits
of the Financial institutions.
There are at present fixed deposits in
the banks amounting to .£13,384,806 —the
interest on which fluctuates from 3 to 6
per cant; but the Government can borrow
on leases at a uniform interest for long
periods at 4 per cent., and if a loan were
raised sufficient to pay off and take over
all the mortgages on landed securities,
which the banks hold, much of this
money would be at once transferred to
No. XII.—A
NATIONAL
As an objection to the establishment of a
National Bank, it may be urged that we
would he placing a financial monopoly in
the hancts of the Government, and tres-
passing on the province of private enter-
prise and competition.
This may, or may not be, a serious
objection, but thoSe who use it appear to
forget that the Government already has a
monopoly of the carrying trade in its
the National Bank, in order to prevent
the sudden influx of the amount of capital
required to establish it.; so that it would
be established almost entirely on colonial
capital, which would be deposited
at a fixed rate of 4 per cent.
The Government could then afford to
lend this money to embarassed land pro-
prietors at 5 per cent., and thus make
.£133,848 per annum, which would be
more than sufficient for working expenses.
By lowering the interest from 7| to 5
per cent, the National Bank would hold
out inducements to landowners, which
they would at once avail themselves of,
and transfer their securities over the land
without any Legislative coercion. In
fact, there is reason to belive that many
of our largest proprietors would willingly
sell back their lands to the Government
for what it had cost them, provided an
equitable arrangment was entered into
by which they could lease tbe land in
large blocks at a fair rental.
A National Bank would therefore be
not only self supporting (which is more
than can be said of many of our Govern-
ment institutions); but while it drew back
to the hands of the Government most of
the landed securities of the colony, it
would lower and regulate the rate of
interest, and thus minimise those com-
mercial depressions which so injuriously
affect colonial prosperity, while it would
relieve the whole community ot per
cent, on their total liability of more than
£22,000,000 sterling, amounting to
£550,000 annually, which sum would be
diverted into profitable channels of indus-
trial enterprise.
BANK—PART 11.
“railways;” and who amongst us can
complain that we are worse served under
that monopoly than we were under the
private enterprise and competition of
bullock drays or stage coaches f
The Government monopoly of our
extended systems of “ telegraphy ’’ and
“mail communication” confers benefits
on the general public which would have
been impossible under private enterprise.


Decennial Return shewing amount of Mortgagee
and Discharges on Country Lands and Stock
to the year 1880.
Year.
Country Land.
Live
Stock,
Amount
Lent
Dise’rged
Lent.
Diso’rged
1871
259,935
115,000
703,353
333.536
1872
228,763
147,000
1,076,432
•1,245,318
1873
269,572
205,000
1,723,336
1,04 5,863
1874
286,737
191,000
1,962,313
818,949
1875
381,025
231,000
2,008,969
992,780
1876
441,670
189,000
2,157,834
1,028,079
1877
462,051
320,000
2,004,363
1,292,703
1878..
735,890
333,000
2,050,348
1,037,119
1879... ...
1,041,045
367,000
2.268,850
1,247,708
1880
2,455,073
434,000
2,818,967
3,804,475
Totals. . £
6,561,761
2,532,000
18,774,743
12^16,330
By adding the sum of mortgages, and
subtracting the sum of discharges, we ob-
tain in round numbers £10,000,000 as the
amount due to the banks on pastoral pro-
perties at the end of 1880 — but at that
Experience of what private enterprise
and competition can do in the matter of
education ” has led us to resort to
Government monopoly in that also.
In our system of “ taxation ” the Go
vernment exercises a control over our
**■ trade ” which could not be obtained
under private enterprise ; but, so far from
this being injurious to the community,
Protectionists desire one half of that
trade—our imports-—to be still further
controlled by increasing taxation, so as
to encourage and increase the value of
our exports ; and as those monopolies and
this control in the hands of the Govern-
ment are held to be beneficial to the
people, the objection to a Government
financial monopoly must fall to the
ground, if it can be shown that the people
will be relieved from burdens which the
present private financial monopolies are
placing upcn them.
Of the £22.890,098 which the banks
have lent in the way of discounted bills,
mortgages, etc., about £13,300,000 have
been lent on country lands and live stoek.
This sum, at the ordinary rate of 7i per
cent, yields a revenue to the banks, from
our pastoral properties alone, of
£997,500 per annum, or more than double
the whole land and miring revenue of
the colony combined, which in 1880
amounted to only £468,938. But the
success or failure of these properties de-
pends so much upon the “ seasons,” that
when a pastoral depression takes place, it
is general throughout the colony ; and, as
the banks derive more than half their
income from this source, it necessarily
follows that during unfavourable seasons,
an undue strain is put upon the whole
“ commercial community,” in order to
make up these deficiencies to the banks.
The large pastoralists have already
obtained about ten millions of acres by
auction or improvement purchase,
together with seven millions by con-
ditional purchases, while they have be
come saddled with a debt of £13,300,000,
o enable them to do so.
Up to 1880, the auction and improve-
ment sales realized £10,500,878, but by
far the greater part, if not the whole, of
the 7,000,000 acres of conditional pur-
chases have only paid the deposit of 5s
per acre, or £1,750,000; making a total
of £12,250,878, which have been paid fra:
these lands ; so that these pastoral pro-
perties are mortgaged beyond the full
value of the land sold to their proprietors,
while a very Isrge portion of their live
stock is also mortgaged as a sort of
collateral security.
In the returns of mortgages on land,
the lands are classified as “ Town,’ r
“ Suburban,” “ Town and Country,” and
“ Country ” ; but for our present purpose
we need only refer in the following
table to “ Country Land.” As the
returns of “ Discharges of Mortgagee
on Land,” however, do not make
this distinction, I have taken the
proportionate part ol the amount of dis-
charges for each year to the nearest
thousand pounds; thus, the total amount
lent on land in 1871, was £697,440, of
which £259,935 were lent on “ Country
land,” the amount of discharges for
that year was £318,168, so that the share
discharged from country lands would be
£115,000, and assuming this principle of
calculating them to be correct, which I
think it is, the following table will
clearly exhibit the position of pastoral
properties at the present time, ard the
increasing rapidity with which they are
passing by mortgage into the bands of
the banks :
time the total amount due to them was


117,210,000 —and as this sum has now
isen to £22,890,098, we may fairly as-
ime tne mortgages on pastoral properties,
) have proportionately increased. This
’oald give .£l3 300,000 as their amount
f indebtedness at the present time, and
lere can be no doubt that the raising of
ns sum has been forced upon the pas-
iralists for the purpose of securing the
sventeen millions of acres which they
ave obtained under the Laud Act of
361. But, at the same time, the security
ver all that portion which is transferable
as been transferred to the banks. Only
small proportion of the selections can
ave been transferred to them, because it
an unsafe kind of security which they
ill not meddle with alone, unless the
ilances are paid up and deeds issued ;
at 66 per cent, of their value has been
Ivanced on all auction and improvement
enchases, so that the great bulk of them
mst have been transferred while the
loney to secure the selections has been
used on the live stock.
The mortgages on country lands have
at ceased yet, for it will be borne in
ind that the auction sales began to
mWe each year from 1873, and it will
3 observed from the above table that the
nounts raised on them by mortgage
)gan the same doubling process in 1878.
bis is (he difference in time that would
apse before the deeds were delivered,
ithout which it was very difficult to
ise money on the land, and it will also
> observed that the Influx of deeds was
ken early advantage ol by the banka in
wing a very large amount cleared off
e mortgages on “ live stock” in 1880.
These tacts point to the conclusion that
proportion to the facility for obtaining
curity over the “ land,” the banks will
scline the security over “ stock.’’
No. XIII.—
he average price realised for the Crown
ands already sold by auction is £1 4s 2d
ir acre, but, as I have already shown, it
is b( en paid almost entirely by borrowed
oney, and as the average rate of interest
7| per cent., it follows that the nominal
vneis are paying Is 9|d per acre annu-
The lands of a young country like ours,
are its best national securities, and our
ability to raise national loans is regulated
by the yearly revenue derivable from
them to enable us to pay the interest as
it falls due; but if we part with the lands
and raise the loans too, we must make up
any deficiency by increased taxation.
We are parting with those securities at
an enormous rate, and while the Govern-
ment values them at 5 per cent, (vide 18th
clause G. L. Act, 1861) we are handing
them over to the banks, who obtain or
8 per cent, for them. This is equivalent
to imposing a tax of 2£ or 3 per cent,
(about 7d per acre) for the benefit of the
banks on all those whom the Lands Act
of 1861 has forced to become land buyers.
By thus forcing two and a half or
three per cent, into the hands of the
banks as a profit, the Land Act becrmes
responsible to a large extent for those
financial depressions which periodically
overtake the commercial community, and
which in all prol ability would have been
avoided if this money had been allowed,
to circulate freely throughout the colony.
In order to redress the evils brought
about by our land legislation, the first
duty, then, of a National Bank would be*
to take over as far as possible all the
landed pastoral securities of the colony ;
and thus, while setting at least two and a
half per cent, on £13,300,000 at liberty
for other investment, which would go
towards developing cur natural resources*
we would relieve that one industry of a
tax of .£360,000 per annum, which, to-
gether with the general lowering of in-
terest, would relieve commerce of an
equal tax, and at cnce place trade on a
sounder and more satisfactory footing
than it has hitherto occupied.
CONCLUSION
ally in the shape of interest on all the
lands they have bought at auction.
Mr. Watson, in his Financial State-
ment, made in the House on 15th
November, 1881, after explaining that
there are 132,000,000 acres under lease,
says—“ Even at one penny per acre, 132


million acres would yield £550,000, which
is nearly three times what we will
receive this year. Taking the rents, how-
ever, on a basis of an average of 3d per
acre, which, I have no doubt, could be
easily obtained under a different system
to that now in force, we would receive an
annual rental of L 1,650,000 which I feel
confident many squatters, if not all,
would be quite willing to pay, provided
they had a netter tenure than that under
which they now hold their rune.”
The manager of the Pulliaming Station
who was examined as a witness in the
Singleton will case, tried at the Supreme
Court during the present month (August,
1882), stated that “ the purchased laud on
the run amounted to 20,000 acres, or l-sch
of the station ; it was pretty nearly all
secured by these purchases, the best parts
having been taken by the testator. * *
* * * There was no land between the
purchased blocks that would divide them
inconveniently.”
What has taken place on Pulliaming
Eun has taken place on hundreds of other
runs. A fifth or so of the land is bought
so as to render the remainder useless to
any other person for the purpose of settle-
ment ; or, to put it in the witnesses own
words, so that “ there was no land between
the purchased blocks that would divide
them inconveniently.”
The colony contains 200,000,000 acres
of which there are 33,683,391 acres
alienated, or, as nearly as possible, 1-6ih,
that is, there are five acres of Crown
Lands for every acre alienated, so that
Pulliaming run is a very fair sample of the
whole colony, so far as alienation is con-
cerned. Taking the present alienation o
the Crown Lands of the colony as a basis,
we have 1 acre purchased, on which
interest is being paid to the banks amount-
ing to Is 9|d, and 5 acres rented from the
Crown at about a half penny per aero
amounting to 2£d, which, added to the
Is 9Jd interest on the first acre, would
give six acres for a little over two shillings,
or at the rate of 4d per acre annual rent.
Mr. Watson suggests 3d, but probably
his is merely an arbitrary suggestion, not
arrived at by any process of calculation or
actual facts. In some articles I wrote in
1878 for the Gleii Innes Guardian on this
subject, I suggested 3|d and arrived at
this rental by the rate of selectors pre-
emptive leases, thus—a selector in virtue
of his holding is allowed a lease of three
acres for every acre selected ; these three
are rented at three farthings per acre,
amounting to but as the conditional
purchase is sold on credit at £1 per acre,
and the Government charge 5 per cent,
on it, or one shilling per acre, it follows
that selectors have four acres for Is 2|d,
or at the rale of about 3jd per acre.
Selectors invariably have done well while
they were able to hold their pre-emptive
lease, and this shews that they did not con-
sider 3Jd to be too much rent. The rental of
Pulliaming Eun, however, is very nearly 5d
per acre, and it will be found that the rentals
of all the runs in the settled portions of the
colony come very close upon this figure
throughout, by calculating them on the
basis of current rate of interest on money
borrowed with which to secure them.
But securing the pastoral runs in this
way —by the purchase of one-fifth or one-
sixth of their area —so that “ there was
no land between the purchases blocks
that would divide them inconveniently ”
is practically securing a fixity of tenure to
the squatters of their whole run in spite
of the law which will not grant it; and in
this fixity of tenure, the great feature is
that they pay nine timss as much to the
banks for one acre as they pay to the
Government for five acres.
Yet with this average rental of 4d per
acre, not only are the squatters able to
pay off large sums annually from their
mortgages on land and live stock, but our
twool industry has increased more than
“ 500 per cent” during the past 20 years.
Now, that our extensive surveys for
alienation and railway purposes has made
us acquainted with the character of almost
every every portion of the colony, we are
in a position to classify our lauds, and a
map could be prepared at a trifling cost,
distinguishing Ist, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, or sth,
class pastoral lands, agricultural areas,
mineral lands, and all the probable routes
for railways likely to be constructed for
generations to come, so that the future
subdivision (into suitable areas) of the
whole colony could be easily designed,
and suitable reservations for travelling
stock purposes, water supply, etc., laid out.
We have a pastoral area of about


130,000,000 acres, which, if subdivided
into blocks of from 1000 to 10,000 acres,
would provide about 20,000 pastoral
estates, on which the holders could live
without being compelled to resort to illegal
or dishonest means of obtaining sufficient
land on which to obtain a livelihood.
These lands would be readily taken up at
rentals, varying from 2d to 6d per acre,
according to classification, and return a
revenue from pastoral sources alone of
£2, 106,000 per annum, as against our
present pastoral revenue of only I!272,000.
The whole of the lands need not be cut
up at once, but by stopping selection
before survey, half or a third of each run
might be surveyed as a first instalment,
and the remainder left to the squatter at
the increased rental till the pregrees of
settlement requires its resumption, or till
the whole of the surveyed blocks on the
run were taken up. This would give the
squatter ample time to prepare himself for
the change, whilst it would also protect
him from being harrassed by prowling
black-mailers, and at once stop the
antagonism engendered by the indiscrimi-
nate scramble for land.
With regard to agriculture, we have
50,000,000 acres of land suitable for tillage
scattered over various parts of the colony,
much more than is likely ever to be re-
quired by our population tor that purpose.
By laying out agricultural areas of from
20,000 to 40,000 acres in all the suitable
localities, with centrally-situated town-
ships, and cutting this area into blocks of
from 40 to 640 acres, we would establish
farming communities along our railways,
mills and agricultural machinery would
spring up, and the colony would be sup-
plied with produce more cheaply than it
can be under the present Land Laws,
which mix up agriculturalists and pas-
toralists in an undying antagonism. In
this way homes would be opened up for
more than 10,000 families, and the farms
would command annual rentals of from Is
to os per acre.
Too much provision can hardly be
made for the accommodation of travelling
stock. Reserves of from one to five miles
wide along all contemplated railway
routes, according to the class of land
through which they passed, would ensure
facilities for bringing stock to market;
and when the railways were constructed,
this land would let at a higher rental than
that more remote from them, and thus go
far towards lessening the burden of their
construction.
As to the tenure and conditions of lease,
I would suggest leases of ten years, with a
pre-emptive right of renewal at the same
rental for a further period of twenty
years, if at the expiration of the first
lease, improvements had been erected to
the value of twenty years’ rental.
At the expiration of that time, submit
the leases to auction and make the pur-
chaser pay to the out going tenant the ap-
praised value of then existing improvement
which he had erected. In the event of no
competition, then the existing tenant
could continue at the original rental, or by
abandonment, forfeit his claim to compen-
sation for improvements.
Some such system of dealing with our
Crown Lands as this, would give the
country a return commensurate with
their present value, while it would reserve
to the next generation the right to renew
the leases of their patrimony on terms by
which they would derive the benefit of the
increased value which time and population
had given it.
The land belongs to the people. It is
the patrimony which has been handed
down to this generation in trust for the
next —and we have no more right to ap-
propriate the whole or any part of it, so
as to prejudice the rights of “posterity,”
than the first fleet of colonists had to
divide the colony amongst themselves to
“ our ” prejudice —or than Captain Cook
had to claim the personal proprietorship
of Australia to the prejudice of “ them.”
Each generation has a common pro-
prietorship in the soil —and no generation
can deal with it to the detriment of the
same common proprietorship in their
successors without doing injustice, by
leaving to posterity the task of redressing
the legislative evils of their ancestors,
and the longer those evils continue, the
more generations they run through—the
more difficult will their eradication be-
come, and the greater will be the amount
of oppression, tyranny and hardship to
which the bulk of the people of future
generations of our children will be sub-
mitted.


Since the foregoing articles were in type
the Lands Department has issued its
second annual report, namely, that for
1881, which came into the hands of
members of Parliament on the 20th
September. ,
This report, like its predecessor, com-
prises the statement and returns 'of' the
three branches of the Lands Department.
The Under-Secretary deals with sales
other than conditional, that is auction,
improvement purchases; purchases on
gold-fields, etc. ; also, preemptive leases.
The most noticeable feature in his report
is that our country land is realising a
lower price by auction thanit did in
1880; in that year its average price was
£1 4s 2d, but in 1881 it only realised
£1 3s 6d per acre ; while, at the same
time, our auction sales had nearly doubled.
In 1880, although 2,015,397 acres were
offered for sale, only 346 487 acres were
sold ; but in 1881, with only 1,258,427
acres offered, we sold 523,657 acres. The
reduced price is accounted for by the
Under-Secretary, Mr. Oliver, as being
“ mainly caused by sales at £1 per acre,
after the land had been previously offered
at a higher rate, but not bid for, and,
having remained for a time open to selec-
tion after auction at such higher rate.” If
this is the case, it would seem that the
object in applying to have immense areas
put up to auction, is that the land should
simply pass the hammer, at the upset
price of £1 5s per acre, without being bid
for, so that it may be again offered at the
reduced price of £l. This is another
“ dodge ” for getting behind the Land
regulations; and, as it could not be
detected with comparative yearly statistics,
it shews the necessity for furnishing lull
decennial returns of the land alienated
tinder the various clauses of the Act, so
that the operation of those clauses can be
seen at a glance.
ADDENDA,
Mr. Moriarty, the Chief Commissioner
of Conditional Sales, furnishes the second;
portion of the annual report in a clear and/
well-digested statement of the work done
in conditional purchases. His return —■
“ A ” —purports to show the number of
conditional purchases made from the
years 1862 to 1880; but ic begins by
lumping those from 1862 to 1869, and
then gives the numbers for the succeeding,
separate years. It is a pity that the returns;
do not give the particulars of every year..
They would be exceedingly useful and
interesting in arriving at an ana'ysis of
the progress of settlement, as fostered by'
the Act. The next table gives a detailed'
statement of the conditional purchases-
during 1881, from which it appears that
during that year 14,220 selections were
taken up, representing an area_ of
2,329,202 acres, as against 8583 selections
in 1880, representing an area of 1,147,001
acres. The selections, however, declared
void, forfeited, or lapsed, amounted tor-
-3274, having an area of 438,155 acres, or
about 19 per cent, of the area taken up-
In 1880, 441,114 acres were declared void,,
forfeited, or lapsed, or about 39 per cent..,,
so that the position of conditional pur-
chases shows a marked improvement in
this respect. It is to bo regretted, how-
ever, that there is no return show-
ing bow many measured blocks were
applied for as conditional purchase.
In the report for 1880 the Surveyor-
General drew attention to the growing
preference for measured lands by selectors,
and probably it is this preference which
has reduced the per centage of
lapsings, etc., to so marked an extent—as
from 39 to 19 per cent, in one year. If
so, there can be no stronger arguments
favour of at once abolishing "selection
before survey.” It is satisfactory to notice
that the number of transfers, although
increasing, have not increased to the same-
extent as C P.’s. In 1880 there were


3841 transfers made, or 78 per cent, on
the number of O.P.’s. In 1881 the trans-
fers numbered 8903, at the rate of 62 per
cent.
"With the addition of a tabulated
„ decennial summary of the operation of
dihe several clauses dealt with by the Com-
missioner, his returns would be by far the
most comprehensive and valuable yet
placed before the public.
The third portion of the annual report
•is supplied by the Surveyor General, and
•occupies from page 33 to the end of the
•volume, containing 114 pages. Someone,
I forget who just now, described language
as the means of concealing thought. In
the 81 pages occupied by the Surveyor-
General’s report there is certainly ample
room for language, so that possibly there
as a considerable amount of thought
concealed in it; if so, it has perhaps
become latent. There is certainly the
evidence of a large amount of labour in it
—in the compilation of long statements of
aninteresting details of the technical work
of the Survey Department, which are
entered into with a minuteness that must
be painful to the general reader, who
desires to arrive at a useful and practical
knowledge of what the Department is
doing.
In the report for 1880 the Surveyor-
General states that the average earnings
ior licensed surveyors for that year was
£540. The amount of arrears in 1879
was 1278 cases in the hands of surveyors,
but in 1880 those arrears were reduced to
529 cases, of which he says: —“The
arrear is therefore reduced from 1278 to
529, and the bulk of those remaining is
due to the neglect of surveyors not now
employed.’’
During 1881, however, the average
earnings of licensed surveyors had risen
to £7ll, but the arrears had accumulated
from 529 cases, to 1070, or more than
double, notwithstanding that surveyors
are earning 50 per cent, more than they
did in 1880, and that those who by their
neglect had become responsible for the
accumulation of the 529 cases of that
year had been removed. The increase
in the number of conditional purchases
s&nnot account for this, for although
3 329,202 acres of conditional purchases
overe applied for, only 860,510 acres
were measured for that purpose, while
818,058 acres were measured for auction,
as against 389,842 acres of auction mea-
surements during the preceding year. The
department is, therefore, measuring
largely for auction sale in favour of the
Crown lessees at the expense of the bona
fide selectors, while it allows their appli-
cations to get largely into arrear. And,
at the same time, the cost of the Depart-
ment has increased from .£233,599 in 1880
to £262,212 in 1881.
In the titst report —that of 1880—the
Surveyor-General, Mr. Adams said, “The
arrears and heavy works, still in an un-
finished state, are due to circumstances
which no Minister or head of a depart-
ment could either foresee or control.”
In 1881 he says, “ This year has been
one of exceptional pressure ot work of all
kinds, especially upon the heads of
branches and divisions, arising from - the
withdrawal of so many valuable assistants
from the various drafting branches, and
he impossibility of suddenly supplying
their places.” Turning to another por-
tion of this report, I find that in 1880,
there were 649 persons employed in the
Department, whereas in 1881 they had in-
creased to 680 persons.
Again, he says, “ The Conditional Pur-
chase Issue Branch, which was at the end
of 1880 fairly out of arrear, had, at the
end of 1881, fallen somewhat into arrear
through an increase of conditional pur-
chase applications." From the figures
adduced above, it will be inferred that it
was the extensive increase in auction sale
measurements which brought the condi-
tional purchase branch into arrear, and
not the C. P. applications.
Further on Mr. Adams says, “ In the
production of parish m ips, I must admit
that the results shown, comparing the
year 1880 with 1881, are not as satisfac-
tory as 1 could wish, the falling off being
no less than 31| per cent. This is
accounted for by the great increase of
work in the Department generally, and
the want of experienced officers to carry
on the business in an efficient manner.’*
If this is the case there is mismanage-
ment somewhere, for notwithstanding
that the number of hands employed has
increased from 649 to 680, the average
salaries paid to them has also in-


creased from .£212 to £222 per annum,
and the question naturally arises:—
Wbat are we paying increased salaries
to a larger number of men for, unless it
is to secure a greater amount of efficiency
in carrying out the public business ?
These contradictory statements arise
in a great measure from the absence of
any system of tabulating summaries of
the information given in the elaborately
prepared returns which accompany the
Surveyor General’s report, the details ot
which are given with so much technical
minuteness, that few persons outside the
particular branches to which they refer
can understand them, and even if they
could, fewer still would undertake the
labour of following them through. If
the returns are to be of use to the public
they should be placed in such a form
that those for whose benefit they are in-
tended can comprehend their import.
In the return of measurements made
Wentworth Court, 27th Sept., 1882.
by licensed surveyors during 1881
1,940,577 aerers appeared to have been
measured, but in the summary of the
charting branch returns, plans represent-
ing only 1,620,353 acres appear to have
been received. Then again in the licensed
surveyor’s return (schedule JP) 818,058
acres appear to have been measured for
auction, whereas in the summary of
auction returns under tbe beading of
“ measured during the year ” only 327,594
acres appear. lam correct in the quo-
tations of the figures, but if I have fallen,
into error in applying those returns to a
purpose forwhich they were not intended,
namely, that of comparison, then so
much the stronger does my argument
become that they should be tabulated in
such a form that the public may see at a
glance exactly the position of the colony
with regard to the alienation of its
Crown lands, and the cost of their
administration.


%nf to Wasliig I Baling Fiwtei
EXTRACT FROM “ NEWCASTLE MORNING HERALD,” OF OCTOBER Lrn
STEENSTE
PURITY.
SOLD BY MANNING BROS, HUNTER STREET, NEWCASTLE.
An important addition to the list of New-
castle industries has just sprung into exis-
tence, in the “ Comet Manufacturing Com-
pany.” This venture is upon so extensive a
ncale that some particulars will be of in-
terest. The premises are situated in Darby-
street, upon a large allotment of land
adjacent to Messrs. Manning Brother’s
branch stores, and cover a considerable
extent ; special provision having been
made,Bwherehy as business becomes more
thoroughly established, to add to the build-
ings and form them into a series of large and
imposing-looking warehouses. At present
the main building consists of lofty and
spacious double-storied premises, the lower
portion set apart for storage purposes, and
machinery, The latter is chiefly utilized
for the manufacture of the “ Comet ” wash-
ing powders, &c., which will give a fair
idea of the chief class of work at the
factory. At present the principal work
carried on is in this particular branch.
Although the Company have made every
arrangement for launching out more ex-
tensively, in a wholesale way, with regard
to baking-powders, spices, teas, preserves,
vinegars, extracts, and other concomitants of
a large manufacturing grocery, the sam-
ples of washing powders turned out
have already found a hold upon the local
and colonial market, and hundreds of gioss
leave weekly either for Sydney, the pro-
' winces or to supply local orders. The
cleansing properties of the preparation far
excels a majority of similar powders to be
met with, a proof of which lays in the fact
that wholesale houses in the metropolis
find its sale so ready that there orders are
repeated -without delay. The process of
manufacture is personally watched by a
practical man, of some twenty years’ ex-
perence, acquainted with all details of the
work, and as a result no hitch occurs. A
visitor seeking to be initiated into its
mysteries must content himself with gazing-
on a room full of capital machinery,
boiler, wheels, belts, etc., which keep
a large grinding Chilian mill con-
tinually going, in which the several
components are scattered and crushed to
the finest powder. When sufficiently re-
duced, an ingenious self-acting apparatus,
the principle of a harbour dredge, is ar-
ranged to scoop up the powder automati-
cally and convey it to an upper storey—the
packing and labelling room. Here some
fifteen or twenty female employees are at
work, and with husyffingers rapidly throw
back scores upon scores of neatly done up
packages, ready for immediate use or sub-
sequent export. The completest order
is maintained all day, and, by this
means, an amount of work is accomplished
that mu st surprise one. We understand it to
be the Company’s intention to soon enlarge
the works very considerably and also increase
the number of hards employed. Additions
to the plant and machinery of most im-
proved character will also be imported, as
it is thoroughly intended to establish a con-
cern second to none in the colony. Nearly
,£2OOO have already been expended in pre-
liminaries, a fact that (combined with
public patronage so far) goes not a little
towards justifying the sanguine expecta-
tions of the spirited proprietors.


fHo
fcipwt iD
ij 1 o ■"
T O I "7*
t C; ( I
LITTLE LARGER SHOP
■^mrs
MESOER7, HATS, CATS, HOSIERY,
-AND .THE-
BEST-MADE OILSKINS AND BOOTS,
idtii m m iiMFiiii mi 14 in ii


NEWCASTLE^
%nw |wM I sm' |#wtti
iA Journal of Commercial, Shipping, Mining, Social, Political, and
General Intelligence. The CIRCULATION is guaranteed larger than
that of any other newspaper in the colony out of Sydney, and its regular If
readers are upwards of ” V
70,000 Weekly. |
I Its columns give the Latest English, Foreign, and Colonial Intelli- I
gence ; and it offers to its subscribers a varied, well selected, and instruc-
i tive circle of General Reading.
J The “HERALD AND ADVOCATE” is now admitted to be not
only one of the most liberal and independent papers in the colony, but *
,l \ also more extensively read, its editorial remarks being universally relied h
upon; consequently, as an Advertising Medium, it stands unequalled. Z_,
It strenuously opposes all rash and hasty innovations, cordially supports T
c) all well-digested measures of progressive legislation and has ever main- K
tained that the interests of Capital and Labour are thoroughly identical.
I Terms of Subscription —36s per annum, in advance; 40s, credit. |
A Cash Terms for Advertising (single insertion) : Two lines and 7
I under. Is ; from Three to Five Lines, 2s ; from Six to Eight Lines, 3s ; ]i
and 2s for every additional inch. Standing Advertisements inserted T
at a liberal discount. No advertisement booked for less than 3s.
OHKrJOHIiXKG: DllilllSl
Is Replete with the Latest English a American Novelties.
|y freest, n m fiiat iron |raty la (jas
SPECIMENS MAY BE SEEN AT THE OFFICE, BOLTON STREET,


AXAA/-XA/.;-/ -•■XX.x- - /AX/ : ■ '
ft Jamming j§roiher§ t %. j
... ' %i'i ■1 H
. o
§||| ORT E R s7lh I
I ' PRODDMEReANTMc, 1
IBTO, WOLFE. A DABBY STEEETS, NEWCASTLE. 5 ,
S —* ».— —
X t I 4 . X |
J (ty |sto be Jlltinrif#) wt Us add.mied 1 |ulbi I
X ' ■' X I
X ,? •> •
x ‘4* 4* X fl
x X
X WHITE FOR PRICE LIST c fa TERMS. X ,
X _ x
x SOLE AGENTS FOR THE “COMET” COMPANY, 5 |
* -MANUFACTURERS OF THE- §
| “OmT fisting I Baking Powders, 1I
I MewesMle, ■
mxK~. ■ ■ •• ■ Xxw.xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
